Preparation: 1919-1944
28
ance its force structure and thereby undermine its ability to pursue a strate-
gy of attrition.45
Britain's lead in armored warfare evaporated during the Depression.
On the surface this period appeared as one of accelerated progress. The
RTC expanded and issued its first doctrinal manual, the EMF conducted
four major exercises, Britain created its first tank brigade, and even in 1934
it still had the largest, most tactically advanced, and best trained tank force
in the world. But during these years armored warfare theorists made no
doctrinal progress. Rather, a reaction set in against armor as the Depression
fueled insecurity and financial stringency, which bred conservatism and
slowed the pace of mechanization. As a result, the army wedded the tank to
infantry support and ultimately disbanded the EMF.46
Most significant of all, by 1934 the "cavalry concept" of armored war-
fare, which viewed the tank as a surrogate for horsed cavalry, had become
firmly entrenched. The cavalry concept conceived of armor as being
employed en masse and without supporting arms for raiding, reconnais-
sance, patrolling, and pursuit in the light-cavalry tradition, and as a coun-
terattack force against enemy penetrations in the heavy-cavalry tradition.
While progressive in 1934, by 1937 the cavalry concept of armored warfare
was obsolete because it viewed armor as a narrow, specialized weapons
system rather than as a versatile and broadly applicable weapon. This view
of armor specialization led the army to procure multiple tank types for nar-
row, specialized missions-
-for example, a light tank for traditional cavalry
reconnaissance and raiding missions and a heavy tank for counterattacking.
The cavalry concept triumphed for a variety of reasons, but mainly
because the army mechanized the cavalry (to protect regimental structure)
rather than expand the RTC in the 1930s. The cavalry changed its mode of
transport but not its mission or its habits. Moreover, armored warfare pro-
ponents generally supported mechanization of the cavalry and the armor
concentration that the cavalry concept engendered because they believed
massed tank forces would both guarantee the independence of armor and
allow it to demonstrate its strategic capabilities. Thus the army went to war
with a unique, untested, and fundamentally flawed conception of armored
warfare that envisaged the employment of armor en masse in a cavalry
role, 47
This conservative view of the role of armor partly reflected the army's
regimental structure. Regimentalism promoted professional socialization
among officers and fostered unit morale, esprit de corps, pride, and cohe-
sion, all of which contributed to the battlefield doggedness and tenacity dis-
played by wartime British soldiers. But it also promoted regimental tribal-
ism and parochialism that hindered interarms and interservice cooperation.
During World War I the regimental system's benefits outweighed its draw-
backs, but interwar technological change necessitated greater interarms and
interservice cooperation. The interarms rivalry the regimental system
The Interwar Period
29
brought about not only hindered development of common doctrine and
standardized training, but it also stifled intellectual thought. As a result, the
army's theoretical preparation between the wars lacked rigor and failed to
raise officers beyond the confines of regimental life. 48
That imperial defense rarely required interarms and interservice coop-
eration did little to promote cooperation either: the interwar British armed
services coordinated poorly. The Royal Air Force (RAF), after its bitter
fight for independence and then for continued survival, was reluctant to
cooperate with the army or navy. The army's culture and finances left it
reluctant to cooperate with the RAF; and the equally vocal demands of
armor and air power enthusiasts that their respective arms were decisive
instruments of war crippled development of air-ground coordination. Thus
in September 1939, the three services were largely incapable of conducting
an integrated war effort. The inadequacy of British interarms and interser-
vice coordination in 1939 was a serious deficiency that contributed directly
to the military disasters that befell Britain during the early war years.
That Britain in the early 1930s was incapable of deploying an overseas
expeditionary force was in many ways inevitable and unavoidable. Britons
erroneously believed that there would be time to prepare for war if a crisis
developed. The emergence in the 1930s of three powerful potential enemies
in distant theaters (Germany, Italy, and Japan), however, confronted Britain
With unprecedented strategic threats at a time when the nation's power had
been greatly diminished. After Hitler's rise to power in 1933, the govern-
ment overturned the Ten Year Rule. Yet even then Britain rearmed casually,
unhurriedly, and tardily because the forces that had fueled military neglect
in the 1920s hindered rearmament in the 1930s. The legacies of earlier neg-
lect, government rearmament policies, and the army's culture and mission
all militated against effective reform.
Britain also failed to orient rearmament toward the threats it faced. The
government rearmed to deter aggression rather than to prepare for war and
So it reequipped the air force and navy, which were perceived to have a
deterrent effect. 49 Fear of the bomber also led to major enhancement of
Britain's neglected antiaircraft defenses.
These rearmament priorities
ensured that the army received little increase in funding. Thus the govern-
ment geared military preparation in the late 1930s to create the illusion of
strength, purpose, and resolve to deter aggression rather than to forge an
effective field force. Such pursuit of deterrence led the government during
the spring of 1939 to introduce peacetime conscription for the first time and
to double the Territorial Army, initiatives that hampered creation of an
expeditionary force.50 Not only did these measures, designed to demon-
strate the government's resolve, neither deceive nor deter Hitler, they
placed a great strain on available resources and delayed establishment of a
viable expeditionary force. Conscription caused chaos in the armamene
industry, disrupted army reorganization, and forced abandonment of the
