82
Preparation: 1919-1944
a lack of resources (prior to 1944 there were not enough independent tank
battalions to train with infantry divisions) further delayed interarms train-
ing. In evaluating the lessons of Tunisia, the army also failed to recognize
fully the need for intimate combined-arms coordination.65
The TORCH landings illustrated the need for extensive logistic prepa-
ration for a successful amphibious assault. Arranged at short notice and ini-
tiated on a logistic shoestring, the Quartermaster and Engineer Corps were
ill-prepared for TORCH. Inadequate preparation, combined with inexperi-
ence in amphibious assault and troop resupply, resulted in a heavy loss of
landing craft and considerable confusion and disorder on the beaches that
delayed the buildup ashore.66 That the chaos was quickly brought under
control testified to the improvisational skills and ingenuity of supply troops
who unloaded throughout the night, beached landing craft, and pressed
pontoon bridges into service as floating supply boats.67 TORCH was a
valuable learning experience which demonstrated the supply service's
adaptability as logisticians and engineers recovered quickly from initial
disorganization. Nonetheless, supply shortages slowed the Allied advance
and the logistic situation remained tight through January 1943, with sup-
plies becoming abundant only in March. The most serious logistic limita-
tion on Allied operations in Tunisia was inadequate fuel supplies during the
campaign. 68
The TORCH landings, like the one at Dieppe before them, also
revealed the need for extensive amphibious assault training. The disorgani-
zation of the amphibious assault and resultant heavy loss of landing craft
might have jeopardized success if there had been determined opposition
rather than the halfhearted resistance offered by the Vichy French.69 The
landings revealed the need for well-trained and equipped supply troops, a
clear chain of command, efficient loading and unloading operations, and a
significant salvage capability — and many of these lessons had to be subse-
quently relearned in the face of far stronger German opposition. 70
Tunisia also highlighted many deficiencies in the U.S. infantry.
Riflemen failed to maneuver and apply firepower, overrelied on artillery
fire, and proved slow in consolidating and bringing up supporting
weapons.? They also experienced difficulty in generating the firepower
needed to obtain objectives, displayed defensive thinking rather than
aggressive drive, and often failed to use terrain to their advantage. Units
both failed to acquire high ground for observation and frequently plowed
through valleys in hilly or mountainous terrain, suffering heavy losses to
observed fire from high ground 2 Early on, infantry personnel also suffered
heavily because they advanced too far behind their own artillery barrages
and because they frequently consolidated at enemy positions on which the
Germans had preregistered their own fire. But perhaps the most serious
weakness was the infantry's poor scouting and passive patrolling, which
prevented U.S. troops from seizing and maintaining the initiative. 74 The
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
83
troops often resorted to night operations, but inadequate training and inex-
perience in such inherently complex operations initially brought frequent
failure and a poor standard of proficiency. 75
The Tunisian campaign also indicated that U.S. airborne forces-in
their first wartime combat drop- required more extensive preparation and a
fundamental rethinking of their mission. The Allies, however, were too
ambitious and reckless in the employment of airborne forces, dropping
them on high-risk targets of limited value without adequate reconnaissance,
planning, and support. In fact, it was only a combination of good fortune
and the training of the U.S. paratroopers that prevented heavier casualties. 76
U.S. antiaircraft defenses did not prove particularly effective in
TORCH either. The threat posed by Axis air power forced the hasty dis-
patch of undertrained antiaircraft units to Tunisia, and inexperience brought
numerous friendly-fire incidents. Moreover, although the army began to
recognize for the first time the potential of heavy antiaircraft artillery in a
secondary ground role during TORCH, it lacked established procedures for
their effective employment.
The artillery proved reasonably effective in Tunisia and confirmed
most of the fundamental principles taught by the artillery school at Fort
Sill. Artillery spotters laid highly accurate observed fire that often forced
the enemy to retire.?7 In fact, many German veterans regarded U.S. artillery
as the deadliest fire they had ever encountered. 78 Well-trained gunners,
effective communications, and flexibility underpinned this performance.
U.S. artillery rarely used predicted fire, except at night to harass and
demoralize the enemy.79 For offensive operations, artillery units fired con-
centrations and box barrages alongside rolling barrages and employed
timed high-explosive fire for devastating airburst effect, especially against
antitank guns.80 Artillery units also used a lethal mix of percussion, timed-
fuse, and white-phosphorus rounds, and fired smoke adjacent to a target to
negate hostile flanking fire. 81
TORCH indicated, however, that the fixed regimental structure for
corps and army artillery was inflexible. 82 What was most lacking was not
quality but quantity: the coordination of artillery fire at division level and
the lack of corps artillery limited the effectiveness of fire support. 83
Divisional artillery, though, proved quick to respond and proficient at
defensive and counterbattery fire.84 In fact, the majority of German casual-
ties in Tunisia resulted from Allied defensive-fire missions during Axis
counterattacks.85 Moreover, dispersed deployment of field artillery and the
use of deception measures, including dummy battery positions, provided
great protection from German counterbattery fire and minimized the loss of
guns. 86 But TORCH operations revealed that the army required greater cen-
tralization and concentration of artillery as well as more medium and heavy
artillery to generate greater firepower. In addition, fire for effect was often
hastily called down before proper adjustment onto the target, wasting
