Preparation: 1919-1944
26
nated and unfocused, and the army itself made little effort to develop doc-
trine.
Lack of a mission, ambivalence to professional development, lack of
strategic threats, dispersion of the army for imperial defense, and fiscal
stringency all forged indifference toward maneuvers between the wars. The
army conducted large-scale maneuvers only twice, which demonstrated that
the army was less well prepared than it had been in 1914. In fact, the War
Office used troop unreadiness to justify abandoning maneuvers amid the
financial stringency of the 1930s.38 The absence of large-scale peacetime
exercises prevented the army from identifying the manifold deficiencies in
its doctrine, training, tactics, organization, and equipment.
Popular antimilitarism also ensured that despite the high unemploy-
ment of the Depression, the interwar army experienced major recruitment
problems. The Great War had destroyed the flower of British youth, and
slow promotion, low pay, and lack of societal recognition of officership as
a profession meant that the officer corps failed to attract the talented and
energetic. Inevitably, officer quality declined between the wars as the army
effectively abandoned evaluation of fitness to command.
Rapid technological change between the wars posed additional prob-
lems for the army as it strove to modernize despite minimal funding. The
interwar army's loss of boldness and aggressiveness ironically occurred at
the very time when technological change restored mobility and offensive
power on the battlefield. The army's lack of a mission and its determination
to forget the experience of World War I engendered indifference toward
technology between the wars,
which meant that the army had the poorest
record of the three services in adapting modern technology to the battle-
field 39 The army of 1939 remained largely equipped as it had been in 1918,
and its failure to keep pace with technological change contributed directly
to the serious reverses that it suffered early in World War II.
The most significant area in which Britain failed to adapt modern tech-
nology between the wars was armor. Britain had pioneered armored war-
fare in the Great War, and the tank had played a significant role in a number
of major battlefield victories during 1917-1918.40 But the technical limita-
tions of tanks ensured that they had only tactical, not strategic, capabilities
in World War I. Britain led thinking on armor into the mid- 1920s, produc-
ing the leading theorists J. F. C. Fuller and B. H. Liddell Hart. In 1923
Britain formed its armor into a separate arm, the Royal Tank Corps (RTC)
and in 1927 created the world's first wholly mechanized formation-the
Experimental Mechanized Force (EMF). In the late 1920s, the RTC also
produced its first doctrinal manuals on armored warfare, and in the Vickers
Medium tank Britain possessed the most advanced armored vehicle of its
day. 41
But, from the late 1920s, Britain both lost its lead in armored warfare
theory and British tank design fell behind that of its neighbors, with the
The Interwar Period
27
result that early in World War II the army proved unable either to master
armored warfare or to find an effective counter to German mastery of
armored warfare. British armored warfare doctrine went awry in the late
1920s for several reasons. Part of the reason lay in financial constraints,
army conservatism, and the army's mission.42 Reduced spending and the
return to imperial policing militated against both tank development and
effective organization and employment of armor. Tasked with imperial
defense, the army had no rationale or impetus to create a large, expensive
tank arm or to develop a coherent, offensive, armored warfare doctrine, and
the government withheld the resources to do so.
Historians have also often argued that socially conservative British
officers maintained an unsound faith in the horse as a instrument of war,
despite the lessons of the Great War. Many of these landed, rural officers
possessed limited understanding of industrial society or modern war, a
provincialism that failed to raise officers above the narrow confines of regi-
mental life. Recent scholarship, however, has demonstrated that the army
was less conservative about mechanization than previously assumed. 43
Rather, the creation of the RTC and the EMF demonstrated that by the mid-
1920s the army had accepted the tank as a valuable weapon of war. 44 The
real explanation for Britain's loss of its leadership in armored warfare is
more complicated.
Clearly, the extremism of many tank enthusiasts that armor was a inde-
pendent strategic instrument capable of winning wars unaided hindered cre-
ation of effective armored forces between the wars. The enthusiasts' claims
for the strategic independence of armor not only hampered development of
integrated, combined-arms mechanized forces but challenged the frame-
work of British strategic doctrine. The army, therefore, rejected Fuller's
call for an elite armored force, and instead embarked on the more sensible,
cautious approach of gradual, broad mechanization. While this approach
meant that by 1939 the army was the only field force in the world whose
transport was fully motorized, it also entailed the disbandment of the EMF.
The crux of Britain's failure to harness armored warfare between the
wars, however, was its rigid opposition to modifying basic strategic doc-
trine to encompass the potential of armor. The tank controversy in interwar
Britain was more about the adoption of a new and radically different con-
cept of strategy rather than about the adoption of a new weapon. The army
was willing to adopt the tank but only to fit it into established strategic doc-
trine, without consideration of how armor could or might change such doc-
trine. Britons also saw the tank as a product of the Western Front and as
such it had limited applicability outside total war, which was unthinkable in
the 1920s. The technological limitations of armor also justified much of the
criticism by reactionaries, for, until the late 1930s, a gulf existed between
armored warfare theory and practice. The army's development of armor
remained cautious and constrained by its prudent unwillingness to unbal-
