278
Normandy 1944
Lacking firepower, the infantry simply could not gain fire superionty
or battlefield dominance without heavy indirect-fire support. The close
combat that the bocage necessitated, however, hampered bringing indirect
fire to bear and made observation and adjustment of fire difficult. 36 The
bocage also aggravated inherent problems of command and control: assault
units often got lost or disoriented, and attacks often became canalized on
frontages much smaller than doctrine advocated. So, the army's doctrine,
training, and equipment had left it ill prepared for fighting in such condi-
The U.S. forces' inexperience exacerbated the inherent problems of
hedgerow fighting because bocage combat put a premium on small-unit
leadership and initiative. Troops would rely heavily on their commanders,
and green units often failed to move under fire and or to press the advan-
eage. Commanders were forced to lead by example, which brought high
officer losses. Many units lost what drive they did possess when their ofi-
cers became casualties. 38
Poor infantry quality also contributed to the slow advance. The difti-
culties of operating in the bocage underscored the infantry's lack of aggres-
siveness that derived from inadequate firepower and poor manpower selec-
tion and replacement policies. Infantrymen were hesitant and often failed to
maneuver to bring greater firepower to bear, but instead went to ground
and, lacking faith in the efficacy of their own firepower, relied on indirect
fire to neutralize the enemy.39
Initially U.S. tactics also addressed German defensive practices inade-
quately. Because they applied their advantage in indirect fire artillery pod
Y, the Americans generally prevailed in the bocage only if they had marked
numerical superiority and overwhest... g firepower. Initially, attack meth-
ods dealt badly With German defensive techniques because the U.S. Amy
had yet to develop responses to the problems of enemy defense in depth
first encountered in Sicily and Italy. The Germans lightly manned their for
ward outpost line and kept most of their stie igth back in their MLK and as
mobile serves even farther back to counterattack any penetration of the
Milk once toward toops had identified the :d mposition, axis, and Obje
uve of the main enemy attack. These defensive tactics aggravated U.S.
onensive difficules: initially U.S. artillery only targeted the lightly held
enemy d ste, spating the powerful fire support avalable, wastre
seate amunion, and inflicting minimal damage on the dispersea
The bocage so negated the firepowd and mobility of armor that it
severely constrained armored operations. The tall, thick hedgerows and
narrow sunken lanes restricted maneuver, reduced visibility and fire, and
left U.S. tanks vulnerable to close-combat destruction. U.S. armor initially
attacked en masse in columns along roads and tracks as doctrine pre-
scribed, but suftered heavily at the hands of German antitank guns, mines,
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
279
and rocket-propelled antitank missiles. Armor quickly learned to move
across country, but the bocage so restricted such movement that it seriously
obstructed any offensive employment of armor. The terrain denied armor its
central role in the combined-arms advance and relegated it to a secondary
Poor tank-infantry coordination further hampered combined-arms
operations in the hedgerows. Many rookie units had undergone limited
combined-arms training and so remained inexperienced at coordinating
tanks and infantry.42 Even veteran formations found coordination difficult
because the terrain rendered existing combined-arms doctrine inadequate.
Tanks and infantry could not communicate properly, often misunderstood
their respective roles and capabilities, and thus rarely operated together
electively. Poor coordination brought setbacks and increased losses and
slowed the advance on St. Lô in mid-June.43
Renewed logistic difficulties also hampered U.S. progress in the
bocage. No sooner had the supply situation improved in the second week of
OVERLORD, when the worst Channel storm (18-20 June) in fifty years hit
and wrecked hundreds of ships, landing craft, and the U.S. Mulberry artifi-
clal port. The storm set back the U.S. buildup by weeks, made worse a
growing ammunition shortage ashore, and forced the introduction of tighter
rationing that prevented the First Army from using its firepower superiority
to full effect for the rest of June. 44
Commanders quickly sought to identify and fix the problems that had
slowed the advance. 45 The organizational flexibility of the U.S. Army, the
willingness to examine and learn from combat experiences, and ingenuity
meant that the problems that confronted them were quickly overcome as
troops adapted in the field during combat. In fact, the determination of both
troops and commanders to retrain in the field was a key strength that con-
sistently allowed them to enhance their combat effectiveness. Little in doc-
trine, training, or combat experience had prepared them for hedgerow fight-
ing, but the troops quickly realized that they had to restore tactical mobility,
deploy more firepower, and coordinate mobility and firepower and bring it
to bear in a concerted combined-arms assault. 46
The U.S. soldiers soon realized that they needed more firepower to
san ground in the bocage with tolerable casualties. They demanded more
automatic weapons, grenade launcher ndan, okas, and mortars. When the
First Army could not meet these unexpected demands from avallable
stocks, it redistributed weapons from nondivisional and noncombat units.47
Troops also improvised in the field to generate more firepower. Infaniry
deptly "acquired extra submachine guns, BAKs, and bazookas; modified
semiautomatic carbines to make them fully automatic; and pressed captured
machine guns and mortars into service.48 Ordnance personnel also modified
several weapons in the field to enhance their effectiveness. Ine poor mobil-
ity of light antiaircraft guns, the taered .50-caliber quad-mounted M51
