140
Preparation: 1919-1944
never seen a shot fired in this war-most of them in fact; they are not in
touch with the "feel of the battle"; they cannot possibly teach their subor-
dinates if they themselves do not know the game. We ought to make more
use of our active front to train our generals; corps and divisional generals
must know the game. 187
During 1943, the pace of British adaptation to the changing character
of the war accelerated as the fortunes of war turned in favor of the Allies.
Since the army learned better from its successes than from its failures, the
pace of innovation accelerated during 1943 as the strategic initiative passed
to the Allies. While eager to identify what they had done right that had
brought them victory, the army was much less interested in identifying
what had gone wrong, 188 This approach skewed the adaptation because it
led the army to enhance its capabilities in areas where it had already
attained proficiency-amphibious assault, massed artillery fire, and set-
piece battles-but retarded improvement in areas where mastery was lack-
ing, for example, small-unit tactics and coordination. This misguided intel-
lectual approach to lessons-learned analysis ensured that British
capabilities improved more quickly once British forces had begun to win
victories.
Montgomery also shaped the lessons-learned process and his impact
narrowed the spectrum of innovation and adaptation. Nevertheless, he was
undoubtedly the man to lead Commonwealth forces in northwest Europe,
for he alone could inject confidence and boost morale. On taking command
he vigorously tackled the task of fully readying the army for OVERLORD
in a few short months. 189 He had neither time nor resources to inculcate
desert methods and experience. All he could do was tinker with the army;
so he attempted a "quick fix." He would overcome mentally what could not
be fixed materially or structurally, and Montgomery's belief in the human
dimension of war was never more clearly displayed than here. Human
resourcefulness and grit would surmount doctrinal,
, tactical, organizational,
and equipment flaws to guarantee success. He visited every formation to
boost morale, and stressed repeatedly that every man must give his all in
the forthcoming invasion. 190
Montgomery strengthened his army group in more tangible ways.
Worried about the home army's inexperience, he posted desert veterans to
green divisions to disseminate battle experience, even though this
inevitably diluted the value of all this combat experience. Just as important,
Montgomery imprinted his distinctive operational approach on the OVER-
LORD planning and devised a clear "masterplan".
-a theater strategy—10
govern Allied operations in northwest Europe that emphasized the El
Alamein formula for victory: maintaining the initiative and massed
employment of overwhelming firepower. Operationally, the weight of
shells would blast the British infantry onto their objectives in a replay of
the artillery barrages of 1917, albeit enhanced by such technical develop-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
141
ments as improved communications and aerial spotters, which greatly
improved command and control. 191 Given Allied capabilities, the timing,
location, and theater strategy for the second front were crucial to Allied
chances of victory. Montgomery's strategy for OVERLORD has generated
considerable controversy, but the evidence clearly indicates that his theater
strategy coalesced during the spring of 1944 and called for the Second
British Army on the eastern flank to capture Caen rapidly and establish a
defensive position inland at Falaise. 192 While continual feints would draw
the bulk of German forces against the British, U.S. forces, after capturing
Cherbourg, would break out in the west, secure the Breton ports, hook
toward the Seine, and fan out into the French interior, while the Second
Army advanced on the inner flank of this hook. 193
In fact, Montgomery wrought significant changes to the OVERLORD
plan. He insisted upon a broader and more powerful initial assault, a less
ambitious tactical role for airborne forces, and a more limited secondary
role for Anglo-Canadian forces. He also demanded the early capture of
Cherbourg and the Breton ports to guarantee the logistic base for a perma-
nent lodgement. These revisions to the OVERLORD plan appreciably
increased Allied chances of victory in Normandy.
British ground forces made much progress in amphibious assault
preparation during 1943-1944. Assault formations extensively rehearsed
for their missions, and the military vigorously enhanced its amphibious
capability. The result was marked innovation as Britain developed special-
ized assault armor, including amphibious and flamethrowing tanks,
armored bulldozers, tracklayers, and ditch fillers, as well as rocket-firing
landing craft, to overcome the German Atlantic Wall defenses. 194
Despite Montgomery's endeavors, deep-rooted problems that defied
quick remedy still afflicted British forces on the eve of D-Day.
Reequipment, for example, had progressed slowly because the priority
accorded to the Mediterranean theater meant that many OVERLORD for-
mations did not reequip until spring of 1944. But the greatest deficiency
remained the army's inadequate coordination. By the summer of 1943
Home Forces was well aware of coordination problems as combat experi-
ence filtered back from the desert and Tunisia. In the year before D-Day
Home Forces energetically addressed the issue. Yet inexperience, regimen-
talism, and lack of holistic doctrine all hampered efforts to improve coordi-
nation, and so only limited progress was made. Regimentalism prevented
the army from discarding its "joint-operations" approach the loose com-
bination of combat arms, rather than intimate coordination— and hindered
efforts to improve combined-arms training. There was some progress, most
notably between infantry and independent tank brigades, but it was patchy.
The combined-arms preparation that dominated training during 1943-
1944 clearly illustrates the detrimental effects of regimentalism: the army's
"joint-operations" approach ensured that infantry and armor invariably
