30
Preparation: 1919-1944
major exercises scheduled for the summer of 1939 while doubling the
Territorial Army further dissipated already meager resources.
Earlier neglect also hampered rearmament in the late 1930s. Interwar
governments had allowed Britain's military-industrial base to run down.51
The loss of production facilities as well as design and development expert-
ise retarded rearmament and contributed to Britain's loss of leadership in
armored warfare. When rearmament began in earnest in 1939, lack of pro-
duction facilities hampered reequipment of the army and condemned it to
fight during 1939-1942 with inferior, and often obsolete, weaponry.
Despite its best efforts, Britain never completely closed this quality gap
during the war, and the army's inferiority in armaments both fueled the dis-
asters of 1939-1942 and delayed ultimate victory.
This gap had become most pronounced in armor by September 1939.
Closely tied with Britain's loss of leadership in armored warfare doctrine
was a parallel loss of its primacy in tank design. Despite British invention
of the tank during World War I and continued design leadership during the
1920s, in the 1930s British tanks fell behind French, German, and Soviet
designs. The dwindling of design and production expertise resulted in tech-
nical problems and mechanical unreliability that badly hampered British
tank development.52 Technical limitations thus contributed to Britain's loss
of leadership in armored warfare. Budgetary constraints shaped procure-
ment too and led to development of cheap light tanks, tankettes, and
tracked carriers suitable for colonial service. It was only after 1936 that
Britain energetically pursued heavy-tank projects, too late to create an
effective heavy-tank force prior to the outbreak of war.53
The most significant cause of Britain's tank development going awry
in the late 1930s, however, was the emergence of the view, already noted,
of armor specialization that led it to procure multiple tank types whose
functions and capabilities overlapped. While partly a consequence of lack
of foresight, the multiplicity of tank types that Britain produced was more
the result of deliberate design than of confusion. Such multiplicity reflected
the army's view of the tank as a specialized vehicle performing a variety of
functions, as the cavalry had done. It also reflected the absence of holistic
doctrine, thus blinkering the army to the broader applicability and potential
of armor. This philosophy of armor specialization dissipated meager finan-
cial resources and overstretched limited design and production facilities. In
1936, for example, Britain pursued development of four distinct tank types:
a light tank for reconnaissance and raiding missions by mechanized caval-
ry; a medium tank for flank protection; an infantry tank to provide firepow-
er for foot soldiers; and a close-support tank for indirect artillery support.
Such diversification exacerbated the severe design and production difficul-
ties that the British tank arm faced as a result of nearly twenty years of neg-
lect.
Loss of design and production expertise, the resultant technical prob-
31
The Interwar Period
lems, and dissipation of resources meant that Britain was unable to produce
a tank in the 1930s that combined mobility and firepower. 54 By 1939
Britain had clearly fallen behind in armored warfare: the German Army had
by then incorporated tanks into its operational and tactical doctrine and
consolidated its armor into mechanized corps. Britain's inability to develop
a quality battle tank in turn drove doctrine to support those tanks that
Britain could produce. By the outbreak of war tank doctrine emphasized
two types of warfare-fluid and positional-that required two types of
tanks-fast, mobile cruisers and slow, heavily armored infantry tanks.
During rearmament in the late 1930s, the British tank arm saw
unprecedented expansion and an influx of new equipment. The army
formed a Mobile Division in 1938 (redesignated the 1st Armoured in 1939)
and combined the RTC and the mechanized cavalry into a new Royal
Armoured Corps (RAC) in April 1939. The outbreak of war caught the
RAC in mid-expansion, at which point it comprised eight weak mechanized
cavalry regiments equipped with light tanks, the understrength Ist
Armoured Division, the ragtag Egyptian Mobile Division, and the Army
lank Brigade. On paper these developments appeared progressive and sig-
nificant reforms. But in reality, this expansion and reorganization was less
effective than it appeared, and in September 1939 the RAC still lacked
well-organized, trained, and equipped armored forces. At the root of this
deficiency lay the army's unswerving adherence to a defensive strategy that
prevented any change in thinking about armored warfare. British armored
forces remained poorly organized, equipped, and trained for offensive
action. The ascendancy of the cavalry concept ensured that the army struc-
tured and equipped the Mobile Division not for an attack role but for recon-
naissance and pursuit missions. The division's organization also reflected
both the prevailing view of armor specialization and the confused and mul-
tifarious mission of tanks within existing strategic doctrine, containing dif-
ferent tanks designed for disparate tasks. The division lacked an all-arms
composition and was very tank-heavy and unwieldy. The army's failure to
exercise with armor between the wars, however, ensured that it remained
blind to the deficient organization of its armored forces.
The amalgamation of the RTC and the mechanized cavalry was also a
dubious reform. The army merged these branches largely to alleviate the
huge intellectual and practical problems the cavalry faced in adapting to
mechanization. The decision was a compromise that allowed cavalrymen
and tankers to coexist in separate but equal status. The creation of the RAC
around the mechanized cavalry,
however, further entrenched the cavalry
concept of armored warfare; while the move undoubtedly improved the
mechanized cavalry's proficiency, it hampered the effectiveness of the
RAC throughout the war.
In September 1939 Britain went to war with two mechanized divisions
that had never exercised as integral formations, and the lack of concern the
