204
Preparation: 1919-1944
Germany would once again resort to a blitzkrieg attack and concentrate
massive strength to outmaneuver and quickly overwhelm Soviet resistance.
Yet the uncompromising fight the Germans were to wage would leave the
Soviet people with no alternative but to fight to the bitter end, and so the
Soviet Union simply could not be conquered quickly or easily.
BARBAROSSA initially met with huge success as the Ostheer con-
ducted devastating strategic deep penetrations that encircled and eliminated
millions of Soviet troops and thousands of planes, guns, and tanks.48 Yet
the vastness of the Russian steppes ultimately swallowed up the blitzkrieg
and sapped German strength as losses mounted. Simultaneously, the Soviet
Union mobilized its enormous manpower resources and relocated its indus-
try east of the Urals, in preparation for a protracted war.49 Depleted and
exhausted, the Germans pressed on in search of decisive victory in the
belief that one more push would bring a Soviet collapse. Forced to fight
beyond its tether, with its strength attenuated, and with precarious logistic
support, the Ostheer suffered heavily and its combat power dwindled. 50
The Eastern Front, which absorbed the majority of Germany's armed
forces throughout World War II, wrought important changes in German
doctrine, organization, tactics, and equipment, as the Ostheer adapted to
novel combat conditions in an ever more desperate and vicious battle for
survival. The Heer possessed sound defensive doctrine based on defense in
depth, but its offensive-oriented training left German troops inexpert at
defense. Moreover, the unique features of the Eastern Front-distance, ter-
rain, weather, and overextension-rendered existing doctrine inadequate.
German troops initially fared poorly in defensive operations in the east,
especially early on during the Soviet winter 1941 counteroffensive.
However, German troops quickly improvised modified defensive tactics
grounded in the core principles of German defensive doctrine depth, fire-
power, mobility, and counterattack—to halt the Soviet forces, and the
revised techniques that emerged during 1941-1943 became standard prac-
tice on all fronts for the rest of the war. 51
Hard defensive fighting accompanied the meteoric blitzkrieg advances
of summer 1941 as distance, terrain, and weather negated standard elastic
defense in depth. Aggressive drives took panzer formations well forward of
the slower infantry and often forced them to engage in heavy defensive
fighting, generally without prepared positions in depth, against both Soviet
forces attempting to evade encirclement and counterattacking relief forces.
Panzer divisions lacked infantry or defensive training, and defense negated
the mobility that was central to their effectiveness. They were, therefore,
not very effective at encirclement operations and often could not fully con-
tain enemy pockets, with the result that many encircled Soviet troops
escaped. 2 Moreover, Soviet counterattacks with heavy armor often pressed
the panzer forces hard, and they increasingly had to deploy Luftwaffe heavy
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
205
antiaircraft guns in a ground antitank role, the Flak 88 being the only
German weapon that could destroy Soviet heavy armor at long range.
The infantry experienced defensive difficulties too. With troop densi-
ties often averaging half those in other theaters, the thinly stretched
intantry faced frequent Soviet counterattacks. Combat quickly revealed that
infantry lacked antitank capability and had no effective counter to Soviet
heavy armor. Infantry divisions often had to deploy forward artillery and
heavy flak guns in a direct-fire role, even though this brought heavy losses
through line-of-sight engagements.53 Since these heavy weapons were
scarce assets and difficult to redeploy quickly, the infantry often had to
destroy Soviet armor in close combat with antitank mines, grenades, and
Molotov cocktails. Successful destruction in close combat required iron
discipline and the separation of Soviet armor from accompanying infantry.
If this was not achieved, Soviet armor often overran the thinly stretched
German line and inflicted heavy loss.54
At first the clumsy, unsophisticated, and ill-coordinated nature of early
Soviet counterattacks saved many German units from destruction. 5 But as
the advance continued German units became dangerously separated and
more depleted, and the Red Army counterattacked frequently. The breadth
of the front and paucity of German forces prevented elastic defense in
depth, and German troops often had to adopt linear defenses (consisting of
widely spaced strongpoints, with few or no reserves) that Soviet counterat-
tacks regularly penetrated. 56 German combat power further waned as troops
outdistanced their lines of supply. The terrible Russian roads and the vast
distances took a catastrophic toll of German motor transport, and little
equipment and few troops were available to replace losses. 57
Its strategic and logistic situation demanded that the depleted, tired,
and overextended Ostheer halt in late September 1941; consolidate and
construct winter defensive positions and a supply infrastructure; and pre-
pare for a renewed offensive the following summer. However, the OKH
sambled on a final big push to take Moscow during the fall — Operation
TAIFUN with weakened forces that lacked ammunition and fuel. German
strength and mobility plummeted during the fall as troops slogged through
the terrible mud and as the Soviet forces threw all available troops, includ-
ing fresh, well-equipped reserves from the Far East, into the line to halt the
enemy at the gates of Moscow.58 Though exhausted, and despite its unpre-
ratedness for winter combat and facing mounting partisan attacks in the
Car that further disrupted supply deliveries, the German Army Group
Center resumed the attack in mid-November in winter snow and ebbing
morale until this weak offensive ground to a halt in sheer exhaustion on 5
December.59
During the winter of 1941-1942 the German defense rarely conformed
to established doctrine,60 Limitations imposed by terrain and weather; by
