182
Preparation: 1919-1944
out and destroy enemy armor, even though its tanks were inferior to those
of the enemy. Worse yet, the Canadian armored formations assigned to
OVERLORD had no combat experience, were less familiar with their
equipment, and were less well trained than their RAC counterparts.
Training had not prepared Canadian armor to operate in concert with other
combat arms because the adoption of British armored warfare doctrine hin-
dered combined-arms preparation. Focused on tank-to-tank combat,
Canadian armor for too long paid little attention to coordination with
infantry and artillery. Moreover, repeated reequipment delayed the progress
of Canadian armor from basic and unit training on to combined-arms
preparation. The 3d Division and 2d Armoured Brigade, for example, began
to train together only in April 1944.80 Canadian armored formations
remained the weakest element in the Canadian order of battle on the eve of
D-Day.
Unlike in the British Army, artillery never became the backbone of the
Canadian Army. The major drawback of the wartime Canadian artillery was
not quality but quantity. Because field artillery was one of the few areas in
which Canada preserved a limited productive capacity between the wars,
reequipping the wartime Canadian Royal Artillery (CRA) was easier than
for the other combat arms. Canadian ordnance was obsolete in 1939, but
the nation quickly produced the excellent British 25-pounder gun, and by
1942 the CRA had been completely reequipped with it.81 As well,
Montgomery quickly converted Canadian gunners to his doctrine of massed
fire while under his command in 1941-1942. The CRA therefore rapidly
adopted prevailing British gunnery tactics, and by 1944 Canadian First
Army fielded its own Army Group, Canadian Royal Artillery (AGCRA).
But its weakness was a lack of quantity. Canada deployed for OVERLORD
only a fraction of the army artillery fielded by the Royal Artillery —a mere
five regiments and no heavy artillery.82 As a result, the AGCRA had to be
brought up to strength with British regiments.83 Consequently, given the
Anglo-Canadian operational approach of firepower dominance, lack of
artillery severely compromised the Canadian First Army's ability to operate
without British assistance.
A key distinction between the Canadian Army of the two world wars
was its exposure to combat. During the Great War Canada had quickly dis-
patched an expeditionary force to the Western Front where extensive com-
bat exposure allowed it to adapt and to enhance its combat effectiveness. In
World War II, however, lack of battle experience meant that many of the
Canadian deficiencies went unidentified and uncorrected before the gov-
ernment finally committed its forces to extensive combat in the
Mediterranean in mid-1943. When finally committed to combat, Canadian
forces performed relatively well and learned quite quickly from their battle
experience. Canada committed its 1st Division and Ist Army Tank Brigade
to the invasion of Sicily, and both formations performed well; in fact, the
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
183
Canadians fought better in Sicily and Italy than they would in Normandy. 84
The Ist Division advanced farther and fought longer in inhospitable terrain
than any other Commonwealth formation, while confronting significant
operational limitations imposed by both the loss of much of its transport at
sea and the lack of artillery and reinforcements. 85 The limitations forced the
division to jettison the British doctrine of firepower dominance it had
learned and to innovate tactically. Much of the division's initial success
was due to uncharacteristic infiltration techniques, active patrolling, and
aggressive junior leadership, as well as excellent artillery support. 8o
The 1st Division's performance was due to a combination of its high-
quality personnel (it contained more PAM personnel than any other forma-
tion), the quality of its training, and the professionalism of its commander,
Guy Simonds. In fact in Sicily the Canadians, and Simonds in particular,
greatly impressed Montgomery. The Ist Division and 1st Army Tank
Brigade were the cream of the crop because they were the most senior, and
hence most combat-ready, Canadian formations. 87 Even though Sicily was
inevitably a rugged experience, the Ist Division learned quickly under the
tutelage of Simonds, who alone among the senior Canadian commanders
recognized the need to both analyze combat experience and to retrain in the
field during combat. Nevertheless, despite his endeavors, many of the
weaknesses that afflicted Canadian operations in Sicily were not quickly or
easily remedied. 88 The I Canadian Corps performed nearly as well in Italy.
The Ist Division again distinguished itself in house-to-house fighting for
Ottona and displayed the same penchant for good artillery support and tac-
tical flexibility that it had shown in Sicily. In fact, it performed better than
more experienced British divisions.89
That the I Canadian Corps was able to operate under British command
contributed to its solid performance because it minimized the limitations
imposed by the Canadian lack of operational experience. Under British
command, the Canadians got the logistic and artillery support required to
fight effectively. Moreover, Canadian forces initially avoided sustained
heavy combat, allowing them to adapt to combat conditions and to remedy
some weaknesses before major actions. Thus when the I Canadian Corps
launched its first big offensive in May 1944 in the Lini Valley, it had ten
months of experience under its belt and did not fumble as the Canadian
First Army would in Normandy.
At the tactical level, Canadian troops adapted quite quickly once in
combat in the Mediterranean. During December 1943, the Ist Division out-
fought the elite and battle-hardened Ist German Parachute Division dug in
at Ortona.91 After the enemy repelled an initial attack, the Canadians
changed tactics and systematically cleared the town to prevent German
reinfiltration. The Canadians quickly learned to advance from house to
house using "bechive" charges to blast through walls under the cover of
masking mortar fire. To compensate for reduced artillery effectiveness in
