184
Preparation: 1919-1944
close-quarter urban combat, Simonds deployed his antitank guns in a
direct-fire role, and the division demonstrated "excellent" combined-arms
coordination. 92 The Canadian urban warfare techniques developed at
Ortona subsequently became standard procedure for Commonwealth forces
and ultimately influenced U.S. Army urban warfare tactics.93
Among the most serious deficiencies initially displayed by Canadian
forces in the Mediterranean was poor tank-infantry cooperation. After sus-
tained but relatively light combat, Canadian combined-arms coordination
improved fairly quickly. The Ist Army Tank Brigade, for example, learned
to integrate at lower levels. 4 The growing tactical skill of Canadian troops
in the Mediterranean clearly reflected Simonds's professional commitment
to retraining.95 On closer examination, though, the performance of the 1
Canadian Corps in the Mediterranean revealed many of the same opera-
tional weaknesses that afflicted the Canadian First Army in Normandy. The
1st Division generally fought well in Sicily, overcoming the stiffest opposi-
tion of the campaign at the battles of Agira and Regalbuto, but command
and control problems plagued the Canadians.96
The success and economy of Canadian participation in Italy intoxicat-
ed Canada's government; it thus decided not to withdraw the 1st Division
for OVERLORD as originally planned but instead sent additional forces to
Italy. This decision, which was based on political rather than military con-
siderations, was an error.?7 Once the I Canadian Corps encountered German
forces determined to hold the powerful Gustav Line, the Ist Division
bogged down in the winter of 1943-1944, suffered heavy casualties, and
lost its offensive edge. 98 The I Canadian Corps experienced as many diffi-
culties with offensive action as the Canadian First Army would in
Normandy. In its first major attack, the assault on the Liri Valley in May
1944, Canadian command and control again proved poor and their opera-
tions in the race for Rome in early June demonstrated their inexperience in
fluid battle conditions.99
Unfortunately, Canadian combat experience in the Mediterranean had
little impact on Canadian preparation in Britain for OVERLORD.
Insufficient time existed for Crerar's command to absorb lessons learned
from the Mediterranean because the Canadian offensive in the Liri Valley
occurred too late to influence preparations for OVERLORD. Equally seri-
ous, amateurism bedeviled the lessons-learned process because senior com-
manders mistakenly believed that Mediterranean experience offered few
lessons pertinent to combat in northwest Europe. Thus there was relatively
little experience to challenge existing doctrine, tactics, and training, even
though the I Corps experience clearly illuminated the operational inexperi-
ence of Canadian troops.
A combination of the inexperience, the dual character of the wartime
army, and the need to field an overseas expeditionary force also ensured
that the combat "teeth" of the CAO was proportionately much smaller than
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
185
in the Anglo-American armies. 100 Uncertainty about the size of the field
force to be deployed, over theaters of operations, and casualty forecasts all
contributed to the uncontrolled expansion of "overhead." Thus only a frac-
tion of the army was in combat formations ready to be deployed in the
field. The CAO also suffered from overstaffing and overadministration, and
was overprovided with engineering, ordnance, and medical units. 101 The
need to maintain the CAO overseas both in Britain and in active theaters
inevitably led to duplication; it was only through combat experience that
the army became aware of overmanning problems. But because Canadian
troops got into combat so late in the war, little rationalization of available
manpower materialized prior to the Normandy campaign. Consequently, by
1944 no belligerent required so many support troops to keep one combatant
in action as did Canada. 102
Despite their elaborate service and support tail assigned to OVER-
LORD, Canadian troops lacked certain critical areas of support and, conse-
quently, could not operate without British assistance. The First Army's het-
erogeneous organization had stunted self-sufficiency because the
contingents assigned to Crerar's command possessed minimal support serv-
ices. Moreover, the available Canadian truck transport capacity was wholly
inadequate and its tank recovery, repair, and replacement organization
underdeveloped. Logistic deficiencies would hamper the Canadian Army's
effort to make a decisive contribution to Allied victory in Normandy, 103
Interservice cooperation is a vital ingredient in military effectiveness.
Yet Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) did not
earmark Canadian air and sea forces to support Canadian ground forces
directly during OVERLORD. A sizable Canadian air contingent formed
part of 83d Group, 2d (British) Tactical Air Force, which Canadian ground
forces trained with during 1943.104 But since SHAEF rated the 83d Group
as the most combat-ready, it assigned it to support British Second Army,
and appointed the all-British, and less proficient, 84th Group to support
Canadian ground operations. Canadian tactical aviation did not support
Canadian ground forces in Normandy. Due to their inexperience and result-
ant failure to learn from the combat experience of their allies, Canadian
forces were slow to recognize the necessity for close liaison with tactical
aViation, 105 Even with the liaison structures established by the War Office,
Canadian forces had conducted few exercises with tactical air support
before OVERLORD 106 In addition, Canadian gunners did not begin train-
ing with aerial spotters until the late spring of 1944, and so had not gained
proticiency with the air OP system prior to OVERLORD. 107
The Canadian Army's early war experience raised serious concerns
about its ability to fight effectively in northwest Europe. While Canadian
troops generally exhibited good morale and enthusiasm, such spirit and
esprit de corps were not matched by adequate higher leadership, doctrinal
and tactical soundness, extensive battle experience, effective organization,
