198
Preparation: 1919-1944
mount the unfamiliar terrain and conditions. Mountains, deep snow, and
winter weather both heavily favored defense and hampered mobility. The
campaign confirmed the lessons of Poland regarding the efficacy of armor:
the single light tank company shipped to Norway played an important role
in German success. Lacking antitank capability, neither Anglo-French nor
Norwegian forces could halt the obsolescent Panzer I and II tanks. 15 But,
only small combined-arms combat groups built around armor and heavily
reinforced in firepower proved able to penetrate Allied blocking positions
across narrow valley floors that denied German maneuver. Forced to launch
unsubtle frontal attacks, German troops maintained a furious tempo, pass-
ing battalions through one another to maintain offensive momentum, and
attacking at dawn and dusk to wear down enemy resistance. German troops
also repeatedly crossed terrain considered impassable to seize mountain
peaks and outflank enemy forces. 16 The Norwegian campaign confirmed
the tactical flexibility and adaptability that German forces had shown in
Poland.
Once again detailed examination of troop performance followed victo-
ry in Scandinavia. The protracted fight for Narvik, in difficult terrain and
against a larger force, revealed that the offensive orientation of German
training had left troops ill prepared for defense. At the same time, the
German assessment of Anglo-French performance in Norway as poor rein-
forced Hitler's determination to launch a blitzkrieg in the west. The OKH
concluded that the British lacked fighting spirit, panicked easily, suffered
from poor morale, and were ill equipped, tactically inept, and slow to adapt
to German outflanking and infiltration tactics.17
Yet faults that later contributed to German defeat surfaced in Norway,
though they were not prominent enough to affect the course of the cam-
paign. German victory relied heavily on daring, surprise, and the enemy's
unreadiness. The campaign also revealed that the Wehrmacht lacked a com-
mand organization for large-scale joint operations, even though the services
had cooperated fairly well in the face of few operational difficulties.
Interservice friction did emerge, however, over the proper use of air power.
The army demanded close air support, especially during the struggle for
Narvik, while the Luftwaffe sought to attack naval targets at sea. 18
Moreover, the crippling losses suffered by the Kriegsmarine while trans-
porting troops and supplies to Norway revealed how unbalanced German
military capabilities were. All the same, the vulnerability of German lines
of communication to air and sea attack was a lesson of the campaign that
went unrecognized by both sides.
On 10 May 1940 Germany launched Operation SICHELSCHNITT, a
massive blitzkrieg invasion of France and the Low Countries. Hitler
employed maximum strength—135 of Germany's 156 divisions—in the
attack, but German forces were still outnumbered and outgunned. 19
Lacking numerical and material superiority or the resources for a protracted
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
199
campaign, the operation depended on concentration, speed, and surprise for
success. As in Poland, Hitler threw virtually his entire air and ground forces
into the attack to overwhelm quickly his enemies before they had time to
mobilize their demographic and industrial strength. Concentrated German
mechanized forces conducted a daring, rapid, and deep penetration through
the wooded, hilly Ardennes to isolate and pin down the entire left wing of
the Allied front until the bulk of the Heer could arrive and annihilate it.
This advance split the Allied front and forced the BEF to fight its way back
to the Channel port and be evacuated. Having cut off the BEF, Hitler halted
his stretched armored forces before the Channel ports, while the infantry
caught up before launching a final attack on Calais and Dunkirk: a delay
that allowed the battered BEF to escape from Dunkirk to fight again. 20
The fall of France was one of the greatest martial achievements in the
history of warfare as Germany rapidly overran France at light cost. Bold,
swift, and imaginative employment of combined-arms mechanized forces
ably supported by Luftwaffe tactical aviation secured victory.21 Similarly
daring employment of airborne forces- most notably in the seizure of the
reputedly impregnable Belgian fort of Eben Emael-speeded success on
the ground. Moreover, the impact of the German winter retraining was
manifest in better concentration and coordination, as well as greater confi-
dence and aggressiveness, as enhanced combat effectiveness contributed to
the devastating German victory.
These spectacular victories were, however, misleading. Despite its
blitzkrieg aura of modernity, the Heer was in many ways less modern than
is opponents. Germany was among the least motorized societies in Western
Europe and outside the elite armored troops, the Heer remained a predomi-
nanly horse-drawn infantry force. Moreover, even though the Germans
used modern communications effectively in their early campaigns, field
radios were never common. In addition, because blitzkrieg aimed to over-
whelm enemies rapidly, the Heer lacked the service support or resources to
right a long and protracted conflict. What the tremendous victory in the
West obscured was that late in the campaign "friction" had badly eroded
the combat power of German mechanized forces.23 Thus blitzkrieg only
worked so well early in the war due to a unique combination of German
organizational and improvisational skill, the flexibility instilled by the
Keichswer in the 1920s, and the obvious unpreparedness of Germany s
enemies.
During the summer of 1940 the Heer reduced its strength, reorganized,
irms, and close integration. Reorganzation slashed tank strength but
