414
Conclusion
Defeat provided impetus for reform to reverse British fortunes, but at
the same time significantly shaped the process and pattern of adaptation
that materialized. Defeat entrenched the army's reluctance to evaluate
openly its performance as senior commanders censored lessons-learned
material to maintain current morale and combat effectiveness in a effort to
halt the string of defeats. But censorship, deemed necessary to maintain the
current combat proficiency, hampered efforts to enhance future combat
effectiveness.
Unappreciative of the need to learn from experience, lacking mecha-
nisms to disseminate lessons, and unwilling to reassess strategic and doctri-
nal fundamentals, the army was slow to learn from combat. At the same
time, enormous political pressure for success led to a series of rash British
counteroffensives in the desert campaigns in 1941-1942. Ironically, the
quest for victory got in the way of British efforts to enhance combat effec-
tiveness. Premature offensive action dissipated scarce resources and, more
seriously, left commanders little time to contemplate larger strategic and
doctrinal issues. Thus the British Army muddled its way through, slowly
learning the hard way by costly trial and error, until in 1942 in North Africa
it gradually discovered a recipe for success a single approach that proved
capable of defeating the Germans. This approach was the de facto opera-
tional doctrine of firepower dominance in which artillery smashed one's
own infantry into the enemy lines and beat down the enemy in grim, slow,
cautious, attritional warfare. At the core of this approach lay recognized
British strengths— artillery, logistics, and administration.
Although the victories of 1942-1943 began to restore troop morale, it
remained fragile. Such fragility led both the War Office and senior com-
manders to continue to dominate the lessons-learned process and to censor
reports that, deemed too critical, might damage morale. The army high
command endeavored to keep the troops ignorant of unpalatable realities,
such as the inferior quality of Allied armor, in an effort to maintain what
there was of morale and combat effectiveness. Whatever the merits of such
motives, the consequence was a hampering of the army's ability to build its
future combat effectiveness. The unwillingness to identify problems openly
and honestly gravely handicapped the army's efforts to rectify the problems
that confronted it.
Defeat also slowed the preparation of the Canadian armed forces. The
most fundamental problem of the Canadian military on the eve of
Operation OVERLORD in June 1944 was its lack of battle experience. Few
Canadian soldiers had seen combat, and for most of those that had this
amounted to a single day in the disastrous 1942 Dieppe raid. Defeat at
Dieppe both promoted and hindered innovation within the Canadian mili-
tary. The debacle provided impetus for a much needed shakeup of the
Canadian Army during 1942-1943, but it also reinforced the Canadian gov-
ernment's reluctance to commit troops to combat for fear of heavy casual-
Conclusion
415
ties that might have precipitated a domestic political crisis. With so little
experience under its belt, the Canadian Army was unable to generate broad
military proficiency before June 1944, and thus it was only during the
Normandy campaign that Canadian troops began to grope their way slowly
and painfully toward military effectiveness.
If British commanders had sought to shield their troops from unsavory
realities, the German High Command and its officer corps resorted to a far
more systematic and warped distortion of reality to maintain the fighting
power of its armed forces. Nazi racism, inculcated through ideological
indoctrination, crippled intelligence efforts to assess accurately the capabil-
ities and potential of enemies, especially the "subhuman" Soviet peoples
and the "mongrel" Americans. Such racism hampered German adaptation at
every turn and hastened defeat. Yet this German self-deception proved
highly effective in maintaining morale, cohesion, discipline and fighting
power, even during the dying days of the war when defeat was imminent.
Tactically, operationally, and technically, the Heer constantly adapted
throughout the war. In consequence, the Western Allies experienced great
difficulty in countering the qualitative edge that the Heer possessed in
1939. This reality helps to explain both why the Allies required six years to
defeat Germany, and why even in 1945 they were still rarely able to prevail
on the battlefield without marked numerical and material superiority.
Extensive combat experience underpinned German adaptation. Germany
went to war in 1939 with essentially sound doctrine rooted in its World War
I experience. The first-line German divisions were relatively well trained
and had gained valuable operational experience from the occupations of the
Rhineland, Austria, Sudetenland, and Czechoslovakia.
One of the great
strengths of the Heer was that, even though the brilliant victories of 1939-
1941 provided little incentive for substantial innovation, it never equated
success in battle with effectiveness in performance. In consequence, the
Heer continually evaluated its performance at every stage through exten-
sive, and often highly critical, battle reports. It also drew widely upon the
experience of even junior officers in collecting after-action reports and
quickly absorbed recent battle experience into revised doctrine and train-
ing.
Its approach to learning was certainly less scientific, less formal, and
less institutionalized than that of the British and Americans. Yet its exten-
sive and broad-based combat experience gave the German General Staff
and officer corps the expertise to extract accurate and appropriate combat
lessons. That the Germans also maintained close ties between the field and
replacement armies facilitated adaptation as decorated combat veterans
were routinely rotated through the replacement army to disseminate their
experience, which brought periodic revision of training syllabuses. So even
in 1944, German basic training remained more realistic and thorough than
that of its opponents.
