108
Preparation: 1919-1944
fare. Rather, COMPASS comprised a series of limited tactical attacks that
met with unexpected success due to a combination of unusual British
opportunism and considerable Italian timidity and ineptitude. Although this
was a remarkable and much needed achievement, these were tactical-not
strategic-victories for British armor, and success largely derived from
profound enemy deficiencies rather than British strengths. Lacking a pro-
fessional officer corps, poorly equipped, with limited mobility and low
morale, the Italian formations rapidly disintegrated. 29
British troops performed better in COMPASS than they had in Norway
or France. Wavell orchestrated elaborate deception to achieve total surprise
and to inflate Italian perceptions of British strength 30 Short on artillery and
munitions, and with little air support, he utilized naval bombardment to
augment available firepower.31 His foresighted establishment of forward
supply dumps provided the logistic base necessary for success. Good inter-
service cooperation, especially from the Mediterranean Fleet, dynamic
leadership, and aggressive troops all aided victory. Attack tactics built
around the superiority of the heavy Matilda Il tank played an important role
in defeating an enemy weak in armor and antitank capability. Just as impor-
tant, gunners adapted prewar principles to desert circumstances in which
terrain, poor visibility, unreliable communications, and fluid warfare made
surveying and fire planning difficult. Gunners improvised quick fire plans
as, on 9 December, the 4th Indian Division fired the first full Common-
wealth divisional artillery barrage of the war to demonstrate that targeted
massed fire was possible in mobile operations.32
Ironically, though, the startling victories against the Italians hampered
army efforts to enhance its combat effectiveness. While the MEC drew
important lessons from COMPASS-most notably the need for better
radios, that artillery support did not hamper the mobility of armor, and the
efficacy of offensive defense desert troops quickly forgot these lessons.33
More significant, though, was that victory disguised serious underlying
weaknesses, most notably the inadequacy of British tank doctrine. The
Matilda Il's important role in the success of COMPASS merely reinforced
the view that unsupported massed armor was a battle winner. COMPASS
thus delayed realization of the need for integrated combined-arms mecha-
nized forces. At the same time, victory gave the army the false impression
that it could easily and effectively master maneuver warfare: COMPASS
promoted fluid warfare and mobile defense that the army was neither
equipped, organized, nor mentally prepared for.34 Strategically, victory in
the desert also appeared to vindicate J. F. C. Fuller's and Liddell Hart's
notions of an "indirect approach," a peripheral strategy that would wear the
enemy into submission. The success of COMPASS solidified Britain's
adherence to a strategy of attrition. As a result, victory against the Italians
contributed to defeat by the Germans.
The fruits of success quickly evaporated with the arrival in February
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
109
1941 of stiffer opposition-Erwin Rommel's Africa Corps. The War
Office's ill-advised diversion of forces to Greece and the arrival of German
troops transformed the situation in North Africa as Wavell halted COM-
PASS, unwisely disbanded O'Connor's command, and dispatched major
forces to Greece and Italian East Africa, which denuded British strength in
Libya.35 The Balkan fiasco bore striking similarities to the Norwegian flop.
Wavell dispatched three divisions to man the Aliakhmon Line in Greece,
but the rapid collapse of Yugoslavia after the German invasion of 6 April
1941 allowed the Germans to outflank the line and force a phased with-
drawal. 36 Once again it proved difficult to move troops in the face of
enemy-controlled skies, and morale ebbed. During late April the Royal
Navy evacuated the majority of Commonwealth troops to Crete, where they
fought a short, desperate action to deny the island to the first strategic air-
borne assault in the history of warfare. The uncertain mission of the Crete
garrison; Wavell's heavy commitments elsewhere; the acute shortage of
shipping, heavy weapons, and air power; and the depleted state of the garri-
son prevented the defenders from vigorously fortifying the island.
Nevertheless, while the Royal Navy blocked any German seaborne rein-
forcements, the defenders resisted fiercely and nearly defeated the
invaders. But German numbers ultimately prevailed, and the Royal Navy
had to undertake at heavy cost another desperate evacuation. 37
As the Balkan drama played out the Africa Corps arrived in Libya.
British intelligence was slow to discover the arrival of German troops and
seriously underestimated the speed, aggressiveness, and daring with which
Rommel would attack the British western flank in Libya, which had been
reduced to a weak and polyglot force of two green divisions commanded by
Lt. Gen. Phillip Neame,38 Woefully short of artillery and armor, Wavell
opted for a delaying withdrawal, but with limited mobility the retreat
turned into a rout during which the Germans captured Neame and
O'Connor on 6 April. Two days later the remnants of the 2nd Armoured
Division surrendered at Mechili, and on 11 April Rommel invested, but was
unable to take, the port city of Tobruk. 39
In retrospect, the foremost causes of defeat were that Wavell had
overextended himself in COMPASS and the Greek diversion had sapped
his strength. The British had also underestimated German offensive poten-
tial, and Rommel's speed and daring took them by surprise. Wavell's deci-
sion to conduct a delaying withdrawal was also, in retrospect, a mistake, for
the retreat became a debacle that forced the British to fall all the way back
to the Egyptian frontier. 40
In the months that followed, Rommel carved up the British in North
Africa in large part because of the British Army's inadequate grasp of the
mechanics of modern war and its failure to preserve its Great War experi-
ence or to develop doctrine between the wars. British operations in the
desert in 1941 suffered from poor leadership (the result of new and under-
