208
Preparation: 1919-1944
ized a major airlift that sustained resistance at Kholm and Demyansk until
German counterattacks relieved both pockets in May 1942.74 Success was
bought, however, at heavy cost in transports and crew, and, as significantly,
success inflated Luftwaffe perceptions of its aerial resupply capabilities,
which rashly led the air force to promise the following winter to resupply
the German Sixth Army after it became cut off at Stalingrad.
During the spring and summer of 1942, the Ostheer collected and dis-
seminated lessons learned and revised training in the light of its expert-
ences. Units forwarded detailed after-action reports that illuminated serious
deficiencies in German equipment, organization, and training. 75 Also, the
German success apparently vindicated Hitler's orders to hold fast and his
belief that iron will could triumph over a more powerful enemy. Armed
with these false notions, Hitler thereafter ordered German troops not to
retreat in the face of overwhelming odds, thereby aggravating losses and
hastening disaster.
After-action reports starkly illuminated the inadequacy of German anti-
tank doctrine and equipment, and demonstrated the difficulty troops faced
in destroying Soviet heavy armor. German antitank guns could only destroy
heavy Soviet tanks at short range, so troops learned to deploy them in
reverse slope (defilade) positions and to engage enemy armor from the
flanks or rear. 76 The Flak 88 could destroy Soviet armor at long range, but
the curtailed availability of the gun, its vulnerability (due to its high silhou-
ette), and Luftwaffe control of most heavy antiaircraft guns ensured that
few guns were available for infantry support. As a result, after-action
reports universally clamored for greater antitank capability.7
Combat in the fall and spring mud and winter snow demonstrated that
the Germans needed greater and more mobile firepower. During 1942,
therefore, Hitler accelerated development of new, heavier tanks—the
Panther and Tiger-and rushed them into service. In the meantime, facto-
ries retrofitted Panzer III and IV tanks with heavier cannon and additional
appliqué armor; increased production of assault guns; and mounted heavy
cannon on tank chassis to produce light tank destroyers. 78 Through impro-
vised designs that sacrificed armor protection and cross-country perform-
ance for maximum firepower, these tank destroyers proved to be effective
interim mobile antitank weapons and a valuable stopgap until purpose-built
vehicles entered service. Simultaneously, infantry and engineers underwent
extensive conditioning for close-combat tank destruction, accompanied by
a revised antitank warfare manual.79
Weather, climate, and rugged terrain also prevented full German appli-
cation of combat power and mobility against Soviet forces because the
Eastern Front was, physically and psychologically, very different from pre-
vious German experience. Climatic extremes, from subzero Arctic tempera-
tures and deep snow in the far north to desertlike summer heat in the south,
sapped troops' endurance, while lack of all-weather roads badly hampered
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
209
movement and resupply operations. At the same time, a series of
north-south rivers-Dniester, Bug, Dvina, Dniepr, Don, and Mius—pro-
vided natural obstacles from behind which Soviet formations delayed and
bled the Germans. And extensive, swampy, primeval forests acted as natu-
ral barriers to blitzkrieg. Forests limited observation and reduced artillery
effectiveness and provided excellent cover and concealment, thus allowing
Soviet forces to harry the invaders. 80 Prior to BARBAROSSA the Germans
had had little experience of forest warfare, and such combat was one area in
which German doctrine lacked realism. Encirclement operations in forests
proved ineffective, and the Germans quickly learned that only meticulous
preparation and methodical execution brought success in woodlands. The
experience of forest combat gained in the East demonstrated the innate
superiority of defense and led to the development of new doctrine. 81
In the far north, too, German troops also initially fared poorly in Arctic
warfare, which contributed to the German failure to sever the Murmansk
railroad along which Western Lend Lease aid poured. 82 So, during the win-
ter of 1941-1942, the Finns retrained German troops for winter and arctic
warfare, 83 All in all, the size and scale of the Soviet Union and the dispersal
of its cities and industry dissipated the effectiveness of blitzkrieg.
Indeed, the Ostheer never recovered from the horrendous losses of the
1941 campaign. By April 1942 it had lost one-third of the troops, 40 per-
cent of the antitank guns, half the horses, and 79 percent of the armor that
had begun BARBAROSSA.84 Massive vehicle losses had significantly
reduced mobility, while ammunition stocks had fallen to one-third of June
1941 levels. 85 New production and replacements could not offset losses,
and infantry, officer, and equipment strengths plummeted. Heavy losses,
lack of reinforcement and supplies, and undiminished Soviet resistance also
sapped German morale. Attrition had crippled the Ostheer's attack strength
and curtailed even its defensive capabilities 86 In retrospect, the 1941 cam-
paign irreparably shattered the Ostheer's striking power, and Germany
could no longer triumph over its enemies because Hitler compounded the
folly of invading the Soviet Union by declaring war on the United States in
December 1941. All that remained to be decided was how long Germany
could withstand its enemies. That Germany fought on for three years in no
small measure reflected the German military's ability to adapt to changing
combat conditions.
Nevertheless, Hitler decided to embark on curtailed offensive action
during summer 1942 on the southern sector of the front to capture the
Caucasus and its oil fields, which he hoped would knock the soviet Union
out of the war. In preparation for this offensive Hitler reinforced, rehabili-
tated, and reorganized the Ostheer to rebuild its combat power. Unty more
troops, equipment, and supplies, and better tactics could offer the Germans
even a slim chance of victory. The Ostheer disbanded some of its worst
shattered formations, combed out rear-area service units, and transferred
