136
Preparation: 1919-1944
climbed and by March the Allies had established a level of air supremacy
comparable to that achieved in Libya by the Second Battle of El Alamein.
By April 1943, both the quality and quantity of air support in Tunisia
had markedly improved. It assisted ground operations on a scale never
before possible: on 6 May 1943 NATAF flew an unprecedented 2,000 sor-
ties. The integration of air power into an overarching joint-services strategy
considerably enhanced the overall impact of air power, and from Tunisia
onward it became a vital and growing element of Allied striking power in
the air-land battle. The integrated strategy and the improved coordination
that first emerged in Tunisia enhanced Allied fighting power more than any
other single wartime advance. 170
The final assault launched in Tunisia in April 1943 finally shattered a
demoralized enemy for whom supply shortages had compromised mobility
and powers of resistance. In late April, the Eighth Army frontally attacked
the naturally strong Wadi Akarit line. Around-the-clock air strikes acceler-
ated the exhaustion of the enemy, but Axis forces again were able to with-
draw intact. Then, on 6 May, the First Army spearheaded Operation VUL-
CAN, a narrow 3,000-yard frontal attack under a huge air umbrella and
with the support of massed artillery fire that cracked the attenuated Axis
defenses. By 12 May enemy resistance had ceased.
The British Army derived more lessons from Tunisia as it finally began
to recognize the need to collect and disseminate combat experience. The
War Office concluded that the campaign demonstrated the general sound-
ness of army training, equipment, leadership, and morale. Yet, at the same
time, the army noted an unprecedented number of defects that included
poor combined-arms, junior officer, and replacement training; poor fire dis-
cipline and use of mortars, and inadequate infantry tactical training. The
War Office also concluded that battle drill had instilled rigidity rather than
initiative. The campaign also highlighted the deficiencies of Allied armor,
notably the inferior quality of British optics and the flammability of the
new American Sherman tank.171
TORCH confirmed the army's need for greater antitank capability. The
accelerating tank gun-versus-armor race left the 6-pounder gun hard-
pressed to deal with the new third-generation German Tiger tanks dis-
patched to Tunisia until the new 17-pounder gun entered service in March
1943. With this weapon Britain finally had a powerful, high-velocity anti-
tank gun capable of destroying enemy armor at typical combat ranges, even
though the gun's bulk and retention in reserve limited its tactical effective-
ness. Thus 17-pounders were rarely in the right place at the right time to
engage panzers.172 Late in the campaign infantry received the PIAT
(Platoon Infantry Anti-Tank), a tube-launched armor-piercing projector, to
replace the Boys rifle. Although inaccurate, short in range, and with poor
penetration, the PIAT was nevertheless an improvement on the Boys
rifle, 173 But because the PIAT left much to be desired, the 17-pounder
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
137
lacked mobility, and few tank destroyers were available, infantry continued
to rely on the 6-pounder for antitank defense. 174
British fire support became more effective in Tunisia. Improved aerial
photoreconnaissance and use of spotters increased artillery accuracy, while
the Parham system of rapid-response massed fire brought greater flexibili-
ty. The First Army's arrival in Tunisia allowed a gradual fusion of the North
African reforms with developments among Home Forces. Tunisia thus first
Witnessed the massive shell expenditures that became the hallmark of
British operations during 1944-1945. Increasingly sophisticated employ-
ment of artillery enhanced defensive capabilities too: at Takrouna on 19
April massed defensive artillery fire shattered German counterattacks. 175
The RAC, however, discerned few lessons in Tunisia because the ter-
rain so hampered the employment of armor that its contribution was negli-
gible. Tunisia's difficult mountains finally began to break down desert
practices, as it forced armor and infantry to work together more closely.
The campaign also demonstrated the effectiveness of the Churchill infantry
tank as a dependable, multipurpose vehicle. Thus the Tunisian campaign
first shook the RAC's faith in massed armor as well as its view of armor
specialization.
British fortunes changed suddenly in 1943 as Montgomery triumphed
in North Africa, the Royal Navy won the Battle of the Atlantic, and RAF
Bomber Command took the war to the enemy. Moreover, equipment
arrived in plenty, even if quality was still wanting. Increasing mastery of
the skies and seas greatly eased the army's struggle for victory, but simulta-
neously masked the difficulties of projecting military power against conti-
nental Europe. It took amphibious operations in the Mediterranean during
summer 1943 to illuminate these problems.
In July 1943 the Allies launched Operation HUSKY, a massive
amphibious assault on Sicily. A three-week around-the-clock air offensive
against the tiny island of Pantelleria, 70 miles southwest of Sicily presaged
the assault and first demonstrated the demoralizing effect of sustained air
bombardment: the Axis garrison surrendered before landing operations
began. 17 The Allies expected that Sicily, defended by poorly equipped and
demoralized Italian forces shored up by two hastily improvised German
mechanized divisions, would fall quickly, especially as a brutal attritional
air war established Allied aerial superiority by the time of the invasion. 177
But the Germans fought a skilled delaying action that inflicted heavy loss-
es, and Montgomery's methodical pace prevented British forces from
wresting the initiative from the greatly outnumbered enemy force, which
was able to withdraw intact to mainland Italy. It was the more aggressive
and faster reacting Americans who smashed through demoralized Italians to
beat Montgomery to Messina, an achievement that clearly demonstrated the
growing tactical proficiency of U.S. forces.
The Allies also repeated the mistake of overambitious use of airborne
