346
Normandy 1944
also carried out a diversionary attack on the left toward Gruchy to confuse
the enemy and divide German reserves.
Despite overwhelming superiority and the use of tactical deception, the
Canadian attack failed to capture the airfield. 19 The failure of WINDSOR
not only illustrated the marked superiority of the defense in Normandy, but
also the problems that beset Canadian offensive actions. The attack failed
due to superb SS defensive tactics combined with flawed Canadian attack
doctrine, tactics, and fielderaft. Increased Canadian radio traffic and poor
wireless discipline, along with with aggressive German battle patrolling,
warned the Germans on 2 July of an impending attack.20 Anticipating the
attack, the Germans massed their meager mobile reserves at Carpiquet, and
disrupted the attack before it went in. As Allied artillery began its rolling
barrage, German guns and mortars hit likely Canadian assembly areas,
inflicting numerous casualties and disorganizing Canadian assault troops.
The Germans then accurately laid fire behind the Canadian rolling barrage,
suggesting that Allied artillery had fallen short, further demoralizing and
disrupting the Canadian attack.21 German tactical skill, therefore, depleted
and badly disrupted the Canadian assault battalions before they even
engaged the defenders.
Flawed Canadian attack doctrine also contributed to the failure of
WINDSOR. The attack lacked coordination. In accordance with prevailing
British doctrine, two Canadian infantry battalions spearheaded the attack
while armor provided fire support from the flanks and rear. After the initial
attack faltered, the 3d Division committed additional infantry and armor
piecemeal, but the armor provided direct support only grudgingly, tardily,
and sparingly.22 Poor coordination meant that the 3d Division failed to uti-
lize fully the resources available, and because neither the Canadian infantry
nor armor possessed the firepower to suppress German defenses on its own,
poor coordination resulted in both arms suffering defeat in detail. Again,
despite massive superiority, the Canadians had failed to gain ground against
the entrenched and tenacious SS soldiers. 23
On 8 July Montgomery launched Operation CHARNWOOD, a major
push for Caen, the D-Day objective that Rommel had denied him for over a
month. During that time, the Germans had developed a well-organized and
mutually supporting system of defense in depth. To breach these defenses,
the Allies reluctantly employed heavy bombers to shatter German resist-
ance in Caen.24 The bombing took place on the evening of 7 July, 6 hours
before the ground attack, and the bomb line was placed 6,000 yards beyond
the Allied front line to safeguard the assault troops. However, this place-
ment largely negated the bombing's stunning effect.25 While inflicting neg-
ligible damage on the enemy, the bombing did hurt German, and raise
Anglo-Canadian, morale; it also destroyed all but one of the Orne bridges
still in German hands, crippling German supply efforts and rendering the
German defense of northern Caen untenable.26
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
347
CHARNWOOD was an unsophisticated frontal attack by three infantry
divisions to overwhelm the German defenders and capture northern Caen, 27
with the Canadian 3d Division on the extreme right flank attacking south-
west to occupy northwestern Caen. CHARNWOOD did see Canadian
efforts to adapt to combat conditions in Normandy. During June Canadian
forces gradually recognized that German defensive artillery fire had dis-
rupted and impeded their operations, so Canadian gunners learned the need
for more extensive and effective counterbattery fire and, consequently, for
CHARNWOOD they launched a larger and extended program of suppres-
sive fire on known German batteries during the night of 7-8 July.28 Then,
on 8 July thirty-one days after its debacle of 7 June, the 9th Infantry
Brigade finally captured Buron northwest of Caen, using the heaviest
artillery concentrations yet seen in support of Canadian operations. Hit by
overwhelming artillery, the already weakened and exhausted Hitlerjugend
Division was unable to withstand the attack of three Anglo-Canadian divi-
sions.29
CHARNWOOD evidenced growing skill by elements of the Canadian
3d Division, but improved proficiency was by no means discernible across
the board. Even against eroded resistance the Highland Light Infantry of
Canada suffered heavily as it struggled throughout 8 July to take Buron in
its first major action of the campaign. 30 Once again poor coordination
retarded Canadian progress and brought heavy casualties. Nevertheless,
Canadian defensive skill showed signs of improvement as the 3d Division
learned from its June experiences to rush forward antitank guns and armor
and to organize a coordinated combined-arms defense once an objective
had been captured. On 8 July, such a combined-arms defense repulsed two
enemy armored counterattacks and inflicted heavy loss, creating the pre-
conditions for final Anglo-Canadian occupation of northern Caen on 9 July
as the enemy retired behind the Orne. 31
The latter stages of CHARNWOOD revealed Canadian weaknesses in
urban warfare as they relied heavily on artillery fire to smash enemy resist-
ance. Fighting for northern Caen quickly revealed that prolonged artillery
bombardment had little effect on built-up areas; thus, it was fortunate that
the Canadians faced only enemy rearguards. Canadian commanders subse-
quently concluded on the basis of CHARNWOOD that street fighting train-
ing had been taught as too much of a drill and that Canadian troops lacked
the flexibility and direct-fire support to prevail against a determined enemy
in urban warfare. 32
The tenor of Canadian operations changed on 11 July when Gen. Guy
Simonds's Canadian II Corps became operational and assumed command
of the 3d Division and the arriving 2d Division on a 8,000-yard front that
included northern Caen 33 Simonds, the most gifted and innovative senior
wartime Canadian commander, enunciated a clear, holistic, flexible, and
original operational policy for his command that emphasized infiltration,
