104
Preparation: 1919-1944
equipped or trained, to provide the rapid, concentrated fire necessary to halt
the German advance. 11
Nor could tactical aviation stem the German onslaught. The commit-
ment of the Royal Air Force (RAF) to strategic bombing meant that it only
grudgingly supported the BEF with the Advanced Air Striking Force
(AASF), which comprised ten squadrons of obsolete Fairey Battle and
Bristol Blenheim light bombers, tasked to fly close-support and battlefield
interdiction missions. Yet Allied fighter forces, while well equipped, were
too few and too dispersed to maintain air superiority. The loss of control of
the skies, combined with the AASF's lack of specialized training, commu-
nications, and a viable doctrine, resulted in the force's decimation without
Its even slowing the German ground advance. 12
During 1940-1941 Britain contemplated the lessons of defeat in
Norway and France. But the army failed to draw appropriate lessons from
these defeats because it was unwilling to evaluate its performance openly
and honestly and because it selectively interpreted from its experience that
which validated its prevailing preconceptions. The army concluded that
German aerial supremacy had brought defeat in Norway and thus blamed
lack of interservice cooperation, especially the RAF's hostility to ground
support, for failure. At the same time, the army blamed poor troop perform-
ance on interwar politicians— who had left the army unprepared for over-
seas service- and the RAF, Royal Navy, and the French for inept support.
Quick to seek scapegoats elsewhere, the army failed to evaluate its own
weaknesses objectively. 13
The lessons of the French campaign were more numerous, but more
ambiguous since the speed and scale of defeat provided few clear messages
for the army's reconstitution. As a result, the army misinterpreted the les-
sons of the campaign. Having misused armor in France, it losing 98 percent
of the tanks deployed, the army concluded that massed employment of
armor had secured German victory. The army failed to comprehend the true
nature of German success: the intimate combination of combat arms as part
of an aggressive strategic doctrine of deep penetration to disrupt enemy
communications and logistics and thus paralyze enemy resistance.
This misperception forged in summer 1940 the "panzer myth," an
exaggerated sense of the power and strategic potential of massed armor,
which the Royal Armoured Corps (RAC) never entirely dispelled. This
myth gained ground in part because it appeared to vindicate both the
armored enthusiast and the cavalry views of exponents of armored warfare.
The myth supported both the "limited-liability" proponents' call for a
small, mechanized elite and the cavalry school approach of massed
employment to smash enemy armor. As important, the notion that the
Germans had won because their massed armor had annihilated dispersed
Allied armor appeared to validate the prevailing British strategic doctrine
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
105
of attrition. That the supposed lessons of France seemed to vindicate exist-
ing strategy made such "lessons" all the more persuasive. 14
The various arms drew their own lessons from the French campaign.
British armor had proved mechanically unreliable, undergunned, and
underarmored. The RAC thus demanded more, better armed and armored,
and more reliable tanks to be employed en masse to shatter enemy armor in
direct engagement. The campaign also revealed that the Royal Artillery
lacked the firepower, range, and speed for effective defensive and counter-
battery fire. It was likewise concluded that the artillery needed greater fire-
power-more and better medium, heavy, and antitank artillery—as well as
greater mobility. The campaign highlighted the artillery's defective organi-
zation, its lack of reliable field radios, and its sluggishness: the speed of
blitzkrieg war simply did not allow for the meticulous fire plans practiced
between the wars.15
Then there was the infantry performance. That hastily raised, trained,
and committed territorials performed poorly was little surprise; but even
the performance of regular units varied considerably due to inadequate fire-
power, poor manpower quality, and indifferent training. But, at the same
time, the most important lesson of the campaign-that ground forces could
no longer operate effectively without interarms and interservice coordina-
tion-remained poorly understood. The army failed to recognize that the
root cause of its failure was the absence of the base of professional prepara-
tion required to repulse German attacks. The army was simply too poorly
equipped, trained, organized, and integrated to withstand blitzkrieg war-
fare. These weaknesses stemmed both from the army's failure to preserve
its Great War experience and from crippling interwar financial cutbacks
that had left the army mentally and materially unprepared for renewed con-
tinental warfare.
While defeat in 1940 was probably unavoidable, what was not was the
army's unwillingness to learn honestly from experience as it once again
sought scapegoats to explain away defeat in France. It thus concluded that
intelligence errors, unreliable Allies, and poor interservice support had
brought defeat. Intelligence failures, the army claimed, had left the Allies
unable to discern the German strategic focus, the RAF had held back many
fighter squadrons that might have tipped the balance in the air war, and the
French had collapsed due to a fundamental flaw of national character-a
lack of will to fight - as they had in 1917,16 What the army failed to recog-
nize, however, was that although these alleged "failings" may have magni-
fied the speed and scale of defeat, better intelligence, stronger-willed
Allies, or even every squadron the RAF possessed would not have changed
the outcome.
The British army of 1940 lacked mechanisms to derive and dissemi-
nate combat lessons. Instead, it focused on the task of salvaging, protect-
