216
Preparation: 1919-1944
To offset this decline in artillery support, the Heer increased its use of
Nebelwerfer rocket launchers and heavy mortars. These weapons, which
were more cheaply and easily produced than artillery, were also more
mobile, consumed less ammunition, were harder to detect, and hence were
less vulnerable to air attack. The rocket launcher branch grew out of the
army's small prewar chemical warfare arm, and during 1941-1943 the
Germans developed heavy, multibarreled launchers that could quickly pro-
duce massed fire. 116 At the same time, the Germans quickly recognized the
lethality of the Soviet 120mm mortar and in 1942 rapidly produced a copy.
The appearance of these indirect-fire weapons in combat in 1943 enhanced
German infantry firepower.
The most significant shift in German defense practices during
1943-1944, though, was the increasing reliance on fortifications and linear
defense as mobility waned. The Western Allies first encountered extensive
German fortified defenses in Tunisia in the winter of 1942-1943. Reacting
rapidly to the Allied landings in northwestern Africa on 8 November 1942,
Germany occupied Vichy France and immediately sent troops to Tunisia to
prevent the loss of Panzer Army Africa, forestall an Italian collapse, and
keep the Mediterranean closed to Allied shipping. By dint of great improvi-
sation, the Axis forces built up their strength in Tunisia far faster than the
Allies had deemed possible, efficiently employing airlift and shipping to
build a new front. l17 This rapid buildup foiled the weak Allied drive to cap-
ture Tunis before winter. Within two months the Axis forces, redesignated
the Fifth Panzer Army, had expanded to five divisions and, after thwarting
the Allied attempt to take Tunis, drove the leading Allied troops back from
the Tunisian plain into the mountains in some of the last major German tac-
tical successes of the war.
Over the winter of 1942-1943, the Germans built fortifications in
depth in the Tunisian mountains. During the spring of 1943, the Allies
experienced great difficulty in prevailing against these echeloned defenses,
which were covered by deep minefields and numerous boobytraps. 118 But
the Germans' decision to defend Tunisia was a mistake strategically, for
their position in North Africa, given the precarious supply lines from
Europe, was untenable. Over the winter, Allied air power slowly exerted
itself as it began to operate in strength from forward air bases in northwest-
ern Africa and as air-ground cooperation improved. The Allies slowly
gained air superiority during the spring of 1943 and inflicted mounting
losses on Axis resupply operations, sapping enemy strength and strangling
their ground forces. 119
Rommel's Panzer Army Africa still proved as formidable in defeat as
in victory as it conducted a skilled delaying withdrawal into Tunisia while
preserving its strength. Rommel evaded Montgomery's attempt to trap his
army at El Agheila on 14 December and linked up with General von
Arnim's Fifth Panzer Army. In February 1943, the Germans launched a
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
217
spoiling attack at Kasserine Pass that hammered the inexperienced
Americans in their only serious reverse in the ETO. 120 But Allied air power
for the first time played an important role in disrupting and blunting the
German attack, and during March Allied air and sea attacks-accurately
informed by Ultra-ended Axis sea transport. 121 Forced to rely entirely on
resupply by air, the Axis position in Tunisia became hopeless, the Luftwaffe
transport arm just enduring another drubbing in this fruitless effort. On 8
May 1943, and with their backs against the sea and out of supplies, the Axis
forces capitulated. Although the German occupation of Tunisia had closed
the Mediterranean for a further six months, the severe losses sustained by
the Luftwaffe and the elimination of Panzer Army Africa outweighed any
strategic advantage gained from this delay. Forced to fight at great disad-
vantage, for no worthwhile strategic goal, German air power, in particular,
suffered heavy losses. 122
The lessons of the Tunisian campaign for the Germans were mixed. On
the one hand, Tunisia provided misguided lessons as the U.S. rout at
Kasserine reinforced prevailing nazi stereotypes of the "Amis" as an
incompetent, amilitary, mongrel race. A more positive outcome, however,
was enhancement of Axis antitank capability as the Germans quickly recog-
nized the potential of the new U.S. Bazooka antitank rocket launcher
encountered in Tunisia. The Germans soon produced a superior copy, the
Panzerschreck that entered service late in 1943 and which gave German
infantry potent antitank capability. 123
During 1943, however, the Heer gradually lost its ability to pursue
mobile defense, using mechanized forces to outmaneuver and destroy
Allied forces as they had with stunning success at Kharkov and Kasserine
Pass. As the firepower balance shifted to the Allies and they gained air
superiority, German mobile defense became less successful and more cost-
Y. Final German mobilization for total war in response to the defeats at
Stalingrad and in North Africa brought a dramatic, if unbalanced, increase
in war production. 124 At the same time, the Heer underwent sweeping reor-
ganization as, on 17 February 1943, Hitler recalled the disgraced Heinz
Guderian and appointed him inspector general of armored forces to revital-
ize the panzer arm. The new command combined armor, tank destroyers,
reconnaissance units, mechanized and motorized infantry, and their affiliate
training and replacement units into a new, elite panzer army within the
Heer that answered to Hitler alone. 125
Increased production and reorganization allowed Guderian painstak-
ingly to rebuild a strategic armored reserve in the East during spring 1943.
but Hitler threw away this reserve in the ill-advised ZITADELLE offensive
at Kursk in June 1943. After the failure of the previous summer, Hitler
embarked on a major, but less ambitious, offensive with maximum concen-
tration of armored strength on the narrowest of fronts to pinch off the
Kursk salient that protruded deep into German lines and to sap Soviet
