258
Normandy 1944
process. AS these forces advanced deep into enemy territory, they became
too spread out and left their logistic support behind. Bradley also made the
cardinal error of dividing his forces as he directed the U.S. V Corps to the
Seine and his other corps to Argentan to meet the advancing Canadians.
Divided and increasingly strung out, neither prong proved strong enough to
defeat decisively the enemy. Fearful that his depleted, tired, overextended,
and undersupplied spearheads would be overrun if they tried to prevent the
German retreat, Bradley halted the advance toward Argentan on 13 August
and did not resume it for five days. When he did, his forces still proved too
weak to close firmly the door from the south to the Falaise pocket at
Argentan, or to push quickly north up both banks of the Seine after the U.S.
V Corps had established a bridgehead across the river on 19 August.
In the meantime, the front became fluid in the second week of August
as the Germans began a phased strategic withdrawal in reaction to the U.S.
breakout on the western flank. But tired, demoralized, and depleted British
forces had failed to pursue the enemy aggressively and were largely content
to follow up after German withdrawals.41 As troops sensed that victory was
at hand, British pressure slackened across the entire front during mid-
August 42 As a result, it was not until 16 August that Montgomery launched
Operation KITTEN, the long planned Anglo-Canadian advance to the
Seine.
Consequently, the burden of carrying the war to the enemy fell to Gen.
Harry Crerar's newly activated Canadian First Army, which assumed oper-
ational control on 31 July of II Corps and the three Canadian divisions now
ashore. 43 Prospects for Canadian success appeared greater than ever during
late July as Panzer Group West dramatically thinned its defenses on the
Caen front to shore up its west flank and to mask the U.S. breakout from
Arianches." So Monty asked Crerar to renew holding altacks south o1
Caen to prevent further German withdrawals to the Americans' sector.
Given the major German westward redeployment, such holding attacks
seemed much more likely to succeed now that the backbone had been
removed from the German defense.
an early August it fell to the inexperience Canadian 2d Division and
he raw canadal th Armoured Division to launch a series of battamo
allans designe to pin verman reserves on the Caen sector. On 1 aug
the Calgary Highlanders thrice struck for Tilly-la Campagne but were halt-
ed each ume by withering enemy fire. + During the night of I-L August, the
Lincoln and Welland Regiment launched a silent Canadian night attack that
also proved abortive.46 This series of attacks concluded on 5 August with
three abortive battalion assaults on Verrières, May, and Tilly-la Campagne
tions in Normandy,47
These failed attacks brought to an end the second phase of Canadian opera
Given the deployment of the Canadian forces and the depleted state of
most British formations, it naturally fell to the Canadians to assume the
A Campaign Overview
259
offensive mantle of 21st Army Group. On 8 August the Canadian First
Army launched its first major offensive, Operation TOTALIZE, with the
objective of capturing Falaise and thus completing the encirclement of the
German forces in Normandy. The operation, planned by Guy Simonds, wit-
nessed the first systematic Canadian effort to overcome the German
defense in depth that had stalled all previous Canadian offensives. 48 The
operation's name implied that it would be a total effort on the part of the
Canadian II Corps. Thus early on 8 August massed Canadian armor and
infantry stormed Verrières Ridge.49 Where infantry and armor coordinated
effectively they quickly took their objectives with minimal casualties.
Indeed, the first stage of TOTALIZE had proven remarkably successful.
In its later stages the offensive went wrong, however. Simonds had
planned an early afternoon carpet bombing attack to smash the rearward
German defenses and their counterattack reserves and to presage the sec-
ond phase of the offensive. The delay that proceeded the bombing gave the
enemy time to recover and unfortunate "short" bombing disrupted the con-
tinued advance. 50 Moreover, severe congestion in the rear caused by pass-
ing four divisions through a narrow corridor and exacerbated by the short
bombing slowed the Canadian advance. 51
The slowness of the Canadian advance on 8 August led to a daring
dash forward the following day by a combined-arms force of the 4th
Armoured Division to occupy the important heights, designated Hill 195.
Unfortunately, this enterprise ended in disaster as the inexperienced
Canadian troops got lost and occupied Hill 140, far to the southeast where
German armor surrounded, counterattacked, and annihilated the force. 52
Nevertheless, during the night of 9-10 August the Argyll and Sutherland
Highlanders boldly seized Hill 195 with a silent night attack. Crerar,
believing the enemy defenses broken and with the high ground taken,
unleashed the tanks of his two armored divisions to exploit forward on 10
August with terrible consequences. The German antitank defenses mauled
the inexperienced Canadian and Polish armor. 53 To regain the momentum
of the advance, Simonds threw the veteran and now rested Canadian 3d
Infantry Division into the battle late on 10 August. It attacked Quesnay
Wood but was outfought by the SS defenders who ambushed the ivo
Canadian lead battalions at dusk and threw them back in disarray. 54 This
failure brought TOTALIZE to a precipitate end on 11 August. The offensive
had gained 9 miles, but neither had the Canadians reached Falaise nor had
they shattered the attenuated German defenses.
The Canadian failure to reach Falaise during TOTALIZE occurred
while the COBRA breakout was rapidly forming a pocket around the
German Seventh Army and the newly redesignated Fifth Panzer Army, the
former Panzer Group West. On 11 August, Montgomery ordered Crerar to
attack again toward Falaise, link up with the U.S. forces advancing toward
Argentan, and complete the encirclement of the German forces in
