222
Preparation: 1919-1944
they had all previous efforts to restore German fighting power. Directive 51
failed to establish an adequate logistic base to underpin the Westheer's
transformation in manpower and firepower; nor could it solve the
Wehrmacht's most debilitating weakness as it approached its sixth year of
war-its shrinking mobility. 150 Finally, Hitler's overexpansion of the
Westheer failed to maximize its combat potential.
The army first restored troop strength in the West, with the unprece-
dented influx of new recruits and transferred veterans virtually restoring
divisions to full strength by D-Day. 151 One of the Westheer's most serious
deficiencies had been poor manpower quality as the Eastern Front progres-
sively siphoned off the best officers, noncommissioned officers (NCOs),
and troops and left it markedly underofficered. 152 Most officers stationed in
the West were either reservists who had last fought in the Great War or con-
valescents. After Directive 51 officer strength in the West greatly increased
as veteran officers were transferred, with the result that by D-Day officer
shortages in combat units in France had all but disappeared. 153
Central to the Westheer's reconstitution was its marked "easterniza-
tion" as thousands of decorated Eastern Front veterans (Ostk채mpfer)
arrived. 154 This process enhanced the Westheer's combat potential by pro-
viding the experience and motivation that it lacked. The Ostk채mpfer, brutal-
ized by the vicious struggle for existence in the East, represented the most
indoctrinated and motivated nazi soldiers. They provided the glue that held
together garrison troops and inexperienced recruits alike in Normandy, 155
Between November 1943 and June 1944, the influx of Ostk채mpfer greatly
improved the Westheer's manpower quality, and by June 1944, in terms of
manpower, the Westheer was the best German army in the field. It was up
to strength and Eastern Front veterans dominated its officer corps. This off-
set the Westheer's inexperience and its reliance on young recruits and elder-
ly reservists.
Yet the most serious personnel problem the Westheer faced was not the
increasing German reliance on young, old, or foreign personnel that Anglo-
American historians frequently stress, but a mounting dearth of veteran
NCOs. Historians have exaggerated both the extent of German reliance on
supposedly inferior-quality ethnic Germans from outside Germany
(Volksdeutsch) and Soviet army volunteers (Osttruppen), and the detrimen-
tal effects of this reliance, 156 In reality, the Heer maintained a strict ceiling
on Volksdeutsch in combat units, so that they remained a minor proportion
of German manpower. Moreover, the Volksdeutsch generally fought well. 157
Likewise, the Germans strictly circumscribed their employment of eastern
volunteers for they had few illusions about the combat value of the seventy
"East" battalions stationed in the West. 158 The Germans employed them to
guard unlikely landing points, hence freeing tens of thousands of regular
troops to man more likely invasion sectors. 159 In fact, the Westheer
remained the most "racially pure" fieid force in 1944: under the strain of
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
223
war and despite nazi dogma, the Wehrmacht in general had become a multi-
ethnic and multinational war machine by 1944.160 The growing shortage of
junior officers and NCOs, which increased the time required to work up
units to operational readiness, was the more serious problem. 161
The Westheer also retrained during spring 1944 to reverse the softening
of and decline in troop proficiency occasioned by four years of comfortable
occupation duty and neglect. Thus, as far as fortification work, garrison
duty, and equipment and fuel shortages allowed, the Westheer trained. The
troops studied Allied combat techniques, tactics, and amphibious assault
doctrine, for which the army widely disseminated combat analyses of
Salerno and Anzio. Soldiers practiced close-combat tank destruction with
the new antitank weapons. The troops also sharpened their camouflage,
night fighting, sniping, and infiltration techniques to minimize the
inevitable Allied materiel and aerial superiority they would face. 162 These
programs represented serious, professional, and realistic preparation based
on broad combat experience; only their tardy establishment, serious
resource deficiencies, and lack of time diminished their impact. This inten-
sive retraining realistically simulated combat conditions, using live-fire
exercises and incorporated recent combat lessons to keep instruction cur-
rent with battlefield developments. Indeed, the maintenance of close affilia-
tion between field and training units facilitated updating of instruction as
frequent transfer of personnel from field to replacement units maintained
continuity. This retraining program helped resurrect German combat power
in the West during the spring of 1944.
That German training was still of high quality even in 1944, was one of
the key strengths of the Heer. The training was distinctive in its intellectual
approach because it taught that individual initiative could be decisive to
battlefield victory. Despite the stereotyped image portrayed by Anglo-
American propaganda of rigidly obedient German soldiers, the German
troop leadership manual stressed individual initiative and operational flexi-
bility. Soldiers at all levels were taught to act independently and to use ini-
tiative.
One of the least recognized, but most significant, aspects of German
preparation for the second front was increased ideological indoctrination
Closely related to the incorporation of Eastern Front veterans. As Germany
assumed the defensive, the Wehrmacht increased ideological indoctrination
to offset growing manpower and materiel shortages. Indoctrination during
the blitzkrieg years had been haphazard, ill coordinated, and informal. Only
after the setbacks of 1943 did the Heer begin systematic indoctrination with
the 22 December 1943 creation of National Socialist leadership officers to
oversee "martial schooling." The OKH carefully selected these officers for
their combination of nazi fanaticism, proven battlefield heroism, and mili-
tary experience. Inevitably, most leadership officers were decorated
Ostk채mpfer. 163
