416
Conclusion
Throughout World War II the Heer also maintained the interwar repu-
tation it had gained for technical innovation as it introduced numerous
high-quality weapons. Technical innovation maintained the German fire-
power edge until late in the war and powerfully reinforced morale, cohe-
sion, and combat resolve (however, the nazi regime poorly orchestrated
technological innovation so that its war machine dissipated considerable
energy, creativity, and resources in the pursuit of unrealistic projects of
marginal utility). Organizationally, too, the army repeatedly refined its
force structure and organization to become a leaner, tougher combat organi-
Zation.
The outcome of the 1944 Normandy Campaign, though, clearly illus-
trated the ascendancy of the law of numbers. Modern military history indi-
cates that the side with a marked superiority in resources typically prevails.
More efficient organization, better equipment, superior training and doc-
trine, and ideological indoctrination can partially offset inferiority.
However, past a certain point the enemy's superiority becomes overwhelm-
ing because armed forces can rarely sustain a significant combat advantage
due to the very process of battlefield innovation. Consequently, Hitler's
invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 probably sealed Germany's
fate; certainly, Hitler's declaration of war on the United States on 7
December 1941 doomed Germany to defeat.
Effective military adaptation also requires accurate evaluatio:: of the
capabilities of the enemy. Anglo-Canadian troops were slow to adapt in part
because they poorly appraised the character and capabilities of their enemy.
In fact, Commonwealth forces often displayed an alarming ignorance of
their opponent, particularly of German defensive doctrine. Thus, in
Normandy Anglo-Canadian forces continued to be taken by surprise by
German reverse-slope positions that had been the foundation of German
defensive techniques since 1917.1 The U.S. Army also had found its tactics
poorly attuned to German defensive techniques during the Normandy
Campaign. But U.S. troops gradually learned to attack the full depth of
enemy defenses and exploit rapidly any penetration of the German front
before the enemy troops had time to react and plug the gap as they invari-
ably did when confronted with more mechanistic British or Canadian
attacks.
What this study demonstrates is that militaries whose peacetime doc-
trines are not fundamentally flawed can adapt effectively, given sufficient
combat exposure, as long as they do not suffer decisive defeat. Where an
army's basic doctrine is fundamentally flawed however, not only is effec-
tive adaptation unlikely, but defeat may follow. Without a correction of fun-
damental doctrinal flaws, other areas of innovation-
-organizational and
training reforms or better weaponry—-can only marginally improve an
army's combat capabilities.
The doctrines of the German and U.S. Armies in World War Il were
417
Conclusion
essentially sound because they were rooted in careful examination of the
lessons of World War I. But British, and by derivation Canadian, doctrine
had serious flaws because the British military, in its efforts to exorcise the
ghosts of the Somme and Paschendaele, failed to preserve its experience of
the Great War. Such failure prevented the British Army from effectively
adapting new technology—the tank and the airplane-between the wars, or
from perceiving how these new weapons would transform the nature of
warfare. Flawed doctrine, therefore, both contributed to the unprecedented
series of defeats the army suffered during 1939-1941 and, at the same time,
British efforts to draw appropriate lessons from defeat. Fragile morale and
a desire to maintain combat capabilities in turn led the War Office and sen-
ior British officers to insulate their troops from the truth during the desper-
ate days of 1940-1942 when the specter of defeat loomed. So British forces
throughout the war generally adapted more slowly than the Americans.
Moreover, flawed doctrine and the army's unwillingness to reevaluate
strategic fundamentals blunted the impact that improvements in British
organization, equipment, and training brought; the British Army, therefore,
did not develop all-round military proficiency until late in the war. Finally,
powerful political pressure for success, combined with the concern over
morale, meant that as soon as the British Army found a battle-winning for-
mula-Montgomery's Materialschlacht-future innovation concentrated
on perfecting these elements in which the British Army had already exhibit-
ed proficiency.
The U.S. Army, by contrast, learned to apply doctrine more flexibly.2
U.S. forces minimized and surmounted the inevitable, manifold deficien-
cies that existed in their organization, tactics, equipment, and training early
in the war by an unusual variety of tactical and technological innovations.
The process of innovation in the army was rapid because it came largely
from the bottom up, as opposed to the top-down adaptation process that
characterized the British Army. This receptivity to feedback from enlisted
personnel and junior officers was an important strength that facilitated
rapid adaptation. At the same time, the U.S. Army exhibited a determina-
tion to retrain on the battlefield to enhance its effectiveness.3
U.S. and Commonwealth forces displayed distinctive operational styles
in Normandy that reflected divergent historical and cultural development.
The former attacked more frequently and more continuously, on a broader
front, with less artillery and logistic support. 4 As a result, the Americans
brought more of their fighting power to bear and applied it more often and
for longer. This operational style reflected the United States' limited experi-
ence of "total war" that resulted in an approach to combat by which the
U.S. military sought to apply overwhelming force to destroy the enemy, in
classic Clausewitzian terms, as quickly as possible in battle. U.S. forces
were, thus, more given to attacking in bad weather and without strong air,
artillery, or logistic support and to press the attack for longer, despite heavy
