350
Normandy 1944
coordination. Moreover, the operation went ahead without the support of
heavy bombers which were fully committed to COBRA. Intelligence errors
again flawed the planning: the Canadians underestimated the strength and
depth of the German defense, the availability of mobile reserves, and the
impact of topographical features. 52 These errors had serious consequences,
given the formidable array of German forces. Despite careful, innovative
planning and extensive preparation, SPRING quickly degenerated into a
debacle. The searchlights employed to facilitate the night attack silhouetted
the Canadians for the Germans, resulting in heavy casualties, and left the
startline unsecured. Moreover, Canadian infantry and armor found it
impossible to overcome the doctrine taught in training and to coordinate
effectively. The North Nova Scotia Highlanders' unsupported attack on
Tilly stalled in the face of withering defensive fire that forced them to retire
to their startline. In addition, German antitank guns thrice drove off the
armor sent forward to support the Canadian infantry as poor coordination
stalled the 3d Division's attack. 53
In the center, German fielderaft played a major role in disrupting the
2d Division's advance on Verrières. The Canadians failed to detect German
tanks cunningly disguised as haystacks, and lack of effective infantry anti-
tank capability prevented the Royal Highland Light Infantry from neutraliz-
ing these tanks. 54 Nevertheless, the Highlanders ultimately managed to gain
Verrières, and Canadian tanks and antitank guns rushed forward just in time
to help the battalion ward off two heavy counterattacks. Thereafter, the
Royal Regiment of Canada made an unsupported advance through Verrières
toward Rocquancourt and ran into a classic German rear-slope position set
up in depth that destroyed the Royal Regiment's lead company. 56
Because German possession of the high ground on the far right allowed
them to observe the entire Canadian front, the Calgary Highlanders
launched a night attack on the village of May. Intense German machine gun
and mortar fire stalled the Highlanders occupying only part of the village.
The follow-up battalion, the Black Watch of Canada, launched a conven-
tional, unsupported "square" battalion assault (two companies up, two com-
panies back) in broad daylight against an intact, alerted, well-camouflaged,
and entrenched up-slope defense. Murderous enemy fire immediately
pinned down the battalion and neutralized its forward observation officers
so that it could not call down fire support. The result was a massacre-and
besides Dieppe, the most costly single Canadian battalion action of the
war. 57
German counterattacks likewise threw the Calgary Highlanders out of
May and back to their startline. The 2d Division threw the Regiment de
Maisonneuve into another unsupported advance late on 25 July to stabilize
the situation 58 But after personally assessing the situation late on 25 July,
Simonds abandoned the operation. After Dieppe, SPRING was the most
costly single day's action for Canada in World War II. 59
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
351
In retrospect, the Germans had clearly once again anticipated the
attack, despite Simonds's efforts to camouflage it, and intelligence failures
had led to a serious underestimation of German strength.60 The Canadian
attack plan was too ambitious for the forces employed. Inexperience, poor
coordination, and flawed attack doctrine dictated that the Canadians would
fail to utilize the strength at their disposal. Moreover, the Canadian artillery
program had neglected "counterflak" operations—the suppression of
enemy antiaircraft fire-which rendered the preliminary air operations
ineffective. 61
Combined-arms teamwork remained poor, and the assault degenerated
into seven uncoordinated battalion attacks that were defeated in turn and in
detail. Nowhere did the Canadians gain a significant toehold on the high
ground south of Caen nor did they inflict significant damage on the
enemy. 62 SPRING also failed to draw German reserves into the line. 63 By
any objective criterion SPRING was a dismal failure, and, in reality, a less
ambitious and better coordinated attack by veteran troops could have
forced German reserves into line and kept them there. SPRING was such a
debacle that it stimulated an immediate post mortem and a board of
inquiry. 64 Despite German strength, Simonds maintained that it was possi-
ble to capture Verrières Ridge without inordinate losses and he ascribed
failure to faulty tactics.65 The post mortem identified multiple causes for
failure. It concluded that the Canadian 3d Division and 2d Armoured
Brigade, which had been in the line since D-Day and had suffered tremen-
dous casualties, were burned out and required extensive refitting.66 It also
concluded that the inexperience of the 2d Division played a key role in the
operation's failure.67 Simonds singled out Gen. Charles Foulkes, its com-
mander, for particular blame.68
Despite failure, SPRING nevertheless demonstrated Simonds's deter-
mination to devise means to surmount the German defenses. The operation
witnessed for the first time in northwest Europe the abandonment of the
immense World War I fire plans that smashed a way for Anglo-Canadian
forces into German defenses for about a mile. Simonds abandoned a pre-
liminary barrage and instead employed timed concentrations in greater
depth than before to deal with German antitank guns and left it to the armor
to get the infantry up. He also had medium bombers drop delayed-action
bombs to disrupt German reserves moving up to counterattack. 69 This
imaginative plan failed, however, due to formidable German defensive
strength and the difficulty in getting Canadian troops to overcome the old
doctrine and to coordinate on the battlefield. 70
On 31 July, Gen. Harry Crerar's Canadian First Army finally assumed
operational control of the Il Corps and the three Canadian divisions now in
Normandy.?! For the first time in the nation's history, an independent
Canadian higher command controlled Canadian troops in combat.
However, the First Army labored under severe difficulties. Its headquarters
