176
Preparation: 1919-1944
though once Canada made such a commitment additional forces were
drawn to the Mediterranean. In October 1943, Mackenzie King again
importuned Britain to send the I Canadian Corps with the 5th Armoured
Division to Italy to avoid the heavy losses that he suspected the Allies
would suffer in Normandy.42 Once Canada had committed an entire corps
in Italy, it proved impossible to withdraw formations for OVERLORD.
The failure to redeploy Canadian divisions from the Mediterranean
robbed the Canadian First Army of both the strength to act as a truly inde-
pendent national force in Normandy and of the experience it required to
perform well. In fact, the Canadian First Army's reduction to a single corps
put its existence into question. To bolster the army's strength Britain rein-
forced it with continental contingents of Dutch, Belgian, Czech, and Polish
troops who had escaped from occupied Europe. Not only had these forces
been raised, organized, and equipped from scratch in Britain, but they
lacked the replacements so that they could not be employed in an assault
role, *3 The shortage of Canadian forces in Britain, the limitations of the
added on continental contingents, and the apparent deficiencies in Canadian
preparation wisely led the Allied planners to assign a follow-up role to the
Canadian First Army in OVERLORD. It would be deployed to Normandy
only after the Allies had established a bridgehead and would then advance
northeast toward Le Havre and the Flanders coast. Given the condition of
the Canadian forces, this supporting function was clearly appropriate.
From mid-1943 on, Canadian preparation for the second front intensi-
fied as formations finally focused on invasion-oriented training. 44 The dis-
aster at Dieppe had stimulated a major review of training and doctrine that
exposed many shortcomings of the Canadian forces in Britain. The defi-
ciencies in basic training conducted in Canada, forced the CAO to retrain at
British facilities and with British philosophies. As a result the CAO thus
became a mirror of the British Army. 45 Lack of equipment, transport, and
experienced instructors all hampered Canadian training, while the enforced
reliance on the British Army inevitably lengthened the time required to pre-
pare Canadian formations for battle. Considering these realities, it is hardly
surprising that the Canadians did not begin offensive training until 1943.46
The CAO was to acquire an increasingly British cast. In late summer of
1941 the Canadian Corps joined South-Eastern Command, where General
Montgomery appraised Canadian capabilities during the September 1941
Operation BUMPER, the first major wartime maneuver in Britain.
Disappointed with the Canadians' performance, Montgomery demanded-
and received-
-the dismissal of two of the three Canadian division com-
manders. 47 Thereafter, Montgomery imbued the Canadians with his opera-
tional approach. Under his tutelage, the Canadian Corps quickly enhanced
its combat capabilities, as it demonstrated during Exercise TIGER (April-
May 1942) when the Canadians outfought the XII British Corps and took
"large numbers of 'prisoners' "48 Nonetheless, these early exercises
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
177
revealed that manifest weaknesses remained, including poor intelligence,
communications, signals security, reconnaissance, "complete indifference"
to air threat, and poor aerial recognition skills. 49
Growing awareness of training problems led to substantive measures
during 1942-1943 to improve training quality by greater standardization
and reorganization so as to diminish duplication and inefficiency. Testing of
trainees finally began in 1942, and a new standardized syllabus took effect
on 12 December 1943. But even under the new syllabus training remained
far from intensive.50 Moreover, in 1943 the Canadians finally began offen-
sive-oriented maneuvers, but inexperience generated manifold problems
during these early offensive exercises. Orders were inflexible, units became
entangled with each other, march discipline was poor, artillery support
inadequate, and tactics unoriginal. At the same time observers evaluated
intelligence gathering, signals procedures, and security as unsatisfactory. 51
That serious deficiencies remained in Canadian training, tactics, and
operational art was starkly illuminated during Operation SPARTAN (4-12
March 1943) when the Canadian First Army practiced the breakout opera-
tions it was scheduled to conduct on the continent. 52 This debut exercise
Illuminated the inadequacy of Canadian commanders and troops; Sir Alan
Brooke, the chief of the Imperial General Staff, concluded from it that
General McNaughton was unfit to command theCanadian First Army in
combat.53 The exercise also illustrated that Canadian formations were still
perfecting basics rather than focusing on collective training, and had yet to
improve aerial recognition skills and radio discipline. 54 The revelations of
SPARTAN led to a return to basics and intensified efforts to correct the
obvious deficiencies.55
In July 1943, the transfer of the Canadian 3d Infantry Division and 2d
Armoured Brigade to British command to train for the D-Day amphibious
assault further undermined prospects of independent Canadian operations
in northwest Europe. The Canadian First Army was thus reduced to a single
corps of two divisions, neither of which were operational. A lack of strong
leadership contributed to Canadian problems: the War Office's final ouster
of General McNaughton in December 1943 had created a command hiatus
at a critical juncture in Canadian preparations. On 20 March 1944 Gen.
Harry Crear returned from Italy, where he had briefly led the I Canadian
Corps, to assume command of the Canadian First Army. However, senior
British officers had misgivings about Crerar's qualifications for the
appointment: despite his time in Italy, Crerar had never commanded the
corps in a major operation. 56
The lack of command experience was a major weakness of
the Canadian First Army. The pool of combat-experienced Canadian officers
remained small and thinly spread. Indeed, only six of fourteen senior com-
manders had seen combat and none had experience at their new levels of
command 57 In this, General Crerar was typical. A World War I artillery
