2.
38
Preparation: 1919-1944
specialized amphibious assault capability between the wars. It remained
wedded to the Mahan doctrine of big surface fleet engagement to the detri-
ment of the growing submarine and aerial threat. Between the wars, there-
fore, the services prepared for separate wars: the army, to defend the
empire; the navy, for surface war against Japan in the Far East; and the
RAF, for a continental European bombing campaign. In fact, the army's
caution contrasted strongly with the offensive-mindedness of the RAF and
the Royal Navy. Indeed, one of the key weaknesses of the other two servic-
es between the wars was their excessive offensive orientation. The RAF'S
fixation with strategic bombing and the invincibility of the bomber led to
the neglect of Fighter Command, while the Royal Navy's commitment to
the battle fleet and Mahan fleet action led to neglect of antisubmarine
forces. The contrasting strategic postures of the services was both cause
and effect of the lack of coherent strategic doctrine. The three services'
reluctance to cooperate and coordinate their war efforts contributed directly
to the disasters of 1939-1942.
In retrospect, the Ten Year Rule did serious damage to British defense
capabilities and ability to innovate between the wars. Interwar neglect—
financial, intellectual, material impeded British military effectiveness
throughout World War II. Up to 1937, home and imperial defense still took
priority over support to allies on the continent. Thus, strategic and political
factors partly account for the failure of the British Army to innovate
between the wars. In the final analysis, Britain's strategic, political, finan-
cial, and social condition between the wars made the army's inadequacies
at the start of World War Il to some extent unavoidable. Popular antimili-
tarism in Depression-torn Britain constrained defense spending, and finan-
cial stringency in turn crippled efficiency and hampered reform. The
British Army thus went to war in September 1939 with very limited combat
capabilities and was clearly no match for the Heer.
More perplexing, however, was the army's inability to catch up with
the German lead during the war. The root cause lay in the army's character,
culture, structure, experiences, and most especially in its amateurism and
lack of doctrine. The army's sluggishness in enhancing its wartime combat
effectiveness in part derived from a military culture that undervalued edu-
cational and professional development. The army discouraged criticism of
prevailing doctrine and got less out of training and maneuvers because it
lacked the determination to learn honestly from them. Moreover, it lacked
mechanisms to derive and then to disseminate combat experience through-
out the army. Battle experience was rarely absorbed into revised training.
At the same time, in the absence of clear, realistic doctrine and in the face
of its rigid, but distorting adherence to a strategy of attrition, the army
found it difficult to draw appropriate lessons from early war experience
against a backdrop of bitter and disastrous defeat. The army not only failed
The Interwar Period
39
to emulate its Great War achievements, but during 1939-1942 suffered
repeated and unprecedented setbacks that brought Britain close to defeat.
Canada
Canada's unmilitary tradition and the resulting reluctance of its government
and people to fund defense expenditures created a climate inhospitable to
the maintenance of effective military forces between the wars. At the same
time, resentment at the heavy loss of Canadian life during the Great War,
pessimism that force could solve the tensions inherent in international rela-
tions, and the impact of the Great Depression further eroded Canadian
defense spending and stifled possibilities for military reform. As a result, the
interwar Canadian military experienced difficulty in simply existing. At the
outbreak of war in September 1939, Canada possessed negligible military
capabilities and few Western nations were as unprepared for war. Given this
unpromising start and the unwillingness of the Canadian government to com-
mit troops to combat for domestic political reasons, it was only late in World
War Il that the Canadian Army developed military proficiency.
Because of its geographic position and political character Canada has
long had an unmilitary tradition. 78 Canada's military, which originated
from the French militia levied in the seventeenth century, had fought in
only one conflict, the War of 1812.79 In consequence, the Militia dwindled.
Nonetheless, Canada made an unparalleled effort to support Great Britain
during the Great War. The Canadian Expeditionary Force (CEF), rapidly
and haphazardly dispatched to the Western Front, grew into a four-division
corps. Forced to learn the mechanics of modern warfare on the fields of
Flanders, the CEF adapted relatively quickly, though at a heavy price in
lives. Raised from scratch, the CEF evaded the parochialism of the militia,
acquired a permanent, cohesive force structure, and received ample man-
power reserves. This allowed it to innovate tactically and organizationally
by adopting and refining British methods. It pioneered, for example, devel-
opment of concentrated machine gun and trench mortar tactics, and the
Canadian Independent Force of 1918 was the world's first combined-arms
mechanized formation.80 The CEF relied heavily on artillery to smash
enemy resistance, rapidly adopted the airplane for aerial reconnaissance,
and developed a counterbattery sophistication. Thorough planning, prepara-
tion, and training forged Canadian fighting efficiency, and consequently the
CEF distinguished itself repeatedly during the Great War, becoming one of
the Germans' most feared opponents. Indeed, it was the CEF that spear-
headed the August 1918 operations that broke the German front. 81
Canada's participation in World War I, however, did not convince its
people of the need for peacetime military preparedness. To the contrary, the
