CAsU
276
Normandy 1944
port, slowed the arrival of reinforcements, and exacerbated German supply
shortages. 23 The U.S. buildup in the Cotentin far outstripped the enemy's
(see Table 7.2). To compensate for munitions shortages ashore, the U.S.
First Army also widely employed naval bombardment, which suppressed
German defensive fire, demoralized the defenders, and played an important
role in the fall of the strong German defensive line along the Montebourg-
Quineville ridge during 13-15 June. Naval gunfire, though slighted in offi-
cial U.S. Army reports, was a crucial ingredient of success and more feared
by the Germans than air attacks.24
Table 7.2
Buildup of U.S. and German Strength in the Cotentin Peninsula, June
1944 (Number of battalions)
Infantry
Artillery
Armor
Total
U.S.
Ger.
U.S.
Ger.
U.S.
Jer.
U.S.
Ger.
Ratio
U.S.: Ger.
• June
8 June
10 June
12 June
14 June
16 June
18 June
30
20
2:1
31
2:1
2:1
2:1
2:1
2:1
54
Sources: Stanton, Order of Battle; NARA T-78, 142, "Gefechtsbericht KG. Hoffmann"; T-
78, 418, 6386950, OKH GenStdH Org. Abt. (I) "Heerestrupen auf d. Halbinsel Cherbourg,
Nr. 1/17 633/44 G.Kdos., v. 22 June 1944; USAHD MS C-018, Lt. Col. Günther Keil, "919th
Gren. Regt., KG. Keil (June 1944)," (Germany: 1948); PRO DEFE 3/175, Ultra Decrypt KV
8956, "Strength Return, Battle Group Schlieben, 17.6.1944," 20 June 1944.
On 22 June Collins launched a final three-division attack on
Cherbourg. Even though previous offensives had badly weakened and
demoralized the defenders, Cherbourg remained a hard nut to crack. 25 Its
landward defenses consisted of a network of reinforced field positions
anchored by two modern forts and supported by powerful coastal artillery
and antiaircraft defenses,26 Moreover, Collins's troops lacked specialized
equipment and training to reduce fortresses, and ammunition shortages lim-
ited available fire support. To compensate for these deficiencies, powerful
naval gunfire directed by spotter planes and the heaviest aerial attack yet
seen in the campaign backed the final assault. 27 In addition, for the first
time, an intensive counterflak program preceded the aerial bombardment to
neutralize the strong enemy antiaircraft defenses. The artillery barrage fol-
lowed immediately, which allowed the infantry to close and breach the thin,
German defense lines on a broad front. 28 Nevertheless, although their situa-
tion was hopeless, the Germans fought fiercely and final resistance only
ceased on 1 July 9 Indeed, the outer breakwater forts that guarded the har-
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
277
bor entrance resisted conventional artillery fire and could only be silenced
by air and naval bombardment combined with direct fire from medium
guns at point-blank range. 30 The Americans finally captured Cherbourg, but
they did so well behind schedule and after the enemy had left the port in
ruins. The enemy had fought stubbornly and with skill, but broad-front
attacks had also dissipated U.S. strength, ammunition shortages had limited
fire support, and inexperience at tackling fortifications had all delayed the
city's capture.
The slow drive on Cherbourg and St. Lô led U.S. commanders to eval-
uate their performance, identify flaws, and devise solutions. The command-
ers quickly realized that projected rates of advance were too optimistic:
progress had proved slow and costly. This in part reflected German skill
and tenacity and the powerful defensive advantage of the bocage terrain,
but it also reflected flaws in U.S. Army combat preparation. Slow progress
demonstrated that planners had seriously underestimated the debilitating
and constricting effect of the bocage terrain on operations. The bocage's
tall, thick hedgerows, sunken lanes, and small fields presented both advan-
tages and drawbacks to the attacker. While it canceled the superior range of
German armor and antitank guns, it reinforced the natural superiority of
defense and aggravated the negative consequences of the U.S. infantry's
lack of firepower. 31
Inevitably focused on getting ashore, Allied planners had barely con-
sidered the problems of conducting the battle inland. Indeed, the U.S. First
Of "paid not specifically prepared troops to fight in the hedgerow ter-
rain. 2 Thus, the formidable barrier that the bocage presented surprised offi-
cers and troops alike. Commanders soon realized that standard attack meth-
ods were ineffective in the bocage because the terrain forced troops to
launch frontal assaults to batter the enemy into defeat, and the thick vegeta-
tion and compartmented terrain hampered unit deployment and maneuver,
negating standard fire-and-maneuver techniques. Hedgerow fighting also
demanded excellent combined-arms coordination if the attacker was to pre-
vail. Yet evidence of poor coordination among the unseasoned formations
quickly mounted 33
Lack of infantry firepower also slowed the advance. The effectiveness
of the most powerful squad weapon, the Browning automatic rifle (BAR), a
light and easily handled automatic rifloe poorld War I design, was restrict-
ed by its limited twenty-round magazine capacity and low sustained rate of
fire. The hedgerow terrain hampered the forward deployment of the bell-
ed, .30- and .50-caliber machine gurue nuBy /hich U.S. infantry traditional-
y reinforced its firepower. 34 As a te -It, the infantry lacked sufficient nre-
power to acquire the fire superiority that doctrine demanded. Troops often
responded with one or another extreme: extravagant, wild fire to suppress
e rusy enemy firepower or reluctance to fire so as not to present a tar-
