202
Normandy 1944
ally operations ended in disaster, but it also meant that U.S. troops vigor-
ously exploited opportunities when they arose.68 Thus doctrine kept the
Americans pushing forward long and hard. The consequence of these con-
trasting British and American approaches was that although the Anglo-
Canadian forces on several occasions pushed the enemy defense close to
breaking point, only the Americans shattered the German defenses.69
Despite initial efforts to adapt to hedgerow warfare, reinforcement by
Collins's VII Corps, and fresh divisions from Britain, the U.S. First Army
still struggled to advance in the bocage when it renewed its offensive
toward St. Lô on 3 July. Maj. Gen. Troy H. Middleton's VIII Corps struck
south from the base of the Cotentin Peninsula with three divisions, and in
five days enveloped and took the important communications center of La
Haye-du-Puits despite fierce opposition. But continued poor U.S. coordina-
tion and determined German opposition halted his offensive at the Ay and
Sèves Rivers on 15 July after heavy losses. 70
Simultaneously, the U.S. VII Corps struck south from Carentan on 3
July with the rested, yet inexperienced, 83d Division. Its attack toward
Périers in poor weather and difficult marshy terrain disintegrated amid
indifferent coordination.? Even after the veteran 4th Infantry Division
joined the attack on 5 July, the VII Corps gained only 700 yards in four
days because even experienced troops found it difficult progressing in the
dense bocage south of Carentan. 72 The Germans defended skillfully and
counterattacked repeatedly and vigorously to sap U.S. strength. Even
though it repulsed several enemy regiment-sized counterattacks between
10-12 July, the VII Corps had to abandon its offensive on 15 July. During
the first week of the renewed attack, U.S. formations continued to struggle
to gain ground against determined resistance without massive numerical
and firepower superiority.
In the second week of July, however, a combination of new "bocage
busting" techniques, which brought greater tactical success at lower cost,
and sustained offensive action wore down enemy resistance and speeded
the advance on St. Lô. The lull in fighting on the southern front in late June
gave units a respite to examine their performance, identify flaws, and
devise and rehearse solutions. Throughout the First Army widespread
experimentation and improvisation allowed the infantry to bring greater
firepower to bear and to coordinate more effectively in the bocage.
The result was improved combat performance that speeded the fall of
St. Lô. On 7 July, Maj. Gen. Charles H. Corlett's newly arrived XIX Corps
attacked south toward St. Lô with three divisions. Enhanced fire support,
better tactics, and improved coordination allowed the 9th and 30th
Divisions to storm both the Taute-Vire Canal and Vire River and rapidly
capture St. Jean-de-Daye, 73 Corlett made rare use of tactical deception with
a crossing feint, and organized a coordinated assault that employed dozer
tanks and that was backed by an elaborate fire plan that included dive
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
283
bombing, tank destroyers in an indirect fire role, and extensive use of white
phosphorous. Thereafter the corps slowly, but inexorably, gained ground
until it cut the Périers-St. Lô highway on 20 July to deny the Germans a
key communications link with St. Lô.74
During early July the 29th Division also pertected new bocage-busting
techniques. It organized combined-arms assault groups, heavily reinforced
in firepower, around a Sherman hedgecutter mounting a rear deck phone. 75
The division employed this new close-assault, combined-arms tactical
organization on 11 July to renew its drive on St. Lô. With only light casual-
ties, its attack overran the strongly entrenched German 9th Parachute
Regiment and stormed the strategic Martinville Ridge that dominated the
northeastern approaches to St. Lô.76
The new tactics and organization also helped the U.S. 2d Division to
capture Hill 192 at the eastern end of the Martinville Ridge that same day.
The hill, which dominated all approaches to the Norman capital, was a key
position in the German defense of St. Lô and was strongly held by the
German 3d Parachute Division. The U.S. 2d Division organized integrated
assault teams and intensively retrained in combined-arms tactics. As a
result, on 11-12 July, the division stormed Hill 192 and advanced across
the St. Lô-Bayeux highway to attack St. Lô from the east."7
Improved combined-arms coordination and hedgerow tactics cut losses
in all three attacks, and, once these methods had proven successful, they
were quickly adopted and adapted throughout the First Army. It took time,
familiarity, and retraining to develop and refine bocage-busting techniques.
New, untested divisions were retrained in the field in these methods before
entering combat, and throughout July the First Army rotated formations out
of line to rest and to retrain. 78 East of the Vire the newly arrived U.S. 35th
Infantry Division joined the 29th Infantry Division in its drive on St. Lô.
The loss of high ground weakened the German defense, allowing the 35th
Division to storm the final height north of St. Lô, Hill 122, on 18 July, and
compelling the Germans to abandon the city the next day. 79
During June and July the army exhibited serious, professional concern
in identifying and rectifying the flaws that had slowed its advance. It
sought technical and tactical solutions to its problems and tackled them
with urgency, intelligence, and creativity. As a result, by late July offensive
coordination had already improved in many formations. 80 Enhanced tactics
and coordination had speeded the fall of St. Lô and put the U.S. First Army
in a position to launch a full-scale breakthrough attempt, Operation
COBRA.
Operational flexibility again characterized U.S. planning for COBRA.
Despite the fall of St. Lô, the First Army still labored under major difficul-
ties, including dwindling infantry strength and growing ammunition short-
ages, which conditioned planning for COBRA.81 Firepower enhancement
and the unexpectedly heavy ammunition expenditures of bocage fighting
