252
Normandy 1944
Corps attacked south from the base of the Cotentin Peninsula with three
divisions, and in five days captured the important communications center
of La Haye-du-Puits against stiff resistance. But determined enemy opposi-
tion ultimately halted the offensive along the Ay and Sèves rivers on 15
July after heavy U.S. losses.?
Simultaneously, Collins's VII Corps struck south from Carentan on 3
July with the fresh, yet green, 83d Division. Its attack toward Périers in
poor weather and difficult marshy terrain made little progress. Even after
the veteran U.S. 4th Division joined the attack on 5 July, the VII Corps
inched forward; even battle-tested troops found it hard going in the dense
bocage south of Carentan.& Though it beat off several vigorous enemy regi-
mental counterattacks during 10-12 July, the depleted VII Corps too had to
go over to the defense on 15 July.
On 7 July Maj. Gen. Charles H. Corlett's newly arrived U.S. XIX
Corps had also struck south toward St. Lô with three divisions and
achieved greater success. The 9th and 30th Infantry Divisions established
bridgeheads across both the Taute-Vire Canal and the Vire River, and
quickly captured St. Jean-de-Daye and its road net. The 29th Infantry
Division likewise overran the strongly entrenched German 9th Parachute
Regiment and stormed the strategic Martinville Ridge that dominated the
northeastern approaches to St. Lô on 11 July.10 That same day the U.S. 2d
Division captured Hill 192, heavily defended by the German 3d Parachute
Division, at the eastern end of the Martinville Ridge, a key position in the
German defense of St. Lô because it dominated all approaches to this
Norman town. The 2d Division then advanced across the St. Lô-Bayeux
highway to attack St. Lô from the east. Thereafter, the U.S. XIX Corps
slowly, but steadily, advanced until it cut the Périers-St. Lô highway on 20
July to deny the Germans a key communications link with St. Lô.12 East of
the Vire River the newly arrived U.S. 35th Infantry Division joined the 29th
Division in its drive on St. Lô from the northeast. With the German defense
weakened by the loss of high ground, the 35th Division stormed the final
height north of St. Lô, Hill 122, on 18 July, to render the defense of the city
untenable, and the next day the Germans abandoned the city. 13
In the meantime, on the British front, as U.S. forces rested and pre-
pared to resume offensive action in the aftermath of the fall of St. Lô, on 18
July General Montgomery launched another major offensive, GOOD-
WOOD, south of Caen. Striking out of the airborne bridgehead-the area
east of the Orne River captured by the British 6th Airborne Division on D-
Day-Montgomery sought to push southeast to gain more ground for oper-
ational maneuver and to attract German reserves to the Caen front in accor-
dance with previously agreed Allied theater strategy. Carpet bombing and
artillery fire smashed the British armor through the German forward lines
to extend the bridgehead to the foot of the high ground south of Caen.
At the same time Gen. Guy Simonds's newly operational Canadian II
A Campaign Overview
253
Corps launched a subsidiary operation, ATLANTIC, to support the right
wing of the main British drive by capturing German-held Caen south of the
Orne River and then seizing the Verrières Ridge, the dominating high
ground due south of the city. 14 This operation witnessed the first Canadian
multidivision corps-level operation in northwest Europe. Simonds launched
the Canadian 3d Infantry Division on an advance to the southwest along the
eastern bank of the Orne from the British airborne bridgehead to capture
the Caen suburbs of Colombelles and Vaucelles. With the 3d Division hav-
ing loosened the German grip on the south bank of the Orne, the unsea-
soned Canadian 2d Infantry Division then struck across the Orne with the
intention of mopping up enemy resistance in southern Caen, and then
storming the Verrières Ridge to the south. 15
But after great initial success on both the British and Canadian fronts,
the Germans reacted swiftly and these Allied formation suffered serious
setbacks. Local German reserves conducted an effective delaying with-
drawal though a deep defensive belt that slowed, deflected, and disrupted
the British armored advance and delayed the follow-up forces. 16 As dusk
tell on 18 July and Allied tactical aviation returned to its bases, vigorous
and well-coordinated German combined-arms counterattacks drove the
British armor back from the foot of the Bourguébus Ridge with further
heavy losses. 17 Dempsey doggedly attacked for two more days, even
though the advance had lost its momentum, until Montgomery halted the
operation on 21 July. Nowhere had British forces established a solid
foothold on the Bourguébus Ridge that commanded the Falaise Plain
below.
Similar reverses afflicted the Canadians in their subsidiary Operation
ATLANTIC. The Canadian 2d Division experienced hard going in its first
operation since its 1942 decimation at Dieppe. Its tricky mission in
ATLANTIC
-an opposed daylight assault crossing of the Orne-went
awry. By midafternoon, on 18 July, the division's assault had ground to a
halt in disorder as its follow-up battalions got tangled with the attack battal-
ions as the former tried to pass through, and as Canadian artillery fire
repeatedly hit its own troops.18 When the 2d Division resumed the attack
the following day, misfortune continued to dog it. Its green assault compa-
nies were again badly hit by their own artillery, and stalled short of Fleury.
Throughout the day, its infantry slowly advanced but failed to reach their
objectives 1º To salvage the situation Simonds committed the reinforced
Canadian 6th Infantry Brigade, without armor support, on 20 July to storm
Verrières Ridge 20 During the morning, the brigade consolidated on a for-
ward slope along the ridge line but halted short of Verrières.
Late on 20 July the brigade suffered a serious reverse when the Ist SS
Panzer Regiment counterattacked in torrential rain that negated Allied
artillery and air support. The SS armor caught Canadian antitank guns and
armor moving up and picked these off. The panzers quickly overran and
