344
Normandy 1944
After D-Day, however, Canadian infantry and armor quickly reverted
to the practices taught during four years of training in Britain and thus
returned to fighting their own individual wars. Coordination remained poor
for much of the campaign, and the repeated failure of Canadian combined-
operations in Normandy ultimately reflected flawed doctrine as much as
inadequate training. Once ashore the 3d Division and 2d Armoured Brigade
struggled through June and into July to execute limited break-in battles,
and as a result suffered a series of setbacks.5
The first of these occurred on 7 June as the 3d Division thrust boldly
inland toward its D-Day objective of Carpiquet airfield near Caen, despite
the known movement of powerful German armored reserves toward Caen.6
The Canadian spearhead, built around the North Nova Scotia Highlanders
and the 27th Armoured Regiment, was a balanced combined-arms team that
conformed to those employed during exercises conducted in Britain.? This
force thrust south across the assembly area of Kampfgruppe Meyer, the
spearhead of the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend. The enemy van-
guard was inferior in strength, but it went directly into the attack and took
the strung-out Canadian force in the flank. The well-trained and disciplined
SS troops, aided by superior armor, soundly defeated the Canadian force.
Even after the Canadians had initially held them off, the SS troops infiltrat-
ed into the Canadian positions and forced a withdrawal into a defensive
box. It took fire from every available artillery piece, as well as a critical
German fuel situation, to halt the SS drive for the coast. In the process
there were heavy Canadian casualties.8
This reverse was the first indication in Normandy that serious flaws
remained in Canadian attack doctrine, for the setback was the result of a
combination of flawed doctrine and inexperience. Poor Canadian recon-
naissance and superb German fire discipline allowed the SS troops to
ambush the Canadians at close range. Lack of experience also had led
Canadian troops to ignore battlefield conditions while they followed fixed
procedures learned in training. Such shortcomings, when coupled with the
limited availability of artillery support, allowed an improvised, but well-
coordinated and well-executed German counterthrust to succeed as the
Canadians were caught off balance and defeated in detail.?
The Canadians displayed the weaknesses on 7 June that were to dog
them throughout the campaign: a ponderous approach to battle, poor coor-
dination, and amateurish reliance on courage, self-confidence, and good
luck rather than sound staff work and planning. Canadian command and
control was inadequate, and emphasis on the controlled battle, which these
deficiencies promoted, robbed Canadians of both the flexibility to respond
quickly to unanticipated and unplanned eventualities and of a "fingertip"
feel for the battle 10 Such command rigidity prevented rapid reinforcement
of the 9th Infantry Brigade while it was under attack.
Further reverses followed in the days ahead that confirmed serious
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
345
weaknesses in Canadian doctrine. The following day, 8 June, the 2d
Battalion of the 26th SS Panzergrenadier Regiment, outfought the Royal
Winnipeg Rifles to retake Putot. With only numerical parity, the ss troops
again infiltrated and outflanked the Winnipegs to encircle their three for-
ward companies. The Canadians made a hasty withdrawal under cover of
smoke but lost heavily in the process. 11
nade a hassy v
The failure of the Le Mesnil-Patry operation on 11 June starkly illumi-
nated the Canadian difficulty in prevailing without lengthy preparation and
overwhelming fire support. The 6th Armoured Regiment and the Queens
Own Rifles of Canada launched a hastily planned and poorly prepared
right-flanking movement through Le Mesnil-Patry to take the high ground
south of Cheux. However, the operation was "a complete and costly fail-
ure." 12 Once again inexperience and a desire to minimize losses led the 3d
Division to commit insufficient resources to the mission. The spearhead, B
Squadron, 6th Armoured Regiment, supported by D Company, Queen's
Rifles, pushed into Le Mesnil-Patry where the 2d Battalion of 12th SS
Panzer Regiment counterattacked and overran them. 13 The failure was
again the result of the commitment of inadequate strength, poor coordina-
tion, and the recurrent tendency of Canadian units to become dispersed
once committed. Le Mesnil-Patry also confirmed the stark reality that both
Canadian armor and infantry lacked the firepower necessary to halt concen-
trated enemy armored counterattacks. 14
By 11 June, the Canadian 3d Infantry Division had sustained 2,831
casualties and had lost its cutting edge in the face of the resistance of the
more powerful, better trained, and fanatical Hitlerjugend troops. The divi-
sion, therefore, went over to the defensive and did not return to the offen-
sive until July. The division used this opportunity to rest, refit, and absorb
replacements. But, despite its shift to defense, the division made little effort
to evaluate its performance during its operational debut or to withdraw
units for retraining. 15
A combination of bad weather, the constricted size of the bridgehead,
and Montgomery's lack of faith in General Crerar delayed the arrival of
Canadian First Army headquarters until late July. 16 Thus when the 3d
Division returned to the offensive west of Caen in early July it remained
under command of the British I Corps tasked with capturing Caen. This
headquarters ordered the 3d Division to capture Carpiquet airfield as a pre-
liminary to a full-scale assault on Caen. The Canadians had recognized
from their June operations that they required heavier fire support to pene-
trate German defenses organized in depth. Thus the I Corps postponed the
attack (WINDSOR) scheduled for 30 June to strengthen it. 17 The powerful-
ly reinforced Canadian 8th Brigade finally launched WINDSOR on 4 July
with heavy fire support. The Canadians brought massive strength and fire-
power to bear on a small German defending force, and achieved an attack
ratio of 20:1.18 Moreover, for the first time in Normandy, Canadian troops
