376
Normandy 1944
reserves, and counterattack rapidly to regain the MLR. As a result, in
Normandy, when a position in the MLR was lost and reserves were avail-
able, local counterattacks usually materialized within the hour. Skillful
counterstrokes in which German troops sought to infiltrate and outflank the
enemy often allowed defenders to regain the MLR at tolerable cost.
German counterattacks habitually used all available strength and fire-and-
maneuver techniques to pry the enemy out of their positions. The combina-
tion of maximum effort and skillful small-unit fire-and-maneuver tactics
often retook lost positions at light cost.
Topography, tactical skill, firepower available to German infantry, and
flaws in Allied attack doctrine meant that the traditional three-to-one
advantage required for offensive success rarely proved sufficient in
Normandy. Only when they possessed marked numerical and material
superiority could the Allies progress with tolerable losses. 14 The firepower
possessed by German infantry bolstered its staying power. The Germans
had learned from the Great War the advantages of heavy infantry firepower,
and throughout World War Il they maintained an edge in small-unit fire-
power. The superlative MG 42, the best general-purpose machine gun of
the war, equipped most German rifle squads in Normandy and generated
the majority of squad firepower. The Germans also widely used rapid-fire
submachine guns that, though inaccurate, bolstered troop morale. Since the
German rifle squad existed to service its machine gun, as long as this
remained operational, the squad could sustain heavy losses but remain
effective. This helps to explain why German infantry continued to resist
even after suffering loss rates that would have rendered Allied infantry
ineffective.
Central to the tactical superiority of German soldiers was the realism
and quality of German training, which stressed individual initiative and
independence. Allied propaganda has left a popular image of German sol-
diers as dull, blindly obedient automatons, but the reality was very differ-
ent. The initiative and independence of German junior officers and NCOS
was central to German combat effectiveness. Time and again in Normandy,
junior officers and NCOs took the initiative to counterattack or to rally
wavering troops and patch up the front. Nowhere was this emphasis on
individual initiative more clearly illustrated in Normandy than in the break-
out from the Falaise pocket and in the retreat behind the Seine in late
August. In the face of the collapse of command and control, individual offi-
cers and NCOs rallied and reorganized troops into heterogeneous battle
groups to break out from an encirclement.
At the same time, German training preached a holistic combined-arms
doctrine where the sum of the whole was greater than that of its parts. The
Heer trained long, hard, and realistically, and thus even half-trained recruits
often offered stiff resistance. IS Even though the high standards of training
earlier in the war had inevitably slipped by 1944, recruits still underwent
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
377
more rigorous, more uniform, and more realistic basic training than their
Allied counterparts. Thereafter field training sought to correct remaining
deficiencies. Thus, while green or undertrained German units did make tac-
tical errors in Normandy, and while Waffen SS troops sometimes operated
as if fanaticism could compensate for inadequate firepower, intelligence,
and tactical skill, German forces rarely made serious tactical errors.
The quality of replacements also maintained German fighting power
and resilience in Normandy. In theory, at least, the replacement system
maintained strict territorial and unit affiliation between field formations
and their corresponding replacement and training units in Germany, or,
increasingly by 1944, in occupied territories. Thus from induction to arrival
in a combat theater, German replacements maintained their unit affiliation.
On the completion of basic training, troops joined "march" units and head-
ed for the front under the command of veterans. At the front, divisional
field replacement battalions assimilated the replacements through field
training. 16
The German replacement system thus maintained replacement cohe-
sion and morale, but sacrificed flexibility and speed for quality. Field
replacement battalions gave formations a short-term ability to offset battle
casualties, yet the system depended on the speedy dispatch of trained
replacements from the Reich. But by 1944 strict affiliation had begun to
break down under the strain of five years of war as Germany reached the
bottom of its manpower barrel. The German system was also inflexible
because field replacement battalions in combat rapidly became depleted,
while those unengaged held trained replacements that could not easily be
tapped. 17 At the same time, it was difficult to modify the flow of reinforce-
ments to meet combat losses because training units in Germany could not
respond rapidly to the manpower needs of combat divisions. As a result,
sustained heavy combat rapidly burned out German divisions in Normandy
and lack of reserves forced formations to stay in the line until they had vir-
tually lost all fighting power. 18
That the Germans offered a protracted defense was also due to their
refinement of defensive techniques in light of combat conditions in
Normandy. The Allies' air superiority and their pronounced firepower
advantage rendered standard German defense in depth less effective in
Normandy than it had been in the East or in North Africa. In particular, for-
ward concentration and immediate counterattack brought heavy German
losses from Allied artillery. 19 Moreover, Allied firepower and the devastat-
ing effect of carpet bombing ensured that even standard defense in depth
could neither stop the Allies from gaining ground nor prevent heavy losses.
So, the Germans gradually refined their defensive techniques to count-
er overwhelming Allied aerial supremacy and firepower. Formations gradu-
ally adopted extreme dispersion as troops deepened their defensive zones
and further scattered their manpower. Where time, resources, and combat
