126
Preparation: 1919-1944
elusive, though, because the army remained sluggish and methodical in the
attack and failed to exploit opportunities quickly. Yet Montgomery, safe in
the knowledge that time was on the Allied side, steadfastly focused on final
victory and refused to take chances and risk a setback that could destroy his
army's still fragile morale. His operational approach aimed to ensure the
greatest prospects of success, and in this he was successful: after El
Alamein he never lost a battle. Despite growing firepower superiority,
Montgomery experienced great difficulty ejecting the Germans from the
well-prepared defensive positions they increasingly relied on. Unused to
assaulting fortified positions, lacking mine-clearing capability, and unwill-
ing or unable to utilize available firepower, the Eighth Army made slow
progress through fortified defenses. 126
Montgomery's determination to prevent Rommel from regaining the
initiative as the latter had so devastatingly done in April 1941 and January
1942 also necessitated caution and the maintenance of strong reserves and
good logistic support. These considerations conditioned Eighth Army's
advance from Tripoli to El Agheila after 5 November and ensured a deliber-
ate, methodical pursuit-and repeated unsuccessful attempts to pin
Rommel on the coast road and then outflank him. The Desert Air Force
proved unable to slow appreciably the enemy withdrawal amid new, fluid
conditions where target identification was difficult. Thus, in late
November, the Eighth Army had to halt before the naturally strong Agheila
position to build up its logistic support. 127
On 13 December the newly promoted General Montgomery launched a
classic multistage assault on the Agheila position with a powerful, narrow
frontal attack in the north along the coast road to pin the enemy down,
while the New Zealand Division made a deep flanking penetration to the
south. But the Axis forces quickly withdrew behind thick minefields that
delayed the British advance, and Montgomery's flanking move lacked the
strength to prevent an Axis retreat. Montgomery had maneuvered Rommel
out of a strong position without a major fight, but the enemy had again
escaped intact, 128
On 15 January 1943, the Eighth Army assaulted the Axis position at
Buerat in a repeat of the Agheila attack. The enemy once again conducted a
skillful delaying withdrawal as Eighth Army cautiously pursued, slowed by
mines and German rear guards,129 On 23 January 1943, the Eighth Army
took Tripoli and soon after crossed the Tunisian frontier. Montgomery's
advance from Egypt to Tunisia had witnessed a dramatic reversal of British
fortunes, and reflected a massive administrative achievement, but nowhere
had Montgomery met an enemy that would stand and fight.
During its advance to Tunisia over winter 1942-1943, the Eighth Army
gradually improved artillery C3 procedures as it refined desert warfare fire
techniques. It permanently brigaded its army artillery and established
corps-level control. These refinements allowed the Eighth Army to generate
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
127
massed defensive fire within five minutes. 130 The failure of the German
spoiling attack at Medenine on 6 March 1943 illuminated the maturation of
the Eighth Army's defensive skills. For the first time, the British laid out a
coherent antitank screen to stop enemy armor rather than to protect intantry
and artillery positions. This screen, backed by massed defensive artillery
fire, stopped the panzers and inflicted heavy losses. 131
During the spring of 1943, the Eighth Army also developed greater
offensive skill, which speeded the defeat of the Axis in North Africa.
Montgomery again utilized tactical deception to conceal his frontal assault
on the Mareth Line during March. Nevertheless, despite marked superiori-
ty, the attack bogged down amid poor weather conditions and strong
German defenses in depth. Yet Montgomery adroitly enlarged the sub-
sidiary flanking thrust by the provisional New Zealand Corps into the main
advance, a decision that proved crucial to success. The most notable feature
of the battle, though, was the effective close support provided by the Desert
Air Force, which for the first time so disrupted and disorganized the enemy
that the outnumbered New Zealanders broke through the Axis defenses in
the Tebaga Gap on 26 March. Moreover, when Eighth Army armor forces
encountered an improvised Axis antitank screen, they did not attack it but
withdrew to hull-down positions and provided indirect fire, and threw out
their own gun line that halted repeated German armored counterattacks.
The New Zealanders' threat to the Axis rear forced the enemy to abandon
the entire Mareth Line position, even though Montgomery had again rein-
forced his unexpected success too late to prevent an orderly Axis Withdraw-
al.
Familiar problems still plagued British operations. Artillery fire plans
tailed to target the full depth of enemy defenses, and troops proved unable
to deploy forward antitank guns quickly. Coordination too remained poor
because the regimental parochialism that was so ingrained in the service
culture proved resistant to reform. As a result, operationally British forces
could only breach German defenses in depth via a protracted slogging
match. The continued absence of holistic doctrine and of mechanisms to
learn combat lessons, as well as the army's lukewarm commitment to
retrain in the field, prevented the army from fully applying its burgeoning
strength and firepower. During 1943-1944 British forces slowly developed
broader military proficiency as they began to draw more accurate lessons
from combat and fully grasp the mechanics of modern war. But this process
remained haphazard and inchoate as flawed doctrine, in particular, contin-
ued to hamper improved combat effectiveness.
The TORCH landings in northwest Africa on 8 November 1942 had
seen the combat debut of the British First Army, commanded by Lt. Gen. K.
A. N. Anderson, that comprised "new army" units raised by Home Forces
during 1940-1942. The divergent development of Home Forces, its inexpe-
rience, and its failure to absorb desert warfare lessons meant that the First
