34
Preparation: 1919-1944
18-pounder gun and 4.5-inch howitzer. It thus lacked the punch of the
105mm howitzers that entered German and U.S. service between the wars
or the velocity to be a good antitank gun. Moreover, it was in short supply
at the outbreak of war, while new medium and heavy guns fell victim to
interwar economy measures. Britain thus entered World War II with only a
few, largely obsolescent, medium and heavy guns, a deficiency that com-
promised artillery counterbattery and defensive fire capabilities. Finally,
most lacking was a self-propelled gun to provide mobile fire support for
armored forces. 65
Financial constraints had also hampered improvements in artillery fire
control and communications methods. The army had introduced its first
field radios in 1928, but lack of funds meant that they only became avail-
able in quantity in 1938.66 Funding constraints also ensured that mecha-
nization progressed slowly. By 1939 mechanization and radio communica-
tions had progressed sufficiently to create artillery that was more mobile
and flexible than its 1918 predecessors, but artillery fire control and com-
munications failed to keep pace with the rapidity and mobility that armor
had injected into modern warfare.
The Royal Artillery also went to war in 1939 with a defective organiza-
tion. In 1938 the army reorganized divisional artillery brigades, both as an
economy measure and in an abortive effort to increase mass-fire capabili-
ties. It introduced a new organization of three field regiments of two batter-
ies divided into three troops of four guns. This reform had two beneficial
consequences: it established the regiment as a tactical fire unit (which
allowed quicker fire) and attached permanent observers (which brought
improved accuracy). However, it also had serious flaws, for it reduced the
number of batteries per division from nine to six, which meant that it was
no longer possible for divisions to provide simultaneous fire support for
each infantry battalion. It also prevented the semipermanent battery-battal-
ion affiliation that promoted proficiency through close association. In addi-
tion, economy measures left only one troop in each battery equipped with
an observation post (the other two troops had to fire blind) and led to the
abolition of artillery survey parties, both of which were retrograde steps
that compromised the ability of gunners to provide rapid defensive fire. 67
British artillery doctrine had recovered somewhat in the late 1930s.
The revised Field Service Regulations (1935) reemphasized the massed
employment of artillery and the importance of signals communications. 68
Consequently, the artillery went to war in better shape than the other arms.
In September 1939, it had progressed far in mechanization and had gained
some radio communications. Its ordnance was largely obsolescent but
mobile, the quality of its training and the caliber of its manpower was good,
and its morale was high. But the most serious problem that afflicted the
interwar Royal Artillery was its fatal misapprehension that future wars
would not require massed fire, thus leading it to assume a novel direct-fire
The Interwar Period
35
antitank role without an effective antitank weapon and denuding it of the
medium and heavy artillery required for effective fire support. Its orienta-
tion toward positional warfare with meticulous fire plans was another seri-
ous deficiency, for it simply lacked the expertise and organization to per-
form in fast-paced mobile operations. Its structure and training emphasized
massed predicted fire that was only possible after extensive survey and reg-
istration, which prevented rapid, mobile action. Its defective organization
and lack of rapport with infantry and armor further hampered its ability to
make its presence felt on the modern battlefield. Nevertheless, the Royal
Artillery made an important achievement between the wars that paved the
way for it to become once again the most adaptable and innovative British
arm during World War II. It devised a basic gunnery technique and created
a uniform and sound doctrine, both of which served with very little modifi-
cation throughout the war.69
If the combat arms suffered serious neglect between the wars, financial
stringency led to even greater neglect of army support services. Provision
for antiaircraft defense was utterly inadequate, and the logistical base for
extended operations overseas did not exist. What distinguished Britain
from Germany, however, was that even though it lacked the resources,
Britain-having learned from its mistakes in the Great War where initial
neglect of logistics had undermined British operations- carefully consid-
ered the logistics of a future war. With adequate attention given to the theo-
retical supply needs of its armed forces, Britain quickly achieved excellent
logistic support for its military operations during World War II. 70
Intelligence failures also hindered British rearmament in the 1930s.
Interwar Britain remained ill informed about the capabilities and intentions
of possible enemies. This was a function of both financial constraints and
of structural flaws. British intelligence consistently misevaluated German
military capabilities and the threat they posed to British interests.? Poor
understanding of military developments in Germany prevented accurate
assessment of German potential and goals. For example, Britain was aware
that Germany had created armored divisions and consolidated them into
corps, but the British military did not identify any strategic implications of
Germany's adoption of an armored warfare doctrine. In fact, the British
military misperceived how the Germans intended to employ armor, believ-
ing tanks would be used in dispersed packets to infiltrate Allied lines in a
replay of the storm troop attacks of 1918.72 Thus the British Army would
disperse its armor along the front in reserve to counter intiltration by small
groups of enemy infantry and armor. Moreover, British military and intelli-
gence agencies failed to evaluate how German history since 1914 had
shaped military developments in Germany between the wars.
The British
Army was prepared to refight the war of 1914 with the tactics and ordnance
During the September 1938 Munich crisis, Britain still possessed neg-
