SLI
328
Normandy 1944
World War II experience. The army's unwillingness to question or rethink
basic doctrinal tenets, such as its adherence to strategic defense and the
offensive primacy of massed armor, further exacerbated this deficiency.
At the same time, problems associated with rapid and massive wartime
expansion as well as lack of combat experience further slowed the collec-
tion, assimilation, and dissemination of combat experience. The setbacks of
1939-1942 then promoted a desperate search for a solution-a system that
would secure victory. This quest ultimately produced Montgomery and his
operational approach, which he grounded in recognized British strengths-
artillery, infantry on the defense, air power, administration, logistics, and
the advantage of time. While Montgomery firmly believed in the need to
learn from combat experience, his "recipe" for victory, once established,
drove the army to emphasize and to enhance those elements that were inte-
gral to the system. Thus, irresistibly, the need for victory to expunge the
taint of defeat led the army to enhance its effectiveness in areas in which it
had already possessed aptitude and that were largely defensive in orienta-
tion, at the expense of improvements in offensive warfare, be they in
armored doctrine or coordination.
Montgomery's approach to battle, while progressive in its professional-
ism and its use of air power, remained grounded in the conservative
bedrock of interwar British military thought and in Great War artillery tech-
niques. His formula for victory narrowed and limited the spectrum of inno-
vation and reform. Moreover, an erroneous presumption that pertinent les-
sons could only be drawn from success bedeviled British lessons-learned
analysis. This reluctance to learn from defeat skewed the lessons-learned
process and ensured that the army enhanced its effectiveness in areas in
which it had already demonstrated expertise (artillery and administration)
but was slow to adapt in areas where it lacked expertise (coordination and
maneuver warfare). This failing particularly slowed the process of adapta-
tion early in the war when victories were few and far between, and so adap-
tation was generally slow, ill focused, and disparate. 146
When a more professional and scientas c approach to lessons learned
gradually materialized in the middle of World War II, the pace of change
accelerated. However, the British Army never achieved the flexibility dis-
played by the U.S. Army as Montgomery's ascendancy increasingly shaped
the learning process. His desire to preserve morale, cut extravagant ammu-
nition consumption, and minimize losses, as well as his quest for a sus-
tained satisfactory performance led him to censor after-action reports, thus
further narrowing the breadth of effective adaptation. Finally, the mounting
manpower crunch acted as a brake on organizational and tactical innova-
tion: manpower was simply not available for experimentation, as the histo-
ry of countermortar groups illustrates.
As a result, even though there was improvement in the army's opera-
tional and tacucal expertise during the Normandy campaign, it was, as it
had been throughout the war, incremental. The army's disdain for intellec-
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
329
tual development and theory still prevented it from substantially rethinking
doctrine and tactics. Nor did it intensively retrain in the field or display
determination to remove inadequate officers. Moreover, British forces con-
centrated much of their strength forward in the line when on the defensive;
a policy that made field training more difficult. 147 The British learning
process— the manner in which the army gathered, evaluated, and dissemi-
nated combat lessons-also remained more centralized than in the U.S. and
German Armies. Not only did after-action reports often lack critical
appraisal, but suppression of negative information further got in the way of
army efforts to enhance its effectiveness.
Dissemination of after-action reports apparently had little impact on
the process of innovation in the field. In fact, most adaptation occurred on a
unit-by-unit basis based on individual units' experiences. But the lack of
effective feedback to provide accurate and honest lessons-learned informa-
tion meant that adaptation remained slow, idiosyncratic, and piecemeal.
Even though the Second Army perpetually fell short of its specific goals
and British forces were slow to adapt, the general shape of Montgomery's
theater strategy—to pin down the Germans at Caen —went broadly to plan.
This illustrated that his master plan was well attuned to strategic, military,
and geographic realities. The Americans had massed in western Britain; the
Allies knew through Ultra that the Germans viewed the British as the
greater threat; and geography both entailed that the Germans would defend
Caen vigorously and that their reinforcements would arrive mainly from
the southeast. His strategy also recognized the limits of British capabilities
as well as the burgeoning American strength, although he failed to appreci-
ate the growing U.S. military proficiency. Moreover, Montgomery's insis-
tence on the early capture of Cherbourg proved vital to Allied victory in
northwest Europe. His strategy realistically utilized the sustainable capabil-
ities of Anglo-Canadian forces, even if he had to mislead his superiors to
get what he wanted. His master plan displayed an unrivaled grasp of strate-
gic and logistic realities that contributed directly to Allied victory in
Normandy. It allowed for a sustained, if unspectacular, performance from
British ground forces that, in retrospect, proved sufficient to guarantee vIc-
tory, as Montgomery had maintained all along. He fought his battles in a
way most likely to filfill British political-military objectives and at a toler-
able cost. His arrogance, tactlessness, condescension, and deceit made him
many enemies and obscured his achievements, but Montgomery played an
important role in Allied victory in northwest Europe.
Notes
1. Public Record Office, Kew, London, Cabinet Papers 106/1060 (hereafter
PRO CAB) Brig. James Hargest, "Notes?" Normandy [summer 1944).
2. National Archives of Canada, Ottawa, Record Group hereafter NAC RG)
