2.
48
Preparation: 1919-1944
German doctrine and operational art. This reality helps explain why
Germany more easily and effectively absorbed armor between the wars
than did Britain.
From their genesis the panzer divisions were interarms, rather than
simply tank, units that trained to cooperate together. 129 This emphasis on
interarms coordination reflected both the lessons drawn from the Great War
on the effectiveness of storm troop tactics and the Reichswehr's efforts to
maximize its fighting power. In August 1935 the Heer conducted its first
large-scale tank maneuvers; it also closely scrutinized British evaluation of
their Experimental Mechanized Force and learned more from its exercises
than the British did 130 Though modeled on the British EMF, the Heer came
to recognize through regular exercises the strategic potential of its mecha-
nized forces.
After 1936, the expansion of the panzer arm lost some momentum
because it both generated opposition and invited grasping hands. Such
opposition, however, focused on the viability of deep-penetration opera-
tions rather than on the value of the tank. In fact, broad acceptance of the
utility of the tank throughout the army led Germany to raise two independ-
ent panzer brigades for infantry support, four light divisions for reconnol-
tering and raiding, and four motorized infantry divisions to hold captured
ground. Recognizing the strategic potential of mechanized warfare, the
Heer consolidated these formations into three motorized corps in January
1938.131 Historians have argued that the early wartime success of German
armored forces was due in part to a German refusal to build this new arm
around cavalry as occurred in the British Army. However, historians have
understated the role that the cavalry played in the genesis of the panzer
arm. Not only was the Heer's first mechanized division built around caval-
ry, but cavalry provided most of the personnel for Germany's first armored
divisions. 132 The key difference was that the Reichswer trained its cavalry
during the 1920s as a mobile, combined-arms, deep-penetration force, 133
Thus the incorporation of German cavalry into the armor force proved far
less detrimental than it was in the case of the more conservative British
Army. In 1933-1935 Germany produced its first two tanks-the Panzer I
and Panzer Il-light, mass-produced training vehicles intended to be quick-
ly superseded by larger battle tanks. Early German tanks were light, under-
gunned, poorly armored, and possessed poor communications and optics. 134
Equipment shortages, inexperience, and rapid expansion all hindered devel-
opment of German armor in the 1930s, so that it was not until 1938 that the
first medium tanks, the Panzer III and Panzer IV, entered service and lack
of expertise meant that production was slow.
The tremendous German victories of 1939-1941 notwithstanding,
German rearmament in the late 1930s was neither easy nor particularly
effective. It was hurried and poorly planned, and the regime failed to gear
The Interwar Period
49
rearmament toward a strategic blueprint. Rather, Germany pursued rearma-
ment in breadth but not depth. Each service pursued independent, uncoordi-
nated, and virtually unlimited rearmament. Such a policy inextricably
bound the Wehrmacht to nazism and its racial-political goals but did so at a
heavy price. Broad rearmament coupled with the construction of the
Westwall fortifications almost bankrupted Germany during 1938-1939, and
it was only the annexation of Austria and Czechoslovakia that prevented
German financial and economic collapse. 135 Moreover, several inescapable
strategic limitations curbed German rearmament, most significantly
Germany's dependence on raw material imports, especially petroleum
products and heavy metals, and its shortage of foreign exchange. 136 Within
these limitations Germany prepared for war to the maximum extent possi-
ble. 137 Unconstrained rearmament promoted innovation but simultaneously
removed central direction, engendering interservice rivalry as well as dupli-
cation in weapons development and force structure. The character of the
National Socialist regime with its numerous competing authorities merely
fueled the interservice rivalry inherent in all military organizations.
Massive, unplanned rearmament gave the West a false impression of
German strength that contributed to Western appeasement and the Munich
agreement. Moreover, the Nazis manipulated propaganda with decisive
success to inflate Western perceptions of German military strength. In reali-
ty, German rearmament was window dressing: raw material and foreign-
exchange limitations placed a ceiling on rearmament. Expansion consis-
tently outstripped both production and training facilities. Even in the spring
of 1939, for example, the army remained seriously deficient in weapons,
especially mortars and heavy artillery, and only had an estimated fifteen
days' worth of munitions. 138 The massive rearmament increased Germany's
dependence on raw material imports, which left Germany severely short of
petroleum reserves. 139
While Germany's ambitious and expansionist foreign policy goals cre-
ated a fertile environment for military innovation, both policy and geogra-
phy directed innovation toward offensive ground warfare to prevent a repe-
tition of Germany's World War I defeat. The army widely adopted radio to
allow rapid, effective communications among its fast-moving offensive
army, and, indeed, Germany developed the best radios in the world between
the wars. But it failed to capitalize on the potential of radar because this
technology's value was largely defensive, and the orientation of German
preparation was overwhelmingly offensive. 140 Hitler expanded the Heer at
a tremendous pace (see Table 1.1), but forced expansion fragmented and
rushed training and reduced its quality. 141 Massive expansion of combat
units also unbalanced the army's force structure, restricted its operational
flexibility, and left it extremely short of nondivisional army troops and sup-
port services. 142
