138
Preparation: 1919-1944
forces in HUSKY that they had made in TORCH. The drop of the 1st Air
Landing Brigade marked the first major British airborne operation of the
war, but inexperience and excessive demands placed on the paratroopers
resulted in wide dispersion and heavy losses. 178 Airborne forces gained use-
ful experience but, as with the Germans, inflated expectations of airborne
units' capabilities hindered their effectiveness and led the Allies to empha-
size strategic missions at the expense of less ambitious tactical missions. 179
British tactical skill further improved during HUSKY. In particular,
British forces more extensively and effectively utilized aerial spotters,
including the first spotter-directed naval gunfire against Catania's harbor.
After the success of this mission, spotter-directed naval fire became com-
mon and brought accurate naval fire support. 180 The September 1943
Salerno landings (Operation AVALANCHE), in southern Italy, gave the
British more experience in amphibious assault and demonstrated the effica-
cy of defensive artillery fire. The caution of Allied forces prevented them
from seizing a sizeable lodgement, and enemy reserves contained the
invaders in a shallow, vulnerable bridgehead that the Germans vigorously
attacked, 181 But spotter-directed artillery and naval fire repeatedly broke up
German counterattacks, demoralized the enemy, sapped German strength,
and prevented then from overrunning the bridgehead. Likewise during the
January 1944 Anzio landings (Operation SHINGLE), the lack of ground
observation made spotters vital and they proved crucial in breaking up
German counterattacks. In fact, spotter-directed fire became the dominant
method of artillery employment in Italy during 1944.182
The rugged, highly defensible terrain in Italy that restricted operational
maneuver finally led British forces to develop an all-around proficiency.
British artillery effectiveness continued to improve in Italy as mass
employment became commonplace. Poor observation in mountainous ter-
rain brought aerial spotters into their true element, and the campaign saw
the debut of spotter-directed counterflak bombardment that sought to sup-
press enemy antiaircraft fire prior to airstrikes. The decline of the German
air threat in 1944 allowed increased employment and success for spotters,
as did the arrival of superior planes. Through trial and error, gunners
learned to employ ever larger amounts of artillery to shatter enemy defens-
es. In the Liri Valley during May-June 1944 commanders called down
record levels of massed fire with unprecedented rapidity. By the summer of
1944 the army had achieved the adept handling of massed artillery fire, the
belief that "shells save lives" had become an army byword, and gunners, if
well supplied, could thwart all German attacks, 183 In fact, artillery handling
was the area in which the army most improved its capabilities during the
war.
Rugged terrain forced British troops to coordinate more effectively.
The inability of armor to advance without infantry support and the gradual
taming of the panzers finally eroded British faith in massed armor. Initially,
139
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
poor coordination brought severe tank losses from enfilading German anti-
tank guns and the new close-combat antitank weapons that appeared in
increasing numbers during fall 1943. Gradually, through trial and error,
British armor and infantry learned to fight together: combined-arms coordi-
nation improved, and brigaded army artillery brought down ever larger
amounts of fire. It was, therefore, in Italy in 1944 that British forces finally
developed a genuine comprehensive military proficiency.
With vctories in Tunisia, Sicily, and Italy, British morale began of
recover. But it was the intensification of preparations for the invasion of
France from mid-1943, the influx of material might, and Montgomery's
November 1943 appointment to command of the 21st Army Group, picked
to spearhead the Anglo-Canadian landings, that boosted British morale. 184
However, the army group, which comprised the British Second Army and
Canadian First Army, benefited little from combat experience in Italy
because Home Forces still lacked mechanisms to disseminate combat les-
The preparation of British forces for OVERLORD during 1943-1944
occurred against the backdrop of important doctrinal change, as the War
Office revised tactical doctrine to incorporate lessons learned in the desert.
The most important change was the abandonment of the use of armor to
spearhead offensives that had gotten so many British units shattered. In
1944, armor instead performed the secondary function of providing indirect
fire support from hull-down flank and rear positions while the infantry,
backed by massed artillery fire, resumed the primary attack role. 183
Armored units retrained to these revised tactics during the spring of 1944,
but many infantry units apparently failed to appreciate or to practice the
new doctrine during the last few months of hectic invasion preparations.
That the upcoming invasion would tax British capabilities and
resources gave senior military and political figures much food for thought,
and most remained uncertain whether the Allies could triumph in
Normandy, 186 Allied successes in North Africa and Sicily were strategic
victories that had derived from the ability to apply great strength against an
enemy that operated at the end of extended and tenuous lines of communi-
cation. But a second front in northwest Europe would require the Allies to
project their power against an enemy in unprecedented strength on the
strategic defensive. This enemy had the advantage of interior lines and rec-
ognized that repelling the invasion presented nazism with its last opportuni-
ty to forestall defeat. Given the inexperience and inadequate training of the
army in Britain, Montgomery remained gravely concerned about prospects
of success. Indeed, he wrote:
The army in England is not really battle worthy; they are not veteran sol-
diers, fully versed in the technique of battle. It is all theory, and a good
deal of it is unpractical and on the wrong lines. Many of the generals have
