354
Normandy 1944
11 P.M. on 7 August with precision bombing on the flanks of the axis of
advance.86 Simonds employed radio beams, Bofors guns firing tracers, arti-
ficial moonlight from searchlights, and green marker shells to guide the
armored armada forward in the dark. Although the Germans had expected
an attack, its timing took them by surprise and the Kangaroos got the
Canadian infantry into German lines before the Germans had recovered
from the bombing and barrage. Early on 8 August Canadian tanks and
infantry stormed Verrières Ridge.87 Good coordination allowed the spear-
heads to take rapidly their objectives with minimal casualties. The first
stage of TOTALIZE had proven remarkably successful.
The second phase, however, went awry. In the early afternoon of 8
August, 492 heavy bombers of the Eighth USAAF dropped 1,488 tons of
bombs on German rearward positions; however, twenty-four planes
bombed short, hitting Canadian and Polish troops. 88 The Canadian 4th and
Polish 1st Armoured Divisions advanced in a textbook exploitation opera-
tion. However, congestion in the rear caused by passing four divisions
through a narrow corridor and made worse by the short bombing slowed
the advance. Despite Simonds's exhortation that the armored formations
press on during darkness, they "harbored" for the night in accordance with
prescribed doctrine. 89
The tardy Canadian advance on 8 August brought a bold push on 9
August by a combined-arms force of the 4th Armoured Division, which
ended in disaster.9º The inexperienced Canadian troops lost their way, and
the Germans isolated and overran them on Hill 140. During the night of
9-10 August, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders boldly seized the
strategic Hill 195 in a silent night attack. Believing the enemy defenses
broken and with the high ground taken, the armored divisions unleashed
their tanks to exploit forward on 10 August with terrible consequences.
German armor and antitank guns savaged the inexperienced Canadian and
Polish armor, which lost 142 tanks, the First Army's highest single day's
tank losses of the war.º! To regain the momentum of the advance, Simonds
threw the veteran and now rested 3d Division into the battle late on 10
August. It launched a coordinated attack on Quesnay Wood, defended by a
SS battle group. The struggle for the wood demonstrated the superiority of
German forest fighting techniques. The SS troops held their fire until
Canadian forces were deep in the wood and then ambushed them at dusk,
forcing both lead battalions to withdraw.92 This setback brought TOTAL-
IZE to a premature conclusion on 11 August.
The offensive had gained 9 miles, largely due to the innovative use of
Kangaroo armored personnel carriers and nighttime bombing, but failed to
reach Falaise or shatter the attenuated German defenses. But TOTALIZE
once again illustrated Canadian tactical and operational ingenuity. It
involved novel tactics, equipment, and devices, including several RAF-
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
355
crewed visual control post tanks as mobile observation posts for the bomb-
ing. 93 However, Canadian troops had very little time to prepare for the
operation, and this clearly limited the effectiveness of these innovations.
But TOTALIZE did demonstrate the 2d Division's developing combat
skill. Its patrol efficiency, in particular, had increased markedly, reflecting
its gradual transformation into a seasoned formation. 95
Two flaws had crippled TOTALIZE in spite of its innovations. First,
the entire operation was wedded to the nighttime bombing attack. This
proved problematic because the initial Canadian break-in met with unex-
pected success and rapidly smashed through the considerably thinned
German defense. The scheduled second strategic bombing attack forced the
Canadian spearheads to halt for many hours, a respite that surrendered the
initiative and gave the Germans time to marshal their meager reserves and
counterattack as the bombing began. So most German troops, especially the
armored reserves, evaded the second bombardment. The second flaw of the
TOTALIZE plan was its reliance for the breakout on two green armored
divisions that were participating in their first major attack. Neither forma-
tion performed well during TOTALIZE. As was wholly typical of unsea-
soned formations in Normandy, they coordinated poorly and stopped to
eliminate pockets of resistance rather than bypass them. 96
Moreover, despite Simonds's efforts the Canadians were unable to dis-
guise their preparations. On 7 August the Germans recognized that the
Canadians were about to strike for Falaise.97 The rapidity with which the
Canadian II Corps organized and launched the operation also meant that
Canadian troops went in tired and ill prepared, limiting the effectiveness of
the new equipment and techniques. 98 Finally, the First Army simply lacked
sufficient strength to smash through to Argentan and link up with the
Americans.99
Nonetheless, TOTALIZE clearly showed the value of the Kangaroo
vehicle, and thereafter it became integral equipment in all future Canadian
operations. The operation also illustrated the potential of large-scale night
operations because the night attack allowed the Canadians to take vital
ground with relatively few losses. The Canadians also learned from
TOTALIZE the need for tactical aviation to strike beyond the range of field
artillery in support of the advance. 100
While the Canadians were failing before Falaise, U.S. troops began to
encircle the German forces defending Normandy. To link up with the U.S.
spearheads sweeping northeast toward Argentan, General Montgomery on 11
August ordered Crerar to renew his thrust on Falaise, link up with Patton's
troops, and encircle the German forces in Normandy. Simonds hastily
devised a new offensive, TRACTABLE, which was executed on 14 August.
Simonds once again innovated to overcome the German defenses. He
employed a revised version of the TOTALIZE plan, which incorporated its
