112
Preparation: 1919-1944
defeat. Instead, Wavell insisted that reinforcement alone could reverse
British fortunes.
Political interference also influenced British fortunes. Even though the
loss of O'Connor and the diversion to Greece had crippled the MEC,
Churchill pressured Wavell to launch an ill-conceived, ill-prepared, and
impromptu offensive to relieve Tobruk and defeat Rommel-while simulta-
neously campaigning in Syria.51 Wavell's counteroffensive, Operation
BATTLEAXE (15-17 June 1941), revealed that the MEC had lost its sharp
edge.52 Concurrent operations denied the British sufficient strength to
secure decisive victory, and haste led to the loss of most of the new
Crusader tanks prematurely thrown into battle. 53 Wavell conducted a clas-
sic attack in accordance with doctrine. He launched a frontal infantry
assault on Haifa and Sollum to pin German forces in place while the 7th
Armoured Division, in a tactical role, swept into the German rear to seek
out and destroy German armor-in accordance with the strategy of attri-
tion-and then relieve Tobruk.
Lack of aerial reconnaissance, though, meant that Wavell had underrat-
ed Axis strength and capabilities. At the same time, failures of communica-
tion slowed British operations and poor radio security sacrificed the ele-
ment of surprise and gave Rommel an edge. Inferior British tactical skill
and the superiority of German armor then ensured that the offensive broke
down with heavy losses. BATTLEAXE was a marginal victory for the
British forces but one bought at heavy cost because of flawed doctrine and
poor execution. 54 Weak air power also meant that the RAF could not gain
air superiority, and lack of air-ground communications ensured that tactical
aviation made little contribution to the ground battle. Heated interservice
conflicts over the role and mission of air power continued to hamper con-
duct of the air-ground battle; the RAF remained wedded to strategic bomb-
ing and refused to divert resources to tactical missions. Along with the per-
nicious effects of interservice rivalry, technical and technological obstacles
limited the impact of tactical aviation. No ground-air communications sys-
tem existed, and suitable tactical strike aircraft were lacking both in quanti-
ty and quality. The air support for Wavell's offensive to retake Tobruk was
so slow and inadequate that the army derided the RAF as the "Royal Absent
Force,"55
That the MEC was slow to learn from experience exacerbated the diffi-
culties it faced. Months passed before it determined the correct reasons for
defeat in 1941 and took steps to rectify shortcomings. The absence of clear
doctrine and of mechanisms to collect and disseminate combat reports hin-
dered quick and accurate evaluation of its performance. At the same time,
the British tried to replicate German success by imitating them without
understanding the underlying reasons for the enemy's success. Thus British
assessments of the causes of defeat in the desert during 1941 paralleled the
earlier misguided evaluations of the operations in Norway and France: the
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
113
army concluded that the inferiority of British armor had squandered
chances for greater success during BATTLEAXE.56 Yet, the real causes of
defeat were both more complex and more fundamental: hasty execution,
inadequate doctrine and equipment, and poor coordination, tactics, and air-
ground cooperation. Moreover, throughout 1941, the MEC assessed its
performance without questioning or reevaluating preconceptions about the
efficacy of a strategy of attrition and of massed armor. Wavell had massed
his armor, but the slow speed of his infantry tanks limited his mobility and
equipment deficiencies hampered his operations. All the same, neither
Wavell nor his subordinates questioned the wisdom of throwing ill-support-
ed masses of tanks against enemy armor in direct engagements, despite hor-
rific losses.
Analysis of BATTLEAXE did, however, demonstrate the unsatisfacto-
ry nature of air-ground cooperation and led to formation of the Middle East
Air Force under Air Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder and interservice examina-
tion of the problems of air-ground cooperation. It took the combination of
the army's shocking defeats during 1940-1941, Fighter Command's need
for a new mission after winning the Battle of Britain, and the arrival of
Tedder and Air Vice Marshal Arthur "Mary" Coningham in the western
desert for the RAF to take tactical air support seriously.58 During summer
1941 Coningham created a system with centralized RAF control, initiated
joint army-air force exercises, and established a means of communication
and control. At the core of these reforms was the attachment of air support
control (ASC) organizations to corps and armored divisions connected by a
"tentacle" radio link to forward air support links (FASLs) attached to
infantry brigades. Ground troops passed requests for air support to the ASC
Via their tentacle, and the FASLs directed aircraft dispatched by the ASC on
the target.Sº At the same time, increased aircraft strength and the introduc-
tion of new planes-
-Beaufighter, Hurricane II, and Kittyhawk fighters as
well as Beaufort, Wellington II, and Baltimore medium bombers
increased aerial capabilities.60 The reorganization of air support during the
summer of 1941 was an important first step in the air-ground battle and
brought the first substantive improvement in British ground combat capa-
bilities since the start of the war.
The disgraced Wavell's successor, Gen. Claude Auchinleck, was
unable to turn the tide in North Africa 61 His November 1941 CRUSADER
offensive, however, was the genesis of the army's future battle-winning
Operational approach: the set-piece battle of attrition. He also set in motion
reforms that later bore fruit as he more closely scrutinized the lessons of
BAlILEAXE. Recognizing that troop performance had fallen well below
expectations, he demanded retraining. At the same time, British intelligence
Sathering improved during fall 194l as the genesis of the RAF photo- and
strategic reconnaissance units and survey flight, as well as the army's Long
Kange Desert Group (LRDG) brought more accurate assessment of enemy
