32
Preparation: 1919-1944
army displayed for the operational inexperience of its armored forces clear-
ly demonstrated that it still failed to see the revolutionary potential of the
changes it had wrought. During the frantic expansion, reorganization, and
reequipment of 1938-1939, the RAC inevitably focused on basic training
and did not participate in large-scale maneuvers that might have revealed
glaring flaws in tank quality, armored organization, or doctrine. The
absence of a strategic doctrine that contemplated the offensive employment
of armor meant that at the outbreak of war Britain had no established,
coherent armored doctrine, little understanding of how mechanized forces
could-and would - revolutionize warfare, nor any properly constituted
armored forces. Thus, in the frenzy of rearmament, the army missed the
lesson that the Germans and Soviets drew from their involvement in the
Spanish Civil War—the need for close cooperation between arms. Only in
the Middle East, where Percy Hobart had turned a ragtag body of troops
into an embryonic mobile division (later redesignated the 7th Armoured),
did Britain possess in 1939-1940 a well-trained and offensive-minded
armored formation. 55
Meanwhile, the backbone of the army remained the infantry that pro-
vided the bulk of the forces that garrisoned the empire. This dispersion was
a major obstacle to modernization and reequipment and prevented the
establishment of a powerful, well-equipped, and modern infantry force at
home in the late 1930s. Although modest reform and reequipment occurred
after 1935, Britain entered World War Il without infantry organized,
trained, or equipped for offense. Lack of political direction to prepare for
continental service also grievously hindered interwar innovation in the
Royal Artillery, which had proven the most flexible, adaptable, and innova-
tive arm in World War I. Then, the gunners had rapidly adopted the airplane
for aerial reconnaissance and the wireless for improved communication and
contro1.56 By 1918 the Royal Artillery had become especially adept at
counterbattery work. Nonetheless, real limitations still existed in artillery
capabilities. Lack of range and mobility and crude communications meant
that massed artillery could smash a breach in enemy lines but could not
provide continuous support throughout an attack.57
Memories of the slaughter in the trenches adversely influenced devel-
opment of British artillery doctrine, tactics, and organization between the
wars. Innovators and reactionaries alike agreed that trench warfare was an
aberration and that future war would never see massed artillery fire.
Instead, the interwar Royal Artillery prepared for "open" warfare and
emphasized mobility and more rapid gunnery. It discarded most of its
heavy artillery and expanded the obsolete mobile horsedrawn field batteries
of the Royal Horse Artillery that undertook imperial policing. Interwar
artillery doctrine rejected wartime experience of mass and concentration
and instead came to stress economy of force, surprise, and precision. 58
Nevertheless, important reforms continued during the 1920s. The army
The Interwar Period
33
opened a new central School of Artillery at Larkhill, which played an
important, if inadvertent, role in the development of tactical gunnery doc-
trine between the wars. Larkhill partially preserved the Royal Artillery's
Great War experience, and a central school promoted both uniform doctrine
and reform. In addition, motorization of the artillery was begun in the
1920s and was complete by 1939.59 The army also formed light artillery
brigades equipped with 3.7-inch pack howitzers to provide close support in
imitation of the German and Soviet infantry guns developed in the 1920s.
Moreover, in 1925 the army developed the pioneering 18-pounder self-pro-
pelled Birch gun, which, despite major limitations, was years ahead of its
time. Most important, artillery doctrine remained progressive in the 1920s:
early armored warfare doctrine in 1929, for example, recognized the need
for artillery support of armored forces. 60
During the Depression, though, the Royal Artillery slipped into the
conservatism that gripped the rest of the army.61 Uncertainty over its future
role, the triumph of the cavalry concept of armored warfare, and financial
cutbacks eroded its efficiency as stagnation and regression set in. In 1931,
revised doctrine relegated artillery support of armor to an ancillary role.
The army also scrapped the Birch gun, which it deemed to slow and unreli-
able for mobile warfare and developed instead a close-support tank that
extended the army's multifarious tank inventory. The addition of infantry
mortars and antitank guns also killed the light-brigade concept in the
1930s.62 The demise of the self-propelled gun, close artillery support, and
tank-artillery cooperation crippled artillery performance early in World War
II. The scrapping of close-support artillery prevented development of
coherent antitank doctrine and inevitably sucked field artillery toward dan-
gerous and improper forward deployment in an antitank role, a trend rein-
forced by the transfer of responsibility for antitank defense to the Royal
Artillery in 1938.63
Yet having failed to appreciate the potential of armor, the army devoted
few resources to antitank defense between the wars. In 1939 the mobile 2-
pounder (40mm) gun, the mainstay of the army's antitank arsenal, had lim-
ited effectiveness against the second generation of German medium tanks,
the Panzer III and IV. Lack of antitank capability forced the artillery to
deploy field guns forward in an antitank role during 1939-1942, thus com-
promising the ability to provide indirect fire support. The disappearance of
the close-support gun led to emergence of a passive, static, and defensive
antitank doctrine that was primarily the responsibility of artillery. 64
Financial constraints also hampered development of new ordnance
between the wars and the Royal Artillery's lack of modern, long-range,
mobile artillery was a major limitation in 1939. The only new weapon
designed between the wars was the excellent 25-pounder field gun, which
proved one of the most rugged and dependable artillery pieces of World
War Il. However, the 25-pounder was a compromise designed to replace the
