CROUET
2
The United States, 1939-1944:
The Leviathan Awakens
When war broke out in Europe in September 1939, the U.S. Army was still
small, understrength, underequipped, and largely outdated in equipment,
organization, and doctrine. Only three of twenty-seven divisions were at all
battleworthy and even these remained at half strength. Divisional organiza-
tion was bulky and unwieldy, the army had only a single armored brigade,
lacked antitank capability, and had no clear operating procedures with air
power. The belief of the U.S. Army Air Corps (USAAC) that its primary
mission was to gain air superiority and then conduct a strategic bombing
campaign, ensured the relegation of battlefield interdiction to a secondary,
and close air support to a tertiary, role. As a result, it was largely incapable
of supporting U.S. ground forces.! In sum, in September 1939 the United
States was incapable of deploying and supporting its land forces overseas.
The U.S. geostrategic position ensured that the renewal of hostilities in
Europe barely perturbed the nation. As in 1914, most Americans believed
that the conflicts of squabbling Europeans did not concern them. Indeed,
Since Japan appeared to be the most likely opponent between the wars, the
U.S. military developed War Plan ORANGE, a blueprint for an extended
maritime campaign in the Pacific that contemplated opposed amphibious
operations 2 It took the resounding German victory in northwest Europe
during the summer of 1940 to shake the United States out of complacency
into general military preparation. Even then most Americans remained
ignorant of the threat that nazism posed to U.S. strategic interests; racism
led many Americans to fear potential Japanese aggression more than actual
German aggression. 3 Such racial antagonism intensified after the surprise
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 that brought the
United States into World War II and hindered the nation's prosecution of
the struggle against Germany after Hitler declared war on the United States
in the wake of Pearl Harbor.4 It took all the skill and statesmanship of
Franklin Roosevelt to steer the United States toward military prepari
for a war in Europe.
