130
Preparation: 1919-1944
.303 was a sound machine gun with a good rate of fire, but its size and bulk
were serious tactical limitations that led to its centralization at battalion
level. Thus the gun was rarely on hand for infantry attacks or at the critical
moment of enemy counterattack as the "Tommies" consolidated on their
objective. Likewise, the 2-inch mortar with its short range and light charge
could not generate the firepower of the heavier and more numerous
German mortars. All this made it difficult for the infantry to adhere to a tac-
tical doctrine of fire and maneuver; the troops could rarely generate suffi-
cient firepower to suppress enemy fire and maneuver on the battlefield. 140
Lack of antitank capability also prevented the infantry from fending off
enemy armor without strong artillery and air support. The loss of most of
its antitank gun inventory in France had forced the army to keep the obso-
lete 2-pounder gun and the Boys antitank rifle in production and improvise
many expedient antitank weapons, most of which proved as dangerous to
the user as they were ineffective. 141 Antitank capability improved in 1942
when the 6-pounder (57mm) gun entered service, but rifle companies never
had sufficient 6-pounders to protect themselves from German armor, and so
infantry continued to rely on the antiquated Boys rifle until 1943.
Another serious problem that confronted Home Forces was the poor
quality of training, which manifested itself in Norway and France. The
training system had expanded dramatically from a minuscule base early in
the war, and lack of modern equipment and experienced instructors affected
training badly. The regimental system also produced great diversity in
training quality. Inexperience, scarcity of instructors, and massive training
demands forged unimaginative and unrealistic training, which in turn bred
boredom and apathy among recruits. 142 The obvious need for improvement
generated two major wartime innovations-the introduction of battle drill
and battle schools. Major General Alexander instigated battle drill during
the summer of 1940 that both emphasized fire and maneuver and sought to
inculcate individual initiative and flexibility at the small-unit level. Later,
Home Forces introduced battle schools designed to replicate combat condi-
tions and instill combined-arms teamwork. 143
The inception of battle drill clearly improved training quality, and
indeed during 1942-1944 Home Forces repeatedly practiced battle drill.
However, such drills still lacked realism and failed to address the funda-
mental problem of British small-unit tactics: the difficulty Bren groups
experienced in generating enough firepower to allow rifle groups to maneu-
ver. Moreover, the army's commitment to the maneuver element in battle
drill was superficial because these small-unit tactics were inconsistent with
the army's de facto operational doctrine of firepower dominance that
emerged during 1942. Infantry rarely employed battle drills in combat
because such drills were incompatible with the requirements of preplanned
artillery barrages, 144
The problems associated with battle drill multiplied when the War
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
131
Office extended such drills to other arms to improve coordination. The con-
tradictions inherent in the extension of battle drill techniques clearly
reflected the army's lack of holistic doctrine. Armored battle drill equated
armor with the infantry Bren group (the firepower element) and infantry
with the maneuver group. The result was the shackling of the tactical
mobility of armor. That basic battle-drill techniques were both fundamen-
tally flawed and inconsistent with operational procedures clearly illumi-
nates the muddled nature of British doctrine. 145
Lack of conformity in training forged disparate quality, safety precau-
tions for live-fire exercises were so extensive that battle schools failed to
simulate realistic combat conditions, and amateurism bedeviled training as
units often restricted exercises to daytime and good weather. Training thus
failed to expose troops to the full range of conditions they would face in
combat. As a result, British soldiers acquired fewer skills from training
than U.S. and German recruits. 146 Most serious of all was the artificial divi-
sion of instruction whereby recruits only underwent collective training
once they had joined field formations. The failure to integrate basic and
collective training was a major weakness that seriously retarded develop-
ment of coordination and cohesion. 147
The capabilities of the RAC also increased slowly during 1940-1942.
The army's reliance on armor as its primary antitank weapon limited the
effectiveness of its armored forces. Britain proved unable to produce a
first-rate battle tank capable of engaging German armor on equal terms. In
fact, throughout the war the RAC remained the weakest link in the army
order of battle. The key cause of inferior quality of armor was not prewar
budget restrictions, uncertain national defense policy, or even tardy rearma-
ment, though these were partly to blame. It was the prevailing strategic
doctrine of attrition that viewed the role of armor as engaging and neutral-
izing enemy armor in direct tank-to-tank engagements combined with the
army view of armor specialization that led to creation of myriad specialized
tanks of limited utility. 148
The working up of Home Forces also suffered from a paucity of large-
scale maneuvers. In comparison with the Germans and Americans, British
troops went on exercises less often and less intensively. Circumstances
clearly militated against the resumption of maneuvers early in the war.
Britain was a small, densely populated island nation subject to air attack,
with its maritime communications imperiled by U-boats, and whose coastal
areas remained manned against enemy incursion. Britain also had few
sparsely populated areas suitable for conducting exercises, a situation exac-
erbated by the urban-to-rural displacement of civilians during the blitz.
Moreover, the army's history of imperial policing had failed to ingrain a
tradition of regular maneuvers: Home Forces conducted only three large-
scale exercises during 1941-1943. Operation BUMPER of September 1941
tested Home Forces' defensive capabilities; at DRYSHOD (August 1942)
