OAQUET
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank the following people for the help, advice, encouragement,
training, and support without which I would never have completed this
project. My adviser, Williamson Murray, was a source of continual encour-
agement and intellectual stimulation. I am deeply indebted to my col-
leagues at Ohio State University-Mark Grimsley, Joe Guilmartin, Allan R.
Millett, and Geoffrey Parker-for their keen insights and enthusiastic sup-
port. The following offered valuable assistance and friendship: David
Bercuson, Jeremy Black, Peter Dennis, Walter Dunn, Anthony Fletcher,
Holger Herwig, John English, and Gerhard Weinberg; Geoff Megargee, Jeff
Marquis, Anthony Milburn, Rich Muller, Jeff Roberts, and Dave
Thompson; Chris Cook, Leo Daugherty, Stephen Glick, and Louis
Rotundo. I am also indebted to Dennis Showalter for his support and will-
ingness to write the foreword for this book.
I owe a debt of gratitude to the hard-working staffs of several archives
who have assisted me. Particular thanks go to Robin Cookson at the
National Archives Records Service; Kate O'Brien and Patricia Methven at
the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, Kings College, London;
Anthony Richards of the Imperial War Museum; as well as the personnel of
the Public Record Office, the Imperial War Museum, the National
Archives, the Canadian National Archives, and the United States Military
History Institute. At Ohio State University, David Lincove and the library
staff were enormously helpful.
The author and publisher acknowledge the kind generosity of the
trustees of the Imperial War Museum for access to the collections held by
the Department of Documents as well as Viscount Montgomery of
Alamein, CBE, and the Montgomery Collections Committee of the trustees
of the Imperial War Museum for use of the the field marshal's papers. The
author and publisher also acknowledge permission from the trustees of the
Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, Kings College, London, to quote
from the Alanbrooke and Liddell Hart Papers. Crown copyrighted material
XV
