116
Preparation: 1919-1944
overreached himself to win CRUSADER. Exhaustion thus halted the
British pursuit at Mersa Brega. At the same time, Japan's entry into the war
led to the transfer of major assets to the Far East, which lifted the choke on
the flow of Axis supplies to North Africa. Auchinleck also withdrew his
depleted armor into deep reserve for rehabilitation and replaced them with
the raw, ill-trained, and incomplete Ist Armoured Division. But he had
underestimated German powers of recuperation, and on 21 January 1942
the renamed Panzer Army Africa launched a spoiling attack that took the
British completely by surprise and forced them into another delaying with-
drawal that rattled troop morale. The new commander of Eighth Army,
Gen. Neil Ritchie, misread the situation and Axis pressure forced him to
retire in disorder to the Gazala Line. The parallels to the previous spring
were readily apparent: Auchinleck, like Wavell, had overreached himself
and had paid the price. 73
Yet after it dug in at Gazala, the Eighth Army failed to make the most
of the lull that lasted until May 1942. British commanders still continued to
blame defeat on defective equipment and demand increased quantities to
reverse their fortunes. Even as the WDAF retrained in a strenuous effort to
improve its operational efficiency, there was no parallel improvement in
army-air cooperation. Auchinleck did recognize that poor coordination had
marred CRUSADER and attempted to improve interarms association by
ordering formations reorganized into combined-arms brigade groups. But
tinkering with organization could not surmount ingrained regimentalism
and bring improved coordination in a few short months. He also recognized
the need for formation integrity and thus limited use of the improvised Jock
Columns that Ritchie had employed to delay and harry the enemy during
the retreat to Gazala. 74
Because of his inexperience and continued defeats, interservice coop-
eration deteriorated as Auchinleck was thrust into a highly complex and
demanding position. Mismanagement, poor staff work, and faulty com-
mand resulted in renewed defeat at Gazala (26 May-17 June 1942) as
Auchinleck allowed Ritchie to disperse his forces when Rommel attacked
and outflanked the British "box" area defenses of the Gazala Line. This
happened even though Rommel had initially found himself trapped in the
"cauldron" between the British defenses and their armored reserves, as
improved British defensive coordination and the new 6-pounder antitank
gun increased Axis tank losses. 75
With Rommel thus pinned down, Auchinleck planned a major night-
time counterattack on 5 June, backed for the first time by a heavy artillery
bombardment, to neutralize the enemy antitank screen before committing
his armor to smash the Africa Corps. This sound plan, which rook account
of the vulnerability of Auchinleck's armor, disintegrated as the counterat-
tack went disastrously wrong when Ritchie launched three uncoordinated
brigade attacks by three different divisions. Moreover, the demise of desert
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
117
fire planning resulted in the bombardment missing its target. At the same
time, the infantry break-in failed to reach the enemy gun line, which then
inflicted ruin on the British armor as it followed through. Rommel quickly
counterattacked and overran much of the 7th Armoured and 5th Indian
Divisions in one of the worst reverses suffered by the British in North
Africa. 76
Having learned a bitter lesson from previous defeats, Auchinleck
decided to stand firm. But the battle was lost on 13 June when Rommel
destroyed the bulk of the remaining British armor and forced the attenuated
Eighth Army to retreat to the Egyptian frontier the next day, leaving the raw
2nd South African Division to be besieged in Tobruk. Ritchie again frag-
mented his depleted and demoralized formations into Jock Columns and
dispersed his field artillery in an antitank role to harass and delay pursuing
enemy forces as he retreated to Egypt. But these measures further degraded
cohesion and fire support and only fueled the growing demoralization of
his troops.77
On 20 June, Rommel attacked and took Tobruk in the worst debacle
that befell British arms in the desert. The port city's fall epitomized what
was right with the German Army and what was wrong with the British.
Rommel launched an impromptu assault into which he threw everything he
had available on the ground and in the air to take advantage of the per-
ceived disorganization of the garrison. Complacency reigned in Tobruk,
and sluggishness, rigidity, inexperience, and lack of initiative prevented the
garrison from mounting an effective defense. In fact, most of the garrison
remained spectators as the Germans broke through the perimeter defenses
on a narrow front and stormed the town. The heroism and courage of indi-
vidual units notwithstanding, the garrison had to surrender and huge quan-
tities of supplies fell into enemy hands.78
The fall of Tobruk was Rommel's greatest success, but it proved a
Pyrrhic victory because it induced the Axis to abandon their planned assault
on Malta and seriously think of reaching the Suez Canal, which in turn led
Rommel to overreach. At the same time, the totality of Eighth Army's
defeat led to massive British reinforcement of Egypt and Auchinleck's tak-
ing command of Eighth Army on 25 June. He abandoned the use of Jock
Columns, but his own mobile defense based on mixed brigade-groups
proved no more effective, and he was unable to halt the enemy at Mersa
Matruh. British troops were still inexperienced at conducting delaying
defense, and Auchinleck's endeavors to reorganize and reform the Eighth
Army in the middle of battle proved abortive.
The British suffered another
serious defeat that further demoralized and disorganized the Eighth Army,
which then barely beat Rommel back to the El Alamein position. Air-
ground coordination dwindled during the retreat too as Auchinleck aban-
doned the practice of colocating army and air headquarters. 79
Widespread ignorance of German doctrine and tactics had contributed
