42
Preparation: 1919-1944
both lacked concrete plans on how to aid Great Britain and remained inca-
pable of projecting military power beyond its frontiers.
Germany
Germany's long military tradition, the military's domination of politics and
society, and the bitter legacy of defeat in 1918 stimulated substantial
reform and innovation between the wars that paved the way for the tremen-
dous German battlefield triumphs of 1939-1942. Germany's tradition as a
military state, dating from 1870, created a climate conducive to innovation
between the wars, and the military dominated German politics and society
down to 1945.96 This political and social ascendancy had encouraged mili-
tary innovation, but it had also dragged Germany into a global conflict in
1914 that the nation could not win.
Despite overwhelming odds, the Imperial German Army outfought its
opponents, defeated Russia, crippled the French Army, and forestalled
defeat for four years. Such battlefield success was largely a consequence of
the Imperial Army's tactical and operational flexibility. It innovated defen-
sively, developing elastic defense in depth based on reverse-slope positions
and rapid counterattack by local reserves, reforms that contributed directly
to Allied failure to overcome trench warfare.9? The army also developed
offensive tactics; it pioneered the employment of poison gas and
became proficient in its use.98 During late 1917, it also developed new
infantry "storm troop" tactics of infiltration and surprise that, when coupled
with new artillery support methods, broke the deadlock on the Western
Front during the German spring 1918 offensives.9º German military inno-
vation in World War I thus both prolonged the struggle and increased the
price of Allied victory, but ultimately sheer numbers prevailed.
After defeat in 1918, the Treaty of Versailles imposed the democratic
Weimar Republic on Germany and reduced its ground forces to a 100,000-
man volunteer internal security and frontier defense force (Reichswehr)
forbidden to possess planes, tanks, antiaircraft and antitank guns, heavy
artillery, or chemical weapons. 100 Versailles also severely restricted
German heavy weapons and prohibited armaments importation or produc-
tion. 101 Throughout the interwar period, however, German politicians and
generals alike remained committed to rebuilding a modern, strong army to
reshape Europe politically. 102 The rise of Adolf Hitler and the National
Socialists to power in 1933, therefore, brought no fundamental shift in
German purpose, only in speed and determination: throughout the interwar
period the German military possessed a clear political mandate to prepare
for war. Such a mandate created a climate conducive to adaptation and
fueled military innovation. Despite its intentions, the Treaty of Versailles
thus failed to emasculate German military power as Germany resisted the
43
The Interwar Period
treaty throughout its sixteen years' existence. Germany first evaded treaty
restrictions by dismantling and hiding weapons and by smuggling ordnance
overseas. 103 Thereafter, the Reichswer covertly rearmed as it developed
forbidden weapons abroad and then secretly inside Germany. 104 It also
maintained secret troop and weapons reserves well in excess of treaty lim-
its. 105
Defeat and the Versailles restrictions spurred the Reichswehr to search
for new ways to prevail against potential aggressors. Toward this goal it
extensively analyzed the lessons of the Great War. The Reichswehr recog-
nized that poor strategic decisionmaking and political guidance were cen-
tral to German defeat, but it made little effort to reorganize or reform at the
political-strategic level. 106 Examination also demonstrated that the highly
trained Imperial General Staff had created a flexible command tradition
that allowed individual initiative within the framework of a uniform and
universal doctrine. This tradition had enabled the army to adapt tactically
and operationally during World War I. Study also demonstrated the impor-
tance of firepower superiority and quality training for successful offense—
and that the army's commitment to retrain in the field had allowed it to
adapt to changes in the nature of the war. 107 The lessons of World War I
thus reinforced the army's belief in its flexibility, tactical superiority, and
mobility.
Germany also extensively examined the air war and concluded that
strategic bombing attacks by Zeppelin airships and Gotha and Riesen air-
craft had failed. Study revealed that Germany had proven innovative in the
air war, developing pioneering specialized ground-attack aircraft and
employing them as integral elements of the storm troop attacks launched
during the spring 1918 offensives in the west. The Reichswehr thus con-
Cluded that the Great War had demonstrated a future tactical role for air-
craft in direct support of ground forces, alongside strategic bombing.
Germany, therefore, emerged from the Great War with a more realistic
appreciation of the capabilities of air power. 108
Scrutiny also revealed Germany's technological inferiority as Germany
had lost the wartime technology race, and its failure to develop an effective
tank, in particular, had contributed to defeat. 109 The Reichswer, therefore,
was determined to remain at the forefront of interwar weapons develop-
ment, despite treaty restrictions, and to replicate the technical achievements
of potential enemies. The lessons that Germany drew from the Great War in
terms of the efficacy of its tactical mobility and flexibility, the superiority
of its training and conduct of air operations, and its strategic and technical
failings, led the Reichswehr to develop modern technology between the
wars. At the same time, forced disarmament robbed Germany of the kind of
large weapons stockpiles that hindered interwar arms development among
the victorious Entente powers. The Reichswehr secretly developed modern
weapons overseas by absorbing and enhancing foreign technology. 110 As a
