90
Preparation: 1919-1944
STRANGLE contributed to the Germans' defeat in Italy by taking away
their tactical mobility 123 In May 1944 STRANGLE gave way to DIADEM,
a combined air-ground offensive, which proved more effective because
combined attacks forced the Germans to stand and fight, exposing them to
heavy attack. So, DIADEM was the precursor of the successful Allied air-
ground victory in France in August 1944.
The U.S. air and ground forces that stood poised on 1 June 1944 in
Britain for OVERLORD were better prepared to tackle the Germans than
their predecessors who had gone ashore in Tunisia, Sicily, and Italy. A key
feature of U.S. preparation for OVERLORD during 1943-1944 was its
adaptation to German operational procedures. For instance, revised training
emphasized the German tactics of reverse-slope defense in depth, and by
1944 the infantry had learned not to consolidate on captured enemy posi-
tions but to push well beyond them to offset losses from enemy artillery
preregistered on these positions. 124
To launch the second front the United States had to establish an
advanced base in Britain. The first U.S. troops arrived in January 1942, and
by D-Day more than 1.5 million Americans had arrived. 125 However, the
Mediterranean diversion absorbed most of these forces. The buildup of an
invasion force only really began in 1943, and lack of shipping capacity
delayed the buildup from hitting high gear until spring 1944. By D-Day
nineteen U.S. divisions were in the United Kingdom. 126
The Supreme Allied Command earmarked the First U.S. Army, which
began to assemble in Britain in September 1943, to spearhead the American
assault. Central to the U.S. buildup was the army's determination to rede-
ploy rapidly veteran formations from the Mediterranean for OVERLORD.
Thus a full half of the divisions seasoned in the Mediterranean returned to
England in 1943,127 Nevertheless, the bulk of the First U.S. Army still com-
prised green troops, and this inexperience confronted commanders with
their most serious problem. For despite the AGF's best endeavors, many
troops had arrived in the United Kingdom incompletely trained. To mini-
mize the impact of their inexperience and undertraining, U.S. forces under-
went extensive retraining and exercising in the year preceding D-Day, 128
The failure of U.S.
airborne forces in Tunisia and Sicily also led to a
rethinking of their role for OVERLORD. The obvious need for concentrat-
ed employment in greater numbers ultimately led to the inclusion of both
the 82d and 101st Airborne Divisions in the initial invasion and with a less
ambitious mission. The OVERLORD plan called for both divisions to be
dropped inland and to block the arrival of German reinforcements while the
assault troops established a bridgehead. The lessons drawn from previous
failure thus resulted in a more modest and sensible tactical employment of
airborne forces than the bold use witnessed in Tunisia and Sicily.
Shipping limitations meant that little U.S. medium and heavy artillery
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
91
arrived in the United Kingdom during 1943, so that in the spring of 1944
there was a buildup of heavy artillery. Even so, the First U.S. Army still
lacked heavy artillery on the eve of OVERLORD. 129 (Despite this, the
artillery arm remained the most effective army instrument in the ETO on
the eve of D-Day.) The U.S. replacement system's emphasis on quantity
over quality ensured that the army's replacement situation on the eve of D-
Day remained satisfactory, with some 78,000 replacements available in
Britain. This large pool allowed U.S. ground forces to fight harder and
longer than their Anglo-Canadian allies in northwest Europe. The replace-
ment system erected in Great Britain also benefited from lessons learned in
the Mediterranean and, as a result, functioned more effectively. 130
Integral to OVERLORD preparations was a massive buildup of
American logistical support during 1943 as the army learned from Tunisia,
Sicily, Salerno, and Anzio the critical importance of excellent supply sup-
port for victory. U.S. forces returned to France in June 1944 with a massive
support tail. Based on its previous amphibious assaults, the army employed
three Engineer Special Brigades in the initial assault to clear the beaches
and to establish quickly the necessary infrastructure ashore to keep the
ground forces supplied. Shipping shortages, as well as the Mediterranean
diversion, inevitably delayed the logistic buildup in the United Kingdom
for OVERLORD. Throughout 1943, U.S. forces in Britain remained short
on support and service units as well as supply stockpiles. The
Quartermaster Corps accomplished a remarkable organizational feat to
complete its buildup during the spring of 1944 so that the army had abun-
dant supply stocks by D-Day. 131
Despite its victories in North Africa, Sicily, and Italy, on the eve of D-
Day the First U.S. Army was still not a perfectly honed fighting machine.
Shortcomings in training, lack of emphasis on interarms coordination, and
manpower and replacement policies all meant that U.S. ground forces had
still not reached their full offensive potential. Combat experience in the
Mediterranean during 1943 had illustrated serious weaknesses in U.S.
infantry who often lacked aggressiveness, frequently abandoned their pre-
scribed doctrine of fire and maneuver, failed to effectively employ their
own firepower, and instead relied too much on artillery to smash the oppo-
sition. 132 Battle experience also demonstrated poor infantry-armor coordi-
nation, which reflected the lack of training in planning and organizing com-
bined-arms operations. Experience repeatedly showed that infantry
commanders employed armor ineffectually and failed to take advantage of
its mobility and firepower. Armor, on the other hand, had often proved hesi-
tant and reluctant to support infantry. Thus, it was only infrequently that
armor and infantry arrived together at the objective. 133 Combat experience
in 1943 had also identified weaknesses in army organization, notably in the
policy of pooling. Independent battalions of armor and artillery frequently
