320
Normandy 1944
forced Eisenhower to halt Patton's advance on 13 August for five crucial
days,
during which many German troops escaped.92 Thereafter, lack of
operational-level doctrine prevented the Allies from encircling the enemy
on the Seine. In late August, the Germans extricated virtually all of their
surviving personnel and a surprising amount of equipment beyond the
Seine.93 The Normandy campaign thus ended for the British Army, like the
rest of the campaign, with a partial success.
The British Army's performance in Normandy was unspectacular, with
Montgomery's troops nowhere decisively defeating the enemy. However,
British political-military objectives did not require a rapid defeat of the
enemy. Given the weaknesses that afflicted British forces, Montgomery
coaxed about the best possible performance from the troops that he could.
The army's inexperience, its character as a civilian conscript force built
around a small professional cadre whose peacetime preparation had been
soft, its unremarkable training, its barely adequate equipment, its fragile
morale, and its growing manpower shortage all limited its capabilities. That
Montgomery was aware of these limitations and developed an appropriate
theater strategy in which his army group acted as a foil that lured German
reserves away from the stronger Americans to Caen was an important
ingredient in Allied victory in Normandy.94
The army's continued slowness to adapt in the field contributed to its
unimpressive performance in Normandy. Nevertheless, the pace of adapta-
tion clearly accelerated during the later stages of the war, and in Normandy
British ground forces enhanced their capabilities in three major areas: com-
bined-arms coordination, fire support, and air-ground cooperation. British
forces achieved some improvement in combined-arms coordination, but it
remained sporadic. 95 The 11th Armoured Division proved the best led and
most adaptable British armored formation, and by late July had reorganized
into balanced mixed brigade groups. But coordination in the overexposed
7th Armoured and green Guards Armoured Divisions remained poor: it was
only in late August that they too adopted a brigade group structure.
Improved coordination also gradually emerged between independent tank
brigades and infantry formations as growing association, familiarity, and
experience bred closer cooperation. However, operational reliance on fire-
power as well as deeply ingrained regimental parochialism worked against
improved tank-infantry cooperation, and effective coordination still
remained the exception rather than the norm during the campaign.
The Royal Artillery continued to enhance its effectiveness and lethality
in Normandy as it had steadily done since 1940. In particular, aerial spot-
ters directed ever greater amounts of artillery fire, culminating on 17 July
with the first spotter-directed bombardment by three separate concentra-
tions of brigaded artillery.9 The neutralization of the Luftwaffe allowed
spotters to operate around the clock and thus achieve their full potential.
Spotter-directed fire suppressed enemy fire and constantly harassed enemy
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
321
operations. Spotters flew continually over the Falaise pocket to deliver
accurate, rapid fire even with the close proximity of Allied forces.98 At the
same time, increased use of mobile forward artillery observers with
armored formations in Normandy reduced both strike times and friendly-
fire accidents.9 Forward observers proved especially useful during the
German retreat from the Falaise pocket, where armored spearheads directed
fighter-bombers against the retreating enemy to harry and hinder German
movement to an unprecedented degree. 100
The efficacy of tactical air strikes against the Falaise pocket demon-
strated that it was with air-ground cooperation that British forces most
enhanced their capabilities during the campaign, reflecting the broad trend
since 1942 of improved interservice coordination. Initially, lack of space in
the bridgehead had forced most squadrons to continue flying from distant
bases in England, but from late July fighter-bombers began to fly in
strength from continental airfields, and thereafter tactical air strikes inflict-
ed mounting damage on German forces. 101 Sortie rates steadily climbed,
and on 7 August 1944 Typhoons of Second Tactical Air Force (TAF) flew
294 missions to help stop the German drive on Avranches and daily sortie
rates peaked at 1,200 during the battle for the Falaise gap. 102 The tactical
use of radar also reached new levels of refinement in Normandy and
allowed increased accuracy and improved capability in bad weather. All
told, fighter-bombers proved more damaging than heavy bombers in
Normandy, and the most notable achievement of Second TAF in
Normandy-the incapacitation of Field Marshal Rommel on 17 July-was
achieved by British fighter-bombers. 103
Nevertheless the effectiveness of the RAF in Normandy, despite the
enormous contribution to victory, remained mixed. Pilot claims notwith-
standing, the physical damage inflicted by tactical air strikes was limited.
Rather, tactical strikes disrupted and dispersed enemy forces, hampered
their movement, exacerbated logistic difficulties, inflicted a steady toll on
soft-skinned vehicles, and slowly throttled the German supply effort. 104 Yet
the Second TAF was unable to assist Anglo-Canadian ground operations as
effectively as the USAAF was aiding U.S. forces. Alongside space restric-
tions that limited tactical operations early on in the campaign, the Hawker
Typhoon-
-mainstay of RAF tactical aviation-proved less versatile,
robust, or accurate a strike aircraft than the U.S. P-47 or P-51. In particular,
the 3-inch armor-piercing rockets the Typhoon carried were inaccurate,
lacked punch, and were not effective against armor. 105 The Second TAF
enhanced its effectiveness during the campaign, but it had yet to develop
the potency displayed by U.S. tactical aviation.
The use of bombers in support of ground operations also had mixed
results. To the dismay of the air power enthusiasts, strategic and tacticall
bombing failed to neutralize the well dug-in German defenders on the
beaches on D-Day. The bombardment destroyed only a fraction of the
