Introduction
the other hand, sometimes fails to rise above nazi apologia. Recently, Omer
Bartov has illustrated how defeat led German Eastern Front veterans to
revise and to rewrite their perceptions of that struggle. It is evident that a
complex mix of defeatism, fear, admiration, and bitterness similarly distort-
ed German recollections of the Normandy Campaign.
1944 Normandy Campaign offers a paradigm of military adaptability. This
study concludes that— contrary to conventional wisdom-the U.S. military
proved more flexible than its Anglo-Canadian allies and thus generally
adapted more quickly and more effectively. Consistently, U.S. forces rapid-
ly and accurately identified deficiencies that hampered their performance.
Just as quickly, through trial and error, American troops devised solutions
to the problems that confronted them, disseminated these lessons learned,
and retrained in the field during ongoing combat operations to enhance
combat effectiveness.
The study also contends that the institutional flexibility of the U.S.
military was an important ingredient in Allied victory in Normandy. For the
Anglo-American armies early in the war were far from being war-winning
instruments, and even in June 1944 their combat power remained limited.
By the end of the Normandy Campaign the U.S. military had developed an
all-around military proficiency. Conventional wisdom maintains that the
Americans prevailed through overwhelming superiority rather than skill.
This study's findings, however, confirm the conclusions of recent scholar-
ship that the U.S. Army became increasingly skilled and perfected its mas-
tery of both combined-arms warfare and of the air-land battle during the
Normandy Campaign 32 The book thus concludes that the flexibility and
creativity of the U.S. military played an important role in the transforma-
tion in the global balance of power that resulted from World War II.
A second major conclusion is that the tenacity of the German defense
of Normandy must also be explained in ideological terms. This study con-
tends that conventional interpretations of the campaign are unbalanced
because they deemphasize the role of ideology. In reality two German
armies fought in the west: one, a cohesive core of nazified Eastern Front
veterans fleshed out with equally indoctrinated young volunteers and
recruits; the other, an older occupation army bypassed by the indoctrination
experienced in the east and softened by four years of comfortable garrison
duty and higher neglect. This study also concludes that it is inappropriate to
view the World War Il German army as a paradigm of military effective-
ness. The evidence demonstrates that logistic deficiencies and ideological
prejudices played a major role in the German defeat in Normandy. This
work thus reintegrates ideology into our understanding of the character of
the German military and illustrates that nazi ideology powerfully shaped
German planning and preparation for, as well as conduct of, the Normandy
Campaign. In reality, nazism proved a double-edged sword in terms of
Introduction
German military effectiveness. It imbued German resistance with tenacity,
but it also bred racial arrogance that led Germans to inflate their own capa-
bilities and to underestimate those of their enemies. In sum, nazi ideology
hampered German adaptation throughout the war.
The study also illustrates that considerable integration both between
nations and services ultimately characterized the Allied war effort, but that
integration between individual arms of those services proved most prob-
lematic because this was where parochialism was strongest. It also illus-
trates that among the Axis forces the reverse was true. Nazi Germany
proved least effective at strategic cooperation with its Axis partners;
German interservice coordination remained poor; and only within servic-
es— and most notably in the army-was coordination good. The net effect
of this was that the Allies possessed considerable all-around strength, while
German strength remained narrowly limited to its army, and even more nar-
rowly to the effectiveness of its armored forces, the soundness of its doc-
trine and equipment, the quality of its training, and the professionalism of
its officer corps. While confirming an overall German tactical and opera-
tional superiority, German excellence was nonetheless narrowly confined to
battlefield performance and further restricted to a battle-hardened elite. In
the fields of strategy, logistics, and intelligence the German army's effec-
tiveness was poor indeed. Ultimately these larger weaknesses outweighed
the German military's limited strengths. 33
This book also offers generalized conclusions about the nature of
wartime adaptation and its connection to military effectiveness. It illus-
trates that the most difficult dimension for adaptation is at the strategic and
doctrinal levels. This study demonstrates that militaries whose peacetime
doctrines are essentially sound can adapt, given sufficient combat exposure
and in the absence of major defeat. Where an armed service's basic doc-
trine, however, lacks fundamental soundness—as was the case with the
British and Canadian Armies between the wars-not only is effective adap-
tation less likely, defeat may follow. Without modification of fundamental-
ly flawed doctrine, improvements in organization, training, tactics, and
weaponry can only bring incremental improvement in combat effective-
ness.34 This reality helps account for the relatively slower pace of effective
adaptation in the Anglo-Canadian armies of World War II.
The factors that contribute to and the processes involved in innovation
are inherently difficult to discern, and few patterns, let alone a model, are
discernible because innovation is complex and ambiguous. 35 By exploring
the strategic framework, organizational structures, and doctrine of each
army, it becomes apparent that a complex blend of personalities, intellectu-
a trends, societal influences, and societal standing of the military affects
innovation. 36 Yet in the absence of an overwhelming demographic or indus-
trial superiority, victory in modern warfare belongs to the armed forces that
learn most quickly and most effectively from their mistakes and adapt to
