Preparation: 1919-1944
20
in logistic capabilities caused by financial cutbacks, the army had to con-
tend with the disdainful attitude of many combat officers toward support
services. In consequence, between the wars the army utterly lacked the
logistic base for extended overseas operations. Throughout the 1920s and
1930s the army also faced serious manpower problems. Officer quality
declined because low pay and slow promotion forced many talented offi-
cers to resign; and some that remained lost their edge and neglected their
professional development. Slow promotion also created an elderly officer
corps. Thus at the start of World War II, many army officers were of ques-
tionable competence and physical condition. At the same time, poor pay
and societal distrust of the military meant that the army experienced even
greater difficulty recruiting enlisted men. The Depression temporarily
ended the army's recruitment difficulties but by the late 1930s the army
once again experienced problems in obtaining sufficient volunteers. 11
The army also had a poor training record between the wars as economy
sapped the quality of instruction and led to the abandonment of multidivi-
sion maneuvers. As a result, U.S. troops were simply too poorly trained to
conduct mobile offensive warfare. In the absence of realistic threats to U.S.
security, the interwar army possessed negligible capabilities and could not
even properly defend the country's coastlines, let alone project military
power overseas. Since at no point between the wars did the army conceive
of its mission as involving combat in Europe, the military undertook no
planning or preparation for a European war. 12
Despite these many obstacles to the maintenance of effective military
forces, the interwar army possessed several strengths that allowed it to
improve rapidly its wartime combat effectiveness. A key strength was the
army's intellectual vitality and creativity as military thought continued to
develop at service schools between the wars. Indeed, the U.S. armed forces
displayed originality and flexibility in adapting new weapons and technolo-
gy despite severe budgetary constraints. 13 Fort Knox, Kentucky, developed
basic mechanized warfare principles that stood the test of time and the
Field Artillery School at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, made equally important
advances in fire direction techniques, including the use of forward
observers and modern radio communications, which allowed massed
artillery fire far more rapid than was possible in World War I.14 This cre-
ativity extended to weapons too: the army developed a rugged 105mm
howitzer and the Garand rifle, both of which saw service throughout World
War II. At the same time, the Signal Corps developed radar as advanced as
any in the world, while the Christie suspension resulted in some of the
fastest tanks produced between the wars. The U.S. armed forces' most
notable interwar advances occurred in communications intelligence, partic-
ularly code breaking. 15
The armed services achieved these technological and tactical innova-
tions despite severe fiscal restraints that often meant weapons and equip-
The Interwar Period
21
ment for these emerging operational doctrines either did not exist or existed
only in rudimentary form. This record of intellectual vitality and technical
adaptation reflected the interwar army's resourcefulness and ingenuity in
the face of adversity. Despite enormous obstacles that prevented mainte-
nance of combat effective ground forces between the wars, the military cul-
ture exhibited a creativity and flexibility that augured well for the chal-
lenges of war that awaited it. 16 Nonetheless, when war broke out in Europe
in September 1939, the U.S. Army remained small, understrength, under-
equipped, and outdated in equipment, organization, and doctrine. Only
three of twenty-seven divisions were at all battleworthy, and even these
remained at half-strength. Divisional organization was bulky and unwieldy.
The army had only a single tank brigade and lacked antitank capability; it
also had no clear operating procedures with air power.17 As a result, in
September 1939 the United States was incapable of deploying and support-
ing its land forces overseas.
Great Britain
Britain's maritime location and imperial aspirations ensured that its army
chiefly fought small, uncostly wars in distant territories during much of its
history. In 1914, however, Britain sent an expeditionary force to France and
was drawn into the bloodiest and most devastating conflict in its history.
The Great War cast a shadow that profoundly shaped the development of
the British Army throughout the 1919-1945 period. Indeed, the legacies of
this conflict hampered the army's performance throughout World War II
and contributed directly to the dramatic string of military reverses that
Britain suffered between 1939 and 1942.
Although the British Army had distinguished itself in World War I-
first with its stoic defense and then with the offensive actions that defeated
the German Army on the Western Front in 1918—operationally it proved
slow to learn and found tactical effectiveness elusive. British operations
were rigid and inflexible, and rarely used surprise. 18 The army's command
structure hampered reevaluation of prevailing doctrine and tactics and thus
it adapted at an incremental rate. The pace of innovation picked up during
1917-1918 as reform slowly emerged, largely from the bottom up. As a
result, the army underwent a partial tactical revolution in 1918, though
reform remained piecemeal. Thus, by 1918 the army had mastered the
break-in battle but not the breakout. 19
The root cause of the slow pace of change was the absence of a British
doctrine of war. 20 Lacking doctrine, the army fought doggedly in defense
but struggled to master the offense. Moreover, the army's class-oriented
and hierarchical culture promoted loyalty above honesty, thus hampering
appraisal of performance. Training too was unsophisticated and did little to
