306
Normandy 1944
working alongside one another. Thus in Normandy, as before, different
arms continued to fight their own wars.10 Armor-infantry coordination
remained poor; and only the Royal Artillery, because of its traditional sup-
port role, took combined-arms operations seriously. At the same time,
regimentalism bred decentralized training that brought great variation in
training quality and performance by formations.
Britain's most serious historical problem, however, was the absence of
a great military tradition as a land power. The less martial nature of British
society, accentuated by interwar pacifism, meant that Britain fielded an
essentially civilian army, in which indoctrination, propaganda, and training
failed to promote military professionalism. The army's culture, structure,
doctrine, and organization forged a ground force that was predictably slow
to adapt.
British forces firmly established themselves ashore on D-Day, thanks
to pronounced numerical and material superiority, months of meticulous
preparation, and, in no small measure, absorption of lessons from previous
amphibious assaults. In particular, the drop of the 6th Airborne Division in
a tactical role east of the Orne River to protect the vulnerable left flank of
the landing from armored counterattack showed that the War Office had
learned from its overambitious use of airborne forces in TORCH and
HUSKY and of the danger posed by panzer counterthrusts encountered in
Sicily and at Salerno and Anzio.12 Montgomery did fail to capture his D-
Day goal of Caen; but the expectation that it could be taken quickly was
unrealistic, despite his uncharacteristic demand that the assault troops push
boldly inland. 13
Despite this exhortation to audacity, after D-Day the British advance
quickly stalled as powerful German armored reserves converged on Caen to
drive the Anglo-Canadians back into the sea. Montgomery beat off these
counterthrusts, but he was unable to advance in the face of the German
armor, and the struggle for Caen bogged down into a grim six-week battle
of attrition.
That OVERLORD planners had gravely underestimated the terrain's
defensive advantages contributed to Montgomery's difficulties. 14 East of
Bayeux the bocage hedgerows petered out into the Campagne de Caen, a
plain stretching from Tilly to Troan that wrapped Caen inside a tight village
grid pattern that provided a powerful, natural defense system in depth with
excellent fields of interlocking fire. Topography thus forced Montgomery
to assault Caen frontally, and placed the onus of combat squarely on the
infantry as he waged a bloody battle of attrition that bled the British
This unforeseen reality reflected a fundamental flaw in the OVER-
LORD plan, which was oriented toward two objectives: how to get ashore
in sufficient force on D-Day to establish a viable lodgement, and how to
exploit a breakout. Indeed, the British force structure-with its full motor-
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
307
ization and large numbers of fast cruiser tanks-clearly was geared toward
an exploitation role. Yet the plan barely addressed the most difficult task
the Allies faced: how to convert a lodgement into a breakout. That British
forces had barely planned, let alone prepared, for the breakout battle added
greatly to the problems they faced, and helps to explain why they became
bogged down before Caen for nearly two months. 15
Montgomery's task was all the more formidable because he faced the
best German formations in the West. Although the overall quality of enemy
forces encountered was lower than in North Africa and Italy, Montgomery
engaged an unprecedented number of German elite units because Hitler and
his generals believed that Caen was the linchpin of the outcome in the
West. Thus, there soon gathered a heavy concentration of German armor
facing the British forces. 16 While the Canadians struggled with the formi-
dable 12th SS Panzer Division, Hitlerjugend, the British fought their old
desert rival, the 21st Panzer Division rebuilt around Africa Corps veterans,
and the new Panzer Lehr Division formed from veteran instructors (and the
best equipped division in the Heer). 17 As a result, until the U.S. Army
breakout from Normandy in late July, the British sector attracted the greater
proportion of German forces, including nearly all the elite units and most of
the armor (see Table 8.1),18 At the same time, the restricted size of the
Allied bridgehead gave the Germans a relatively short front that allowed
them to develop powerful defenses in depth that presented Montgomery
with the strongest opposition he had ever encountered.
Table 8.1 Allied Estimates of German Armor in U.S. and British Sectors,
June-July 1944
Date
U.S Zone
British Zone
Total
Ratio
IS June
30 June
10 July
20 July
25 July
70
140
590
725
865
5101
800
190
560
750
12:88
26:74
16:84
25:75
23:77
190
645
835
source. Jonn Ellis, brute Force seed Strategy and lacies in the second World war
New York: Viking, 1990), 377.
Montgomery's conduct of the campaign. He refused to take risks that might
Manpower
and morale concerns also profoundly affected
result in heavy losses or a major setback, for his command was a wasting
asset with finite manpower any u! insar morale. Above all else, Montgomery
feared that a major setback would tarnish his aura of invincibility, upon
which the army's confidence athatnorale rested heavily. 19
