120
Preparation: 1919-1944
badly needed iron grip on the demoralized Eighth Army. His military
thought, while rather narrow, was simple and realistic, and his approach
minimized prospects of defeat by leaving nothing to chance. He sought vic-
tory through the set-piece battle, by overwhelming fire superiority — rather
than by skill-to wear the enemy down into defeat by attrition. 89
Montgomery applied in North Africa the fundamental military principles
that his extensive professional study and his Great War staff experience told
him would bring success. 90
One of Montgomery's great strengths was that he was one of few sen-
ior Allied commanders who had some grasp of the operational level of war
that lay between tactics and strategy—the prosecution of a campaign in a
single theater of operations. He immediately laid out his operational doc-
trine upon taking command of the Eighth Army. He forbade the fluid
mobile actions and delaying withdrawals in which the Germans had so
often defeated the Eighth Army. He had it stand fast, at all costs, at El
Alamein and shatter his opponent's strength in a slow, deliberate set-piece
battle of attrition before he attacked. He saw the role of armor as being to
secure and dig in on vital ground supported by infantry, antitank guns, and
air power that would force the enemy to attack and be destroyed. He aban-
doned the use of armor in "penny packets" for infantry support. 91 He used
massed artillery fire to disrupt and prevent enemy deployment of antitank
gun lines; and he also emphasized maintaining the initiative and aggressive
offensive action, applying the principle of concentration of effort. He
demanded better reconnaissance, a skill long neglected by the army, and
opposed the rigid, inflexible organization of training at home and the artifi-
cial division between individual and collective training. Instead, he
demanded extensive and frequent evaluation of recruits along with com-
bined-arms exercising under realistic conditions.92
Montgomery also immediately created a mobile reserve, X Corps, to
act as a fire brigade and retrained it in the rear in a counterattack role.93
Since he had come to understand the vital importance of air power and the
need for coordinated air-ground operations in France in 1940, he improved
coordination with the Desert Air Force. He as quickly abandoned ad hoc
brigade groups and Jock Columns and restored divisional integrity.
Reorganization, reequipment, and retraining came alongside a major house-
cleaning of desert commanders. 94 Montgomery's greatest achievement,
though, was his resurrection of the Eighth Army's morale. Integral to his
military thought was due emphasis on the "human dimension" of war. A
consummate master of public relations, he exuded publicly a total confi-
dence that he did not believe privately. His confidence proved infectious
and dramatically improved British morale.95
The key to Montgomery's operational approach was firepower domi-
nance. As he massed artillery, the Royal Artillery reemerged as the rightful
queen of the battlefield. The fruits of centralization materialized during
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
121
Montgomery's first battle in North Africa, Alam Haifa (30 August-6
September 1942), where he massed 248 guns. Short on supplies, Rommel
launched a spoiling attack against the Eighth Army to blunt its growing
strength. Benefiting from advanced warning from Ultra and aerial intelli-
gence, Montgomery renounced maneuver, held well-prepared defensive
positions, refused to be enticed out, thus forcing the Germans to attack the
British defenses.% Employing mutually supporting combined-arms box
defenses buttressed with armor deployed in hull-down positions supported
by coordinated artillery and antitank fire plans, the Eighth Army repulsed
Rommel and inflicted heavy loss. Montgomery, believing Eighth Army still
weak and with little offensive capability, then cautiously counterattacked
and pushed the enemy forces back almost to their start line before he aban-
doned the offensive on 7 September. That most of the British counterat-
tacks failed justified his caution. Sound defense had defeated a weak
enemy thrust and boosted morale, air support had reached new heights, and
good intelligence had allowed concentrated fire support. 97
The Battle of Alam Haifa thus marked the first occasion on which
British ground forces had orchestrated a successful defense through coordi-
nation of armor, artillery, and air power. At the same time, the battle wit-
nessed the first wartime triumph of British mass and firepower over
German mobility. Montgomery's reluctance to exploit success reflected his
determination not to overextend himself by continuing the battle as had
occurred during COMPASS and CRUSADER. Such caution became a cor-
nerstone of Montgomery's operational approach thereafter.98 The battle
also provided a number of important lessons for the Eighth Army. The con-
centrated employment of armor and artillery was a key ingredient in victo-
ry; and the reintegration of army and RAF commanders at a joint battle
headquarters brought improved air-ground coordination and with it more
effective air support.99
Nevertheless, serious deficiencies remained. Artillery command and
control remained poor. 100 Coordination remained indifferent, and although
Montgomery emphasized combined-arms coordination, he adhered to offi-
cial doctrine and thus made no effort to integrate below the divisional
level. 101 He was also indifferent to radio security and underestimated the
value of signals intelligence to the enemy. 102
It was thus not until October 1942 at the Second Battle of El Alamein
that the Eighth Army secured a major offensive victory. Montgomery
planned an offensive that incorporated many lessons learned in the previous
two years of desert fighting. For his offensive, Operation LIGHTFOOT
(23-26 October), he intended a double-pincer attack by the XXX Corps
with four divisions in the north supported by the heaviest British artillery
bombardment since 1918 to break into the Axis defenses. 103 Thereafter, he
aimed for the X Corps to push through and halt astride the enemy supply
lines and induce the enemy to attack, while infantry steadily "crumbled"
