chou
274
Normandy 1944
a battalion of the 115th Infantry Regiment on 9 June as Gerow ordered the
regiment to advance rapidly through the flooded Aure valley toward St. Lô.
After the battalion outdistanced its flanking units, retiring German troops
ambushed the battalion from the rear and dispersed it with heavy losses. 13
The slow advance allowed German reserves to come up and prevent
the fall of St. Lô. By 12 June, when the U.S. 29th Division assaulted across
the Elle River, the German 3d Parachute Division had moved into line. 14
Moreover, poor U.S. tactics nearly defeated the crossing attempt. Failure to
comprehend German defensive doctrine rendered the heavy preliminary
barrage ineffective as the Americans had hit only the thinly held enemy
outpost line, rather than the German main line of resistance (MLR) or
enemy reserves dispersed in depth. In addition, poor radio discipline and
indifferent radio security warned the Germans of the attack. These lapses
enabled the Germans to hit the U.S. infantry in their jump-off positions
with a furious barrage that stopped the attack dead. Only an impromptu,
surprise dusk assault by the 116th Infantry Regiment secured a narrow
bridgehead. Is
Thereafter, ammunition shortages and mounting losses curtailed
Gerow's drive on St. Lô as Collins's VII Corps received priority to capture
Cherbourg. When the V Corps resumed its advance on 16 June, it did so
with considerably restricted fire support that prevented it from overpower-
ing the enemy. Again, poor American tactics and coordination helped the
defenders stop the attack dead, while vigorous enemy counterattacks again
ambushed elements of the 115th Regiment and threw it back in confusion. 16
The advance of the V Corps ground to a halt at Hill 108, 2 miles short of St.
Lô. Too weak to take the town, the V Corps assumed the defensive on 18
Skilled and tenacious German resistance combined with U.S. opera-
tional, logistical, and tactical deficiencies had slowed progress.
Operationally, U.S. doctrinal emphasis on broad-front attacks slowed the
advance because such attacks dissipated available resources and firepower,
increased losses, and, in the short term at least, denied the Americans sub-
stantial progress and decisive success.17 Logistical shortages also slowed
the U.S. drive in the first weeks of the invasion as supply deliveries fell
well behind schedule (see Table 7.1). Planning estimates proved too opti-
mistic and at the same time, the First Army experienced unexpectedly high
ammunition consumption as bogged-down troops relied heavily on fire
support to advance in the bocage. 18 Slow unloading, high consumption, and
unofficial unit hoarding, kept stockpiles ashore low and necessitated the
introduction of rationing on 15 June. Lack of ammunition prevented the
First Army from fully employing its firepower early in the campaign. 19
Troops and commanders quickly became aware that flaws in tactics,
training, and equipment had hampered troop performance and slowed the
U.S. advance. In the meantime, as the First Army sought to identify and to
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
Table 7.1 Percentage of Planned U.S. Supplies Delivered, Summer 1944
7 June 9 June
10 June 11 June 13 June 15 June 17 June 30 June 31 July
Percentage
Delivered
21
31
38
47
60
71
76
81
93
Sources: FUSA, Report I, 78; V, 147; Roland G. Ruppenthal, Logistical Support of the
Armies (Washington, D.C.: OCH, 1953) I, 390, 401, 416-421, 457; Steve R. Waddell, U.S.
Army Logistics: The Normandy Campaign, 1944 (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1994),
275
correct these defects, it revised its operational plan, improvised logistically,
and utilized air and sea power extensively to maintain the pace of the
advance and bring about the fall of Cherbourg, despite the operational and
tactical flaws that hampered progress in the bocage.
Senior U.S. commanders also displayed operational flexibility. The
slowness of the advance on Cherbourg as the Germans stubbornly fought
before Montebourg led Collins to jettison the original invasion plan that,
couched in traditional doctrinal tenets, called for a direct advance on
Cherbourg.20 Instead, on 15 June Collins struck west to cut the peninsula
and isolate Cherbourg from the main body of German forces. At the same
ume, since supplies were insufficient to sustain offensive action across the
entire front, Gen. Omar Bradley, U.S. First Army commander, halted the V
Corps advance on St. Lô to focus on taking Cherbourg.
Quartermasters also improvised to speed the flow of supplies and
reduce munitions shortages that handicapped the U.S. drive. From 12 June,
supply troops unloaded around the clock, beached landing craft to allow
faster unloading, and quickly assembled the prefabricated Mulberry artifi-
cial port to accelerate cargo discharge rates. As a result, during the second
week of the invasion, the supply situation ashore improved considerably
(Table 7.1),21 An improved logistic position allowed Collins's drive on
Cherbourg to move into top gear in the second week of the invasion. By 15
June, the VII Corps had enlarged its bridgehead sufficiently to concentrate
it strength for the push west across the peninsula. This renewed drive rap-
idly penetrated a German defense already attenuated by previous broad-
front attacks. Spearheaded by the experienced 9th Infantry and 82a
Airborne Divisions, which advanced aggressively and boldly without
regard for their flanks, Collins's troops severed the Cotentin peninsula on
7 June, isolated Cherbourg from reinforcement and resupply, and thus nas-
tened its fall.22
The Americans also employed air and sea power to good effect in sup-
port of the advance on Cherbourg. In accordance with doctrine, the IX
Tactical Air Command (TAC) interdicted enemy reinforcements and sup-
plies moving into the Cotentin, inflicted heavy loss on German motor trans-
