146
Preparation: 1919-1944
reform occurred. His approach was the product of much more than egoism,
however. Britain desperately needed to win: the end was far more important
than the means. Victory was what counted. Britain wished to defeat
Germany at tolerable cost and to preserve its empire, army, and internation-
al standing in the process.
One of Montgomery's major achievements was to sharpen air-ground
cooperation prior to OVERLORD. The Home Forces' lack of preparation
for the air-ground battle had horrified him when he assumed command of
21st Army Group, so he promoted the effective blueprint for prosecuting
the air war in Normandy that the Tunisian campaign had provided. First,
Allied air power sought air superiority as an absolute prerequisite for the
invasion. Then, during the spring of 1944, it flew deep interdiction strikes
to isolate the battlefield. And once the campaign began it provided battle-
field interdiction and close support.
A new generation of long-range fighters equipped with drop fuel tanks
allowed the Allies to take the fight to the Luftwaffe in late 1943 to win the
air superiority battle.218 But German fighters refused to engage as the
enemy husbanded its strength for the impending invasion. However, the
Luftwaffe energetically opposed the Allied heavy bombers that, after the
July 1943 introduction of Window (aluminum foil chaff) blinded the entire
German defense system radar, inflicted a rising tide of destruction on
German cities.219 German countermeasures soon overcame the Window
challenge, though. Tame Sow tactics-night-fighters vectored onto targets
by ground-based early-warning stations-inflicted a mounting toll on
Allied bombers as they struck deeper into Germany and nearly forced the
Allies to suspend the bombing campaign. 220 But the new Allied long-range
fighters, when committed to escorting the bombers, were finally able to
engage and cripple the Luftwaffe's fighter force over the winter of 1943-
1944 and acquire the aerial superiority necessary for an invasion. Just as
important, the near crippling of RAF Bomber Command over the skies of
Germany overcame the vehement bombing advocates'
opposition to the
employment of heavy bombers in direct support of the invasion. The full
application of available air power in support of OVERLORD gave the
Allies an enormous advantage that contributed directly to eventual victory.
The quality of British leadership also troubled Montgomery. The
wartime conscripts came from a decidedly unmilitary, even antimilitary,
generation. The slaughter in the trenches of the Great War had destroyed
the intrinsic trust and faith in officers' abilities that their fathers had shown
early in that conflict. The hardships of the Depression had heightened sus-
picion of and hostility toward authority. These soldiers would have to be
led rather than driven, and the army's performance thus rested heavily on
the quality of its officer corps. But rapid expansion of the army prevented
rigorous weeding out of the unfit, and repeated defeats did little to instill
confidence in the army leadership. Moreover, the British Army was overof-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
147
ficered, especially at the higher levels of command. 221 Officer selection and
training standards diverged markedly between arms, and the War Office
gave heavy weight to class origins in its standards. Only in 1942 did the
War Office establish selection boards (along German lines) to provide more
rigorous and scientific assessment of aspiring officers. Also, Officer Cadet
Training Units of the early war years lacked experienced instructors, and
only after 1942 did the War Office reassign veteran officers as instructors-
but by then many undertrained officers were serving in the field.
The army also lacked a continental-style general staff. The Army Staff
Colleges at Camberley and Quetta, India, trained selected officers for staff
positions, but the press of time and numbers meant that the colleges never
sought to refine doctrine but simply imparted existing doctrine to an
increasing number of Commonwealth staff officers. Unlike in Germany,
staff appointments were neither attractive nor prestigious, especially given
the army's neglect of operational art and its disdain for intellectual study.
The army viewed staff officers with suspicion. Encouraging high-quality,
energetic officers to join the staff proved difficult, so the general standard
of wartime staff officers never approached German standards.222
Question marks thus remained over many of the senior British com-
manders, few of whom had seen action. Lt. Gen. Miles "Bimbo" Dempsey
commanded the British Second Army that was to spearhead the Anglo-
Canadian assault. Though a tough, quiet, efficient, and unflappable com-
mander, Dempsey had never led an army in combat.223 His command com-
prised I, VIII, XII, and XXX Corps commanded by Lt. Gens. John Crocker,
Richard O'Connor, Neil Ritchie, and Gerard Bucknall, respectively. Since
the War Office had few veteran commanders to choose from, it was diffi-
cult to find qualified corps commanders. 224
Backed by Churchill, O'Connor received the Home Forces' corps de
chasse, the VIII Corps. One of the most talented British officers, his cap-
ture in North Africa in April 1941 badly set back his career. Even though he
escaped in December 1943, his confinement had left him out of touch with
military developments. He thus only briefly fought the Germans and had
never handled armor. 225 Neil Ritchie, too, survived the disgrace of defeat
alter mishandling the Eighth Army at Gazala and subsequently proved a
competent corps commander, as did Crocker.226 Montgomery had promoted
Bucknall for corps command over Alanbrooke's strong objections.227 The
quality of divisional commanders also varied widely. Maj. Gen. "Pip"
Roberts had forged the 11th Armoured Division into an effective formation
and was the best British armored commander. Other commanders were less
satisfactory, reflecting the limited pool of seasoned senior officers. General
Agair of the Guards Armoured Division, for example, was a Grenadier
Guardsman with no operational armored warfare experience 228
On the eve of D-Day, the British Second Army's assault formations
stood poised to launch a meticulously planned invasion for which they had
