412
Conclusion
ences is particularly hard. Nevertheless, it is possible to draw some gener-
alized conclusions: prevailing military culture and doctrine exerted the
greatest impact on the ability of these military institutions to adapt during
World War II.
Cultural factors go some way toward explaining the greater flexibility
and adaptability of the U.S. and German militaries. In fact, prevailing mili-
tary culture profoundly influenced institutional capacity to adapt. The
Americans exhibited a managerial and scientific approach to war that
reflected the interwar spread of modern business management techniques
and notions of professionalism. The Germans, on the other hand, viewed
war as an art. It, therefore, championed individual initiative and a flexible
command tradition through which its General Staff and officer corps pro-
moted a practical approach to war that emphasized both military education
and the need to learn from combat experience.
In interwar Britain, however, officership remained the preserve of elite
society and afforded a vehicle for social advancement. Few Britons, both in
and out of the military, regarded officership as a profession that required
full-time education and preparation. As a result, the army exhibited an ama-
teur approach to professional development that denigrated theory and edu-
cation and instead elevated improvisation and pragmatism. Class concerns
also created an enormous gulf between officers and men that hampered the
army's ability to learn and to adapt from the bottom up, the fastest and most
effective means of adaptation. British military culture also valued and
rewarded loyalty to one's superiors above honesty. Such a rigidly hierarchi-
cal culture did not foster the honest self-criticism necessary for rapid and
effective adaptation. On the other hand, the culture of the U.S. and German
armies proved more receptive to criticism and honest self-appraisal (though
for different reasons), which facilitated easier, faster, and more accurate
identification and dissemination of lessons learned.
The British Army's long and illustrious history also deeply ingrained
traditionalism. The British regimental system had fostered both excellent
esprit de corps and a parochial tribalism since Napoleonic days. In the
twentieth century, however, its drawbacks threatened to outweigh its bene-
fits: modern warfare demanded greater interarms and interservice coordina-
tion. During World War II, however, regimental tribalism hampered the
British Army, and to a lesser extent the U.S. and Canadian Armies, from
developing combined-arms proficiency. Regimentalism also promoted an
intellectual parochialism that inhibited British reevaluation of strategic fun-
damentals and hindered doctrinal development.
Historical factors also clearly played a major role. World War I pro-
foundly shaped the character, development, and performance of the com-
batants during World War II, and exerted a baneful effect on the interwar
development of the British and Canadian militaries. Societies' reactions to
the enormous loss of life created a climate in which both militaries not only
Conclusion
413
had difficulty simply existing but in which they felt compelled to jettison
the knowledge of modern war that they had gained at such bitter cost in
Flanders. Defeat, on the other hand, energized Germany between the wars
to re-create an effective military to eradicate the stigma of failure and
achieve the world power status that Imperial Germany had sought. Such a
climate proved a powerful stimulus to reform and innovation. The Great
War had less effect on the U.S. military. Because the United States entered
late, World War I was far less costly or damaging to the country and thus
had only a limited influence on the development of strategy, military poli-
cy, or the fundamental character of the army. While the nation returned to
its historic isolationism, the U.S. military absorbed the lessons of the Great
War into revised doctrine between the wars. As a result, it entered World
War Il with a doctrine that was essentially sound, which greatly aided the
army both in distilling correct lessons from its combat experience and in
quickly enhancing its proficiency.
Geography and geostrategic considerations also played their part. That
both Canada and the United States were able to raise and prepare their
ground forces at home free from direct enemy attack facilitated an ordered
enhancement of combat capabilities. Great Britain faced its enemy across
the English Channel, and until 1943 its maritime lines of communication
were imperiled and the nation was subject to disruptive air attacks. Such
proximity mandated considerable diversion of resources from the primary
task of preparing the armed forces to assume the offensive and crush the
enemy. That Germany, on the other hand, was a continental power shaped
the pattern of interwar innovation and directed it toward ground warfare
against obvious enemies-Poland and France-which made the task of mil-
itary reform easier.
Domestic political realities also played an important role in shaping
relative combat capabilities. The political climate in interwar Germany was
conducive to reform as successive German governments gave their military
a clear mandate to prepare for ground war against its enemies. The political
climate in the United States, Britain, and Canada between the wars was
inimical to reform and badly circumscribed the degree of innovation possi-
ble. As a result, these militaries had limited capabilities in September 1939.
Political considerations also strongly influenced British preparation in the
late 1930s as the government geared rearmament to deter German aggres-
sion rather than prepare for war. Interwar neglect, followed by hasty and
ill-conceived rearmament left the British Army incapable of meeting the
military obligations that its government rashly committed its armed forces
to fulfilling in 1939. This quixotic quest for deterrence contributed to the
unprecedented series of defeats experienced between 1940-1942 from
which the army never fully recovered. The legacies of defeat profoundly
influenced the development and performance of the British Army through-
out the war.
