WO 171/1112
14624327
AR DUAN
1685
9982)
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
iv Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
topographical and chimatic. Clear sketches snowing postons of troops at
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
important phases.
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
v) Nature and description of held engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(i) Each branch of the staff in the
headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
umber
of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
ii) Unit commanders.
111) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staft.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A. —In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(vil Meteorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Norr _ vents should be entered up. not in the order as siven above, but at the time taev
occur, or come to notice.
At the close or cach day, events (Vi anu vul Maat be duded.
PARA. 5.-Apdendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation of
or instructic
issued during the period covered by the current
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
upon which to base future improvements
n army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war experie of
their formations or units
ny ideas, opinions and recomme and inter-service co-operation whic
ime to the toy ot to Wear earth in the Army, a wel a miteral kely to be of value
initialled by ton oficer detaile, to pepit,
NOTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the
fficer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a dialy
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
ncluding any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
hey should be included).
All diaries will conform to the regulations for draiting orders, reports, etc.
See F.S.R., Volume II
PARA, 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
(i) Unless otherwise ordered,
nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices a
The time entered should be the mule
none No. The the in entered should be the time the information or ord cach
li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staft.
WO 171/355
WO 171/308 L
WO 171/323 L
WO 171/612
+0:00: 20 920Z/0/60
