North Africa the new composite pack was so popular that the troops were
reluctant to change to the Field Service ration scale.
A description of the different types of pack, and their contents, is con-
tained in Appendix IX.
Petrol Depots
The original organization for the supply of P.O,L. to the B.E.F. provided
for packed petroleum products being received in the first place, stored, and
sent forward, by the petrol sub-depots.
Dispersal and tactical requirements led to these sub-depots breaking away
from their parent B.S.Ds., and becoming independent units.
Petrol depots
were thus evolved, with a variable number of sections, each of 6.500 tons
deadweight capacity, or, say, 1½ million gallons.
They were designed to receive, store, and issue the packed petroleum
produces received in non-returnable tins from U.K., and the output of the
can-filling centres in France.
They received stocks by rail from the ports,
and distributed them by rail and M.T., and barges were also used.
For the campaign in Norway in 1940, a special petrol depot was organized
hurriedly and with a scratch collection of personnel and equipment; but it
proved so successful that it was used as the model for the reorganization of
petrol depots, which took place at the end of that year with the object of
providing greater flexibility in the allotment and employment of these units.
Three types were introduced. Type "A", the largest, was designed to hold
12,500 tons, or about twice as much as the original petrol depot.
Type "B",
holding 5,000 tons, was an enlargement of the special petrol depot; and Type
"C" holding 2,000 tons, was practically the same as the special depot.
Besides being employed as field force units, these three types were also
used at home as War Office controlled depots, and it was found that, given
good road and rail communications, accommodation, and labour as necessary,
facilities not normally available in the field, tonnages could be held greatly
in excess of the figures laid down.
Type "A" depots, indeed, held as much as
30,000 to 35,000 tons.
Bulk Supply of P.O.L.
In consequence of the development of bulk supply of petrol in France,
various new units were designed to carry out this work.
These included a
Bulk Petroleum Storage Company, to administer and control the storage and
movement of petroleum products in bulk; Bulk Petrol Transport Companick
equipped with road tanker waggons, to carry
out distributive work at the
base and on the L. of C.; and a Base Petrol Filling Centre, as the natur
corollary of the decision to introduce the use of the returnable container, whit
it was designed to fill and repair.
in the active operations in May, 1940, vide Chapter IV.
This latter centre early justified its existen
It was, however,
Evident that it was too static, and its equipment top heavy, for it to be suit.
for employment in mobile operations; mobile petrol filing centres were ther
fore introduced, and ultimately ousted the B.P.F.Cs.
As the result of experience gained in the Middle East, the War Establish
H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Petroleum
ments of P.O.L. units intended for service with 21 Army Group were revisc
Installations,
were reduced in
54
number of units controlled increased from three to five, as this enabled more
effective control to be exercised over P.O.L. units on the L. of C.
The head-
quarters, Bulk Petroleum Storage Company, was made responsible for the
administration of four B.P.S. sections,
instead of eight as formerly.
New
War Establishments created for the operation were Petroleum
Technical
Stores Depots and the Bulk Petroleum Storage Companies for the operation
of " Pluto", for which see Chapter VIII and Appendix II L.
As the result of the experience gained in Middle East and in 21 Army
Group, where the petrol depot, Type "C", was found to be too small and
not flexible enough, the new Light War Establishments provided for a petrol
company, R.A.S.C., able to control up to five petrol platoons.
The latter took
the
place of petrol depots, each having a holding capacity of 4,000 tons,
and a filling element of 60 tons per day.
The next important development in the bulk supply of petrol took the
form of means for getting bulk petrol ashore in the earliest possible stages of
an invasion.
The ship-to-shore pipelines, known as " tombolas", were to be
instrumental in introducing bulk supply of fuels into captured and improvised
ports long before harbour facilities had been sufficiently re-established to
allow tankers to be berthed for discharge.
The use of pipelines within bulk installations on shore gradually developed,
and eventually extensive pipeline systems,
carrying bulk fuel over great
distances, were employed.
The most important examples of this method of
bulk supply are to be found in the Indian system, vide Chapter XI, and in the
ultimate achievement of "Pluto", the
" pipeline under the ocean", which
supplied 21 Army Group (see Chapter VIII). In this last connection, it is
of interest to note that a scheme for an under-sea pipeline from
Dover to
Calais was actually drawn up by Q.M.G.17 in November, 1939, over four years
before the vision became fact.
The development of the pipeline system in 21 Army Group necessitated
the introduction of a special R.A.S.C. unit, the Petrol Pipeline Platoon.
This
was the result of the
policy decision, by which the whole operation of pipe-
lines became a R.A.S.C. responsibility, having been previously shared between
that Corps and the Royal Engineers. (The matter is dealt with in greater
detail in Chapter VIII.)
Portable Petrol Tanks
The problem of the carriage of petrol in bulk by road in a field force
led to the production of portable petrol tanks.
As explained elsewhere, the
specialized vehicle is undesirable, as it is not capable of being switched to the
carriage of another type of load.
In the case of the road tanker lorries, the
number of this type of vehicle required during different phases of a campaign
varies considerably; and, if a force were provided with a fleet of them sufficient
to meet maximum requirements, there would be periods during which they
would stand idle, in face perhaps of a great demand for standard load-carriers.
A pool of portable petrol tanks, capable of being easily installed in 3-ton
lorries, would thus enable the road tanker strength to be supplemented when
necessary, and give that degree of elasticity which a modern army demands
of its petrol supply system.
Such a tank would also have numerous uses, as
a static tank at re-fuelling points, depots, etc.
55
wes7et17
WO 277/21.
27
WO27726
