the United Kingdom, with particular regard to the feeding of the Air Defence
of Great Britain organization.
The maintenance of the B.E.F. implied, in the first place, the provision of
adequate reserves of foodstufis of the required sort; the provision of storage
accommodation in the United Kingdom for those reserves, until they were
wanted; and the provision of an organization in the B.E.F. capable of receiving,
storing, and issuing the supplies provided.
The plans in regard to the provision of reserves are described in Chapter
IV. The question of storage accommodation in the United Kingdom is dealt
with in Chapter XII, and the organization of the supply service is described
in Chapter III.
In all these respects, the task was, to some extent, facilitated by the fact
that much experience of the wider aspects of feeding very large armies in the
field had been gained in the war of 1914-1918, and this was used as a basis
for planning for a potential Second World War.
The plans for coping with the increased feeding strength in the United
Kingdom, and with the special problem presented by the wide dispersion of
units of A.D.G.B., are described in Chapter XII.
There was, in peace, no supply or petrol unit existing, even in cadre form,
to meet the field force requirements in this request.
On mobilization, there-
fore, such units would have to be improvised; that is to say, they would be an
ad hoc collection of personnel and equipment, never before assembled, and
with no previously existing nucleus.
P.O.L.
There was no real precedent for planning for the provision of the enormous
quantities of petrol, oils, and lubricants expected to be required in the event
of war, as consumption in the first world war was comparatively small, and
there had been no peacetime manoeuvres on a big enough scale to act as a
guide.
In spite of this difficulty, the problem of maintaining fuel and lubricant
supply to a mechanized army in the field had been under constant examination
both by the War Office and by the R.A.S.C. for at least ten years before the
outbreak of war in 1939.
The basic factor to be decided was the means of
bringing petrol to the consumer, whether by bulk tanker lorries delivering
direct to vehicle tanks, or by the medium of containers, returnable or non
returnable.
If the latter method was adopted, then the shape and size of the
containers had to be settled.
Experience indicated that supply by road tankers direct to vehicles, the
superficially obvious method,
was impracticable in operational conditions
owing to the vulnerability of the tankers and the slowness of the refuelice
Some form of container was, therefore, necessary.
This policy
was crystallized in 1936 by the report of the War Office Committee on te
method of delivery and distribution of petrol to units in advance of railhe
and the momentous decision was taken that petrol should normally be supplied
in the field in the expendable, non-returnable, 4-sallon tin of standard tre
design (see also Chapter VI).
The only available returnable container, le
for the purpose.
ordinary commercial 2-gallon can, was not forthcoming in quantities sufficiet
32
This decision was much criticized later, but it did at any rate go far
towards ensuring that the supply of petrol could begin on the outbreak of
war, even if alternative methods had to be introduced afterwards.
It simplified
the distribution problem, in so far that it eliminated the necessity for getting
empties back, and it avoided the possibility of contamination by gas, as the
tins were cased, two in a wooden case.
It was considered that filling rates
could be so balanced as to avoid long storage and possible consequent deteriora-
Mom.
With this policy settled, the next step was to arrange for the supply of
containers and their filling.
After consultation with the oil industry, it was
decided to erect two War Department can making and filling factories, at
Llandarcy, South Wales, and Avonmouth, near Bristol.
Both these places were
convenient to the great western terminal oil installations, and also as far
removed as possible from the threat of air attack.
To provide the spirit for
putting in the cans, a War Office reserve of petrol and oils, calculated at six
months' estimated operational requirements, was to be established at Llandarcy,
Avonmouth, and Stanlow, Cheshire.
Work began on these projects early in
1937, but it was impeded by shortage of material, and the first experimental
cans were not produced until the summer of 1938.
When the Munich crisis
arose, there was at least a potential in existence for the packing and distribu-
tion of petrol.
Pre-war financial policy was however reflected in the condition of the
factories.
Owing to lack of funds for materials, tin-plate, paint, etc., or for
training operatives, the plants had not been run in, or fully tested or staffed,
and there was nothing to show that they could actually achieve their object.
Even with the impetus given to warlike preparations by the crisis, there was
little improvement in this respect.
Financial authority had been given for
the manufacture of a very limited number of tins, to get the machinery into
working order.
This short-sighted policy was to result in breakdowns and
stoppages when the plant began to operate in wartime.
Greater reserves of petrol and diesel fuel, and additional bulk storage at
home, were authorized however.
Two of the new installations were to have
underground storage owing to the danger of air attack, and these were located
on Southampton Water in anticipation of operations on the continent.
Here
construction went ahead satisfactorily, and, in addition, the war reserve of
packed lubricants slowly accumulated, although bulk storage for lubricating
oil was behind schedule.
A quite separate scheme was in hand, with the object of safeguarding the
supply of P.O.L. to the organization for the Air Defence of Great Britain in
war conditions.
This provided for W.D. reserve tankage, set aside for the
purpose, to be constructed in selected depots of the civilian oil companies.
This was not completed by the outbreak of war, but it was sufficiently advanced
to ensure that it was ready by the time the enemy air offensive was launched
in the summer of 1940.
Finally, in order to ensure that the Army should have available on mobili-
zation the necessary highly qualified technical officers for petroleum duties,
suitable individuals, employed in the oil industry, were earmarked for com-
missions in the R.A.S.C., and for allocation to key
appointments in the
War Office, and in War Office controlled installations, in the event of war.
33
WO 277/21
488
27
WO 277/26
