Bakery Units-Maintenance
The Field Bakeries (other than Mobile) allotted to 21 Army
had each 16 steam double-deck ovens.
Group
as fuel in any proportion.
Coke or fuel-wood could be used
Production of 30,000 lIb. of bread daily by each
as t would require either 4,500 lb. coke, or 30,000 lb. fuel-wood a day or
a combination
of the two fuels.
Besides the
gredients,
normal bread-making in-
60 lb, of emulsion were required for each bakery daily for
bread-tin greasing.
The Field Bakeries (Mobile) were equipped with three steam, double-
deck mobile ovens, oil-fired.
The fuel used could be either stationary diesel
fuel, derv, gas oil, or kerosene, and 90 gallons a day were required for each
bakery producing 20,000 lb. of bread.
In addition, 30 gallons of diesel oil
a day for a bakery were required for the generator.
quired lubricating oil, special oil for dough-contacting surfaces, and emulsion
for bread-tin greasing.
Provision had been made by 21 Army Group for coke fuel for the mobile
ovens, diesel oil for the generators, and lubricating oil while the other
items would be shipped automatically with the flour in the necessary ratio.
Cold Storage
To meet the requirements of 21 Army Group for cold storage the follow-
ing programme of provision of plants was agreed:-
In the first month, 15 10-ton plants; in the next two months, five
10-ton, five 200-ton, and one 500-ton; after D+90, five 200-ton and
three 500-ton; and between D + 120 and D + 180, ten 10-ton.
Two 400-ton refrigerated coasters were to be made available by
M.O.W.T. when required.
Hospital Supplies
An issue of hospital supplies (foodstuffs) on a modified scale, was made
to all General Hospitals,
Casualty Clearing Stations, and Field Dressing
Stations, to be taken overseas as part of their A.F. G 1098 equipment.
iscue was intended to be sufficient for 30 days for the hospitals and fo
14 days for the other units.
Medical panniers, containing similar items, were issued to Field Ambu-
lances, sufficient to make them self-contained for 14 days.
a very attenuated
No hospital supplies would be shipped ill D + 5; from then until D+ 00,
scale had been agreed,
troops ashore, but on
the phasing in of the
based not upon the number of
medical units.
included ciparettes and latrine paner at normal daily scales for ten per cent.
of the force.
These items were also included in ye compo ration pack,
but the aytra cunplies were to he sent to avoid the onening of cases simply
to extract the cigarettes and latrine paper.
After De30 the normal scale of hospital cunnies (foodstuffs) as in
Appendix IX for temperate climates,
scale laid down world he regarded se cufficient for 2.000 men for 20 days
298
and not for 1,000, as normally.
hu the fact that provision of hospitals overseas was based on five ner cent.
This modification was held to be justified
y the forces, instead of the normal ten per cent., being in hospital at one
rime, owing to the proximity of the theatre to the United Kingdom, to which
larger transfers of casualties than usual would be possible.
In order to build up reserves, ten days' hospital supplies for the numbers
of men ashore on D + 30 were to be shipped in addition to the normal scale,
from D + 31 to D + 70.
Miscellaneous Supplies
An attenuated scale of miscellaneous and disinfectant supplies was fixed
and thereafter the normal temperate climate scale
(see Appendix IX) would be introduced.
Chaplains were to take an initial supply of sacramental wine and wafers
with them when they went overseas; and arrangements were made for further
provision as required after D + 60.
Kitbags had been prepared by Ordnance for issue to soldiers falling
Besides clothing, arms and ammunition, these included some
Experience had shown that certain items in the Compo pack ration were
very liable to pilferage, which was extremely difficult to prevent in spite
of every precaution.
All consignments of Compo were therefore to be
accompanied by a percentage, varying between three per cent. and five per
cent., of attractive items in a separate pack; these were cigarettes, chocolate,
sweets, tea-sugar-and-milk powder.
While Compo was in full issue, the R.A.F. would not require any supplies
other than common-user items.
Aircrews standing by late
carly in the morning were to be provided with snacks by issue of an addi-
tional one-third of a Compo ration for each man.
For the first 60 days
after introduction of the F.S. scale, the R.A.F. requirements of non-common-
user items (raisins, barley-sugar, and chewing-gum) would be covered by
the quantities of such items carried by R.A.F. units as part of their equip-
ment, or by the continued issue of additional Compo rations.
provision of non-commer-iss items would be made on demand in the
usual way.
Water was to be taken in jerricans, but Ordnance branch was responsible
for their provision, filling, and shipping, and also for providing 30 tons of
softened water in barrels, for smoke screens.
The inclusion in the Compo packs of six pieces of latrine paper a mar
a day was suicien the Compo pa -35.
From then to D+90, shipments
would he at the normal coale of five nieces a man a dav
From D+91,
provision would be a normal Printing and Stationery Services responsibility
shipments being made as required.
Units were taking three weeks' supply of green
envelopes (for un-
D+ 18 and D + 30.
censored lattore with tham and fue callion would he shipped between
299
W0277/21
27
WO277/26
