(c) to act as increment of additional section to a Type "B" Depot;
operate under a Corps, interchangeable with the
Platoon of a Corps Troops Composite Company employed on
(e) to act as the administrative headquarters of a group of six Mobile
Petrol Filling Centres,
and at the same time to hold 600,000
empty containers;
(A) to operate as a small petrol depot, or as a petrol filling station.
This type of depot was, however, in spite of its usefulness, found to be too
small, and not sufficiently divisible for duties in an Army roadhead.
In general, it was found that mobility was of paramount importance for
all types of P.O.L. units, the next most important characteristic being inde-
pendence, i.e., the ability of each unit to operate as a self-contained entity.
The tendency was, therefore, to use the smaller types of units, and particularly
the Mobile Petrol Filling Centres and the Petrol Depots, Type "C".
In the
early stages it was found more economical to group a number of M.P.F.Cs.
so that they worked under a central control and pooled their resources of
personnel and equipment.
It was found that the combined output of filled
returnable containers from centres working in this way was greater than that
of units working independently.
The delivery of empty containers to the
filling area was
greatly facilitated.
In practice three Mobile Petrol Filling
Centres could easily perform the nominal task of a Base Petrol Filling Centre,
filling 24,000 containers a day, with three-quarters of the number of per-
sonnel.
The
B.P.F.C.
was consequently not
used, and was disbanded.
M.P.F.Cs. were for preference located in field maintenance centres, but their
use so far forward depended on the availability of rail tank wagons.
The grouping of M.P.F.Cs. led to a similar grouping of Petrol Depots,
Type "C", to hold the increased output of filled jerricans.
As a result of this grouping of smaller units, the administrative responsi-
bility of the various H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Petroleum Installations, differed very
widely.
In some cases, they were responsible for up to thirty P.O.L. units,
while others were administering only two or three.
The method of delivery by pipeline succeeded beyond all expectations.
many cases, the line followed the advance so closely that its head was only
a few miles behind the most forward position.
The pipeline system displaced, to a great extent, the M.P.F.C., particularly
in the latter's role of holding packed petrol for the re-fuelling of vehicles.
new system was evolved by which unips were directed to filling stations, which
consisted of a series of filling-trees or standpipes from which large convoys
could be refuelled simultaneously.
These stations were manned by R.A.S.C.
personnel, organized in new units, called " Petrol Station Companies".
consisted of a H.Q. for supervision and co-ordination, and 24 self-contained
sections, each designed to operate one station.
The Composite Platoons of Bulk Pation Transport Companies seldom
operated with their companies, and their normal task was the running of
petrol stations, one platoon
being capable of manning two stations.
companies themselves generally operated as part of the Army Group pool of
340
Responsibilities of R.E. and R.A.S.C.
in regard to P.O.L.
Probably the most important change which resulted from the campaign
was a revision of the respective responsibilities of the
Rt. and the R.A.S.C. in connection with the bulk distribution of pet of un.
Before the mounting of " Overlord", the division had been very ill defined,
although it was generally accepted that the R.E. were responsible for con-
struction and major repairs, while the R.A.S.C. carried out mainient cond
minor repairs.
The absence of detailed terms of reference showed itself
plainly when the time approached for the introduction of bulk into the
S.T. 2 was responsible for P.O.L. provisioning, and it seemed logical that
R.A.S.C. petroleum engineers should be present at reconnaissances of sites
for the erection of bulk tankage, and that they should be represented when-
ever policy concerning the development of the P.O.L. bulk distribution system
was being discussed.
There were differences of opinion in regard to these questions.
these occurred in the field, they had to be settled by mutual agreement
between the individuals, as there was not time to refer to higher authority
for policy decisions on matters of detail. To settle the matter a directive was
issued in April, 1945, setting out the respective responsibilities of the R.E.
and the R.Á.S.C. for the supply of P.O.L. in bulk by pipeline.
Appendix XF, and may be compared with directive issued in 1942 defining
the responsibilities of the two corps in regard to petroleum projects in the
Middle East (see Chapter VI), and with the War Office Directive of November,
1942 (see Appendix XC).
The R.A.S.C., in consequence, assumed responsibility in all commands
and theatres, at home and abroad, for the control, operation, and day-to-day
maintenance of all bulk petroleum installations, pump stations and pipelines.
A new unit, called a petroleum pipeline platoon, was designed to meet
the new responsibilities (Appendix IIK).
The organization of "Pluto", and the definition of responsibilities in
relation to its operation, have been dealt with in Section 1 of this chapter, and
its contribution to the maintenance of 21 Army Group is narrated in Section 4
Operation of Army Roadheads
The operational arl of the site and donate ta roadhead was controlled
in both Armies by the Staffs and Services at Rear Army Headquarters.
local administration of these units ata was the responsibility of the com
mander, Second Army Troops (or, in +he First Canadian Army, or th
Canadian L. of C. Terminal).
railway stations serving the roadhead were allotted for onerational work to
In the case of the Second Army, groups of
combined headauarters consisting a Cp ASC (known as C.R.A.S.C.
Rear Army H.Q. Staff and Services concerned, through an "
Movement Control.
Control), the commander of the Dioneer Groun. and a renresentative o
All three of these officers received instructions from
"Administrative
he Services responsible for the clearance of railheads.
of Army H.Q.
The object of this arrangement was to group together
N02947
117
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
