L.C.T. (R) firing salvo.
(o) The neutralising of enemy battery positions. Fundamentally a naval and air preblem.
Guns of 4-in.- 6-in. calibre mounted in monitors or
addition to any 15-in. gun support which can be made available.
Support Towers' in
(d) Air support.
requirement."
In all stages of the action, all forms of air support would be an urgent
Recommendations of the Technical Sub-Committee
The Technical Sub-Committee produced a paper' which was taken by the Chiefs of Staff on
The conclusions of this paper were :—
" (a) Unless we are prepared to use old battleships and cruisers, we must build a number of
6-in. 15-knot monitors and self-propelled Maunsell towers.
practicability of the latter should be examined at high priority.
We recommend that the
(b) In close support, 52 special armoured craft mounting army type guns or howitzers are
required for each assaulting Brigade.
(c) For immediate support of the Infantry as they advance we need, 48 self-propelled guns
for each assaulting Brigade.
(d) We note that there may be a requirement for Canal Defence Lights in special small craft,
but this has not yet been fully examined.'
C.C.O., who was present at the Chiefs of Staff meeting, in referring to the conclusion pointed
out that some 100 guns would be required to support a Brigade Group, half in armoured craft and
half in landing craft.
This latter factor would result either in displacing a corresponding number
of vehicles or in increasing the total number of landing craft required, or in reducing the number of
brigades which could take part in an assault; if Maunsell towers proved feasible, the effect on the
shortage of landing craft would be most beneficial.
The decisions of this meeting were that " R" Class battleships would not be used to support
a landing, but that design and experiment for special gun craft should proceed at once.
also decided that the construction of two pilot models of Maunsell towers should be accorded
As a result of these decisions, a meeting was held on 21st December, 1942, to discuss the
armament of " Mobile Support Towers"
and it was agreed that two towers would be designed, each
mounting two 6-in. howitzers with ammunition on the scale of 200 rounds per gun.
fire control and communications was also investigated. In the event, other projects of a higher
priority prevented production being completed in time for Normandy and the work on the prototype
ceased in the spring of 1944 before firing trials had been conducted.
The First Designs of Landing Crait Gun (L.C.G.)
On 22nd December, 1942, a meeting was held at C.O.H.Q. to consider in detail the requirements
for close support gun craft.
The General Officer Combined Operations was in the chair and
G.O.C.-in-C. Ist Canadian Army and the Director Royal Artillery were present, together with
representatives from the Admiralty, War Office, G.H.Q. Home Forces and the Ministry of Supply.
It was agreed that D.N.C. should produce two designs for this craft, one to have a speed of 15 knots
and the other 10 knots.
D.N.C.'s designs were discussed at a further meeting? on 4th February,
1943, with C.C.O. in the chair, and he stated that agreement had been reached with U.S. authorities
that the title of support craft should be L.C.G., and that there was little prospect of these craft
being built in the U.S.A. for use by British Forces. At the Casablanca Conference he had emphasised
the importance of this type of support and had given General Marshall a letter on this subject.
Conclusions of the meeting were :—
(1) That the speed of 15 knots was essential.
(2) That the craft should mount two 25-pdrs., 17-pdrs. or 95-mm. guns.
(3) That the quantitative demand for craft for 1944 should be based on 26 x 2-gun craft
per Brigade, with a proviso that, if Rocket craft were successful, this number may be
reduced to 12.
The Conversion of Landing Craft Tank into Support Craft
It soon became apparent that it would not be possible to produce
these L.C.G. (M.), as
they were to be called, before 1944, and that improvised support craft would have to fill the gap
C.C.O. therefore made available an L.C.T. for experimental conversion to a provisional
1 C.O.S. (42) 448 (O) dated 15th December, 1942.
a S.R. 1168/43 dated 4th February, 1943.
121
WO 277/21
27
30
