Army Troops drew stores direct from Army sub-depots, i.e., supplies
from D.I.Ds., and P.O.L. from Petrol Points.
P.O.L. for British troops in Fifth (U.S.) Army
was
provided from
American sources.
The U.S. organization followed much the same pattern
as the British, M.P.F.Cs. being known as Filling Stations, and Petrol Points
as Truckheads.
Army Transport
The number of companies under Army control in Italy varied greatly
according to circumstances.
Thus, during the build-up for the last Cassino
offensive,
Eighth Army, with five Corps under Command, had 47 load.
carrying M.T. companies allotted to it, including Corps
Troops transport,
but excluding tippers and bridging lorries.
Later, in the final offensive of
the campaign, with an Advanced Base close at hand and railheads well
forward, the number of companies allotted to Eighth Army for third line
maintenance varied from 57 to 11.
Whenever possible, 10-ton G.T. com-
panies were used in Army area, but good main roads were essential for these
During the summer of 1944, Eighth Army was maintained for a con-
siderable period 200 miles in advance of railhead.
In the winter of 1944-1945, in order to avoid the double handling in.
volved at F.M.Cs., and to reduce congestion at those points, Fifth Army
used Corps and Divisional pack trains, with separate supply packs for
each of five divisions, Corps troops, and Army troops; separate ammunition
packs for two Corps and Army troops; and separate petrol packs for two
This enabled second line transport to run
through from railhead to delivery point, and in consequence practically no
Army third line transport was required.
The number of companies allotted
to the R.E. usually represented an addition of ten per cent. on the number
allotted for other Army purposes.
The transport of formations relieved from fighting came into the Army
R.A. first line transport formed three platoons for the
final battle, and Army Troops companies manned four 3-ton platoons and
one 10-ton platoon surplus to war establishment.
The method of meeting the second and third line transport needs of
GHO. and Army arity the second aid third line tra companies and
R.A.S.C., did not prove completely satisfactory, but
second and third line transport.
practicable alternative seemed to be an increase in the general pool of
be an increase ipanies and platons at
the hase and on the T. of C were invariably emploved on general transport
work; and the workshops of companies not employed in their proper rôle
were used to provide British cadres for static
tenance of civilian transport padres, for static we oks exceptionally heavy
workshops for the main-
afiliated vehicle maintenance loads from other companies at the base.
The lay-out of the corns grea followed standard nattern throughout the
transport collected from Army
delivered to Corne Railhe than a mila tens sunilable alau, Linh were
assembled in a F.M.C. for breaking down into divisional packs.
280
As a rule, bulk M.T. petrol was delivered to the M.P.F.C. at Corps
wagons filled from Army pipeheads, and advanced
possible to allot bulk storage to
Corps, whose M.P.F.Cs. then filled containers direct from bulk storage.
As a rule, two M.P.F.Cs. and one Petrol Depot, Type "C", were allotted
The M.P.F.Cs. filled cans for Corps maintenance from
centre being capable of filling 200,000 gallons
The Corps Petrol Depot was used to hold and distribute derv,
kerosene, and lubricants, to hold the corps reserve of M.T. spirit, and to
run the Corps Petrol Supply Point.
When the Petrol Depot and one M.P.F.C.
moved forward to open a new F.M.C., the other centre stayed behind to clear
When there were two F.M.Cs., each was allotted one M.P.F.C.,
and the Petrol Depot was split between the two F.M.Cs.
Formations and Corps Troops normally drew stores from F.M.Cs. in
second and first line transport respectively.
The R.A.S.C.
activities of the
Corps F.M.C. were usually supervised
by the C.R.A.S.C., Corps Troops.
An instance of a special lift by the Canadian corps transport was the
move of 4,245 tons of ammunition, petrol, and supplies, in 90 hours over
a distance of 30 miles.
This was effected by six G.T. platoons running
continuously in ten-hour shifts with two-hour intervals for maintenance
between
It was found that, in such conditions, neither the drivers nor
the vehicles suffered: but the necessity for 24-hour control by the staff
and the transport officers limited such an operation to six days without
a break for rest.
Maintenance crews were a corollary to continuous running.
Divisional Maintenance Areas
In this campaien. Divisional Administrative Areas, in the form in which
they were visualized in visi War Ofice instructions in February, 1944 see
Chapter I, Section in the no Oneralsy adopted, but Divisional Moin-
tenance Areas, as they were more usually called, primarily took the voin
of areas allotted for the dumping of second line loads on the ground, while
the transport was employed on other tasks, and for the establishment of
the Divisional Supply Point (or Bulk Breaking Point) and the Divisional
Petrol Point. where as many units as nossible drew their reanirements with
their own first line transport.
administrative units are cited mage tha DMA but this denended on the
It often happened that a number
availability of accommodation in the whole Divisional area, and on the
Operational rôle of the units concerned
Divisions normally drew stores in divisional bulk from Corps F.M.Cs.,
of the division.
with a varying number of their R.A.S.C. companies, according to the rôle
The stores
R.A.S.C. company to operate it.
Troops in the Divisional Maintenance Area, which usually required one
were distributed to Brigades and Divisional
two or more D.M As for one division either to keep up with a rapid advance,
It was often found desirable to operate
or because road communications were restricted
This was easily effected
on a brigade basis.
the pud cotem of mintenance as compared with maintenance
of the economy in Composite Platoon personnel which resulted
281
wer
W0277/21.
27
W027//26
