Bruneval-Radio location set marked by arrow.
Re-embarkation beach in bottom right-hand corner.
L.V.T. negotiating the mud on Walcheren beaches.
From then on the tempo of work and planning increased and the Combined Operations Organisa-
tion quickly grew.
and in working out the plans.
Throughout, C.O.H.Q. played a major part in solving the multitudinous problems
tora tae area i satane it To predate die in trip and sported more pan
" a plan for re-entry into the Continent.
The J.P.S. produced their paper' in December entitled Operation
In January, 1942, the Chiefs of Staff asked
mand and Fighter Command and C.-in-C.
" i. Home Forces to examine this pa Po, coulting as necessar de, amme. Bomber atio
to threaten the enemy and ease pressure on Russia) appeared and C.-in-C. Home Forces, A.O.
C-in-C. Fighter Command and C.C.O., were directed to work on it. In April, planning for " Round-
up
was brought into line.
The Combined Commanders
All through this the naval representations, in what came to be known as the Combined
Commanders, varied and was not really clear until Admiral Ramsay was appointed Flag Officer
Expeditionary Force in May.
This was done at the request of C.C.O. in order to avoid him having
to give purely naval advice to the prejudice of his position as an impartial Combined Commander.
In June 1942, C.C.O. ceased to be a Combined Commander and the Naval C.-in-C. became third
member.
The methods employed naturally varied as the system built up.
Generally it amounted to
teams from the headquarters concerned preparing papers and plans for the Combined Commanders
who submitted their recommendations to the Chiefs of Staff. The whole set-up was clearly defined
in June, 1942, in a paper? from which date the " Round-up" Planners became a definite entity and
so remained until the appointment of C.O.S.S.A.C. in April, 1943.
References to many operations appear and disappear such as "Tinder," "Imperator,"
"Super
Round-up,
" but
the only one that remained throughout was " Round-up,
until it
became " Overlord.'
Current Work
The J.P. paper of 24th December, 1941, recommended that the study should :-
"(a) be taken now as a basis of preparation, organisation, and production by the Service
Departments ;
(b) be submitted to the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, for detailed study in conjunction
with the Special Operations Executive and also the appropriate Naval and Air Force
Commanders.
The Chiefs of Staff at their meeting on 2nd January:-
" (a) Invited the Commander-in-Chief Home Forces, in consultation with the Commander-in-
Chief, Portsmouth and the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Bomber and Fighter
Commands, to examine and comment on the report. ...
(b) Invited the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, in the light of (a) above, to prepare an
outline plan for operations on the Continent in the final phase and to review the plan
periodically with a view to being able to put it into effect if a sudden change in the
situation should appear to merit such a course.
On 24th January, G.H.Q. Home Forces submitted a report on plan " Sesame," in which the
opinion was expressed that the enemy ports in Brittany were the only worth while objectives for a
large scale raid and that this would not be possible in the spring of 1942, owing to lack of landing
craft and trained troops.
The Joint Planners in considering this report thought that effort should
be concentrated on " Round-up
" and that plans for a large scale raid should be kept up to date.
Another name that appeared at this time was "Tinder," which provided for a hasty return
against crumbling opposition in 1942."
The Chiefs of Staff at their meeting on 13th February (49th) agreed that the policy of small
raids should be pressed visorousy and agreed the following new directive to C.-in-C. Home Forces
which replaced that of November :-
"(1) German morale and strength in the West may deteriorate at any time in the future to a
degree that will permit us to establish forces on the Continent.
You are, therefore,
to plan and prepare for a return to the Continent to take advantage of such a situation.
1 C.O.S. (41), 1028 dated 24th December, 1941.
a C.O.S. (42), 306 dated 16th June, 1942.
* J.P. (41), 1028 dated 24th December, 1941.
4 J.P. (42), 124 dated 11th February, 1942.
(C52794)
WO 277/21
48
27
30
