Sheep were obtainable locally, and the force put land under cultivation
and grew its own vegetables from seed sent out.
Initial shipments of coal were sent from the United Kingdom and there-
after shipments came from South Africa.
The ration strength was 1,020 in August, 1942, 1,628 in August, 1943, and
180 in August, 1944.
The R.A.S.C. detachment was reduced in proportion
Initial stocks of P.O.L. to last at least seven months were sent out with the
force, and further supplies followed in the automatic shipment.
rug vas obtained by direct shipment from Chile, and diesel fuel from
The M.T. vehicles of the R.A.S.C. detachment were a mixed lot, including
motor-cycles, utility vans, 15-cwt. trucks, jeeps, 30-cwt. and 3-ton lorries, two
Scammell tractors with six trailers, two tippers, a trailer fire pump, and two
It was found that, owing to the absence of roads outside the
port area, and the marshy nature of the soil, only the jeeps and infantry
machine gun carriers could be used for cross-country work.
A considerable
amount of the transport work was in the removal of coal from jetty to dump or
unit lines, and in the carriage of stone for the upkeep of roads in and around
jeeps and two more tippers were
authorized by War Office in February, 1943, but owing to the decision to
relieve the force early in 1944, they were never shipped.
At the request of the War Office, in July, 1943, a reduction of R.A.S.C.
transport personnel was effected by handing over some of the
vehicles to other units who had drivers on their establishment who were not
being employed as such.
About half the R.A.S.C. vehicles were accordingly
This released the transport officer, 27 driver personnel, and six
artificer personnel, but in fact they did not leave until the force was reduced.
The original stock of spares sent with the force was found to be inadequate.
The schedules, which might have been correct in other parts of the world,
were surplus in some respects; mechanical failures requiring spares were road-
springs, half-shafts, and Ford back-axles. The supply of tyres was far in
excess of requirements.
SECTION 7.-CARIBBEAN AND BERMUDA
North Caribbean Area
Before the war, the only garrison, in what eventually became the North
Caribbean Area, was located in Jamaica; it included a R.A.S.C. detachment
for supply, transport, and barrack services.
Jamaica, the Bahamas, Leeward Isles and British Honduras.
Later, the area comprised besides
In the summer of 1939. the question of food supplies in Jamaica in case
from the United Kingdom as was the normal practice.
that sea communications between the United Kingdom and the West Indies
War Office assumed
would not be seriouslv disturhed: but. if they were the items ohtained from
440
the United Kingdom were only tea, salt, jam, butter, and
mustard, which
could be obtained locally in case of emergency.
Beside this, supplies from
Canada or the U.S.A. would have to be paid for in dollars.
It was therefore
decided that the peace system should continue.
In October, 1939, however,
bacon, oats and
bran, to be
arrangements were made
imported from North America, local contract quotations being made in
In July, 1942, the O.C. troops, Jamaica, asked War Office to arrange for
additional items to be obtained from North America, to avoid loss by enemy
action at sea on the voyage from the United Kingdom.
A serious shortage of
meat occurred in the island at this time, and was met by the War Office agree-
ing to this commodity being obtained, either direct from
U.S.A. through
B.A.S., Washington, or from local U.S. Army stocks.
was followed
shortly by B.A.S., Washington arranging to assume responsibility for supply-
ing foodstuffs to Jamaica.
All demands, thenceforth, were placed through
B.A.S. and met under Lend/Lease arrangements.
In July, 1939, Jamaica's suggestion to increase the reserve which then
stood at 60 days, with 90 days' working margin, was not accepted by War
Office, who considered the existing level adequate.
By 1941, the figure was 40 days' G.S. reserve, with 84 days' working
margin, and, in 1942, the G.S. reserve was raised to 45 days.
When B.A.S.,
assumed responsibility, they kept this latter figure, with a
further 135 days of non-perishable items not procurable locally as a working
This large stock was to be held in case of shipping being diverted
In January, 1945, the G.S. reserve in the area was
fixed at 105 days, including maintenance stocks, as an " island reserve "
to fall below 50 per cent. of that level.
A summary of the ration strengths of the area, for the month of Septem-
ber, 1940 to 1945, is at Appendix VIIIA.
R.A.S.C. Services
At the end of 1942, a new and enlarged establishment was approved for
the R.A.S.C., North Caribbean Area.
This was necessary to meet
increased work, due to the assumption by War Office of responsibility for the
local forces in Jamaica and the other colonies in the area.
The new establishment was of a composite nature, and included supply
staff, a bakery element, and M.T. personnel.
Additional provision was later
made of personnel for R.A.S.C. duties in the outlying colonies, including a
subaltern for the Leeward Isles, a Warrant Officer, Class I, for
Honduras, and seven other ranks for these and the Bahamas.
The R.A.S.C. supply staff carried out, in this area, numerous duties which
did not fall on a C.S.D. at home.
tional load on the remaining personnel.
In addition, sickness threw a heavy addi-
were consequently working with very little margin indeed.
The R.A.S.C. services in the area
spite of the urgent recommendations of various senior R.A.S.C. officers, no
further increases were allowed.
tively.
There were three ration scales, for British, natives and internees, respec-
The British were fed on the peace-time system.
