A number of craft were operated during the war on an inter-island
service, the vessels being administered by the R.A.S.C. establishments until
June, 1944, when a Water Transport Company was formed.
This had become
necessary, owing to the difficulty of obtaining civilian crews, and the use of
military crews consequently being essential.
There was no War Department cold storage in Jamaica, or in the other
islands. A civilian store was hired in Jamaica.
The War Department bakery in Kingston, Jamaica, was capable of
maximum daily output of 14,000 lb.
Bread supply in the other islands was
Up to the end of 1942, there was no R.A.S.C. M.T. in the area beyond one
pre-war W.D. ambulance in Jamaica.
An establishment for an M.T. section
consisting of 13 vehicles was then approved, and
personnel were enlisted and
Otherwise, transport was hired, apart from unit transport
and a little animal transport in Jamaica.
In Jamaica, petrol was obtained by contract, which arranged for the con-
tractor to hold a reserve of 10,000 gallons.
In addition, the R.A.S.C. held
5,000 gallons in tanks.
Gas-oil fuel for defence electric light equipment was obtained by local
contract, one year's reserve being maintained.
Lubricants were also provided
by local contract. This was not altogether satisfactory as military needs had
to compete against civil requirements.
In British Honduras and the Bahamas, supply of P.O.L. was also by
contract, a reserve of 1,000 gallons being held in the Bahamas.
Barrack services operated in Jamaica in the normal way.
were erected in British Honduras, the Bahamas, and the Leeward Islands, the
system was brought into operation in those stations as well.
South Caribbean Area
S.T. and B. Services-Organization
Until early in 1941, the garrison in what subsequently became the South
Caribbean Area consisted of local forces, and there were no organized
supply, transport and barrack services.
Two R.A.S.C. officers, one for supply duties, were then sent out, with
instructions to submit recommendations of the staff required for the per-
formance of these services.
The O.C., Troops, Trinidad, at once decided that full R.A.S.C. services
should be instituted for both Imperial and local forces, in the form of a
supply and transport corps and barrack services, to be raised from personnel
of the Trinidad Volunteers.
It was considered impossible to form and
train this organization from native personnel unless the principal admini-
strative positions were filled by experienced R.A.S.C. men.
ment, which was to be reduced in due course, was accordingly approved to
train the local troops in R.A.S.C. duties.
time as the scope of the duties in the area widened.
This was increased from time to
At last, in June, 1944,
an establishment was promulgated, of a composite nature, including a H.O.
section, M.T. section, transport office, barracks, and supplies, and also
sections for duty in the various outlying locations.
R.A.S.C. Duties
Owing to the wide dispersion of the different components of the area,
which eventually included
Trinidad, Barbados,
Isles, and Leeward Isles, the work of the R.A.S.C. was very much compli-
In addition, the organization suffered from having been built up
from nothing; the initial establishment and subsequent increments were all
too small, and amendments were made too late.
Even the small establish-
ment allowed was not kept up to strength, and, in 1944, two officers out
of seven, and five O.Rs. out of 16, were deficient.
United Kingdom.
He performed three distinct functions.
He controlled
supply stocks and was responsible for formulating demands. He commanded
the Area Supply Depot at Port of Spain.
He acted as C.P.O. in arranging
the replenishment of 11 supply units (two in Trinidad, one in British Guiana,
and eight in the Islands).
To assist him, he had only three British N.C.Os.
and nine coloured personnel.
One subaltern covered all R.A.S.C. services for the Leeward and Wind-
ward Isles, comprising seven separate garrisons, and carried out
Even by air, he could not visit any island in less
than a week's round trip, and was often held up by weather for two or three
He had only two coloured other ranks to assist him, and consequently
had to do most of his own office work. He had to pay cash for all local
purchases, hire vehicles, and charter shipping space.
Until 1941, the original colonial system of subsistence allowances was
Then a crude system of rationing was introduced, in Trinidad
only. All supplies were obtained by local contract, but there was a reserve
of 90 days' biscuit and M. and V. ration, provided and turned over by the
United Kingdom.
The only other reserve was one of 28 days, held by con-
tractors, providing commodities were available.
unsatisfactory, as,
This method was entirely
to shipping difficulties, contractors
always meet their liabilities, and the reserve was sometimes non-existent.
Control of the supply of foodstuffs was in the hands of a civil food
controller, whose authority had to be obtained before supplies could be
bought for the Army. The R.A.F. Detachment was rationed by the U.S.
When B.A.S., Washington, in 1942, assumed responsibility for the South
Caribbean Area, instructons were issued for demands to be made on B.A.S.
for all commodities not locally produced.
Action was taken to construct a
supply depot at Trinidad, to hold a 45 days' reserve, and 90 days'
margin. No supply depot of any kind had existed hitherto.
In August, 1943, a G.S. reserve of 45 days, with 135 days' working margin,
was held for the area.
This reserve was changed to an " island reserve '
105 days in January, 1945, to cover maintenance stocks which were to be the
responsibility of Area H.Q., the reserve not being allowed to fall below
50 per cent. of that figure.
The figure of the ration strength in the South Caribbean Area stood at
about 250 British, and 3,600 native in 1943-1944.
443
