Control of Tank Transporter Units
the advance,
A system of control of tank transport or units as developed die
on the following lines.
In order to avoid duplication d
demands, and multiplicity of orders, the whole movement of tank to
porters, except tactical in battle, was controlled by the General Sal,
through the C.R.A.S.C., Tank Transporter Column.
The recognized chi
of supply was: -
(a) Railhead or seahead to Tank Reorganization Centre, under Ar
(b) Tank Reorganization Centre to Tank Delivery Squadrons, und
Corps.
(c) Tank Delivery Squadrons to Brigades or Regiments, under Division.
In these operations, however, in order not to waste time in tran
ferring loads, normal replacement tanks were loaded at Tobruk and caril
straight through to delivery points.
During the battle for the Mareth line,
the first stage was from Tobruk to Tripoli (963 miles), the second and third
together to Medenin (177 miles).
The total run of 1,140 miles took a
22-day turn-round, transporters resting,
where possible, at the most co.
venient tank transporter company camp, and using each other's workship
tacintles
C.R.A.S.C.,
Column, established a sub-H.Q. at Tobruk and &
the delivery area, and was in touch by wireless with each company. Or
company was located at Medenin, and three at the Tank Reorganizatio
Centre, with
three farther back.
There were thus four companies readiy
available for reinforcement,
tactical, or recovery duties with the forward
troops.
Employment of L. of C. Transport Columns
The following is a description of the method adopted in 30 Cops
throughout the operations in Libya and Tunisia,
for the employment a
its three Headquarters, L. of C. Transport Columns.
One column H.Q.
talled the loading and decratch of all CT commaniag in arcordance wit
was located at the Forward Base,
where it con
a standard daily
maintenance tonnage
between Army and Corps.
Variations in the standard pack were notes
by Corps to the column commander.
General transport companies were not allotted any specific loads c
roles by D.D.S.T., a sufficient number of companies,
allowing for tun
round and tonnage factors, having
forward hoot EMCDetaile de loade were diven to OeC compamies ly
been made available to operate fros
The second column H.Q. was located at an intermediate point along the
movement back to rear column
forward to S.T. corps.
ing station, where supply to second line is by rail.
The duties in fact were sin ta to those of a reali
The third column H.Q. was located well forward, and controlled mov
directing tread ra the proper RMC
This H.Q. also arranged and issued orders for back-loading.
An additional function of all such column H.Q:
was the control of
workshops and M.T. first-aid repair
the top workshon platoone often had to be cares le sited. on advanced
workshop was establi plat the forward to be the min. ea, near F.M.C.
208
and a rear workshop near the seahead or railhead.
These were formed
cher by detaching sections from several unit workshops, of by selecting
one or more companies' workshop platoons.
Wireless Communication
Pre-war Training Manuals envisaged the use of motor-cycles for inter-
communication between CRAS and transport companies; but it was
soon found that this did not
provide an adequate system for control,
that wireless telephony
was the only practicable method.
For some time,
technical considerations made the allotment of W/IT sets to R.A.S.C.
units
impracticable.
Operations in the Western Desert showed that owing to the
distances involved, the use of motor-cycles was inadequate, and as a result
each Transport Column H.Q. was issued with a set from Army or Corps
pool.
The following comment
was made in the pamphlet dealing with the
lessons of the campaign in October and November, 1942:-
"The operations have shown that, in the fast-moving modern battle,
an efficient and flexible system of wireless inter-communication is an
essential part of the
S.T. organization of modern forces.
After the
break-through, the advance
was so rapid that line communication
could not be maintained.
Many detailed orders concerning troop-
lifting from rear to front, rapid despatch of petrol, ammunition, and
supplies to newly opened areas, changed requirements for operating
Corps, etc., have to be notified to supply and transport terminal points
quickly, and the importance to an advancing army of the supply and
transport link cannot be overstressed."
Supplies
In the previous campaigns,
the battle ration had been considered the
basis of supply, and troops had sometimes lived on this hard fare for
months on end.
In this final campaign, however,
" O" Staff of formations
did not insist on the use of the battle ration, and from the start of the
olensive insist on the use made to keep, the rations up to the full Middle
East Field Service scale, and to issue fresh rations whenever possible.
Fresh meat and fresh bread were provided for as many as
possible as
far forward as possible.
vided occad as possible. Frozen min the railhead area; and the cold storage
Frozen meat was railed daily to Tobruk, and pro-
plant at Benghazi was brought into use.
Maintenance of supply of this
commodity by sea was never satisfactory, owing to the shortage of suitable
shipping, the only large ship being completely unreliable.
Two field bakeries
were sent to Tobruk in November.
When Tripoli came into full operation as a seahead and advanced base,
the frozen meat prob in wall simplied to some extent, as cold stosage
capacity was found blem, was sin was possible to discharge a large ship
partly at Malta, and to take the balance at Tripoli.
Fresh fruit and potatoes were
shipped from Egypt to Tripoli, and,
although it proved impossible to ship
vegetables satisfactorily, local sup-
plies were obtained at Benghazi and Tripoli.
Where it was not practicable to issue the frach items on the Field
Service scale the alternative preserved ration scale proved completely satis-
factory from the mintee wiew of the maintenance of the health of the
209
Mars micro 0.5mm
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
