In August, 1941, War Office gave instructions that reserves would be
built up to 300 days, but this was easier said than done.
In satisfaction
of a demand for 640 items on Middle East, two small packages were received,
the remainder having been shut out at the port of shipment.
The main difficulty was provision of spares for impressed
Cannibalization and improvisation were carried out
extensively, to keep
vehicles on the road at all costs.
Priority demands for shipment by sub-
marine were submitted, and a small quantity of stores was received from
Middle East in this way.
Good stocks, particularly of tyres and tubes, were handed over to the
In view of the damage caused by bombing, provision should have been
made for the underground storage of spares, but air-conditioning would
Two of the five stores were demolished, and about
5 per cent. of the holdings were lost.
Petroleum products were classified as "combined items",
were demanded, imported, and stored, by the Government of the Colony.
The primary call on all storage was on behalf of the Royal Navy, though this
monopoly was later shared with the R.A.F.
In the light of after-events,
it is apparent that a central authority should have been entrusted before
the war with the task of planning and providing storage.
tanks, with a total capacity of 72,000 gallons,
July, 1940, for the Army, and were ready for use in April, 1941, when they
were taken over by the Government.
The can-filling plant was located
several miles from the bulk storage tanks, and came into use in June, 1941.
The lack of bulk storage for M.T. had resulted in the whole of the island's
requirements of this fuel being imported in 4-gallon non-returnable tins, or
barrels, the contents being decanted into kerb-side tanks to save loss by
After the initial expansion of Army P.O.L. holdings at the beginning
of the war, R.A.S.C. responsibilities in this direction dwindled, and activities
were confined to the receipt and issue of day-to-day requirements.
Petrol rationing for the whole island was introduced in August, 1940,
the weekly allotment to the Army being 14,000 gallons.
This allotment
afterwards fluctuated according to the stock position on the Island; thus, in
November, 1942, when stocks were down to 11 days, the allotment was
only 6,000 gallons.
This rationing made it necessary to reduce the use of M.T. as much as
possible, and horse transport was used to a considerable extent, 300 carts
a month being employed. In August, 1942, direct delivery of supplies to
units by R.A.S.C., M.T. was stopped.
Units within two miles of D.I.Ds.
drew their rations in horse-drawn carts, and for the remainder supply routes
were arranged, with a number of supply points on each.
delivered at the latter, where bulk was broken, units collecting in horse
transport. This modification of the system of issue saved 1,200 gallons of
416
Effect of Campaigns in Africa and Sicily
immediate relief to the island,
The advance of the Eighth Army from El Alamein to Benghazi brought
while the campaign in North
enabled stocks to be replenished to the
Africa opened the shipping route from
For four or five
The restocking of the island involved very heavy transport commitments.
months, vehicles of
assisted by those of other
arms, worked day
the road for inspection and maintenance.
transport companies,
12-hour shifts each.
and night, and were only off
Two drivers to each vehicle worked
The part played by Malta was not entirely passive, and it made a
definite contribution to the mounting and maintenance of the Sicily campaign.
On the supply side, this included taking in and holding a stock of 3,200
tons of supplies; the subsistence of 30,000 personnel, the advanced elements
of the Eighth Army and the Desert Air Force; the despatch to Sicily of
the reserve supplies; and the supply of 18,000 lb. of bread to the force in
Sicily daily from 22nd July to 13th August. All units of the invasion force
arriving in Malta were supposed to bring with them all rations required
for the initial assault, together with a reserve of disinfectants, but owing to
various causes, many units arrived deficient of some or all of the items con-
The majority of these deficiencies were made up from local stocks.
Voyage rations had to be placed on the craft to be used for ferrying
assault troops, but it was useless to issue F.S. rations, as no cooking could
be done on the craft, apart from boiling water.
To meet this commitment,
a scale for a 25-man pack was devised.
This was chosen because 25
suitable rations were easily issued in a convenient form of two sandbags
and one tin. The contents of the pack are described in Appendix IX.
In order to meet these increased supply commitments, additional supply
units were required.
Two D.I.Ds., one section of a third, and a Field
Bakery, were accordingly sent from Middle East.
The Field Bakery went
on to Italy after August, 1943.
A.F.H.Q. repeatedly urged, during the autumn of 1943, that one DID.
should be released from Malta for employment in 15 Army Group in Italy.
It was, however, fully employed in connection with the shipping of supplies
to Eighth Army in Sicily, and would also be required to help receive supplies
expected in Malta. Eventually it was released in January, 1944.
The building up of the stocks for the Sicilian campaign was also a
busy time for the transport, but two Palestinian G.T. companies were sant
This activity was followed by the arrival of the troops, who had
o be conveved to the various camps throughout the island and later taken
for re-embarkation.
Then came the re-loading of daily maintenance and
Other transport sent to help
other requirements called forward for Sicily.
ncluded one platoon of , Bulk Petrol Transport Compan emploved under
ordere of the Roval Navy in refuellino landing reft on the "Hards": and
30 ambulances operated by one platoon of a G.T. company for the evacua-
tion of sick and wounded brought from Sicily.
In 1943. the G.S. reserve was standing at 210 days, with no actual
vorking margin, owing to tholoved underuation though this was normally
regarded as being 60 davs. In the middle of that year, the G.S. reserve was
417
(37452)
