The problem of shipment to the Islands was that the capacity of the
available vessels was too large, yet the shipping authorities were unwilling
to route a ship to any port without a full cargo.
Apart from Madagascar,
the regular replenishment of other ports could only be economically effected
by means of small coastwise shipping.
This method was unsatisfactory, and
points in the Islands were only maintained by shipping full cargoes, far
in excess of requirements, which was all right from the shipping point of
view, but not from that of those responsible for P.O.L., as containers rusted
very quickly and leakage losses were heavy.
The source of supply to Somaliland was Aden, which was not in the
command, and the only inlet Berbera, which had inadequate harbour facilities,
and where excessive ferrying, handling, and a long haul inland, produced
constant labour and leakage problems.
Many P.O.L. problems were solved when the War Office reduced the
reserve figure from 90 to 45 days plus 30 days' working margin.
Turnover
especially was eased.
The command reserve had been 5,000,000 gallons on
the War Office basis for 10,000 vehicles; but, owing to the impossibility of
even partial turnover, cased stocks had lain untouched for two years, with
consequent leakage and risk of deterioration.
It was now possible to start
a programme of liquidating some reserve dumps and to put 14 million gallons
into local consumption.
disappeared.
In this way difficulties of storage and leakage
Supply Situation, 1943-1944
There had been difficulties over supplies, too, but in this case the reserve
had been fully justified.
In 1943, the G.S. reserve was 90 days with 60 days'
working margin.
War Office had insisted on the full reserve being held as
a measure of safety against completely unforeseen circumstances. This proved
fortunate, as, during 1943, the command experienced droughts, cyclones,
foot and mouth disease, and locusts, resulting in the failure of the maize and
rice crops and the breakdown of the fresh meat supply.
This made necessary
large import programmes, which took some time to arrange.
Nevertheless, at the beginning of 1944, East Africa suggested reducing
the scale of reserves.
The policy of the command as to the utilization and
development of local products, together with the difficulties experienced in
the turnover of tinned equivalents, were factors in the assessment of the
reserve figure. The War Office therefore agreed, on the understanding that
the reduced reserve would cover all contingencies, to certain items-M. and
V. ration, maize, dried peas and beans, groundnuts, and tinned vegetables-
being reduced to a lower level.
A year later, the figure was fixed at 60 days'
G.S. reserve, and 60 days' working margin.
A summary of the ration strength of the Command as in September each
year from 1940 to 1944, is in Appendix VIIIA.
S.T. 6 and 7 were not responsible for the supply of coal to East Africa,
but kept a close watch on the stock states of the railway companies, as
the East African forces were largely dependent on the railways.
The actual
supplies for the latter were controlled by the Ministry of War Transport,
which shipped about 30,000 tons a month to East Africa, and kept S.T.,
War Office, informed as to stocks.
404
30°.
-15°
Bara
MAP No 6
RIES
200 MILES
SOCOTRA
0 F
