In planning for the campaign against the Japanese in the Far East, which
it was ernested wanld follow the end of the war in Europe, it was appreciated
that supply by air would assume greater proportions than it had done in the
European theatre.
In consequence it was expected that the majority o
R.A.S.C. units, whether located on the L. of C. or in the forward areas, would
require to be familiar with the principles and practice of packing and reception
supplies by air; and the policy was adopted that all divisional R.A.S.C
should be trained in the principles and organization of airportable divisions.
Airborne Divisional R.A.S.C.
The airborne divisional R.A.S.C. as at first conceived in May, 1942
when the formation of this tune of division was being considered, had the
(a) Maintenance of the division, and supply of all second line scales
commodities on wheels when the formation was " grounded ».
(b) in the event of active operations in the United Kingdom, to carry ou
the same tasks as any other divisional R.A.S.C. company;
(e) by virtue of its particular rôle, to be responsible for the carriage and
delivery of all commodities to numerous airfields and for the skill
task of loading freight-carrying aircraft and gliders.
be divided into two stages: -
(i The initial loading of the airborne force, before the operation
(i) the subsequent distribution to airfields, and loading of all supplies
to the force, up to the maximum of six days.
It was expected that these tasks would be made more difficult by enemy
counter-air action,
necessitating wide dispersion and the use of a large
number of airfields.
The standard War Establishment was not generally applicable to the re
quirement, without numerous modifications, increments, etc.
In view of the rôle of the company, and particularly in view of the points
referred to in (c) above, it was not considered that the functions of the non-
airborne portion of the company should be carried out by the general podl
of transport at the disposal of G.H.Q., home forces.
Airborne Divisional Composite Company
A special War Establishment was therefore designed, for an Airbone
Divisional Composite Company, R.A.S.C., organized in two wings, an At-
borne, and a Non-Airborne.
The former comprised part of company HO.
an airborne transport platoon, parts of the composite platoon and of the
workshop platoon, and one relief driver increment.
The non-airborne wit
consisted of the balance of company H.Q., and of the composite and workch
platoons, together with four transport platoons, each of standard composit
and equipped with 3-ton lorries.
The airborne transport platoon (called at first the Blitz Buggy, i.e, Jop
Platoon), was organized in a headquarters and seven sections,
latter comprising five jeeps.
The platoon included a defence section of
aircraft and anti-tank guns.
drivers, to man three L.M.Gs.. five anti-tank rifles, and three 20-mm. adi
96
The initial intention was that each jeep should tow one 10-cwt. trailer,
but it was later proposed that each of the 32 load-carrying jeeps should pull
two trailers in tandem, in order to increase the lift.
Some doubt as to the
wisdom of this method was expressed by the technical experts, on the grounds
that prolonged towing would have serious effects on the towing vehicle, and
that difficulties would arise over braking on hills, and on greasy surfaces.
There was no objection to towing in tandem over short distances in an
emergency.
As the result of tests, however, using the Ford car (and not the
Willys, which was more powerful), it was decided that no serious difficulties
would arise, and 64 trailers were accordingly added to the establishment.
Reorganization in Three Companies
This establishment was tentative and provisional, and, in the light of
subsequent experience, revision was necessary.
The non-airborne wing of the
company, which had no R.D.Is., as these had been used to provide the airborne
wing, was continuously employed on normal transport duties for the division,
at the expense of vehicle maintenance and training.
The airborne divisional
R.A.S.C. was reorganized in
March, 1943, in three companies, i.e., two
ordinary composite companies and one light composite company.
The ad-
vantages of this arrangement were that each company could be trained
separately in its particular rôle, especially the light company, the personnel of
which had to be free from other duties.
While one composite company carried
on the routine work of the division, the other could be trained in the work of
packing and loading supplies, which was part of their rôle; and, if the division
was committed operationally, one composite company could carry on the
packing and loading for the maintenance of the formation, while the other
went to relieve the light company in the new theatre.
The composite companies were each composed of three transport platoons,
three R.D.Is., a composite platoon, and a workshop platoon.
The light com-
posite company consisted of four airborne transport platoons, two R.D.Is., a
composite platoon and a workshop platoon.
Each airborne transport platoon
consisted of seven sections, each of five jeeps and ten trailers.
The workshop
platoon of this company had the innovation of trailers, instead of 3-ton lorries,
for the carriage of its equipment and stores, on the scale of two for stores,
one machinery, one generator, and one electrical repair.
Each transport
platoon in the light company included a defence section of 17 other ranks.
A
total of 25 all ranks of the light company were operational parachutists.
A H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., was now included in the establishment of the airborne
division.
There had not until this time been a R.A.S.C. representative on the
divisional H.Q., although the administrative detail, both planning and execu-
tive, for an airborne and air-maintained force was of greater complexity than
for a normal division.
Reorganization of Light Composite Company
In April, 1944, the establishment of the airborne light composite company
was again altered.
As the result of operations in the Central Mediterranean
theatre and elsewhere, as well as of a careful study of the maintenance problems
of an airborne division, it was considered possible to relate an efficient organi-
zation to actual requirements.
97
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
