It was clear that 'Torch' could only be a slap and not the first of a series of punches.
The purpose was to get a force together of sufficient magnitude somehow and get it away
secretly to date.
That this force started mounting in September, 1942, and carried out the
operation in November, 1942, was in itself an extraordinary
piece of work, and was only
achieved by the relatively independent efforts of every individual responsible.
not time for tidy co-ordination.
The result of this
There was
showed itself in considerable wastage
in material and a rapid fall in the availability of craft in the U.K."
The Effect of "Torch" on the Combined Operations Organisation
It became apparent before the expedition sailed that " Torch" had put a most severe strain
on all Combined Operations resources.
its own appendices, at Appendix 11.
The summary of its conclusions was :—
(1) "Torch" had taken more landing craft than C.C.O. could produce crews, and numbers
have had to be made up from other R.N. resources.
(2) The standard of training of a large part of the craft crews and assault forces was not high
enough for a tough or protracted assault.
(3) So large a part of the Naval Combined Operations Command had been given up to
"Torch
" that it would not be possible to train an adequate new force before the
summer of 1943.
(4) The early formation of a Naval Raiding Force was an essential prerequisite for any re-entry
into the Continent, and it must be given regular fighting experience.
Manning of Landing Ships and Craft
The situation regarding the provision of crews for landing ships and craft had become critical.
The planning of amphibious operations, which were proposed for 1943, was proceeding and the pro-
duction programme of landing ships and craft required for these operations had been accelerated.
The intake of naval personnel had, however, been restricted by a War Cabinet decision to the
extent that it was quite impossible to meet the normal Fleet commitments and at the same time
provide the rapidly increasing numbers of men for the manning of combined operations ships and
craft.
The only possible solution was to increase the intake into the Navy, a difficult matter in view
of the War Cabinet's ruling.
Admiral Mountbatten, therefore, decided to make a direct approach to Mr. Bevin, the Minister
of Labour, on the question. The Minister explained that the reason for the restriction on the naval
intake was because every possible man was required for the Army for the invasion of France.
However, he appreciated that if it was not possible to man the invasion fleet, the Army would be
unable to reach the Continent. Under these circumstances he said he would regard crews to take
the soldiers to France as part of the necessary manpower for the 'Army, and give directions
accordingly that C.C.O. should be given all the men needed for " Overlord."
Formation of Force " J"
The ships and craft, which had taken part in Operation " Jubile," were kept together in the
Solent area under the command of Captain J. Hughes-Hallett.
The five L.S.I.(S) had to be employed ferrying landing craft required for " Torch" from the
south to the north coasts. Also the landing ships (stern chute) were likewise employed on this
duty.
permanent basis.
As recorded earlier, it was obvious that this organisation of ships and craft should be on
eing on 12th October, 1942.
This was agreed between the Admiralty and C.C.O., and Force " J" came into
Squadron, which was commissioned as H.M.S. Vectis.
planning and execution of Operations " Rutter" and " Jubilee."
pf fats on the seafront which had been originally requisitioned as Combined Headquarters for the
Operation " Round-up" and " Overlord."
rat was intended that this force should form a prototype for other assault forces to be used in
In the meantime it was ready for further raids or
operations at short notice. As it was a considerable naval force, it was fortunate in that berthing
could be found in the Solent.
The L.S. T.s lay off Cowes and the L.C.T.s were moored in the
Beaulieu River off Exbury House which had already been commissioned as H.M.S. Mastodon.
The remainder berthed in the Hamble River off HI.M.S. Tormentor.
The Solent was excellent for
training,
as in its sheltered water it provided strong cross-tides and any form of beach that
was required.
The next step taken by the C.C.O. was to send a memorandum to the Chiefs of Staff, urging
the formation of further similar forces.
The text of the memorandum is as follows :—
NEED FOR THE FORMATION OF NAVAL ASSAULT FORCES
Memorandum by the Chief of Combined Operations
(S.R. 982/42, dated 16.11.42.)
(1) Of the many lessons learnt at Dieppe, the Force Commanders of that operation agree with
me that the second most important lesson, next to the need for Naval Support fire, is the
following :—
" For any amphibious campaign involving assaults on strongly defended coasts held
by a determined enemy, it is essential that the landing ships and craft required for the
assaults shall be organised well in advance into Naval Assault Forces.
These must have
a coherence and degree of permanence comparable to that of any first line fighting formations.
The need for discipline,
morale, tactical integration and flexibility and professional
competence, are not disputed in the case of troops, war vessels and air formations.
Precisely
the same applies to assault ships and craft."
(2) Against half-hearted opposition, it is, of course,
possible to mount an operation like
" Torch'
and with very few rehearsals carry it out successfully.
Against serious German opposition
such as was encountered at Dieppe, a very highly trained naval force is needed.
(3) In fact, I postponed the operations because rehearsals showed the naval force was
insufficiently trained in the assault stages, and, in all, the " Jubilee" force was kept in being and
trained for a period of 13 weeks.
Force) The constalty have now agreed that the force should be reconstituted as a permanent
" consisting initially of :-
1 River gunboat,
7 L.S.I. carrying L.C.A. and L.C.S. (M.),
48 L.C.1.
6 L.C.F. (L.),
72 L.C.P.,
4 M.L.
4. 70-ft. M.G.B.,
1 M.T.B.
The longer this force remains in being, the tougher the problem which it can tackle.
of craft " on paper
fighting experience of this kind.
(7) On this more rational system of reckoning, and having regard to other strategic requirements
now contemplated, the possibility of obtaining a simultaneous assault lift for five British Assault
Divisions in the U.K. early in 1944 as recently postulated by the Combined Commanders, is
exceedingly remote.
join up with Force " J" itself.
WO 277/21
27
30
