At the same time as considering internal adjustments to meet this requirement, I think
it is necesary to deine how my duties should be carried out on occasions of my absence,
such as my recent illness.
Ortet an earnin the Sa hot pron after, in ed ande Air Vice-Sarhal
Their present titles, in
accordance with
ostrictions, are respectively Vice, Deputy and Assistant Chief of Combined Operations.
your original
In addition to these
Pilot who held an R.A.F.
General Wildman-
The man Loint an and Eidicutival the ite Helet the Chairmanship of Major.
and individually the three Heads of Services act as Chiefs of
Staff in respect of their own Services.
In order to make their authority quite clear and at the same time to remove an apparent
Crating to Kilty Che at Star At oil eatened to earn and At Chiet ol
Stall: Flag Olicer, Combined Operations and Naval Chief of Staff; and to leave Wildman-
Lashington's title as Chief of Stait, Combined Operations.
iscretion with all matters concerning their own Service
the more important decisions, but need not consult me beforehand unless the matter is con-
troversial or one on which they know me to be personally concerned.
Matters affecting more than one Service will be referred to me as necessary at the fina!
tage through the Chief of Staft
place.
I request your approval of the above proposals.
(Signed) LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN,
Chief of Combined Operations."
The Prime Minister's reply to this letter was as follows :-
"C.C.O.
Approved, but pray take care to maintain the position of the C.C.O. and his Command
intact.
I trust that the integrity of the Inter-Service Organisation of C.O.H.Q. will be preserved
and that the reorganisation will not split your Staff too rigidly into their separate Services.
(initialled) W. S. C.
1.5.43."
Conference " Rattle"
With the appointment on 13th April, 1943, of the Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Com-
ander (C.O.S.S.A.C.) a new authority had been given the task of planning the re-entry into the
Continent. The C.C.O. knew full well the difficulties which C.O.S.S.A.C. would come up against
nd gave every assistance which he could provide from his Command. After personal discussion with
O.SS.A.C., he suggested to the Chiefs of Staff that a Study Period should be organised at Larg
where all the high ranking offcers engaged in the planning could study the matter in an atmosphere
removed from that of Whitehall and have access to the establishments which were daily concerned
with the training and development of combined operations technique.
the code name " Rattle."
This conference was given
peth a in un at the hang the chi stuy Sat an in the metie, of their
Deers, who cos now commanding the United States Forces in the Buropean Theatre, asked if he
and his stafi could take part. This request was cordially ascepted auropean the study Period at
once became not only an Inter-Services but an Inter-Allied meeting.
* C.O.S. (43) 123rd (0), dated 11th June, 1943.
60
techier haperor the reco. the Con a very as to e revie and a tie to tad that ery
were examined, together with demonstrations of new equipment.
(1) The German defensive system.
The agenda incladed :-
2) The mounting of the operation-assembly and embarkation of forces.
(3) The naval aspect of the operation prior to the actual assault-fighting instructions
the cross-Channel voyage navigational problems.
(4) The air aspect of the operation. Preliminary bombing-use of airborne forces - delay
of enemy resources.
) The assault special weapons naval bombardment-air bombardment — the fire figh
day and night assaul
and equipment.
-engineer problemsallocation of craft-scales of personnel
6) Administrative aspects of the build-up, including movements and maintenance.
(7) The follow-up and build-up.
(8) Effect of the system of command and control on the Combined Signal Organisation.
(9) Technical developments and special equipment.
(10) Training problems.
The question of the strategy to be employed was not considered as it was felt that this would
depend to a large extent on the impressions formed by the officers who would have to prepare
the plans and put them into execution.
The Conference began on 28th June and lasted till 2nd July.
At all the meetings of the conference the C.C.O. acted as Chairman. A list of the Senior Officers
present gives a good idea of the representative nature and scope of the subjects discussed:-
Admiral Sir Charles Little, Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth.
General Sir Bernard Paget, Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces.
Lt.-General F. E. Morgan, C.O.S.S.A.C.
Air Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh Mallory, C.-in-C. Fighter Command.
Lt.-General J. L. Devers, C.G., E.T.O.U.S.A.
Lt.-General A. G. L. MacNaughton, G.O.C. Canadian Corps.
These were accompanied by staff officers from their Commands; and representatives from the
Admiralty,
War Office and Air Ministry attended throughout, with of course the appropriate
members of the C.O.H.Q. Staff.
itle of C.O. (R) 1 to 24 and embodied in the record of the Conference
Theo. 1 to 24 and am odictim there cordo the papers e (... (25, da ted uy, 15 t).
Finally the C.C.O. addressed a report of the conference to the Secretary of the Chiefs of Staff
Committee which runs as follows :—
Conference " Rattle"
" 1. The object of Conference ' Rattle' was to study the problems in Combined Opera-
tions involved in Operation ' Overlord.
.. The subjects dealt with at this Conference were discussed against the backgroun
of the German defences and dispositions as they exist to-day,
he Conference full
appreciated, however, that the eventual plan may have to be put into effect against a lesser
degree of opposition or a lower state of morale than that which exist now, and that this
may also involve an advance on the present target date.
The C.-in-C. Portsmouth
suggests
that Operation ' Rankin' is for such a contingency.
Commanders-in-Chief and the Chief
of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander were impressed with the necessity for ensuring
that all our preparations for 'Overlord' would take into account this possibility.
special attent on three hito starring from the Conference to which I would invite the
4. Firstly, the strength of the enemy defences and the limitations imposed on the degree
of supporting fire, which can be brought to bear during the landing,
are such that it will
obviously be essential to subject the area of the assault to the most intense bombardment
beforehand.
This bombardment will probably have to be carried out over a considerable period of
time and it appears that it must mainly be done by the R.A.F.
1 C.R. 7127/43, dated. 7th July, 1943.
61
41/57
WO 217/21
27
