work.
This totalled about 265 W.D. load-carriers, and 320 vehicles provided
by the Road Haulage Organization.
The R.A.S.C. transport organization could not, with its existing resources,
accept any further commitment for clearance by road from ordnance depots
unless use was made of transport units at the disposal of 21 Army Group,
which were specifically released from administrative tasks in order to improve
their training.
this connection, see Chapter XII, Section 2.
In these
circumstances,
only a negligible contribution could be made by road trans-
port to the reduction of rail traffic as proposed.
There was, however, already a very acute rail congestion and shortage
of wagons, and it was urgently necessary to afford the railways relief, at
any rate in respect of short rail traffic hauls.
With this object in view, the
existing orders for the control and use of W.D. transport were modified as a
temporary measure, so as to permit a greater use of road transport.
The allocation of traffic for W.D. services, as between rail and road, was
the responsibility of Movements branch in commands, in consultation with
S.T., as described in Chapter XII, Section 2.
Lift of C. (M) T. Companies Increased
The utmost use was ordered to be made of W.D. vehicles operated by
C. (M) T. Companies, so as to reduce demands on the Road Haulage Organi-
zation if the M.O.W.T. wished to transfer the R.H.O. resources, so released,
for use in the areas where the railways were congested.
Close co-operation
with M.O.W.T. officials and the R.H.O. was enjoined, to implement' the
arrangements to the fullest advantage.
These measures proved inadequate, and in April, 1944, the M.O.W.T.
asked War Office to expand the military load-carrying capacity for adminis-
trative traffic in the United Kingdom, in order to alleviate the general inland
transport situation by reducing demands on both rail and civil road trans-
port resources, for W.D. administrative services.
The position was conse-
quently examined, and it was found that, by a drastic curtailment of no-
operational activities and reduction of the internal administrative require
ments of command (mixed) transport companies to the barest minimum, the
load-carrying capacity of these units could be increased by about 10 per
cent. without the provision of additional personnel.
This meant the use of
N.C.Os., spare drivers, and administrative personnel,
man additional
issued to certain C. (M T. companies. so as to provide un to one additional
Accordingly, a total of about 1,000 additional 3-ton lorries was
platoon each in excess of establishments.
The intention was that the provision of these vehicles would enable more
flexibility to be introduced into the C. (M) T.
the transfer of
company organization, and
between commands as might be found necessary in the immediate future, to
manned vehicles, in complete transport platons,
meet abnormal transport de a found necessare mounting commands.
arrangement was only intended to anply for the period of mounting an
initial maintenance of " Overlord".
additional strain on the units concerned which had no corresponding increase
It imposed, of course, a considerable
of supervisory or workshop personnel to help them carry it.
A number of
these platoons continued in existence until the end of the war and after.
324
Transport Requirements for Mounting " Overlord»
The total additional transport requirements of mounting commands were
ive platoons of load-carriers and twelve platoons of troop-carriers, to siors
two platoons of load-carriers as War Office reserve.
Against this,
the non-
mounting commands could make eleven platoons of load-carriers available,
and fifteen platoons of troop-carriers could be produced as five emergency
companies from the resources of training establishments.
The troop-carrying transport was required for troop movements onwards
from concentration areas, 21 Army Group having undertaken
troop-carrying transport for the move into concentration areas from its own
resources.
There was a special troop-carrying lift of nine platoons of 3-ton
lorries for moving the airborne division to the airfields at which it would
emplane.
It was at first agreed to meet this from late-phased General Trans-
port Companies of 21 Army Group; but, in view of the fact that waterproofing
might make this impracticable, the commitment was ultimately provided for
from the resources of three Reserve Divisions.
The employment of Home Guard M.T. companies for part of the move-
ment of troops onward from concentration areas was considered; but it
would have involved mustering the Home Guard, and it was decided not to
do this.
G.T. companies of 21 Army Group would not be available, as they
would be under load.
In order to relieve the strain on the command transport resources as much
as possible, the policy was for non-operational transport services to be reduced
to a minimum, and for hired transport to be used to the utmost for necessary
serviced
At the end of May, and early in June, 1944, a large quantity of prefabri-
cated mock landing craft had to be transported by a secret road delivery on
a twenty-four hour basis to ports in the South of England, where they were
put in the sea as a means of deceiving the
The craft were carried
back again in July and August.
A daily lift of 1,050 tons of ammunition and petrol had to be moved from
depots to ports 1,050 tons a War Transport agreed to efect this through
the Road Haulage Organization.
R.A.S.C. officers were located at central
points at Bedford and Oxford to act as liaison officers, receive demands from
depots, and arrange provision of transport with area road haulage officers
Tank Transporters
In view of the shortage of tank transporters, it was agreed that all tanks
should move to p shortage barkation on their own tracks.
At the beginning of July,
Army Group were still emploved on the delivery of Á.F. Vs. under the United
1944, two tank transporter companies of 21
Kingdom tank import programme,
as possible.
but their release was required as soon
This could not be effected until two War Office transport com-
panies had been eaninned with tank transporters to take their places
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Farce had decided. as a matter
of policy, that the tank import programme was to have priority, and that the
325
~02947
17
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
