employed on the task of transporting supplies, with the most serious result
that the mobility of the forward troops was greatly affected.
This shortage of
transport, which was to have serious results later, was probably the greatest
single obstacle hampering operations in the Middle East during the first six
months of 1941, in the circumstances described below.
see also Chapter III, Section 4 (Supply and Maintenance by Air).
In this connection,
For lack of transport, 2 Armoured Division could not maintain its forward
troops in the best position west of El Agheila, an additional 40 miles.
withdrawal therefore began, but 2 Armoured Division still suffered from the
shortage of transport, which tied it to dumps, and so restricted its power of
manoeuvre, which resulted in eventual disaster to the division.
Early April saw a rapid withdrawal to Tobruk and beyond.
That pott
was invested by the enemy, and our forces established a front again, approxi-
mately on the Egypt-Cyrenaica frontier.
Apart from certain fluctuations, due
to operations of an unsuccessful nature initiated by both sides, there was then
a static period on the frontier until the middle of November. It is, however,
noteworthy that our losses in the tank battle in June, 1941, would not have
been so serious if the large proportion of casualties due to trivial mechanical
breakdown could have been recovered; but there were not the tank transporters
available.
Siege of Tobruk
At the start of the siege, there were in Tobruk about 40 days' supplies for
the 45,000 troops
there.
Surplus personnel were then evacuated, and the
strength was reduced to 28,000.
Maintenance of the garrison was difficult, but
the supply situation never became serious.
Convoys of coasters could only be
run during moonless periods,
which meant at most two convoys a month.
Ships were lost on the voyage, and more especially while discharging. These
losses led to destroyers being used to supplement the convoys and to feve
convoys being run.
In consequence of these precarious arrangements, the
stocks never reached the target of 60 days, but the main items never fell belor
21 days.
The number of convoys was increased before the November 1941
offensive, and stocks at the time of the relief amounted to slightly over 30 days
for the garrison of 30,000.
The main difficulty was the supply of fresh items, which are more important
than ever under siege conditions.
It was found wasteful to ship potatos by
coaster, and impossible to ship vegetables. Fresh potatoes and root vegetals
could be shipped by destroyer, owing to the faster passage, but roots were o
of season most of the time that the destroyers were operating. Lack of sink.
varieties made it impossible to send fresh fruit, apart from small quartis
of bananas.
Bread supply
before the siege.
was maintained throughout by the bakery estabite lot
The normal ration seale wae clichtly modified to meet siege conditio
water more palatable, were introduced.
Small luxuries, such as chocolate, and lime juice powder to make the Tobruk
fresh fruit and vegetables, nine ascorbic acid tablets were issued weekly to
To compensate for the deficieny f
156
each man.
The fortress commander afterwards made particular reference to
the fact of an adequate ration having been maintained throughout the siege.
Organization of Divisional R.A.S.C.
As the result of the experience gained in the course of these operations,
it was found that the organization of the divisional R.A.S.C. in commodity
companies was unsuitable to the conditions encountered, but the brigade group
organization was satisfactory.
This was owing to the fact that the division
rarely operated as a whole, but more often in brigade groups.
The Com-
mander-in-Chief, Middle East, General (afterwards Field-Marshal) Wayell
therefore proposed to the War Office that the brigade group organization
should be recognized as the normal for divisional R.A.S.C.; his arguments
are recorded in Chapter III, Section 1, of this history.
His recommenda-
tions were accepted for application to the forces in Middle East, and it was
not long before they were also applied to all theatres.
The necessity was also recognized for a greater degree of flexibility in the
maintenance organization of a force operating in a country lacking adequate
rail facilities.
The abolition of the too rigid third line transport organization
was therefore advocated, the units involved to be replaced by a pool of reserve
M.T. companies.
An example of the more flexible use of available transport resources was
seen in the use of the Australian and New Zealand first and second line trans-
port to stock a F.S.D.
In the majority of these operations, the timing of
offensives often depended upon the capacity of R.A.S.C. transport to deliver
the requisite quantities of supplies, P.O.L., and ammunition; an example was
the postponement of the attack on Bardia for 48 hours, to enable adequate
stocks to be assembled.
Experience also showed that a 40-mile second line transport run (i.e., an
80-mile turn-round in the day) was too great a strain on men and vehicles in
desert conditions.
Ten miles in the hour was established as a safe maximum
if vehicles were to remain desert-worthy.
This meant that a 40-mile delivery
entailed at least eight hours at the wheel.
When to this was added the time
required for refuelling, loading and off-loading, little margin was left for rest
and maintenance.
As a result, a 60-mile daily turn-round was accepted as
a reasonable maximum.
L. of C. Transport
It was found from experience that, when transport was employed over
long distances on the L. of C., running under individual driver control greatly
increased the risk of accident and breakdown. In civil life, only tried drivers
of experience were employed on individual running for big mileages.
With
the high proportion of drivers with little driving experience then in charge of
Army vehicles small contralled convovs. ie platoons. were considered to
be more satisfactory.
In addition, it was found that, with individual running,
control was lost, and confusion arose, and any change of plan or diversion
of delivery was made most difficult.
A further consideration was that, should enemy air or ground action take
place on a L. on C. Fration was ta, sport running individually, no controlled
or organized action oad assince could be efected without platoon oficers
(37452)
157
wet
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
