unit were spread over ten ships. and took a week to collect in France. Sub.
units were thus broken up, and parties of vehicles had to be
forward without their proper workshops or supervisory personnel.
despatched
A further trouble uns the pilferage of accessories from vehicles during
the voyage.
In spite of precautions those to be adequate, deficiencies due
to this cause ware constantly discovered on arrival in respect of such items ..
clocks, mirrors, tyres of spare wheels, and other fittings and equipment.
personnel did not accompany their vehicles.
Although conducting officers
Unit
ware cent with moment venices and attractive articles were packed
in cases, the trouble was never completely eliminated.
The provision of the full complement of workshop and stores lorries for
pAgearested considerable difficulties, both in the pre-war
mobilization arrangements, and after the outbreak of wai, owing to poo
deliveries of machinery and electrical equipment.
Consequently, their allot-
ment to units in the first contingent was reduced to the minimum essential
to enable the unit repair organization to operate, the available vehicles being
spread over, so that each company had at least one set.
The D.S.T., B.E.F. was warned that, if extra units, beyond the existing
ceiling in the Order of Battle, had to be provided, he would have to make
local adjustments to find the necessary vehicles for them.
The reserve vehicle liability was shipped to France in September and
October. Details of the scales on which these vehicles were provided, and of
the numbers by types, are in Appendix VIA. It was observed that insufficient
drivers were allowed in the V.R.D. for clearing vehicles from docks, ie,
only 20 for 300 vehicles, with a turn round of 70 miles.
By Ist October, 1939, two months' estimated consumption of spare parts
and stores had been despatched to France.
Further consignments were ready
to complete six months' holdings, after which B.E.F. would demand on the
home M.T.S.D. as required.
A serious deficiency in R.A.S.C. vehicle equipment, which took some time
to rectify, was the shortage of tarpaulin covers for impressed vehicles.
Situation in the Autumn of 1939
The planned provision of transport for the B.E.F., especially at the base
and on the L. of C., soon proved inadequate.
The maintenance project had
foreseen that there would be heavy demands for transport at an early stage for
the movement of transportation stores, building material for the base and for
hutting, material for hard standings for vehicles, tentage and accommodation
stores, and fuel and other supplies obtained locally, which had to be collected
from far afield. In spite of this, no provision had been made for local trans-
port on the L. of C., particularly in the assembly area.
Presumably it was
the intention to rely on hired transport, but this could not be obtained, oving
to the French mobilization.
The long L. of C. and the wide dispersion of bases for air defence reasons
entailed long journeys and intensified wear and tear, while pooling of tra
port was minimized.
By the end of September the intake of all bases was increasing, while the
development of rail and water transport facilities was behindhand; new bases
were being opened. Road transport was reauired for the converance n
118
personnel to rest-camps, and of stores from rail to depot.
A considerable
amount of second and third line transport was necessarily being employed in
carrying low-grade materials for building and road-making, to the detriment
of the vehicles.
All these factors combined to produce a situation where additional trans-
port companies and increased War Establishments were needed, while vehicle
wastage was expected to be heavier than had been forecast.
But little more
transport could be provided at that stage, and, although B.E.F. asked for four
reserve M.T. companies, War Office could only offer troop-carrying com-
panies, which were accepted though they were not really suitable to meet the
commitments.
Position in December, 1939
By December, the transport needs of the L. of C. had risen considerably,
but the transport establishments of the base and L. of C. areas had not been
met.
Thus, base sub-areas were allowed one reserve M.T. company and one
L. of C. M.T. company each, but two of them had only one section of a
reserve company each.
L. of C. sub-areas were supposed to have a reserve
company each, but one had only one section of a company, and the other
three sections.
In addition, further L. of C. sub-areas were likely to be formed, and
would require a company each, while a reserve company was required for
the two medical bases.
At least one reserve company was needed as a per-
manent allotment for the assembly areas, in view of the difficulties experienced,
the number of troops going through, the detailed issue of supplies, and normal
transport duties.
Two hundred and thirty vehicles a day, drawn from formation transport,
were being used for the carriage of low-grade material, which ruined the
vehicles and endangered the mobility of the force.
This was supposed to be
the work of reserve M.T. companies, but the two which should have been
allotted had to be used on the L. of C.
When active operations started,
formation transport would no longer be available, but the work would still
have to go on, and provision of transport for this commitment was essential.
The deficiency of transport had been manifest when operations had been
expected, and the consequent arrangements had completely exhausted the
availability, and necessitated reserve transport being required to stand by.
Fortunately, nothing had actually happened, and the acute shortage of trans-
port had only been of short duration.
A further cause of shortage was that none of the seven petrol depots was
rail-served, and road transport was therefore necessary for them.
B.E.F. requirements were stated to be five reserve M.T. companies and
three L. of C. M.T. companies at once, and eleven companies later.
This
took into consideration the fact that, while the transport was already in-
sufficient, the size of the B.E.F. was about to be doubled, and new bases were
being taken into use.
As the 8,000 personnel required to meet this commitment could not be
produced for many months, the War Office could only offer a compromise.
The equivalent of five reserve companies and one L. of C. company could
119
w0s947/17
WO277/21
27
1027772
