Landing Craft
Prior to 1943, minor landing craft had been manned by sailors. Die sa the first quarter of 1943,
the problem of finding the manpower for the assault feet and, at the same time, to provide the
various and multitudinous special parties required, came under very close study. Possible solutions
incided the provision of American landing craft crews and the transfer of personnel to the Navy
from the other Services.
In the event, it was agreed that the load should be divided between the three Services, the
Army and the Air Force making a certain contribution to assist the Navy.
It was at this time
that the Royal Marine Division was disbanded and its units reorganised to meet the requirements
ot the new situation: its Headquarters, under Major-General Sturges, provided the main element
of the new Commando Group Headquarters, its infantry battalions were re-formed as Commandos,
and the large numbers of officers and other ranks from the other units of the Division were used to
man landing craft.
Thus the Royal Marines assumed what was to become one of their permanent
war and post-war commitments. Previously they had only manned the guns of support craft.
The acceptance of this landing craft commitment involved a considerable change of policy
for the Corps.
In particular, the admission of Royal Marine Officers to the command of commissioned
ships of the Royal Navy was in itself a marked departure from tradition and a development of
importance. A.F.O. 3795/43 is of interest in this connection :-
" Royal Marines Command in Certain Classes of Vessel
(C.W. 24996/43.-19 Aug. 1943)
In the following classes of vessels, officers of the Royal Marines are to be employed as
Executive Officers.
For the purpose of assessing their relative executive rank, Article 224,
Clause 2, of K.R. and A.I. is to be followed. The order of command of such officers amongst
themselves and in relation to Executive Officers of the Royal Navy, Royal Naval Reserve
and Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, will then be governed by the rules in Article 175-181
and elsewhere.
They will be entitled to command money,
entertainment allowance
and First
Lieutenant's allowance at the same rates and under the same rules as for executive officers.
Royal Marine Officers appointed in command will exercise all the powers of Commanding
Officers of H.M. Ships.
All Royal Marine Officers appointed to these vessels will previously have been given a
suitable course of navigation.
Classes of Vessels affected
Landing craft, assault
(L.C.A.)
Landing craft, flak
(L.C.F.)
Landing craft, gun
(L.C.G.)
Landing craft, infantry
(L.C.I.)
Landing craft, mechanised
(L.C.M.)
Landing craft, personnel
(L.C.P.)
Landing craft, support
(L.C.S.)
Landing craft, tank
(L.C.T.)
Landing craft, vehicle
(L.C.V.)
Landing barges
(L.B.)"
Nine months after the decision that the Corps should man British minor landing craft, two-
thirds ine the British craft in the " Overlord" landing were manned by Royal Marines.
This is
ample evidence both of the adaptability of the Corps and of the excellence of the training
organisation which was set up to meet the commitment.
From then onwards Royal Marine-manned
landing craft took part in amphibious operations in all theatres, notably at Walcheren, in the
Mediterranean and the Arakan.
ibies panations inal thotties, sailor crews for such craft ag
broucht out during operations against the island of Brac in the Adriatic in 1944.
L.C.A.s had
landed about 0 men of 2 Commando, who held a small perimeter after the main force had with-
Germans.
The craft were lying in a cove when the Commandos ashore were heavily engaged by the
Headed by their officer, the crew of the L.C.A. left their craft in charge of one man and
went inshore as a military organisation to extricate the Commandos.
They carried Brens and
chines and their arrival tinned the scales enablind the Commandos to withdraw. bringing with
them a seriously wounded officer who could not otherwise have been evacuated.
114
STAEDTLEI
Beach Maintenance
The development and employment of the Beach Organisation is fully dealt with in Chapter 18.
That chapter shows how the Army itself became responsible for its own beach maintenance and the
provision of the organisation to carry out the task.
But mention will be made here of the R.M.
Beach Unit, which was formed in 1941 for use in support of the R.M. Brigade, and the part played
by the Royal Marines in the formation and operation of Beach Bricks for operations in Sicily and
Italy in 1943.
The 7th Battalion Royal Marines, which left U.K. for South Africa in late 1942, was ordered
to the Middle East in December, 1942.
up a draft organisation for a Beach Brick within tve days.
On arrival, the Commanding Officer was required to draw
This was done.
for Sicily in July,
The battalion remained at Kabrit from Ist January,
1943.
Middle East,
in Cairo,
During this time, in conjunction with the C.T.C.
1943, until embarking
Kabrit and G.H.Q.
trained.
Briefly
the Beach Brick Organisation was evolved and Bricks were formed and
the Bricks consisted of a nucleus
battalion, to which specialised units (an
A.A. Regiment, Signals,
R.A.S.C., R.A.O.C.,
R.A.M.C., a R.N.
Beach Commando) were
added, making up a total strength of about 2,600. A defence company with carrier-borne mortars
was provided by the nucleus battalion, but the essence of the idea was that all Brick personnel
were prepared to fight, the rifle companies of the nucleus battalion providing the hard core of this
defensive potential.
7 R.M. trained itself and its attached units for this role, and produced teams of instructors
to assist in the tram. Welch
in Egypt and Palestine, of the four infantry battalions chosen to fulfil a
similar role
(1st Bn.
Regiment, 1st Bn. Highland Light Infantry, 2nd Bn. Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders and 18th Bn. Durham Light Infantry) and their attached units.
five Bricks were employed in the landings in Sicily.
Mobile Landing Crait Advanced Bases
Some mention must be made of the M.O.L.C.A.B.s.
These were bases possessing facilities
which could rapidly be established on a selected site for the accommodation of personnel and the
maintenance and first aid repairs of hulls, machinery and armament of landing craft.
strength of a M.O.L.C.A.B. was 36 officers and 374 other ranks, of which the major proportion
were Royal Marines, under a Royal Marine Commanding Officer. The functions of the M.O.L.C.A.B.
were as follows :—
(1) As a temporary advanced base at which the short range portion of an assault force (the
Build-up Group) could assemble in preparation for an assault.
(2) As an advanced base set up in captured territory directly after an assault to support
the build-up phase of an operation.
(3) As an advanced base at which a Build-up Group could re-form, recuperate and refit, after
an assault, in preparation for a new operation
(4) As a temporary
addition to a static rear base in order to provide increased facilities
during a peak load period.
These units were designed primarily for use in South-East Asia and the Far East and, in the
event, owing to the collapse of Japan, the five units which had been planned were not all found
necessary.
However, half of one M.O.L.C.A.B. was sailed across the Channel, transported by road
to the Rhine and used to assist in the Rhine crossing.
Subsequently two M.O.L.C.A.B.s were
located in the Far East.
Raiding
The Commando role of the Royal Marines with its embodied responsibility for amphibious
raiding, was by no means a new departure for the Corps.
Operations by various ships' detachments
early in the war (notably by that of H.M.S. Ramillies at Diego Suarez, Madagascar) can reasonably
be considered as falling within its scope.
Other purely amphibious
raiding operations by units
other than Commandos were also undertaken; details of operations by three such units are narrated
briefly here.
11th Battalion Royal Marines
This unit was the infantry battalion of Ist Group of the Mobile Naval Base Defence Organisation
(M.N.B.D.O.), which was organised to establish and defend an advanced naval base.
After the
withdrawal from Greece, this unit was located in the Middle East and carried out a smal rat ton
the island of Kuphonisi to destroy a radio location station.
Later it attempted a much larger
scale raid to destroy harbour installations at Tobruk.
This operation, undertaken when Rommel
had driven the 8th Army back to El Alamein, did not succeed owing to bad weather and the
preparedness of the defenders.
115
extr
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
