CHAPTER 3
RAPID GROWTH, OCTOBER, 1941-MARCH, 1942
Directive to Adviser on Combined Operations (A.C.O.)
The Chiefs of Staff issued a new directive to Commodore Lord Louis Mountbatten on his
arrival.
It laid emphasis on his position as Adviser on Combined Operations (A.C.O.) whilst he
retained command of the training establishments and schools of instruction.
He was responsible
for all technical information supplied to the Force Commanders, both as to training and planning,
and it was incumbent on them to seek his help on all occasions.
The Special Service troops were still under command and could be used for small operations
which he might mount.
The full directive is shown at Appendix 5.
The General Situation in October, 1941
When Commodore Mountbatten took up his appointment the general situation with regard to
Combined Operations was as follows :—
(1) The total staff at his headquarters amounted to twenty-three including typists and
There were no active service naval officers, no regular air force officers
and no signals officers.
(2) The three Landing Ships Infantry (Glengyle, Glenearn and Glenroy) with a full complement
of Special Service troops and landing craft were in the Suez Canal Zone.
A Combined
Training Centre had been set up out there, at Kabret, but the ships and troops were
not being employed in duties for which they were intended.
(3) The Force earmarked for Operation " Pilgrim" was in the Clyde area, standing by for
the capture of the Canary Islands.
They were continuously employed on training
and developing techniques.
formations.
(5) The Future Operations Planning Sections of the Joint Planning Staff were just beginning
their study
of the problems involved in the re-entry into the Continent and the
Commander-in-Chief,
Home Forces was thinking
in terms of the invasion of the
Continent rather than a German invasion of the U.K.
(6) The concentration on current operational requirements at the expense of the long-term
build-up of forces for the invasion of the Continent began to abate, and with this a
better sense of proportion was being achieved.
(7) An examination of the number of ships and craft required for the return to the Continent
showed clearly that the building facilities in this country were unequal to the task
and, in consequence, the Admiralty were on the point of sending a mission to the United
States to lay the problem before the authorities there.
This mission took with them
the designs for the L.S.T., Mark II, and the Landing Ship Dock.
8) The question of the intake of personnel into Combined Operations, their accommodation
and training was a difficult problem for both the Admiralty and the Combined
Operations Organisation.
Control of Combined Operations Forces
personnel clearly called for a central authority around which all combined operational activity could
During November,
projected increase in combined operations ships,
This was represented to the Chiefs of Staff by Commodore Mountbatten and they in
their turn directed him to submit proposals.
18
Accordingly on 3rd December, 1941, Commodore Mountbatten recommended that with the
expansion of the Combined Operations Command, involving greater numbers of ships and craft
and suitable bases, certain new appointments should be made for their
proper control.
Rear-
Admiral Horan of Combined Operations Headquarters was appointed Rear-Admiral Landing
Craft and Bases (R.A.L.B.) and Commodore Warren was appointed Senior Officer Assault Ships
and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.), both under Commodore, Combined Operations.
He also recommended the formation of teams of operational staff officers to be lent to Force
Commanders to help in planning operations and providing technical advice.
The Chiefs of Staff approved the recommendations which were promulgated in a confidential
order acquainting the three Services of the Combined Operations Organisation.
They also approved
certain amendments to the directive to the Adviser on Combined Operations.
Commodore Mountbatten
was to be known as Adviser on Combined Operations (A.C.O.)
when advising the Chiefs of Staff or Force Commanders and Commodore Combined Operations
(C.C.O.) for administrative command and command of raids.
This new directive, which was issued on 9th December, 1941, is given at Appendix 6, and the
confidential order issued to the three Services is at Appendix 7.
A complete reorganisation of the
staff and the work at C.O.H.Q. followed together with the institution of an Inter-Services Planning
Staff, and a purely Naval Administrative Department.
In administrative matters, the C.C.O. acted as a retail authority and the Combined Operations
Section of the
Naval Staff at the Admiralty handled the wholesale business.
For example
the Combined Operations Section would calculate the total manpower requirement to provide the
forces approved by the Chiefs of Staff and would obtain approval for the necessary programme of
personnel intake into combined operational training extablishments. C.C.O. would work out the
training programme and progress the personnel through the training establishments and control
them thereafter.
The same
applied on the matériel side, in which the Directorate of Naval
Equipment, Combined Operations (D.N.E. (C.O.) ) was the Admiralty Department concerned.
The relationship between C.O.H.Q., the Combined Operations Section of the Naval Staff and
D.N.E. (C.O.) was so close during the ensuing period of rapid expansion that it established an
interesting example of two teams working closely together but owing allegiance to different Chiefs.
The arrangements might have broken down on divided loyalties, had these existed, but the desire to
work together for a common end and the fact that the pace was so fast, meant that there was no
time for consideration of anything other than meeting essential requirements or solving the
immediate problem in hand.
New ground was being broken daily and, as no precedent existed
for guidance, a solution had to be found quickly by the few concerned round a table.
This decision
was immediately acted upon on the assumption that covering approval would be forthcoming in
due course.
In the end it resulted in the C.C.O. initiating new proposals and the Admiralty Departments
progressing them through the Admiralty machine.
The Administrative Problem
The transfer of ships and training bases to the C.C.O., in December, 1941, meant that under
the Rear-Admiral Landing Craft and Bases (R.A.L.B.), a Naval Administrative Staff came into
being whose duty it was to carry out the day to day naval administration
of the Combined
Operations Command.
It was divided into Personnel, Material and Ships and Craft Sections.
For the first three months, most of their time was taken up with the provision of the necessary
base and accommodation facilities for the personnel of the command.
The story of how these
bases were developed is told in Chapter 12.
Raids on the Norwegian Coast
Towards the end of September, 1941, the Chiefs of Staff decided that operations against the
Germans occupying the Norwegian coast were to be carried out as soon as possible.
Prinds the ships bad been sent to Freetown for Operation "Pilgrim," the only ships Commsdore
As the ships originally destined for these special operations, namely the Queen Emma and the
Mountbatten had available were four of the small Belgian type assault ships,
Infantry, Small (L.S.I. (S) ). Some doubt was expressed by certain Admiralty Departments as to
their suitability for carrying out operations so far afield but this was quickly overcome.
In fact
all the ships of this class were subsequently employed in both the Sicilian and Normandy landings
and acquitted themselves well.
-7
WOztt/
27
30
