vehicle losses in Greece and Crete, equipment of the Polish Division, and
provision for desert conditions,
where the necessity for a reduced vehide
load had to be borne in mind in calculating vehicle requirements.
desert load was a maximum of 75 per cent. of the nominal.
The
Middle East
estimate of requirements of R.A.S.C. vehicles up to the end of 1943 amounted
to over 50,000.
In September, 1942, responsibility for the provision of R.A.S.C. vehicles
passed to the R.A.O.C., and the subject cannot therefore be pursued hete.
10-ton Lorries
In January,
1941, Middle East asked for 10-ton lorries to be provided
for use on the extended L. of C. beyond Tobruk.
In view of the time that
it would have taken to obtain American vehicles with single tyres as pre
ferred by Middle East, it was decided to form a L. of C. Railhead MT.
Company
from local personnel resources,
Cypriot or Palestinian, with a
cadre of British personnel, and to equip it with such British-built 10-ton
lorries on
twin tvres as
were available.
The balance was made up in
American single tyre vehicles as they became available.
It should be ex
plained that the sand rolled up in front of and between the twin tyres, and
impeded progress.
Other 10-ton companies followed, and these units did very good work
on the L. of C., and in some respects were superior to the 3-ton lorry.
had a good desert and cross-country performance; their load-carrying capa-
city was 7} tons on the desert and 10 tons on the road, and with the
addition of 5-ton trailers, these figures were increased to 11 tons and 15 tons
respectively; their Diesel engines had an average desert life of 35,000 miles
against 15,000 to 18,000 miles for a 3-ton petrol engine; and their fuel
consumption was more economical about the same as that of a 3-ton lory.
The use of these vehicles also effected a direct economy in personnel, as
there were two drivers for a vehicle as against three plus a percentage spare
for an equivalent carrying capacity of 3-ton lorries.
There was also an
indirect saving in repair and maintenance personnel.
10-ton G.T. companies were employed where this type of vehicle ofter
the greatest advantages,
i..., on those portions of the L. of C. where the
mileage between terminals was greatest, and where the heaviest loads had to
be lifted.
In this way, the best value was obtained from low fuel con-
sumption and reduced personnel in relation to the tonnage carried.
lorries also did really valuable work in base areas, on they were ideal for
ammunition, supplies,
rapid dock clearance, and for large inter-depot transport of bulk goods, eh.
cement, etc.
with
Four 10-ton companies were operating
campaign.
Eighth Army L. of C. during the fO-lon coes of the Tripoli- Tunis
Vehicle Maintenance
the second at Tel-el-Kebir.
The original sat of hase MT installations was located at Abhassia, an
from, Eighth Army units.
detaching a forward mark to Tobruk, to facilitate issues to, and evacuations
The third was placed at Alexandria, the VRD.
174
To ensure maximum production
and the best use of available man-
power and machinery, makes and types of vehicles were allotted to H.R.Ss
as follows: -
Abbassia.—British cars and load-carriers.
Tel-el-Kebir.- American petrol-driven cars and load-carriers, also all
Diesels, i.e., tank transporters and 10-ton lorries.
Alexandria.-Other tank transporters, also captured vehicles and priority
jobs for Eighth Army.
The stocks of spares in M.T.S.Ds. were in the process of being adjusted
to meet the needs of the H.R. Ss. to which they were respectively linked, when
the transfer to R.A.O.C. took place
in September, 1942.
V.R.Ds. were
necessarily allotted on a geographical basis, to deal with the Delta, Palestine,
and Eighth Army respectively.
In order to accelerate the delivery of spares and replacements of vehicles,
and to avoid evacuations over an already hard-pressed railway system, ad-
vanced elements of H.R.S.,
M.T.S.D.,
and V.R.D. were located in the
vicinity of areas, formations, etc., far distant from the main base.
These
elements were co-ordinated in one unit known as an Advanced M.T. Depot.
The first was formed in February, 1941, and located at Tobruk.
The second
went to Greece, and after its return was held in reserve.
No. 3 was at
Haifa, and looked after the units in Palestine and Syria.
With the increased number of affiliated vehicles in base areas, it was found
necessary to provide for their maintenance by forming Station Maintenance
Companies.
The first was formed at Abbassia in April, 1941, and its load
had reached over 800 by August, 1943.
Four other companies were formed
subsequently, provision being made for the addition of extra workshop
sections if needed.
These companies were retained by the R.A.S.C. when
"R.E.M.E., Phase 1" was put into operation.
The events which, in Middle
East, preceded that reorganization, are described in Chapter III.
When the transfer of the Base M.T. Installations to R.A.O.C. and
R.E.M.E. took place, the change was considered to have affected the R.A.S.C.
adversely, owing to the loss of the personal touch between " user" units
and the replacement and heavy repair organization.
Thus, a unit which was
dissatisfied with a vehicle drawn from a V.R.D. was more likely to receive
sympathetic consideration from the same corps than if the depot was run by
another corns. and the same anplied to questions of the standard of over-
haul effected by H.R.S.
At any rate, there was considered to have been a definite deterioration
in the any rate, there mechanical standard of replacement vehicles.
1943, it was found that R.E.M.E. could not keep pace with the repair of
load-carriers.
After the end of the campaign
in North Africa, a large
number of transport companies came back for refitting, most of their vehicles
being in need of general overhaul.
They were also in urgent need of being
re-equipped to ensure that the torming up of the invasion force for Sicily
was completed in time.
tee a sufficient turn-out to satisfy second and third line transport require-
Base Workshops, R.E.M.E., were unable to guaran-
The situation necessitated the grouping of unit workshops in the
Middle Bast RAtion Messitated the gre, with the object of carrying out
an overhaul
I.M.T. was placed in charge, and the centre was given priority on assemblies
programme with the use of replacement assemblies.
(37452)
175
wett
7/14
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
