•STAEDTLES
PART II
CHAPTER 11
THE STORY OF SOME OPERATIONS AFFECTING DEVELOPMENT
OF COMMAND AND CONTROL
- 7
WO 277/21
27
3
Introduction
Combined operations by land and sea forces have taken place throughout British history,
but in modern times, the Gallipoli Campaign of World War I and the blocking of Zeebrugge, in which
the young Royal Air Force was allotted a diversionary role, were the
prior to World War II.
outstanding operations
Between the wars some slight study of the subject was made, but it was not until 1937 that
the first steps were taken to bring the matter into perspective.
Although much useful constructive
thought on up-to-date lines took place in 1938, very little had actually been achieved at the out-
break of war, when even the small organisation which had been set up, the Inter-Services Training
and Development Centre (I.S.T.D.C.), was disbanded.
The I.S.T.D.C. was re-formed in December, 1939, and a number of Independent Companies,
later to form the nucleus of the Commandos, were also being formed by the War Office.
During the
Norway campaign, the naval and military members of the I.S.T.D.C. were called in to assist in
the preparations for the Narvik operation, and six of the Independent Companies were employed
between Namsos and Bodo.
Two landings were made in April 1940, one at Herjangs and one or
the Narvik peninsula, with the aid of the few old landing craft available; the occasion is notable
for being the first in history on which tanks were landed over a beach in an operation of war.
At Dunkirk, all the available landing craft, including those newly completed, were used.
Most of them were lost, but four L.C.A. survived and were finally able to return to the U.K. after
evacuating 2,000 troops.
At the conclusion of the Dunkirk evacuation, the position with regard to landing craft was
that, in addition to the four surviving L.C.A. and one L.C.M., there were forty-eight L.C.A., thirty
L.C.M. and eight support craft building, but there were no arrangements to establish a naval
organisation to man and serve these craft.
The six Independent Companies raised for, but not
employed in, Norway were available and ten Commandos were in the process of being formed.
The I.S.T.D.C. was still in existence, but that was all.
It was from these small beginnings that Combined Operations developed, against a sombre
background which began with the fall of France.
Britain and the Commonwealth then stood alone,
until the German invasion of Russia in mid-1941.
The planned expansion of our war industries
had not yet reached its full output and American aid was confined to the Lend-Lease programme
and the direct orders which our limited dollar holdings permitted.
Our sea and air forces
were
engaged in defensive battles, our land forces were recovering from the heavy losses sustained on
the Continent and were being reorganised for defence against possible invasion which left few men
and little material for less urgent tasks.
It was not surprising that the Admiralty had stated that,
owing to our urgent needs for destroyers and escorts, no priority could be given to the landing craft
building programme and that no further construction could be undertaken.
As time went on, Germany became deeply committed in Russia and our war production began
to approach its peak.
When America entered the war in December 1941, her enormous resources
became fully available and plans for re-entry into the Continent were no longer academic.
HrOM
then on, the study and practice of Combined Operations had become inevitable.
It is in this context then, that we can review some of the operations which took place and
some, which were planned, but never executed.
We shall see what effect they had on the planning,
organisation and execution of operations, which finally led to the success of " Overlord'
greatest invasion of all time. Combined Operations can be divided into two categories: Raids and
Raids necessitate a short penetration followed by a withdrawal.
Assaults are intended
to establish a beachhead from which further operations against the enemy can be launched.
83
