assumption of responsibility for displaced Russian prisoners of war on the
slapse of the German Army, released British and Allied prisoners of war,
and other contingencies.
The request for units was calculated on the standard yardstick without
regard to the reasonable expectation that, at this stage in the campaign,
supply units should be able and required to work considerably in excess of
The units included in the demand were seven B.S.Ds., 35 D.I.Ds., 31
Field Bakeries (Mobile), and five Port Detachments.
were, of course, no units available at all. In order to provide at least a
nucleus of the total demands, and to take advantage of the new " light"
organization, War Office considered the possibility of forming two B.S.Ds.,
and three Supply Companies (Light) of four platoons each.
mean that some supply companies would later be available and ready for the
Eventually, four Supply Companies (Light), each of four platoons, were
formed and sent out in May, 1945.
As far as the bakeries were concerned, it
was agreed to provide one warrant officer baker, and five senior N.C.O. bakers
and supervisory personnel for each field bakery, up to ten, that 21 Army
Group could form with prisoners of war.
Besides the ovens already ear-
marked for such bakeries, eight sets of equipment were sent out from the
United Kingdom to enable them to be formed.
Supplies Budget
Increases in the provision commitment were necessitated by additional
demands on stocks in N.W. Europe.
60,000 civilian mid-day meals had been
budgeted for, but the potential daily figure was now placed at 200,000.
There
were also 8,600 rations a day required for employees in Army hostels and
clubs, of whom 6,500 were locally recruited. At the end of February, 1945,
the strength of British and Allied forces, and liberated manpower, to be
maintained, was agreed at two million overall for provision purposes.
Com-
mitments in respect of Allied and United Nations prisoners of war had been
covered at half a million for four months.
Provision was also proposed for
over half-a-million Russians in the S.H.A.E.F. Zone, who might be prisoners
Two requirements making a persistent drain on R.A.S.C. stocks, were
those of E.F.I. and unit canteens, to which 21 Army Group set no limit.
stringency of the supplies situation made it necessary for War Office to lay
down as a matter of policy that issues for E.F.I. use should be confined to
sugar, flour, bread, frozen meat, and potatoes, and for unit canteens to the
ingredients for buns and cups of tea.
Maintenance, March, 1945 and after
What appeared to be the excessive demands for normal maintenance b
21 Army Group were examined by War Office.
Group could not exactly agree the quantity of supplies received with each
It transpired that 21 Army
asset in preparing demands.
demand and had therefore no relichle foures of dues in to include as an
The information lacking was that of out-turn
of vessels, owing to want of accurate documentation in this respect.
368
me consequently instituted, to enable depots to report their receinte h
kes, which was expected to correct the excess.
i Army Group, adopted the demand procedure used in other theatres, which
At the same time, S.T.,
aled obtaining a forecast of future feeding strengths from the Can
When the ration strength in the theatre was approaching two million, the
strain on the S.R.Ds. in the United Kingdom, which had only been planned to
mian forces in 21 Army Coup of under one million, began to be beyond
their capacity.
In order to relieve this situation, flour, sugar, and dried peas
ted bans, were drawn direct from Ministry of Food depots for shipmens.
nd future supplies of canned meats were arranged direct from South America.
In the middle of May, the port of Hamburg opened, and 1,000 tons of
hiping space a day from Ist to 10th June was allotted to S.T. 14,000 tons
it cold storage were found at the port, and provisional arrangements were
nade for deep-draft refrigerated ships to go in.
Allied P.W. Parcels
Even before D-day, consideration had been given to the question of feed-
ing Allied P.W. by air in the event of a German collapse; the rations provided
nould have to maintain them adequately until the ground forces reached them.
By September, 1944, a satisfactory pack had been evolved. The rations
were made up on a uniform, fully balanced scale. All items were packed in
new cement sacks, and only those which would otherwise deteriorate were
in tins, such as dehydrated meat, spam, and chocolate.
Tea was in 4-1b.
packets, as generally sold; milk and eggs were in powder form in cartons, and
margarine was in 1-lb. packets.
Trials showed that 90 per cent. of the rations were recovered on free
doping. Powders and solids did not suffer any serious ill effects, but tinned
liquids had to be given up, as their containers burst on hitting the ground.
Ton thousand tons of food, representing eleven million rations, were
packed in this way in three weeks in 1944.
Most of the work was done by
Rogers in the S.R. Ds., bee millers also packed flour under Ministry of Food
The rapid advance made by the Allies, however, released so many P.V.
bat at the end of Anril. 1945, these rations could be turned over to use fo
ting the starving people of Holland.
Between 20th April and 8th May,
I million ratione wars fros dranned in Malland hesides nearly one million
imilar, but less attractive. rations prepared specifically for Civil Affairs use
" Medloc"
In January 1045 de boat as condered of ening a railway To n
for personnel across France, to be known as " Medloc".
A similar line had
been in operation during the period December, 1939, to May, 1940, for the
conveyance of the cavalry divicion and other troons to Middle Fast
personnel and families returning from the Middle East, India, and the Far
All exerntive antion was now taken in the theatre
a transit camp. capacity 6.000 to 10 000 at ench terminal, served by a R.A.S.C
The proposal was for
Depot holding 20 dave reserve and ten dave maintenance stock.
and one sectien of a Fiald Bakery were needed for each.
The halting places
369
NO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
