CHAPTER 2
THE EARLY DAYS, JUNE, 1940 OCTOBER, 1941
Commander of Raiding Operations Appointed
After the defeat of the Allied armies in France and the Low Countries in May, 1940, it was
apparent that the only way of returning to the offensive, other than by bombing, was by means
of amphibious operations.
In Europe, at this juncture, the policy could only be one of raiding the
occupied coasts
with the aim of causing the enemy
to disperse his forces
and equipment
uneconomically. Further, the successful execution of a raid is excellent for morale at a time when a
country must be strategically on the defensive.
On 14th June, the Chiefs of Staff authorised the appointment of a Commander of Raiding
Operations and Lieutenant-General A. G. B. Bourne, who was Adjutant-General, Royal Marine:
it the time, was given the post
The directive (Appendix 3) issued to this officer shows that he was not only appointed
Commander of Raiding Operations, but also Adviser to the Chiefs of Staff on Combined Operations.
General Bourne was given operational command of the Independent Companies (later to be
known as Commandos), which the War Office had raised under Brigadier C. Gubbins for guerilla
operations in Norway.
He was also informed that he would have a number of parachutist
volunteers placed at his disposal and other irregular Commandos then being raised.
The Inter-Services Training and Development Centres (I.S.T.D.C.) were also placed under his
command and he was ordered to expedite the development and production of special landing craft
and equipment.
General Bourne set up his headquarters at the Admiralty and an officer of the Royal Air Force
was attached to assist with the parachute troops.
The latter were just being formed and in a
report of his available forces made in October, i
1940, mention is made of 100 parachutists under
training. Later, when the number expanded, the parachute troops were removed from his command
and became the First Airborne Division.
General Bourne's staff at first consisted of :—
One Captain R.N. (Deputy).
One Captain R.N. (Intelligence).
One Captain R.N. (Operations).
The Army also had a representative.
The Situation-
-June, 1940
On taking up his appointment, the Commander of Raiding Operations found that his resources
were sparse.
On 15th February, 1940, a report had been submitted by the I.S.T.D.C. stating that 90 minor
landing craft were built or being built in the United Kingdom with the expected completion date of
December, 1940. In this report they asked for certain facilities in the Hayling Island area and a89
15tht Northney Camp (later H.M.S. Northney) was requisitioned and subsequently commissioned on
craft based on H.M.Y
In Tune. 1940. Operation " Collar" was carried out in the Pas de Calais area using adapted
Office (M.0.9) under Tientenant-Colonel Dudley Clarke. R.A.. who had raised the Independent
Melisande in the Hamble River.
Planning was carried out in
Some assistance was afforded at this stage bu Admiralty and A.C.O. Responsibility
Companies., was transterred from M.O.9 to the Commander of Raiding Operations on 17th june.
1940, and the raid was staged on 24th/25th June, 1940.
improvised equipment was of no value in the kind of warfare upon which we were now embarking.
This operation preved conclusively that
12
Further, for this operation the craft were manned by crews inexperienced in running landing craft,
an arrangement which was found to be also unsatisfactory.
It was realised that special personnel
would have to be trained for the purpose.
As a result, a six weeks' course of basic naval training in
the handling and maintenance of landing craft was inaugurated at H.M.S. Northney,
on the
completion of which the naval personnel were transferred to H.M.S. Tormentor, at Warsash, which
was commissioned as a raiding base.
Director of Combined Operations (D.C.O.) Appointed
On 17th July, 1940, Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes was appointed as Director of Combined
Operations (D.C.O.) in succession to General Bourne.
This appointment was made by the Prime
Minister, as the following letter shows :—
" Prime Minister to General Ismay and Sir Edward Bridges.
I have appointed Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes as Director of Combined
Operations.
He should take over the duties and resources now assigned to General Bourne.
General Bourne should be informed that owing to the large scope now to be given to these
operations, it is essential to have an officer of higher rank in charge, and that the change
in no way reflects upon him or those associated with him. Evidently he will have to co-operate
effectively. I formed a high opinion of this officer's work as Adjutant-General, Royal Marines,
and in any case the Royal Marines must play a leading part in this organisation. Pending any
further arrangements Sir Roger Keyes will form contact with the Service Departments
through General Ismay as representing the Minister of Defence."
No new directive was issued at this time.
Headquarters Moved to Richmond Terrace
Towards the end of August,
1940, Admiral Keyes moved his headquarters to Richmond
Terrace and took with him his staff with the exception of the Naval Operations Section.
latter section remained in the Admiralty and became an Assistant Directorate of the Operations
Division (A.D.O.D. (C.O.) ) and, under different titles, remained in existence throughout the war.
Almost at once it became clear that it was necessary to have a material section in the Admiralty
to deal with combined operational matters and, in consequence, a Department was set up under.
the Director of Naval Equipment (D.N.E. (C.O.) ). This worked under the Controller and in double
harness with A.D.O.D. (C.O.). These two entities worked virtually as one organisation in the closest
co-operation until well after the end of the war.
The move to Richmond Terrace was decided upon because whilst General Bourne's headquarters
remained in the Admiralty it was looked upon as an Admiralty Division. By having his headquarters
outside the Admiralty, Admiral Keyes ensured that the Combined Operations Organisation would be
regarded correctly as a Joint Inter-Services Establishment.
The First Combined Training Centre
It soon became apparent that combined training facilities would have to be established.
reconnaissance was made and, as a result, the Combined Training Centre was set up at Inveraray in
August, 1940, with Vice-Admiral Hallett in charge.
(The detailed story of this and other training
establishments is given in Chapter 12.)
Forces Available
In July, 1940, the forces under the command of the Director of Combined Operations amounted
to about 500 men of the Commandos and 750 men of the Independent Companies :
the craft
amounted to 15 L.C.A., 4 L.C.M. and various other minor craft.
The Lessons of the Dakar Expedition
At the beginning of August, 1940, a proposal to instal General de Gaulle and his Free French
Forces in Dakar came up for consideration.
This operation, known as
« Menace" was to be
supported by British naval and military forces.
The initial plan for the operation was made at short notice by the Inter-Services Planning Staff
(the forerunner of the present J.P.S.) and was submitted to the Chiefs of Staff on 9th August, 1940.
13
22987
FI 7
WO 277/21
27
30
