to be recognized. This fact was borne in mind when planning for the main-
tenance of the second B.E.F. began in 1938.
The Field Service (Guide) Ration
Scale was then produced, which included a number of tinned or dried alterna-
tives, to cover operational conditions, or to give variety.
It was the first of
a very large number of scales employed during the war of 1939-1945, providing
for a wide range of operational, climatic, national, feminine, and other special
requirements.
The number of scales in operation at the end of the war was
380.
As a contrast to our conception of what was necessary in a ration scale,
the limited and frugal scale of the Japanese Army has also been included in the
appendix.
A very important development in relation to the supply of the Army was
that of special ration packs, produced to meet a variety of operational and
other requirements.
The composition of the principal British types of special
pack is included in the same appendix, together with some American and
Australian types for purposes of comparison.
Certain features of the special
ration pack are also discussed in Chapter III.
The story of the development of the petrol container is illustrated at the
end of this History (Appendix XJ) by photographs of some of the principal
types employed, while a comparison of the jerrican with its predecessor,
the 4-gallon " flimsy" tin, shows what an enormous saving there might have
been, of spirit, money, and material, besides transport both by sea and by
land, had a container as good as the jerrican been worked out and adopted for
use by the British Army before the war. It may be noted here that the story
of the petrol container begins in Chapter III, continues in Chapter IV, and
reaches its conclusion in Chapter VI.
In addition to the list of historical records at Aldershot, already mentioned,
Appendix XIIIA contains a note of other authorities from which information
has been derived.
CHAPTER II
THE SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT SERVICES: THEIR NATURE AND
CONTROL: PREPARATION FOR WAR
SECTION 1.-THE DIRECTORATE OF SUPPLIES AND TRANSPORT
AND THE SERVICES WHICH IT CONTROLLED
The Supplies and Transport Services of the British Army, as organized before
the outbreak of war, were combined in the Directorate of Supplies and Trans-
port, as part of the Quarter-Master-General's Department of the War Office.
These services covered a wide range, as will be seen from the following
list of the responsibilities of the Director of Supplies and Transport during
peace, and at the outbreak of war in 1939:
(a) The administration of supply, transport, and barrack services at
home and in stations abroad, including the civilian personnel employed
(b) The provision, custody, maintenance, and issue, of food supplies and
(c) The custody and issue of Barrack stores.
(d) The inspection, storage, issue, and repair, of all M.T. vehicles on
units, or with other units driven by
R.A.S.C. personnel, and the maintenance of replacement and mobiliza-
tion reserves therefor.
(e) The presentation of specifications; preparation of estimates, statistics,
and demands on contract branches, for the supply of such vehicles and
their component spare parts and stores.
(f) The custody of reserve stocks of M.T. spare parts and stores for such
(g) The impressment of M.T. vehicles on mobilization to meet the require-
ments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
(h) The operation of the peace subsidy scheme in respect of certain types
of M.T. vehicles required for W.D. purposes on mobilization.
(i) Animal transport for general transport services.
(k) Liaison with the General Staff and Adjutant-General branches in
connection with the organization and mobilization of the R.A.S.C. for
Field Force and other projects.
During the war, several important functions were added to these responsi-
(I) Control and operation of W.D. vessels on coastwise services, and the
formation of the R.A.S.C. Fleet of vessels and motor boats, organized
into R.A.S.C. water transport companies and motor boat companies.
(m) The operation of amphibians by the R.A.S.C.
(n) The supply and maintenance of forces by air, involving the setting
up of an air despatch organization.
(o) The control and organization of the Army Catering Corps.
(p) Responsibility for barrack services requirements.
WO 277/21.
27
WO27 7/26
