The new organization also involved the transfer of a number of R.A.S.C.
officers and other ranks to R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E., while the officer then
holding the appointment of D.D.S.T. (T.), S.T.3, became Director of Mechani-
cal Maintenance (D.M.M.), later changed to Director of Mechanical Engineer.
ing (D.M.E.), as head of R.E.M.E.
Changes at War Office
S.T.3(b) which had dealt with the provision of R.A.S.C. M.T. vehicles and
spare parts and stores for units of R.A.S.C. responsibility, and with all repairs
to R.A.S.C. M.T. vehicles, became redundant.
A number of the staff, hitherto
employed on these specific duties in S.T.3(b), were transferred, the A.D.S.T.
and six other officers going to the Directorate of Warlike Stores as a new
ordnance branch (W.S.6) and a D.A.D.S.T. to the new D.M.E. Branch.
The residue of the technical work of S.T.3(b) in connection with the
operation and maintenance and minor repairs of R.A.S.C. vehicles was
merged into S.T.3(c).
A year later, however, it was evident that these transfers had left S.T.3
with inadequate staff to deal with these technical matters, and S.T.3(b) was
resuscitated, under an A.D.S.T., in September, 1943.
The Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport, R.A.S.C., continued to operate
as before, in respect of R.A.S.C. vehicles, and to receive defect reports from
R.A.S.C. units, irrespective of the new repair procedure, although close co.
operation with the 'R.E.M.E. Inspectorate was instituted.
It was agreed in August, 1942, that W.S.6 Branch would take direct
action with the M.O.W.T. on all matters affecting the actual acquisition of
M.T. vehicles hitherto undertaken by S.T.3; and that S.T.3 should continue
to deal with all questions concerning hirings, rates of hire, transport services
under contract, and other operational transport subjects.
The fusion of the R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. M.T. Census Records was com-
plete by August, 1942, and the M.T. vehicle records of all " A " and "B"
(including late R.A.S.C.) vehicles were thereafter maintained by the Central
Census Branch, C.O.D., Chilwell.
Procedure for Repair
The future procedure for repair, overhaul, and replacement, of "B"
vehicles, including those R.A.S.C.-operated, was considered at War Office
in December, 1942, and it was agreed that the previous R.A.S.C. system of
immediate replacement to units of all vehicles evacuated for repair, should
be adopted for all units, and that the R.A.S.C. system of documentation
should also be adopted throughout the Army.
Supply of Spare Parts
In the organization for provision, holding, and issue, of spare parts re
quired for R.A.S.C. operated vehicles in the Field, it was agreed that the
existing R.A.S.C. system should remain substantially unchanged.
ter XII.)
(See Chap
At home. R.A.S.C. units were to submit indents to D.A.D.O.S. of the
formation or district, and not to M.T.S.Ds. direct, as before the fusion.
8
supply of requirements would then be effected through normal ordnance
channels.
The latter arrangement proved unsatisfactory in practice, and there were
serious delays in the issue of stores through ordnance channels to R.A.S.C.
units.
A revised procedure was consequently introduced by which all R.A.S.C.
transport units submitted their indents for M.T. stores direct to the command
ordnance depot concerned, and not through the A.D.O.S. or D.A.D.O.S. of
the formation, etc.
Co-operation and Reciprocity in Maintenance of Vehicles
In order to ensure maximum economy in petrol and rubber, it was decided
that repairs and inspection of
vehicles (including those R.A.S.C.-
operated) would be carried out, wherever possible, in the nearest suitable
R.A.S.C. or R.E.M.E. workshop.
The principle was to be applied in a commonsense and reasonable manner.
The fact that a nearby workshop did not normally service a particular unit,
or was outside the specific command or formation boundary, should not
prevent repair or inspection being undertaken by that workshop, if, in doing
so, the necessity for a longer journey could be avoided.
Phase Il
The second phase of the reorganization was that in which all repair
facilities existing in the workshop platoons of R.A.S.C. transport units would
pass to the control of R.E.M.E.
As early as November, 1942, all commands
at home and abroad were asked to submit their views as to the scope and
implementation of Phase II.
The conclusion reached was that Phase II should
not be implemented at that time. This was confirmed in April, 1944, when
the policy was enunciated that, as the result of a review, in the light of
experience gained during actual operations of the vehicle repair and recovery
organization in the field, the repair and recovery of vehicles operated by
R.A.S.C. personnel was to be carried out by the workshop platoons of those
companies.
Any work beyond the capacity of those workshop platoons was
to be dealt with by R.E.M.E. workshops. This policy had not been changed
when the war ended.
Provision of Artificers
The question was also examined as to whether eventually all maintenance
tradesmen of types common to the several arms of the Service should be pro-
vided by R.E.M.E.
This included the application of the policy to the R.A.S.C.,
with a view to the eventual possibility of all inspection and repair facilities
in the R.A.S.C. becoming the responsibility of R.E.M.E.
Commands at home and overseas were consulted, and the decision was
that R.A.S.C. should continue to provide their own tradesmen.
SECTION 4.- AIR SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT
Supply and Maintenance by Air
The primary function of the R.A.S.C.
was the delivery of their daily
requirements to the troops in battle, and any new form of transport, which
enabled this to be done more quickly and efficiently, called for the immediate
WO 277/21
WO277/26
