terminal.
Orders came to main control, and were passed to group control
rooms, which passed them out to pumphouses.
Diagrams in main control
and group control rooms showed the position and state of every valve, in the
whole system, and in the group, respectively.
whether each valve was open
or shut.
A red or green disc showed
The shift officer on duty in main
control could see at a glance what the situation was, and, in the event of a
leak, could use the alternative lines, and so isolate the faulty section for repair.
Distribution of P.O.L.
As the armies advanced, the pipeline system was steadily extended, at
the rate of about three and a quarter miles a day, and connected up with
available bulk storage.
The filling centre near Rouen now proved to be too
far back, owing to the difficulty of returning empty jerricans.
Filling centres
were therefore set up in the Advance Base area, and, in November, the Mobile
Petrol Filling Centres controlled by Army were withdrawn and placed under
G.H.Q. control, which left Armies with no responsibility for filling jerricans.
In addition to the pipelines, the Belgian and French canal systems were
extensively used for the distribution of P.O.L., and 10,000 tons of bulk
P.O.L. barges were at the disposal of S.T.
It was agreed that the routing of
these barges should be done entirely by S.T.
Special requirements of P.O.L. were the supply of fuel for the fog-
dispelling apparatus on airfields, known as "Fido", which consumed 90,000
gallons a night; and a squadron of the R.A.F., operating jet planes, required
3,000 gallons of kerosine a day.
P.O.L. Containers
After the break-through, and the subsequent advance to the Dutch
frontier,
the supply of returnable containers had considerably diminished,
causing such a serious shortage that special arrangements had to be made
for their collection, and over a million were collected in a month.
War Office had agreed to maintain a minimum production of l4 million
non-returnable containers a month for M.T. 80 spirit, and also held a reserve
of 30,000 tons of M.T. 80 in non-returnable containers.
In consequence,
M.T. 80 in these tins was imported in order to improve the situation, and by
the middle of November the average daily imports had risen to 2,750 tons.
Had the pursuit been continued into Germany,
been invaluable.
these imports would have
As it was, by the beginning of December, 1944, about 30
per cent. of the whole packed stock of 21 Army Group, or about 20,000 tons,
was held in non-returnable tins..
Then arose the problem of turnover, and the
necessity for stopping the accumulation ose stops in this type of container.
A difficulty was that good can discioline had by then been enforced with
regard to the return of jerricans, and if " flimsies
" were put into circulation
back to jerricans.
in large quantities, it might be dificult to " insis " is can discipline on going
container was almost non-existent.
The jerrican had proved most satisfactory. the leakage with this type of
not generally in use in the Army area.
The 4-gallon non-returnable tins were
many in the Army area, received petrol in barrels.
Most units in the L. of C. area, and
Many of the 620-gallon
portable petrol tanks were installed in the lines of static units, etc.
366
Operation " Goldflake"
This operation was the move of 1 Canadian Corps and 5 British Divisio
from Italy to 21 Army Group, and began during February, 1945. 21 Arm
Group asked for additional non-divisional troons to cover the reauirements
i these formations, bie unipovey was enunciated by War Office hatens
intes in administrative units was precluded, and any such units whichay
Amy Group considered essential must either be given up by the theatr from
chich a formation came, or else be provided from 21 Army Group resouros.
The demands for transport were considered justifiable, but it was realized
that, in certain cases, notably in respect of G.T. Companies, the theatre might
rot be able to surrender the total numbers required, and 21 Army Group
would therefore have to meet the difference.
Eventually, in addition to
formation second line transport, the following transport units accompanied
the formations from Italy: —11 G.T. Companies, seven Artillery Platoons.
one Tank Transporter Company, one Bulk Petrol Transport Company, one
Bridge Company, and one Ambulance Car Company.
A "C" Type Petrol Depot also arrived.
From the supplies aspect, the chief problem was the provision in 21 Army
Group of the additional supply units required, there being almost no resources
in the United Kingdom from which they could be produced.
It was difficult for the War Office to assess accurately the respective loads
borne by the supply units of 21 Army Group and A.F.H.Q., owing to the lack
of detailed local knowledge and information.
The ration strength of 21
Army Group was 1,200,000, that under A.F.H.Q., 1,400,000, while the con-
templated transfer amounted to 170,000.
To meet its increased commitments,
21 Army Group asked for four B.S.Ds., six mobile field bakeries, three field
butcheries and C.S.Ds., and two D.I.Ds.
The claim for bakeries was thought
crossive by War Office; but one was offered by A.F.H.Q., and two could
with difficulty be taken from the bread-producing force in the United King-
dom. The B.S.Ds. and D.I.Ds. could not be found, but the field butcheries
iere covered by three, included in the order of battle, but not yet sent to
21 Army Group.
While the demand seemed extravagant, it had to be remembered that the
nation strength of 21 Army Group was forecast to rise, in the comparatively
neat future, to no less than two million.
(In fact, it never quite reached that
Saue) On the othes than A FiliO, had, from the begining of the can:
paign, been verv short of sunolv units. due chieflv to the serious under
estimate in the early planning of the ration strength of the theatre
Eventually. the three Field Butcheries and two Field Bakeries (mobile
were sent from the United Kingdom. and A.F.H.Q. sent two Field Bakeries
(mobile). 21 Armv Group were told that their requests for the remainde
also Chapter VII (Italy).
of the units could not be met, and they would have to do without them
More Supply Units Required
At much the same time as the " Goldfake" problem was being faced, a
quite senarate demand came f1 Am Co feeditional suppls
units. This was based on its maximum estimated requirements, if all their
the increase in ration strength rising from the liberation of Holland, the
emmitments, as then foreseen, materialized at the same time.
They included
1B 2
(31452)
367
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
