pg_0009.pdf:
27TH ARMOURED BRIGADE
OPERATION "GOODWJOD".
Has Drawy
JOE SECRET
27 AB/292/G
35 Jul 44
Copy No
13.
Attached at Appr "A" is Movement Table for assembly of mits for
Operation GOODWOOD.
2,
Units will move with complete "p" Echs and "Al" Echs.
30
All Units on arrival EAST of Canal will pay particular attention
to concealment;
vehs and personnel will be sited out of air and ground
obsorvation in so far as it is possible.
Once in Assembly Areas there
will be no movement during daylight except for DRs and the odd Jeep.
4. (a) Rogt "A2" Echs remain in Bde "A" Ech aroa.
(b) Rogt "B" Echs will move to Regt present "p™ Ich aroas under Undt
arrangements.
(o) Bae HQ "A" Ech remains present location,
1) Main Bão HQ plus one Scissors Br will move in small partios t
chard 078757 on 16 Jul 4 (Orders separately
Two Scissors Brs u/c E Riding Yeo will move so as to arrive E Riding
Teo present location by 1700 hrs 15 Jul We
6.
Staffs Yeo will organise a 17 pdr Tir Ip of 4 Iks under a IP Idr which
will most probably be placed u/e 13/18 H aftez 1400 hrs 16 Jul.
If this
Tp is used by 13/18 H it will be used as a Ip and held
in Reserve by RHO
Under no circumstances will individual tks be placed u/c 13/18 H Ips.
7• INTERCOMMUNICATION
(a) Units will assume permanent listening watch immediately they loave
their present locations.
(b) Wireless silonce will be strictly maintained by all stas EAST of the
This means
that all Nettirg and Check Nots must be effectod
before Units leave their present loctitions, as far as possible.
Netting done EAST of the Canal must be done by wavemeter.
c) Wireless may be used during moves in an emergency until Units cros
Canal.
hereafter 'B' set only may be used to complete the move
'A' Set will NOT be used.
Security on the
'B' Set must be 100% - the enemy can intercept on the
'B' Set frequenoy.
(a) When established in their new concentration assembly areas Units will
liaise with neighbouring formations and endeavour to establish line
communications, notifying this HQ of results.
18. MET ....o:

