pg_0037.pdf:
10.
5. Burials
In order that graves may be sited neatly a plate marked "NEXT GRAVE"
will be provided,
and placed in the position to be occupied by the first
grave
4 each cemetery by
the fmn responsible for selecting the cemetery site.
This pluce will then be placed in
the position to be occupied by the
second. grave,
and so on,
by the offr responsible for tho provious burial.
A copy
of the burial return,
AF W 3144,
or 3314A,
is NOT required at the
War Office. These forms will be disposed of as follows :-
(a) The original will be addressed:-
33 Graves Registration Unit,
and will not be sent to DAD Graves,
Second Army.
(b) The copies (two in the case of own dead and three in the case
of enemy dead) will be sent to GHQ 2nd Echelon.
In order to facilitate registration
the offr conducting
ensure that the burial form is properly and legibly completed.
6.
Tyre Pressures
Damage to
tyres, other than by enemy action,
is almost always due to
underinflation®
This is particularly noticeable just now, and
no doubt that drivers tend to reduce pressures on rough roads to give
greater comfort. Pressures must be kept correct and checked DATY.
are few replacement tyres available and the rubber shortage is still aoute.
7. Reclanation
The W Crock Park is now closed.
8.
Sma]1 kit of oas
Cas evac to CCSs should take with them minimum requirements of small kit
fork, spoon, washing material,
towel, razor
and shaving brush.
cas are sent without them they are merely caused unnecessary discomfort.
It is a
unit responsibility to ensure that cas are accompanied by their
small kit whenever possible.
9.
Claims and Hirings
(a) Claims
and Hirings Service is now established to deal with all civilian
claims for requisition of land or buildings, damage to
crops etc.
Application for the use of land or buildings should be made in the first
place to Town Major (if available).
Only in cases of emergency will requisitioning be carried out by other
using A.F. A.3686.
offrs, w DAD Claims - Firings at 1 Corps.
Duplicate AF. A.3686 will then be sent to Bao
(b) Every effort will be made to avoid leaving civilians without sufficient
acen for their own minimun use,
and danage to growing crops will be
avoided where suitable alternative land is available.
Further, the
following will not be requisitioned without prior authority from this H. l-
Places of worship
- Convents
Local Govt buildings still functioning
Public utility undertakings.
Hospitals.
Places of
exceptional historio or artistic interest.
(c)
Chattels, furniture, etc, will not be requisitioned without prior
authority from this H.Q, and strong discinlinary
action will be taken
in cases of irregular requisitioning of such property.
Amn empties will be collected as follows:
Different types in separate paokages.
(ji) Fuze covers, clips,
safety caps, plugs etc in fuze boxes,
(iji) Cart cases (except SAA) and fuze cylinders in their correat
boxes if available.
(iv) Packages should be fastened and marked to denote contents.
Fired SAA will be packed in sacks.
SAA bandoliers, cartons, charges may be repacked in empty
Care must be taken to
avoid including live components and explosives in
empties. Any cas resulting will be investigated, and if negligence is proved
offenders will be punished.

