doris spl-203207 (ALBERT DUAN)
Return by (20/11/2025 07:00:04)
WO 171/426
14624323
AK DUAIY
Document 5:
Document 4:
Document 3:
Document 2:
Document
Documen
TON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
f mobilisation or
(v) Dead come of pen in at or at inpant can pete, factor fein
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
c. 36), and personal
sumy, war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Tha Nam i i que in a te within e no he her should to sty at.
data upon vect. Is object improvemen a historia record epipation,
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
u, or Pens should be entered up nch in the veer grind thy ve tit at the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
) Ace of each field ution a is are pet cool ty of each op vatione of
(i Copies re orders, or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
oF other per it shent be ma pe clear that the officer de initials the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
prepain a aly so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(i) In decisit osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Darcy eatin he cements during the pot treat fos are or asid present dispositions.
See F.sA., All iaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
"i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preeding month will
to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(* The duplicate copy, deadly marked a soch a carats o me to ries chator
units will be
i choos to to tan at te to cord to tie not To eat utody.
te in l the month duple of cop tyc
the uncone No The the in entered should to the tin he tren i hoto
stretchers.
round sheets.
airbome sloopina bags.
nel tin kerosens.
invalid packs.
5 Airborne Ponniors (standara contents)
one outraciont egpt to donl with 500 cas.
"will drop following sups in resupply programe
An meet c
Ax A
• B
B
