ents (Sec. 36), and
is representatives.
war duties will be
NOTE B.—Sce also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
Note C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and to provide
data
upon
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administration.
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
A.F. C.2118.
It will be eated up foil, mach eat incialed ly the fier depaird to map it. e
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTe.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 1.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(* at alien. ocent due the pretenty one hour and prent dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occu
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and rat
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be m
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. IV.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(il) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ini) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketche
relating thereto, to
operating ludin any ket he to the delay ng the 0, to sup
supplement the
e account of
numbered, and each will h
to appendices will be made in the let derive end caning the apport ten es
PARA 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :
first day of the
ERRATE
the unit concerned.
SO NO. - The on need told be the time the iren i one order reaches
Month and Year JAN. 1q44.
Date
FIGSAURY CAMP
WINTERBeMANE JaMiY.
GUNNER.
23
28.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
Unit 6. 0 Mon
24 py. Army Form
Commanding Officer W. D. MoRn
CAPT.
References to Appendices
Received UM. 79/MOB/5774/597 (AG5 MOB) d. 5- Jan444
Capt- Marris look 10 men to an Auarel Parade at Bulfond, mhere
a Certificate al Meril was precented to ADOS, Pk. Col Fielding RAOC
alonelfaering, D005 airbornetances vicited the lit
R1 Rame virited COD Bicests ne. "A' Vehicle lares.
Pasting Lustruction for Pt Levelt 2 ife receired 21AB8p/3166/2/0/A/0 dzap/4+ mon
Chit ou Eercise Navelt. Three Horsa lliders used,
one for persannel from Store, Cors to Arenton auer
1 Coal ACe; y Cars 5 cut 474; y homies 3 ton 4x4 buired,
lesthen 30 items an G 1098. 11. home applied ferozife poly
e of your doc
its - Enquire a
e documents are in use
Desk for full details
lents in your Bulk Or
u have requested
