pg_0399.pdf:
V07795 (398) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
367
The field returns are filed after the record and statistical sections
have recorded such information as may be required.
So far as circumstances allow, it will be the constant endeavour
ot the reinforcement section to return personnel to their original
unit and to avoid cross postings and transfers. Esprit de corps is
fostered and the contentment of personnel thereby assured; whether
this may be always possible, nowever, will depend on many considera-
tions, chief amongst which are questions of man power and the
relations of the army to its line or lines of communication.
5. From the field returns the O. i/c 2nd Ech. will complete
consolidated strength returns for the information of commanders,
&c., as may be ordered. Aiso on the 4th of each month he will
forward to the respective personnel branch at the War Office and to
the Army Agents a nominal roll of offcers, by units, on A.F. B 158,
• on strength on the last day of the preceding month. Similarly
A.F. B 157, for other ranks, by units, will be furnished to O. i/c
home records concerned.
(7) A.F. W 3010. Casualty return-Officers and nurses.
A.F. W 3011, Casualty return— Other ranks.
A.F. W 3012.
Casualty return Officers and other ranks attached
from another unit or corps.
1. Casualty returns as above will be rendered by commanders of
all units in the field to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. daily or as often as
practicable.
These returns should contain accurate particulars of all battle
casualties, wounds, accidents, &c., promotions, appointments,
reinforcements, transters, postings,
attachments, &c., admissions
to and return to duty from hospitals, C.C.S., &c., furlough, leave,
of-kin with postal address, transfers to or from the "X" List and
any other items affecting the taking on or striking off strength or
concerning an officer's, nurse's or soldier's record of service.
2. Casualty returns on A.F. W 3010 and A.F. W 3011 will be
used by units when reporting casualties to officers, nurses or other
ranks counting against the posted strength of units, i.e., personnel,
who actually belong to their unit.
Casualties to personnel belonging to the " X" list will be reported,
on A.Ps. W 3100 and W 3011 respectively, by the .C. unt by which
the other, nurse or soldier was administered when the casualty
occurred.
V07795 (398) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

