pg_0402.pdf:
V07795 (401) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
370
[Appendix III.
Item 9, Column F. These forms will be compiled by the officers in
charge of the record sections from the various returns received by
0. i/c 2nd Ech. and should contain a complete record of, and will be
the olfcial authority for, every circumstance attecting the personal
services of officers and nurses (other than such promotions, appoint-
ments, &c., as are notified in the London Gazette) and other ranks.
In the case of "X" list personnel, separate copies of Part II
orders will not be sent to the units with which such personnel are or
were administered.
In the case of officers of the Royal Marines serving with the
military forces in the field, manuscript extracts from A.F. O 1810A
will be prepared and forwarded to the Admiralty by the O. i/c
2nd Ech.
(10) A.F. W 303A (Nominal roll of patients in general hospitals)•
A.F. W 3034A (Progress report of dangerous and serious cases
in general hospitals).
1. A.F. W 3034.-Forwarded daily to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. by
general hospitals; names of patients will be inserted by the arms of
the service to which they belong.
A copy of A.F. W 3034 will be forwarded daily by general hospitals
to the Casualty Section, War Office.
On receipt by the O. i/c 2nd Ech., this form is passed to the.
casualty section. In the casualty section the information is ex-
tracted as follows :—
1. Any information regarding an officer or nurse is extracted on
to the individual's index card kept by the casualty section
(the casualty section keeps a card index of all battle and
sick casualties affecting officers).
ii. All information is extracted and sent to sections concerned
for verification and when verified inserted on B 103.
iii. After verification the extract is returned to the casualty
section and by them such information as is required (see
Note (7) para. 5) is forwarded in the. casualty list and
hospital return to the War Office, and to record offices.
iv. On receipt of A.F. W 3034, when used as a nominal roll
of invalids proposed for embarkation, the Q. i/c 2nd Ech.
will prepare the invalids' documents for sending home, and
on receipt of the ship's label on A.F. W 3083 (see Note 12)
will check the nominal roll against the ship's label and
despatch the documents of the men who have actually
been sent home. He will also notify the paymaster and
V07795 (401) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

