pg_0401.pdf:
V07795 (400) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
369
iv. Gas cases.
v. Self-inflicted wounds. (Brief particulars to be stated if
possible.)
6. A daily hospital return on A.F. W 3015, numbered consecu-
tively and arranged regimentally, will be rendered (together with the
daily casualty lists) by the officer i/c 2nd echelon as follows :-
For officers and nurses. —1 copy to Casualty Section, War Office.
For other ranks and enrolled civilian personnel.-1 copy to
officer i/c home, records concerned and 1 copy to Casualty
Section, War Office, for information.
A copy of each hospital return will be retained by officer i/c 2nd
echelon for reference.
This return will include particulars of all sick and wounded
personnel admitted to and discharged from hospital or other medical
units in the theatre of war. Dangerous and serious cases (and
progress) will be shown under distinct headings.
(8) A.f. B 2069. Offence report.
This report is rendered weekly by commanders of units to the
0. i/c 2nd Ech., and will contain a complete record of all offences
committed and punishment awarded since the submission of the last
report.
On receipt by the O. i/c 2nd Ech. the form is passed direct to
the record section, where the form is checked and the entries
extracted on to A.Fs. B 103 and Part II orders of the men and unit
concerned.
Any question arising as to the illegality or irregularity of any
particular entry will be taken up by the record section with the
responsible officer on the staff.
When finally checked and in order, the report will be sent to the
home record office.
(9) Part II Regimental orders.
Part II regimental orders for an army in the field are compiled
at whose offices is
sat sed a we the the orde to a serian to some es ig
specially detailed for the purpose charged with the duty of keeping
the records of each unit in the army.
Separate Part Il orders will be prepared for officers and nurses
(A.F: O1810A) and other ranks (manuscript) each series being
numbered consecutively, and disposed of as detailed in Table II,
V07795 (400) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

