pg_0405.pdf:
V07795 (404) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
373
2. A.F. B 2090C (Presumption of death on lapse of time).
A.F. B 2090c will be used in connection with the acceptance for
official purposes of the deaths of soldiers previously reported missing
and respecting whose fate no further information has been received.
War Office will send A.F. B 2090c in duplicate to O. i/c 2nd Ech.,
stating that it is proposed to accept death for official purposes.
The O. 1/c 2nd Ech. will complete A.F. B 2090c, and will send one
copy to the War Office and the duplicate to the regimental pay-
master.
3. The final decision regarding presumption of death will in all
cases be given by the War Office.
(17) A.F. B 117 (Report on accidental and self-inflicted injuries).
1. In every case of accidental or self-inflicted injury sustained by
any member of the army in the field, (whether fatal or not), A.F.
B 117 will be rendered to the O. i/c 2nd Ech., through the com-
mander of the formation concerned, and will be a record of the
considered opinion of the military authorities in the field.
2. In order to assist the responsible home authorities in assessing
claims to pension by the individual or his dependants, care should
be taken when completing this form to give the fullest possible
details concerning the circumstances of the injury, particularly
as regards the degree of negligence or misconduct, if any.
The commander of the formation concerned will invariably
endorse the form to show whether a court of inquiry has been held.
3. On receipt by the O. i/c 2nd Ech., the form is passed to the
section concerned where an abstract is made and passed to the
record section for inclusion in the individual's record.
The form is then passed to the War Ofice, a copy or abstract
being filed.
(18) A.B. 64 (Soldier's pay book).
1. This book is divided into two parts :—
i. The book proper containing the soldier's description, address,
next-of-kin, a blank form of will, and all information
affecting him. This book is the personal property of the
soldier and forms part of his effects. It is the duty of
his commanding officer to ensure that it is correctly
kept up to date and that all casualties affecting the soldier
which may appear in Part II orders are entered therein.
V07795 (404) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

