pg_0407.pdf:
V07795 (406) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
375
(22) A.F. W 3389 (Base depot strength state).
This form is rendered to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. daily by officers
commanding base depots made up to 1200 hours. This state shows
all ranks serving on the strength of the base depot, differentiating
between permanent staff and reinforcements, and whether fit for
the front or not. Reinforcements are shown by corps, and their
specialist trades, if any, must be stated. From this state the
reinforcement section of the 2nd Ech. selects the men he requires for
despatch to the front and orders them accordingly.
(23) A.F. A 3104 (Review of sentences awarded by Courts-Martial).
1. Where sentences are suspended under Section 57A, Army Act,
the superior military authority forwards A.F. A 3104 through the
O.C. the soldier's unit, to the O.i/c 2nd Ech. who is responsible for
bringing the case forward for review at intervals of not more than
three months.
14 days before the review is due, the O. i/c 2nd Ech. will forward
A.F. A 3104 to the competent military authority, through the O.C.
unit with which the man is serving, who will attach a conduct report
and copy of conduct sheet.
When all action on review has been taken, A.F. A 3104 will be
returned to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. through the man's O.C.
2. Sentences in execution upon men not discharged from the army
will be reviewed at intervals of not more than six months. In
such cases A.F. A 3104 will be sent to O. i/c 2nd Ech. by the com-
petent military authority through the O.C. the man's unit.
14 days before the review is due, the O. i/c 2nd Ech. forwards
A.F. A 3104 to the competent military authority in whose command
the man's unit is serving.
After review, the competent military authority will return A.F.
A 3104 to the O. 1/c 2nd Ech. through the commandant or governor
under whom the sentence is being served.
(24) Other secret and confidential documents.
Secret and confidential documents sent to the O. i/c 2 Ech.
for safe custody should be accompanied by a covering letter stating
whether the documents are required for future reference or whether
they are for custody only. In either case an exact list of the docu-
ments forwarded must be enclosed in the covering letter and in the
parcel containing the documents.
The parcel containing the docu-
ments, the envelope of the covering letter and the list of contents
must all bear the same distinguishing mark or number.
V07795 (406) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

