F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
crea for of the partian diary man do repe in depicate from the fist day of mobiliation or
() Each bean of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept tom the In the case of lordiations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NoTe B. —See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of sporta showing pos as is trooping
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reference.
i A cit, in cading native report on rations dra, to by a serberdine formation
later for the History of the War.
on Are diary. i be tered up that a eh tray in anded ey the of ep detailed to pepit,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
of her perse shout be made dea that the oficer who is to do the rie is the commander
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :
(1) Imp drast os dere, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
EYE CEN
Month and Year.. Was 1944
Date Hour
(See F.., a taries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:
(i) Unless otherwise
diar for the preceding month will
are attached.
he SPECIAL NOTE
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit 60 Innih Cant
Commanding Officer Ng e
107.
Beatline
References to Appendices
Ja/ten deies Cattericle Can k
Clops coses addies ADD England: Colche lE
Heal oie notifil as fined centre fa mit mail
Tnt 32 man.
Soléblishel entact inth leaT
T/Capt SC. Bron ACC Spendia Messin price
pra 9 Ba Rifla Brigade portal to unit prom
21 Afp ACe. pore.
moree ti HEMINESTONE delrainin at
NEEDHAM MARKET a them laT to Hemistre
lil accamodatal in repisitinal triedio
Wati suptis very limital. More mery
o no incidents.
May C.H.O. 2nd -chiero
guaranteed t
may have st
