Closure status: Open
9991969 (Albert duan)
Return by (21/11/2025 15:10:20)
WO 171/419
14627088
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in
Each bra oh sub the staf the the bea
adquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(ii) Unit commanders
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-
- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.-
-Any
question of doubt whether or not a war
The bar Ofice, London, S. W.1
o guit whether or not, to he dider Scoretary of State (5. 1),
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and Pop. vid data jon ise to se object is to furish a historical repria curations,
improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administation
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war
their formations
units any ideas opinions and recommencations, baseu on actual cavelieu
in regard to
alinment tactics. organisation and inter-servie
• short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War
A war diary will be entered up daily,
on AH. C. 2118.
tom F. can diary an obe ted that the caraction a d re
he extray in talled ey the oftep detailed to keep it,
or other person moul be made dear that the olicer he a is to do the dorical womander
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
PARa. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
ements during the past twenty-four hours anu preseat dispostu
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
nV Veralled account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
solowers and or animals should be noted
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.-
-Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the
occul, ol come to mouce
At the close of each day, events (vi
ven (vi) might ate hadime they
PaRA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F.
W.3008 and AF
W.3009) and of asch
set or instruction issued during the period covered by tof care operation o
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit. including anv sketches or m
operations furnished in the text of th
i relating thereto, to supplement the account of
diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief des
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
uptive heading naming the author. Reference:
(iv) Copies or important
and relevant aemi-ofhcial letters by comr
anders of formations,
they should be included).
have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
LARA. O.
(See F.S.R., Volume II)
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, eto
PARA. I-FORMATIONS AND UNIS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(4) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the
receals month wu
be lorwarded on the hrst dav of the succeedin.
the offcer i/c G.H.O
and echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendice.
are attached.
(i The dali we copy, periody
early marked as
such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
the diaries of units will be sent within
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records ofices at home tot
SPECIAL NOTH
the unit concerned
The the in onered should be the tine the information treat it reoce
Army Form C. 2
Unit.
HQ RASC 3 BrT Inf Div.
Commanding Officer It Col. A.K. Yapp.
References to Appendice
INVERNESS
Month and Year April, 1944.
Date
How
WAR
DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
C.O. proceeded to London for Conference.
Capt, R.H. Wharton (Adjutant) and Capt. G. Fairbrother returned from leave.
Capt • GAR Yull.,.
Returned fron Course - No. 3 Coy Conds (FF) at the
OTS SOUTHEND-ON-SEA.
Obtained result 'D'.
Capt • RoH. Wharton.
Awarded 1939/43 Star under conditions of ACI
Capt. E. Barlow.
450/44•
2/ It. Brooks, MDB.
Posted this HQ (Supernumerary to Establishment)
from supernumerary strongth of 48 Coy RASC (Inf Div Ips).
2/ Lt•
Dimond A. (Supernumerary to this EQ WE) • Posted to 1683 Arty
Rest: PI. Churwell.
CTBA HQ 3 Br Inf Div.
2/ Lt•
Brooks •
Attached to HQ 3 Br Inf Div as M.T.O.
Maj• RoR. Vonning.
Proceeded on leave,
Capto G.A.Ro Yull.
Proceeded on leave.
Lt •
G. Lo Neighbour.
OTBA 90 Arma Bde Coy RASC and joined this FR
for duty.
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd.
51-1541)
MaY
WAR DIARTES SECTIO
13 MAY 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
S
82:60 9L 920Z/OL/OL
096L666
S802291L
11 OM
23/INFAN-
