doris spl-203207 (Albe
Return by (21/11/202:
14625861
WO 171/427
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
(1V) Detailed account of operations
operations, topographical and climatio
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
o1 modinsauon or
ordinate commana
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
As regaras casualties the names and ranks of
oncers and the number or other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted
in decruon in the case or units on the 1.. or . changes in stores, transport, euc
(v11) Meteorological notes
c. 36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political
, not in the order
occur, or come to notic
It, or come to notice At enteres up, not in the order as give
n above but at the time ther
o1s representatives
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F
W.3008 and A.F. W.3009
and of each oneration or
he war diarv
vel ul stucuon issued ains the period covered bv the current volume o
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NOTE C.
nestion of doubt whether or not a
y question of dont witch am i, to that diary should be best & biat
The War Office, London, S.W.l.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
drawn up by a subordinate formation
and *ARA. 2.—A war diary is Secro
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operation
rovide data uron which to base future improvements in army training, equipment
oreanisation and administration
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
extraction and retention or appenaices, mays, cuc..
AR C2118
It 1s to De nOu
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the
entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
numbered. and each will have a brief descrintive headi
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.211‹
appenuices wul b
ning the author. Keference
Giaries will contorm to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
PARA 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES
Disposal will be made monthlv of war diaries as follows :
Para. 3.-Omitted.
ParA. 4.—-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded wher
preparing a diary :-
(i) Impottant orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Day cations cement during to storey four hours and present dispositions,
Ga) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the stal
1) Unless otherwise ordered, the origmal copy or a war cary for the preceding month wil
be lorwaraed on une nirst day or the succeee
any monen chrect to the omcer 1/c end Echelo
for transmission to the War Ofhce, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
• The dunlicate conq clearly marked as such. of a cavalry or infantry brionde or hich
irmation will be forwarded within a demod of two months to the ofncer 1/c 2nd Fchel
for transmission to the Under-secretary or state, lne war vice.
2n Echelon to be transmitted to recor
SPECIAL NOT
entered should be the time the information or or
the unit concernee
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text
F7E33
WAR DIARY
Arm
orm C. 2118
Month and Year DECEMBER 19L2
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required)
Unit. ArA 6 Airborne Divisi
Commanding Officer
C.A.
summary ot Events and Information
References to Appendice
DULL ORL
BULTORT
•Dec 1 236
FIGHELDEAN
PIGHELDE AN
R.A. on Block Leave till 16 Dec 44,
less by Ma; Can 1.T.
MC at Garrison
to command Airborne Cop Theatre
"Prepare to Move Overseas""
SIRA moves off with Advance Party.
FICHELDE AN
moves to staging camp DAGENHAN.
Artives 1600 hrs.
DAGENHAM
imbarked TILBURY for NORTH VEST EUROPE,
CALAIS
Arrived Calais. Disembarked, CRA and. BURA
moved direct to operational area,
TORA with main party to PATIMAGE (ne RENNAIX).
Divisional Artillery in Action.
PATIMACE
0900
SI GERARI
Main Party moved to Operational Area, Arrived 1800 hrs.
DI GERARI
No Activity, No Shells Fired "Order of Battle"Attched!
ST GERARI
Activity. No Shells Fired "Order of Battle"Attached!
No Activity. No Shells Fired "Order of Battle"Attached,
SONNEL
Tangor
