Oner
doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (21/11/2025 07:00:03)
WO 171/427
14625861
1680
kept no
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
or not a war diary should De
NOTE C.
will be guest, hot done whether of not to wher diady should be ket i sit
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
Its obiect is to furnish a historical record of operations
and lo provide daa dion which to
ovide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
i or unitsanged as opinions and e
m At C. diary will one noted that in
It is to be norea
rom a war diary is an offence under the Oficial Secrets Acts.
rech tract in talet by the offpendies, maps, elo,
NOTE.-It should be
nade clear that the other who initials th
r other person mentioned in para, I, not the officer he details to do the desic the commande
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(1) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) Dailyh tables in the
le caretar i the at treaty our hour and present dispositions
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
'ILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
y of mobilisation
operations,
topographical and climatic.
Hxact hour of imbortant occurrences. tactors aftecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructea, or quarters occupied
ubordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
of other ranks
s or tolord and of anie as should branted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc
(vil) Meteorological notes
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
ments (Sec. 36), and
occur, or come to nouce
NoTE. Events should be ent des up, caciday, events (vi)
not in une order as given above. out at the time thei
At the clos
and (vii) might be added
d his representatives.
ay, war duties will be
PARa. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F
W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during une perloa covered ov the current volume o.
the war diary.
i Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(i11) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a suborainate formatio
or unit. includine any sketches or mays reidens thereto, to supplement the account o
operations furnished in the text of the daly Pard. *, i above
appenaices will d
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive her
to append, ces will be made in the last column of A.P. C. 2118.
(iv) Copies o
s ol important and relevant aemi-othcial letters by commanders of formations
they should be included)
have been marked personal (provided the writer considers
(See FA., Vill dies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNIIS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(1) Unless otherwise ordered, the or the sue i a modia it the pre ofting i thO
varded on the first day of the
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(i) The duplicate copy, dearly on ted as such, the brigade a
the unit concerned
The The in emered should be the tina he storm in the torde
Army Form
HO RA 6 Airborne Division
Commanding Officer Brig. MoC.I. Faith
BULFORD
BULFORD
BULFORD
LARKHILI
SALISBURY
PLAIN AREA
MARRANI
RU SHTON
DIV AREA
Month and Year.
Hour
0900
1.000
3 Nov
6 Nov
1.700
8 Nov
13 Nov
16Nov
1000
21 Nov
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
NOVEMBER 1944+
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Informatior
Lecture by Brig R.W.loLeod (SAS) on "Operations by the SAS before and after
D-day.
Exercise BUG - Div HQ on deployment and drill to be adopted after landing.
1st and 6th Airbom
/ RA and Airldg LAA Bty RA, and FOU. for European and Far
Eastern theatres of war.
Airlag A tk Bty RA - "Battle Practice" at BLACKBALL FIRS. (6 prs and
2 Air lag IẠA Bty
nd HQ, Airbome.
RA come under coma for trg and adn - remain under op
Setting up HQ RA in
a phe a com ned with signals exercise on fou and
practice.
Loading of full G 1098 stores into gliders prior to Exercise REAR (Div tps)
Exeroise BEAR - practising setting up of Div HQ after initial landing in
an airborne opo
Gliders and parachute tps took part.
Visit by Coma 1st Allied Airborne Army and Coma 1st British Allied Airborne
Lecture by
with particular
CRA 1st Airborne
reference to arty.
• Div - "Account of Airborne Ops at ARNHEM",
Exercise EVE.
2 Para Bles Exercise with Airldg A tk Bty and FOU.
RA
chiefly concerned with practice of wireless conns
on Support and Gounter
Mortar nets.
WL.47724,093 2,000,000 8/48 W. H &
To Sheet 2.....
