doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (21/11/2025 07:00:03)
WO 171/427
14625861
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
TARA,
-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
111) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept Nom Ahe Arn the case of fodiations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.—Any
requestion of doubt whether of
though the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.),
+ a war diary should de
improvements in army training, equipment,
To effect this comma
their formations or units
in regard to weat for short-t
any ideas, opinions arganisation
oment. tacues, 0.5an
later her the History of the War.
me research in the Aisay, as well as matrial likely to be of value
n and inter-service
On AT C. 215. T
initialled hu the oficer detalled to keep i
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
or other person mentioned in paid
xer p. It mentioned in de cleat, thot the officer he details to to ene des
the officer who initiato the the cies is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:-
(1) Ind deant as ders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
lovements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositio
its or of formations are or assistau
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the stafl.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
v) Detailed account of operat and climat
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
perations, topograph
Clear sketches showing positions of troops al
important pnases
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or rollowers ana or ammais shoula de norea
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time th
occur, or come to notice.
At the close or cach day, events (Vi, ane (vll mient ve aade
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation o
outine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume o
the war aldry
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(iv) Copies of important
cluains a
/ which
ey should be includ
I relevant demolia lets by come the wife contions,
PARA 6—Al diames will coniorm to the reguanons for aratung orders, reports. ei
See F.S.R., Volume Il
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the
the spECTAt NOT The in entered should be the tine the information rot reacher
Place
BULLORL
- TE
Month and Year..APRIL. 1944
Date
Hou
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
20/23
Corps exercise MUSH in CIRENCESTER area
Unit..HQ. RA 6 ARBORNE DIVISION
Commanding Officer It. Col J.S.I. 1
is, No, he
Keterences to Appendice:
G. H.Q. 2nd Echeton
Z C
WL 47724/999 2,000,00
gAR W. H. & S. 51/6375
