doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (21/11/2025 07:00:03)
WO 171/427
14625861
uestion of doubt whether of not a the Under-Secretary c
Its object
is to furnish a historical record of operations
A war diary is sh to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
and to provide data pistrat
and administration.
To elect this commanders of all grades are ecimenda tons, based in tact,
• war diaries of
eration which
their formations
in regard to weapor shot-feren
may ber the History of the War
daily, each entry
initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
On A1. C. 218
y will be entered
it is to be mo
ed that the extrac
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
trise is the command
i other per in henli be man pe clear, hot th
d in para. 1, not th
ficer who iris to do the derical work
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:
*) Ind deant star, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Daily locations.
Ball ate in the ament der in the pat twenty four hour and present dispostions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
MPILATION OF WAR DARTES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operation
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affectin
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
t day of mobilisation
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
,a subordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks o
and the number of other ranks ol
wers and of animals should be noted
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
pointments (Sec. 36), and
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.
Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time thes
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ge and his representatives.
Army, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F.
and of each operation o
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(i) A mit, if each na native or neport on o rations drat, o by pubert nate count on
ent the account of
endices will be
of tormatic
(iv) Copies of important
na relevant i mat of a lester ly come die of frontir
inely should be included)
(Se .., i dares will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless the is orderes, the origine cope dia mandia d for the precedice
be forwarded on t
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendice:
orwarded wit
, the Under-Secretary of State, of th
Bat toeton to be rile ento eat it of tro month to i bay
the spECTAt NO. The The tip rated should be the time the information oth
reaches
BULFORD
Month and Year. March.1944
Houl
22/23
25/.21.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Exeroise BIZZ I in FARINGDON area.
Exercise BIZZ II in FARINGDON area
Unit. HQ RA 6 ATRBORNE DIV
Commanding Officer It. Col. J.S.L. I
WAR DIARIES SET
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Wt. 47724/893 2,000,009
