Oner
doris spl-203207 (Albert Duar
Return by (21/11/2025 07:00:0
WO 171/427
14625861
Корт 1топ
NoTE B. —See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.
thot doubt whetieh arnes, to the diary shored te kept be a l
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
ot is to furnish a historical record of operations
ma To a day in To ta due inpon in any tale titan,
manders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
any ideas, pinions organisation and inter-service
later for the History of the War.
initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
or other pe it houl be in pe dear, that the ofter who imitate the laties is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
") Impotatos ters, instructions, reports, mesages or despatches received and isued,
(11) Dally locations
Daly eatin in overent deing the ost twenty four hour and present dispositions,
üi) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174),
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
xact nour or lmportant occurrences. lactors artecuing
opographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
of mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
bordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks o
oncers and the yulive.
ranks or followers and of animals should be noted
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vil) Meteorological notes.
nents (Sec. 36), and
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to nouce
of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
his representatives.
1, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
ila ol each Operduon o
(1) cope of each fielt retion (sue during tane pet .309) bay t of each operation of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference
iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formatio
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, t
(Para, 4, v above) Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptiv
ning the author. Reterence:
to appendices will be made in the last colu
(iv) Copies or amportant and relevant a mari letters prone hers it fomasions,
which may have been markea personal proviced the writer considers
they should be included).
ries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
(1) Unless otherwise ordered, the i the copy a modia yet the pre oding me th
arded on the first day of the
succeeding monun cirect to une orcer 1/c .11.0
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
(ii) The
duplicate copy, clearly on ted a such, the brigade hither on tich Will be
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned
he time en even recorded should also be given in the te
092. 10N0N2202(252)
MVS
DIV5)
