10171/2233
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate comman‹
ind area or sub-area of the L. of C
(ii) Unit commanders
(iti) Commanders of detachments of a unit
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.O. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36). and
nersonal stall.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives
• of formations and units of the Territorial Army. war duties will bi
kept vom the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv) Detailed account of operations
Exact hour of 1
operations, topographical and climatic
important phases.
Clear Sketches showing positions or tetin
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(v) Changes in establishment or strength.
AS regards casualties the names and rante
in addition in the case of units on the . of . overses id to an, tals spotle be
ollowers and of animals should be note
vil Meteorological note.
(vii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur. or come to nouc
should be ent led up, eatin the event as given above, bit at the tic
sven above, but at the time the
PARA. D.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(*) Acting of teh feld return (.. 303 an 300) ay of each potion o
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
na to provi
ween ta. ate object is for funich a historical record equipaint,
rganisation an
To effect this commanders
of all grades are encouraged to include
their tormanons of ules dity
the wal experience
ent, tactics,
which
organisation anc
in regard to weapons, equipme tes earch in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entere
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be note
the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that
r who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
nd decisions take
(i Daly oating Meet ge with or at renty-four hour and present dispositions.
(i Importable in the cease of lar the duties of each branch of the staft.
(iv) Copies or my orict mad relevant a marketicial letters by ovided der witter contides
they ding any which ma)
› have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
(Se .., Volume ianes will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i) Unless otherwise ordered, the onginal copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
he forwarded on the hrst dav of the succeeding month direct to the oincer 1/c GHO
are attached.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
(11) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded within a veriod of two months to the oicer 1/c u.h.o. nd Echelon to
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State. The War Office. The duplicate copies o
the diaries of units will be sent within a penod or three months to the omcer i/e u.a.s
ma chelon to be transmitea to recores onces di nome for sate custod.
the unit concernee
SPECT NEe The time entered should be the tial the informati he text, it e
Non-waterproof able vehs to include MCs.
orrect designation, ic, ll Austin K.3, 4 x 2.
Month and Year...ay. Wh
Date
Houl
Place
In the Fd
WAR DIARY
*INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY:
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
379 COy RASC (Arty) move to new location at Crook, Co Durham, less 1561 Arty Pl
at present on Exercise
"FABIUS" •
Proposed move of HQ CRASC still in abeyance.
CRASC makes repeated efforts to squash move to Kneresborough in view of bad
geographical
posn in
relation to Coys under comd.
As alternative suggests
opening Irg HQ in Bedford area, either at Somersham or Claphan Pk.
Decision made to move IQ to Somersham as above with small party at Scriven Hall,
Knaresborough.
Coy prepare to move into 65 Warwick Ave, Be sed
Routine Orders 17-
Army Form C. 2
Unit... HQ CRASC, 22 Ipt. Coln
Commanding Officer It Col J.W.Clement
References to Appendices
and new Pls
esborough,
for
2201/4•
TOTEL Of this Had WAR DIARIES SEPHON
at Fornham Pk
12 JUN 1944
CRASO returns from Nob Centre.
A retro potato for conference tomore - these are
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
discussed:
Appx 2 & 3
CRASC visits 21
Gp and discusses question of locations of Pls and the
porsonnel deficioncies.
/7 May (cont)
are for
one di
Bulk Orders are for one da
returned on the same day
Pease mark this box when you have fin:
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
One or more of your documents have spec
I requirements - Enquire at the Information
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
