THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
or it could never have been effected in time to meet the crisis.
The first stages of the advance from the bridgehead were slow,
and Second Army was being maintained from No. 2 ARH* (Army
Roadhead) in the area of Bayeux.
Plans were in hand to establish
the next ARH (No. 4) between
Glos la Ferrière and Rugles by
expanding the area occupied by XXX Corps FMC.
distance then being covered by the Corps in stocking their FMCs
were not too great, Army transport was available and was held in
readiness to stock this ARH.
While the necessary transport was
still available, it was decided to lift forward stocks of ammunition,
petrol and supplies as far as Falaise, and hold them there ready to
move forward to the new RHs.
As soon as this was done the move
forward to the Seine and on into Belgium began, and was so rapid
that issues were made from the stocks held at Falaise, while stocking
of No. 4 ARH was
done from Bayeux.
The next ARH to be
established was No. 6 at Hal, south of Brussels.
This was followed
by No. 8 ARH, centring around Bourg-Leopold.
This system of lifting forward and establishing dumps of goods
which were then rapidly consumed was adopted as standard practice
during the advance to the Meuse.
In retrospect, the system seems
undesirable; it places an unnecessary strain on depot staffs.
But it
did maintain a long and rapid advance and kept transport in
centrally controlled pools.
The method of operation of Army transport was to establish
a CRASC (Control) at the delivery end of the transport chain,
that is to say at the roadhead in use.
This CRASC had no transport
under command, but he and his headquarters received convoys as
they arrived,
co-ordinated their unloading
arrangements
despatched them back to RMA, with the least delay,
A similar
headquarters was established at the loading end in the RMA, whose
task was to regulate arrival of transport at the various loading
depots, ensure provision of labour and do everything possible to
lessen the time of the turn-round.
Most of the transport companies
were located at the loading end of the route, where they could most
effectively be rested, maintained and allocated to tasks.
But some
were located along the route, where companies were grouped under
CRASC (Operational) who were also responsible for organizing
staging camps.
Really good wireless communications were essential
to the success of this organization and ST Second Army operated a
rear link with RMA when distances became great, and also inter-
cepted all wireless signals between report centres.
DDST Second
Army was thus in possession of the current position of all convoy.
and the probable state of his forward stocks at any date in the near
future, for which plans were being made.
* ARH stands for Army roadhead or railhead,
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
38g
By September 10th, 1944, the railway lines from Bayeux to the
Seine had been repaired and rail was introduced in the L of C as
Second Army set up an organization on the
Seine for the clearance of railheads on the south of the river and for
movement of stocks by road transport to railheads on the north of
A ST rear link formed part of this organization, and was
later supplemented by representatives from Q and Q (Movements).
It continued to control the transfer of stores across the Seine until
such time as No. 6 ARH was established, when HQ 21
Army
Group set up a special control at Amiens.
'Trance', as it was
called, took over from Second Army rear link and controlled all
movement on the L of C behind the army rear boundary.
No. 8 ARH was stocked by road and rail.
Ten different railway
stations were used as railheads, and these circumstances forced
Second Army to create a special organization for the stocking of
this roadhead.
The railheads were divided into two groups, with
a CRASC Transport Column HQ allotted for the clearance of
railheads in each group.
The two CRASC set up a combined
headquarters at which were representatives of Q (Movements) and
Labour, Second Army.
When rear Second Army moved from the
area of the roadhead, a rear link was left behind to co-ordinate
activities there.
This organization worked well in conjunction
with the following arrangements which were made for obtaining
accurate information on the arrival of trains, in order that the most
economic use could be made of limited transport at the disposal
of the CRASC.
In order to overcome the effects of a civil railway
system which had not recovered from the destruction caused by
Allied bombing and enemy sabotage, ST Second Army formed a
railway check point with a Q (Movements) representative on the
main 'up' route.
This check point informed the CRASC direct
by wireless of estimated times of arrival of trains at each railhead.
The control of transport links forward of Army was often on a
similar basis, ST corps established their rear and forward control
points at ARH and FMA respectively.
These were formed by
CRASC corps troops and an additional MT column headquarters
allotted by army.
On the few occasions when the latter could not
be spared, CRASC corps troops split his headquarters to meet the
emergency.
The ST wireless net linked the DDST corps and both
control points, providing the means for full control over transport.
As the advance continued, the distance between ARH and FMAs
fluctuated. The establishment forward of a new ARH would
result in corps transport being required to cover only a small
As corps established
new FMAs
this mileage
increase until the advance justified the establishment of a new
roadhead by army. Corps demand for transport varied with the
