Landing
and
529
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
over the river Dives to prevent the approach of enemy reinforcements.
The GRASC's plan was to send two parachute platoons and three
jeep-trailer platoons by air on D Day, the remainder of the light
company travelling by sea. One heavy company would be engaged
solely in air despatch duties, while the other, loaded with second-
line holdings, was to go by sea with the assault force.
So great
was the competition for shipping space that the workshop vehicles
of this unit were 'frozen out'.
However, the artificers, determined
to get there, went on foot, carrying their tools. Airborne supplies
were to consist of a jettison drop, followed by a normal supply drop
the same evening. It was expected that the assault forces from
the beaches would join up with the division within a day or two,
bringing further supplies, but since there would be a general
scarcity in the beach-head in the early stages, three further supply
drops to the division were arranged for the first week.
In spite of the various contretemps which seem inseparable from
airborne operations, this plan was highly successful, and by o6oo
hours on D Day a dump had been set up in the orchard of the
Ferme d'Ecarde near Ranville and stocked with the produce of
the jettison drop. Although this had been very scattered, enough
was recovered to keep the division going until the link-up, the only
shortage being of 75 mm howitzer ammunition, of which 15,000
rounds was expended the first day, 13,000 the next, and 2,500 on
June 8th, when the first pre-loaded vehicles managed to get through
by land.
Collection and distribution were complicated by the fact that
several of the RASC men were 'dropped wide', and had to make
Wading
their way some miles through unfamiliar enemy country to a
location they had never seen.
Among them was the senior supply
officer, who encountered a German patrol, which he routed,
killing some, but was himself seriously wounded, and had to be
evacuated when he at last rejoined the column.
The CRASC
did not arrive until D plus t, the tow-rope having parted on his
glider, which landed at Worthing. In spite of these setbacks, by
the morning of D plus 1 the DMA was in full working order, and
enthusiasm.
the men, although very tired, were doing their job with great
For some time afterwards, all were overworked, for
from D plus 1 onwards ist and 44th Special Service Brigades
(Commandos) came under command.
They had no RASC units
of their own, and in consequence one attentuated company was
supplying the needs of five brigades.
1C7 1044
During the afternoon of D plus 2, the enemy counterattacked in
some strength across the glider landing zone, and many RASC
men were in action. The attack was successfully repelled.
At first, the &-gun 15 mm howitzer battery was located round the
