394
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
May I remind you, possibly for the last time, of the necessity of
three things:—
Speed in turn-round. This means speed in loading and unloading,
speed in thinking, speed in repairing, quick off the mark.
But not necessarily speed in driving go like Hell, but not
when you're driving.
Good road discipline.
Don't double bank or cut in.
the road if halting. Watch behind you and use your signals.
Look out for the b-
Good maintenance.
-y fool driver, but don't imitate him.
Keep those wheels turning at all costs.
loose nuts, that bit of grease, in and out of shops like lightning,
going?
You are comino to the last lan. Tet it do, good luct and good
Two units of the Corps deserve special mention for their part in
the actual assault Tha licht commanu of 6th Airhorn missional
RASC landed by parachute and glider and met heavy opposition,
suffering, before and after landing, a total of 36 casualties out of a
strength of go.
The company commander, Major C. P. R. Crane,
Was landed wide of his objective, but he collected his party and.
fought his way through to it. In spite of his heavy losses in men
hea equipment, and the difficulties of working under intermittent
heavy fire, he organized and inspired his company, so that the work
was satisfactorily performed.
Major Crane was
awarded the
Military Cross, and Cpl L. T. C. Knightly, of the same company,
to duty when severely
received the immediate award of the Military Medal, for devotion
wounded.
special mention is 536 (dukws) Company.
The other unit selected for
The preparations for
the airborne assault included the formation of a dump on the west
bank of the rivers, which had to be ferried across to the airborne
divisional RASC as soon as the bridgehead had been established
The dukws conducted this ferrying successfully under heavy
on March 24th.
drivers were awarded the Military Medal.
Their casualties were considerable, and
It took Second Army four weeks to get from the Rhine to the
Elle, and although this advance was tootso rapid as the one across
France and Belgium, the strain on transport was as great.
commitments, apart from those connected with the advance
our own troops, arose.
of
The backloading of German prisoners of
war as well as our own, whom we continually uncovered, the clear-
ance of refugees and inmates of concentration camps, including the
notorious Belsen, and relief to the
starving population of the
Netherlands, were all added to the battle tasks of troop-carrying,
dumping, bridging, and normal maintenance.
Two examples from
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
divisional transport diaries are worth quoting.
On one day all the
companies of the RASC of a division moved with their normal
loads, then lifted three brigades and finally dumped a large amount
Another divisional RASC never spent more than
one night in a location throughout the four weeks' advance.
the end of the advance GHQ had given Second Army a total lift
of 31,000 tons, excluding basic corps and divisional transport and
At the beginning of the advance from the Rhine, No. 10 Army
Roadhead lay west of that river, and in the first stages of the move
of the three corps (VIII, XII and XXX), eastwards, bridges were
again a limiting factor, and the railways in Germany were not
working. No. I2 Army Roadhead was established near Rheine, a
distance of about t1o miles from No. I0.
CRASC 22 Transport
Column co-ordinated and controlled most of Second Army trans-
port located in the area of 1o Army Roadhead, CRASC 45 Transport
Column, received convoys at 12 Army Roadhead.
roadhead was soon required further east, but it was impossible
to eliminate 12 Army Roadhead because of the wide area to the
north in which Second Army was also operating.
Transport Column controlled the transport arriving at 14 Army
Roadhead in the area of Sulingen, some 45 miles from No. 12
Roadhead, and about 150 miles from No. 10.
In the main, both
12 and 14 Army Roadheads were stocked from 10 Army Roadhead,
which later was taken over by I Corps, but all transport returning
from 14 Army Roadhead was routed via 12, so that an urgent
demand could be met immediately and stocks could be kept balanced
in the interests of economy. As soon as it became obvious that
Second Army would not proceed beyond the Elbe and that no
further established roadhead would be necessary, 65 FMC, estab-
lished by XXX Corps in the Lineburg area, was stocked under
control of Second Army and maintained the most forward troops.
Although some mention has already been made of the work done
by the tipper companies, no adequate picture has been given of the
range and scope of their operations.
This can be more effectively
described now against the general background of the campaign
than in relation to any one phase.
A large number of tipper
companies in 21 Army Group, were organized into one transport
column.
Their headquarters started in Normandy and finished
the campaign in Germany.
But the location of their headquarters
and the whereabouts of their CRASC bore no relation to one
another.
He might appear anywhere from Hamburg to northern
France in the later period of the campaign, or from Bailleul to
Brussels in the earlier days. His units, sub-units and individual
vehicles were to be found working for the sappers on
airfield
