ANIMAL, TRANSPORT
enemy had the advantage of holding the mountain sides overlooking
the valleys,
The only way to dislodge them was the usual tedious
process of winkling them out,
mountain by mountain, Two
brigades were detailed for the task,
When a brigade is fighting a moving battle in mountains,
normally weeds at least three pack companies to support it, but in
this operation, with the main road being cleared by half a mile or
so daily, motor transport was able to follow up to within gun
distance and then fan out up the lateral lanes,
As the
enemy
vacated a hill top, the advancing brigades would move down to
the preceding valley and take up their positions just short of the
lately vacated hill top.
The sappers quickly constructed tracks over
these hills which enabled the jeeps to deliver the division's needs
to the last river bed, from which the mules took them up the
mountain to the infantry,
It was a short carry, but the companies
suffered many casualties.
During this operation two sections under the command of a
British corporal,
with an infantry escort in attendance, had a
skirmish with a German patrol.
The escort, who were ahead of
the party, were fired on as they rounded a bend in the track and in
subsequent scuffle all were killed or taken prisoner,
The
KASC Cpl, Copland, shouted to his Arab NCO to tum about and
get the sections back while he covered the top of the track,
The
muleteers leapt on to their mules, and, led by Cpl All Ben Ali,
charged down the hill to wafety,
Copland was wounded, but he
wormed his way through the scrub and so rejoined his mules,
There was no respite for the division or its mules as the tedious
process continued of prising the enemy off the hill tops.
operation, which after three weeks of hard fighting, gained about
two miles of territory, was marked by the alleged prevalence of
fifth columnists
Wherever the unite halted they were frequenty
and accurately shelled, and on two occasions civilians were said to
have been caught operating WT sets in contact with the enemy.
One pack
company
commander, whose jeep had just been
painted with the letters HQ over the crossed horse-shoes on
the front of his vehice, was within a few hours shelled out of a
small villa which he and his veterinary officer were uning as a
billet, As a precaution he had 11Q' painted out!
Although by this time the operations of the pack units were
turning farly well to routine form, a foray behind the enemys
lines provided a fresh experience,
An infantry company, made up
of machine gun and mortar platoons, was to make an incurion
through and behind the enemy's ines with the aid of Malian
partisan guides to eatry out what was described, for want of a
vetter term, as я patrol,
Their immediate needs were to be carried
ANIMAL, TRANSPORT
spares, moved off and disappeared into the hills,
charge, the rear being brought up by an infantry platoon.
a mule loaded with a walkie-talkie set was led with them.
tunately the guides lost their way after traversing only one mountain
and a halt had to be made.
The mules were dispersed for cover
while a scouting party was sent forward,
It was not until dawn
that this party returned and led the main body over rocky tracks
and dried river beds to a tiny village, where they lay up for the
day,
The following night they sent a section of mules back to bring
up rations and extra horses for reconnaissance.
On the following
day the area was mortared, but there were no casualties.
The next
night they again moved forward to another village well behind the
enemy lines and lay up.
This village overlooked a small town
occupied in some strength by the enemy; this was the patrol's
objective,
Moving towards it the next night, they halted as dawn
was breaking, and dispersed in the neighbouring trees and bushes.
An officer and two sections of infantry now crept toward the silent
village and disappeared from the view of the excited pack men.
Suddenly there was a terrific crash of fire; then again dead silence.
After some time the pack men decided to investigate,
forward in sing thie, haking de walk, try steal Cried
village square to find their infantry friends in complete
control with the enemy force in their hands as prisoners of war.
The loaded mules were brought up and quickly tucked away, but
not quite soon enough, for the enemy reacted quickly and started
to shell the village killing nine mules with the first shell,
Mules were sent back to fetch up another infantry company;
This they accomplished without lows, bringing more rations and
some fresh mutes.
The following night the whole party moved on
to the next village, which offered litte opposition after a machine-
gun nest had been cleared up.
A small town on a main road was
next on the list.
Patrols were sent out and occupied parts of this
town, the patrols being gradually built up until the entire force
scupied the town, allowing the road to be opened up for motor
traniport.
was complete,
The main forces then moved up and the operation
The troop leader ended his report thus: "We were sorry the
expedition was over because it had gone extremely smoothly and our
casalties in men had been nil, although we did lose nine good mules.
After the first two days our forage problem solved itself, as hay was
plentiful and we found abundant wain in deserted farmhouses?
