134
ADDLE EAGT 1
included) occupying a considerable depth and a front of about 10
miles to ensure adequate dispersion:
The advance proceeded by waves, as it were, the third line wave
coming last.
The senier column commander controlled the forward
mevement of third line companies, and it is unlikely that on any
other orcasion has a lieut colonel of the kASO given the advance
signal te a couple of thousand RASC vehicles on a 10 mile front.
He had a 'point to march on', that being a certain kilometre post
on the frontier track, north and south of which the necemary gaps
in the wire would have been made by the armoured cars.
It must
have been an imposing sight from the air when that enormous mass
of vehicles started moving:
Of course the armoured cars had gone
forward carlier,
but most of the remainder
were on the move
throughout the daylight hours of November i8th.
A dap was allowed between echelons, but the commander of
the third line had the dust of the very desert worthy 7th Armoured
Division RASC to guide him.
However, as he had not been long
in the desert, he was provided with a competent navigating office:
The twe disagreed as to bearings throughout the advance, and the
commanding offer still maintains that he was right.
One would
be more incined to support him if his navigational record had
always remained as immaculate as his otherwise spotiess reputation.
He that as it may, second line transport followed up and replen
ished its troops during the wight, and carty next morning gathered
found the FMC like vultures,
The plan was for 6a FM€ to feed
7th Armoured Divisions
and 63 FMO the South
Africans:
woth FMEs anxious members of the corps O, and ST staff wanted
the horizon to the south for the fust sign of dust which would mark
the arrival of the third line eolumns known to have spent the wight
on the Libyan side of the wives
Glases swept the desert, and at
last, at about food hours, dust clouds like the steam from dozens of
express traine began te come over the herizon
Navigation had
been excellent, and at 6a FM@ Captain A. J. Millman later to have
both feet blown off by an ant tank wives affived fret, with font
platoons of to tenness
As the FMCs were these daye turn sound from pallhead and the
third ine tramport was bardy sumcient to meet requirements, no
vehicles could he held at FMEs under load, and commodities hat
either to be accepied of returned
and it took a strong minded
man te send a load back all that way.
Scalce and load tables bad
been carefully worked out, but inevilably there were over saint
As well as
under-shimates
and
wait
Petrol was in such demand that the infamous
safesty had time te leak.
Hogeyes, because of the large percentag
of new of practeally new vehicles in wette, the normal & per cost
ТИВ МІВЬЕВ КАФТ 1
185
lubricants againet petrol proved much too generous.
Agalli, sins
of the more exotie types of ammunition were not being discharged
at field fores ceiling rates,
As conveys were loaded 40 hours in
advance, the flow of these unwanted items could not
• верреа,
and there was an accumulation of goods for which there was no sale
until scales were adjusted.
At 6a FM& in particular there was an
embarrassing surplus which never solds it may be there sull.
Rommel's Break through
Life in the RASC stratum of this war, never at any time really
dull, was much enlivened on Novenber
84thc
On that date
Kormel made his famous break through from west to east,
This
resulted, so far as XXX Corpo was concerned, in much fist Bas
transport being dispersed and second line deven off to the south
Admirable cosiness was displayed by the company commanders of
ith Armoured Dwision in withdrawine their waits wnder confo!
tor instance, Major # V. Molynous was awarded a Millary One
when, attacked by enemy tanks, he withdrew his wait to the south
heletely under contre, ignorins the considerate confused res
Vailing at the time.
only three
unit, 65 Company gih Armowed Brigade, wers loot, and replenit
mont of his formation was not interfered wih
Even those whe actually took part in the widespesad movements
of units and individual vehicles which occurred at this time coula
hardly obsce to beine descried as smally twered.
In daylaht it
was difeult, and after dark almost imposeitas to distinguich fiona
frow foe,
There is lackine, however, reliable confumation of the
tale that a contain irascible officer whose
another of similas appearance in a face for a sap in the frontier
wire had his fluene commens replied to in bually Roome Certan
DOST XXX Corps
was fortenate in being out of camp when
Rowwel arived.
One the bost
ope marked the former site of ear headquarters, so he A6eided H9
withdraw te 6a FMC, which then operated as aa bee roar coope hoad
grafters foy sowe days.
The son sives present in the veinity
$ 6x PM& when wouble bew up was the seond in bowmand ef
Althoreh his had only
ww apposimon, and indeed in the downt, Ros a fow Days
command and, informed ever his w/t of
the town things were taking, preparod the area foy defence
tie thes
atival of EroT, die youre RASC TA major, lates le besome a
vigadies, had ceflected kow filly manned a ponidore which had
Mayed from the mats battle, and many other weapons, to koum a
Awelow defense
Alchough enomy parties came very elous te both da and 6a PMOs
