320
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
nowhere, as the land forces at the disposal of the Commander-in-
Chief were undoubtedly insufficient for the purpose.
Many of
the fighting units were still militarily immature, and few had the
opportunity of receiving any specialized training in the type of
warfare to which they were to be committed.
From the start of
the campaign the forces were hopelessly handicapped by lack of air-
power, many of the aircraft were out of date,
and there was a
lack of fully trained air crews.
The power of the naval forces
available, although reinforced a few days before by the arrival of
the powerful battleship Prince of Wales and the battle cruiser Repulse,
was unbalanced, as the force lacked any aircraft carriers or heavy
cruisers.
The arrangements for civil defence were far from being
fully developed.
It was truly not an inspiring situation. All the forces were
imbued with the will to do their best, but the campaign resulted in
our troops being hopelessly outnumbered and outfought.
Within a
few days the enemy was able to establish complete air superiority,
and the sinking of the Prince of Wales and Repulse left the Japanese
in undisputed command of the Far Eastern waters.
So far as the RASC were concerned, preparations for the supply
and transport services were fairly complete when hostilities broke
On the west coast stocks of food and petrol for the rith
Indian Division were held as far north as Alor Star, backed by
20 days at Sungei Patani, while a month's supply had been built
up at Bukit Mertajam, to be drawn on if plan Matador was put
into effect.
The gth Division were also well provided, for 2o days'
stocks had been laid down at Kuala Krai for replenishing Kota
Bharu, and 20 days at Jerantut for replenishing the small garrison at
Kuantan on the east.
To enable the garrison at Penang to hold
out if by-passed by an enemy advance, six months' supplies had
been laid down there.
Various other stocks were held at other
centres such as Ipoh and Seramban on the main Western Railway,
the main forward reserves being stored in the advanced base supply
and petrol depots at Kuala Lumpur.
In principle the replenishment of the northern depot was to be
done from Kuala Lumpur, and the depots to the cast and south
were to be re-stocked by rail from Singapore, but in the event of
any break in the eastern railway line there were alternative arrange-
ments for supplying both Kuala Krai and Jerantut from Kuala
Lumpur by road.
Food Supplies
So long as the various forces on the north could hold their ground
there seemed to be little danger of their lacking food or motive
power even if they were temporarily cut off from their normal line
of supply, and approximately 120 days' stocks were held in the
base depots in Singapore to make good any losses and maintain
supply for several months.
The available general transport was also so disposed that it could
be used to the best advantage as the course of the operations became
the Indian and Australian divisions)
were self-contained with sufficient transport to draw their daily
requirements from the nearest depot or dumps.
47 (Perak Chinese) RASC and 2/1 Reserve Company, AASC, were
located at Ipoh. Nos 45 (FMSVF) and 43 Companies RASC were
stationed at Kuala Lumpur, two platoons of the latter company
being disposed at Kuala
Krai and Jerantut.
An independent
platoon was provided for Penang.
The remainder of the companies
were held in Singapore, and formed temporarily into a transport
column under a CRASC.
The enemy was quick to follow up his success at Kota Bahru
and, finding it impossible to dislodge him, the Indian brigade,
weakened after heavy fighting, was withdrawn to avoid the risk of
its being completely isolated in the event of further landings on the
The brigade was then redeployed about Temerloh to watch
the road approaches from the east and to protect the rear of the
Iith Indian Division fighting in the north.
Krai were successfully back-loaded to Singapore by rail, and the
evacuation of the brigade afforded the first opportunity for the
RASC (Malay) Transport to prove its worth.
doubts about these untried men, they were soon dispelled as the
platoon of 43 Company, which was the last to leave, earned the
commendation of the divisional commander for its work.
The strength of the enemy's main forces employed in his drive
to the west soon began to tell, and the rith Division, after losing
heavily at Jitra, were forced to begin to withdraw to the south.
Alor Star and the adjoining airfield were lost and Sungei Patani
overrun, but not before most of the stock of petrol and food had
The advanced depots at Bukit Mertajam proved
to be an embarrassment as, stocked up for the proposed Matador
plan to advance into Siam, the stores were untouched and could
not be removed in time, although valiant efforts were made to
destroy them.
The island of Penang was soon left uncovered from
the mainland, and as heavy air attacks had completely disorganized
the civil services, it was decided to evacuate the garrison by sea to
Singapore.
Efforts were made to destroy the stocks of food and
Petrol and the MIP Platoon after ita amiral at Cingapore, wad cont
forward to join 42 Company at Kuala Lumpur.
The losses sustained by the tith Divicion in its continued marching
and fighting were so severe that by the time it reached the Krian
X RABO
