234
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
It was found that about 300 rail tank cars were available,
but
not all could be used for petrol and orders were placed for further
cars to be shipped to Africa as soon as possible.
Many of the cars
were very dirty internally, some of them having a thick coating of
a tenth of an inch of oxidized oil, and a strong body of pioneers had
to be employed in cleaning them out.
The next stage in organizing
supply was to take over and provide additional tanks at airfields
and other centres of activities, and pumping arrangements for intake
from rail or road cars.
A large number of barrels were taken over
from the French for the use of small units and for carrying supplies
to kerb-side pumps, which were also requisitioned or re-installed in
large numbers.
The first bulk supplies to be handled into the main installations
came by
rail from Oran in the American sector and in
cars
which had been filled by a short sea line fitted up from a torpedoed
and beached ship.
The first ocean tanker to discharge its cargo
arrived on the 22nd day after the first landing and small coastal
tankers were obtained for carrying supplies to Bone.
Intake into
the installations at Algiers did not present any special problems,
but the position at Bone was fraught with many hazards.
Because
of the layout of the harbour tankers had to be berthed stern on.
In some cases their cargo had to be discharged through some 300
to 400 feet of 6-inch and 8-inch pipeline which was built up on
pontoons to connect the ships' discharge points with the intake pipes
land.
In some cases the ships' pumps were not sufficiently
powerful to withstand
the back pressure
from the partly filled
storage tanks
on land, which involved considerable delays as
the connecting lines had then to be transferred to other empty
tanks.
Although the bulk stocks available at the end of December were
adequate, largely because of the transfer of American stocks from
Oran and a loan of French reserves, there was a serious and unfore-
seen loss through leakage of the non-returnable containers which
had been shipped from home.
Special arrangements had to be
made for decanting all leaking tins as they were discharged and for
despatching the contents to the nearest installation for testing and
redistribution.
Many ships arrived with cans stacked so high that in some
instances the holds of the ships were swimming with spirit to a
depth of a foot or so.
The Second Phase-On the Defensive
When rain and mud brought operations to a standstill at the end
of the year it was inevitable tope each opponent would seek to
extend his
lines to guard against surprise flank attacks.
NORTH AFRICA
235
Allied line extended from Cap Serrat in the north to Gafsa in the
south.
The British V Corps held the sector from the north down
to the Goubellat-Bou Arada plain; the French XIX Corps held the
central
positions along the natural barrier of the eastern Dorsale,
which included the important gap at Fondouk connecting Ousseltia
and Kairouan; and the United States II Corps continued the line to
the south.
Headquarters First Army moved to Constantine at the end of
December, as Allied Force HQ had arrived and assumed executive
command of the whole theatre.
As there were still few formations in the theatre-there were
only the 78th and 34th Divisions, until the 6th Armoured was
brought up to strength-the presence of so many superior head-
quarters excited the remark that 'never have so few been commanded
by so many'.
The chain of command consisted of AFHQ,
HQ
First Army and V Corps, besides the main administrative head-
quarters on the lines of communication.
It was a critical period in the campaign because the Axis forces
had, generally speaking, the initiative, and their future position in
Africa would largely depend on their efforts to counter the hold
which the Allies had gained on their flank, in North Afri
They
knew that it was only a matter of time before the Allies could
develop their full power when communications could be developed
and our air power increased.
When General Eisenhower reviewed the situation at the end of
the year he deral dise atempt to regain the initiative by thrusting
through the Dorsale in the south to the coast at
Sfax, and so
threaten the communications of the Axis forces facing Eighth Army.
The attack (operation 'Satin') was to be carried out by the American
II Corps, but as it was learned later that General Montgomery did
not expect to be in a position to attack the Mareth Line before
mid-February, the plan was cancelled.
The build-up of the reserves for this operation threw a heavy load
on the transport of the First Army, which undertook to lift 2,000 tons
of American stores from the Souk Ahras area to
Tebessa.
addition to this task a 6-ton GT Company and a 3-ton Company
had to be provided to operate a shuttle service to supplement the
railway to Tebessa.
While the work of building reserves went on,
the opportunity was taken to use the lorries returning
empty
carry grain from the Ain Beda area for the civil population at
Constantine, where there was a food shortage.
The decision to
cancel operation 'Satin' was therefore received with some relief by
the DDST of the army and the ADS Is at the base ports, who had to
provide the GT companies from their already impoverished resources.
Meanwhile the 46th Division had arrived from home.
