PRELUDE
setbacks.
There was also the situation which was common to the
whole army, in which service overseas meant in many cases for the
married soldier long periods of separation from his family.
All these factors combined to minimize the attractions of the
Corps, particularly to officers, and at one time the maintenance of
the officer intake was seriously threatened.
The horse had now gone and the promotion block, even up to
the rank of major, remained obdurate until the introduction of
time promotion in
1938.
However, the status of the Corps and
its chances of training improved gradually, especially after certain
reforms had been propounded in the late nineteen twenties, and
were a little later
adopted.
Eventually an improved intake was
obtained, though never enough in numbers to meet all commitments
in peace.
This
was achieved by retaining a call on the Royal
Military College Sandhurst for a quota of cadets, by opening the
door wider to University candidates, including those with engineering
degrees, and by making transfer to the Corps more worth while to
selected candidates from other arms.
Minor campaigns and Imperial policing
It was an
onerous task that faced Major-Generals Sir
Evan
Carter, P. O. Hazelton and G. F. Davies who filled successively the
appointment of Director
of Supplies
and Transport after
retirement of Major-General Sir Alban Crofton-Atkins at the end of
the First World War.
With resources which diminished with far
greater rapidity than the military commitments with which they
had to deal, the years from 1919 to 1927 were fraught with great
difficulty and offered little opportunity for reorganization or for long
term planning on a satisfactory basis.
A great deal was achieved during these difficult years.
There
were a whole series of minor campaigns in various parts of the
world and each one required the services of the Corps in one form
or another.
British
India, for instance,
demanded and indeed
obtained a constant flow of reinforcements for the companies and
'base units' which the RASC operated there.
During the Irish 'troubles' after the First World War, there was
a special demand for supplies and transport because the British
garrisons in Ireland were so scattered.
The Corps suffered many
fatal casualties during
these troublesome months which led up
the establishment of the Irish Free State in 1q21, yet in spite of all
the difficulties that ensued the Corps met all demands made upon it.
Further cast MT companies of the Corps in India were taking
part in the Third Afghan War.
This campaign proved valuable,
for it showed up the serviceability of motor transport in mountain
warfare in territory which was undeveloped.
Indeed the lessons
GENERAL SURVEY
learned from the campaign were to have a vital bearing on the
policy of keeping the peace in the North-West Frontier Province,
particularly in Waziristan, for a good motor road was built to open
This road ran in the shape of a horse-shoe with
one end at Bannu, in the north, and the other at Dera Ismail Khan
in the south.
RASC companies were stationed at all the inter-
mediate garrisons on the road, and subsequently units of the Corps
took part in operations in this area in 1923.
By the time the next
Frontier war took place the Corps had handed over its responsibilities
in India to the RIASC.
It may be said that in building up the
MT organization in India, as well as in the services rendered there
to the British Army, the RASC performed a task of which it may
be justly proud.
Nearer home a tense situation arose when
in 1922 the new
Turkish leader, Mustapha Kemal, fresh from his victory over the
Greek Army in Asia Minor,
threatened to occupy the
peninsula and to close the Dardanelles.
To counter this situation
a British force was despatched hurriedly to the scene with orders
to occupy Chanak on the Asiatic shore of the Dardanelles.
force was fortunately not called upon to fight, statesmanship
ultimately achieving its object without bloodshed.
From the
RASC point of view, the expedition was of special interest because
of the use for the first time of the new pneumatic-tyred
30-cwt
lorries.
After Chanak and the Indian Frontier
war came the crisis in
China in 1927 and 1928.
It was caused initially by the rise of the
Kuomintang party.
Although it governed one of the Allied nations
in later years, at its rise this party adopted a strongly nationalistic
attitude and made things 'difficult' for foreign, especially for British,
nationals and business interests in the Yangtse Valley.
To safe-
guard these interests a special 'Imperial Police Force' was sent to
Shanghai in 1927.
Some RASC units went out from the United
Kingdom to this force, and others joined it from India.
The
Shanghai Force, like the Chanak force,
eventually achieved its
object without open recourse to arms and was later withdrawn.
Meanwhile the RASC hand-over to the
RIASC in India was
taking place and was completed by early 1928.
It involved inter
alia the transfer of some 112 officers from the British to the Indian
service, many of whom were men of a
calibre which could ill
be spared.
In Western Europe, the Saar plebiscite in 1934 necessitated the
despatch of a small international force to this scene of Franco-
German controversy in order to ensure free and orderly elections.
The British contribution included 5.
Company,
RASC,
and a
supply detachment.
This force was joined by
an Italian and a
