130
THE MIDDLE EAST I
desert warfare was something apart.
It was not, but it had its
little peculiarities of which notice had to be taken if you wished to
continue in the business.
After this digression we must return to the gth Australian Division
withdrawing from position to position on the Jebel in conformation
with the withdrawal of the remains of 2nd Armoured Division-little
more than headquarters and administrative units--before the deter-
mined German advance.
The division had no vehicles for its
second line transport and few for its first line.
Cyrenaica Command
HQ, which had replaced XIII Corps at the end of our advance,
placed supplies,
ammunition and petrol within reach of its unit
transport as it withdrew, and also provided troop-carrying transport.
The only transport available came from third line companies on
FSD maintenance, and as platoons of the third line companies
came forward they were off-loaded in ad hoc FSDs and allotted to
troop-carrying.
At the same time attempts were made to establish
dumps for the elements of and Armoured Division to the south.
Unfortunately, many 10-tonners loaded with petrol fell victim to
enemy air superiority.
Eventually,
the
headquarters and remnants of units of 2nd
Armoured Division surrendered at Mekili, and gth Australian Divi-
sion withdrew to Tobruk to begin its historic defence of that place.
A few people withdrew much faster and went much farther.
is said that some were only finally brought to a halt by the Suez
Canal.
In Tobruk, steps were taken to introduce a ration based on the
unbalanced stocks available.
It may
be mentioned
that such
unbalanced stocks were caused by enemy action against shipping
from the Delta and not by any ST failure.
The gth Australian
Division ASC provided a headquarters,
but owing to lack of
vehicles, many of them were employed as infantry.
As the fortress
area was compact, units drew direct from FSD.
For operational
reasons British 3-ton
elements at brigade disposal.
companies had to provide troop-carrying
It was found possible before the gate
was shut to get back to Egypt many 10-tonners which had poor
troop-carrying capacity and were urgently needed for the mainten
ance from railhead at Matruh of forces being formed to build up a
new front on the Egyptian frontier.
for the moment.
And so we may leave Tobruk
Throughout the siege,
the RASC with some
AASO assistance ran supplies, transport, petrol and ammunition,
while many of the AASC of the gth Australian Division did gallant
service as infantrymen.
RASC units included 9 BSD, 48 DID,
115 Petrol Depot, a section of 1 Bulk Petroleum Storage Company,
a field bakery section, 25 Company (MAC), 6t Company, and 345
Company.
At a later stage of the siege, 9th Australian Division
THE MIDDLE EAST I
131
was relieved by 7oth Division, the RASC of which was composed
of 61, 145 and 419 Companies.
Needless to say, only the men and
not the equipment and vehicles were subjected to the dangerous
passage between Tobruk and Alexandria.
Cyrenaica Command HQ, leaving its transport behind, withdrew
by sea to Maaten Bagush and became once more HQ Western
Desert Force. With some difficulty fighting troops to man the
frontier line and administrative troops to support them were found.
Fortunately Rommel had outrun his administrative resources and
both sides were for the moment incapable of any great activity.
This condition of stalemate continued throughout the summer
with the exception of certain alarms and excursions in both direc-
tions, of which the most important was the abortive operation
'Battleaxe', of which much had been expected.
An FSD, complete
with stocks of rations, water, petrol and ammunition, was placed on
wheels for this operation and was to have opened in the escarpment
just south of Sollum, from which it was hoped to maintain it by sea.
As the operation was unsuccessful the FSD never opened.
Mention has been made earlier of the presence in the desert of a
10-ton company-
-286-
-operating Mack and White vehicles.
Real
scope for them was found during this period in maintaining the
FSDs from railhead at Matruh.
30 FSD was right by the side of
the road and trailers could, therefore, be used although of course
this was impracticable in the desert,
but there the Macks and
Whites had a very fair performance without trailers.
As time went
on these excellent vehicles suffered from lack of spares and of tyres.
The latter was a particularly serious problem and was ingeniously
alleviated by a system of repair involving cutting out burst or
damaged portions and bolting a piece of another damaged tyre in
place of it.
This method worked and many vehicles were thus kept
on the road, but it was expensive in manpower.
Consolidation
The six comparatively quiet months before the considerable
operations which were to take place in November were of great
value to the RASC in building up their strength and in training for
desert work the third line companies which were now coming forward
in satisfactory numbers.
Moreover, two most important events occurred which were to
influence the operation of the Corps in all theatres for the rest of
the war.
These were (a) the formation of the Field Maintenance
Centre, and (b) the provision of RASC column headquarters for
command of third line transport.
The FMC grew out of the FSDs whose formation has been already
outlined. What had become evident during the advance to the
