208
THE MIDDLE EAST II
ranks, mainly RASC, were involved in this operation which, unwar-
like though it was, would, had it been conducted in peacetime, have
been in the headlines of the world's press.
The force employed in Arabia consisted of two parties.
One,
38 Company RASC (GT) moved in from the east and the other,
the larger, consisting of 446 GT Company (Palestinian Arabs), two
platoons from 175 (Tank Transporter) Company equipped with
10-tonners, and signal and medical details moved in through Aqaba.
The force included men with desert experience, which was fortu-
nate, as the Arab drivers had had no experience in desert driving
and the conditions which they were to meet were in some cases
more exacting than those to be found in the Western Desert and in
the campaigns in Iraq, Syria and the Italian colonies.
The route
from Agaba to Yenbo on the Red Sea where a base was to be
established, was unknown to the column, but guides were provided
by King Ibn Saud.
Unfortunately the guides started with little
knowledge of the capabilities of MT vehicles and presented the
column with some pretty obstacles to negotiate in the way of soft
going, sand dunes, and hill country.
Oddly enough, at one point
assistance was afforded by the formation of the derelict Hedjaz
railway built by the Germans for the Turks before the 1914-18
War which featured so largely in Lamences campaign That tảc
column eventually got through to Yenbo was most creditable to all
concerned and particularly to its commander.
Of him a medical officer wrote Never have I served under such a
man.
When a vehicle is bogged in the sand, his shoulder is the first
behind it? There was so much soft going that he must certainly
have had a sore shoulder before reaching his destination.
But reach
the end of their journey both columns did and accomplished great
destruction amongst the hoppers, finally concentrating in the triangle
Hail-Hanakiya-Rumahiya.
The whole operation had taken nearly
six months, but its success justified the diversion of transport and men.
CHAPTER VI
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
MALTA, G.C.
Peacetime Conditions
THE epic of Malta, G.C., lends a special interest to the part
played by the RASC in that island during the lone period of
the siege before it was finally relieved by the advance of the
Eighth and First Armies in North Africa.
Before the war, Malta
was regarded as an attractive station.
Its climate, reasonable cost
of living, nearness to home, and facilities for recreation made those
stationed there count themselves fortunate.
Military
life in the
garrison was not too strenuous.
There were exercises for seaborne
and air defence of the little colony, but there was little opportunity
for training on a large scale because of lack of space.
The pre-war organization of the RASC in the island was not
unlike that in Gibraltar. A small transport company of about
40 vehicles and a few War Department vessels for military harbour
duties and target towing were adequate for meeting the needs of the
garrison of some 3,000 troops.
Food was provided through a small
supply depot and bakery located at Sa Maison, Valetta, and a cold
storage depot which was at Marsa.
Petrol was obtained by contract,
and no special military reserves had to be held.
It may perhaps seem to be unnecessary to remind the reader of
the conditions which existed in the island during the two years of
Situated only 60 miles from Sicily, the inhabitants and the
garrison had to withstand a constant assault from the air day after
day and the attacks reached their peak in the spring of 1942.
Many
were short of food and petrol and at times of water and means of
lighting, and little could be done to relieve their plight as each
successive attempt to run a convoy from either east or west met
with heavier attacks and casualties in both ships of the Royal and
Merchant Navies and their ships' complements. Throughout the
period there was also the continued threat of an enemy assault by
sea and the possibility of full scale airborne landings.
In the back-
ground was the knowledge that the iland was the only stepping
stone in the Mediterranean for the flow of reinforcing aircraft for
the Middle East and the only harbouring place for our submarines
over the 2,000 miles which separated Cibraltar from Alexandria in
PRASC
