PRELUDE
The RASC, Territorial Army and Supplementary Reserve
During these lean years between 1919 and 1927 the Territorial
Army was hard hit but, with the unquenchable public spirit which
has always marked its members, it contrived to keep its organization
and traditions alive.
The RASC Territorials were at this time in
an even worse position than their brothers in the Regular Army.
The establishment of officers and men was reduced to such propor-
tions that it was only the spirit and vision of the faithful few that
kept the almost
nominal headquarters RASC and the skeleton
three companies alive in each of the 14 divisional trains.
These
RASC Territorials were still on a HT basis, but had no horses!
This policy of contraction seems inconsistent when the Territorial
Army was at the same time recognized as the means of expanding
forces in time of war.
In the case of the RASC as a whole, an attempt was made in
about 1922 to combat the officer shortage, in the event of mobiliza-
tion, by the enrolment of suitable candidates in the Supplementary
Reserve,
Many men came forward in response to this call, passed
through a preliminary training of four weeks at the RASC Training
College, and took their place in the cadres which were eventually
called up in 1939.
However, there was no corresponding Supple
mentary Reserve of other ranks.
Reorganization of the Divisional RASC
Such,
then, was the general position in the nineteen twenties,
but towards the end of this period events were to take place which
exercised a profound eflect on the whole structure and outlook of
the Corps.
The somewhat unsatisfactory position in which the
Corps found itself at that time was not ony, ely due to the general
policy of retrenchment.
The Corps, though fully combatant and
drawing its officers from the same sources and through the same
channels
outside
as other combatant arms, had, nevertheless, remained
the normal army framework for staff questions, training
and manpower,
i.e. the directorates covered by the General Staft
and the
Adjutant-General.
The DST took his orders in these
matters directly from the QMG.
Strangely
enough it was
Shanghai that was
the small 'policing expedition' to
the indirect cause of the great changes which
were made a Corne organisation, training and manning from 10
onwards.
for
Lieut-Colonel D. C. Cameron, who was made responsible
the organisation of the amall RASA component of thie force
was so impressed by the dificulties inherent in organizing its few
units that he worked out a more lorical and operational basis for
organization and training of the Corps.
This was adopted
GENERAL SURVEY
some years later when he was Commandant of the RASC Training
Centre.
Unconventional in his outward appearance, he possessed
nevertheless a precise, determined and logical mind, so that those
who worked with him said in later years that he never wasted a
word and that every word was worthy of attention.
He declared
that unless the RASC could be fitted into the normal framework
for training and manpower, and unless every fighting formation
was furnished in peace with a nucleus of those Corps units which
it would require in war (a policy sometimes dubbed 'divisiona-
lization'), the Corps must remain virtually untrained.
It was
moreover impotent to fill its true role and liable to break down
under the strain of modern war.
Not destructive for destruction's
sake, he at once proceeded to demonstrate at the RASC Training
Centre how that centre, itself the key to his proposed reforms,
should be reorganized, and at the same time he pressed for the
adoption of his new system in its entirety.
He could not have formulated his ideas at a better time, for they
coincided with those of the newly appointed Director of Supplies
and Transport, Major-General Evan
Gibb, himself an
original
thinker, a man of great drive and of considerable 'extra-RASC
experience. General Gibb was, moreover, under the orders of (and
strongly supported by) a Quarter-Master-General,
Lieutenant-
General Sir Hastings Anderson, of like ideas, and these two men were
to prove invaluable to the Corps in the campaign for self-improve-
ment, for there were still the General Staff, the AG's Department
and the Treasury to be convinced.
Looking ahead a little, one may
add that the Corps was fortunate also in the 'run' of DsST succeeding
General Gibb at the War Office.
Happily for us the General Staff and the AG welcomed the
proposed changes and the Director of Military
Training quickly
assumed responsibility for instructing the Corps, while the Director
of Recruiting and Organization undertook the manning of it.
The formation of RASC divisional troops and brigade companies
for each regular division followed soon afterwards, and in due
course a skeleton organization on similar lines was
adopted for
the TA.
The new status of the Corps acted as a strong inducement to its
younger officers to study for the Staff College,
while
the new
appointments open to Corps officers offered some reward to the
number of far seeing and public spirited officers who had already
passed through that establishment.
It is hard to convey in these
few paragraphs the widespread beneficial effect of the new policy.
It infused new life and enthusiasm into the regimental officer and
man, and it provided the opportunity for the RASC staff at the War
Office to ventilate, directly or indirectly, the whole question of the
