18
PRELUDE
Regular commissions were offered to officers of the TA and SR.
Although some
of these measures amounted to 'robbing Peter to
pay Paul', on the whole they were successful as far as they went.
The remaining deficiencies were, partly, made up by the creation,
for the Army as a whole, of the Army Officers' Emergency Reserve
(AOER),
consisting
mainly of former temporary officers of the
First World War,
who volunteered for service again.
Although
most of these volunteers had previous service, there were some
difficulties over age and rank and even shape (three outraged mem-
bers of the AOER were on
one occasion ordered by their young
Regular commanding officer to 'get rid of their stomachs in three
weeks'!), and some of this intake was not quite up to standard.
in spite of all these measures the Corps had to start the war handi-
capped by serious deficiencies both in quality and quantity of its men.
Help from the Auxiliary Territorial Service
Here special mention must be made of the Auxiliary Territorial
Service (now the Women's Royal Army Corps), which was to relieve
the manpower problem of the Corps considerably by the provision
of drivers and clerks and 'housekeeping personnel' in many static
establishments.
The RASC had a direct interest in the formation
of the new corps as for many years past it had undertaken the
technical training and general sponsoring of the First Aid Nursing
Yeomanry (the 'FANYs').
This was an unofficial body possessing
limitless enthusiasm which, although not recognized by the War
Office, still managed to maintain their identity from South African
War days to 1939, and to carry out annual training at their own
expense in similar camps to those of the TA, with the loan of WD
equipment.
From the FANY were drawn most of the offcers for
the MT branch of the ATS.
No doubt the history of the WRAC
and of their forerunners in the ATS, will be written in due course,
but this seems an appropriate occasion on which to record that
the thanks of the RASC are due to all those olicers and women of
the ATS who helped them so admirably during, and after, the war.
Conclusion
If it is thought that too much emphasis has been placed on the
difficulties of the
Corps during the aftermath of the First World
War and preparations for the second, let in be said that, when the
call came in September, 1939, the Corps was duly and smoothly
mobilized.
Expeditionary
with its fall comnlement of PASC units, the RASC organization at
crossed to France
home expanded and met all the calle made on it. while reinforce
ments, supplies and material began to flow to all parts of the world.
The machine was working.
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
A predominantly Mechanical Transport Corps
At the end of the First World War, the RASC, though largely
composed of mechanical transport units, was still one of the mounted
arms of the service.
They owed full allegiance to the horse, and
their general way of military life, even their dismounted drill (foot
drill), followed the mounted tradition.
In the years immediately
only, and that was the Animal Transport Company of the Training
College.
MT companies were reduced to a handful, being scattered
over the main military stations.
By 1925,
some 2,000 vehicles
(excluding those in India), were operated and maintained, compared
with the 125,000 of the First World War.
Yet the RASC remained
the only Corps to have MT operating on a world-wide scale, and to
have built up a complete supporting
organization
for vehicle
maintenance.
They were the pioneers of this branch of the Army
(due credit being given to the Royal Engineers for their early and
limited efforts of 1899-1903), and their activity embraced every
phase of the life of the vehicle from the drawing-board to the
The decline of horse transport and its gradual eclipse by the motor
vehicle had a profound effect on the training and outlook of all
All officers had to acquire the necessary knowledge of this
'science to make them intelligent, economical and enterprising
operators of motor transport, as well as competent horsemasters and
supply officers, while the way was open to a small proportion
(about one in 10) to qualify as fully trained mechanical engineers.
The 'other ranks' joined as horse transport drivers, mechanical
transport drivers, or artificers, but they all received the same basic
military training (in company with their colleagues of the supply
their own particular
lines, the HT drivers and artificers and the MT artificers at the
Training College (later Training Centre) at Aldershot,
and the
MT drivers at the Driving School RASC (R Company) at Feltham,
Middlesex.
The Training Centre, therefore, thus taught the principles of
horse mastership, of the operation of MT units, and of hirings.
its more specialist side it taught artificers (including boy artificers)
their trades,
and gave many officers with a
mechanical bent a
good grounding in mechanical engineering, bringing them up to the
standard required for associate membership of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers.
Officers who took up this side of Corps
duties spent some three years in advanced engineering studies,
