28
PRELUDE
their agents throughout the world, instructing them to freeze the
sale of all load-carrying vehicles and give the United Kingdom the
first option of purchase.
By
the next day the Corporation had
produced a written statement of the vast numbers and the locations
of all the vehicles so held.
However, the Munich crisis did not
lead to war at once, and their offer was not followed up.
Very soon afterwards,
however, it was decided to stockpile 500
load carriers in the Middle East and, as a mark of appreciation of
the firm's services,
and also because they could offer immediate
deliveries, Treasury approval for the purchase of 500 GMC lorries
was given.
These were shipped in a
'completely knocked down'
pack, and QMG 3 thus inaugurated a system of vehicle shipment for
army purposes which was later to have a most important bearing
on the economical use of shipping tonnage and to which the Prime
Minister himself in the war years attached the very greatest import-
ance.
The degree to which vehicles were knocked down depended
on the capacity of receiving theatres to erect them quickly and
efficiently, and so the forerunners of the war-time vehicle and
equipment assembly units were called into being.
The Corps can
feel a justifiable pride that they were the medium for the introduction
of this principle into the Army's economy.
Another contribution to the
successful mechanization of our
forces in the Middle East was the introduction of the sand tyre, a
super low pressure tyre with a special 'sand tread', which has already
been mentioned.
Low pressure tyres were first introduced for
infantry 15-cwt trucks, and their use was soon extended to heavier
Fortunately, the sand tread was developed in time to be
fitted to the 500 GMC vehicles ordered for stockpiling in the Middle
East.
These gave a performance of outstanding value in the Libyan
Desert a short time later.
It was certainly a feather in the cap of
the British Army that they were the nioneers in the production of
these tyres and that their lead was followed so wholeheartedly in
America in later years.
A spontaneous tribute to the efficiency of
the sand tyre was actually paid in an order promulgated by General
Rommel himself, stating
that for
particular operation of the
Afrika Korps only captured British vehicles would be used, as they
were capable of superior desert performance.
So, it seems, every-
body was satisfied!
Vehicle impressment
To meet the responsibility of the Corps for impressment, a small
nucleus of officers, styled the Inspectorate of Supplementary Trans-
port, was set up under a Chiet Inspector, with representatives in
every area of Great Britain.
The basis of the scheme was to conduct
a first-hand insection of civilian vehicles snitable for military use.
TRANSPORT
29
by makes and types, the necessary powers being given to inspectors
by specially enacted legislation.
The inspectors
also
were to
maintain a record of such vehicles. No vehicle was listed unless it
had at least three years' useful life before it.
In the event of
mobilization,
orders would be issued to owners to drive their
vehicles to selected vehicle collecting centres,
which would be
established for the purpose.
Events proved that the scheme not
only saved the day in September, 1939, but that it continued to be
of inestimable use in re-equipping the Army after Dunkirk when
every vehicle (with the exception of one staff car allotted to a staff
officer who had no intention of being deprived of his vehicle at any
cost), was left behind in France.
The original plan called for the
impressment of some 14,000 vehicles, but during the course of the
war this figure rose
scheme for hiring
35,000.
vehicles for use in home commands on mobilization yielded an
initial 10,000 vehicles, and was arranged with admirable prompti-
tude and efficiency.
The MTSD and the HRS prove their worth
The activities of the MT Stores Depot at Feltham also merits a
brief description. By 1930 this had become the storing and issuing
depot for the RASC only and it had reached a high degree of
efficiency. The Corps realized the vital need for a steady and prompt
flow of spare parts and assemblies to its heavy repair shops and its
workshop sections, and were well experienced in forecasting needs
and knowing how to translate formal rates of wastage and theoretical
estimates into a practical provision plan.
Some of the best and
most experienced officers of the Corps had set up a similar establish-
ment, the MT Stores Depot at Chaklala, in India, and had operated
it with equal success, handing it over with the rest of the MT
establishments and units in India to the RIASC in 1927.
the period immediately before the war, not only were stocks of
spares increased against the expansion of the Corps, but they were
also pre-packed in cases ready for despatch in such a way that the
quantities in each batch comprised roughly two months' spares for
each 50 vehicles of any one make.
At the same time complete
lots were packed in readiness to stock the base MT store depots
which would form part of the field forces.
All the work of body changing, modifications,
which has
been mentioned was rendorad nossible hu the existence of the Heavy
Repair Shop RASC, Eden, Which was close to the MT Stores
Depot.
This repair unit, intended primarily
complete
overhaul of RASC Vehicles in service, was also naturally used for a
large number of varied engineering tasks connected with mobiliza
One of the most important of these was the
assembly of
