278
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
took away from Italy the very formations which were most valuable
in mountain fighting, of which there was to be so much in the
battles on the Gothic Line.
Their place was taken by the gand
United States Infantry Division and the Brazilian Infantry Division,
which
did not, however, arrive in Italy until September and
October, 1944.
Nevertheless, the advance went relentlessly on.
By the middle of
July the River Arno was reached, Pisa, Ancona and Leghorn were
captured, and the most important administrative centre of Arezzo
was in our hands.
All this involved heavy fighting; during the
first 10 days of July the 34th United States Division fired an average
of 117 rounds a gun a day, and in one day fired 715 tons of ammuni-
tion.
Arezzo was rapidly developed as a railhead, and a system of pack
trains was introduced.
Although this system, no doubt, effected
considerable economies in transport, it caused great difficulties in
front of railhead, mainly because of the irregularity in the arrival
of trains and the frequent discrepancies in the contents of the
various
packs.
It made the
establishment of railhead depots
absolutely essential, with the additional handling that this involved.
As one DDST put it: 'Pack trains are the bugbear of any forward
planning.
Transport is kept hanging about near railhead for hours
and then probably arrives at the FMC just when issues are in full
swing.'
With the capture of Florence in the first week of August
resistance south of the River Arno came to an end and the Allied
armies found themselves coming up against what was to prove the
last great German defensive position in Italy-the Gothic Line
which extends from north of Pesaro on the east coast, through the
Futa Pass on the crest of the Apennines, to south of Spezia on
the west coast.
The Autumn and Winter Battles of 1944
Throughout the autumn and winter the battles went on,
the
Eighth Army, with its
British,
Canadian,
New Zealand, Indian,
South African and Polish formations, slowly working their way
forward on the Adriatic sector, while the Fifth Army,
with its
American and Brazilian divisions, and later, once more, with many
British troops, gradually overcame opposition in the mountainous
western half of the front.
The weather was indescribably bad, and
shortage of ammunition and of reinforcements reduced a great deal
of the front to inactivity during the worst of the winter months.
The engineer commitment can be well appreciated from the figures
of stores handled by the Engineer Stores Depot at Ancona, which
amounted to an average of 600 to
800 tons a day of bridging
material and 400 tons a day of other engineer stores.
SO MILES
SWITZER
LAND
YUGOSLAVIA
Triest
enice
Gulf of
Venice
Bolzano
Trento
Como
Brescia
Turin
Comacchio
Modena
Bolognia
Genoa
Rimini
{Florence
Leghorn f
Northern Italy
