202
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
vehicles accompanied the landing, and so the maintenance of the
division depended on the greatest use of requisitioned transport and
of the railway, whenever possible.
Brindisi was occupied on Septem-
ber irth and Bari on the ith, and while the 78th Infantry Division
were beginning to arrive at
Taranto, patrols linked up with the
Ist Canadian Division advancing from the south-west near Roton-
della on September 16th, the same day that the junction between
the 5th Division and the Fifth Army took place.
By September
25th the Allied line ran roughly Bari-Potenza-Auletta-Salerno, and
the two armies were poised for their advance to Naples and Foggia.
The Administrative Situation
While the Fifth Army went on to capture Naples, it was now
necessary for the Eighth Army to make a short pause in order to
allow certain administrative adjustments to be made.
days the Eighth Army formations had been pushed on as fast as
possible in order to ease
the pressure at Salerno, and this had
stretched the maintenance resources to their limit.
communication had now to be switched from the toe to the heel of
At the same time V Corps was in process of landing at
Taranto, and XIII Corps was being side-stepped across from
Potenza to the Foggia plain.
Not until October ist was the advance
Brigade, which was still maintained by 5 Company,
a sudden thrust forward and capturing
group of airfields around Foggia on September 27th.
This was a time of great strain for the transport, stretched as it
was along winding coastal roads from Reggio to Sapri, with innumer-
able diversions and one-way stretches.
It was a common experience
for drivers to be at the wheel for 36 hours at a stretch with only
occasional snatches of sleep.
The 5th Divisional Transport Column
had to maintain the division for 1o days from Sapri to its location
in the Foggia plain and at the same time meet troop carrying
The use of dukws was invaluable,
them it would not have been possible to maintain the speed of
The spy role pood i go real ape to during tit
The supply programme for the forces assaulting at Salerno was:-
D Dau to Dalus t. 19 hour mece-tin ration sunnlemented b
one tin of preserved meat and a packet
of biscuits.
D plus 2 to D plus 18: Compo rations.
ITALY
D plus 19 onwards: Half compo and half field service scale
gradually changing to 100 per cent field
service scale.
By the end of September (D plus 21) the issue of 'compo' rations
had ceased and fresh bread was being issued to forward troops.
The scale of petrol landed at Salerno was based on vehicles
travelling 25 miles a day from D Day to D plus 6 and 50 miles a
day from D plus 7 onwards.
An allowance of 30 per cent was
originally made for waste, leakages, losses by enemy action and
other causes, but this was later cut to 10 per cent.
The main problem in the supply of petroleum was to keep the
rapid advance up the east coast supplied.
its stocks and, until a ship could be unloaded at Taranto, convoys
consisting of whatever transport could be made available (including
dukws), were run across from the west coast from Salerno and Sapri.
Bulk storage tanks at Naples, Taranto and Bari, many of them
damaged, were soon repaired, and two bulk petroleum storage
companies were set to work in order to introduce bulk supply as
For the RASC the keynote of this phase of the campaign was
improvisation.
Divisional RASC maintained units of their divisions
without any transport; field butcheries acted as port detachments;
field bakeries operated as base supply depots; a mobile petroleum
laboratory supervised the manufacture of a substitute for hydraulic
brake fluid from captured castor oil and industrial alcohol.
Plan-
ning yardsticks and establishment capacities went by the board.
Somehow, by one means or another, the results were achieved and
the armies were successfully supplied, until gradually a normal state
of affairs was restored.
The Italian Theatre
At this stage in the narrative we may suitably pause to examine
some of the general features which were to affect the operations
which ensued and the administrative problems which arose.
forces which could be made available for the campaign had to be
subordinated to the claims of 'Overlord', the operation for the
invasion of north-west Europe, which began on June 6th, just two
days after the forces in Italy had taken Rome.
Italy was therefore always low on the priority list, particularly
where American resources were concerned.
This resulted in the
withdrawal of experienced formations and units from Italy for
service in North-West Eurone while at the came time the army in
Italy was being gradually increased by formations drawn from
elsewhere. Thus the order of battle was rarely static and from an
