THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
With the loss of our resources of tin in Malaya, in February, 1942,
it became imperative to find substitute materials for the petrol
After some experiments it was found
that a 'black'
or terne plate could be used for the purpose, but the main effect of
the shortage of tinplate was to turn attention to the use of steel
The Middle East Command had some months before recom-
mended to the War Office
that the German jerrican should be
adopted as a standard container but a considerable interval of time
elapsed before the pattern was accepted and put into full scale
production, a matter which has been much criticized.
the reproaches directed at the War Office are well founded or not
cannot be examined here beyond mentioning that any reversal of
policy in war,
which demands the employment of more labour,
plant and shipping is a decision which cannot be lightly undertaken
and must be subjected to exhaustive technical and high level
The jerrican was a novelty and required novel methods of pro-
duction.
Special presses were required for stamping out its steel
sides and parts and mass production welding plant was needed for
welding the parts together.
Hitherto the commercial method of
producing durable containers was either to roll steel plates into
drum shape and seam the sides and ends, or cut the plates to size and
link them together, also by seaming.
Some time was lost by the first decision taken to produce a can
somewhat similar in shape and appearance to the jerrican, and to
order 1,000,000 of them from America (hence the reference to
merricans).
The new can lacked, however, one of the predomin-
antly useful features of the
German prototype-the aperture
specially designed for pouring and the closure which combined ease
of opening with a non-leak seal.
The first shipments to the Middle
East began in March, 1942.
As an interim measure a circular
4-gallon drum was designed which could be easily manufactured
and which could be produced at various points in the Middle East;
can supply was also supplemented, from the available production
in England, of 4-gallon square cans.
Over a million of the latter
and 800,000 of the former were shipped to the command up to
April, too end 800.000 merricans allowing for the losses at sea,
sent from America in the same period.
The production of jerricans
started in 1012 and 1,000,000 had been despatched to Africa by the
end of the campaign in 1943•
These figures are given in detail not because they have any
intrinsic value, but to show that in spite of the growing can popu-
lation of returnable cans provided between 1942 and 1942, and t
1 Term used in the War.
PETROLEUM
485
capture of about 1,500,000 enemy cans, it was still necessary to use
4-gallon tins, to the tune of over 4,000,000 a month, to keep the
forces maintained.
During the time when ST 2 were engaged on the development of
returnable containers, operation "Torch' had been put into action by
the invasion of North Africa in November, 1942.
The early main-
tenance of the force presented a considerable problem as 8,000,000
gallons of petrol had to be accumulated in the home depots for the
purpose and, for example, the shipments for the assault convoys took
I26 train loads of petrol for loading over 106 different ships.
Initial
supplies had to be in packed form as, although the expedition was the
first to have a complete petroleum organization with it, no reliance
could be placed on utilizing bulk supply until local facilities had been
reconnoitred, rehabilitated and supplemented.
Operation 'Torch' was the first joint Anglo-American large scale
expedition and as petrol was a common user commodity, ST 2's
responsibility for supply eventually passed to an Allied organization
set up by AFHQ when they were established in their new operational
Oil Supply
Oil supply was only to a small extent a military responsibility.
The Army, which was only one, and that not the biggest, of the
claimants on resources, undertook the executive task of moving its
own supplies forward from the ports in overseas theatres; but in this
country the oil companies, grouped in a special organization known
as the Petroleum
Board, were responsible for
distributing
supplies, both civil and service.
Moreover the whole task of pro-
curing supplies from their sources and shipping them to the various
theatres, including the United Kingdom, was performed by the oil
industry, which, however, worked under supervisory Government
committees on which the Army
was represented.
Ultimate
responsibility for all oil questions rested with a sub-committee of
the Cabinet, the Oil Control Board, of which the Quarter-Master-
General was a member.
The resources of petroleum which could be drawn upon were
world wide.
Before the war, Britain drew about 43 per
cent of
its supplies from the Caribbean area (Venezuela, Colombia and
Trinidad), about 24 per cent from Persia and about 18 per cent from
the United States.
the Allies throughout the war.
Fortunately, all these remained available to
The maintenance of war supplies
was thus primarily a matter of protecting the sea lanes and main-
taining sufficient tanker tonnage, in the face of continued and often
heavy losses by enemy action.
There were several critical periods
of tanker shortage, and throushout the greater part of the war the
