PRELUDE
including two years of practical training at selected civilian vehicle
manufacturing works.
The output of the Training Centre and Driving School went to
fill the cadres of the transport units and transport offices at home
and overseas.
These consisted (apart from those in India) of a
number of MT companies on a modest establishment at the larger
military stations, backed up by a group of three maintenance units
at Feltham, a vehicle reserve depot, a MT stores depot, and a heavy
repair shop.
Mention has already been made of the driving school
there, which was more in the nature of an 'outpost' of the Training
Centre than of a technical unit.
In India,
the Corps was organized on much the same lines,
substituting Indian other ranks for British, except for certain super-
visory grades, artificers in particular.
The location of the companies
however, was on a tactical plan, and they were integrated more
closely with the formations which they supported than was the case
in Britain.
From 1920 to 1927, India absorbed about half of the
vehicles operated by the RASC.
As the horse began to disappear, infantry drill took the place of
dismounted cavalry drill, and the tactical side of RASC training
assumed
greater importance.
was especially
important because of the growing menace of air power and the
increasing adoption of tanks and armoured cars in Europe.
the reforms in RASC training and organization already referred to,
the Corps took the shape in which it went to war in 1939.
much happened, particularly on the technical and the planning side,
during the intervening years.
The RASC lead on the technical side
The Corps, in its short life as an operator of MT, had always
been responsible
provision, inspection,
maintenance and,
except for a very short period before and after the start of the First
World War, repair of its own vehicles.
It relied on obtaining its
requirements in vehicles from normal commercial production.
I9T4, the 1,200 vehicles required for the original British Expedition-
partly
impressment,
responsibility.
both of these activities being a Corps
Technical research and development on a lesser scale had been
vested in the
'Inspection Branch,
MT' before 19I4.
branch functioned under the wing of the ASC Training Establish
and by a natural sequence the same work fell to the MT
School of Instruction, under the RASC Training Centre, after the
First World War.
The School of Instruction was fortunate
TRANSPORT
engineering, Colonel H. Niblett, who was an automobile engineer
of wide experience in the heavy transport field and formerly a
temporary officer of the Corps.
What was achieved at almost
negligible cost was without doubt due to Colonel Niblett and his
and it was this small
group which had to
develop the ideas of the 'MT Advisory Board'. This board was the
successor of the pre-i914 'MT Committee'
examination of the development and use of MT for military pur-
The new board, of which the DST was chairman,
with wheeled vehicles only, tracked vehicle development being the
responsibility of another body.
The first task of the board after the war ended was to develop a
3-ton load carrying vehicle with improved performance over rough
Our 1914-1918 vehicles, 3-ton
20-cwt with solid
tyres, while giving excellent service on hard ground, were instantly
bogged down if driven over fields, sand, or anything except the
smallest irregularities on the ground.
The use of pneumatic tyres for commercial vehicles was still in
its infancy, and their practicability and cost were being considered
with anxiety by the motor industry.
The Corps took the plunge
however, and by 1g22 the force sent to Chanak was equipped with
a number of 30-cwt pneumatic-tyred vehicles,
which earned good
The question of a wider distribution of the driven axle
The French firm of Renault made a big
advance by producing a six-wheeled light load carrier with twin
driven rear axles which demonstrated its power in a trans-Sahara
expedition in the early nineteen twenties.
Instruction secured a sample of this type and greatly increased both
its riding qualities and its tractive power by designing a torque
reaction gear which forced both driven axles downwards with an
even thrust, thus countering the tendency, in the original design,
for the forward axle to lift at the precise moment when maximum
power from both axles was required.
By 1925, designs for a heavy and a medium type six-wheeled
vehicle with four-wheeled driven bogies at the rear were perfected
and accepted as the standard for Army vehicles.
These vehicles,
with pneumatic tyres, gave a fair cross-country performance, and
were calculated to cope with any of the duties expected of a primarily
It was hoped that this design would also
be adopted for general commercial use,
fostered by the attractions
of a free gift by the War Department of the various patents which it
embodied and by the payment of a small subsidy in annual instal-
ments to those who made use of such vehicles and kept them in fit
condition for possible military use.
This subsidy scheme, unfortu-
nately, produced only meagre results, because of the comparatively
