92
element of w
petrol depot, a special transport
section, a field bakery secuon, a field butchery section, and 4 Supply
Personnel Company with three sections.
The transport was ex-
tremely limited, consisting only of a car for the GOC, six light
ambulances,
four Bedford
Scammell tractors with 5-ton semi-
trailers, and four Austin two-seater cars for the use of the Guards
Brigade.
The intention was that all general transport needed should be
hired locally—a forlorn hope based on over-optimistic information.
The RASC staff of Avonforce was not formed from 49th Divisional
RASC, but posted in to fill a special establishment consisting of
ADST (Lieut-Colonel H. M. Hinde), DADST, DADS, and two
captains, one of whom was for local purchase duties.
This little
party, with their clerks and batmen,
formed on February 22nd,
1940,
was disbanded at Easter, only to be reconstituted on April
Ist, before its individuals had time to disperse.
Avonforce embarked at the end of the first week in April at
Clydeside, headquarters being in the Polish liner Batory, and sailed
to Scapa,
where it remained about 24 hours,
waiting to join up
off Cape Wrath with naval forces destined for Andalsnes.
Officers
were told on board that the objective was Narvik,
but it was not
until well on the way that they learned that the Germans had
invaded Denmark and had forestalled their arrival at Narvik by a coup
de main, having had a ship full of troops lying there for some weeks.
Sailing on north about the Loften Islands in a severe blizzard,
Avonforce arrived on a clear morning on April 12th in the Vaags
fjord.
By good fortune the leading destroyer located and sank an
enemy submarine which was sheltering in the fjord.
After turning
south, now escorted by scores of fishing boats nicknamed 'puffers'
from the exhaust note of their single engined diesels, the convoy
anchored off Harstad, a small fishing port on the island of Hinno.
The decision was made to disembark the force there and set up a
base before marching on Narvik some 50 miles to the south.
ADST landed with the first 'recce party and the remainder of
the ST headquarters an hour later.
Contact was made early with
the British Vice-Consul, Mr. Per Sanvig, a Norwegian and a repre-
sentative of the Anglo-American Oil Company.
The help rendered
by this gentleman was of immense value, especially to the ST staff.
The immediate task was to locate suitable supply and petrol
depots and organize transport, as unloading of stores was to begin
the next day.
Unloading of troops began immediately.
Lack of Transport
The transport picture was depressing.
There was only one
contractor, who was also owner of the main garage and workshops.
NORWAY, 1940
It was arranged that he should provide as many load carriers as
possible as well as taxis and private cars for use as staff cars.
first night only four go-cwt trucks could be raised.
used to help clear kit from the quay, while a few private car owners
helped by transporting staff officers about the town.
For the first night, headquarters, including services, were quartered
in the Grand Hotel, but on the following morning ST Branch moved
to a pension for quarters, and took an office backing on to the
The supply depot and the bakery were located in
and around a disused fish canning-factory on a promontory about
half a mile from the centre of the town.
The petrol depot was to
be in a field about a mile out of Harstad on the Solaagen road.
The only points at which stores could be landed were the town
quay, which could berth two ships, the coal quay (one ship up to
5,000 tons), and the oil wharf, served by a very narrow road (one
In view of the extreme scarcity of transport, hired vehicles were
allocated according to three degrees of priority, the first operational
as ordered by the G Staff (one or two only); the second priority
being for dock clearance; and the third to meet individual demands.
On an average daily hirings were 14 cars and 14 lorries, the peak
being 21 lorries.
Unfortunately these vehicles
were somewhat
unreliable, especially during air raids, when the drivers were apt to
disappear with their vehicles into the hills as soon as the warning
went and not to return for hours.
The RASC transport landed about three days after disembarkation
began and did sterling work, especially the four tractors and trailers,
which were put on to dock clearance and worked 24 hours a day
with drivers in shifts.
The same day heavy snow began to fall,
developing into a blizzard which raged for three days without
respite.
The vehicles sent with the force had been supplied with
snow chains, but these had been shipped separately
vehicles and proved to be all of wrong sizes.
from the
Every available set
of chains in Harstad was bought and adapted, and urgent signals
were sent to the War Office demanding chains of the proper sizes
for all vehicles.
Reinforcements which arrived about four days after the initial
landing included a French Chasseurs Alpins demi-brigade, with
four sections of a supply personnel company and a section of a
motor ambulance convoy.
After these troops had been
and the blizzard, which had viven some relief from German acrial
attention, had died down, Harstad base began to achieve some sort
ol order. Preparations were then made to mount an attack on
Narvik and, in support of this, to eatablich an adored base at
Skandand (on a now vered swamp) and an air strip at Soreise.
