CHAPTER XIII
AIR DESPATCH
General
S
UPPLY by air was a new function for the Corps and was
brought into being by the improvement in the reliability
and capacity of aircraft, together with the increasing difficulty
in many theatres of maintaining lengthy lines of communication.
These lines were so extended that not only did their organization
absorb an inordinate proportion of the 'ration strength' in the
theatre, but also it became impracticable to protect them from
being cut by the enemy.
Air despatch, in its broad sense, means the maintenance by air of
a force not easily reached by ground maintenance organizations,
and the term covers both landing supplies in the desired area by
aircraft (which required the preparation and protection of forward
landing fields or strips) and the actual dropping of supplies over a
dropping zone, or DZ, from aircraft in flight.
The latter entails
using crews who are expert in the rapid and rather tricky busines
of completing the drops.
Dropping may be by parachute loads
which are required for all delicate loads (e.g. men,
mules, guns,
vehicles and stores, or supplies in containers liable to burst or by
"free dropping', where aricles ane than of such a robust nature
that they can be despatched in their own containers, or, if not to
robust, can be packed in special containers.
One example of the
last named type is the double bag in which it was intended to drop
The petrol was filled into the inner bag while the outer bag
burst on impact with the ground.
This container was quite succesful
on trials, but was impracticable for large scale use because it could not
be stored filled, and the extreme difficulty of filing large numbers an
short notice made its use prohibitive.
Several other forms of shock
reducing devices were tried with varying degrees of success,
free dropping, eliminating as it does the capacity of loads to float
for long distances in unpredictable directions with their supporting
parachutes, simplifies the organization of the DZ, and reduces its
proportions.
These advantages are considerably offset,
by the limitations on the types of load to be dropped, by the damage
done to many of the loade when dropped, and bu the danger to
ground staff of the loads falling on them.
AIR DESPATCH
509
The Work of the Air Despatch Group
Technically, the tasks of the Air Despatch Group were divided
into two types of maintenance by air: first, the air maintenance and
re-supply, which meant the maintenance (normally by dropping)
of ground or airborne troops as a routine task, after they had estab-
lished themselves in an operational area, and secondly, supply by
The latter means the loading of aircraft with stores and
supplies straight from dumps without special packing, and landing
the complete aircraft and load at the destination.
The term 'air
despatch'
covers, too, the organizational bodies which exercise
co-ordination and control at each end of the journey, the composite
executive units required to fulfil the requirements of these bodies,
and the aircraft placed at their disposal.
Higher control was a
staff matter on account of conflicting priorities, distances and the
need for a communications 'net'; and the RASC provided most of
the staff officers required. In the United Kingdom the executive
portion was at first under a CRASC Air Despatch.
Later, as the
task grew, an Air Despatch Group was formed.
This consisted of
a Headquarters Air Despatch Group RASC, three HQS RASC,
air despatch companies, and airborne divisional companies (attached
from ist and 6th Airborne Divisions).
There were also general
transport companies for collecting
from supply and ordnance
depots the stores for despatch, small RASC and RAOC depots for
holding 'cushions' of commodities at ready availability, and an
air maintenance company,
RAOC, for holding
and packing
specialized and delicate RAOC stores.
There was also a detach-
ment RAOC for operating the 'cushion' ammunition depot, and a
pioneer company for labour.
The aircraft for the carriage of the
stores were not, of course, part of the Air Despatch Group but were
controlled and operated by the Royal Air Force.
In SEAC, where
there were no civilian or well established military communications,
a signal regiment was also part of the organization.
Supply by Air before 1942
The idea of carrying supplies by air had been thought of long
before the Second World War, but the scarcity of aireraft and their
limitations of range world War, bid out little promise of achievement
until the latter part of the war.
As long ago as 1916 attempts had
been made to sustain the writish force besieged by the Turks ax
Kut-el-Amara in Iraq by nine aircraft which flew 140 sorties in six
the disaster of capitulation.
days. The amount dropped. however, was insufficient to avert
In 1918 a certain amount of ammuni-
tion was dropped to British troops on the western front who, in
