596
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
steadier.
It was no longer a wild rush like that of 25th Tank Brigade.
Then 2ist Tank Brigade, Churchills again, but the weather was
drying,
and we had only
to haul them to Ghardimaou.
The
brigade were going forward for the battle, and we were ordered to
haul them from Ghardimaou to Testour.
The telephone rang; BRAG asking for a squadron to go up to
Gafour straight away.
'It's 1500 now,' said brigade.
"How soon
can a squadron get to the loading base three miles away?'
They
suggested arrival by I600, which meant that we would have to
move fast. 1600 hours brought the sight that never palls-a quick
load in village streets.
Transporters wheeled in from their hide to
the south, and the Churchills thundered in from the north, and
RASC section NCOs were at the junction leading in the two troops
they will carry. There was the noise of Churchill engines, and
there was the smell of derv and petrol engines
then, suddenly,
there was peace,
the village was deserted,
and the
convoy was
moving steadily down the road to Souk el Arba.
And the time—
Later another ambition was achieved, to take a whole regiment
forward at once instead of in penny numbers.
Sixty-four transpor-
ters rolled out with 63 tanks on board: not only a regiment, but
bits of brigade headquarters as well.
Then there was the thrill of
a 'pull' to Seven Dials and meeting our fellow craftsmen from the
Eighth Army.
an almost romantic delivery in
the moonlight at Testour, when all went like clockwork.
light came we suddenly noticed that the detector paint on the car
had gone red.
Gas at last? But no, that was another lesson
learnt-never to open a tin of sardines on the bonnet in the dark
and splash the oil on the detector paint. If you do, it may worry
April, 1943, saw us on the same old run: Souk-Ahras-Bone-
Souk el Arba-
-Seven Dials-Testour, with reinforcement Churchills
for our brigades.
Frequently we had to tour our
locations to make sure we knew their exact locations in case of a
Once occasion arose to go from Bou Arada to Medjez.
The direct road seemed suspicious, so we asked a lance-corporal
(not a Corps man) nearby.
He replied, 'O.K..
Down the road
we rocked, over a strand of barbed wire.
There was a loud noise.
We got out and discovered that the hub covers had been blown off,
the rear light had vanished, and the boot had been blown off.
had driven into an anti-personnel minefield.
After creeping the tar back slowly nhrough it, we found we had
We crept
previously driven through 10 rows of anti-tank mines.
even more slowly through that.
Returning hastily to Bou Arada,
we learned that German RHQ was in Goubellat, and it was just
534 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
as well we did not lunch there as we had intended.
the damage and replaced the boot of the car.
But we were almost
grateful to that mine when the layers of paint it removed exposed
the old original 54th Divisional sign.
When we knew that Tunis had fallen, it meant a lot to us. There
was a standstill order on tank movements, and for a blessed week
nothing moved.
It was the first time the vehicles had stopped
since those 48 hours on March 3rd and 4th.
But there was no time
We vetted them, checked them and 'minor repaired'
for there was more work coming.
All the tanks we had
hauled forward would have to come back, so we upped stakes and
It was easier this time, for 228 Company had
as well now.
We embarked on some really big
convoys, with go vehicles in each.
They were horribly unwieldy,
particularly as we were moving at 10 mph, and someone had routed
I,000 AGRA vehicles at 15 mph, an hour behind us on the same
Soon Cap Bon was clear of tanks.
There were a few odd last
minute jobs for stuff going to Sicily, and then we were off to Algiers,
picking up 47 'dead' Churchills to take to Bone as a pay load,
these same Churchills we had hauled forward in February.
of long hauls-Algiers-Oran-Bone-
Algiers, 1,500 miles as
the transporter does not fly.
were anxiously watching them as they came in after a fortnight on
the road, and counting the number of tractors being carried on
It was now eight months since we unshipped those 65 Diamond
Ts, and we had only evacuated two of them, a tribute to the grim
unflagging determination of workshops to have them fit when
Defects they had: cracked cylinder blocks (we had had
I1), broken rocker bearings causing four trailer wheels to fall off
(that happened to times), and fuel injector oil shafts always choosing
the most awkward spot to break.
But ask a driver to swap, suggest
to an artificer he should lead a quiet life somewhere else.
be a brave man who would suggest it.
Since the vehicles were landed in North Africa, they had averaged
9,850 miles each, and the aggregate mileages of the transporters
had been 618,464•
The tanks carried had been mainly Churchills
and Shermans, but we also carried SP Guns, Scorpions, German
Mark III's and IV's.
Sometimes, when First Army could fit them
in the programme, we had done rush jobs for the United States
The total of tanks and guns carried had been 1,666, and
each of them had been carried an average of 165 miles - 165 miles
of African road, so called, struggling through fords a foot deep one
day and nearly four feet deep the next.
