116
THE MIDDLE EAST I
defective ones being returned for repair.
This was particularly
necessary in the case of engines, which, because of desert conditions,
needed overhaul after a comparatively small mileage.
With three
HRSs at work, it was possible to adopt this policy, and a regular
flow of major assemblies was kept up, in addition to normal vehicle
repair.
A high standard of efficiency was reached by the M'T stores
depots in meeting the demands of the HRSs, and also in supplying
the technical needs of RASC units, either working in the field or at
the base, or mobilizing.
Elements from the HRSs, the MT stores depots, and the VRDs
were formed into advanced M'T depots, of which one was sent to
Tobruk in 1941, and a second to Greece when operations began
there.
A third was located at Haifa, to serve units in Palestine and
Syria. It was a cause of deep regret to the RASC that, in October,
1942, the base workshops were taken over by the REME, when this
Corps was formed, and assumed responsibility for third line repairs.
At the same time, the RAOC took over MT stores depots and VRDs.
Almost all the members of the RASC at these installations were
transferred to the other two corps.
The RASC second line workshops remained, and kept up their
standard of technical efficiency.
Credit must also be given to the
Chief Inspector Mechanical Transport, and his staff, whose regular
technical inspections and help were big factors in maintaining this
standard.
In May, 1943, after the surrender of the Axis forces in North
Africa, Middle East was no longer an important operational com-
mand, though it took part in the mounting of the operations for the
invasion of Sicily,
A large number of RASC MT companies from
North Africa came back to the Delta for refitting, most of their
vehicles badly needing overhaul.
This was now a REME responsi-
bility, but as their workshops were heavily engaged in the overhaul
of fighting vehicles, the work was undertaken at the RASC Mobiliza-
tion Centre, 'Tahag.
The RASC companies' second line workshops
were grouped, and carried out an overhaul programme, chiefly by
assembly replacement, under the direction of an Inspector of M'T
RASC, with a REME liaison officer attached, to deal with the supply
of assemblies.
By
this
means, more than 5,000 vehicles
were
reconditioned in four months, and a valuable contribution was made
to the mounting of the Sicily expedition.
Experience throughout the Middle East showed the advantages
and elasticity of the organisation of the GT company, formed of
standard platoons, which enabled units to be readily converted from
one role to another.
Although the main need was for normal load
carrying companies, other specialized units had to be provided,
such as tank transporter companies, bulk petrol transport companies,
THE MIDDLE EAST I
117
and water tank companies.
For all these purposes the organization
of the GT company was satisfactory, and the number of platoons
could be varied as circumstances demanded.
A number of ro-ton GT companies were employed in the desert,
chiefly on those stretches of the lines of communication where the
mileage between terminals was greatest, and where the heaviest
loads had to be lifted.
The reduced number of men required in
relation to the tonnage carried eased the manpower situation, and
the 10-tonners did fine work; more could well have been used.
The wear and tear of desert warfare on transport called at all
times for the highest standard of vehicle maintenance.
Only the
strict adherence to this standard, and the rigid application of the
'task system' of maintenance made it possible for success to be
achieved.
The Western Desert
The Desert: something about the name is forbidding, bringing with
it a picture of heat and hunger and thirst.
Yet as a Corps we had
had much desert experience.
As well as in India, large numbers of
Corps units had served in Mesopotamia and Palestine in the First
World War and there, even with the solid-tyred, low-powered MT
vehicles of the time, they overcame conditions of terrain almost as
bad as, and conditions of climate probably worse than, exist in any
other part of the world.
Moreover, the Western Desert was not
unfamiliar to a Corps which had operated there in 1914-18 and
which had since had several opportunities to gain experience.
For
example, during the 'flap' of 1936, there was considerable RASC
representation in Mersa Matruh for some time.
Such excursions as this apparently did not succeed in creating any
general feeling of confidence: rather the contrary seems to have
occurred, arising perhaps from the discovery of the short life of an
internal combustion engine unequipped with a suitable air cleaner
to remove the sand and dust which is otherwise drawn into the
cylinders.
Moreover, the driver of the vehicle, who has the greatest
difficulties to overcome in the desert, and upon whom
falls the
burdens of the sheer physical strain of driving and bad going, of
the glare of a seldom obscured sun in the summer, of the blast of the
cold winds of the winter, of the blowing sand which prevails at both
seasons and works its way into every opening in man and machine,
and of the long hours of work, was replaced every few years and his
experience was lost.
Consequently, in 1938, there were compara-
tively few RASC men in Egypt with much desert experience.
September,
1938, brought another 'flap': this time, Munich.
Once more there was a rush out to Mersa Matruh, the terminus of
the desert railway.
Little advantage was, however, taken by the
