They use the word 'mainly' because they know that in some cases
those who undertook the work sought assistance from sources of
which the Committee is unaware.
In such cases much research
and hard work was necessary and in the hunt for information many
Corps and ex-Corps officers with the required knowledge were run
to earth in many
For these reasons, individual authors'
names have not been linked with particular chapters.
The preparation of the subject matter has not, in the view of
the Committee, been the most difficult task; they are quite certain
that the most onerous
task in the compilation of the story has
fallen on their Honorary Secretary, Major-General H. M. Whitty.
Not only has he had to discover those who could provide suitable
material but he has had constantly to follow up his contacts and to
send manuscripts to others who might be able to add to or elaborate
the original contribution.
In addition, the views of the senior officer
in each theatre have been obtained wherever possible.
To find suitable contributors, to persuade them that they alone
could perform the duty, to collect, distribute and re-collect manu-
scripts, to circulate them to Committee members for reading-all
this has been a colossal task which few but General Whitty could
have undertaken with such success.
The Committee were fortunate enough to obtain the assistance
of Captain H. L. Brigstocke, who served in the Corps throughout the
war, to carry out the duties of Sub-Editor, but before his work was
completed he had to take up an appointment abroad.
His place
was taken by Captain F. A. Baughan who was an officer with the
Royal Fusiliers in the Middle East.
As both Captains Brigstocke
and Baughan are journalists by profession their help has been
invaluable.
Major-General Sir Bertram Rowcroft, K.B.E., C.B., has earned
the special gratitude of the Committee for his assistance in the
preparation of material and for his constant and willing help and
advice on many problems.
Apart from authorship, editorial and secretarial work, there have
been various other contributions of great value.
Boileau
did much original research.
Lieutenant-Colonel P. M.
Edgell has placed his
wide experience of book production and
illustration at the disposal of the Committee of which he was a
member.
Tribute must also be paid to the four artists who were
responsible for the coloured plates, in particular Mr. Aubrey Sykes,
R.I., who served in the R.I.A.S.C. in the war, and who also executed
the drawing for the wrapper.
The Committee are grateful to the
Imperial War Museum
for permission to use the photographs
reproduced in the
book,
and to Mr. T. White for help in their
selection.
The choosing of the photographs was in itself a problem.
PREFACE
xi
The Museum had many showing the Corps at war,
but only a
limited number suitable for reproduction, and it was not easy, with
the limited space available, to make a selection that would include
as many facets of Corps activities as possible.
For the compilation of the Roll of Honour and for the particulars
of recipients of Awards the Committee are indebted to the staff of
AG 8, The War Office, who consulted all relevant authorities.
The
Committee also received much help from the Director of Supplies
and Transport and his staff, and from the R.A.S.C. Training Centre.
In deciding the nomenclature of units and forms of abbreviations
military custom than by the desire to use terms which will be easily
understood and which are in accord with the best publishing
A common criticism of war histories is that the maps provided are
Large numbers of maps and sketches on various scales
are ruled out for a work of this nature because of cost.
mittee hope that the course adopted of providing a limited number
of sketches on a standard plan will serve as an adequate guide to
the course of the various campaigns.
Throughout their labours the Committee have enjoyed the expert
guidance and assistance of the publishers,
G. Bell & Sons
In particular, Colonel Hugh Bell, D.S.O., O.B.E., late Royal
Engineers, placed his wide knowledge unreservedly at their disposal.
His combined military and publishing experience has been of the
normally be expected of a publisher in the great personal interest
he has taken in every aspect of the book.
Apart from those whose outstanding
contributions have been
mentioned above, the Committee would like to acknowledge the
help and assistance of the following:
O.B.E., Brigadier W. J. J. Allen, O.B.E.,
Major G. L. W. K. Bird, Lieut-Colonel I. S.
Bisset, Brigadier G.
C. G. Blunt, D.S.O., O.B.E., Brigadier D. H. Bond, C.B.E., M. V.O.,
Major-General G. A. Bond, C.B.E., Major-General D. H. V. Buckle,
G.B., C.B.E., Lieut-Colonel M. P. Buckley, Brigadier M. J. Gahill,
O.B.E., Major-General W. d'A. Collings,
C.B.E., Major E.
Collins, M.B.E., Lieut-Colonel R.
R. T. Cooke, C.B.E., Brigadier C. E. Davis, C.B.E.,
Lieut-Colonel A. J. Dewar,
H. C. Dudman, O.B.E., T.D., Brigadier E. Dynes, O.B.E., Major-
General W. J. F. Eassie, C.B., C.B.E., D.S.O., Major H. Edmondson,
Brigadier A. F. J. Elmslie,
C.B.E., Brigadier M. F. Farquharson-
Roberts, C.B.E., Major L. Feeney, Major T. A. Gardner, M.B.E.,
