292
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
ships awaiting unloading had been withdrawn to the mouth of the
bay.
craft at Faliron.
But there were two 'hards' suitable for unloading very light
Fortunately Faliron adjoined the all-weather air-
strip of Hasani at Kalamaki, and the area was still in our hands,
although it could only be lightly defended until reinforcements were
landed, and could not be used by night.
An improvised headquarters for the new base 'Greenbase' was in
position by the morning of the 13th and set to work at once to
organize the intake of stores over the beaches and to receive the
reinforcements from the 4th Division which were beginning to
arrive on the adjacent airfield.
Their landing was often greeted
by intermittent small arms fire from the insurgents in the hills nearby.
Transport offices were set up for the control of transport at the
beach-head and airfield; a new site was taken over for building up
stocks of canned petrol and another site for forming a temporary
depot for bulk stocks of food.
The DID, which also housed a part
of the garrison, was cleared of all men except those needed for its
defence, and within a few days the little base was in working order.
Troops in the locality drew their needs direct from the supply and
petrol depot.
'Arkforce' and the central sector were supplied by
nightly
escorted convoys run along the Syngros Avenue where
various enemy posts were being cleared up, and supply to iggth
Brigade and 5th Indian Brigade (which had arrived as a welcome
reinforcement)
was arranged by sea to the Piraeus.
With the
arrival of the first infantry brigade of the 4th Division,
Major-
General Dudley Ward, the divisional commander, assumed com-
mand of that brigade and those defending the Piracus.
His first
object was to re-establish communications by road between the
two parts of his command.
The first element of the 4th Divisional RASC arrived by ship and
set to at once to assist in ferrying troops ashore in assault boats.
The 4th Divisional Composite
Company,
which was landed by
mid-December, was equipped with so vehicles borrowed from the
ordnance depot and other units, and was soon busy maintaining is
RASC Units in Defence
The first and
most serious attack against our forces took place
early on December Isth against the collection of units in the infantry
barracks, which included 331 Company, RASC.
Throughout the
night of December lath/ith there was heavy firing around the
barracks,
which proved to be attacks on the Greek Mountain
Brigade who were expected to reinforce the garrison of the barracks
if they were attacked.
In the first confusion which resulted in the
pitch dark night, when the ELAS blew a hole in the barracks wall,
293
GREECE, 1944
it was difficult to distinguish between friend and foe until blazing
petrol and burning huts lit up the scene.
700 ELAS troops were able to gain an entry before the situation could
be taken in hand, but not before there had been many casualties.
The men in the stronger buildings held out, but intense heat and
fire gave the platoons in the flimsier billets little chance.
There
were many acts of individual gallantry on the part of the garrison,
such as that of Dvr W. Prickett who performed one hazardous task
after the other until badly burned, but even then refused to give up
until the enemy had been cleared.
Captain V. H. Band, in spite
of enemy fire, organized the clearance of petrol stocks to a safer
point and later went in search of wounded under enemy fire until,
wounded himself, he was rescued under heavy fire by Dvrs J. W. E.
Carter and H. Hobson.
Captain Band and the three drivers were
given immediate awards of the Military Cross and the Military
Medal respectively.
Three days after the attack on the infantry barracks the small
detachment of 26th Field Butchery who were operating the FIX
cold stores were overrun after ELÁS troops had blasted their way
into the rear of the installation. This little detachment in company
with a few sappers had been surrounded in enemy held territory
since December gth, but were, up to the i8th, able to repel the
various attempts to force an entry and refused to give in to several
calls to surrender.
No. 13 Port Detachment were more fortunate
as, also surrounded in their location in the Piraeus, they
were
extricated and evacuated by sea on December 17th, and were then
employed at Faliron on their normal duties and in helping to
develop the temporary base supply depot. During this period, the
original site, on the Athens/Piraeus road, selected for holding bulk
stocks which was manned by a section of 123 DID, continued to be
surrounded.
Protected by a detachment of infantry and the small
depot staff, they held out, although one of the three sheds in
the depot was captured, until the enemy were cleared from the
arca at the end of December when the unit came into operation
The other two transport companies, 561 and 6go Corps Car
Company, although they were not subjected to concerted attacks,
also had their share of the fighting. No. 561 Company was affiliated
to the Greek Mountain Brigade, against whom ELAS seemed to
make a concentrated effort.
The location of the company was
under continuous fire and a good deal of damage was caused to their
vehicles, although their casualties were relatively light with one
sergeant killed and eight wounded.
Throughout the period from
December ath to about the last week of the month the unit fulfilled
its normal task of maintaining petrol and supply points for the
