24
PRELUDE
tracked machines, to the MGO and the creation of a new 'Mechanical
Warfare Board',
later styled the 'Mechanization Board', which
absorbed the duties hitherto performed by the Mechanical Transport
Advisory
Board
and the Tracked Vehicles Sub-Committee.
mark the importance of the new board, the MGO himself assumed
the chairmanship.
The RASC were represented on the board and
also in the new Army experimental establishment, the Mechanical
Warfare Experimental Establishment (MWEE), which was set up at
Farnborough.
This measure was welcomed on all sides, though
not without a shade of regret on the part of the Corps, who thus
lost their intimate responsibility for research, which they had borne
with great enthusiasm and no little success since the end of the war.
The Mechanization Board had its teething troubles but evolved into
a most useful clearing house for investigation and research.
From this time, too, executive action within the War Office for
the provision of wheeled vehicles was officially the task of an MGO
branch, MGO 6, but in practice the QMG with the DST as his
adviser, still remained responsible for deciding what vehicles he
required, and the DST's MG 3 branch still remained responsible
for the receipt, custody and issue of RASC vehicles and for their
repair.
To discriminate between the QMG's responsibility and
that of the MGO, the Army's vehicles were divided into
categories, A vehicles (purely fighting vehicles), B vehicles (first line
transport vehicles for arms other than the RASC),
and 'RASC
vehicles.
A and B vehicles were the responsibility of the MGO,
RASC vehicles that of the QMG.
To the outsider this organization was confusing, to put it milly,
yet the new scheme worked well until it became strained by war
production
programmes.
material and shipping priorities.
with their implications in manpower,
At a time when the very best use had to be made of the limited
amount of public money available, the contract procedure for pro-
ducing a complete vehicle was indeed a complicated one.
No fewer
than ten separate contracts had to be drawn up and tenders invited
to cover the separate provision of the body, and the mounting of it,
the driver's cab. and canvas for lorry covers, and there had to be
another contract to make them into the complete canopy:
siderable patience was necessary in fitting in the delivery of all these
components so as to be able to issue a complete vehicle to a unit
There were even two separate contracts, one for the spring draw-bar
and another for the towing hook which was attached to it!
assemblv and equinoing of all vehicles was one of the manv important
features of the work in the heavy repair shop at Feltham.
The relations between the two branches,
MGO 6 and QMG 3,
were of the closest, partly because of the presence of several RAS
TRANSPORT
25
officers who were posted to the new organization, including its
Mechanization Board and its Inspection Department, as well as its
War Office branch.
Some of these officers transferred to the RAOC
Engineering Branch,
and of these Major J.
S.
Crawford was
eventually to become Director of Mechanization and later Deputy
Director General of Tank Supply in the Ministry of Supply.
those who remained with the RASC, Major W. S. Tope, who went to
MGO 6, later became the second Director of the new Corps of Royal
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers formed later in the War. Lieut-
Colonel M. S. Brander and Major E. B. Rowcroft, who became the
first Director of REME, were successively Inspector of Tanks and
Major C. C. Saunders-O'Mahoney was
the first
Inspector of
Mechanized Vehicles (i.e., wheeled transport vehicles), and was
succeeded by Lieut-Colonel J. C. Mackie.
The Corps had always placed special importance on their own
system of inspection under which the mechanical and operating
efficiency of every RASC company was known personally to the
DST, from which he gauged the efficiency of the commanding
officers and of the transport organization as a
whole.
Resolute
action in meeting all shortcomings ensured that everything was kept
at a high pitch of efficiency.
The fact that the officers of the
Inspectorate were regimental officers who took their turn at this, as
well as other duties, ensured that they brought a practical as well as
a reasonable mind to their task.
This rearrangement did not, how-
ever, affect the Corps vitally, but it did have an unfortunate effect
after the outbreak of war, for no plans were made to continue the
CIA's inspections of unit equipment after mobilization.
The DST
had, therefore, from his already strained resources to set up again
the RASC Inspectorate at home and in every main theatre of war.
At this stage, then, the division of responsibility between
MGO (or the RAOC) and the QMG was such that the former
inspected ALL equipment for the Army and provided, stored, issued
and maintained all equipment for all arms except the RASG.
The
QMG for his part, remained responsible for the vehicles and their
operation in the RASC and in any such other arms or services for
which the RASC provided drivers, for instance of ambulances,
staff cars and military fire engines.
The RASC retains its MT Depots and Workshops
Now a different and more threatening question arose, when a
strong body of opinion put forward the
view that the RASC
organization for provision of spares and the execution of repairs
should pass to the MGO's organization.
It was felt that it was
uneconomic to have two parallel systems running concurrently, one
for the Corps and one for the rest of the Army.
This was no new
