546
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
in the art of making up pack loads and tying them, and in the
technique of moving laden mules over mountainous country.
It was soon evident at Boufarik that the hardy British HT drivers
from Gibraltar could out-march their infantry comrades, but it
was not long before both showed equal ability to master a 20-mile
trek in blazing July weather over the most difficult country.
At
Djidjelli this ability could not be proved, as the animals hired from
local civilians were unfit to stand up to any such trials.
At last the invasion of Sicily brought all training to an end. The
Gibraltar company was transferred to Tunis, and the two North
African companies left Tunis and went to Sicily, where it was in-
tended that they should be re-formed and re-equipped with animals
which it was hoped would be available locally.
On arrival in Tunis the Gibraltar company took over the 700
animals left behind by the North African companies.
To bring
the unit up to the desired strength a number of Tunisians were
drafted in.
These, though perhaps slower and quieter than the
Algerians, were tough and were later to prove their worth in Italy,
Helped also by a French cadre, the work of expansion was soon
finished, and the unit was then allotted to support the it British
Division which was then training hard for operations in mountainous
country.
In the event the North African companies were not actively
employed in Sicily, As recounted in Chapter VII, there was
difficulty in getting mules and the small number obtained did not
permit of any being allotted to the companies.
So ended the trials on the 'nursery slopes' of Africa. They proved
that a small, well trained British cadre, given good material,
animals and a little time to train local muleteers, could give a first-
clam account of themselves.
Thus when the campaign in Italy opened there were three pack
companies prepared to join in the fray and share the fortunes of
the RIASC and Cypriot group from the Middle East and later the
Italian groups of pack units.
"SS Mont Everest'
The title of this story does not mean that the newly formed
Pack Group in North Africa was destined to operate on the highest
mountain in the world,
To those who moved to Italy from Tunis,
however, the name will always remain in their memory as the ship
which carried 450 officers and men and 700 animals to their new
sphere of operations in the CMF,
The movement of animals by sea is never an easy matter, and it
was with some misgivings that the old haver watched the arrival of
the good ship Mont Everes fying the Panamanian Hag and apparendy
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
547
completely devoid of any means of embarking an animal load.
However, the ship's captain, the officer commanding and 'Jackie'
Phrayre, the French pack officer, went into conference and decided
to lift the animals on board by rope net.
The Mont Everest was a ship of about 8,000 tons which was said
to have been originally a meat ship. She had been fitted on all decks
with a series of bays so made that animals faced inboard and were
secured in front, waist high, with bars.
Thus the mules could
hang their heads out as if from a stable door.
No provision had
been made for the accommodation of officers or men, or for carrying
extra drinking water.
The ship's crew were of all nationalities,
When embarkation began 'Old Job', one of the few survivors of
the former Gibraltar company and a great character who had a
crafty habit of nipping unsuspecting people in a most vulnerable
spot, and who worried about nothing except the next feeding time,
was invited to have first go.
He waddled, full of trust, on to the
net spread out on the ground, with an NCO at each corner.
The
corners were immediately whipped up to the hook of the derrick
cable; the NCO in charge gave the signal to the donkey man; and
before Old Job could get his ears back he was swinging in mid-air.
surveyed the animals below with a proud and disdainful expression,
to the huge delight of the Arabs. This then was the way to do it, and
towards the end of the day the animals were going on board at the
rate of one every two minutes.
No sooner had the ship put to sea than every Arab was sick.
The wretched men, unable to understand what had happened,
prayed to Allah and then went into a coma for three days.
This
meant that about 70 British soldiers of all ranks had to water and
feed more than 700 animals a 24-hour-a-day job.
The ship's performance in no way belied her appearance. Full
apeed ahead was four knots, and every now and then a terrific
vibration started up.
The engineer would at once fly down to the
bowele of the chio, where be performed cacie eiter aber wbich tha
vibration would die downbut sever for long: soon off fe would
After two days the ship anchored in the bay outside Augusta,
Sicily, and there she stayed for five days, lying in the middle of a
large conyoy. On the second nicht the convoy was bombed. and
some 6o ships opened up with their anti airerate weapons, eausing
panic among the animals. On the fifth day the officer
