THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
limited and their plans for raising more transport units were regu-
lated by priorities laid down by the staff.
They were also faced
with the unexpected necessity of raising a number of companies for
use at home.
However, they met the urgent need for transport
for carrying material for the new defence line by producing works
which later became the well known maid of all work,
the tipper company, and answered the call for troop-carrying units
for conveying labour to their daily place of work, by converting
some Territorial load-carrying companies.
If the word 'phoney' could be used to describe the period between
the landing of the BEF and the beginning of active operations the
next year, it certainly did not apply to the task of the RASC transport
in the force. All divisional and corps units when not under training
were fully employed and the severe winter conditions and ice-bound
roads made their task no easier.
The RASC had few new vehicles.
Most of them had been
obtained through the
impressment scheme so that the
RASC
organization
for
maintenance
was well tested.
Although
the
original site selected for the Heavy Repair Shop, an old cattle cake
factory, was by no means ideal, the unit was soon hard at work
with its mobile equipment and it was not long in reaching a
maximum output.
An idea of the effort put out may be gained
from the fact that the equipment provided was on a basis of 3 per
cent wastage of 4,000 vehicles and that by early 1940 the number
of vehicles to be maintained had risen to over 10,000.
There were
21,000 vehicles in May, 1940, and as a temporary measure some of
them which required overhaul were sent back to the newly introduced
Ministry of Supply repair organization in England.
The unit which handled spare parts, the MT Stores Depot, was
established about 15 miles from the Heavy Repair Shop,
but as
stores took as much as to days to reach the BEF, an advanced section
was set up near Rouen.
The MT Stores Depot kept pace with the
1,300
demands received each week which sometimes involved
handling and packing some 4,000 different spare parts.
Replacements for vehicles which were beyond the repair capacity
of MI companies were made by the Vehicle Reserve Depot, which
spread its sub-parks between Amiens (Fleselles), the assembly area
near Le Mans, and its permanent headquarters near Nantes.
By March, 1940, there were 104 RASC transport units in France,
and it is to their credit that only 3-7 per cent of the RASC vehicles
had to be evacuated to the base for repair and that two thirds of
the heavy overhauls were effected in France.
The transport story of the so-called 'phoney'
period would not be
complete without came mantion of the arrival of the RASC anima
transport companies, and later a British company drawn from that
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
traditional source of muleteers, Cyprus.
The arrival of the RIASC
companies made history, as they were the first units of the Indian
Army to take the field.
Petroleum
The plans made for providing the BEF with petrol in tins had
worked, but it soon became obvious that a separate organization was
required for handling petrol and other fuel oils and lubricants, and
that more economical arrangements should be made by making
use of existing bulk storage facilities in France-which, contrary to
expectations, remained free from enemy air attack.
For the first
few weeks the main stocks for the force were stored in tins by the
no. 5 sections of the two base supply depots which, covering a large
area and having to be located well away from their parent head-
quarters, were practically separate units.
As soon as the War Office
agreed to separate petrol organization, speedy action was taken to
acquire from the French sufficient bulk storage for about 70,000 tons
at Le Havre, at Honfleur on the opposite bank of the Seine, at
Rouen and other places, and a new unit, a bulk storage petroleum
company, was provided for supervising their
operation.
The
existing no. 5 sections of the base supply depots were converted into
petrol depots for packed stocks.
New units, base petrol filling
centres, were introduced for filling cans and established at Rouen
and later near Lille. Transport companies for carrying petrol in
bulk were formed and manned by men enlisted from the
United
Kingdom Petroleum Board.
All petrol units included a high
proportion of officers and men who had been employed in peacetime
by the large petroleum corporations.
While the months passed by the BEF grew stronger. A 5th
Division had been formed in France and, between January, I940,
and April, the 42nd, 44th, 48th, 5oth (motorized) and gist Divisions
had arrived from home.
A third corps (III Corps) was formed in
April, so that just before the battle broke out the BEF had three
corps with nine divisions on the main front and a tenth, the gist,
disposed with the French armies in the Maginot sector.
Three other divisions which had not completed their training,
had also arrived the tath, aard and 46th-which were intended
for labour and guard duties on the lines of communication.
lacked the usual complimes of the ancillary fighting arms and had
only a skeleton administrative organization.
The original deficiency in general transport and troop carrving
companies had been made partly good by the arrival of more
companies from Enoland. and the sunnly oroanization had been
