648
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
freighter bore down on them, missing them by a few feet, and then
the Japanese spotted them and shelled them.
Next morning they
found to their dismay that they had gone north instead of south in
the darkness, and had to return past Singapore.
Enemy aircraft
apparently decided that they were a native boat, and left them alone.
After rescuing some RAF men, whose boat had been sunk,
reached Sumatra, only to find that the Dutch were evacuating that
But they were given some old lorries, in which they reached
the west coast, where they linked up with 400 other refugees from
Singapore.
A cruiser took them to Java to continue the fight,
but resistance was diminishing there,
and the whole party got
across to the west coast, where they were lucky enough to find an
incredible contraption of a vessel, called the
Yangtse River boat which had been washed up there with 200 RAF
bombs on board.
She was quite unseaworthy and falling to bits,
but she was a chance, and the 400 officers and men took it.
left on March ist for a 3,500 mile trip across the Indian Ocean to
Ceylon.
The weather remained fairly calm, but the ship rolled
about 25 degrees.
When she was about 1,500 miles from Ceylon, a Japanese sub-
marine saw her and fired three torpedoes.
Thanks to her flat
bottom and shallow draught, only 6-8 feet, they passed beneath her,
doing no damage.
As the bombs were still on board, the effect if
the torpedoes had hit would have been, to say the least, spectacular.
The submarine surfaced 150 yards away,
but for some reason,
possibly because of a dummy gun mounted in the Wuh-Chang's
stern, did not shell her, but submerged again and stalked the ship
to try and fire another torpedo.
The old boat had considerable
manoeuvrability, and succeeded in taking evasive action, thanks to
the frantic efforts of her crew, and the submarine at last made off.
The Wuh-Chang reached Colombo about a week later and was
taken over by the Royal Navy as an auxiliary submarine depot ship
and stationed at Trincomalee.
Considering the rough conditions
of their trip, the men on board were all remarkably fit, and a few
days later had already started their normal work again.
ROUND TOUR OF EUROPE
Thie is an aCCount fan DISCafeare norind of captivity in the
hands of the Vichy French authorities, ending happily under the
terms of the Wilson/Dentz armistice, thanks to our victory over
the Vichy French authorities in Syria.
It is a good indication of
the spirit and resource of an RASC individual in the face of dis-
couragement and, for him, disaster.
The story is given in his own
ROUND TOUR OF EUROPE
words. He was part of the force moving along the land L of C
from Iraq on Syria at the time of our operations against the Vichy
forces there.
My company was operating with Rabforce, the vehicles being
loaded with ammunition, supplies and petrol and parked at H3
while the fighting troops were advancing on Palmyra.
The code
word for my convoy was 'Rabbits January', later convoys being
designated 'Rabbits February', 'Rabbits March', and so on.
When
this code word was received by signal, I was to understand that
Palmyra had fallen and that I was to proceed there immediately
with my convoy.
After waiting at H3 for some days the code word came through
by telephone and, immediately afterwards, an officer of the Arab
Legion, Scott by name, reported himself as having been sent by
General Clark (ist Cavalry Division) to escort my unit to Palmyra.
We moved out forthwith and travelled for the remainder of the day.
When dusk fell it became apparent that our guides had lost their
way and we had to make a wide detour to get back on our course.
Towards midnight we were still in some doubt about our exact
location, as the night was very dark.
As I naturally wanted to
avoid falling into an ambush, I halted the company and sent a
signal from my wireless PU to divisional headquarters, giving my
approximate position and asking them whether I should continue
or leaguer for the night.
I received a reply to leaguer, which we did.
Daybreak found us again on the move and, on a pre-arranged
signal the vehicles fanned out as soon as it was full light, as we had
learned that certain troops of ist Cavalry Division had been heavily
bombed the previous day.
We were then traversing a flat, open
plain which was the area in which, I surmised, this attack had
occurred.
Right enough a number of Vichy aircraft swooped
down on us but disappeared without attacking after circling round
several times.
Shortly afterwards I heard the noise of firing and,
judging from some smoke billowing up behind a high sand dune,
I concluded that mortars were in use.
I decided to halt my convoy and carry out a personal recon-
naissance because, so far, conwy aid ce try out a perso dale, out
would come into full view of were in the lee of the is we arceded
I arranged with Scott for two Arab legionaries to crawl
up the rear slope of the sand dune to have a 'look-see', while Scott
and I followed them as closely as possible in the car.
The Arabs
reported that there was a forly as possible in the ce dune and that
some English troops were firing at it from entrenched positions.
A few minutes later they reported that the fort had apparently
surrendered, as they saw the Enolish troops entering it.
In point
