540
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
had begun; fourthly, to replenish divisional stocks by drawing from
VIII Corps CMA at Lüneburg; and fifthly the attachment of MT
sections to other arms to supplement their light establishments.
A sixth task, not usual for RASC, was the phasing of all units
of all arms across the bridge, which was conducted with notable
smoothness.
The assault took place on April 2gth, 1945, and by May ist the
bridgehead was secure.
The column had been strained to the
uttermost, but there was no rest for it, since on May and the rush
for the Baltic began.
Now under command of XVIII United States Airborne Corps, the
6th Division was inspired in its dash over the next and last lap of
80 miles by three objects to reach the Baltic coast before any of
their American companions, to capture Wismar before the Russians
could get there, and to be the first British troops to link up with
the Russian forces.
No reliable information existed about the enemy; there was no
indication of whether he would fight or yield, and consequently
no chance to decide whether ammunition or petrol would be the
more important load. The CRASC had to provide plenty of both,
and in this he had perhaps the hardest task of the campaign, since,
in addition to supplying the division along three separate brigade
routes, covered at high speed, his transport resources were over-
strained by the necessity of carrying two of the brigades (in 120
3-ton lorries). The third brigade hoped to move by rail in a
German train they had discovered if they could get it to go,
is worth mentioning too that the division had under command two
field regiments and an anti-tank battery RA, and the Royal Scots
Greys, the last named having one squadron with each brigade,
which made the RASC task no easier.
CRASC decided that the second-line movement could only be
on the central route, following up 3rd Parachute Brigade,
On this,
all supply, petrol and ammunition points would be established,
and the brigades on the other two axes would have to draw from
these by cross-country route,
A signing squad' from 716 Company
followed the RASC vehicles up the road, hammering in Pegasus
signs so that no matter where unit vehicles joined the route, they
would be automatically directed to the points,
Lo reduce the call on points as much as possible, in case anythin,
went wronk, every one of the troop-carrying RASC lorries carried
51 filled jerricans of petrol, and each brigade headquarters had tro
The food prote
Lo-tonners of ammunition permanently attached,
lem was less urgent, as all units carried feserves as well as their
normal day's maintenance at the beginning of the move,
It might all have been necessary, but in the event, the adyand
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
541
began in a mad rush at oBoo hours on May and, 1945, and grd
Parachute Brigade reached Wismar on the Baltic at 1430 hours,
later reporting that its total ammunition expenditure en route was
objects had been achieved in a few hours.
The RASC drivers of the troop-carrying vehicles had the privilege
of seeing the complete collapse of the German armies north-cast
The activities of the column thereafter, though busy and interest-
ing, need not concern us,
On May ugth the air party took off from Lüneburg for the
United Kingdom; on the goth the land party began its long journey
The airborne divisional columns RASC had completed
their task in the world's greatest war,
