222
ITERRANEAN
the assault were successful anu une immediate objective, the seizure
of the enemy's airfields in Tunisia, could be fully exploited, there
was a good hope that the enemy could be driven out of Africa, that
the Mediterranean sea routes would be freed, and that firm bases
could be established for the invasion of Sicily and Italy.
It was a serious decision because French reactions to an incursion
into their territories were unpredictable and so much depended on
whether the move of our forces could be conducted over many
thousands of miles by sea without the enemy learning our intentions.
The outline plan for the operation, which was finally confirmed
in September,
was that three separate task forces, the western,
central and eastern, would land at Casablanca, Oran and Algiers
respectively, the eastern force being predominantly British.
The
British force
and the
34th United
States
Division were to be
mounted in Britain, and the western and central forces in America.
The specific role of the British force, after landing and capturing
Algiers, was to strike at once for Tunis which lay over 500 miles to
the east.
The decision to implement operation 'Torch', which was the code
name for the plan, was a momentous one for our forces which had
been training so assiduously at home for a return to the offensive.
Perhaps it was a happy coincidence that the orders to begin planning
and training for 'Torch' were received by the nucleus of the future
expeditionary force, formerly known as Force 110, while they were
engaged in 'Dryshod', the most elaborate amphibious exercise that
had been staged up to that time.
Each task force was to be responsible for planning its own share
of the operation, their joint efforts being co-ordinated by a new
Allied Force Headquarters.
General Eisenhower was appointed as
Allied Commander, and Major-General H. M. Gale became his
chief administrative officer.
The headquarters, which began planning on August 8th at
Norfolk House, London, was the first of its kind in that British and
American officers worked together.
It was not possible to integrate
all the service sections because of differences in equipment and
orpanization. but plans were made for exercisine unified control of
supply over items which were common to both armies, such as petrol.
there were separate supplies and transport,
quartermaster branches, both services maintained a close liaison
throughout the campaign and wherever necessary undertook to give
Two imponderables faced the planners for 'Torch': the probable
attitude of the French forces in North Africa, and the speed at
which the enemy might be able to reinforce his garrisons in Tunis
when news came to him of our landings.
Two plans had therefore
to be made, one on the assumption that the French would oppose
the invasion, and the other on the supposition that little or no
resistance would be offered and that the French commanders might
even be disposed to co-operate actively against the Axis forces.
But whichever plan turned out to be the correct one the forces to
be used for the initial landings had to be trained and equipped for
an opposed landing and provided with the special craft required
for an amphibious operation.
The amount of shipping and special craft that could be provided
was limited, and the number of fighting troops that could be
landed for the initial assault had to be carefully balanced against
the administrative units which would be needed to maintain the
striking force in the first drive on Tunis.
on a striking force which could not be adequately maintained would
have been to court disaster.
This resulted in a high proportion of
the available freight being taken up by administrative units, with a
consequent diminution of the number of fighting troops that could
be employed in the first months of the campaign.
The British force was to land at Algiers only.
There were other
ports nearer Tunis, notably Bougie, Philippeville, Bone and Bizerta,
but they were closer to the enemy's airfields in Sicily, and the Royal
Navy had not enough escort ships to guarantee the passage of
convoys with safety.
The best that could be done was to provide
for a floating reserve, to land at Bougie, if all went well at Algiers.
The British task force was named the First Army and placed under
the command of Lieut-General Kenneth Anderson.
consist of two corps, V and IX Corps, with the ist, 46th and 78th
Infantry Divisions, the 4th (Mixed) Division and the 6th Armoured
Division and 25th Tank Brigade.
The American element in the
force consisted of two combat teams.
The strength of the British force was estimated as 200,000 men
and 35,000 vehicles, but several months elapsed before the whole of
the force could be landed, the last division, the 4th, arriving four
and a half months after the date of the first assault.
For those who are unacquainted with this campaign it is important
to bear in mind that in practice the British force which fought the
first campaign in North Africa was an army in name only, as for
the first weeks of the operations there were only two divisions, the
British Wh and American 34th, and a regimental armoured group,
and that for some weeks the army was little more than the strength
Even then the divisions had to be landed short of their own unit
transport which was not due to arrive until the second main convoy.
Thus the 'army' which made the first thrust to Tunis was in fact
only a small striking force and not completely equipped at that.
