224
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
It was recognized that a little time would have to elapse before
the Allied headquarters could
assume effective command
and
administrative
control over
the
three
task forces.
HQ
First
Army were to be responsible for the initial build-up of the line of
communication, and were to have the assistance of a small increment
of officers from AFHQ for the purpose.
Brigadier Hinde, who was appointed DDST of the army, had
many new problems to consider in planning the RASC organization
required for this expeditionary force, which was the first to leave
these shores since 1940.
The supply organization had been re-
modelled since the days of the
BEF.
The RASC petroleum
organization was also a post-1939 development.
Water transport
units would be wanted for work along the North African coastline,
and provision had to be made for a pack transport organization
which could be expanded at short notice by using local animals and
locally enrolled muleteers. The system for effecting heavy repairs
to RASC vehicles and for providing replacement vehicles and spare
parts had been radically altered and had still to be tested in the field.
The ultimate order of battle
which was settled included 70
transport units of various kinds in addition to the usual complement
of companies which formed part of formations.
There were about
30 supply units and about the same number of petroleum units,
which included sufficient units for four separate bases, as it was
hoped that all three ports east of Algiers-Bone,
Bougie
and
Philippeville could be used for that purpose as soon as the striking
force had cleared Algiers and air superiority in Algeria and Tunisia
had been achieved.
Few of the units had seen active service before, but what they
may have lacked for that reason they made up for by their keenness
and sound training.
Many of the officers of the force had been
trained by Brigadier Hinde when he was commandant of the RASC
Officer Cadet Training Unit.
They were first rate material.
were the men, most of whom had been enlisted during the war.
The Plan
The role of the eastern force was to land on the beaches on either
side of Algiers whereupon the Itth Brigade (78th Division) was to
seize the airfield at Blida, south of Algiers, and cut the main road
leading to the south.
The 39th Combat Team and some rangers
were to make for Maison Blanche airfield, a few miles to the east of
Algiers, and then march on the city; while the 168th Combat Team
was to attack Algiers from the west.
Parties of commandos and
rangers had the task of seizing Algiers harbour to prevent sabotage,
The 36th Brigade was to form a floating reserve, in ships which
were to lie off during the assault over the beaches.
If the landings
Pack Transport
Hove Dump
HOVE
DUMP
