MALAYA
305
MALAYA
Introduction
The campaign in Malaya opened almost simultaneously with the
Japanese attacks on Pearl Harbour and Hong Kong on December
8th, I941.
In Malaya there was no question of a surprise as there
was in the case of Pearl Harbour.
It was only a matter of where the
enemy would make his attempted landings and the strength he
could bring to bear against our relatively weak forces which had to
be disposed throughout the length of the Malayan Peninsula and in
the island of Singapore.
It is well known that what is so often
mistakenly referred to as the 'defence of Singapore' has been the
subject of criticism and controversy.
But although such matters
are not germane to this account, it is necessary to give a brief
outline of the main events and conditions before hostilities broke out,
as they were to have a considerable influence on the initial disposi-
tions for defence and consequently on the accompanying administra-
tive arrangements.
The decision to establish a naval base at Singapore was taken as
far back as 192I.
Subsequent defence policy was based on the
premise that if war broke out in Europe the fleet would sail for
Singapore and that its arrival within 70 days would automatically
put an end to any serious threat of attempt at invasion.
Thus the
role of the garrison, which before the war was about an infantry
brigade, was accepted as being one of the defence of the island
base and the adjoining waters.
In the years that followed, the building up of the defences in
Singapore and its adjacent islands moved slowly.
It took time and
money to strengthen the anti-aircraft and coast artillery defences,
and to provide more airfields, some of which were located in Malaya.
Plans were also made, which never fully materialized, for fortifying
the island of Penang, which lay some 300 miles to the north off the
west coast of Malaya.
But the general conception of defence
remained as being one of protecting the naval base.
When the international situation began to deteriorate in the late
thirties, the defence of Singapore was only one of the man in uestions
Which had to be considered by the Government and their service
advisers, and with the expected resources which would be available
in the event of war, it was impossible to be strong everywhere.
common with the defence requirements of many other vital areas
this plan for defending Singapore was becoming rapidly outmoded.
In an appreciation of singapore was becoming rape command put
forward the view that the danger to Singapore lay not in a direct
attack against the island but from an invasion from the north
through Malaya. He considered that it was unlikely that the Fleet
W RASC
