78
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
the water line and had barely got out of range when we were
attacked by five Messerschmidts which came at us again and again,
causing us heavy casualties in
dead and wounded.
curtain to our short lived expedition.'
The fortunes of those awaiting their turns on the beaches were, of
course, no different to the general experience of the many thou-
sands who were to be taken off by the fleet of every conceivable
type of small craft which had assembled for the purpose.
must be recorded that at the same time RASC men took their
share in many simple acts of heroism.
Among these were Dvr R.
Baldry (35 Company) who swam out under heavy fire to rescue a
drowning man; Pte W. Johnstone, a 'volunteer' stretcher bearer,
who carried on although badly wounded himself; CSM A. Jones,
9 Company, who, after embarking on one of his Majesty's ships, was
instrumental in saving many lives by taking command when his
officers were killed; Dvr A. Ord, 48th Division, for his work in
embarking the wounded and Captain L. A. F. Gould Marks for
his more prosaic deed of turning his ammunition section into a
supply 'point' and feeding all who came his way from May 2gth to
June 2nd.
Marks was awarded the Military Cross, CSM Jones a
Distinguished Conduct Medal and the other men the Military
Although such acts seem to be a fitting note on which to end this
brief story of the RASC with the BEF, before turning to an account
of the operations which followed south of the Somme, mention must
be made of the special part played by the WD Fleet (as it was then
The vessels employed in the evacuation brought away
nearly 2,000 men, although many of the craft were badly damaged.
Four vessels returned as late as June 2nd to bring off French troops
from Dunkirk.
It is probable that the vessel Marlborough was the
last to enter harbour, as it did not leave France until 2 a.m. on
June grd and was towed home—less both its propellers.
South of the Somme
When the German forces reached Amiens and Abbeville on the
Somme on May 19th, there were few British fighting troops left
south of the river to protect the vast network of lines of communica-
tion which reached back from Le Havre and Rouen, on the Seine,
to Cherbourg and to St. Nazaire and Nantes on the Loire.
only complete division, the 5Ist (Highland), was 300 miles away
to the east holding a sector of the French front in the Saar area.
Advanced
elements
of the
Ist
Armoured
Division,
which was
being hurried over from
England, had arrived a few days before,
but the main body was only just beginning to land at Cherbourg
with orders to concentrate at Pacy, south of the Seine.
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
Immediate protection depended on a few battalions, some of
which had been raised from reinforcements in the base depots,
under the command of Brigadier Beauman, who was responsible for
the defence of the area around the Seine.
There were three important RASC base units in the threatened
area-No. 3 BSD at Le Havre, the large central bakery at Bolbec,
close by, and No. 1 Base Petrol Filling Centre at Rouen. All
these units had been actively engaged in maintaining the BEF and
supplying other small depots on the lines of communication, as far
afield as Boulogne in the north and Metz in the east.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the first news of the break in
the French defences along the Meuse had led to local defence schemes
being put into action, but the first practical effects on the working
of the depots were difficulty in obtaining civil labour and at times
in procuring sufficient empty rail wagons to make up the pack
trains which had to be despatched on fixed programmes to the BEF
By May I4th the BSD was supplying a peak figure of nearly
180,000 rations a day and having to handle 2,000 tons a day, as
ships with supplies from home were still being unloaded.
serious news came on the igth, when a message was received from
the railway regulating station at Abancourt, through which all rail
traffic was passed forward to the BEF, that there was such a conges-
tion in the marshalling yards that some supplies would have to be
unloaded and stored temporarily until the situation was clearer.
A detachment was despatched at once to Abancourt to offload as
many trucks as possible into the new but partly finished depot
which was being built close by, but heavy
Later that evening the Movement staff declared that they
could accept no further traffic for the BEF.
All railway lines had
been cut and were in enemy hands.
The appearance the next day of strong enemy patrols south of
the Somme and the absence of any information regarding the
situation of the BEF or the steps which were being planned by the
Allied high command to restore the position, made an immediate
withdrawal of the base units on the Seine seem imperative, and
the next day orders were received by the BSD and bakery to cross
to the opposite bank of the river.
The night of the 20th brought a
heavy air raid on the BSD, and that more damage was not caused
was largely because of the action of Pte R. H. Abercrombie who,
single handed, extinguished to incendiary bombs, an act which
earned him the Military Medal.
On May 21st, detachments
of the BSD and a bakery were
despatched to the south bank with orders to set up small depots to
maintain the units still in the area, and a small ship was loaded
