THE R.A.S.C, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
means of distribution was the 4-galion tin and the capacity of the
tin-making and filling plants, at Suez and Alexandria, was only
about 15,000 cans a day.
When the future situation was appraised in September, 1940, it
was estimated that an additional 155,000 tons of tankage would be
required, to provide for a 6o-day reserve for 21 divisions, and that
extra filling plant would be needed for 76,000 tins a day.
The calculation for the extra filling plant was made on the
amumption that only about 20 per cent of the petrol wanted would
be distributed in bulk or in returnable containers.
The decision
to continue to rely on the 4-gallon flimsy tin may now seem to
have been faulty in the light of subsequent premure to adopt a
returnable can.
It seems probable that it was influenced by the
resources available at that time.
The deficiencies of the 4-gallon
tin were well known but expansion was a matter of urgency.
It has
since been estimated that on a 20-day turn-round over 3,000,000
returnable cans would have been wanted as well as a supply of about
15,000 cans a day to make good wastage by lows or damage.
British a gallon returnable drum in use at the time was not regarded
with particular favour.
Even if it had been adopted the provision
and shipping of such vast numbers would have taken a much longer
time than would the provision of the eight extra tin-making and
filling plants which were subsequently authorized. A further factor
which had to be considered was that unlems bulk supply could be
carried forward and filling plant brought up to keep pace with the
Army's advance, the number of returnable cans wanted would
become greater as the distance between the bases and the forward
troops increased.
The general wheme for the 155,000 tons of tankage and filing
plant was called the 'Reserve Storage Egypt' scheme.
It was
authorized by the Treasury in October and work began on the new
filling plants and expanding the existing bulk storage insalations
at the end of the year,
Expansion in the Middle East made heavy demands on ST 2 in
arranging for the plant and stores required and providing petroleum
units, at a time when technical men were beginning, to be warce,
During the period that new units were beiny raised and trained
at home the Middle Rast had been forced to run their petrol
organization with men from their own meagre resources
thouch it units were earmarked for desgatch to the command
carly in 194t they were delayed by shipping difficulties.
Shipping
was disappointingly slow. Of is units offered for shipment in
Before the
July, 1941, only one was included in the last convoy.
final operations in 1942 the establishment in the command had,
however, been increased by 40 petroleum units.
PETROLEUM
483
Supplies for the forces in the Western Desert and the Nile Delta
was of course only one of the Middle East petroleum problems as
the command had also to cater for operations in East Africa,
Iraq, Palestine and Syria, and for the maintenance of garrisons in
Cyprus and on the Red Sea littoral. Each territory presented a
different supply problem.
Petroleum distribution and the Jerrican
Ample supplies of refined petroleum were of course available in
the Middle East area.
from the output of crude oil in Iraq, central and southern Persia
and to some extent from the Egyptian oilfields.
The refineries at
Haifa, Suez, and Abadan provided petrol and derv, Aviation
spirit was produced at the Abadan refinery,
Early in 1942 the
output from Abadan was 200,000 tons of 100 octane and 100,000
tons of go octane. It was doubled by the end of 1942 and a target
of 800,000 tons had been set for a later date.
The principal
problem was storage and distribution in each of the widely separated
areas where our forces operated.
There was usually some bulk
storage at the bigger towns in each territory but the distribution of
civil supplies was mainly in -gallon tins which were in common
use in these eastern regions.
Full use was made of existing civil tin-filling plants but military
requirements often exceeded their output and large shipments of
ready filled tins had to be made from Abadan.
There was a heavy
demand in 1941 for 45,000 tons of reserves for Port Sudan, Masawa
and Aden which could only be met by drawing on Abadan,
because of further unexpected demands from the forces in Iraq,
packed supplies had to be obtained from as far afield as India and
the Dutch East Indies.
More petrol carrier ships had to be ob-
tained at a time when shipping was at a premium.
Heavy losses
from leakage and from damaged cases were inevitable but the posi-
tion had to be accepted.
At the end of 1941 there was a serious shortage of tinplate in the
Middle Fast owing to the increasing demand and the non-arrival of
shipments expected from America.
An emergency demand, for
10,000 tons of plate, followed by a second demand for a similar
quantity, had to be made by the War Office on the Ministry of
Supply whose stocks were low.
tin-making plants operating in the Middle Fast,
There were, at that time, some 20
Some were civil
plants, some had beeraoblained from the USA, a few were ex.
enemy ones and others had been ourchased 'second hand' from
More plants were on order from India, Australia and the
USA. The combined output of all the plants in operation was in
the region of 3,000,000 tins a month. A year later it rose t0 4,300,009,
