SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
moved to Rome on June i4th, when for three weeks it worked
both road and air evacuations,
having meanwhile sheered off up the Tiber valley.
After Rome, by a jump to Chirisi on July 6th, the unit came back
under XIII Corps, and,
on the link up of forces engaged round
Lake Trasimeno, moved to Cortona on July 12th, evacuating battle
casualties from the strong German resistance before Arezzo, after
the fall of which the unit moved to Rapolano on July 22nd and
north, on the axis of the South African push on Florence, to Grevi
on August 5th.
At this point, A Section of 25 cars was detached from command
of XIII Corps to work directly under 6th South African Armoured
Division with which it remained throughout the autumn and spring
campaigns, including the spectacular
South African advance of
April, 1945, to Bologna, Finali, Padova
and Milan.
When the
South Africans left Italy for home, this section rejoined the unit at
Portogruaro.
to Montevarchi on August 24th, to Leccio on September 5th, and
on September 18th to Florence, where it remained for the fight for
the Gothic Line which ended the year's campaign.
With the movement of Eighth Ármy back to the Adriatic coast,
the unit came indirectly under command Fifth Army, but still
under XIII Corps.
On October 4th it moved to San Lorenzo and on November
29th to Vecchio where it was fortunate to secure reasonable winter
quarters in a very overcrowded district.
ally
concerned with
fighting,
mainly artillery exchanges, in the mountainous upper
valleys of the Lamoro and Santimo rivers.
was done, and motorcyclists were trained for the coming summer
by means of an ambitious riding trial.
were taken into use by the unit for the first time, and were allocated
to A Section with the South Africans.
The first participation in the
final offensive began with the
detachment of B Section to the Adriatic coast in the Rimini district,
when it worked under 86 Area as soon as the battle started, and
moved to Forli, Mirabello and to Gaiba, across the Po, on May ist,
1945-
Unit headquarters, now maintaining a virtually coast to
coast service, stayed at Scarperia from March 3oth,
carried the last of XIII Corps' battle casualties of the
Italian
campaign, while located at Mirabello and (on May Ist, 1945) at
Ficarolo, on the north bank of the Po.
After the final surrender in Italy, the unit moved to Portogruaro,
where it evacuated German wounded from their own hospitals in
A DIVISIONAL R.A.S.C.
623
Yugoslav disputed territory, and put a section into Cerugnano and
a detachment into Trieste during the period of uncertainty of tenure
that followed.
Suitable VE Day festivities were organized when the day came
at Portogruaro, with illuminations, dancing and the operation of a
'wine point' which became quite famous, and the men of the unit
were thanked personally by Brigadier Cheyne for their past work
and enthusiasm.
From the first day of serving with the Eighth Army in a battle
area, the men's spirits went up and up and the work of the unit
was soon commended by the heads of services under whom it
worked.
The unit sign, a
'Donald Duck' with two fingers raised
in the familiar type of soldiers' salute, soon became known far and
wide and men falling sick in the unit and being left behind showed
extraordinary, if officially improper,
sometimes hundreds of miles to rejoin it.
The unit carried for Eighth Army some 100,000 casualties, the
highest weekly total being 10,000 during the battle of Cassino, and
the courage and resource of NCOs and drivers in action have several
times been the subject of comment by formations for whom they
have worked.
A DIVISIONAL RASC
Narrative by the CRASC 4th Division
This narrative relates the experiences of CRASC, 4th British
(Mixed) Division in North Africa on the eve of the break through
to Tunis and Bizerta.
This particular operation, in which an
enemy thrust in considerable strength preceded our own attack
(and the tale concerns the effects of this thrust on the operations
of the divisional RASC) was distinct from the break through to
Tunis, which took place some weeks later.
The battle now started to warm up.
Beja and Medjez el Bab
are two towns 25 miles apart linked by an excellent road running
from north-east to south-west.
This road had been in Allied hands
since the beginning of the campaign but the enemy, by occupying
high ground to the north, denied us the use of it.
To get from Beja
to Medjez one had to make a wide detour to the rear through
Thiba and Teboursouk.
The first part of the operation in which
the division was now engaged had been to clear the enemy from
this high ground.
This had now been completed, the direct road
was ours to use, and the way was clear to start the push for Tunis.
On April 16th, 1943,
I attended a conference at corps head-
quarters at which the & side of the projected operation was fully
