36
PRELUDE
providing a reserve overseas, so that the money was devoted to
buying approximately 120 days' supply of those commodities which
took time to produce, reliance being placed on the ability to obtain
foodstuffs in everyday use (such as flour and frozen meat) when war
became imminent.
The purchase of the reserve was to be spread
over two years and was bound up with an intricate plan of turnover
(i.e. eating down and replacing stocks when the commodities neared
the end of their useful life).
There were, however, many depart-
mental delays, and the Munich crisis came before the first half of the
programme could be speeded up to schedule.
The reliance which was to be placed on obtaining staple com-
modities at the last moment was influenced by the knowledge that
the embryo Ministry of Food, the Food Defence Plans Department
of the Board of Trade, had undertaken to meet demands at once and
without the delays which seemed to be so inseparable from normal
contract procedure.
This arrangement of relying on the future Ministry of Food to be
the suppliers of provisions broke fresh ground for the Armed Forces.
It resulted from a lead given by the War Office in the establishment
of an Inter-Service Committee to work with the Defence Plans
Department to co-ordinate the supply of military with civil require-
ments.
The department for their part responded by asking that a
Services Liaison Officer should be appointed to join them.
The
appointment was filled by Colonel J. H. Morris, late RASC, who
remained as head of the Services Supplies Branch of the Ministry of
Food throughout the war.
There could have been no better choice,
as he fulfilled his dual function of being a member of the Ministry
and the mouthpiece of the services in an admirable fashion.
As the future Ministry of Food only planned to provide staple
commodities, planning for the production of commodities which
had to be specially manufactured to service specifications remained
a direct War Office responsibility.
But here again the Defence Plans
Department assisted in the investigation of productive capacity and
in undertaking to arrange for the supply of the staple raw food which
would be needed for fulfilling service contracts.
Dormant con-
tracts (i.e. contracts which only became effective if war occurred)
were then concluded by the Services with most of the principal
industries of the food manufacturing trade.
By early 1939 the triple plans of purchasing of reserves, perfecting
detailed plans for the supply of Ministry of F'ood commodities, and
the conclusion of dormant
contracts were well in hand.
arrangements were primarily intended to ensure the maintenance of
the field force, but they also covered the supply of the few com-
modities which the RASC were at that time responsible for pro-
viding for the Home Army.
SUPPLIES
37
In QMG 6's view the standing arrangements for feeding the Army
at home in war, which were laid down in Mobilization Regulations,
were imperfect and quite unsuited to the conditions which might
prevail at home.
Put simply, the standing instruction was that
'the peace system of messing would continue'.
To QMG 6 it seemed evident that if these islands were subject to
enemy air attack, as was generally expected, there was bound to be
some dislocation of the normal civil organization for distribution
which implied the need for reserves at the main military centres.
They knew it was highly probable that rationing would have to be
introduced, and that this implied the need for official control over
units' purchases, and it was also common knowledge that to operate
the peacetime cash system called for some skill even on the part of
trained messing officers.
Unless well trained messing officers could
be provided for the hundreds of units to be embodied, there was
every risk of units' messing accounts soon falling into debt.
QMG 6
emphasized strongly that standard diets should be issued and charged
up to units at a fixed sum per head, and that a chain of RASC supply
depots and complementary NAAFI stores should be set up in each
command.
They also urged that specific reserves of all the principal
commodities required for the standard diets) should be held in case
of any dislocation of normal means of distribution.
The short experience gained from the partial mobilization of
the Air Defence of Great Britain organization at the time of the
Munich crisis proved that it was vital to all anti-aircraft formations
to have their own RASC supply and transport organization which
could undertake to 'draw' the commodities provided by the RASC
and NAAFI on a standard basis.
But even so, the proposal that a
standard scale at a fixed sum per head should be issued to all units
on mobilization was met with vigorous opposition.
This was based
solely on financial grounds and embraced many questions, varying
from NAAFT's legal status and its charter to the matter of rebate,
much of which accrued from purchases made for the official messing,
of a unit.
It is therefore of interest to record that barely a year later
all these 'arguments' proved, on the threat of invasion, to be illusory
and were swept away, and that the new system of messing introduced
after Dunkirk still persists to-day:
Failure to
adopt QMG 6's
suggestions before the war resulted in hundreds of units getting into
official messing end such delore not mane
The plea for the creation of supply depots before war was declared
was, however, met, and nearly 40 were set up in time.
Authority
was also granted to procure three o were set ups of food to be held in
them-but only of the few commodities (meat, biscuits, tea, sugar
and salt) which were a RASC responsibility at that time.
However,
it was a case of something being better than nothing, and there were
