142
THE MIDDLE EAST
command in safety, and was awarded the Distinguished Service
Order.
Many of his officers and men were also decorated.
When
so many have behaved so gallantly, it is invidious to select any
individual for special mention, but the circumstances under which
Major J. W. Rea won the Distinguished Service Order were so
illustrative of the problems that faced RASC convoy commanders
in the desert that they justify summarizing.
During the operations
15oth Infantry Brigade of Joth Division was surrounded and cut off
in its sector of the Gazala Line.
It was eventually compelled to
surrender.
While it was still holding out, efforts were made to
maintain it, and Major Rea tried to lead in a convoy of 40 lorries
of his company (523), which were loaded with various commodities,
by going round south of Bir Hakeim and coming in from the west
He failed in his effort, as 150th Brigade was completely encircled.
On the morning of June ard, he left his convoy under protection of
the French in Bir Hakeim and went off with his driver to reconnoitre
a route to return to Teecol. By this time the area was infested with
enemy elements, and he could not get through.
It will surprise
no one who knows what conditions were like at the time that he
also could not find his convoy again.
However, in the course of
three days spent looking for it, he found many other British vehicles,
including tanks captured and later abandoned by the enemy, and
either destroyed them or recovered them as best he could.
gether, 523 Company lost 5 officers and go men in three critical days,
The divisional RASC of ist and Ith Armoured Divisions also had
difficult problems.
Fortunately, in anticipation
of just such a
"soldiers' battle as took place in the area, considerable reserves of
essential items had been established in selected localities.
The fact
that their existence was unknown to the enemy made it unlikely
that he would locate and capture them.
This scheme proved
successful, although it was, of course, uneconomical in stocks and
resulted in heavy waste.
The RASC were not therefore tied to 2
fixed daily delivery but brought forward urgently required items ca
The maintenance of ith Motor Brigade, which was operating
round the comer of the Gazala Line West of Bir Hakeim between
June and and fith, was done by 550 Company, with which the
name of its commander, Major Duncan Riddell, will always be
associated. Enemy columns were also operating in the area i
vehicle losses were heavy,
although 550 Company's convoys were requenty dipersed and
the maintenance of the brigade
secured. Major Riddell was awarded the Military Crow dor la
gallant leadership during this difficult operation.
L/Sot F Hallanen of o92 Comman was sent to recover som
f-pounder guns which had be cn left arhind in the Bit Hakeim bod
THE MIDDLE EAST I
143
They were difficult to handle, as they had been dug in and were
dismantled, but this NCO worked on until he was obliged to retire
by an enemy armoured car patrol which entered the box.
He
brought away six guns with the loss of only one trailer, and well
deserved his Military Medal.
During the fighting many vehicles of both armoured divisions,
either singly or in small numbers, became detached from their
units and were destroyed or captured.
One young officer reported,
by wireless, the progress of the battle in which he was involved up
to the point where, just before 'going off the air', he announced
that he and his driver had eaten their codes.
The Germans took
advantage of the fact that they possessed many captured vehicles of
British or American make to drive up to unsuspecting British vehicles
and hail them in English.
This ruse sometimes worked: it also
worked both ways.
That the maintenance of the brigades of both
armoured divisions continued throughout this very 'fluid'
period
says much for the efficiency of the RASC units concerned.
Many RASC platoons were, as usual, employed in troop-carrying,
and this gave scope for the display of initiative and leadership by the
type of junior NCO with which fortunately we were well provided.
Some examples of the task which they were required to perform
can be deduced from the citations of their immediate awards.
On one occasion a battalion of the Highland Light Infantry was
being carried in vehicles of 240 Company.
The battalion had
suffered heavy losses and was
being forced to withdraw.
Sgt
Freeman was in command of vehicles under the control of battalion
headquarters, which was in immediate danger of being overrun
by enemy tanks.
This NCO went forward from the regimental aid
post under heavy fire, and attended to the wounded, running from
one position to another.
He saved many
wounded from
falling
into the enemy's hands, and also, oddly enough, saved the battalion's
secret files after the adjutant was wounded.
He was awarded an
immediate Military Medal, as was also Dvr J. Whatsize,
who was
twice wounded, and had three tyres punctured by shell bursts; he
changed the wheels for some off derelict vehicles, and went on with
the work of withdrawing the remnants of the battalion.
There had been a scheme (Freeborn) on the stocks for a with-
drawal to 'the wire', but it was now evident that the enemy superi-
ority in armour was not going to permit this position being occupied,
and that we should have to retire to the Alamein Line of which
the right flank was protected by the sea,
and the left flank by
the Qatara Depression.
There was the added advantage that the
enemy's lines of communication would be well stretched.
The 'gates' of Tobruk were shut on June 17th and by the 21st the
fortress had fallen.
