THE MIDDLE EAST II
Petrol plans and their initial execution were much assisted by the
existence of some 100,000 tons in bulk storage belonging to the
Shell Company with the necessary canning plant.
No. 2 Advance MT Depot, one of the three units of this type
which are mentioned earlier as having been specially formed in
the Middle East, arrived in an early flight and did useful work,
but unfortunately suffered heavy officer casualties in a bombing
By the end of March the bulk of the force was ashore and had
deployed. Now 1 Armoured Brigade was on the Bulgarian frontier
watching the Reupel Pass.
The New Zealand Division and 6th
Australian Division,
the latter not yet completed, were under the
command of Australian Corps HQ on the Aliakmon position.
Lof C was becoming organized and a start had been made with
establishing the Athens base.
Every day saw the
force more firmly established and, given
breathing space, it might have rendered a good account of itself,
but on April 6th the Germans attacked southwards across the
frontier.
Events moved quickly,
and within a few hours
the
situation was already looking serious.
In particular the
Greek
Macedonian Army, with which the armoured brigade was associated,
was in danger of being cut off, and the Greeks asked the British for
several hundred lorries to assist in their withdrawal. Except for
the second line of ist Armoured Brigade, which was fully engaged,
there were no vehicles within two
days'
march.
Nevertheless
50 lorries,
mainly from 211
Company,
were placed at the
disposal of the Greeks, but they never succeeded in getting through
to their destination.
The main German attack was launched on
positions in advance of the Aliakmon line, held so far as the British
were concerned by elements from the two infantry divisions, as well
as so much of ist Armoured Brigade as had succeeded in withdraw-
ing from the Macedonian front, on April 10th.
In consequence
withdrawal to the Aliakmon line was forced upon us and was
completed by April 13th.
This was merely the prelude to a further
withdrawal, under the difficult conditions of enemy air superiority
to what was known as the Thermopylae line.
This was completed
by April 20th.
While it was going on the possibility of evacuation
Enemy
rapidly became a probability, and eventually a certainty.
air attack was rendering Piracus practically unusable as a port.
On the sist the Creek Army capitulated and the date of pris
evacuation already fixed for April 28th was advanced to April
24th/25th.
Durine this period, 1 Reserve MT Company was emploved on
troop carrying with
the Australians.
Maintenance of formations
was conducted under the ad hoc arrangements inevitably connected
with an involuntary withdrawal.
The stocks in FSDs were either
issued or transferred to new locations farther back.
maintained by
road convoy from Larisa, until that place was
The DIDs were established at railway stations along the
axis of withdrawal, but, as trains loaded with stocks for them were
mostly destroyed before reaching their destinations, replacements
had to be sent by road convoys operating by day and night.
were subjected to continual air attack, and on the outward journey
were driving against a stream of refugee traffic.
showed great courage and determination
dangerous duty, and the DDST of the force, Brigadier W. d'A.
Collings, placed it on record that no praise was too high for their
steadiness and morale.
There was apparently no failure to issue
rations during the retreat.
The first embarkations were to take place at Nauplia near Argos
in the Peloponnese Peninsula.
For the RASC, this operation had
two aspects: the rendering of the necessary supply and transport
services to the last possible moment and the embarkation of RASC
for the formation of beach supply
dumps, and men were detailed to staff them.
at Nauplia, well stocked with food and POL.
The remaining
supplies in the BSD were handed over to the Greeks, who were
short of food for the civilian population, and large quantities of
petrol were denied to the enemy by puncturing tins, as wholesale
destruction by fire was forbidden.
The DID at Nauplia was meeting
demands up to the night of April 27th/28th, and water in tins was
placed at various evacuation points.
The transport units continued
at work, moving stores and troops southwards.
When they could
no longer make use of their vehicles, they destroyed them.
RASC units coming in from the north were assembled in a
corps concentration area near Athens, where they were given their
orders for embarkation.
The Corps was particularly unfortunate
in the evacuation, as a large proportion of them went to Nauplia
and Kalamata, and at these two points the operation was least
About 1,500 were at Nauplia on the night of the 24th,
when embarkation was only partially achieved owing to one ship
being disabled and another burnt out.
Several thousand men were
then moved from Nauplia to Kalamata, 50 miles away at the south-
western extremity of the peninsula.
some by a road convoy composed largely of 232 Company, which
did particularly well.
The convoy arrived safely, after an adventur-
ous journey over difficult roads, during which it was attacked from
the air several times.
On the 27th, the New Zealand Division asked for transport to
take 18,000 rations from Nauplia to Argos.
A call for volunteers
