THE MIDDLE EAST I
into disrepair. In some cases the spoil from the original excavation,
augmented by the accumulated sand of countless cleanings-out,
had produced landmarks which were almost the sole physical
features in many hundreds of square miles of desert.
they were of great value, particularly as many were marked on the
map with fair accuracy.
Now whereas it is a Royal Engineer responsibility to produce
water from a well or from a pipe, it is the responsibility of the
RASC to distribute it therefrom, but this was a matter to which the
RASC had not recently given any great thought: some head scratch-
ing was now to take place.
For the purpose of bulk distribution in third line, 350-gallon
water cistern lorries could be used, but they were not suitable for
second line, because of the delay in decanting which would arise
at the replenishing point.
There was nothing for it but that forward of the transfer point
from third to second line, the bulk of water for all purposes had to
be carried in the 2-gallon petrol can, which was in army, but not
commercial use in the Middle East.
This involved a heavy manu-
facturing load in the Delta and the provision of the necessary steel
It will be remembered that the desert climate led to boiling of
radiators, particularly in the case of vehicles of certain American
makes, and to loss of water due to damage to radiators and connec-
tions.
Water was also required not merely for drinking but for
tea-making,
cooking generally, washing up in cookhouses, and the
washing of the person and clothes.
Those unable to obtain a true
picture of what it meant to do all these things with a ration of water
which often did not exceed i gallon a day for long periods and
sometimes dropped to i gallon, might select a nice warm summer
day, put on shorts and a shirt, work all day in the garden and see
how far 4 or even. 6 pints will go towards quenching their thirst
in tea or
other beverages,
cooking their meals and washing up,
having a bath at the end of the day and washing the shirt and
There will not be much left for the radiator.
To return to the system; as time went on the Royal Engineers, by
magnificent work, brought water by pipe from Alexandria far into
the deserabwond Matruh, wat in yo, except for a source being
developed at Maaten Bagush, which was of use to rearward troops,
the main source of supply was from the old Roman system at Mersa
Matruh supplemented by distillation.
Thus the RASC carry began in third line. A limited number
of 350-gallon water tankers was available through pre-war fore-
sight in planning.
Later 300-gallon tankers were improvised by
bolting rectangular tanks on Chevrolet chassis.
As a last resort
THE MIDDLE EAST I
125
44-gallon drums carried in ordinary load carriers had to be used.
In the early days, during the summer of 1940, the tankers operated
from Matruh to east of Sidi Barrani, where the 2-gallon containers
were filled by the tedious and laborious method of a row of taps at
the rear of the vehicle.
Much thought and effort were spent on
improving on this method as time went on, and eventually an
'octopus'"
was produced, but, generally speaking, throughout the
campaign the somewhat elementary method of a gravity feed from a
row of taps was used.
Another method introduced was that known
as a 'Sportapool'.
This was a canvas tank, the sides of which were
supported by the weight of its contents.
It was similar to tanks used
as children's pools in gardens.
Although it had the advantage of
providing static storage and thus released much needed vehicles to
keep up the turn-round, it had many disadvantages.
Vehicles had
to discharge into it, and this was a slow process with danger of
congestion.
The water had then to be put into the containers by
one means or another, most of them insanitary. It had to be kept
covered with canvas to keep out sand, reduce evaporation, and
minimize the risk of its being seen from the air.
But the cover
became soaked and sank, and the sand got in just the same.
Where
'Sportapools' were used, it did not much matter what beverage was
prepared from the water: tea, coffee, rum, lime juice, just plain—
they were all the same colour and the taste did not vary much.
Forward of third line, as had already been stated, except for the
occasional introduction of other containers to make up deficiencies,
most water was delivered, until the advent much later of the water-
carrying jerrican, in 2-gallon petrol cans.
These vessels were, of
course, returnable, but everyone knows the difficulty in enforcing
return
under
operational conditions.
They were fairly easily
damaged, although nothing like so easily as the 4-gallon flimsy, and
could, and invariably did, lose their caps.
Moreover, several sets
or echelons were required, as may be readily worked out.
Taking
a case where second line was operating in a two-day turn-round,
which sometimes occurred as in the case of the armoured brigade
mentioned above, then at least five complete sets were required,
namely:—
one being filled at water point,
one in each second line echelon (2),
one in first line, and
one in the possession of troops.
The only method of ensuring return was a rigid one-for-one basis
at the water point.
Incidentally there was no surer way of infuriat-
ing the RASC in the field than to send up empty water containers
from base where so much beautiful water was available.
