644
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
were examined by Major Savage, RASC, the analyst who was
making a report on all captured supplies.
Captured German
supplies included such items as Danish butter, tinned strawberries,
and tinned hams.
There were also large stocks of eau de Cologne,
which was apparently used in the German Army instead of anti-
mosquito cream.
After only a fortnight at this depot, during which a great deal of
hard work was put in to put it in order, the unit was relieved by a
BSD straight out from England. A and C Sections then moved to
Sousse to join up with B Section.
On April 23rd, 1943, B Section moved from Zafrane to Sidi Ayed
to operate as a railhead supply detachment. Issues were made
daily from the pack train and two days' reserve of rations was held
at the railhead reserve store, and the feeding strength was about
64,000, which included IX Corps, Ist British Armoured Division,
6th Armoured Division, and 46th Division.
On one occasion, during the battle, about 370 German prisoners
were brought in by ist British Armoured Division when coming to
the railhead for rations, and these were left for the detachment to
manage.
feeding and entraining of these prisoners.
On May 8th the section moved again and opened another rail-
head at Bou Arada, for feeding ist Armoured Division, ist Infantry
Division, and 46th Division.
The area round Bou Arada was
heavily mined, and great care had to be taken to avoid minefields
all around the station sidinos. Many dead cows lying around
served as a warning of the danger.
At this point the train services, which had been operating quite
well up tili then, seemed to collapue, and the pack trains, instead of
arriving early in the morning, used to turn up at four o'clock in the
afternoon.
This meant that a large number of vehicles had to be
discered and Lidden around the coilhead for mont of the day
On May z2nd, 1943, the railhead finally closed, and men and stocks
from the reserve store were Khed by transoort of at Division to
B Section arrived at Souse on May zard and opened a supply
depot at the local olive oil factory.
A week later A and C Sections
moved down from Turis and the DID was complete again.
Lo diele cfoo tatt bull, Carton a denot was darted to addition to
the ordinary detail issue depot, and this was eventually handed
over to en bet Aber only ful daud teuing, the deoot wat again
handed over to 57 DID, and 88 DiD mired to the holy city of
Kairouan on June 10th.
The debot at Kairouan was started to meet the needs of the
large number of RAF personnel operating from the aerodrome
EMBARKATION SUPPLY DEPOT
645
round about. Throughout the summer, the DID operated here
under extremely trying conditions which included oppressive heat
and large numbers of flies, mosquitoes and scorpions.
Morale at
this point was at its lowest.
Two corporals reverted at their own
request, and five other ranks applied for transfer to the Airborne
Division.
The unit provided a detachment to represent the British Army
at the parade held in the city on July tath in honour of the fall of
the Bastille. For their smartness of turnout and drill they were
commended by the Area Commander, Brigadier A. E. Matthews,
and by the ADST, as well as by the French Commander,
At the end of August, the unit handed over to the Supply Platoon
of 221 Composite Company, and returned once again to Soume.
EMBARKATION SUPPLY DEPOT
At the beginning of the war, the office of OIC Supplies Devonport,
had a triple role, embracing the duties of OC Supplies South-western
Area, OIC Supplies Devonport and Embarkation Supply Officer,
Plymouth, but excepting a lew vehicle ships in the carly months of
1939, the ESD did not function again until May, 1940, when the
port was again used for embarkation.
I remember particularly a
Canadian formation which had to be refuelled or embarked, only
to return two or three days later, having been turned back at Brest
or Cherbourg,
They were a most disgruntled body of men.
One afternoon, at the end of May or early June, 1940, a confer-
ence was called by the AA & OMC, SWA, at which we were told
we could expect 10,000 French troops before the evening, that there
had to be accommodated for the night, fed and embarked the
following day, and that a similar number would be passing through
daily for some time.
The supply of rations presented no particular
difficulty, except that preserved meat had to be issued, as there
was insufficient time to cook frozen meat this first day,
of biscuits was rendered unnecemary by a contractor undertaking
to produce 5,000 Ib of bread by midnight and a similar quantity
by six o'clock the next morning.
As this contractor was not holding
the army contract at that time, his ready co-operation was much
appreciated.
By way of special rations, I received from SRD five
40-gallon barrels of French wine, presumably as a token laue.
whole operation proceeded very amoothly, haversack rations being
put up for the 'guests" by the "host units, and at the end of the week
all concerned were congratulated by the COC SWA, and we were
informed that in the seven dave, & total 6o,300 French troops had
been passed through the port without preparation and the most
