CHAPTER XV
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
This Chapter incorporates some personal narratives which give such a vivid
impression of the operations of pack units that they have been included here
rather than in Chapter XVII.
Introduction
N the years between the wars, the horse lost its military import-
ance, and was finally retained only for ceremonial occasions.
Its passing from the
regret by both old and young.
army was undoubtedly watched with
Pre-war plans for placing a force
in France in the event of attack by Germany did not include a
single animal in the vast quantity of transport which would
accompany it.
Nevertheless, although it was hoped that mechanization and
modern weapons would confine operations to country where their
power could be developed to the full, it was obvious that the
machine in mountains and jungle would often be useless.
The RASC, as the transport corps of the army, were therefore
charged with keeping alive the technique of pack transport by
maintaining a small training nucleus, which, considering its small
number of animals, 25 only, was given the somewhat grandiose title
of Animal (Training) Transport Company. Few people at this stage
would have guessed that once again that sturdy, strong, rather
lovable yet surly animal of uncertain mood, the mule, was to provide
the backbone of the pack transport units, which were to make it
possible for the army to advance in the steaming jungles of Burma
and on the snow-clad hills of Italy.
The training company had a wide charter as the term 'pack
technique' included not only the skills of using pack saddlery and
making up pack loads but such matters as the organization of pack
units and methods of instructing units in the use and management
of small pack detachments.
Army was to form pack units in theatres of war by using cadres o
The normal practice in the British
British officers and NCOs and filling the ranks from locally enlisted
Animals also were normally drawn from those available
locally in overseas commands.
This practice involved the ability
to train and equip a diversity of men and animals when the occasion
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
543
The first indications that the animal was to return to his own
came shortly after the war broke out with a call for animal
transport companies for the BEF and with a decision that a mounted
division was to be formed and despatched at once to Palestine for
training.
As the Indian Army still possessed animal (horse, mule
and camel) transport companies, the Indian Government agreed to
fill the wants of the BEF.
Thus the honour of being the first Indian
Army units to take their place in an active theatre of war fell to
our sister Corps the RIASC.
Their story is already well told in
Eastern Defence but it is of special interest to record that the com-
mander of the companies was Lieut-Colonel R. W. W. Hills, who had
received his early training when serving with the Corps, before he
transferred to the RIASC.
The divisional RASC for the mounted division was mechanized
but the provision of the forage required for the mounted regiments
produced a fresh problem for the supply branch at the War Office,
as, having been assured a few months before that there would not be
'a horse in the force', they had disposed of their forage reserves just
before the war. The new Ministry of Food, which had taken over
the control of grain imports, responded to the occasion and made
arrangements to produce what was wanted at home for the voyage
to Palestine and to cover the transitional period after landing over-
seas before animals could be acclimatized to eat the grains which
could be obtained locally. The division had a short life in its
mounted role after arrival overseas, and many of its animals were
then used to equip four pack companies which were needed in the
Middle East and formed by cadres sent out from Home for the
purpose. Not long after Dunkirk orders were given to form a pack
transport company in the United Kingdom. Reorientation of
strategy after the fall of France included the possibility of at least
one division being required for operations in mountainous country
generally assumed to be Norway.
was formed; both were composed of British officers and men.
Later, in 1941, a second company
The
disbandment of the Cavalry Training Regiment provided a source
of trained horsemen who proved willing volunteers for the two
new companies.
North Wales was their training ground and, after
a period of general toughening up, both units moved to Scotland
for practical exercises with the 52nd Division which was being
specially trained in mountain warfare, although, ironically enough,
to the public it was famous as the
52nd (Lowland) Division.
Perhaps the most unexpected demand for pack transport came
from Gibraltar where a small company was formed in 1942 from
the officers' chargers which were
available in the station.
The
oficer commanding the unit combined his official duties with being
the honorary treasurer, honorary secretary and kennel huntsman
