26
PRELUDE
proposal, and it may be mentioned that 19 out of some 20 enquiries
or committees had rejected it
adopted later under the stress of total war.
before something on these lines was
much to be said for the proposal, even in these early days.
In theory there was
A central
organization seemed logical and calculated to save overheads as well
as some duplication at lower levels.
Economy in skilled manpower,
a matter of supreme importance, could be expected, and the work of
the MGO branches (later M of S) would be simplified.
The senior
officers of the Corps were against the proposal, as there was neither
an organization of sufficient scope and experience to cope with the
whole load, nor one which could be called into existence in a short
time.
The view of these officers was upheld.
Later events proved
this stand to have been justified, for the successors of the MGO's
organization had to be drastically reformed in the early days of the
war to cope with their own side of the work, and a wholly new
maintenance and repair organization, the REME, had to be called
into being before the full implementation of the proposed reforms
could be tackled. Provision, storage, and issue of vehicles and spare
parts then passed wholly into the hands of the RAOC.
Even so,
it was not until some years after the war that the forward repair
of RASC vehicles was handed over to the REME and the Corps
lost its workshop platoons.
Rearmament on the transpert side
So much for the framework of the Corps. While these policies
were taking shape, the rearmament programme kept the DST's
QMG ยง branch busy in concrete preparations for war.
The main
task was the provision of the vast fleet of vehicles and motor cycles
required by all arms on mobilization.
Responsibility for the pro-
vision of new production rested now with the MIGO, but the brunt
of the task fell on the DST,
who was responsible, under the
QMG, for procuring the large balance of the Army's requirements
from vehicles already in commercial use.
He also had to make
arrangements for the scheme of hiring vehicles for use in home
commands, when the latter lost their service vehicles to the proposed
British Expeditionary Force.
The question of provision in the carly 1950 3 was vitally affected
by the rising
cost of requipping and modernising the Army.
Every penny that could be spared in the Army's annual vote was
required for armaments.
The purchase of new wheeled vehicles
had naturally to take second place aste at as there was a ready
supply of vehicles in commercial use,
which could be tapped it
necessary.
military vehicle in large numbers.
There could be no question ef producing a standardined
The whole matter was investi-
sated in t9s4 by a War Oflice committe which laid down certain
TRANSPORT
27
general principles of great assistance to the planners.
They recog-
nized the desirability of all load-carrying vehicles conforming to
the six-wheeled design, but took into account the great improvement
in the design and performance of four-wheeled vehicles in later
years, especially when those four-wheelers were fitted with large
low pressure pneumatic tyres.
They concluded, therefore, that six-
wheeled vehicles should only be provided where a high performance
was required, while most of the load carriers should be four-wheeled.
To build up the number of six-wheelers required
under this
policy, it was decided that every RASC unit in peacetime should be
equipped with this type, and that the further numbers required to
complete mobilization tables should be ordered and kept in store
on a care and maintenance basis.
At the same time, as most of
the 'high performance' vehicles were for technical purposes, arrange-
ments were made to purchase the special bodies, storing these in
the vehicle depots and fitting as many as possible to the stored
mobilization stocks of six-wheelers.
The balance would be fitted
on mobilization to the six-wheeled load carriers operating in peace
in RASC companies.
These activities necessitated a big expansion of the RASC Vehicle
Reserve Depot's storage space, and this could not be achieved at
Feltham.
Therefore a new site was sought and found at Ashchurch,
near Tewkesbury, and it was opened in 1940.
While waiting for
this to become available, arrangements were made to take over
temporary accommodation in the Slough Trading Estate in hangars
and standings originally planned by the RASC for a long term
storage scheme as long ago as 1918!
In order to leave production available for armaments and fighting
vehicles, only five firms in the United Kingdom were allotted to
six-wheeler production for the RASC.
They were Messrs. Albion,
Austin, Karrier, Morris and Thornycroft.
Output was of excellent
quality, but small in quantity.
Then, in 1935, came a sudden call for vehicles for the Near East
and Palestine emergencies.
This was
the first occasion
when
QMG 3 obtained vehicles from a firm
which
was not
wholly
British-financed.
The General Motors Corporation controlled firm
of Bedfords, of Luton, were able to furnish 300 Bedford lorries in a
modified form within a comparatively few days,
thus overcoming
an emergency which could not have been met in any other way in
the available time.
The Munich crisis three years later further
emphasized this inability of British manufacturers to
meet,
by
themselves, an even greater emergency.
The War Office discussed
with the General Motors Corporation the serious situation likely to
arise if "Munich' really meant war, with the result that, with War
Office approval, G.MC representatives telephoned to every one of
