364
BURMA AND CEYLON
manned by the CASC.
The Kurunegala depot was the advanced
depot.
The Colombo depot,
RASC manned,
functioned as a
All supplies were thoroughly examined and reconditioned where
necemary.
To assist in this
work, a War Department chemist
was carried on the establishment of CRASC Supply Units.
This
reconditioning
unit, which was much overworked, undoubtedly
effected substantial financial savings.
In December,
Brigadier
C. E. Davis was relieved by
Brigadier J. T. Reckitt as DDST, and in 1944 Brigadier M.
Farquharson-Roberts arrived from ALFSEA to take over from
Brigadier Reckitt.
From the time of the fall of Singapore in February, 1942,
the
situation in Colombo docks had become increasingly chaotic.
The
docks are small, and no ship can go alongside.
Civilian lighter
Meets were limited to the normal requirements of peace, and labour
Thousands of tons of stores were pouring in for the
rapid expansion of the defences of the island and for the maintenance
d the increased numbers in all three services.
In comparison the
dearanoe rate was negligible.
Ships were delayed, and transit
sheds filled to capacity.
By the end of 1943 organized clearance
was practically at a standstill, although an Indian docks operating
company had arrived and was assisting in the actual handling of
canapes from ship to shore,
In an effort to solve this problem, the
onwanderin-Chief called a meeting with Admiralty and naval
Calembo CrAl Council,
and KAY representatives, and members of the
At this meeting,
the RASC offered to
take on the task of clearing the docks.
The offer was quickly
A CRASC transport column was flown out from Britain,
Wah within five months the docks had been cleared and restored to
one for
The method was the establishment of dumps,
tain eh the these services and one for civilians, located some distance
Wine the poetr
*А tatepot солити.
Clearance to these dumps was then effected by the
Coquat & Comintation
ta 1ogt, at the request of Middle Past, an effort was started to
enese the the kAid or atrica dutes, primarily in
To That Rat, shah BA he at to ties, any pay ig
The response was gratifying (pay and marriage allow-
Mad boli, poles was ailmellye to the average Ceylonese), and.
His to the tash gandard ween to the Miradle Bast after being
nia litany edeneed duties,
This training had to be undertaken
Sim/ / the three HAS Ohiots inia chace Regular RASC
CEYLON
365
warrant officers and non-commissioned officers, in addition to their
normal day's duty.
Later,
Ceylon Command were asked if they
would set up a training school for RASC drivers, to be recruited
locally.
This task was accepted, and Middle East provided the
officers and NCOs to run the school, while Ceylon provided recruits
in abundance.
These men, unlike the clerks, were not required
to speak English, so the field of recruitment was enlarged, and the
difficulties
instructors correspondingly
success of the whole venture, however, can be gauged from the fact
that nearly 7,000 were recruited, of whom some 4,500 saw service
in the Middle East.
duties at base supply depots and petroleum installations.
labour was controlled by the CASC.
The supply of petrol for the island did not present any great
problem, as initially it was effected from the Shell Company's
nstallations in Colombo and elsewhere.
depots were formed with RASC fire-fighting sections.
In 1944 Geylon Army Command were made responsible for the
launching of a combined operation in the Cocos Islands in the
Indian ocean about 1,500 miles from Ceylon.
The islands were
difficult to approach, as they are surrounded by a coral reef, and
mooring alongside was impossible.
The task consisted in the setting up of an RAF airstrip where
bombers could touch down and refuel before launching an attack
on the Japanese positions on the mainland of Malaya, then in
Japanese hands.
Surprise was of paramount importance.
Had
the Japanese become aware of the venture before the island defences
failure, since the Roval Navy had insufficient forces to give much
were erected, the whole enterprise would have been doomed to
protection.
The maintenance of the force responsible for the protection and
operation of this base was difficult.
It was decided that the main
requirements for maintenance were to be shipped from Calcutta.
The time and space problem controlled from Ceylon was therefore
complicated.
Petroleum tanks had to be conveyed to the islands,
transhipped to the mainland and finally erected.
The first requirement was the clearance of jungle to make way
for the air strip.
A reconnaissance party was flown to the islands,
and on its return a plan was carefully prepared.
One of the main
problems was water only, and it was decided that water for the
force would have to be chinned to the islands until such time as the
Royal Engineers could arrange normal supply.
The water
ultimately shioped from Calcutta in cans. and this was a RASC
responsibility.
Fresh vegetables were obtained from Ceylon, but great care had
