290
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
transport for general purposes would be obtained locally, and that
the supply and petrol organization need only be sufficient for static
It was considered that the RASC brigade companies
with each of the brigades and a small supply depot, bakery, butchery
and static petrol units would be quite adequate.
their actions does not rest so much on their lawful activities as on
their conduct when called upon to defend their lives and their
Hence a more detailed reference to specific units is
warranted than the length of this history allows in the chapters
concerned with the main campaigns.
For the first day or two after hostilities broke out there was little
interference with the distribution of supplies and petrol apart from
some sniping, and no concerted effort was made against the several
buildings which were being occupied as storehouses.
have been because of the military inexperience of ELAS, or possibly,
a desire to avoid direct action against our troops, and it was found
possible to remove a large stock of food which was stored at Rouf
and to transfer it to more secure positions.
But this situation was
not to last long, and by December 8th 'Arkforce' was split up into
three semi-isolated groups in which almost every available man was
needed for manning the defensive perimeters, any local reserves
available being employed on patrolling the main supply routes.
Attacks on the 'Fortress'
ELAS, heartened by their first success and being in numerical
superiority began to intensify their efforts, especially against the
centre sector.
This sector became known as the Fortress Area, and
also contained the headquarters of the force.
Its defended area
covered about 3,000 yards by about 1,000 or 2,000 yards from north
to south.
Colonel M. J. Cahill, had only just been
transferred from a similar appointment in Italy.
His appearance
seemed to bear out his reputation that his arrival was inevitably
followed by some sort of blitz, as before long the enemy brought
mortar fire against the headquarters building, began to open attacks
against the several RASC units scattered over Athens and the
Piraeus, and almost cut off the centre sector from its only source of
supply-at Faliron.
Colonel Cahill quickly appraised the situation.
was vital to establish at once an emergency maintenance centre in
the middle of the city for food, petrol, and water, to have central
control over an organized system of night convoys, suitably escorted
by AFVs, and to add to transport which at the time only consisted
of the two brigade companies, numbers g3t and 56t and a small
corps car company.
The only supply depot operating as such was 123 DID, with two
291
GREECE, 1944
sections at Faliron. The third section, with a detachment of 22 Indian
DID, was holding bulk stocks on the Athens-Piraeus road, and was
completely isolated.
Stocks of canned petrol were held in the small
236 Petrol Depot, also at Faliron.
The bulk petrol storage section
and mobile petrol filling centre had been located at the main civil
installations in the Piraeus and were soon cut off by land, although
it was possible to gain access by water.
Both 123 DID and 236 PD
were within easy range of any type of weapon possessed by the
enemy, and were subject to desultory fire.
The detachment of
26 Field Butchery, which controlled the only stock of frozen meat
held in a civil cold store, was also isolated in the heart of enemy
territory and could do little more than guard their position with the
help of a small party of Royal Engineers.
The field bakery was
also isolated until it was extricated by the 2nd Parachute Brigade.
The long straight road, the Syngros Avenue, which linked Faliron
with the heart of the city was under fire from various enemy posts
and detachments, and the roads joining the centre of the city with
the Piraeus ran through territory occupied by strong ELAS forces.
The first step taken by the DDST was to organize an escorted
convoy which was successful in bringing in 100,000 composite
rations into the fortress area, where a small extemporary DID was
formed with the aid of a borrowed major and his clerk, and a few
men, also borrowed, from the composite platoon of a brigade
company. A petrol point was established in the well known
Constitution Square, the meeting place for all good Athenians in
normal times, and a detachment of 64 Bulk Petrol Company was
drawn in to form a mobile reserve.
Static water tanks were built
up by the Royal Engineers in the streets around corps headquarters
and were supplemented by a platoon of water tankers which made
nightly runs to Faliron, eight vehicles being retained full each night
as a mobile reserve.
To overcome the lack of transport the DDST arranged for the
withdraval of about 250 vehicles, originally landed for the Greek
Government, as an organized night operation from the ordnance
depot. He then formed a new company with the aid of loyal Greek
adherents.
At the same time agreement was given to the employ-
ment of the transport of 66 Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment RA as a
temporary transport company.
After the visit of I-M Alexander, the Supreme Allied Commander
in Italy, on December teth, orders were given for hastening the
despatch of reinforcements, the 4th British Division and the King's
Dragon Guards (an armoured regiment) and for the establishment
of a temporary base at alien and a firm line of supply with a view
to the resumption of the offensive.
The use of the deep
harbours of the Piraeus had been denied for some days past and
