THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
Pre-war planning took into account that the island might have
to depend on its
but the period before which it
could be relieved if it were invested was determined as being six
months, and all plans for laying in stocks of essential war material
were based on that premise.
War planning had to be a joint service
and civil affair as the civil population of about 250,000 were largely
dependent on imports for their existence.
When plans were being considered before the war, each service
made its claims for the provision of the stores and accommodation
which would be needed for the maintenance of the garrison, but as
will be seen later in this account not all these claims could be fulfilled
and the unexpected fall of France and entry of Italy into the war
instances final approval for projects was not obtained until the siege
was nearly over, but nevertheless the RASC carried on and were
able to fulfil their role successfully.
The principal RASC defence
commitment was to build up
sufficient food for six months for the garrison, which was to be
reinforced when war came, but no one could have foreseen that the
estimated strength of about 6,000 would eventually reach a peak
figure of nearly 40,000, or that the DDST, Colonel H. P. Raymond,
who relieved Colonel H. A. C. Gardiner two days before the island
was first invested, would be placed in the contradictory position of
trying to supply
an ever increasing garrison with
diminishing stocks, as convoys became less frequent, as sinkings
increased and losses through enemy action and pilferage became
Mobilizing the Transport
Mobilization arrangements differed from those at home inasmuch
as no additional men (reservists) units or vehicles were to be sent
from England.
A request,
made a year before the war, for an
additional company was refused on the grounds that vehicles and
civilian
drivers
could be obtained locally.
The refusal was no
doubt due to the limited resources which would be available in the
United Kingdom and to the knowledge that distances in Malta were
short and no well organized mobile transport units would be needed.
Expansion was,
therefore, dependent on a scheme whereby about
7,000 civilian vehicles were assigned by the RASC, with the help of
the civil police, to provide for the extra transport which would be
needed by the garrison to bring their first line transport up to a
war strength, and to produce the additional vehicles which would be
wanted by the RASC Transport Company.
It was estimated that
about 600 of these vehicles would only be wanted as a temporary
measure for conveying units and their equipment to their war
In fact only some of the vehicles assigned were requisitioned.
There were plenty of civilian cars, lorries and small buses, but a
dearth of ambulances had to be made good by converting small
The drivers of the vehicles which were required for permanent
duty were not enlisted but were enrolled for the duration of the
war as members of the Malta Auxiliary Corps.
Although subject to military law these men retained their civilian
status and received no military training.
They continued to wear
plain clothes but for distinguishing purposes were given a cap, an
Proposals to enlist Maltese into the
RASC were considered in 194I but, because
accommodation difficulties, were not proceeded with, but in the
following year a Malta section of the RASC was formed, known
the Army Service Corps, Malta Territorial Force.
special tribute must be paid not only to the civilian drivers and
men of the MT but also to those Maltese civilian employees who
were permanently employed by the RASC before and during the
Men in all categories gave loyal service and many of them
still remain with the Corps in one capacity or another.
As the siege went on there was no lack of transport, so long as the
petrol stocks lasted; the main concern of the DDST was how to
keep the vehicles in running order.
In some cases the owners of
impressed vehicles were made responsible for keeping their vehicles
on the road, but in others maintenance and repairs had to be
conducted by the RASC Company Workshops which, like all other
units, had to do their work under continuous bombardment from
Authority had been given in February, 1939, for preparing a
stock of six months' spares for military vehicles, but there was no
special plan for providing reserves for the large number of civilian
vehicles which would have to be taken over.
No protected storage
could be provided for the main stock of army spares which had to
be dispersed over five garages.
Two of these garages were destroyed
by enemy bombing, garaghe net loss of stocks only amounted to
about one twentieth of the holding.
In August, 1941, instructions
were received that the reserves of spares were to be built up to last
300 days, but by that tree shippi,sp was scarce and, in response to
a demand placed on the Middle East for 640 items, two small
packages only were received; the rest had been shut out to make
room for more vital stores.
brought in by submarine.
A few priority goods, however, were
As spare parts became fewer the greatest ingenuity was displayed
