THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
which the government of the country and the direction of the war
was conducted, and elaborate transport plans had therefore been
drawn up for the orderly
evacuation
of all those engaged on
this work (save for a few who could be given adequate shelter);
The strict secrecy in which these things were very sensibly veiled
did nothing to ease the task of the planners, but, long before the
threat came to a head on June 13th, 1944, all plans had been
perfected.
Happily, the defensive measures taken, the destruction of launch-
ing sites and of the facilities for the transportation of the weapons
thereto, the fighter and AA defences, and the alertness of the fire
fighting and rescue organizations, reduced the attack to manage-
able proportions and,
once again,
ST 3 could, with a sigh of
relief (echoed by many others), file away their emergency plan
Exactly a week before the first V 1 fell in Sussex (I saw the
bastard fall, his tail was properly afire!, a Sussex publican was
heard to exclaim triumphantly), the landings in Normandy took
place, and the months of preparatory work came to fruition.
task in the United Kingdom, ratthy transport side of the RASC,
became one of moving the stores required for transit to Normandy,
of raising additional transport units for the reinforcement of BLA
in its almost rail-less
lings of communication, of raising further
transport units for service with the Air Despatch Group. and of
organizing the direction of this Group from the War Office.
top of these commitments came a little later the inevitable call for
transfer of officers and men to the infantry.
On the credit side, however, the commitments in trained drivers
could be forecast on a diminishing scale and to meet them and these
additional loads, resort
was had to the
mobilization centres,
which were becoming in part redundant.
training brigades and
So, with the help of the ATS and of our hired civilian drivers, our
heads were kept above water.
From October, 1944, until the end of the war there was little
change in the transport position at home.
continued to run down and to be disbanded, the transport companies
The training brigades
in commands were able, without the aid of the departed formations'
transport, to mect the requirements of the depleted commands, the
V weapon counter measures were no longer actively operating and
AA Command enjoyed a welcome freedom trom its continuous
labours of the preceding five years.
(It is not generally realized
that, during the whole period from September, 1939, until May,
1945, the defences of Great Britain were, somewhere, in almost
ceaseless action.
If it was not attack from the air it was attack
from the sea or from the heavy coastal batteries in the Channel.)
TRANSPORT
451
The obvious approach of the end on the Continent, however,
spelt no relaxation for our fighting formations because of the
continued resistance of the Japanese.
Elaborate plans were laid
for the re-deployment of formations from the Middle East, Italy
and North-West Europe to carry out what promised to be a series
of coast hopping operations from Malaya to Hong Kong.
The
sudden collapse of Japan on August 15th, 1945, hastened by but
not wholly attributable to the dropping of the first two atomic
bombs to be employed in warfare, stopped the execution of these
plans, to the general relief, and so the tale of the RASC effort in
respect of transport at home comes to its end.
Looking back on this effort one is conscious of the great debt
owed to the planners of pre-war days-the small team of officers in
ST 3 which was led by Colonel Fitzherbert (later Major-General
E. H. Fitzherbert, Inspector RASC).
Their sound appreciation
of what would be required, and for their well directed efforts, at a
time of financial stringency
which only eased (for the fighting
services) in the last few months before the war, to put the system of
procurement of new, and utilization of existing, resources on the
best possible lines.
The standard of vehicle maintenance in the Corps, too, stands
out as an important factor in the sustained mobility of our forces,
backed up as it was in the initial years by a provision and main-
tenance system second to none.
It will have been noted that, since the days of 'divisionalization'
increasing attention had been paid to the military training of the
RASC officer and soldier.
This paid handsome dividends,
for the
increased use of armoured forces,
the disappearance of the old
'front line' of trench warfare, the liability of rearward areas to
airborne and seaborne attacks as well as to aerial bombardment,
the employment on our part of independent raiding forces such as
the Long Range Penetration Group in the Middle East and the
Chindits in Burma, the place of the Corps in amphibious assaults
and airborne operations and, finally, the temporary adoption in all
theatres of war and at home of an infantry role by many units of
the Corps all depended for their success on the qualities of the RASC
officer and man (particularly in transport units) as soldiers first and
foremost.
The future is obscure, the shape of formations and, particularly
the proportions between 'teeth' and 'tail', will doubtless be pro-
foundly affected by the advent of atomic weapons, the development
of airborne forces, developments in pilotless aircraft and guided
missiles, but if the Corps'
traditions of preparedness and service
remain at the same high level as during the war years the transport
services of the Army will not be found wanting.
