248
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
Eighth Armies into the north eastern corner of Tunisia, the capture
of about 257,000 prisoners of war, and the need for bringing relief
measures to the civil population created an administrative situation
which necessitated drastic action.
The influx of Allied troops was
dealt with by dispersing
them-the Eighth Army beginning to
retrace its footsteps southwards to Tripoli a few days after the Axis
surrender.
The First Army formations could not be withdrawn so
rapidly, but by the end of May only one British and one American
division were left as a garrison in Tunis.
The emergency relief of
the civil
population
had
been carefully planned by the North
African Economic Board, and the first train with food and much
needed coal was on its way to Tunis on the day of the final surrender.
The maintenance of such large numbers of prisoners of war was
another matter,
as the Intelligence forecast had been that only
157,000 would have to be evacuated to the west.
The capture of a
million German and Italian rations helped to tide over the immedi-
ate problem, and the transfer of prisoners to the 'cages' prepared
for their reception was assisted by their obliging habit of organizing
their own convoys and arriving in
good order at the appointed
place.
The feeding and clothing of the prisoners according to
international agreement earned the praise of the officials of the
International Red Cross who supervised their general well-being.
The RASC could look back on the seven months' campaign with
some satisfaction.
The British North Africa force had been well
fed and had enjoyed a high standard of health, a fact which was
conceded to be largely due to the excellent and plentiful rations on
which
subsisted.
The 6,000-odd
RASC 'task' vehicles had
covered 35 million miles between them.
Some units did not arrive
until the campaign was nearly over, but the vehicles of one bulk
petrol company averaged over 15,000 miles and one vehicle held a
record of 30,000 miles.
The record of the companies' workshop
sections was one to be proud of, as during the whole campaign only
418 task vehicles had to be evacuated, and it is perhaps significant
that replacements were received for only 298 in return.
The young
petroleum organization had shown what well-planned organization
and the use of modern equipment could achieve.
Pack transport
had established its reputation which
Italy.
was to be excelled later in
wounded
RASC casualties were 103 officers and men killed and 146
CHAPTER VII
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
ITALY
Decision to Invade Italy
THE campaign in Italy, which was preceded by the capture
of the small islands of Lampedusa and Pantelleria and the
invasion of Sicily,
was one in which the RASC
develop each of its activities to the fullest extent, as, in addition to
an extensive supply and transport organization,
both animal and
water transport were used on a large scale, and the
campaigns
provided the RASC with their first opportunity of demonstrating
the value of their new form of transport-the amphibious vehicle.
Plans for the invasion of Sicily were well advanced before the
final defeat of the Axis forces in North Africa had been accom-
plished, but the decision to invade Italy was the subject of much
discussion because it was thousht that the effort which would have
to be devoted to such an enterprise might detract from the main
Allied objective, the invasion of North-West Burope in the coming
Pantelleria and Lampedusa fell with surprising swiftness, in two
days, in June, 1943•
The first airborne landings were made in
Sicily on the night of July gth/toth, and by August lith the whole
of Sicily was in our hands.
In the event the decision to follow the invasion of Sicily by an
invasion of the mainland proved to be a correct one, as it achieved
the original limited obie pros of knocking the Italian Army out of
the war and gaining possession of the airfields at Foggia for use as
bases for operations against the southern and eastern areas
Germany.
Moreover the campaign tied down 20 Axis divisions
which might otherwise have been employed against the Russians or
against our own forces in the main battle in Europe.
For convenience the forces employed in Italy will be referred to
as the CMF (dentral Mices emancan Force) although, as will be
seen later, this name was only given to the headquarters for a short
But before describing the work of the RASC with the CMF,
there follows a shoes accing thef he part they played in the two
preliminary operations.
