536
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
No. 274-Right wing damaged by flak and torn off on landing.
Carrier intact, and no injuries.
No. 275-Badly hit by flak, crashed in the Wesel area (United
States sector) and broke up.
one officer, one OR wounded. The remainder fought with the
Americans for two days until the way was open to return to their unit.
No. 276- Set on fire by flak, but made a fair landing and the
carrier was extracted before the glider burned out.
wounded.
The glider was quickly surrounded by a large enemy
party and all were captured.
No. 277- Hit by flak, crashed and broke up, on a railway line.
One or two war correspondents wounded.
No. 278-A good landing.
Carrier struck by small arms fire
on leaving the glider, but little damage resulted.
There can be small wonder that after one operational flight, most
glider-borne troops wished they had elected to become parachutists.
Dumps established
In spite of these mishaps, the DMA was quickly reconnoitred and
stores dumps began to be established, transport consisting only of
three carriers, one trailer, and a captured lorry.
the first supply drop took place, and it was a bad one.
was it widely dispersed, but much of it was dropped from too low a
height, giving the parachutes insufficient time to open, so that a
containers burst open.
This was not wholly a dis-
advantage, since it was decided to open all containers in situ, to
save transport, instead of carrying them complete to the DMA.
The process was of course slow, and by 1600 hours the division
was running out of ammunition,
the situation being described for
desperate hard work,
ammunition supply was maintained, and things became easier by
1800 hours, when three more carriers and two more trailers were
The officer commanding the light company badly needed
help, but the CRASC's representative at divisional headquarters
had been badly wounded, and the AA&QMG had not arrived.
However, the officer
commanding went himself and found a
DAQMG, who promised the aid of 1o jeeps and trailers from the
air landing brigade to get the droppiny zone cleared during the
night. Only to turned up, and those not until dawn, when they
did good work.
Clearance continued through the night, in spite of paries of
enemy infiltrating through the woods and crossing the dropping
One party of about 200 captured an RASC officer and four
men, and alo unfortunately the German forry, thus cutting down
the remaining lift quite seriously.
However, later in the night,
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
537
they yielded to the officer's threats, reversed their roles, and were
duly delivered to the cage, when the lorry again became available
for clearance of the SDZ.
In the meantime, progress from the far side of the river had been
The first crossings had been made about 10 hours
before the airborne landings, and CRASC's adjutant, arriving about
0945 with HQ RASC of the 15th (Scottish) Division, set out on
his reconnaissance, although fired on several times, and selected
and marked a site for the Pegasus dump.
That day 18 dukws
crossed, and by the evening of the next, 84 dukw-loads had been
delivered at the Pegasus dump. At this point, amphibious transport
was stopped, through fear that a breakdown might cause a dukw
to be swept by the swift current against the newly-built pontoon
bridge a little below the crossing point.
Thereafter, all supplies
crossed the bridge in the vehicles of the heavy companies, which
were given bridge priority.
Soon after this, normal supply to 6th
Airborne Division from the Pegasus dump began, and the division
became to all intents an infantry formation for the rest of the
With the crossing of the Rhine, the last airborne operation was
complete, and no more actually took place (though others were
planned), during the remainder of the war, if the occupation of
Copenhagen and other Scandinavian cities by ist Airborne Division
is excepted: these moves were peaceful ones, the forces being
comfortably landed on airfields.
But the airborne arm had not finished its work; indeed, from
then on to the final submission of the enemy, the 6th Division carried
on its longest campaign, in the role of an infantry formation.
that purpose it was not at first ideally organized or equipped, and
its RASC in particular were greatly handicapped by having only
three companies, one equipped with jeeps.
The new role of the
division was, in conjunction with tith Armoured Division, to lead
the advance of VIII Corps in pursuit of an enemy whose capacity
and will to hit back were so far unknown, and the intention was
that the pursuit should be as rapid as possible a chase in which
the Germans were to be given no chance to stand and reorganize,
or to prepare defensive positions. Clearly the column's transport
was inadequate for this work, especially as it was called upon to
"motorize' two-thirds of the division at a time in the interests of speed.
Accordingly, during the first few days after the Rhine crossing,
the column withdrew to the Pegasus area, and in a few days,
allocations of five transport platoons, including two of 5-tonners,
had been obtained from outside resources.
A column transport
olice was set up to allocate vehicles rapidly to whatever function
top-carrying, ammunition, petroleum, or supply duties and to
