318
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
vehicles to those units which were some distance away, while units
in the vicinity came and collected the vehicles that had been allotted
to them.
The scheme worked well in practice, although disobedi-
ence of orders and indiscriminate impressment by one formation
nearly wrecked the carefully made plans for the use of the transport
in the district.
One Indian officer, in a moment of exuberance,
stopped a car at pistol point and demanded that it should be taken
over at once.
The owner was the chairman of the board and the
sequel can be imagined.
While
there was adequate bulk petrol freely available in the
hands of the oil companies, special steps had to be taken to make
certain that the military reserve, which represented about a year's
supply at peacetime
consumption rates,
did not deteriorate,
normal motor spirit (cracked spirit) tended to 'gum up' after some
months' storage.
Most of the reserve had, therefore, to be obtained
in the form of 'straight run spirit' which could be stored safely for
periods of over a year.
Distribution was a
matter
of getting enough containers, and
although the 4-gallon tin was in use for kerosene in the commer-
cial market, a large supply
of 44-
and 60-gallon drums were
manufactured locally from sheet steel, of which there was fortunately
enough, while as much use as possible was made of the normal
kerb-side pump fed from underground 1,000-gallon tanks.
A chain
of petrol depots was also established, on the line of communication
and in the
forward northern areas close to the complementary
depots
of the
food
supply
organization.
In many places
proximity of plantations or forest offered a serious fire risk, but all
depots
were provided with protection from blast, and dumps so
bunded as to prevent a fire from spreading.
As no tarpaulins
were available for covering stacks to reduce the effect of the sun's
rays and tropical rainstorms,
each dump was protected by
attap'* shelter.
Decanting from the 44- and 6o-gallon drums was a problem, as
no decanting apparatus could be obtained from
RIAS POL sections were equipped with a hand operated decanting
apparatus and can cleaning and testing plant, but the output was
small although rotary, and even stirrup, pumps were introduced to
speed the flow.
In consequence it was a common sight to see a
military vehicle with its own reservoir of a Go-gallon barrel on its
tail-board,
The Australian reserve MI companies went one better by decanting
which was decanted by the driver into his own tins.
direct from
barrel to tank by means of rubber hoses
stirrup pumps, the flow of fuel being started by the simple proces
of what is known in the Royal Navy as 'sucking the monkey'.
*"Atta' = The branch of the palm tree which was used extensively in building hus,
MALAYA
319
There was, of course, wastage, but it was less than would have been
incurred by an extensive use of the flimsy can.
An increasing demand for water transport was met by the forma-
tion of a water transport company from the original peacetime
detachment, some British officers and NCOs being provided from
Britain for the purpose.
Additional vessels were obtained locally
by purchase and new construction.
The locally purchased vessels
were of the Tongkon variety fitted with a Ford V8 engine.
Some
were mounted with small guns, but their performance was somewhat
hazardous as the boats were apt to sink when the guns were fired!
High speed target towers were under construction when hostilities
broke out, but as the engines had not been fitted they had to be
abandoned as hulks.
The new company was located at
Pulau
Brani with a large detachment at Changi to serve the many islands
where coast defences had been developed.
Meanwhile the period of preparation was gradually drawing to a
close as the months of 1941 passed by and tension increased.
the autumn many Japanese nationals who were resident in Malaya
received orders from their Government to leave.
There were clear
indications that the Japanese were preparing to establish themselves
in southern Siam, and their reconnaissance aircraft were already
flying over Malaya and Sarawak.
On December ist a state of emergency was declared, and the
volunteer forces were mobilized.
Six days later Japanese convoys
of warships and transports were reported to be steaming westward,
and on December 8th the enemy began to land strong forces at
Singora and Patani in southern Siam and at Kota Bahru.
Inadequate Defences
The opening moves of the enemy on December 8th bore out in
only too realistic a fashion the accuracy of the several military
appreciations of his probable course of action. Gaining a strong
foothold almost immediately, the Japanese forces began to press
over to the west coast and down the centre of northern Malaya and
consolidated their possession of Kota Bahru and its important airfield.
To meet this threat III Indian Corps was so disposed as to be
responsible for all that part of Malaya which lies north of Johore
and Malacca, the t1th Indian Infantry Division being in the west,
and the gth Indian Infantry Division in the south centre and watching
Kota Bahru and Kuantan in the east.
The Australian Imperial
Force was responsible for the defence of Johore and Malacca, and
the protection of Singapore was the task of the two Malaya infantry
brigades.
located in Singapore.
The 12th Indian Infantry Brigade in GHQ Reserve was
It was a case of trying to watch everywhere and being strong
