442
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
origin, and we, as a corps, were dependent for our life-blood, our
vehicles, largely on the operation of the lend-lease scheme.
The growth of the Corps in numbers and types of units tended to
a somewhat chaotic collection of 'companies",
"sections' and 'sub-
sections of varying strengths, particularly in the case of sub-units.
War establishments were 'tailor made to suit each individual unit,
and standardization was a secondary consideration.
In 1941 &
start was made on a complete reorganization of the transport units
of the Corps, adopting as sub-units the platoon and section, almost
exactly comparable in size to the infantry platoon and section, thus
producing, a unit whose size was immediately appreciated by
officers (especially staff officers) of other arms, and one, moreover,
which could be switched readily to an infantry role when required,
The section was composed of seven vehicles, with a section
commander mounted normally on a
motoreycle.
The platoon
consisted of a headquarters which included a platoon officer, a
platoon sergeant and a fitter and four sections.
The total strength
of the platoon was 3o vehicles.
This platoon was not only the
exact counterpart of the infantry platoon but also, if equipped with
?ton lories, it could carry in one lift the marching portion of an
infantry battalion.
plan and execute.
This made troop carrying a simple matter to
If a second driver was required on each vehicle, the platoon
remained altered but was given a 'relief driver increment,
the anyantages of the sister made themselves apparent, platoons
of supply and petrol men were formed, or, for commodity companies
such as supply companies and petrol companies of
formation
RASCo, 'composite platoons were adopted which included men of
vations trades.
But the platoon remained of its calculated sue, or
very nearly so. Mobile workshops were similatly organized on a
platoon basis.
The company consiated of a headguarters, one or more workshop
platoons, and as many transport platoons and composite platoons as
were necessary for it to fulfil its role.
Where, as in &
division,
armented division, any corps, lines of communication of base area,
a number of RASC compaties were required to perform
the RASC
Cuties for a formation on area, these comvaties were grouped into a
'cohol under a CRASC, the column being the equivalent of a
battation in the infantry,
The term column was a timely revival
of the early nomenclature for grouped ASC compaties,
This new organisation, which remained in being after the wat,
from the Staff Duties branch of the War Office and from the War
Retabhohments Committee, whese latwurs were onsiderably simpli
fied thereing,
TRANSPORT
44%
The course of the war in 194t was not favourable to the Allies,
The German attack on Russia led to an additional load on the
British producers of tanks and vehicles, while the Japanese assault
on Pearl Harbour in December of that year meant (as did the
American entry into the First World War in 1917) a partial
cemation of the supplies of American vehicles.
Reorganization of the MT Maintenance System
The operations in the Middle East, with their waxing and waning
success, constituted a serious drain on the Army's resources in men
and material, in which the RASC was heavily involved, and much
anxious thought was given to the maintenance of the flow of vehicles
from North America to the Middle East.
All this was initiated and
coordinated by the transport branch at the War Office,
Towards the end of the year difficulties arose over the supply of
technical manpower to the three fighting services,
Industry, under
constant urge to increase output, became alarmed at the drain on
their human resources as the increasing complexity and amount of
technical equipment in the hands of the three services led to ever
increasing demands for the call up of skilled men to maintain this
equipment.
A feeling was evident that some waste of this skilled
manpower was occurring:
Eventually a committee was set up
under the chairmanship of Sir William (later Lord) Beveridge, on
which sat representatives of the Ministry of Labour and National
Service and
of the trade unions.
Their duties were to examine
the numbers of skilled workers in each of the three services, to
ascertain if there was any overlap in their duties and, if so, to make
recommendations for their more economical use,
As far as the Army was concerned, senior officers of the RE,
RASC and RAOC branches at the War Office were examined, and
the committee paid visits to the technical establishments of all
three corps.
They also took note of the numbers of skilled men
serving in all arms, including the RAC, RA and R Sigs, as well as
in the main technical corps concerned,
It may fairly be claimed that the RASC emerged well from this
examination in the matter of skilled men required for, way, every
to try unite, keep ten the site men tie ta, way, every
on the war establishment of transport units,
Rightly of wrongly,
the Crous had always genarded de dévermed anice as very mud
first and mechanics,
only on occasion,
were mainly used on first echelon maintenance, in the sub-unit, and
ad little part in the workshop platoons of the heavy repair shops
eing as their name imolied, essentially drivers.
But the committee,
with their great urge for
economies in
technicians, did not see things in this light,
Even had they done
