202
THE MIDDLE EAST II
Indian Army Ordnance Corps of inadequate strength.
There were
similar discrepancies in the organization of supply and petroleum
units; what was a DID in the British army was a DIS in the Indian;
DISs were all detachments of a parent unit called a supply company,
which was the central accounting and administration unit of eight
or ten DISs strung out from one end of the country to the other,
each probably in the area of a different local commander.
It was
decided that too
these
different organizations side by side in the same formations, and that
the RIASC in Paiforce must be reorganized on British war establish-
ments.
It was not without a struggle that this was achieved, for
Army Headquarters in India viewed these innovations with con-
siderable misgivings.
The port of entry into the command was Basra, a well equipped
port which had been developed as a military base for the Mesopo-
tamian campaign 25 years before.
Basra is the base for two lines
of communication, the one running through Iraq with a metre-gauge
railway system, and the other through Persia with a standard gauge.
The nature of the country is such that after these two lines diverge
at Basra, there is no lateral communication between them till the
Bagdad-Teheran road is reached 300 miles farther north.
The
base was split in two by the broad Shatt-el-Arab River, and it was
necessary to divide the installations.
What should be held on the
Iraq side and what on the Persian side of the base became an
absorbing and never ending calculation.
As the base grew, installa-
tions were scattered over an ever widening area of desert, many of
the RASC units being at Zubier, a desolate spot about 2o miles
from Basra.
Zubier has already had a mention in commissariat
history, for it was there in 1914 that a mule transport company of
Indian ST Corps (afterwards
the RIASC) arriving on
battlefield with a load of forage at the crucial moment, was mistaken
by the Turks for a fresh cavalry
regiment which induced their
immediate surrender.
It was here, in 1942, that an accidental fire
in the petrol depot provided, for many, their first demonstration of
the advances that had been made in fire-fighting technique.
A cold storage installation, petrol tin making plants, and assembly
plants for vehicles were among the many developments at the Base
during
this period.
Work was also begun on an advanced base
area in the neighbourhood of Bagdad, which included among its
units a
combined RASC/RIASC Training and Reinforcement
Depot at Mussayib, to which newly arrived units were sent to
complete their equipping and acclimatize themselves, and where
new locally raised units took shape.
The planning of a military campaign is necessarily done in secret,
and only a limited number of people take an active part in it.
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
The units themselves are usually quite unaware of what is being
planned for them, and they judge the value of their contribution to
the war effort by what happens around them.
Yet in PAIC-a
command in which not a single shot was fired at the enemy-many
officers and men of the RASC and RIASC took part in an operation
whose direct connection with the war was obvious to the least
This was the 'aid to Russia' operation, which continued
during the whole of the active life of PAIC.
When the command was formed in September, 1942, a consider-
able tonnage of supplies of all kinds was being transported to Russia
both over the Trans-Iranian railway, which was being operated by
the British, and by the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation,
which had chartered a large number of Persian civilian lorries and
had added to these many Lend-Lease vehicles which had been
assembled at the UKCC plant at Bushire and were driven by
Most of these lorries operated from Andimesk, at the foot
of the mountain barrier, to the Russian railhead at Tabriz and to
Pahlevi on the Caspian Sea.
In November, 1942, the Russians fighting in the Caucasus had
urgent need of ammunition, and 203 and 204 GPT Companies,
RIASC, were allotted specially for this task. As an increased lift
of ammunition and other warlike stores was required, HQ 16 L of
C Transport Column was formed in December.
Two further com-
panies were provided almost immediately, and early in 1943 the
strength of the column was built up to eight companies.
In the spring of 1943 the United States Service Command began
to operate at strength on the route from Andimesk to Kasvin.
was therefore decided to leave the main Persian line of communica-
tion route to the Americans and to concentrate PAIC resources on
the Iraq line of communication.
transported by river and railway to Khanigin on the Persian border
and thence by road through Persia to Tabriz.
This route was 700 miles in length and included four great
mountain passes, the highest being 7,700 feet.
from 120 degrees or more in summer to minus 1o degrees or less in
winter.
snow, ice and blizzard and it was not unknown for a convoy to
start out in khaki drill and to finish up in battledress, sheepskin
coats and gum boots.
The vehicles of 16 Transport Column were operated in platoon
convoys, and the normal turn-round was 17 days, including loading
and unloading, maintenance, repairs and time off.
The platoons
of one company, 51 (Mysore) GPT Company, which joined the
column soon after it was formed, each completed 15 round trips
(20,000 miles) before being withdrawn for rest.
