39°
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
centres there dealt with large accumulations of jerricans.
'Pluto'
was then working to Cherbourg.
Ostend came into operation for
bulk petrol supply on September zoth, when the first ocean tankers
discharged.
CRASC 8 Petrol Installations took up the
task of
opening up bulk installations, first at Ghent, Brussels and Antwerp,
of laying down resources of 130,000 tons, and of establishing a
filling centre near Brussels.
Petrol and oil depots in the advanced base were grouped geo-
graphically in
the same three
areas as
the supply groups.
Antwerp, seven V bombs fell within one depot area, and the bulk
installations themselves received three direct hits.
One of these
started seven separate fires and there were many casualties, but only
3,500 tons were destroyed,
Captain J. B. Hesber climbed on top of
threatened tanks and flame-proofed all the vents.
He also entered
tanks and opened valves.
He was made a member of the Order
of the British Empire for gallantry.
The second phase of 'Pluto' (pipeline from Dungeness to Boulogne),
was completed in October and the overland pipeline system was
steadily developed. The pipehead was at Eindhoven and it was
fed from Antwerp.
Thence petrol was carried forward by the road
tankers of 37 Transport Column at a rate of 1,000 tons a day,
use of bulk petrol on the lines of communication was expanded by
the setting up of petrol stations along the routes, staffed from the
composite platoons of the bulk petrol transport companies.
convoy-lane method of refilling by this means was employed, and
many vehicles could be refuelled at one time.
Petrol points were
also established for bulk issues to large units.
From the Rhine to the Baltie
While the Battle of Rhineland was being fought, the Rhine
crossing was being planned,
Administrative preparations for it had
begun as early as December, before the German counter-offensive
in the Ardennes,
Roads and railways had been repaired and
developed, and Second Army depots had been stocked with some
130,000 tons of stores.
In consequence of all this forethought,
21 Army Group was able to launch the operation for crossing the
Rhine a fortnight after the completion of the Rhineland battle,
The attack began on the night of March 23rd, and by the next
morning all the assaulting divisions (two British and two American)
and the British Commando Brigade had accomplished their intial
crossings between Rheineburg, and Rees,
The key to the crossings
was the important communication centre of Wesel, which was
captured by the Commando brigade after an intense air ataly
Bomber
Command,
On
the morning
of March 24th,
United States Airborne Corps, with
the
6th British Airborne
IE INVASION OF NORTH WEST EUROPE
391
Division and one American airborne division, dropped on the east
bank of the Rhine, within supporting distance of our guns on the
west bank.
These drops were successful
and the
British and
American bridgeheads were quickly joined,
The
Koyal Navy
played a considerable part in ferrying across the river with craf
which had been carried by road across Belgium, the southern
Netherlands and the Rhineland,
Within four days the bridgehead over the Rhine had been
established, and on March 28th the advance to the Elbe began.
Second Army advanced with its left flank directed on Hamburg.
On the extreme left, II Canadian Corps, after crossing the Second
Army bridgehead, swung north along the Rhine to outflank Arnhem
and open up routes leading northwards from the Arnhem area,
Later I Canadian Corps assaulted across the river at Arnhem and
turned into the western Netherlands, where they established a
protective flank between the Rhine and the Zuider Zee,
The subsequent operations of 21 Army Group were similar to
those in
the drive across North-West France,
The
German
communications from east to west towards the coast were progres-
sively cut, and a series of right hooks were delivered to round up
the enemy,
The formation on the left flank advanced towards the
coast to complete the enemy's defeat,
VIII Corps of Second Army
crossed the Weser near Minden on April gth, and was followed a
few days later farther north by XII Corps,
The latter corps then
worked its way along the east bank in an advance which brought it
to the outskirts of Hamburg.
Bremen fell at the end of April after
a further "hook' on that city from the east.
By mid-April, the
Canadian Army had liberated most of the northern Netherlands,
had safeguarded 21 Army Group's flank in the western Nether-
lands, and isolated the large enemy garrison there,
The main drive to the Elbe continued towards Lüneburg, which
was reached on April 18th, when the British forces began to line up
on the southern bank of the river to mask the city of Hamburg,
The Fibe was crossed on April goth. and soearheads made straight
for Lübeck in order
to seal off Schleswig-Holstein peninsula,
Aeross the Elbe there was hardly any opposition and on May and
& German party came out from Hamburg, to negotiate its surrender,
The countryside was crowded with masses of German soldiers and
refugees fleeing, in opposite directions, from 21 Army Group and
from the Russians with whom contact was established on May and.
The negotiations which began in Hamburg led on May
grd to
the despatch by Admiral Doenitz of envoys to Field-Marshal
Montgomery's tactical headguarters on Lineburg Heath.
evening of May 4th, General-Admiral Friedeburg, Commander-in-
Chief of the German Navy, signed the instrument of unconditiona
