580
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
With the invasion of Hong Kong and Singapore we lost all our
craft, including the very fine cargo carrying-cum-target towing
vessel, Sir Hastings Anderson, which had been specially built for the
fleet by Messrs. Harland & Wolff at Belfast in 1934•
As the war
against the Japanese progressed, plans were evolved for the recapture
of Rangoon, Malaya, Singapore, Hong Kong and the other Far
Eastern territories.
In these plans provision was made for a large
number of RASC Fleet units of all types, including such new com-
panies as floating workshop companies, coaster companies, and
ambulance launch companies.
In September, 1944,
the HQ, CRASC, 56 Water Transport
Units, was formed at Stranraer, quickly followed by Nos. 856 and
884 Companies RASC (motorboat), as they had then come to be
Cadres
of trained and battle experienced men
were
provided from 42 Water Transport Units, and the units were built
up to strength from the output of 467
engaged
Company, at that time
on continuation training at Stranraer.
The demand
from Headquarters, Allied Land Forces, South-East Asia (ALFSEA)
for these companies was urgent.
and one officer from
In January, 1945, the CRASC
headquarters left by air for the Far East,
the headquarters following by sea.
By January, 1945, 856 Company
was also on its way and soon afterwards 884 Company embarked.
Their craft-the ubiquitous 36 ft harbour launches-were to be
shipped as soon as cargo space became available.
RASC Motor Boat Companies in Burma
Arriving in India in February, 1945, as the Arakan campaign
was drawing to its close, 856 Company was sent urgently to Akyab
to assist IWT. As its own craft had not arrived, eight D-type
tugs were taken over, together with the most unpromising camp
site-Ezekiel's former rice mill on Satyogya
Creek, a name that
will conjure up to all those who kney it visions of dilapidated
buildings, overgrown clearings, and a skeleton of what was once a
jetty on the chaung edge.
The company did work there that they had
surely not been taught at Rothesay or West Mersea: how to assist
in mooring a 10,000-ton freighter in a six-knot tide, or to tow one,
possibly two, heavy barges laden with men and supplies through
treacherous waterways without charts.
In April. 104e. the company was withdrawn to Calcutta and re
equipped with it own 36 it harbour launches, which by then were
arriving from Britain in large numbers.
While in Calcutta,
unit was based at Dhoppa Lock, another name that will be remem-
bered with anything but affection by all mariners of 56 Water
Transport Units!
Rangoon.
Soon they embarked with the assault forces for
There they took over what had once been a prosperous
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
581
iron foundry on the muddy banks of the Rangoon River. It had its
own jetty at the foot of the Sulei Pagoda road and operated various
harbour services.
Boarding and mooring craft were provided, but
perhaps the most interesting, and frequently exciting detail was
the weekly despatch boat which ran from Rangoon to Bassein to
supply the garrison there.
In the meantime, 884 Company had arrived at Chittagong in
March, 1945•
Again, pending the arrival of its craft by freighter,
this unit also were diverted temporarily to assist IWT, this time in
the traffic down the River Chindwin from Kalewa to Myngynan.
Headquarters and part of the unit were flown to Indangyi, from
where they made their way to Kalewa through the famous gorge
in a convoy-not of boats but of jeeps.
At Kalewa, they took over
many tugs which had been assembled on the banks of the river.
Now the operation of craft on a swiftly flowing river is not quite
the same thing as sailing in harbours and the open sea which, after
all, the men had been trained to do.
On the Chindwin particu-
larly, situations arose which were not even hinted at in such publica-
tions as Jottings for Young Sailors!
However, much experience was
gained—the hard way.
The coxswain, on reporting for his sailing orders, would probably
be told You will tow these four barges down river to — All you
have to do is to follow the river, and the channel is marked by
bamboo poles starboard hand painted red-port hand painted
white with a black tip.'
(Note that even the markings were
unusual.) Of the barges, three would probably be more or less
normal, but the fourth might well be a curious and monstrous craft
some 50 ft long by 20 ft beam, loaded with about go tons of steel
girders, and perched on top of all would be Indian troops.
Where the river was fairly narrow, there was not much doubt
about where the channel was, but buoys were often missing, and in
the wider reaches sandbanks were numerous.
Often a choice had
to be made between three apparently similar channels.
Running
aground was by no means uncommon, in spite of cautious sounding
with a bamboo pole.
But how could one navigate with caution
when so many unwieldy tons were being propelled on a three-knot
current?
The 'monstrosities' presented a problem in such circum-
stances, and bitter experience soon showed that the best way of
getting them afloat again was to persuade the Indian troops to go
overboard and push.
The danger of running aground was less
likely on the return trip, but then progress was desperately slow.
Often it was only just possible to move, and this was by using the
back eddies close to the banks.
The round trip took about 10 days,
and usually there was just time to collect the mail -and possibly
the beer ration-
-before the crew were off again on another run.
