528
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
the division was to form began to assemble in the Salisbury Plain
area.
detached
Among these was 398 Company RASC, which had been
reorganization.
from the Royal Marine Division, then undergoing
For some months this was the only unit to repre-
sent the RASC column, and it found itself employed almost exclu-
sively on daily transport chores for the rest of the formation so that
apart from building up its strength of parachutists it was able to do
little in the way of training for war.
In September, however, it
was decided to complete the column and 716 and 63 Companies
arrived for conversion. A CRASC headquarters was formed at
the same time.
Planning for D Day
With the experience of the ist Airborne Division now available
and with the competitive spirit induced by the presence hard by of
the Ioist United
States Áirborne Division, the column, spurred
also by the knowledge that D Day could not be far ahead, rapidly
gained in efficiency and within a matter of weeks was fit for war.
Many exercises on an unprecedented scale could now be undertaken.
All the resources both of Transport Command RAF and of the United
States Army Air Force were available for a complete divisional
exercise, and the RASC column also took part in several American
exercises, gaining valuable experience of operating technique.
The arrival of the 82nd United States Airborne Division in the
United Kingdom led to the formation of an American Airborne
Corps headquarters under General Matthew Ridgway.
About the
same time the return of the Ist Airborne Division to the United
Kingdom was the signal for the formation of headquarters ist
British Airborne Corps.
This had long existed, but in a much
reduced form under the title of HQ Airborne Forces.
As a full-
blown Corps HQ it now received a DDST in the person of Colonel
T. H. Jefferies, who was promoted from the ist Airborne Division
in which he was succeeded as CRASC by Lieut-Colonel M. St. J.
Packe, who
had been
RASC.
the first airborne company commander,
There is no uced to describe the intensive preparations
which took place in the carly months of 1914 since they had a
parallel in every division of the British Army.
The 6th Airborne
Division had been selected as the one to play an essential part in
the carliest phases of the assault upon the enemy stronghold.
The parachute brigades
D Day (June 6th, 1944),
were to drop in the early hours of
before the seaborne assault approached
the beaches to seise the vital bridoes over the Orne and the Caes
Ouistreham Canal, and secure the les olenk of the intended beach-
head. Reinforced later in the day by the air landing brigade in
gliders, they were to extend the territory held and destroy brides
At Railhead
Crossing a Pontoon Bridge
