430
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
to those in the planned order of battle could, therefore, only be
done by continuing the impressment scheme for much longer than
was originally intended.
Impressment was also used to get new
vehicles which were on the production line and could not have been
purchased quickly by normal Ministry of Supply contract procedure.
Works companies were a new type of unit to operate with the
Royal Engineers on airfield and road construction.
These units
had come to stay, and under their later designation tipper companies
were found to be indispensable in most theatres of war.
The formation of four troop-carrying companies was a typical
example of the rapidity with which a unit could be prepared for
service overseas.
It was only a matter of weeks after war had
been declared that the formation of these new units became an
urgent necessity.
It was decided to provide men from two Terri-
torial formations, namely, the Mobile Divisional RASC and the
55th (West Lancashire) Divisional RASC, which at that time had
reached an advanced state of embodiment.
For the vehicles it
was clearly impossible to upset the smooth operation (already under
way) of equipping units of the
field force, particularly as
vehicles of the new units had to be modified for troop-carrying.
It was fortuitous that the production line at Messrs. Austin Motors
had just completed a batch of 3oo civilian type 3-ton lorries.
These
were impressed and despatched immediately to units.
There was
not time to enter into contract procedure, nor were facilities available
to modify these vehicles in Regular Army units.
The sides of the
lorries had to be heightened, folding seats had to be fitted, and
some form
of canopy
protection devised.
The work
was
entirely to the Territorial Army commanding officers,
who were
able to complete it in a matter of days by direct contact with the
large number of small and medium body builders and garages
spread over most of north Wales and Cheshire.
Resort was also
had to the impressment of new machines coming off production
lines when the influx of recruits called for an immense increase in
the number of vehicles required for driver training.
About 500
Austin taxi chassis were impressed and fitted with dual controls
and small van type bodies, and 100 of these were issued to each of
five driver training battalions in a few days.
Standardi zation
Later, the supply of vehicles and tanks was merged in the Ministry
of Supply under a "Director of Mechanical Equipment' /Sir Geoffre
Burton), whose deputy on the vehicle side was Major-General M. S.
Brander, after the age limit had removed him from the Army, and
on the tank side Major-General J. S.
Crawford, who has already
been mentioned in the Prelude as an carly transfer from the RASC
TRANSPORT
431
to the RAOC. A greater degree of standardization was eventually
reached and the spare parts problem was brought more under
control.
But, under any form of government except a military
dictatorship,
it is not practical politics to
standardize transport
equipment absolutely.
The inroads on civilian design and conse-
quently on the export market will not permit of it, nor do the high
clearance and relatively large engine power of the military vehicle
commend themselves to the civilian user at home.
Nevertheless, from time to time people have been very critical
of the British Army because so many different types of vehicle were
operated, with the consequent multiplicity of different spare parts
required.
The subject had received close attention before the war,
but on the demise of the subsidy scheme standardization of the
British Army vehicle would have been much too expensive.
Once
war had broken out, the Ministry of Supply had to produce vehicles
very
quickly, and any vehicle at that time was better than no
vehicle at all.
British manufacturers could not be allowed to
delay production while new patterns and jigs were provided to
enable one standard vehicle to be produced by all of them, and the
problem was accentuated by the complete loss of the vehicles of the
BEF in Europe.
In contrast with the United States of America,
Great Britain was in distress, and the Americans were fortunate in
that they had time to build up, in organized stages, an immense
output of standardized transport.
They were not embarrassed by
having to limit the increase in production to the availability of
newly made jigs and patterns.
It is also worth mentioning that the
task of the British manufacturers was made extremely difficult by
the lack of particular metals and of materials.
At one time aircraft
manufacture had priority over all other work, and aluminium and
substitute alloys had to be devised at short notice for road transport
components.
At another time nickel was diverted in large quanti-
ties to other production, an event which was to prove of far reaching
importance when the eventual adoption of leaded petrol meant the
replacement of a prodigious number of engine valves which had
been constructed, without nickel content,
merely to stand up to
low octane fuels.
The question of standardizing vehicles became one
of such
moment that, in 1943,
the
Quarter-Master-General called for a
paper on the subject so that the lessons learned in this war might
anyhow be taken
into account-in the
next war.
The paper
included a scheme whereby the Army adopted an ideal specification
for its vehicles operated in peace, and held in store a liberal reserve
of foundry patterns, jigs and plant.
The last named would then be
available in emergency for many different manufacturers to switch
over without delay in producing the standard military design.
