THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
allocation of sources to supply the various areas was governed by
the need to keep tanker journeys as short as possible.
the closing of the short route through the Mediterranean Persia
ceased to be drawn upon for home supplies and greater quantities
had to be obtained from the United States.
The fields in Persia and Iraq, however, continued to be useful
for supplying the Middle East where demands for local use within
PAIC and other countries and for aid to Russia were mounting
rapidly. By February Ist, 1944, it was estimated that the total
annual production from the Persian fields, at Abadan
manshah, and the fields in Iraq at Khanakin and Kirkuk, had
risen to about 12 million tons.
To deal with storage and transport
problems special petroleum committees were set up in Cairo and
Their chairmen were members of the home Ministry of
Fuel and Power and the members consisted of representatives of
the Services, the oil companies and other bodies interested in supply
and transportation.
In the initial stages of the campaigns in North Africa and in
North-West Europe supplies were drawn from Britain and depended
on the security of the vast stocks which had to be held in bulk
this country.
damage from enemy air attack.
The United Kingdom refineries
were also almost unscathed although their loss would have been
less important as the
national requirements were
imported in refined form.
When America came into the war arrangements were made to
zone responsibility for supply between
Britain and the United
Before America declared war her resources were also drawn upon
Ior lubricants.
Up to 1941 the basic oils for manufacturing lubric-
ants were shipped from the United States to Britain in bulk and
blended
and
packed at home.
Contracts were then
made in
America to supply the finished products and shipments were made
direct to
although losses by sinkings averaged 5,000 tons a month.
The entry of America into the war made it necessary to standardize
the range of spirit and lubricants
vehicle designs and improved engine performance had brought with
them demands for different grades of spirit and lubricants.
some give and take on the part of each country it was possible to
obtain a fair degree of co-ordination by unification and simplifica-
tion, particularly of automotive lubricants and greases.
A reduction
technical difficulties.
in grades of spirit required was beset by many
for all general purpose vehicles.
A standard MT spirit, MT 8o, was introduced
It was also used for AFV's, which
PETROLEUM
had formerly required two different grades, MT 87 and MT 85,
after suitable engine modifications were made.
The elimination
of other grades in use, MT 68, 70 (Middle East) and 75, was not so
easily achieved until British and American automobile engineers
got together and helped to produce engine modifications which
eliminated the valve burning troubles attributed to the alternative
The Final 'Phase-Overlord'
Long term planning for the final phase of the war may be said
to have begun over 1941 and 1942 when the War Office decided to
increase the bulk reserves in England, to create six petrol reserve
depots for packed stocks, to build satellite tin making plants and to
install two large filling plants for returnable containers.
To save further construction of military owned tankage it was
arranged that the additional military bulk reserves would be held
in civil installations and would be administered by the Petroleum
Board on the Army's behalf.
By this means the military holdings in
early 1941, of 227,000 tons of bulk tankage,
was raised to nearly
I,000,000 tons by the end of the war.
The six War Office controlled
petrol depots were designed to hold 50,000 liquid tons of packed
petroleum products.
The plans to provide more filling facilities
were changed as the strategic situation
turned from defence to
offence and the use of tins changed to that of cans.
filling units, which were partly staffed by ATS, were built in
the north in what were considered to be non-vulnerable areas.
They fulfilled a useful purpose during the invasion period but
were closed in 1943 when the threat of invasion had lifted.
was some delay in executing the plan for the satellite tin factories.
They were intended to be an insurance against the two main
factories at Llandarcy and Avonmouth being put out of action,
provide a cover for extra output.
The plan was only
partly implemented, but the factories which were built made a big
contribution to the supplies wanted in the final phases of the war.
Two of the plants were later dismantled and crated for shipment to
North-West Europe as reserve plant.
All these early measures taken by ST 2 were a valuable asset
when the time came to review resources and to balance them against
the 21 Army Group's future requirements which were gradually
evolved by the Cossac planning staff in the summer of 1943 and by
their successors, SHAEF, in December, 1943.
By the time that active planning for Overlord' began a great deal
of experience had been gained in the Middle East, North Africa and
Italy and in the Far East.
The original conception of the functions
of the various types of British petroleum units proved to be quite
