14 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Figure 1.1
Echelons, 21st Army Group Headquarters, France
21st Army Group HO, France
Canadian Military Headquarters
London (CMHO)
Canadian Section, 1st or "Q" Echelon HQ
21st Army Group (overseeing resources, equipment,
logistics, and personnel in 2nd Echelon)
Canadian Section, 2nd or"A" Echelon,
21st Army Group HQ (personnel)
First Canadian Army HO, France
Source: Stacey, The Official History of the Canadian Army in the Second World War, vol. 3,
The Victory Campaign.
21st Army Group seamless, reinforcement practices mirrored those of the British
Army. This development was necessary to assist the Canadian reinforcement
process in June-July 1944, a period before administrative and headquarters
processes were firmly established on the continent.
The principal headquarters for Canadas personnel reinforcement organization
was No. 2 Headquarters, Canadian Base Reinforcement Group (CBRG). This
headquarters controlled the distribution of reinforcement personnel for all army
trades in northwat Durana fun Tune 104A to the annerance of No 2 CBRO
in March 1945. The No. 2 CBRG was decidedly smaller than its twin reinforce-
ment Organization in Italy the No A CRRG While No 1 CBRG had a total o
eight reinforcement battalions, No. 2 CBRG had only five." Senior staff were
concerned about tha latarades of trainine levels hecause less training too
place in the holding units the closer personnel were to the front; thus, it was
better to have a smaller organization that would hold reinforcements for a shorter
periods They planned to hold a two-to three-weeks suboly at "intense" casualty
rates for the landing forces taking part in the invasion. the ard Canadian Infan-
a, Divicion and the and Canadian Armoured Rrigada Ta Contract to the
worth of reinforcements had been set aside for Operation Husky, the July 1943
invasion of Sicily. (The Canadian Army's miscalculation concerning projected
Personnel Reinforcements 15
The No. 2 CBRG was under the direct command of 21st Army Group and its
echelons, and it later worked closely at all junctures with the headquarters of
2nd Canadian Corps, the First Canadian Army, and CMHQ in London.' Its
five reinforcement battalions were numbered nine through thirteen.' During the
last phase of the war it was commanded by three experienced staff officers, the
first being Brigadier G. Francoeur. His successor was Brigadier Gostling who
was in turn replaced by Brigadier J.G. Spragge by war's end.® As soon as the
Normandy landings occurred, a forward base was established on the continent.
The first battalion to establish itself in France was the 1oth, landing on 9 June
1944. Next was the gth battalion, which came ashore on 13 June. These battalions
were soon followed by the uth and 12th. All four fed a British advance reinforce-
ment battalion, which in turn supplied the ist British Corps reinforcement
company with Canadian replacements until mid-July. It was this company that
fed reinforcements forward to Canadian formations in response to daily casualty
reports.' A representative of the Canadian Section of the 21st Army Group
Headquarters, Canadian 2nd Echelon, was attached to this company to control
the posting of Canadian personnel. In mid-July, the 2nd Canadian Corps became
operational, taking over the leadership and administration of all Canadian
formations ashore from the ist British Corps. The 2nd Canadian Corps was
placed under the command of the Second British Army, but this arrangement
was short-lived. Early August saw the First Canadian Army become operational,
utilizing the 2nd Canadian Corps as one of its two corps. With this act, Canadian
control of the personnel reinforcement process became nearly total, with only
the 21st Army Group Headquarters maintaining administrative oversight.
The last No. 2 CBRG battalion in France, the 13th, landed on 3 August. Once
it was ashore, it based itself forward at the newly operational First Canadian
Army road-head staging area. 1º This unit's task was to act as the advance re-
inforcement battalion, replacing a British Army equivalent battalion in this role.
It oversaw the flow of personnel to the 2nd Canadian Corps reinforcement
company and the divisional reinforcement companies, which directly fed the
infantry and other combat arms regiments to constantly make good their losses.
On 2 December 1944, No. 2 CBRG's unit strength was 93 officers and 572 other
ranks, and it contained 6,846 reinforcements.'
The 1944 reinforcement battalion typically consisted of several categories of
personnel in addition to new overseas active volunteers. 12 Personnel could be
returning battle (related to enemy action) or nonbattle casualties (nonbattle-
related injuries), remusters from another trade, or home defence soldiers for-
merly conscripted through the National Resources Mobilization Act who
volunteered to "go active." Thus, although some were new to the Canadian Army,
