54 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
these locations, the material was then moved to the divisional-level field parks.
At the division level, there was a divisional ordnance field park and a corres-
ponding armoured or infantry ordnance subpark.? The field parks were num-
bered by the division number, and the subparks were numbered 201 through
205. For example, the sth Canadian Armoured Division's ordnance depots
consisted of the 5th Canadian Armoured Division Ordnance Field Park and the
205th Canadian Armoured Ordnance Subpark." In these large parks, all manner
of equipment, vehicles, and stores were located in a manner similar to the corps-
level parks. From these points, divisional units were authorized on a need basis
to receive vehicles and equipment to retain their wartime establishments.
RCA medium, field artillery, antitank, and light antiaircraft regiments re-
ported their status in a manner similar to the armoured units. Guns were the
primary piece of equipment for artillery regiments, and the number of oper-
ational guns and those under repair were constantly monitored. A "Gun State
of Ordnance Holdings" report accompanied by an "Ammunition Usage" report
was forwarded each day by the artillery regiment's regimental headquarters to
higher RCA command. These returns were important, as their data was used
to calculate supply requirements and to gauge ammunition usage.? The returns
made their way up the chain of command, and army-level field ordnance parks
would then authorize the release of new equipment to make up for combat
and mechanical losses. New replacement artillery equipment was held by army
group-level British Army ordnance field parks. The Canadian Army-level
ordnance park would then receive new equipment from the OMC and move it
to the corps-level ordnance field parks. Repaired and reconditioned equipment
would also be transported by RCEME personnel to the division field ordnance
parks and subparks, where it would be taken on strength.
The divisional ordnance parks contained everything in the way of new and
repaired towed artillery pieces, replacement artillery vehicles, and radios. While
all artillery equipment and weaponry was sophisticated, maintaining and oper-
ating it was less complicated than maintaining an AFV; which had a motor,
running gear, transmission, power turret traverse, sights, and radios. Compared
to a 17-pounder antitank gun, a Sherman Firefly tank was much more chal-
lenging from a maintenance and delivery perspective, hence the lack of a 2sth
CADR-type organization exclusively for artillery regiments. In 1944-45, the
approach to maintaining sophisticated artillery systems was similar to that for
an "A" or "B" vehicle. The successive "lines" within the REME's repair system
could handle increasingly difficult artillery repairs. Guns constantly required
maintenance, which could largely be completed at the regimental level by the
LAD. If a gun was worn out or damaged, it could be easily replaced. A new one
Vehicles and Weapons 55
would be picked up at the field ordnance or subparks by a gun crew with an
artillery tractor or tower. New or repaired guns were drawn as needed to replace
weapons under repair or lost in battle. A mass draw of new equipment occurred
in early August 1944. All three RCA field regiments within the grd Canadian
Infantry Division drew an entirely new complement of seventy-two towed
25-pounder howitzers, turning in their old self-propelled M7 Priest 105 mm
howitzers. 33
The RCA operated many heavy AFVs within its regiments. These were mainly
artillery observation post tanks, self-propelled artillery, tank destroyers, and
artillery towers. These vehicles were delivered by the 25th CADR in the same
manner as a Sherman Firefly tank was delivered to an armoured regiment.
Universal Carriers, Ti6s (a vehicle similar to a Universal Carrier), and M14 gun
tractors were also "A" vehicles, but the delivery of these smaller vehicles was
accomplished via tank transporters because of their low weight and small size.
In contrast to the German Army, in 1944-45, the Canadian Army was totally
mechanized in all areas that required soft-skinned "B" vehicles. This large motor
pool was one of the First Canadian Army's greatest strengths. It allowed
Canadian forces to be mobile and carry out all logistic tasks, increasing their
military effectiveness. As opposed to occasional "A" combat vehicle shortages,
there was never a shortage of soft-skinned transport in Canadian units. The
31 August "B" vehicle return for the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division shows
125 general service 3-ton lorries on strength as opposed to its war establishment
number of 104, making it significantly overstrength. In comparison, as of
1 June 1944, the German 12th SS Panzer Division had only 65 percent of its
authorized number of trucks operational, and only 33 percent of its gun
tractors.35
Unsophisticated general service vehicles could be used in multiple roles by
virtually any type of unit. Some examples of general service "B" vehicles within
the Canadian Army were 3-ton lorries and jeeps. Many were produced in the
United Kingdom with a right-hand drive, while others were of North American
manufacture. Not being AFVs, they could not sustain damage and had a limited
capability to mount weapons. More specialist "B" vehicles included petrol tank-
ers and command caravans that came with assigned drivers to operate them.
Documentation for these vehicles had to follow the vehicle from point to point,
and their employment and status was monitored constantly.
As shown in Figure 3.5, the British 21st Army Group vehicle depots released
"B" vehicles when authorized by 2nd Canadian Corps and later First Can-
adian Army headquarters. Released "B" vehicles then travelled directly either
to the Canadian Corps-level ordnance field park or to a delivery point near the
