The
undel
the 'I
demc
earth
work
class
Soldi
nilit
allow
Man
non-
carer
This
4 Introduction
a seasoned foe equipped with advanced weapons systems. It was a titanic chal-
lenge to overcome attrition in personnel, weapons, and equipment. From 6 June
through 23 August, casualties in Normandy totalled 18,444, including 5,021
deaths.' These losses were the equivalent of a full-strength infantry division.
Vehicles and weapons-systems losses also mounted during the summer of
1944. On 11 June, the 6th Canadian Armoured Regiment (ist Hussars, 6 CAR)
had fifty-one of its sixty-one 75 mm Sherman and 17-pounder-gunned Sherman
Firefly tanks destroyed, a loss rate of 84 percent.' The Canadian Army main-
tained adequate personnel and equipment levels through rapid replacements,
which allowed units to remain operational and achieve battlefield victories.
This practice preserved units and a formation's combat power. The Canadian
Army could not mount offensive operations if there were not enough soldiers
or weapons. Strategy, planning, and tactics would be for nought in the absence
of reserve resources with efficient administrative systems to sustain the front-
line formations."
This book shows that for most of the Canadian Amy's operations in north-
west Europe during 1944-45, its three traditional combat arms
armour, and artillery - were effectively reinforced. Here, effective reinforcement
is defined as the successful maintenance of units near or at their establishment
strengths for vehicles, equipment, and personnel. Reinforcement allowed these
units to continue offensive operations despite heavy losses in intense combat.
The efficiency of the Canadian Army's personnel- and equipment-reinforcement
systems thus allowed it to realize its prime objective: the defeat of the German
military by the concentration of superior forces at the decisive points in the
theatre.
Historians of the Canadian Army's campaign in Normandy observe that it
regularly conducted operations with understrength infantry units? Most critical
is the observation of American military historian Russell Hart, who notes the
following in his seminal work, Clash of Arms: How the Allies Won in Normandy:
The Battle of the Falaise Pocket witnessed the hardest fighting the Canadians
had yet encountered as the enemy fought to escape encirclement. By August a
growing infantry shortage undermined Canadian combat effectiveness.
With
only one division in action during June available replacements covered losses,
but by mid-July infantry casualties were 80 percent above forecast. By early August,
when the infantry deficit reached 1,900, Crerar acknowledged that the replace-
ment situation had become the most serious problem confronting the Canadians.
The heavy losses suffered during TOTALIZE and TRACTABLE increased the
shortage: On 15 August Canadian formations were short 2,644 riflemen. Manpower
introduchion
shortages thus sapped Canadian offensive drive at the moment when it was
put in the unique position of "bagging" the remnants of two German armies in
Normandy.®
However, the idea that the Canadian Army regularly utilized understrength
infantry units to lead an attack during the start of major set-piece operations
in the summer of 1944 is a myth.' Rather than being half-strength infantry bat-
talions (regiments) struggling to achieve their objectives with a bare minimum
of personnel, attacking units were always at or very near their establishment
strengths at the start of major operations. While some challenges occurred
during the latter half of August and early September 1944, the reinforcement
system still functioned. The issue the Canadian Army faced was that the inten-
sity of combat and the sheer number of losses on a weekly basis simply over-
whelmed the replacement system for a period of roughly sixty days. Replacements
arrived, but the losses were higher and occurred at a much quicker rate than
anticipated. Critics who observe that each infantry battalion was not at 100 per-
cent overlook that the First Canadian Army was taking on a major operational
role in late August 1944. It was involved in the destruction of two German armies,
these containing the majority of the Naz's military strength in occupied France,
and suffering heavy casualties in the process daily. 1°
Canadian military historian Terry Copp states: "It is also important to note
that the shortage of infantry replacements had an especially adverse effect on
the 2nd Division. By 28 July it was short 1,060 infantrymen; and by 20 August
it was reporting a deficiency of 1,840 Infantry Other Ranks.""! This is the standard
view on the Canadian Army's reinforcement capability in the summer of 1944.
But it does not consider that the majority of Canadian infantry units were in
tolerable shape and capable of operations that would ensure the defeat of the
Wehrmacht. Consider that on 28 July 1944 the Essex Scottish Regiment, one
of nine infantry battalions in the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, forwarded
a return of 38 officers and 735 other ranks, 96 percent of its establishment
strength. 12 Though battalions were understrength at certain points, their
strengths changed on a daily basis. If the performance of the Canadian infantry
regiments had not been effective, the Falaise Gap would not have been closed,
and the decisive victory over the German forces would not have occurred by
21 August 1944.
Make no mistake, during the late summer of 1944 some Canadian infantry
regiments were in poor shape, but this situation was remedied largely by mid-
September - before major combat operations in the Scheldt Estuary began in
October. 3 But even on 31 August 1944, when the Canadian Army's infantry
