86 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Normandy, putting tanks out of action. Soft targets such as trucks and cars could
be destroyed, sapping the enemy's morale and ability to move openly in column
on roadways in daylight. The German infantry formations were impotentagainst
these attacks, and Canadian morale was boosted greatly by seeing the impact
of rockets, bombs, and cannon fire.
The designated role of the RAF's 2nd Tactical Air Force was to fight the air
battle and support the zist Army Group by means of aerial reconnaissance and
ground attack.* For this purpose, the RAF composite group headquarters and
the army headquarters met regularly to discuss support for operations. How-
ever, the ties between the RAF, RCAE, and Canadian Army in northwest Europe
were not particularly strong. A certain amount of animosity existed between
the services regarding the role and utilization of tactical aircraft in support of
the ground troops on offensive operations. Air-ground cooperation in theform
of an established doctrine was not an institutionalized aractice as it is in the
modern Canadian Army. Because of this, the potential effectiveness of tactical
airpower in support of Canadian ground operations was never reached. if
ground controller was present, this role was usually taken on by a RAF Air
Support Signal Unit. These units were RAF-controlled and strictly retained
control of RAF and RCAF air activity, regardless of what the Canadian Army
wanted or needed.
The practice of embedding RAF and RCAF ground controllers in a manner
similar to the artillery forward observation officer in an infantry battalion was
accomplished on a limited scale with the use of CAC "contact cars" from
September 1944 OnWard 65 These were CAC armoured vehicles manned by
RCAF and RAF ground signallers with a CAC crew commander and driver.
These vehicles were in close contact with the most forward infantry or armoured
tactical headquarters but were still subordinate to the Air Support Signal Unit
with regard to directing RAF or RCAF ground-attack sorties Direct communi-
cation with air assets bv Canadian Army personnel. which could have enhanced
the quality of air support, was lacking. Also, terrible instances of fratricide
occurred when large numbers of RAF RCAF and US Armv Air Force four-
engined strategic bombers were utilized to destroy in-depth German defences.
The danger of this occurring was not something that the Canadian Army rec
ognized or had trained for in the months leading up to Operation Overlord.
Reduction of the risk of short hombing and tarast misidentification wastackled
in an ad hoc manner by the Canadian Army as the situation demanded." The
Canadian Army's lack of influence in air-support matters offent the excellent
support that the RAF and RCAF provided on me battlefield. This led to
Army Doctrine and Losses 87
continued misunderstandings and frustration over friendly fire incidents and
cancelled ground-support missions until the end of hostilities, 68
As a result of combining the combat arms and air support in a dynamic man-
ner, the Canadian Army (Active) in northwest Europe achieved victory during
the majority of its offensive operations. By seeking to achieve only limited
objectives, aided usually by overpowering air and artillery support, it tried to
never push the assaulting forces past their capabilities. At the same time, it took
maximum advantage of opportunities to inflict heavy losses on the enemy.
The best example of this was the aforementioned defeat of the German 25th SS
Panzer Grenadier Regiment in the villages of Buron, Authie, Cussy, and Gruchy,
Normandy, on 8 July. In this action, part of Operation Charnwood, the 3rd
Canadian Infantry Division's infantry units, along with supporting arms, over-
ran fortified German defences in both villages, attaining all their objectives.
They then defeated a powerful German armoured counterattack, inflicting even
more casualties on the enemy. This was an impressive victory that reflected an
improved level of tactical effectiveness as a result of combat experience gained
in June. It was even more impressive considering that the Canadian forces util-
ized a combined arms method of fighting that had not been perfected during
training in the United Kingdom.
Large-scale combined arms training in the United Kingdom for operations
in northwest Europe was a challenge. The process of equipping the and Can-
adian Corps divisions with their full equipment establishments was slow. In
March 1944, the 4th Canadian Armoured Division and 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division were deemed nonoperational because they had not received enough
weapons and vehicles.?" At this stage, it was critical for both formations to be
fully equipped and involved in constant, realistic, and intensive combined arms
field exercises? Exercises in tank-infantry cooperation for some Canadian
divisions in the United Kingdom were only sporadic in fall 1943.? In northwest
Europe, the utilization of RC A forward observation officers to call down timely
artillery support was necessary to consistently defeat German counterattacks?
The skill of summoning and maintaining artillery support had not been per-
fected in infantry and armoured regiments despite the long period of time spent
training in the United Kingdom from 1940 to 1944.
To make matters worse,
Canadian D-Day assault formations had focused training solely on the one-day
amphibious assault. They were in as bad shape as the follow-on divisions regard-
ing combined arms training.
While the RCA field artillery regiments were equipped with superb weapons,
the CAC and CIC were not. While it would have been advantageous for the
