46 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
not until late 1943 that the majority of Canadian units designated for the inva-
sion were properly equipped and training intensively with that equipment?
As the campaign in Normandy raged in summer 1944, the continued stock-
piling of large amounts of materiel on the continent was not a great challenge.
This stockpile was made possible by Allied success in the Battle of the Atlantic,
by Allied economies reaching their full production capacities by mid-1944, and
by the securing of the Normandy beachhead. Ample cooperation with the British
government and extremely high levels of Canadian war production allowed
Canadas military to be equipped and resupplied as needed. As a result, the
Canadian Army enjoyed full access to a well-stocked common pool of Can-
adian, American Lend-Lease, and British produced equipment.
As the larger twin to the personnel replacement organization, the ist Canadian
Echelon within z1st Army Group Headquarters dealt with the equipment and
weaponry concerns of the First Canadian Army. The total amount of equipment
removed from the strength of combat arms units on the front line because of
mechanical failure or enemy action usually amounted to 100 percent of a units
establishment within several months.
The vehicles of a battalion-sized regiment were spread among its adminis-
trative echelons. These three echelons consisted of the "Ai" (Fighting) Echelon,
which had everything needed to carry out the combat mission; the "A2" Echelon,
which had everything needed to immediately resupply the "Al" Echelon; and
a small "B" Echelon, which consisted of all supply and stores items not im-
mediately needed and the administrative support elements required to keep a
battalion-sized combat grouping functioning. Within the combat arms units,
vehicle attrition in the three echelons stemmed from excessive use, enemy ac-
tion, and travel over harsh terrain. The highest equipment losses occurred during
the three months of the Normandy Campaign. Combat in Normandy was more
intense and affected a greater number of combat arms units than infantry-
oriented battles in the Netherlands and the Rhineland in late 1944 and early
1945. During this time, more enemy heavy weapons and armoured vehicles were
encountered due to combat action against multiple German panzer divisions,
the Canadian Army's primary opponent from June to August 1944. The fighting
power of these armoured formations made a sizable impact on the monthly
totals of equipment losses. These totals dropped off markedly once the campaign
in Normandy came to a halt in late August and were relatively low on average
for the reminder of the war, when German armoured forces were engaged to
the south against the British and American armies.
As an example, of the sixty-one Sherman tanks the 6th Canadian Armoured
Regiment (1st Hussars) fielded on D-Day, nearly all were lost to enemy action
Vehicles and Weapons 47
Figure 3.1
The equipment losses administrative system
Divisional
Administrative
Area
(delivery points)
Corps Troops Area
Division-level
ordnance held
parks and
subfield parks
Corps Administrative Area
Forward Maintenance Area
Corps-level
ordnance
field park
Line of Communications Area
Army road-/railhead ordnance
maintenance company weapons
and vehicle-receving point
Source: Grodzinski, Operational Handbook for the First Canadian Army, 92-93.
or mechanical failure by the end of August. The Hussar Sherman tank "Holy
Roller' now a monument in London, Ontario, was the only that remained in
the regiment's possession from D-Day until the end of hostilities." There were
many noncombat reasons why a vehicle or weapons system might disappear
from a regiment's holdings: tanks sent away for heavy maintenance could return
with another unit; be replaced by a newer, more technologically advanced
models; or be unnibalized if their engine or parts were worn out. The "Holy
Roller" was the exception rather than the rule.
The administrative system designed to replace all Canadian equipment losses
was sophisticated. As illustrated in Figure 3.1, there were a total of five adminis-
trative areas within the First Canadian Army's area of operations. From the front
lines to the rear areas, these zones consisted of the Divisional Administrative
Area, the Corps Troops Area, the Corps Administrative Area, the Forward Main-
tenance Area, and the Line of Communications Area.' The administrative-
control area of Canadian ist Echelon - which, as mentioned earlier, had control
of the supply of major weapons systems and vehicle logistics - began with the
Ordnance Maintenance Company (OMC). This unit was much greater in
strength than a company-sized organization. It consisted of a headquarters, a
