188 Appendices
Table A1.9
Towed RCA Field Artillery Regiment (Armoured Division), January 1945
Company or
Subunits, strength
platoon
officers, and other ranks Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Regimental HQ
Antiaircraft troop
8 x towed 20 mm antiaircraft guns
RCEME LAD ("B")
towed
8-62
"A" Battery
2 x towed field artillery
8 x towed 25-pounders howitzers,
troops
2 x Observation Post (OP) tanks,
10-192
1 x Universal Carrier
"B" Battery
As above
As above
"C" Battery
As above
As above
Total
38-638
24 X towed 25-pounder howitzers,
8 x towed 20 mm antiaircraft guns,
6 x OP tanks, 3 x Universal Carriers
Source: LAC RG 21. Vol. 12.660 "First Canadian Army A&O War Diary." December 1944, "Armoured
Division War Establishment Staff Figures, Field Artillery Regiment, Towed, WE Il/190B/, Tanuary
war establishment than that of a towed field regiment in an infantry division.
The most notable difference was a limited allocation of observation post tanks,
as its forward abcaration officers were renuired to go forward with the ar-
moured squadrons. It only had six observation post tanks on its establishment
versus the thirteen of the self-propelled field regiment. It also had a limited
number of Universal tracked carriers, having only three. Like all field regiments,
its batteries were equipped with a total of twenty-four 25-pounder towed how
itzers, and the regimental HQ contained a troop of towed 20 mm antiaircraft
guns. "B" vehicles as of January 194s consisted of 21 cars and 103 trucks of general
service and specialist design, including 36 artillery tractors. The regiment also
contained twenty-six motorcycles and twenty-two trailers. The REME LAD
type "B" was one officer and thirteen other ranks.
The Canadian AGRA towed RCA Medium Regiment as of October 1944 was
an army-level artillery asset, as illustrated in Table A1.10. It consisted of two
batteries of eight 4.5- Or S.5-inch towed guns each, for a total of sixteen guns
per regiment. Each battery was divided into two troops of four guns each. The
medium regiments were held at the AGRA level and controlled by the army-
level AGRA artillery command structure. The primary role of these regiments
was to provide flexible, heavy indirect fire support wherever it was needed,
Appendices 189
Table A1.10
Company or platoon
Regimental HQ
"K' Battery
AGRA RCA Medium Regiment (Army Troops), October 1944
Subunits, strength
officers, and men
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
RCEME LAD ("B").
2 x towed medium
8 x towed 5.5 - or 4.5-inch howitzers
"D" Battery
Total
artillery troops
As above
28-540
As above
16 x towed 5.5 - or 4.5-inch howitzers,
6 x Universal Carriers
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 13,659, "First Canadian Army A&Q War Diary," October 1944, "AGR
Mar alishment Saf Figures, AGaR Medium Artillery Regiment, Towed, WE II/0/3,
working in close cooperation with field artillery regiments at the divisional
level. The Canadian Army in northwest Europe had no superheavy artillery
regiments, so these regiments were the most powerful indirect assets the First
Canadian Army possessed.
A total of six RCA medium regiments were raised to establish both the ist
and and ACD A formations These regiments served in both Italy and northwest
Europe three to an AGRA. All six were to come together in spring 1945 because
of the redeployment of the ist Canadian Corps to northwest Europe. Three were
equipped with 5.5-inch guns, but the other three were equipped with 4.5-inch
variants because of a shortage of 5.5-inch artillery pieces. These regiments did
not have an antiaircraft troop. "B" vehicles consisted of eleven cars and eighty-
four trucks of various types, including eighteen artillery tractors. This vehicle
Pool was supplemented by sixteen trailers and nineteen motorcycles. The
RCENT TAD the "p" consisted of one officer and thirteen other ranks. As
noted previously, there was also one self-propelled field regiment allocated to
each of the ist and 2nd Canadian AGRA organizations. These regiments, desig-
nated "Army Field Artillery Regiments" worked in conjunction with the medium
regiments to supplement divisional artillery assets. The self-propelled AGRA
field regiments were equipped the same as the self-propelled regiments attached
to the armoured divisions.®
At the corps level, as of October 1944 there were two RCA Survey Regiments
of battalion strength, each consisting of two batteries, as illustrated in Table A1.11.
The battlefield roles of these units were artillery flash-spotting, sound-ranging,
