26 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
thirty-seven were declared ineligible. Furthermore, many thousands of civil-
ians were rejected because of physical standards that were unacceptable in the
American and British military recruitment processes.!3
In August 1941, Canadian Army chief of the general staff Major-General
H.D.G. Crerar completed a plan to construct an overseas army of two corps by
1942. 4 To realize this plan, his successor, Major-General Kenneth Stuart, for-
warded on 18 November 1941 the proposal, titled Army Programme, 1942-1943.
The proposal sought to radically enlarge the army and fully utilize available
manpower. Ralston endorsed the proposal and supplied data in the form of the
Walker-Robinson report, which illustrated that Canada could supply the neces-
sary manpower without damaging national industry. National Defence Head-
quarters (NDHQ) General Staff in Ottawa also stated that this program could
be completed without resorting to conscription, the main issue of resistance in
the Liberal government!" By late December 1941, Ralston was proving to be
susceptible to the advice of the general staff on matters of army expansion and
was much shaken by the recent military disaster at Hong Kong, in which two
Canadian regiments and a brigade headquarters had been lost. * A former army
colonel, he began to be perceived by his Liberal Party colleagues as a moutn-
piece for army demands and would in time, they believed, eventually endorse
conscription to utilize available personnel for overseas service.?
Prime Minister King relented to the demands for a larger army on 6 January
1942.18 He faced political pressure from all sides within Canada for a more robust
war effort. The Conservative Party pushed for a coalition government, and
powerful Toronto business leaders lobbied for conscription and a more "total
war" approach to Canada's contribution Maior-General A G.L. McNanahton,
commander of the Canadian Army (Active) in Great Britain, also aggressively
pressed for more intensive Canadian Darticination in land onerations, volun-
teering Canadian forces for any operation that seemed feasible!" McNaughton
and other senior army officers also spoke to the press about the perceived chal-
lenges the army was facing in sustaining the war effort. Ralston did not stop
these transgressions, which continued throughout the war At this point, he
perceived army expansion to be so important to the war effort that it was worth
resigning over should King and others rebuff the program Threatening King
with this politically damaging act and acting in cooperation with the armys
long-term cornorate interests Bolston divorcad Lin if from his tiharal col
leagues to form a proconscription camn within tha Ottawa Wor Committee
By late 1942, the foundations for what would eventuallu he the Lirat Canadian
Army were laid. What was missing Was a strategic rein forement plan to custain
this colossus the political will to cranto a recorue of rein framenta through
The Sixty-Day Shortage 27
conscription, and, finally, the means to equip a large army. Concerning the last
point, Canada in 1942 still partially lacked a diversified arms industry to supply
all its needs in the way of modern weapons systems? The equipment for new
units arriving in the United Kingdom simply did not exist, a shortcoming that
significantly hindered training well into 1943.2' Within the army's all-volunteer
personnel pool, a reinforcement reserve did not exist to deal with all possibilities,
including military disaster on a massive scale.
A primary presupposition held by NDHQ at this point was that it would be
politically impossible for the Canadian government to not to sustain a larger
army once it was operational in a combat zone. The Liberals political opponents
would not tolerate the army "withering on the vine." It was also clear to senior
army leadership that it would be impossible for this large army to be sustained
during combat operations without the implementation of conscription, a stra-
tegic, if undisclosed, goal of NDHQ. This point was never clearly passed onto
the minister of national defence or the prime minister in 1942. National Defence
Headquarters was also sure that the British government, grateful for the forma-
tions, would equip them with their most modern weapons to ensure success.
There were also long-term plans afoot to maintain this creation after the war.
Once a larger army was constructed, it was quite plausible that it would be
politically difficult to disassemble. Part of Crerar's intent in his plans for a "Big
Army" included never revisiting Canada's military insignificance of the 1930s.22
A factor that made it even more impossible to sustain the all-volunteer army
was its approach to utilizing personnel. Even in November 1944, post Normandy,
personnel resources were still being managed poorly despite the shortage of
replacements that had occurred during the summer. In comparison to the US
Army, the Canadian Army's headquarters units were overstaffed. As historian
E.L.M. Burns later noted, in November 1944 only 34.2 percent of all personnel
(excluding reinforcements, or 110,147 troops) were part of combat arms units.
A disturbing 28.2 percent of personnel, or 90,347 troops, made up Canadian
headquarters and other overhead. This compared to 11.6 percent in the US Army
in March 1945.23 As Normandy loomed closer in spring 1944, the army made
no attempt to reorganize itself to cope with a possible shortage of infantry re-
placements. Compounding matters, the army was fully committed to main-
taining this bloated establishment. In March 1944, the deputy adjutant and
quartermaster general of the First Canadian Army, Major-General A.E. Walford,
stated that it was overstrength and could not be sustained. His recommenda-
tions to alter its structure were ignored.5
What presuppositions did King and the remainder of his War Committee
colleagues possess in January 1942? A main assumption was that the "Big Army"
