102 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
the Regina Rifle Regiment, which lost forty-five men, and the Queen's Own
Rifles of Canada, which lost sixty-one? The division immediately pushed inland,
consolidating its area of the beachhead and landing the remainder of its units
in the next few days.
The fighting of 7-11 June resulted in a consolidated, static front for the inva-
sion force. An important defensive success was achieved in this period, with
all German armoured counterattacks against the beachhead being defeated:
However, infantry and armoured forays to the south against Le Mesnil-Patry,
Carpiquet, and Carpiquet airfield failed with heavy losses. Attempting to take
Carpiquet airfield and the adjoining village on 7 June, a 9th Canadian Infantry
Brigade task force initially made good progress but then suffered a sharp reverse
in the afternoon, when the Germans unleashed an armoured counterattack that
the Canadians stopped only at the cost of heavy infantry casualties. The th
Canadian Infantry Brigade's operations to the east on 8-9 Tune had better results,
capturing the villages of Bretteville-l'Orgueilleuse and Putot and holding them
against frequent armoured and infantry attacks. The 7th Canadian Infantry Big-
ade prevailed because of excellent defensive combined arms tactics and effective
artillery support. These previous successes were tempered on i1 June, when the
Queen's Own Rifles of Canada took heavy losses while supporting a failed and
Canadian Armoured Brigade armoured attack against Le Mesnil-Patry. Follow-
ing these battles and the successful Allied defence of the beachhead, the fighing
turned static for the remainder of the month.
During June, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division received large numbers of
reinforcements to bring its regiments back un to strength. The record keeping
for this period was incomplete because of the chaotic nature of the initial
bridgehead battles and landings, but some data was recorded. For example, the
Roval Winnipeg Rifles, the 1th Canadian Infantry Brioade regiment that had
sustained some of the highest casualties received no new personnel, which,
by 30 June. brought its strenath to z7 officers and 790 other ranks, o7 percent
of establishment.?
Landing on D-Day, the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade faced some of its
most difficult fighting of the war during the Mormandy Campaion Prior t
the landings, armoured-fighting-vehicle and personnel strengths within the
brigade had been satisfactor. The brigade was 22 percent overstrenath in ve
hicles, with 245 tanke on hand varcus ite authorized number of don 8 Dersonne
returns for the regiments were also adequate prior to the invasion of the con
tinent. The 10th Canadian Armoured (the Fort Garry Horse) Regiment's field
return of 3 June reported a strength of 26 officers and 665 other ranks, 2 percent
The Normandy Campaign 103
overstrength. On 6 June, elements of the brigade successfully assaulted Juno
Beach and drove inland. Further bridgehead battles with German armoured
battle groups led to heavy casualties in personnel and tanks. From 6 to 30 June,
battle casualties totalled 331 personnel. During this phase, the brigades three
regiments were instrumental in providing armoured support to defend the
bridgehead. This success was tempered by two significant reverses on 7 and 11
June, when the regiments attempted to take a more forward role in offensive
operations. An operational pause in late June and early July allowed the regi-
ments to train, receive new tanks, and take on reinforcements. On 10 June,
British Army forward-delivery squadrons delivered twenty-six armoured fight-
ing vehicles (AFVs) to the ist Hussars, twenty-one to the Fort Garry Horse, and
twenty-seven to the Sherbrooke Fusiliers. These vehicles were delivered through
the British replacement organization, and specific types are not mentioned."
In early July, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division's infantry brigades again
assaulted the German defences west and north of Caen. Operation Windsor,
the 4 July assault on Carpiquet village and airfield, was only partially successful.
Operation Charnwood, the 8 July operation against German forces north of
Caen, met all its objectives. 12 Heavy infantry casualties were sustained in each
operation. Moving south to support the British Operation Goodwood on 18
July, the division took the southern industrial portion of Caen in its part of the
Canadian Operation Atlantic. Following this initial success, the newly arrived
2nd Canadian Infantry Division took over the advance and attacked southward
towards Verrières Ridge. Its assaults were repulsed, resulting in heavy casualties
and limited gains. Following the mired results of Oneration Atlantic, on 25 July
the grd Canadian Infantry Division participated in Operation Spring, During
this operation, the gth Canadian Infantry Brigade suffered severe casualties
while attempting to take the village of Tilly-la-Campagne. These reverses on or
near the tactically significant Verrières Ridge stemmed from the aggressive use
of German armour, which was too strong for any breakthroughs to take place
or significant objectives to be taken!* Despite terrible casualties, a majority of
the division's infantry regiments were still maintained at satisfactory levels of
strength in late July As an examble. the Stormont Dundas, and Glengarry
Highlanders of the gth Canadian Infantry Brigade recorded a strength return
of 34 officers and 727 other ranks on 28 July, 89 percent of its war establishment
strength. 14
This was not the case with all infantry regiments. For instance, the North
Nova Scotia Highlanders of the oth Canadian Infantry Briande's strength stood
at 29 officers and 572 other ranks on its 20 Tuly 101a return, putting ite strenetl
