140 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
and after this series of operations allowed its infantry regiments to rebuild
themselves. Once fully engaged in the battles north and west of Antwerp, a
continuous reinforcement effort allowed the infantry regiments involved to
maintain their strength. The lack of panzer divisions on their front and a lack
of suitable terrain in some phases of the fighting allowed the noninfantry
combat arms regiments involved to escape heavy losses. The situation was even
better for the RCAs field artillery units, because by fall 1944 the German ability
to strike at these units had almost completely disappeared.
8
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End
OPRATIONS IN THE NEW YEAR largely consisted of patrolling and indirect
fire missions as formations of the Canadian Army faced the Germans along the
Wal and Maas Rivers. Weekly casualties in the winter were low. The time was
used wisely for reorganization, integrating new personnel, receiving new vehicles
and weapons, and preparing for further offensive operations in the spring.
Prior to its February 1945 deployment to Germany and the battles in the
Rhineland, the znd Canadian Infantry Division had no obvious weaknesses. Its
strength on 31 January 1945 stood at 970 officers and 17,092 other ranks, for a
total of 18,062 men, or 99 percent of its authorized establishment. The cutting
edge of the division, its infantry regiments, were very strong. The South Sas-
katchewan Regiment had a strength of 34 officers and 814 other ranks, and the
Royal Highland Regiment of Canada (the Black Watch) contained 38 officers
and 817 other ranks? Divisional artillery units were also up to strength. On 27
January, the 6th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA), had 38 of-
ficers and 629 other ranks against an authorized strength of 38 officers and 638
other ranks, while the 2nd Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, contained 36 officers and
646 other ranks against a war establishment of 35 officers and 614 other ranks?
Near the commencement of Operation Veritable in February, the 2nd Can-
adian Infantry Division's equipment and combat "A" vehicle state were satis-
factory. The division had a large inventory of heavy weapons, 1 percent over
what it was authorized. Meanwhile, on 31 January, combat "A" vehicle inven-
tories totalled 745 versus the 638 it was authorized, or 117 percent of its author-
ized strength. The vehicle return for the end of January records the arrival of
some of the most advanced weapons systems operated by the division. The 2nd
Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, received the first six of its authorized Valentine
Archer 17-pounder self-propelled antitank guns. With the addition of these
armoured fighting vehicles (AFVs), the regiment's antitank capability had never
been stronger.
Combat resumed on 8 February with the division's participation in Opera-
tion Veritable, designed to clear the western bank of the Rhine in preparation
for a deeper invasion of Germany itself. The division was active during this
