92 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
return for the set-piece limited attack with overpowering indirect fire support.
Weakened German formations in late 1944 and spring 1945 had limited assets
in which to defeat these assaults. Devastating firepower from the RCA, operat-
ing with impunity, reduced resistance and crushed all German counterattacks.
Canadian infantry with plentiful armoured and antitank support would then
capture and consolidate their objectives, taking an acceptable number of casual-
ties on average in the process.*?
5
Formations and Their Units
DURING THE COURSE of the campaign, the Canadian Army fielded three in-
fantry divisions, two armoured divisions, two independent armoured brigades,
two corps-level artillery groupings, and over a dozen independent units held
at the corps and army level. The personnel, vehicles, and equipment that these
regiments were authorized are listed in Appendix 1.
Created from both permanent force regiments and militia units, the ist
Canadian Infantry Division had been authorized to begin forming soon after
hostilities broke out in September 1939. Deploved to the United Kingdom later
that year, large parts of the division were not properly equipped or combat ready.
In June 1940, the ist Canadian Infantry Brigade arrived in France but was evacu-
ated shortlv afterward as the British position became hopeless 1 Elements of the
2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade took part in Operation Gauntlet, from 25 August
to 3 September 1941, and successfully denied German occupation forces coal
and weather reports from the island of Spitzbergen, located close to the Arctic
Cirde? Some personnel were detached to serve in the British First Army in
1943, gaining valuable experience in the final fighting in North Africa? From
late 1941 until mid-1943, the division performed garrison duties and conducted
training exercises. From 1943 to early 1945, it fought in Italy as part of the British
Eighth Army, forming part of the ist Canadian Corps. In January 1945, the entire
corps began a planned redeployment to northwest Europe. The overall aim of
Operation Goldfake was uniting the corps with the First Canadian Army. The
ist Canadian Infantry Division began the move to Belgium in late February
1945, travelling by sea from Livorno, Italy to Marceilles, France 4 From there, it
moved north by road through France's Rhone Valley. It took until late March
1945 to reorganize, re-equip, and concentrate the infantry brigades and other
divisional units.
As of April 1945, the division's commanding officer was Major-General H. W.
Foster: The division comprised the 1st, 2nd, and ard Canadian Infantry Brigades.
The ist Canadian Infantry Brigade consisted of the Roval Canadian Regiment,
the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment, and the 48th Highlanders of Can-
ada. The and Canadian Infantry Brigade consisted of the Princess Patricia
Light Infantry, the Seaforth Flighlanders of Canada and the Loyal Edmonton
