56 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
division-level ordnance field park. Unit drivers signed for the new vehicles
on a need basis at the delivery point near the divisional ordnance field park.
General-service category "B" vehicles repaired by RCEME maintenance units
would also go directly to the delivery points near the divisional ordnance field
park, where they would also be picked up by unit drivers. New and repaired
specialized vehicles such as wreckers, radio vehicles, and ambulances were as-
sembled at the corps-level ordnance field park. From this point, these specialist
vehicles could be dispersed to unit delivery points, but only with the proper
documentation and the assigned driver. Only 2.5 percent of the corps' total unit
holdings of various technical vehicles were held in divisional field ordnance
parks and delivery points as replacements.
The Canadian Army's recovery-and-repair systems for maintaining its in-
ventories of vehicles, weapons, and equipment was run by units of the RCEME.
Its creation and the recovery-and-repair systems utilized by its units were directly
influenced by the introduction of the British Army equivalent, the Corps of
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME), formed in October 1942.
In October 1941, the British Beveridge Report had identified the need to properly
employ large numbers of skilled tradesmen, engineers, and technicians who
had hurriedly been put into uniform in the mobilization of 1939." This recruit-
ment had stripped a section of British industry that desperately needed their
skills. At the same time, these personnel were not being correctly employed
within the military. It was deemed necessary to release some of these personnel
for civilian wartime production and to reassign those still needed within the
British Army to utilize their technical expertise for maintenance duties.
The subsequent British Sinclair-Weeks-Dunkly Report of February 1942
went further, recommending the creation of a new corps of electrical and
mechanical engineers. This corps mainly affected British Royal Ordnance Corps
personnel, who were responsible for repair, recovery, and replacement. After
royal assent, this corps became REME, and it was officially incorporated into
the British Army in the fall. New processes came into effect to allow the re-
covery and repair of all British Army vehicles, weapons, and equipment in the
shortest amount of time.
In May 1942, the commander of the Canadian Army (Active), Lieutenant-
General Andrew McNaughton, pointed out the importance of keeping systems
for recovery, repair, and maintenance as similar as possible to those of the
British Army while minimizing organizational change. As a result, REME pro-
cesses were offcially introduced in January 1943, but personnel affected by these
processes remained in the Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps (ROC). Although
two-thirds of all RCOC personnel were involved in maintenance or other
Vehicles and Weapons 57
Figure 3.5
Path for "B" vehicle replacement
Combat arms regiments
Delivery point near divisional
ordnance field park
(Unit drivers pick up GS
and technical "B" vehicles)
second- and.
third-line
workshoo
Corps ordnance field park
(Technical specialist
"B" vehicles with drivers
and documents,
Advance vehicle park
run by vehicle company
(GS "B" vehicle mass park)
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 10,663, "First Canadian Army Plans Diagram of 'B' Vehicle Delivery/
Replacement," file 215C1.045 (D12); and Grodzinski, Operational Handbook for the First Canadian Army,
93, Appendix D, "Canadian Army System of Supply of Ordnance Stores in the Field Figure, 1944."
engineering roles ("E" Branch) rather than logistic stores roles by 1942, resist-
ance to the creation of a new corps was prevalent within the upper levels of
RCOC leadership, made up of senior ("®" Branch) stores officers. Although
they had not yet created a new corps, by the time Canadian forces participated
in the Sicilian Campaign in summer 1943, REME processes had been fully
adopted. Overworked divisional workshops were reorganized into multiple
brigade workshops and regimental-level LADs within participating Canadian
formations.38
Pressure from on-loan REME officers within CMHQ and public debate in
the Parliament in Ottawa spurred on by the civilian Canadian Engineering In-
stitute and its publications led the army to again contemplate the creation of
a separate corps in spring and summer 1943." Meetings within CMHQ about
the operational-planning details of Operation Overlord led to acknowledgment
of the need for a separate mechanical-engineering corps within the Canadian
Army. Official organizational change to create the Canadian Corps of Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers finally came into effect on 1 February 1944, one year
and six months after the official incorporation of REME. With royal assent, the
corps became RCEME on 2 April 1944, just in time for the Normandy invasion. "
With this act, virtually the entire "E" Branch of the RCOC was rebadged to
become the first members of RCEME.
