The
under
the 'r
demo
earth
worki
class
Soldie
Many
artific
mom-
caree:
Al
This
10 Introduction
of Prime Minister Mackenzie King. This political crisis led to the November
1944 decision to employ home defence conscripts overseas. Prior to this point,
during a sixty-day period in August and September 1944, a limited supply of
reinforcements had led to serious personnel deficiencies in Canada's infantry
regiments. This brief shortage was the result of poor planning for high-intensity
operations in Normandy and the Low Countries. Casualty-projection planning
at Canadian Military Headquarters (CMHQ), in London, was influenced by
the British Eighth Army's recorded casualties by army trade in North Africa
during 1941-43. Compared to combat in northwest Europe, warfare in the desert
was much more fluid, with the possibility of a logistic and infantry unit suffering
similar casualties from wide-ranging German battle groups." As a result, in
this mobile armoured warfare theatre, the bulk of Commonwealth casualties
in North Africa were not borne exclusively by the infantry. This led Canadian
planners to calculate lower levels of infantry replacements than would be re-
quired to maintain 100 percent unit strengths in 1944-45. The Canadian govern-
ment also viewed low casualty estimates favourably because conscription was
to be avoided at all costs. But by 1943 the manpower limits of an all-volunteer
overseas force were rapidly being reached.
At First Canadian Army headquarters, there were constant returns regard-
ing operational vehicles, vehicles under repair, personnel strengths, and casual-
ties. The most detailed of these were the daily and weekly returns of the Adjutant
and Quartermaster (A&Q) war diaries, which tracked the flow of new human
and major weapons-systems resources. Using these reports, it is possible to
track personnel and material losses and their replacement and to measure the
fighting strength of Canadian units at any given time.
There were also organizations within ist and and Canadian Corps specifically
tasked with delivering new ordnance to the field units?* Given the value of the
assets they were signing for, be it a Sherman Firefly tank or a 25-pounder artil-
lery piece, accurate records were needed for this important job. Tanks, antitank
guns, and tracked carriers were examples of equipment that suffered the highest
rates of wastage due to their vulnerability to direct enemy fire. While personnel
replacement was an all-Canadian affair, the material to equip the British and
Canadian armies came from the same common stocks. These stocks consisted
of British, Canadian, and American Lend-Lease war material. Depots containing
this equipment were located in the United Kingdom or in liberated France
Only a portion of the army's heavy weapons were produced within Canada and
then shipped overseas, All major land weapons systems, from artillery pieces
ments to the Commonwealth land forces.
to tanks, were found within these common stocks and used to issue replace-
Introduction 11
Looking at reinforcement of the three traditional combat arms, An Army of
Never-Ending Strength does not provide an all-encompassing assessment of the
combat effectiveness and tactics of every corps and the resources they each
consumed. With the exception of a discussion of the shortage of infantry re-
inforcements in the last year of the war, it does not address the larger strategic
choices made with regard to personnel, equipment, vehicles, or resources. 25
Canadian and German unit-level combat effectiveness - that is, their ability to
achieve battlefield objectives - is discussed briefly. But this discussion narrowly
focuses on how the army utilized certain tactics to maximize the attrition of
the enemy and limit their own losses. While some of these tactics minimized
losses in certain areas, they caused higher levels in others. These outcomes in
turn influenced the amount of additional resources needed to fill these gaps in
specific areas of the reinforcement system.
The focus here is on combat arms units at the regimental level under army-,
corps-, and divisional-level command. These infantry, artillery, and armour
units were in direct combat with the enemy or operating major weapons systems
that were critical to defeating German forces. Table I.1 illustrates the size of
regiments (battalions), brigades, and divisions to give an understanding of their
composition. Although other Canadian Army trades suffered casualties and
required reinforcements, and although they played their part in the final victory,
this book focuses on the three combat arms that were in continuous combat
and suffered the bulk of the losses. This study does not address consumable
resources such as water, petroleum products, and ammunition.?7
In tracking the replacement, losses, and inventories of vehicles and equipment,
this book focuses on major weapons systems. For armoured or artillery regi-
ments, this included heavy armoured fighting vehicles (AFVs) or artillery pieces.
Table 1.1
Units and formations, First Canadian Army, 1944-45
Unit/formation
Regiment (battalion)
Number of personnel
500-900
Brigade
Division
2,500-3,000
18,000-20,000
Composition
Three or four companies, squadrons,
or batteries
Three regiments (battalions)
Three brigades with separate units
attached. Semi-independent
brigades often attached in support.
Source: Bouchery, From D-Day to V-E Day, 10-16.
