166
An Army of Never-Ending Strength
effective during this final phase of fighting in the Netherlands and northern
Germany. On s May, the ist Canadian Armoured Car Regiment contained 81
officers and 823 other ranks, making it s percent overstrength 23 During the
month of April, this regiment had received nineteen replacements and had
recorded fourteen battle and thirteen nonbattle casualties. 2 Authorized equip-
ment and vehicle levels were satisfactory, and even the ist Light Anti-Aircraft
Regiment, RCA, which was in the process of retraining and re-equipping, re-
corded 100 percent of its war establishment of 40 mm antiaircraft guns being
on strength 25 On their arrival in Belgium and the Netherlands in spring 1945,
all four corps level units had been adequately equipped and had no major
shortages that would impair their combat capability.
In conclusion, in spring 1945 all Canadian formations involved in operations
were adequately reinforced with personnel, vehicles, and weapons. Despite the
German military's much reduced offensive and defensive capabilities on the
Canadian front, instances of heavy combat did occur. The reinforcement system
to maintain each formation's fighting strength performed flawlessly, and any
losses suffered were rapidly made good. Regarding personnel, the addition of
NRMA conscripts into the reinforcement nool ensured that no defciencies of
any kind were present. On , May, at the conclusion of hostilities for the First
Canadian Armv, each division and indenendent brigade's units as well as those
held at the army and corps level were experienced, battle-hardened, and ex-
tremely combat capable, being at or near their war establishment strengths in
all relevant categories.
An Assessment of Canadian Formations
THROUGHOUT MOST OF THE Canadian Army's campaign in northwest Europe
from June 1944 to May 1945, all regiment-sized units at the independent brigade,
division, corps, and army level were combat capable. Most units had their full
establishment of personnel, vehicles, and equipment. As a result, all formations,
those organizations of brigade size or larger, were fully capable of offensive ac-
tion for nearly all of their combat deployments. At war's end, each of them had
largely reached their maximum strength and military capability.
The ist Canadian Infantry Division was among the most rested and capable
of the three Canadian infantry divisions as of May 1945. Infantry and other
reinforcements were plentiful, and the number of heavy weapons and "A" vehicles
were sufficient for operational units. There were minor equipment challenges,
but they were limited to the area of heavy armoured fighting vehicles (AFVs)
within the ist Anti-Tank Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA). Combat
operations by the division in April 1945 were entirely successful. Any missing
assets, such as the 4th Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment (4th Princess Louise
Dragoon Guards), had their combat power replaced by attached combat arms
units from other formations.' On average, enemy opposition during the last
month of the war was weak. There was no urgent need to address minor short-
ages in the division, as the end of the war was imminent. The division finished
the war adequately equipped in most equipment categories, Like all Canadian
units at this point in the campaign, it was near its authorized strength in
personnel.
The 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, though several of its units suffered ter-
rible losses in July 1944, was completely rebuilt and up to strength at war's end.
It had endured some difficult reverses at the hands of the Germans during
the Normandy Campaign but had emerged as a capable and battle-tested
formation. The performance of its infantry regiments was critical in clearing
the Seine River crossing at Forêt de la Londe in August 1944, the flooded pol-
ders of the Scheldt Estuary in fall 1944, and the Rhineland forests in 1945. By
May 1945, the division's field artillery regiments were extremely effective. The
division's infantry brigades utilized this strength continually, employing large
artillery support programs. However, one area in which the division had
