174 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
casualties. Personnel strength was never a problem for artillery and armoured
units, and this allowed them to continuously operate their large inventories of
weapons and vehicles. Throughout the spring of 1945, infantry regiments could
take high losses one day, be rebuilt, and then be strong enough to conduct
operations a short time later? But unlike the reinforcement records of the RCA
and Canadian Armoured Corps, the history of personnel reinforcement in the
Canadian Infantry Corps during 1944 was not without blemish.
During August and September 1944, there were challenges in supplying
infantry units with other ranks (nonofficer) replacements. In this two-month
period, a shortage of infantry personnel existed within the reinforcement
organization's holding units. This was only one trade out of the three combat
arms trades, but the infantry was the spearhead of Canadian offensive oper-
ations. The shortage lasted only two months out of an eleven-month campaign,
but for two weeks of this period it was important for the First Canadian Army
to be operating at its highest possible performance level. During the last
phases of the Normandy Campaign, each infantrv company had large demands
placed on it.
While some infantry regiments during August and September 1944 were still
reasonably strong, others faced serious shortages that reduced them to two in-
fantry companies rather than four. As an example; Les Fusiliers Mont-Royalon
21 August contained a strength of a- officers and 516 other ranks, only 6s percent
of its war establishment 9 The lack ofa sufficient numher of infantrymen at this
point in the Normandy Campaign arguably led to a reduction in the First
Canadian Army's overall capability But the strongest Canadian infantry regis
ments, not the weakest, always led attacks during operations, and by late August
the majority of German forces were withdrawing at high speed, not fighting in
place. On 21 August, the Falaise Gap battle was largely concluded, and the First
Canadian Army was overwhelmingly victorious. It is impossible to determine
whether stronger Canadian infantry companies could have concluded this battle
sooner or broken through German defences in mid-August more effectively.
But it can be noted that in would have been impossible for any army in the
Second World War to perfectly maintain its unit establishment strengths during
heavy combat against a peer enemy. Modern weapons simply did too much
damage at an incredible rate.
A large program to remuster excess personnel in other trades was in effect
by August 1944, but the transformation of these personnel into infantry, other
ranks, could not occur instantaneously. Significant results were not apparent in
formations like the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division until late September!" Most
deficits were made good by early October, and replacements were not an issue
Conclusion 175
for the remainder of the campaign in northwest Europe. By 30 September, one
of the most depleted units, the South Saskatchewan Regiment, contained 32
officers and 703 other ranks, 86 percent of its war establishment." This number
would improve before the regiment commenced combat operations in the
Scheldt in early October.
RCA units had the fewest problems maintaining personnel strengths. In
adition to having the most advanced artillery technology, RCA artillery units
suffered consistently lower personnel casualties than armoured and infantry
unis. The failure of the German Army to effectively use artillery counterbattery
fire and the inability of the German Luftwaffe to conduct regular airstrikes
meant that RCA operations went largely unhindered. Because the First Canadian
Army consistently held the initiative, large numbers of RCA personnel were
never lost because of a sudden German advance reaching field artillery and
light antiaircraft units. There were instances of batteries losing guns to occasional
German counterbattery fire but their loss was not an everyday occurrence 12
RCA antitank regiments, with their direct-fire antitank guns and tank destroy-
ers, did suffer significantly higher losses than rear-deployed field artillery regi-
ments, which were somewhat immune to direct fire. A greater effort had
to be made to keep these units' personnel levels and equipment inventories up
to strength. 13
For nine months of the eleven-month campaign in northwest Europe, the
personnel reinforcement system operated smoothly for all trades. In June and
early July 1944, it had responded effectively to the limited needs of the 3rd
Canadian Division and and Canadian Armoured Brigade without difficulty.
During this time, both units were involved in challenging combat operations
against powerful German units. From October 1944 to May 1945, combat arms
units were consistently reinforced, giving them the strength to overpower enemy
opposition. The introduction of National Resources Mobilization Act conscripts
in spring 1945 erased any remaining shortages within the reinforcement system.
The events of August and September 1944 were a temporary blip on an otherwise
effective record. Additionally, the fact that a successful personnel reinforcement
system was operated within an army composed of an all-volunteer force until
early 1945 was an incredible feat.
In conclusion, during most its campaign in northwest Europe in 1944-45, the
Canadian Army operated effective, if not efficient, systems to supply its unit
equipment inventories and maintain its personnel levels. These twin systems
allowed the Canadian Army to continuously maintain its combat effectiveness
in comparison to its opponent, whose units were ground down by attrition. The
battlefield impact of the First Canadian Army having all its combat arms units
