3
Vehicles and Weapons
GIVEN THE HIGH INTENSITY of combat operations conducted by the Can-
adian Army, an effective system of equipment recovery, repair, and replacement
was essential. The number of operational vehicles and major weapons systems
was critical to keeping the units' offensive and defensive capabilities at a high
level.' The "A" and "B" categories of vehicle classification, taken from the British
Army system, encompassed nearly all vehicles within the Canadian Army in the
late war period. The "A" vehicle category included nearly all heavy- and light-
armoured combat types, and the "B" classification encompassed all lighter,
soft-skinned, wheeled supply and general-service types. If a unit's equipment
inventories were significantly below their war establishment levels, its level of
military effectiveness was impaired. These establishment levels were the or-
ganizational guides for equipping combat arms with personnel, vehicles, equip-
ment, and weapons. Because Canadian units suffered equipment losses for many
reasons and often at a rapid rate within infantry, armoured, and antitank regi-
ments, their real strength was often below their establishment levels. How rapidly
such losses occurred was determined by unit activity and exposure to enemy
action. Accidents and normal wear and tear were also unrelenting, taking ve-
hicles and weapons systems out of action just as effectively as enemy fire.
The First Canadian Army's repair-and-replacement services for "A" and
"B" vehicles and major weapons systems were remarkably effective at achiev-
ing their main goal: maintaining the combat strength of the Canadian Army
(Active). Compared to opposing German forces, new and repaired vehicles and
weapons systems reached front-line artillery, armoured, and infantry units at
a much faster rate and in larger quantities. Superiority in organizational struc-
ture and performance was made possible by the Corps of Royal Canadian
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers' (RCEME) repair units being largely separ-
ated from the combat arms units they serviced, making them much more ef-
fective. In contrast, German divisional-sized formations were largely responsible
for the upkeep of their own major weapons systems and vehicles, and because
of lack of replacements, they zealously guarded what resources they had, oper-
ational or not.
Vehicles and Weapons 45
In the early years of the war, because Canada was not fully engaged in war
production, Canadian land forces were equipped in a limited manner. Any
production that was achieved in way of equipment and munitions was allocated
to existing British orders.? What little was left went to the Royal Canadian Air
Force and the Royal Canadian Navy; the Canadian Army was the last to receive
resources. Because Prime Minister King and his government were focused on
limiting Canada's involvement in direct front-line combat in what was per-
ceived as a European conflict, the 1st Canadian Infantry Division was largely
equipped from British stocks when it arrived in the United Kingdom and partly
deployed to France in 1940.
Despite a terribly slow start in 1939, Canadian production levels significantly
rose after the fall of France in 1940. While aircraft- and ship-building programs
took priority in the early war years, the production of equipment and vehicles
for Commonwealth land forces increased significantly as the war proceeded.
Levels of production for military vehicles and equipment was very high between
1942 and 1945, far exceeding the army's needs.? In total, Canada only utilized
34 percent of its total war production of equipment, of all types: 53 percent went
to the United Kingdom, 12 percent went to the United States; and 1 percent went
to other wartime allies.* Shipments to the United Kingdom for the British Army
included 6o percent of Canadas production of armoured vehicles, 67 percent
of its artillery pieces, and 7o percent of its rifles. Because of the initial neutral-
ity of the United States and Canadas Commonwealth status, British military
vehicles and weapons were taken on as standard for the Canadian Army. When
the United States entered the war in Europe in January 1942, the decision was
made to stick with supplying the British with equipment and vehicles and to
not adopt US standard equipment and weaponry; Canadian officials saw great
difficulty in completing such a transformation and little perceived value in
adopting American standards.
Like all wartime Commonwealth armies, the Canadian Army was often
dependent on the will and ability of the British government to supply it with
cutting-edge technology, most notably armoured vehicles.' The supply question
regarding these vehicles was complicated further by British tank development
and production issues that forced the adoption of the American Sherman tank.
Thus, Great Britain became dependent on US allocations for its principal tank
in all British and Commonwealth armoured regiments. Available stocks went
first to Anglo-Commonwealth formations in the field, which were rightly seen
as having a higher priority. Up until mid-1943, the vast majority of the Canadian
Army (Active) was not involved in continuous combat operations, and it was
