62 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
complete the rebuilding and reconditioning of equipment. This was not a service
available within the first and second lines as shown in Figure 3.7. Rebuilding
and reconditioning took a long time and had to be completed in a static factory-
like environment. In these locations, detailed and complicated work could take
place out of the way of the elements and enemy action. This was their designated
role, but most of the work was overflow from second-line maintenance. The
corps troops, armoured brigade, and infantry brigade workshops could all feed
overflow repair cases directly to third-line units. The No. 2 Tank Troops Work-
shop was an example of a third-line RCEME asset in the summer of 1944. This
facility was used as an overflow catch point for overworked second-line brigade
workshops." The third-line maintenance units lacked integral transport and
had difficulty remaining at a fixed distance from second-line workshop bases.
If one was ordered to move forward, the others stayed in place to take on the
moving unit's workload. First Canadian Army fourth-line maintenance was a
capability that existed in the form of the No. 1 and No. 2 Advanced Base
Workshops. The No. 1 Canadian Base Workshop, as the parent organization of
these fourth-line facilities, remained in the United Kingdom. These organiza-
tions were commanded by the director of mechanical engineering, 21st Army
Group. They were designed to be available at the rate of one per Canadian
corps. They also provided factory-like rebuilding and reconditioning services
for vehicles and other major pieces of equipment on a higher level than third
line. In addition to their designated roles, these groups could also be utilized
for special missions. For example, No. 1 Advanced Base Workshop inspected
and performed maintenance on over four hundred artillery pieces prior to
Operation Totalize in early August 1944. It also rebuilt and repaired large num-
bers of submerged vehicles recovered from the Juno and Sword Beach landing
areas in Normandy, 8 If third-line maintenance assets could not handle a job
or were overloaded, these two facilities assisted in rebuilding and recondi-
tioning tasks.49
Specialized recovery assets in the army-level Line of Communications Area
also existed. The RCEME Canadian Army No. 2 (and, later, Nos, 1 and 3) Re-
covery Company operated in the strategic route-clearing and vehicle recovery
role to the rear of the corps and divisional areas, Prior to August 1944, there
was little vehicle and equipment backloading above the regimental and brigade
level because of the small area within the Normandy beachhead. As the breakout
from Normandy developed in August, these activities increased as broken-down
vehicles were littered across northern France. 5°
Once repairs were complete, the vehicle or piece of ordnance would be sent
on its way. Using an AFV as an example, once it was deemed fit by a repair line,
Vehicles and Weapons 63
it was shipped back to the relevant 25th CADR squadron. It would then be sent
off strength of the RCEME unit that had worked on it and be taken on the books
of the respective 25th CADR squadron. Once the 25th CADR squadron delivered
it, the AFV joined the strength of the armoured or RCA unit, and the circle was
complete. At its height, in May 1945, the RCEME repair organization was large
and extremely capable. A total of 150 RCEME units and subunits existed, from
the LAD detachments within combat arms units to fourth-line maintenance
facilities located in static locations.
In his seminal 2001 work, Clash of Arms: How the Allies Won in Normandy,
American military historian Russell A. Hart says of the First Canadian Army's
Normandy Campaign: "The rapid but haphazard wartime proliferation of sup-
port and service elements further curtailed the Canadian ability to operate
independently?5! This work would like to respectfully present a different ap-
preciation. The armoured and infantry regiments of the First Canadian Army
closed the Falaise Gap, sealing the fate of thousands of German troops. This
success was due to the fact good service and support services made the combat
arms regiments militarily effective.
The Canadian Army (Active) benefitted from adopting what were largely
British Army practices that had evolved through trial and error over the course
of the war into a very sophisticated system. During the Italian campaign in
1943-44, the army had the opportunity to practise these methods in the field.
On its arrival in northwest Europe, familiar practices were put into action with
excellent results. Canadian combat arms regiments were never hindered in their
operations because of a shortage weapons or vehicles.
