The
under
the I
demc
earth
work
class
oldi
alit:
A
allow
Man
artifi
caret
A
This
Introduction
shortage was at its height, the average strength of the twenty-two Canadian
infantry battalions was still roughly 77 percent of their establishments. Though
reduced, these battalions were still capable of attacking. Considering that these
infantry units had just closed the Falaise Gap and were now engaged in high-
intensity exploitation operations, their strength returns are indicative of an
army at war, not one on the parade ground.!4
Canada's system of constant reinforcement was in direct contrast to Ger-
many's. Its army suffered continuous losses and was rarely reinforced with new
personnel or equipment. The Germans let the strengths of standard infantry
formations fall to nothing; they only reinforced a limited number of elite div-
isions on an ongoing basis. As a result, they had to construct new infantry
formations from scratch. Combat formations eventually had to be withdrawn
to be reconstituted, re-equipped, and retrained. I5 The Germans did not see
the process of constantly reinforcing a division in the field as the most efficient
way to maintain a field army's military strength. Often, they allowed near an-
nihilation by attrition to occur before withdrawing a unit for a program of re-
constitution. National honour or a unit's history never prevented the destruction
of a formation. A recently raised unit with new personnel and equipment would
take its place. Because of a lack of reinforcements, corps headquarters perceived
German formations as employable tools with a temporary value. This led to
their ruthless combat employment by higher command with little regard
for their welfare or status!* By contrast, during the final year of the war, Can-
adian divisions were rarely withdrawn from the combat environment and, if
so, higher headquarters tasked them with a reserve role near the front line. This
constant front-line deployment arguably increased the combat effectiveness
of the units within Canadian divisions, as they never ceased operations apart
from small breaks.
By offering a detailed statistical analysis of the combat records, this book
builds on the existing literature on the Canadian Army's manpower struggles
during its last eleven months of operations." Given the lethality and destruc-
tive power of modern weapons in 1944-45, an army's ability to rebuild itself
was of equal importance to its ability to defeat its enemy. This book, therefore,
is as much about the nature of twentieth-century modern warfare as it is about
the administrative processes of the Canadian Army.
Detailed statistical studies of the combat records of Canadian units are rare.
Operational narratives usually relegate supporting data to limited appendices
that are rarely analyzed. The research presented here tracks actual Canadian
Army unit strengths and losses and shows how its administrative and logistic
Introduction 7
organizations successfully reconstituted units during intense operations. The
book presents an overview of the operational record of the division or independ-
ent brigade to which each combat unit belonged. Within the historiography of
Canadian military engagement during the Second World War, historians typ-
ically focus on the regiment or combat arms corps rather than on formations
such as divisions or brigades. By including data on larger formations and group-
ing together statistics on all their component combat arms units, An Army of
Never-Ending Strength presents a more complete picture. As the greatest military
force ever created by the nation of Canada, the First Canadian Army's size,
strength, and capability were constantly evolving.
Chapters 1 and 2 outline the personnel reinforcement system and how sig-
nificant challenges in 1944 were resolved. Chapter 3 examines the equipment
replacement system and how it maintained the army's military strength. De-
voted to battlefield tactics and equipment, Chapter 4 shows why certain losses
in personnel and equipment occurred. Chapters 5 through 9 tell the story of
how personnel and equipment were replenished in the field. The Conclusion
assesses the Canadian Army's replacement practices for both personnel and
equipment and how the performance of these essential functions was critical
to victory in 1945.
Although the Canadian Army effectively reinforced its three traditional com-
bat arms, it would be incorrect to state that it did so in the most efficient manner
possible. Effectiveness, as defined in the larger military spectrum, refers to a
group successfully producing an intended mission result. Efficiency in the same
environment is the practice of achieving a mission while keeping wasted or
excessive effort to a minimum. The personnel and administration effort required
to attain the army's reinforcement goals were at times excessive. As an example,
No. 2 Canadian Base Reinforcement Group (No. 2 CBRG), a main cog in the
personnel replacement organization, was militarily effective. When well-
supplied and given time to establish routine deliveries, it achieved its goal - the
timely distribution of personnel to front-line units.l But it was excessively
bureaucratic in its operations, which hurt its level of efficiency. The five No. 2
CBRG reinforcement battalions that supplied units at the front were holding
units. They were beset by the administrative processes to receive, hold, and
dispatch soldiers, all of which took time. The skills of soldiers held in these
battalions eroded the longer they stayed. To move a replacement soldier from
the 21st Army Group reception camp in northwest Europe to his regiment took
seven administrative moves between organizations, and two of the destinations
were in No. 2 CBRG itself.
