94 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Regiment. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade consisted of the Royal 22nd
Regiment, the West Nova Scotia Regiment, and the Carleton and York Regiment.
Divisional troops consisted of the 4th Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment (4th
Princess Louise Dragoon Guards) and the Saskatchewan Light Infantry
(Machine Gun). The reconnaissance regiment had been converted to an infantry
regiment during its service in Italy in 1944 and was assigned to the 12th Canadian
Infantry Brigade, part of the sth Canadian Armoured Division. This brigade
was disbanded because all Canadian formations joining 2ist Army Group in
northwest Europe had to conform to established divisional standards for re-
supply and logistics. Thus, on its arrival, the regiment was ordered to reconvert
back to a reconnaissance regiment. It carried out this task throughout April
1945 and was not committed to operations. Divisional artillery units consisted
of the znd and 3rd Field Regiments (RCA), the ist Field Regiment Royal
Canadian Horse Artillery, the 1st Anti-Tank Regiment (RCA), and the 2nd Ligni
Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA).'
Formed in May and June 1940, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division was or-
ganized on regional lines from militia units located in Ontario, Quebec, and
the Prairie provinces. Prior to 1942, the division saw limited action, conducting
garrison duties in Iceland before being deployed to the United Kingdom. Two
of its three brigades took part in the disastrous August 1942 raid on Dieppe,
France, Operation Jubilee. The regiments involved suffered catastrophic losses
and were completely rebuilt? The division trained continuously throughout
1943 to spring 1944 in preparation for its upcoming role in the Allied invasion
of the continent. It did not land on D-Day as part of the initial assault force,
instead arriving during the first week of July 1944. With other Canadian forma-
tions, it formed part of the 2nd Canadian Corps.
As it commenced combat operations in Normandy, its commanding officer
was Major-General Charles Foulkes. The main combat fighting components
of the division were the 4th, 5th, and 6th Canadian Infantry Brigades. The 4th
Canadian Infantry Brigade consisted of the Royal Regiment of Canada, the
Royal Hamilton Light Infantry, and the Essex Scottish Regiment. The sth Can-
adian Infantry Brigade's main components were the Royal Highland Regiment
of Canada (the Black Watch), Le Régiment de Maisonneuve, and the Calgary
Highlanders. The 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade was made un of Les Fusiliers
Mont-Royal, the Oueen's Own Cameron Hishlanders of Canada, and the South
Saskatchewan Regiment. Divisional units consisted of the 8th Canadian Recon
naissance Regiment (14th Canadian Hussars) and the Toronto Scottish (Machine
Gun) Regiment. Artillery units consisted of the ath. eth and 6th Field Regiments,
the Royal Canadian Artillery, the 2nd Anti-Tank Regiment (RCA), and the 3rd
Formations and Their Units 95
Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA).® A significant problem within the division
was an initial lack of self-propelled antitank capability in the znd Anti-Tank
Regiment. In contrast with the antitank regiment in the 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division, it was not authorized any self-propelled antitank guns. Taking into
consideration future combat encounters with enemy armour in July 1944, the
presence of these armoured fighting vehicles could have strengthened the div-
ision significantly.
The grd Canadian Infantry Division was activated in Canada in spring 1940.
It spent the following year assembling its component brigades. The regimental
units were drawn from the Prairie, central, and eastern provinces.!° During
the winter of 1940-41, one of its regiments, the Cameron Highlanders of
Ottawa (Machine Gun), formed part of the Allied garrison in Iceland. Trans-
ported to the United Kingdom in fall 1941, the division embarked on a three-
year period of training and further garrison duties. While the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division participated in the 1942 Dieppe Raid and the entire ist Can-
adian Corps deployed to Italy in 1943-44, the grd Canadian Infantry Division
remained in Britain. In July 1943, the division was designated as one of the
amphibious assault formations for Operation Overlord." As a result, its training
focused on successfully assaulting the beaches and defending the initial lodge-
ment. Arguably, this specialized training for a temporary role was conducted
at the expense of offensive combined arms training to defeat German armoured
formations after the landing. 2
From 31 May 1944, the ard Canadian Infantry Division's commanding officer
was Major-General Rodney Keller. Its main infantry formations were the 7th,
8th, and 9th Canadian Infantry Brigades.!3 The regiments of 7th Canadian
Infantry Brigade were the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, the Regina Rifle Regiment,
and the Canadian Scottish Regiment. The 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade con
sisted of the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada, Le Régiment de la Chaudière, and
the North Shore Regiment. The 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade's was made up
of the North Nova Scotia Highlanders the Stormont, the Dundas and Glen-
garry Highlanders, and the Highland Light Infantry of Canada. Divisional field
artillery units consisted of the 12th, 13th, and 14th Field Regiments (RCA). An
additional field artillery regiment, the army-level 2nd Canadian Army Group
Royal Artillery's (AGRA) 19th Army Field Regiment (RCA) was temporarily
attached. This addition gave the division a total of four Canadian field artillery
regiments, as well as other British Royal Artillery field and medium regiments
temporarily attached for Operation Overlord. 14 Antitant and antidircraft units
consisted of the 4th Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA) and the 3rd Anti-Tank
Regiment (RCA). Nonartillery divisional units were the 7th Canadian
