2
The Sixty-Day Shortage
FOR A SIXTY-DAY PERIOD in August and September 1944, the Canadian Infantry
Corps had insufficient other ranks reinforcements because of poor strategic
planning. Planners had failed to account for the personnel needs of infantry
regiments over the long term and allowed other trades to accumulate overly
large reinforcement pools that were not needed. As a result, the No. 2 Canadian
Base Reinforcement Group (No. 2 CBRG) had a reduced ability to rebuild in-
fantry units engaged in combat operations during the late summer of 1944. The
mistakes were serious and somewhat impaired the overall combat effectiveness
of the First Canadian Army, which in late August was engaged in some of the
most difficult fighting of the Normandy Campaign. This period is a blemish
on an otherwise satisfactory record of personnel replacement.
It must be stressed that the shortage of infantrymen was limited to the other
ranks. There was no shortage of commissioned infantry officers, subaltern or
higher, leading up to the Normandy invasion. This was evidenced by the fall
1943 Can Loan scheme, by which 623 Canadian Infantry Corps officers and so
Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps officers volunteered to serve within the British
Army? Because of the tremendously high rate of casualties suffered by British
junior infantry officers, available reinforcements in the form of subalterns began
to reach dangerously low levels. The Canadian government thus offered up
volunteers. At the time, there was an excessive number of infantry subalterns
either at the rank oflieutenant to captain in the reinforcement stream or made
surplus by the disbanding of the 7th and 8th Canadian Infantry Divisions,
earmarked for home defence in Canada. The first groups of these officers arrived
in the United Kingdom in April 19443
Likewise, once it was clear that there was a shortage of infantry, other ranks,
rapid action was taken to correct the problem. Unavoidably, it took time to
remuster and retrain surplus troops in other trades, but by early October 1944
Canadian Military Headquarters (CMHQ), London, had significantly reduced
deficits in the front-line infantry regiments. The number it remustered person-
nel totalled ten thousand by December 1944. The period of shortage lasted for
less than two months in an eleven-month campaign, and the other combat arms
The Sixty-Day Shortage 23
trades, armour and artillery, were unaffected. From early June to late July 1944
and from October 1944 to May 1945, all infantry regiments engaged in combat
were kept at adequate personnel strength levels.
The sixty-day shortage was an entirely separate event from the November
1944 Conscription Crisis, which centred on the uncertain supply of infantry
reinforcements. But it certainly influenced the crisis. By late October 1944, after
the infantry regiments had been rebuilt and a reserve of 16,825 personnel cre-
ated, the larger problem of maintaining the reserve proved challenging. Prime
Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King's War Committee was divided on how
to accomplish this goal. Conscriptionists believed the use of National Resources
Mobilization Act (NRMA) home defence conscripts was inevitable, while anti-
conscriptionists, the prime minister among them, hoped that all future needs
could be met with Canadian Army volunteers. But the Canadian Army could
not present a viable plan to use only overseas volunteers or personnel converted
from NRMA status to cover its reinforcement needs into 1945. Political impasse
and pressure from the prime minister led to the forced resignation of Minister
of National Defence ].L. Ralston. After the removal of Ralston and the discovery
that there were no other viable options, on 23 November the King government
decided to deploy conscript personnel overseas.*
The origins of the shortage resided in earlier decisions to radically expand
the army yet retain its all-volunteer status. From one infantry division in 1940,
it expanded to include five divisions and two independent brigades, along with
all the necessary support units to sustain them, by August 1944. In fall 1944,
these formations formed one complete corps in Italy and a second corps in
northwest Europe. Yet evolution in the Canadian Army went past its sheer size.
By early 1944, it had also created a completely new trade, the Corps of Royal
Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, and had embraced the latest
combat, command, and logistical doctrine of the Commonwealth armies. These
practices had evolved as a result of combat experience during campaigns in
North Africa, Sicily, and Italy.
During wartime, Ralston managed the size of the army in accordance with
decisions made by Prime Minister King and the rest of the War Committee.
Political and financial considerations and the needs of the other two services,
the Royal Canadian Navy and Royal Canadian Air Force, forced the government
to tightly control army expansion. However, during the early months of the war,
there was a focus on minimizing Canada's wartime contribution. While the
prewar Canadian Army had many plans for expansion, none were firmly en-
dorsed by the government when war broke out. Such was the disarray that in
