132 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
German ports on the English Channel with their coastal gun emplacements
was an important task for the 2nd AGRA, and it was fully engaged in these
operations throughout late August and September. During the Battle of the
Scheldt in October and early November, the znd Canadian AGRA delivered
effective indirect fire against entrenched German infantry.
The Battle of the Scheldt Estuary began in earnest for the and Canadian
Infantry divicion an a Out her when it attacked northward townade the Sout
Boolas ta abandont cabat the digita canada the lethmus.
fought its way west, and linked up with elements of the British s2nd Infantry
Division Soon. all progress made in rebuilding the division was partly erased
as infantry losses mounted in the difficult Scheldt Estuary fighting! Forests,
flooded fields, canals, rivers, and built-up areas were a challenge for attacking
Canadian infantry regiments. These dificult infantry operations in largely
flooded terrain ended in early November with the clearance of the north bank
of the Scheldt Estuary!" Casualties were heavy, and infantry strengths in late
October again became an issue. Fall casualty totals for three infantry regiments
within the divicion ¿luctuate the autont of the damage. The Fosey Scottish
Regiment cuffaloe turacualtias durina to Chamb ar
Lattle casualties died 119 Too Brodies Mant DauLanataine
329 battle and or nonbattle cacualties 20 Noninfantry regiments in the divisio
sufered lichta escual Durina these three months the lth Canadian Re
emphasis on dismounted infantry tactics.
As of 30 November, the division
contained 102 pascost enocLe bant trenath in combat «n" hirle
and 99 percent of its major weapons systems.
ordered to move east to the vicinity of Antwerp, Belgium. From late September
onward the division was to take part in operations to clear the Scheldt Estuary.
This clearance was necessary so the vital port could be opened for Allied ship-
ping. Strength returns for the infantry regiments during early October reflect
the fact that a significant reinforcement of the division had taken place in late
September. As of s October, the th Canadian Infantry Brigade's average bat-
talion strength was 39 officers and 754 other ranks, for a total of 793 personnel.
The 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade's average was the strongest at 37 officers and
Channel Ports, Scheldt, and the River Mass 133
774other ranks for a total of 811 personnel. The gth Canadian Infantry Brigade's
average unit strength was the weakest, but still adequate, at 38 officers and 746
other ranks23
The division's main task for October was the liquidation of the Breskens
Pocket, an are surrounded by the Leopold Canal forming the south bank of
the Scheld Estuary. The Germans, surrounded in the pocket, were defending
the area from prepared positions and were well supplied. On 6 October, the
division launched Operation Switchback, which consisted of amphibious as-
sauls cross the Leopold Canal to clear the pocket. During land and amphib-
rousassaults in October, it liberated Hoofplaat, Biervliet, Schoondijke, Groede,
Retranchement, and Knocke-sur-Mer, one of the last areas of Belgium to be
liberated." Due to the infantry-centric nature of these operations, infantry cas-
walies were high, and the brigades needed considerable reinforcements. The
fighting was dificult because of the flooded terrain, dikes, and entrenched
enemy?' The final German positions fell on 3 November.
The strength and casualty returns for 31 October 1944 illustrate how well
the division's infantry regiments had been resupplied with new personnel dur-
ing the Battle of the Scheldt. The Regina Rifle Regiment of the 7th Canadian
Infantry Brigade had suffered 384 battle and 74 nonbattle casualties during the
month. * It had received 387 reinforcements, the equivalent to three complete
new riffe companies, and its strength was 36 officers and 766 other ranks, 94
percent of its authorized personnel strength. The 8th Canadian Infantry Brig-
ade's Queen's Own Rifles of Canada was not as strong. It had suffered 146 battle
and 29 nonbattle casualties?" It had received 222 reinforcements, bringing its
strength at month's end to aa offcers and 721 other ranks, 88 percent of its wal
establishment
much lighter than those suffered by the infantry regiments than bore the brunt
of German defensive fire during the Battle of the Scheldt. The Cameron High-
landers of Ottawa (Machine Gun) suffered 30 battle and 33 nonbattle casualties.
Tea daad cathomash rebuilding it
machine gun and mortar companies. Suffering 39 battle and 33 nonbattle cas-
ualties, the zth Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment (17th Duke of York's Royal
Canadian Huscore repained 8a reinforcements during the course of the month
bringing its strength up to 42 officers and 742 other ranks.* RCA casualties
within the division were very low because the enemy had a difficult time attack-
ing their gun positions. Massive Canadian retaliation occurred if the Germans
made any attempts at sustained counterbattery fire. Because of these conditions,
the number of nonbattle casualties in the RCA regiments during October
