96 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Reconnaissance Regiment (the 17th Duke of York's Royal Canadian Hussars)
and the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa (Machine Gun).
The 4th Canadian Infantry Division was ordered to begin forming in spring
1940. Established from units located in central and western Canada, in eady
1942 it was reorganized as an armoured division. Prior to its deployment over-
seas, its development was slowed by the diversion of some units to what would
become the sth Canadian Armoured Division. In fall 1942, the division was
deployed to the United Kingdom and arrived in several convoys. Like the d
Canadian Infantry Division, it did not to take part in combat operations prior
to its 1944 deployment to Normandy. Administrative and supply problems dur-
ing winter 1942-43 caused some delays in equipping the division with armoured
fighting vehicles and other pieces of equipment. These delays interrupted is
training schedule, and the division did not conduct battalion-level exercises
until fall of the latter year.!* On the eve of its deployment to Normandy, in late
July 1944, as part of the znd Canadian Corps, its commanding officer was Major-
General George Kitching, The main combat formations within the division were
the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade and the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade!"
The armoured brigade was composed of the z8th Canadian Armoured Regiment:
(the British Columbia Regiment), the 21st Canadian Armoured Regiment (the
Governor General's Foot Guards), and the 22nd Canadian Armoured Regimen:
(the Canadian Grenadier Guards). Its infantry component was the Lake Superior
(Motor) Regiment. This last regiment was mechanized and equipped with M3
and Ms half-tracks so it could keep up with the tanks as motorized infantry.
The 1oth Canadian Infantry Brigade was the dismounted infantry force of
the division and close in composition to an infantry brigade within an infantry
division.' While the division's armoured brigade was designed to make ar-
moured breakthroughs through the enemy's main line of resistance, the infantry
brigade could hold these gains and launch attacks of its own. It consisted of
three infantry regiments and an independent machine-gun company. The three
regiments within the brigade were the Lincoln and Welland Regiment, the
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada, and the Algonquin Regiment.
Rather than a full battalion as in an infantry division, support was provided by
an independent machine-gun company - the toth Independent Machine Gun
Company (the New Brunswick Rangers). The role of reconnaissance within the
division was taken up by a fourth armoured regiment. the zoth Canadian
Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment (the South Alberta Regiment). Divisional
antitank and antiaircraft assets consisted of the sth Anti-Tank Regiment (RCA)
and the sth Light Anti-Aireraft Regiment (RCA). The RC A divisional field artil-
lery was made up of two regiments, the isth Field Regiment (self-propelled,
Formations and Their Units 97
(RCA) and the 23rd Field Regiment (RCA), which operated 25-pounder
howitzers.
Raised in February 1941 and initially named the ist Canadian Armoured
Division, the sth Canadian Armoured Division was composed of units from
across Canada. After building up its strength by incorporating units of the
nascent 4th Canadian Infantry Division, the division deployed to the United
Kingdom in fall 1941. It was initially organized with two armoured brigades in
accordance with the 1941 British armoured division organizational structure.
In January 1943, it was reorganized with one infantry brigade and one armoured
brigade. The division saw action in Italy from January 1944 to early January 1945
as part of the ist Canadian Corps. Operating with an additional infantry brigade
from July 1944 onward, the division in Italy had a much different structure than
armoured divisions fighting in northwest Europe. Ordered to northwest Europe
as part of Operation Goldflake, the division moved by road to Livorno, Italy, in
carly February 1945. It was then transported by ship to Marseille, France, and
by road and rail to Belgium, arriving in late February. After reorganizing itself
and being re-equipped, the division took part in combat operations in northwest
Europe from 31 March until the end of hostilities!" The division's commanding
officer was Major-General Bertram Hoffmeister. The two main fighting com-
ponents of the division were the u1th Canadian Infantry Brigade and the sth
Canadian Armoured Brigade. The armoured brigade consisted of the 2nd Can-
adian Armoured Regiment (Lord Strathconas Horse) (Royal Canadians), the
sth Canadian Armoured Regiment (the 8th Princess Louises [New Brunswickl
Hussars), and the gth Canadian Armoured Regiment (the British Columbia
Dragoons). The mechanized infantry component of the brigade was the
Westminster Regiment (Motor).
The uth Canadian Infantry Brigade contained the Perth Regiment, the Irish
Regiment of Canada, and the Cape Breton Highlanders. The uth Independent
Machine Gun Company (the Princess Louise Fusiliers) was available to provide
support for the infantry regiments. Like the 4th Canadian Armoured Division,
the sth Canadian Armoured Division did not possess a machine-gun bat-
talion. Divisional reconnaissance was provided by a fourth armoured regiment,
the grd Canadian Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment (the Governor Genera's
Horse Guards). The two Roval Canadian Artiller feld artillery regiments within
the division were the 17th Field Regiment and the 8th Field Regiment (Self-
Propelled) Antitank and antiaircraft assets were provided by the sth Light
Anti-Aircraft Regiment, RCA, and the 4th Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA.
The ist and and Canadian Armoured Brigades were independent armoured
formations consisting of three armoured regiments each Thace brigades were
