48 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
regulating station section, a stores section, an ammunition section, and a tank
section. It received all manner of supplies, vehicles, and equipment from British-
controlled vehicle and ordnance depots located within close transportation
distance to the First Canadian Army rail- or roadhead.
Rail- and roadheads were located in the Line of Communications Area and
were the logistical start points for the Canadian Army in northwest Europe. In
1944-45, as the front moved forward, there were often multiple rail- and road-
heads in existence that included various Service Corps units and numbered
supply depots. The OMC distributed what it received from the British Army
to Canadian Army-level equipment-storage locations, fuel and ammunition
dumps, and vehicle parks. Before anything moved or entered storage, the
OMC and road- and railhead personnel worked to prepare all war material
for long-term storage or immediate use as required. In a reverse flow, these
road- and railheads also received damaged or obsolete equipment removed
from the front.lº
If railroad transport was not available, new vehicles and ordnance were driven
forward from the Line of Communications Area depots to the corps-level ord-
nance field park." By April 1945, there were two ordnance field parks within the
First Canadian Army!? The corps-level ordnance field park contained everything
to support a complete army corps, with the exception of rations, water, and
petroleum products. All forms of heavy and light weapons and all types of am-
munition and spares for all weapon systems were present. Smaller stores such
as small arms, optical, engineering, signals, and workshop equipment were also
held. Large parking areas had row upon row of new and repaired "A" and "B"
types. Only light "A" vehicles were present, the heavier armoured fighting vehicles
(AFVs) having their own separate transport and replacement system. There
was a wide variety of specialist "A" and "B" vehicles (command vehicles, wireless
trucks, recovery vehicles, and specialist light tracked carriers) present. 3
This park then fed the forward division-level ordnance field parks and re-
spective armoured or infantry subfield parks. From these parks, deliveries
were either made to further supply points or signed for on a need basis by the
regimental-level units that required them. For smaller deliverable items that
could be pushed forward, these parks contained divisional delivery points. At
these delivery points, unit "B" Echelon troops of the combat arms regiments
showed up to sign for authorized equipment, vehicles, and weapons and sup-
plies on a need basis.
Heavy AFVs - the major weapons systems of the armoured, armoured recon-
naissance, self-propelled field artillery, and antitank units - were the vehicles that
required the most logistical resources to transport. As depicted in Figure 3,2
Vehicles and Weapons 49
Figure 3.2
The AFV replacement system
Corps troops
armoured
car regiment
Self-propelled
artillery, OP tanks,
and tank destroyers
in field and antitank
regiments
Armoured recce
regiment (tanks)
Armoured brigade
x three armoured
regiments (tanks)
Corps delivery
25th CADR
Forward
delivery
25th CADR
Corond-line
repair
workshop
Ranaired
ArUs
Army delivery
25th CADR
Third-line
repain
wOrksnOt
Donaired
AFVS
Rear line of
Communications Terminal Area
Tank park
AFVs received by Ordnance
Maintenance Company
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 10,663, "First Canadian Army Plans Diagram of AFV'A' Vehicle Recovery,
Repair and Replacement," file 215C1.045 (D12); and Grodzinski, Operational Handbook for the First
Canadian Army, 89-90, Appendix E.
AFVs were cut away at the OMC and processed along a separate transport
path. Prior to large-scale operations, armoured regiments wanted the number
of operational tanks to be as close to the war establishment figures as possible.
As an example of maximum serviceability prior to operations, and Canadian
Armoured Brigade's strength on 31 January 1945, just prior to Operation Verit-
able, was 214 tanks against a war establishment figure of 226. '* Units contain-
ing armour reported their replacement needs through an "AFV or tank state"
that would be reported on a daily or weekly basis.
These daily and weekly returns from the regimental headquarters of each unit
were forwarded up the chain of command. For example, an armoured regi-
ment's AFV state would be a daily summary of whether 75 mm Cruiser tanks
(Sherman V), 17-pounder Fireflies (Sherman Ic or Vc with the longer gun), and
37 mm reconnaissance (Stuart Recce) light tanks were fit, not fit, or written off.
"Fit" referred to an AFV being fully combat operational. On 1 November 1944,
