112 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Although an impressive number, it was insufficient to cope with the sle
demands of infantry regiments for new personnel, especial to tea.
Canadian Infantry Division. And not all reinforcement were nant - .,
were artillery and armoured troops. The actual infantry reinfrentso.
divided among two infantry divisions, an armoured division, multiple smal
units, and headquarters. Nonbattle casualties resulting from bate chast
and normal occurrences of accidents, illness and disease increase the ont
evacuees. In August, the Royal Regiment of Canada's 4th Canadian later
Brigade suffered 97 nonbattle casualties. This was in comparison to the 150
battle casualties suffered during the same month.54 A total of 259 nobatie
casualties occurred within the three regiments of the brigade for the month dr
August, a significant number.55
Combat for noninfantry units within the and Canadian Infantry Diat
had also been difficult, but they had not sufered similar casualies. Wate
flicting large losses to enemy armour. the and Anti_Tank Regiment. RCA, hit
suffered only 187 battle casualties during lulv and Angust 56 The field artille
units also suffered very low casualty rates due to their rear positions on t
battlefield. August battle casualties for the ath Field Regiment, RCA, totalled
twenty-two.s7
For the znd Canadian Armoured Brigade, some of the hardest fighting o
the campaign occurred during Operation Totalize. The armoured units soul
to break through German positions and advance south to Ealise and they wer
only partially successful in achieving these goals. During Operation Tractable
it finally met these objectives. In each of these operations, the brigade supported
the dismounted infantry units of the 2nd and 3rd Canadian Infantry Divisiot
Following these operations, the regiments took an active role in the capture 0)
Falaise and the encirclement of the trapped German forces. Large tank losser
occurred within the brigade during these final operations of the Normand
Campaign. A successful repair-and-replacement program, however, ensurel
adequate tank strenaths within the regiments. As of 21 August the and Canadia
Armoured Brigade contained 265 tanks on strength in comparison to its war
establishment figure of 199. This return placed the brigade 33 percent over is
authorized strength in this category 58 It should be noted that not all these tank
were operational, and many were being repaired by the LADs or part of the
armoured brigade headquarters squadron. Many tanks were lost to mechanic
breakdown in late August during rapid advances across northern France after
repaired AFVs to maintain its strength.
Normandy. During this month, the brigade received seventy-three new a
The Normandy Campaign 113
Arguably among the most powerful Canadian divisions, the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division was the last to arrive on the Normandy front and partici-
pate in the campaign. The division landed in France in mid-July but did not
begin offensive operations until 1 August. As a result, the month of July is not
included in the statistical totals and the divisional records. As of 1 August, total
divisional strength stood at 829 officers and 14,757 other ranks. At this point,
all regiments within the division were at or close to their war establishment
personnel strengths. The three armoured regiments within the armoured brig-
ade had high personnel levels. For example, as of 29 July, the 2ist Canadian
Armoured Regiment, contained 37 officers and 654 other ranks, placing it
1 percent overstrength. The other two armoured regiments had similar returns.
The Lake Superior (Motor) Regiment also contained satisfactory personnel
levels. Its strength stood at 36 officers and 811 other ranks as of 29 July 1944,
98 percent of its war establishment. ' The loth Canadian Infantry Brigade's
three regiments were also close to their establishment numbers. To take two
regiments as examples, the Lincoln and Welland Regiment contained 37 off.
cers and 810 other ranks, g9 percent of its authorized strength," while the
Algonquin Regiment was just as strong, with 37 officers and 803 other ranks,
98 percent of its war establishment. The personnel levels within all four RCA
regiments was adequate, with a combined strength of 187 officers and 3,181
other ranks. There were some shortages, however. The strength of the sth Anti-
Tank Regiment stood at 37 officers and 692 other ranks, 93 percent of its au-
thorized strength. 65
Due to its reduced infantry component, the 4th Canadian Armoured Div-
ision did not contain nearly as many personnel as an infantry division. However,
it possessed many heavy weapons and AFVs. givine it increased combat nower
As of 31 luly there were adequate invento hat "a" chide within the
division. The division contained 830 combat "A" vehicles versus its authorized
strength of 783. Of this number, 333 were Sherman medium or Stuart light
tanks. A shortage of 17-pounder-equipped Sherman Firefly tanks did exist.
had been issued. Of the forty-eicht When IT famethrower carriers that were
Against an authorized strength of forty-five Sherman Ve Fireflies, only eight
authorized. none had been issued to the division. But the division's inventories
of heavy weapons were satisfactory." It contained is heavy weapons, exactly
the number it was authorized Because it was an armoured division, with much
of its strength concentrated in combat "A" vehicles, the division had fewer heavy
weapons than an infantry division. This shortage was compensated for by a
large number of AFVs, many of which were self-propelled artillery pieces.
