154 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
The division then switched its advance to the east, relieving the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division and advancing from Groningen to Delfzijl. In what was the
division's last significant battle, the Canadian Scottish Regiment of the 7th
Canadian Infantry Brigade took the village of Wagenborgen in a two-day batle
with armoured cunna 69 Conceir into Cermanu tor the aft woole of the wat,
the division cantured the Carman city of Leer and advanced north to the
vicinities of Eden and Aurich against disintegrating opposition. Here, the war
ended for the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division.
The German forces limited capabilities in the last months of the war allowed
the divisional RC.A regiments to operate within a reduced level of. Field artillery
regiments continued to use their full offensive capability to bombard enemy
positions with littlo dander of saunterbatterv fire occurting, Apart from mine
routes and the dangers of infantry.combat for their forward observation Dartie
their weapons systems on ground targets from long range, also significantly
limiting the danger to themselves.
In spring 1945, the number of battle and nonbattle casualties within the div-
ision's five RCA regiments had changed little from those suffered in the all and
Winter Totle in Elators about 1.0 santosla cacualtiac A tota
of 116 reinforcemente bad been dieratabad combatting ongoing attrition ?
The artillery-hased destine afthe Canadian Army ensured that a constantleve
of damage was done to the enemy bu the division's three field regiments. This
was achieved in exchange for few artillery casualties within these regiments.
The German forcee were bombarded conctantly by an unseen enemy the RCA
which they could do very little about.
The divida, infanta brict house brunt of tho holtar hotues
FebrutV and Ancil Two infantry regimente token as examples reveal tha
matched with sa, sanhatto sacate Dainfareemente to Lean +Lie codiment
up to strength totalled oe 72 Decite receiving reinforcements totalling fiv
muster 21 officers and 761 other rante T. Dédiment de la Chaudière, part of the
8tb Canadian Infanter Deia tAMarad 220 battlo and tea nonbattle casualties
On 20 Anil tha regimente cranath was to officers and gof other rankie 7
pool of NRMA conscripts?* Reinforcements for all army trades at this stage
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 155
of the war were plentiful, and leave to the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
and other locations was regularly approved on a rotational basis for soldiers.
Deserving long-service members were also eligible for leave to Canada, a wel-
come respite for soldiers who had been overseas since 1940 or 1941?5
Following the difficult battles in the Rhineland, in April and May the 2nd
Canadian Armoured Brigade supported units of the 2nd Canadian Corps as
they drove northward across the Rhine into the northern Netherlands and
Germany. These final operations of the war were mounted against disintegrat-
ing German opposition, and casualties were lower than in previous opera
The combined personnel losses of all three armoured regiments durin
thirty-five-day period totalled 86 battle casualties and 102 nonbattle losse
regiments were reinforced with 282 replacements during this period, a
them to remain close to their war establishment strengths. As an exam
27th Canadian Armoured Regiment's strength on s May was 35 officers a
other ranks. These figures placed it at 97 percent of its authorized stren
the end of hostilities.
On 30 April, Sherman, Sherman Firefly, and Stuart strength within the b
amounted to 227 vehicles against a war establishment of 226. This total
the brigade at just over 100 percent of its authorized strength?" These I
illustrate the constant effort that had gone into reinforcing the brigade to
the constant drain of AFVs lost to enemy action and mechanical failure
nd Canadian Armoured Priondes three regiments eni
war in nori
Germany, supporting the znd Canadian Corps last infan
ations.
For the 4th Canadian Armoured Division, preparatio
onti
drive east in Operation Blockbuster saw it assemble in Cleve
February?" On 26 February, the division attacked east
Wemmershof between the lines of the 2nd and grd Canadian
Divided into five battle groups, the division successfully atta
Udem ridgeline: On 27 February, it began a further assault t
the Tuschen and Balberger Wald forest areas, south of the la
Forest. The 1oth Canadian Infantry Brigade was relieved on 1 Ma
limited gains. Going back into action the next day, it continuec
Only after bitter fighting and slow progress did the division reach
Xanten Road on 3 March." A further advance towards the G
Veen on 6 March was halted by stiff German resistance. The di
grouped and then mounted further assaults that encountered
sistance. On 9 March, the town finally fell when German forc
The following day, the infantry of the 1oth Canadian Infantry Briga
Winnenthal, successfully capturing the town.
