106 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
was entering its final work-up phase before deploying to the continent to join
the invasion forces. As of 31 May, the division contained 643 combat "A" vehicles
versus a war establishment of 593, making it 8 percent overstrength. Some "X"
vehicle shortages did exist at the beginning of June 1944. Only thirty-six of the
sixty authorized medium machine-gun tracked carriers had been issued to the
machine-gun battalion. There were only seventeen Humber armoured cars
present against the authorized number of twenty-nine. This shortcoming was
offset by the unauthorized presence of nine Fox armoured cars, but the div-
ision was still short three. There were thirty-two tracked 4.2-inch mortar carriers
on the war establishment figures, but none had been issued. Against an autor-
ized number of fifty-four Wasp II tracked flamethrower carriers, none had been
issued. This last "A" vehicle was a very valuable infantry support weapon. Its
employment with other Canadian divisions would prove to be effective, espe-
cially against entrenched infantry. Twenty-First Army Group's monthly returns
for nonvehicle equipment for the division do not exist for 31 May or 3o June."
The first return with the division's equipment listed is for 3 July, which was after
a significant period of combat had occurred. However, in evaluating the war
diaries from the division's regiments there is no mention of severe shortages in
any major weapons systems.
Once the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division's component brigades, including
all their vehicles and weapons, were concentrated on the continent in mid-uly,
they participated in Operation Atlantic on 19-21 July. In this, their first combat
operation since the Dieppe Raid, they were badly mauled, suffering large losses
from German armoured counterattacks? Poor execution of combined arms
tactics left the battalions highly vulnerable to direct German AFV fire. The dis-
mounted infantry were not adequately supported by other arms during assauls,
particularly by armour, and this led to catastrophic losses. After Operation
Atlantic the division particinated in Oneration Spring on 2e July again king
heavy casualties for very limited gains.26
Though there were significant personnel losses in August, the bulk of the
casualties inflicted on the division during the or mandy Campaign occurred
in July. As a result of Overations Atlantic and Soring, by 21 July the division'
overall strength had fallen by over 1,261 men. To compound the damage, this
figure was recorded after all of July's personnel reinforcements had been ac-
cepted.? The Royal Highland Regiment of Canada (the Black Watch) of the sth
Canadian Infantry Brigade suffered 20> battle casualties on s lulv alone, 28 The
extent of the damage to the regiment is reflected in a 27 July strength return.
The regiment on this date contained 32 officers and 415 other ranks, 53 percent
of its war establishment.?9
The Normandy Campaign 107
Because of the division's back-to-back participation in two major operations
in late July 1944, its infantry brigades lost a large number of personnel in a short
amount of time. These deficits would not be reduced significantly until just
prior to the Battle of the Scheldt in mid-September. The infantry regiments
were still combat ready, but they had reduced capabilities. Every time they re-
ceived reinforcements, they were immediately engaged in new combat oper-
ations, losing even more personnel. In this manner, the strength of the regiments
was slowly but steadily reduced during late July and early August.
In response to these heavy losses, replacements were sent to the and Canadian
Infantry Division, but they did not arrive quickly enough or in significant
enough numbers to mitigate ongoing losses. The main challenge was that per-
sonnel losses were occurring in much higher volumes and much more quickly
than the reinforcement system could handle. After Operation Atlantic, there
were not enough replacement infantry officers and general duty infantrymen
located to the division to rectify the shortcomings. A 22 July 1944 letter to the
and Canadian Corps commander, Lieutenant-General Guy Simonds, from
Corps Deputy Adjutant and Quartermaster General Brigadier H.V.D. Laing,
spells out the main obstacles to reinforcing the division:
1. GOC 2nd Infantry Division phoned me at approximately 2100 hours that he
anticipated the following shortages as a result of operations of the last 24 hours.
Replacements required: Officers 8, Other Ranks 750-1,000.
2. The above mention reinforcements are applicable very largely to the infantry
of the division, and in particular, to the SSR, the Essex Scottish and the Fusiliers
Mont-Royal, but to the latter battalion only to a small degree.
3. The reinforcement situation in the Rft Battalions, according to the latest in-
formation given to the DAQG on the 21 July, 1944, is, in brief, that there are
approximately 26 officers and 150 other ranks available, the ORs being, of
course, general duty.
4. In the division forward battalion there are 6 officers and 120 other ranks."
ment of reinforcements, depleting the font favailable reinforcements set aside
It also should be noted that on 20 July the division had just received an allot-
forit. General duty (other ranks) infantry were available, but in mid-July a large
number of them were located in reinforcement organization bases in England.
The personnel shortages could be remedied but not immediately. In the mean-
time, ongoing losses due to combat conditions continued. In these circum-
stances, the division could not meet the challenge of maintaining its war
establishment personnel strength in July and August.
