52 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
combat operations. On 12 August, however, a further sixteen tanks were deliv-
ered, bringing up the regiment's new tank deliveries to thirty-eight? The number
of tanks and the speed with which they arrived was impressive.
Examining the record of the 27th Canadian Armoured Regiment (the
Sherbrooke Fusiliers) over an eighteen-day period in August 1944 illustrates the
AFV replacement and repair process within an average Canadian armoured
regiment. Over two and half weeks, the 27th CAR lost a significant number of
vehicles because of enemy action and mechanical failure. It had participated in
Operations Totalize and Tractable and in the initial battles of the Falaise Pocket.
Though significantly weakened, after the delivery of new and repaired vehicles,
the regiment fielded thirty-eight fit tanks on 18 August. Over the next two days,
it repaired two additional tanks within its LAD, for a total of forty fit by 20
August? Though not perfect, this was enough to theoretically field three squad-
rons of four troops. Each troop could field three tanks each plus four for the
headquarters' squadron.
In contrast, within the German Army, tank losses due to combat and mech-
anical failure were not replaced as efficiently. As an example, the second battalion
of the German Panzer Lehr Regiment 130 in Normandy received only eleven
replacement 7.5 cm L/ 48 gunned Panzer IV tanks on 8 July 1944, having received
none in June? The effects of combat, mechanical failures, and battle damage
on the battalion's operational strength between 1 June and 26 June were severe.
Repairs were also slow, as they occurred within the panzer units rather than in
specialized, separate repair units. As of 26 June, there were forty-seven Panzer
IVs in short- and long-term repair shops, all near the chaos of the front lines.?*
Over the course of the campaign, the asth CADR successfully resupplied all
Canadian units operating heavy AFVs. This success was due to large levels of
production from repair workshops and 25th CADR forward-delivery squadrons
being able to maintain large floats. As an example, "D" Squadron delivered a
total of 295 new and repaired AFVs to the 4th Canadian Armoured Division in
October 1944.29
This was enough to nearly re-equip the entire division. As illustrated in Fig-
ures 3.3 and 3.4, while Canadian armoured regiments maintained their strength,
opposing German units withered. It also certainly helped that Allied forces at
this time had total air superiority, large amounts of replacement equipment,
and unimpeded vehicle movement and recovery.
The Canadian Army did not use any special delivery squadrons to transport
non-AFV major weapons systems and other equipment to a fighting unit. Once
past army-level ordnance parks, the weapons and equipment were deposited
or driven to corps-level ordnance field parks, as illustrated in Figure 3.1. From
Vehicles and Weapons 53
Figure 3.3
Sherman tank strength, 6th CAR, June 1944
Panzer IV tank strength, German II/SS Panzer Regiment 12, June 1944
Figure 3.4
Appendix E, "Strength Returns for the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade in June 1944."
Source: Jarymowyz, "The Quest for Operational Maneuver in the Normandy Campaign," 336,
capabilities of the LAD, all these Shermans must be considered operational.
the practice of immediately back loading tanks with any deficiencies or damage beyond the repair
Note: War establishment was fifty Sherman V and 17-pounder Sherman Firefly tanks. Because of
6 June
7 June
2 June
3 June
18 June
9 June
21 June
4 June
27 June
8 June
29 June
30 June
7 June
24 June
26 June
Note: War establishment was 101 Panzer IV S
Source: Számvérber, Waffen SS Armour in Normandy, 234, Appendix 7, "Tank Strength of SS-Panzer
Regiment 12. 1 Tune-11 August 1944.
