80 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
forward infantry line companies. Because these companies' experienced, highly
trained, and effective infantry platoons were the real fighting power of the
unit, the Black Watch's combat effectiveness in the immediate aftermath was
reduced to nothing. Inexperienced replacements did not perform at the same
level as their predecessors, so the Black Watch could not regain its previous
combat effectiveness for some time.
It was dangerous for any combat arms unit to launch a new operation after
receiving a large number of new replacements. If new personnel were not in-
tegrated with appropriate refresher training, heavy losses could occur. This is
what befell the Black Watch on 5 August, during its second failed operation
at May-sur-Orne. This action involved many new replacement personnel who
had not had time to acclimatize themselves, and there was no experienced
leadership at the senior noncommissioned officer level. " Experienced leader-
ship was vital in that it facilitated refresher training once replacement soldiers
arrived at the front. Having a refresher in field craft and effective combat
leadership at the ten-man infantry section level was important to overall unit
performance and for ensuring that new soldiers did not quickly become
casualties. 4
It was beneficial to slowly acclimatize new personnel to front-line condi
tions, regardless of the combat arm. Upon arrival, a new infantry replacement
would not know any of his fellow platoon members or his section commander.
To function as a well-oiled machine in combat, each section member had to
possess a certain confidence in his fellow soldiers and his weapons. This came
through training and shared experiences, the most valuable but most danger-
ous being combat itself. And it needed to happen as soon as possible because
of the often immediate need to thrust soldiers back into action. However
military necessity and a lack of forces meant this training often did not occur.
Failure to accomplish successful integration could result in poor combat per-
formance and increased casualties within the ranks of the new personnel, es-
pecially in the infantry While a shortage of infantry and constant high-intensity
operations from August to November hindered the infantry replacements ability
to integrate, a period of inactivity in winter 1944-45 allowed for unit training
and gradual integration.
The US Army's approach to integrating new personnel into infantry units
had had negative results from 1943 to 1944. Replacements were thrown into
combat with little chance of getting to know their fellow squad members or
conduct realistic training prior to reaching the front line Althouch it helped
maintaining the strength of front-line units, this practice reduced the combat
Army Doctrine and Losses 81
effectiveness of individual companies within American infantry battalions. In
fall 1944, this approach changed: new replacements were received in divisional
replacement camps that gave refresher training,45 They were then posted to
companies that were out of the front line, giving them additional time to ac-
climatize themselves.
The re-emergence of the supremacy of concentrated artillery, in which the
British Empire had achieved mastery during the First World War, was in-
strumental in improving the battlefield performance of the British Common-
wealth armies in the last years of the Second World War. From the onset, the
role of artillery in the Second World War was decisive. It was an artillery war
first and foremost, with half of all combat casualties resulting from indirect
fire. In the First World War and the interwar period, huge leaps in the techno-
logical development of artillery weapons had occurred. Shells, fuses, and the
chemistry of propellants had all advanced. The role of artillery in all armies
during the Second World War was a basic one: to fire munitions beyond the
range and power of the infantry and armoured units' direct-fire weapons.
Following the British defeat in France in 1940, a decentralization of artillery
command and control had occurred. During 1940-41, this change resulted in
an increased allotment of artillery at the division and brigade level, allowing
more artillery to be available to divisional and brigade commanders during
a fluid, mobile battle, similar to the German model. British failures in North
Africa showed that this dilution of artillery force made it a nonunified organ-
ization whose power could not be massed for a serious blow against enemy
attacks or defensive positions.")
This battlefield reality led to an urgent reorganization of the British Royal
Regiment of Artillery, commonly known as the Royal Artillery. This parent
organization encompassed all British Army artillery regiments. Command
structures such as Divisional Commander Royal Artillery and Corps Com-
mander Corps Royal Artillery were reintroduced, and tactical groupings such
as the corps-level Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) were reformed.
Sophisticated communication nets and synchronized tactics were developed
that were superior to anything fielded by the German Army and amazingly
destructive. 48
British Royal Artillery field artillery regiments that used the ubiquitous
Ordnance QF 25-pounder howitzer took on two major roles. The first was to
engage targets of opportunity with concentrated fire. The second was to carry
out fire plans of predicted fire, which were highly sophisticated. One tactic was
moving fire, utilizing a creeping or standing barrage, which provided a barrier
