142 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
offensive, and between 8 and 19 February its infantry brigades captured Wyler,
Kranenberg, and the area near Louisendorf, Germany, the site of bitter combat
as German armoured forces counterattacked, battering the division's infantry
regiments and causing some local reverses.' With armoured support, the division
eventually turned the tables on these attacks, and the German forces were forced
to withdraw because of heavy losses, By 21 February, the operation was complete.
During the fighting, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division suffered high person-
nel casualties on several occasions.
Prior to combat operations in the Netherlands and Germany in 194s, the gl
Canadian Infantry Division had few personnel deficiencies. Its strength as of
31 January stood at 990 officers and 18,346 other ranks. The program of remus-
tering general-duty reinforcements had been successful from September on-
ward? Immediately prior to combat operations in February, there was no lack
of combat capability within the division's three infantry brigades and divisional
units. Its infantry regiments had suffered few battle casualties and received
adequate reinforcement to cover nonhuttle losses between November 1944 and
January 1945. The number of nonbattle casualties for all combat arms units
had incranent in the winter mouthe barause personnel were living in dugout
or ruined buildings. The Royal Winnipeg Rifles lost 443 personnel to battle and
254 to nonbattle causes in three months. As of 31 January 1945, it received 323
reinforcements, bringing its strength up to 38 officers and 837 other ranks. Le
Régiment de la Chaudière suffered 49 battle and 176 nonbattle casualties during
the winter period. Over 410 soldiers rejoined the regiment or were posted as
reinforcements; on 31 January, its strength was 43 officers and 795 other ranks.
At the end of January, the RCA regiments also contained high levels of per-
sonnel. The grd Anti-Tank Regiment's strength stood at 36 officers and 632 other
ranks, putting it 3 percent over its authorized strength? Casualties were low
among the RCA regiments due to the limited capability of the enemy and their
battlefield position to the rear of friendly infantry regiments. The artillery regi-
ments were active in supporting the infantry's patrolling activities and in en-
gaging targets of opportunity. The RCA's antiaircraft and antitank crews were
also involved in the engagement of enemy positions and occasionally took
small infantry roles. Total casualties in January for all RCA regiments within
the grd Canadian Infantry Division were 3 battle and 156 nonbattle. The regi-
ments received a total of 146 replacements during the month. '
As of 31 January, the division's equipment and weaponry inventories were
similar to the numbers on strength in October 1944. Little had changed apart
from the acquisition of more potent combat "A" vehicles and heavy weapons."
New weapons systems on hand included twelve towed 17-pounder antitank guns,
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 143
acquired at the expense of a similar number of 6-pounders. New combat "A"
vehide included twelve new Valentine Archer 17-pounder self-propelled tank
destroyers, received in exchange for Mio 3-inch tank destroyers. Unauthorized
vehices held by the division at this point included nineteen Wasp II flame-
thrower carriers and fourteen Humber scout cars.
Combat commenced in mid-February. From 8-14 February the division
deared the southern banks of the Waal and Rhine Rivers. Because these areas
were fooded, the operations were largely amphibious. Advancing southeast, by
14 February the assaulting infantry brigades reached the Rhine at Emmerich.
Between 16-17 February, the division's lead regiments assaulted Moyland Wood
in their part of the Hochwald Gap battle. Forest fighting against dug- in enemy
positions was difficult, and the progress was slow. Follow-on forces then as-
saulted west past the German town of Louisendorf, taking heavy casualties
when counterattacked by German armoured forces. 2
In fall and winter 1944-45, the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade's regiments
accepted personnel reinforcements and more advanced armoured vehicles. As
a result all three regiments had satisfactory personnel levels and sufficient
quantities of new and repaired battle tanks at the end of January. Between
November 1944 and January 1945, the 27th Canadian Armoured Regiment
received 350 personnel. " During the same period, the three regiments received
136 new and repaired Sherman, Sherman Firefly, and Stuart light tanks of all
In spring 1945, the brigade played a large role in supporting infantry oper-
ations during Operation Veritable. This advance through the Reichswald Forest
between the Maas and Rhine Rivers brought the 2nd Canadian Corps to the
vicinity of the German city of Goch. These offensive operations were followed
up by participation, in late February and early March, in Operation Blockbuster.
In these battles, the armoured regiments drove east through the forested areas
between the Rhine and Maas Rivers, supporting battalion-level infantry oper-
ations. This fighting was challenging as the armoured squadrons had little room
to manoeuvre. These engagements brought some of the last armoured encounters
of the war for the brigade, and it managed to inflict heavy losses on the German
armoured units. Many Sherman Firefly 17-pounder tanks were in action during
the fighting, and the well-armed tank was effective against German armour. The
regiments suffered a total of 121 battle and 230 nonbattle personnel casualties
in February and early March. 15
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division, as part of forces deployed in the
Nijmegen Salient, was subordinated to ist British Corps. As of 25 December
1944, it was designated an army reserve for the First Canadian Army and
