The
unde
the
dem
earth
C
worl
class
Sold
Man
artifi
cared
A
This
12 Introduction
For infantry regiments, the major equipment items were medium machine guns,
antitank guns, tracked carriers, and mortars. The number of these items held
by a unit indicated the army's ability to replenish equipment stocks during the
course of high-intensity combat operations.
The focus here is northwest Europe, and the analysis encompasses events
and battles in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and northern Germany. This
choice was not made to denigrate Canadian campaigns in Italy or other theatres;
rather, it reflects the fact that the Canadian Army's most powerful and complete
force was assembled in northwest Europe. Between June and August 1944, this
huge force faced the most powerful and concentrated enemy formations on the
western front, and the resulting battles led to catastrophic losses for the and
Canadian Corps, losses that were without equal in Italy or Sicily.
Despite these losses, the Canadian Army managed to sustain and reconstitute
units in its three traditional combat arms. By doing so, it managed to remain
in a perpetual state of offensive capability. While major losses did occur, its
combat power was never inhibited for an extended period. The Canadian Army's
constant state of strength reflected its administrative and logistic capability. Its
administrative strength and total combat power contributed greatly to eventual
victory.
Personnel Reinforcements
THE PERSONNEL REPLACEMENT system in the Canadian Army was designed
to be a constantly ongoing process for maintaining formations over the long
term. Several layers of bureaucracy were necessary to properly administer and
control the process. Many control points were needed to ensure that the right
number of replacements reached the units in a timely fashion and that the
system had the flexibility to divert or increase the flow. In June 1944, staff officers
at Canadian Military Headquarters (CMHQ), London, were reasonably confi-
dent that they had created a system that could meet any challenges that lay
ahead in northwest Europe.'
Personnel matters were the responsibility of the Adjutant General's Branch
within the Canadian Army and were referred to as "A" branch staff concerns.?
Logistics matters concerning supplies and war material were handled by "Q"
branch, the domain of the Quartermaster General Branch. "Q" matters were
more complicated because of the large amounts of war material and consumable
supplies required to sustain the Canadian Army in the field. As shown in Fig-
ure 1.1, two staff echelons, or groupings, were created to take on these functions
at 21st Army Group Headquarters, in France, prior to June 1944's Operation
Overlord. Their official titles were ist or "Q" Echelon (Quartermaster General)
and znd or "A" Echelon (Adjutant General). These organizations freed First
Canadian Army headquarters of all administrative and logistic matters not
immediately related to operations. The leadership of Canadian ist Echelon at
21st Army Group also oversaw and directed Canadian 2nd Echelon activities.
Canadian 2nd Echelon's primary focus was personnel administration and
replacement.
Canadian ist Echelon was commanded throughout 1944 by Brigadier A.W.
Beament. Following his tenure, Major-General E.L.M. Burns took command
in January 1945 after he relinquished command of ist Canadian Corps in Italy.
Both men were very experienced administrators who understood the import-
ance of their responsibilities. The commanding officer of Canadian 2nd Echelon
during 1944-45 was Colonel V.S.C. McClenaghan. He was also an officer who
had gained experience in administration and planning duties while serving
in the Mediterranean theatre. To make all administrative processes with the
