42 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
the front, it is highly probable that they would have performed adequately in
whatever role was selected for them.
There is no way the leadership of the Canadian Army could have judged in
October 1944 whether a large number of infantry reinforcements would be
needed for future operations. Given the challenges encountered while trying
to create a reinforcement reserve out of remustered personnel in fall 1944, the
only feasible option was to dip into the NRMA personnel supply. Furthermore,
there were many military uncertainties in late 1944 that made the utilization of
NRMA personnel appear to be a necessity® Had Allied operations in the
Rhineland not been postponed, had the German military fought on until mid-
1945, and had the Netherlands been aggressively liberated, it is likely that large
numbers of NRMA personnel would have been needed. A large infantry re-
inforcement pool needed to be created to sustain all Canadian combat arms
units for a possible long-term struggle, and previous attempts using only vol-
unteers had not been successful. The reserve, which had been so difficult to
establish, contained 24,500 personnel by late April 1945. Despite the great ad-
ministrative and political struggle to create it, Germany's surrender meant that
the reserve was never needed.81
Although the War Committee had approved the rapid growth of the Canadian
Army after 1942, both it and NDHQ in Ottawa ignored the need for a detailed
plan to reinforce the army when it engaged in combat operations. Both parties
understood that the costs of modern warfare would demand potentially large
numbers of new personnel to sustain this military entity. The need for conscrip-
tion was a topic that was politically unacceptable to the Liberal government
and one that the Canadian Army did not wish to force because it would endanger
its expansion plans. Furthermore, historian Richard Walker argues that the army
put no particular emphasis on the need to be efficient in its use of manpower
or on pursuing a successful volunteer-recruitment campaign in Canada. It if
did, it would have been endorsing the then all-volunteer status of the overseas
Canadian Army (Active), a situation of which it did not approve. During the
months leading up to Operation Overlord, Lieutenant-General Stuart failed to
heed clear indications that a shortage of infantry, other ranks, reinforcements
could occur. National Defence Headquarters and CMHO, London, signifi-
cantly failed in their responsibility to accurately forecast future infantry casual-
ties for the campaign in northwest Europe. These two headquarters accepted
1943 British infantry-loss projections as accurate when ample operational evi-
dence suggested otherwise. The final failure was a long-term inability to create
an adequate reserve of reinforcement infantry in the months leading up to the
invasion of Europe, despite having excess Canadian Army (Active) personnel.
The Sixty-Day Shortage 43
because of these failures, infantry units engaged in ongoing combat operations
were weakened by a lack of reinforcements to make good their rapid losses.
The shortage of infantry, other ranks, reinforcements only affected the
Canadian Infantry Corps in August and September 1944. The situation was
resolved in late September because of the earlier implementation of a large-
scale remustering program. While this remustering program was temporarily
effective, its effects were not rapid, and the shortage persisted over a sixty-day
period. It is arguable that a more ruthless management of personnel in the all-
volunteer Canadian Army (Active) could have minimized the problems of
summer 1944. The crucial decision to create an adequate reserve of infantry
reinforcements in spring 1944 was never made, and only half-measures were
taken to resolve the situation, allowing the events of August and September
1944 to occur. This reserve, incompetently pursued by the Canadian Army
during 1944, was only successfully created after the political decision to insert
large numbers of conscript NRMA personnel. Because a limited number of
these personnel reached the front, the First Canadian Army maintained its
nearly all-volunteer status to the war's conclusion.
