176 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
constantly at full strength was tremendous. Consistently possessing a superio
amount of resources gave Canadian units an undeniable edge before any oper-
ation began. When this strength was matched with a superior artillery-based
doctrine that caused extreme attrition of the enemy while preserving the strength
of Canadian forces, the First Canadian Army became unstoppable.
Senior leadership within the Canadian Army in Europe always understood
that there was a direct correlation between adequate personnel levels and combat
power As a result. Canadian Army reinforcement organizations made deter
mined efforts to maintain these levels. What temporary personnel challenges
did occur in the late summer of 1944 were due to a failure to predict what in-
fantry reinforcements were required and remuster surplus noninfantry person-
nel. In sprine 1011 there was no overall shortage of reinforcement personnel
just excess numbers in the wrong army trades. Once these problems were ironed
out in late September 1944, infantry regiments were consistently kept at high
personnel levels for the remainder of the war.
Canadian units in northwest Europe were well equipped combat «a" vehicles
and heavy weapons. Little time was needed to replace or repair what losses oc
curred, and whatever challenges were present in repair turnaround times were
minuscule compared to those within the German military. While these vehice
and weapons sustems were effective enough to allow the Canadian Armv to ac-
comblish its missions. some were mars offortiuo than othere Infantry and ar-
moured forces faced challenges in this area, and the inability of the Canadian
Army to obtain quantities of the most effective equipment possibly influenced
casualty levels and performance Put thace weaknesses were comnensated for
by the superiority of the Canadian artillery arm. The RC As battlefield domin-
ance allowed the First Canadian Army to relentlessly advance.
Due to the First Canadian Army's massive combat over in 1944-45, it could
be slowed down or delayed, but never stopped. In battle after battle, victory
after victory was achieved. Though minor tapeical rebattle did occur, this field
army never suffered a major defeat in northwest Europe. What the enemy en-
countered in the last year of the war was an invincible army, an army of never-
ending strength.
Appendices
APPENDIX 1
War Establishments, Canadian Combat Arms Regiments,
Late 1944 and Early 1945
In Canadian regimental war diaries, official histories, and operational narratives,
there are accounts of units or subunits being "destroyed" or suffering large
losses"' in combat. These accounts will often mention the total number of cas-
ualties or quantity of equipment lost in a day's fighting. What is not presented
is the actual fighting strength of the unit, a figure necessary for understanding
the level of damage done to its fighting capability and establishment. If so many
tanks or men were lost, could the unit continue operations before reinforce-
ments arrived? To understand how these losses related to the unit's ability to
carry out future missions, it is important to comprehend the unit's size and
organization. This appendix briefly outlines the structure and size of Canadian
combat arms regiments of battalion strength. The second half of this study is
largely dedicated to the statistical records of these regiments, what losses they
incurred, and the reinforcements they received. Once these organizations are
outlined, it is easier to comprehend the significance of losses suffered and how
this damage could have affected the army's performance.
Each type of combat arms regiment within the Canadian Army had a different
role and was staffed and equipped accordingly. These regiments were structured
as battalion-sized units, with their role (infantry, armoured, artillery) influencing
how their companies (squadrons, batteries) were titled. This study encompasses
nineteen different types of combat arms regiments that served in northwest
Europe in 1944-45. Some armour, artillery, antitank, and antiaircraft regiments
had up to three different variants at the army, corps, and divisional level. Each
was unique because of its role, equipment establishment, or parent organiza-
tion. Due to these differences, this study includes the organizations of all variants
as separate figures, the exception being if the war establishments of two variants
were identical but were given different titles. As noted in the Introduction, Can-
adian units serving within British divisions in northwest Europe are excluded.
