50 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
the 4th Canadian Armoured Division fielded 247 fit tanks of all makes and 79
fit scout cars. For Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA) field artillery and antitank
units, self-propelled Mio tank destroyers and self-propelled Sexton howitzers
were reported as part of their gun state.' At the armoured brigade level, the
combined states of all armoured regiments would be forwarded to higher com-
mand from brigade headquarters. If an armoured unit was short tanks in any
of its troops or squadrons, it would be slotted to receive new AFVs at a certain
date. These repaired or new replacement tanks would be driven to the front,
transported by low-bed trailer or loaded onto rail cars, and then received at the
"B" Echelon of the receiving regiment.
The key component of the replacement process for armour was the 2sth Can-
adian Armoured Delivery Regiment (25th CADR). This regiment was divided
into a total of eight squadrons, designated "A" through "H.") The 25th CADR
squadrons in northwest Europe operated a sophisticated and efficient system
for supplying new and repaired AFVs to all Canadian Army units that operated
them. They also supplied British, Polish, and Czech units operating within the
Second British Army and First Canadian Army. The first 25th CADR squadrons
that landed in France in June-July were initially under the command of the 1st
British Corps. They were then incorporated into the 2nd Canadian Corps and
the First Canadian Army when they became operational in mid-July and early
August. "C" Squadron landed in Normandy on 7 June and immediately began
transferring tanks to the three armoured regiments of the znd Canadian
Armoured Brigade.!® On 10 July, "E" Squadron arrived within the beachhead.
This squadron was responsible for tank deliveries at the 2nd Canadian Corps
level. These two squadrons were followed by "P" Squadron, which landed on
23 July. This squadron would aid in railhead acceptance of AFVs and became
responsible for the delivery of vehicles at the First Canadian Army level once
the army became operational. In this role, it was also the squadron responsible
for sending tanks to British, Czech, and Polish armoured units under the First
Canadian Army's command. "D" Squadron landed on 26 July and was respon-
sible for all units within the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade.!9
British stocks of replacement AFVs were delivered to large vehicle depots on
the continent near roadheads and railheads by the British Army's transport units.
The Canadian Army's receiving procedure to accept these vehicles into service
was quite comprehensive. From August 1944 onward, the OMC's Tank Rail-
head Section and the 2sth CADR's "F" Squadron worked in tandem. These two
groups would receive a shipment of AFVs from a British Army-administered
Rear Vehicle Park (Tracked) ? Once they arrived, the new AFVs would have
their documents examined and kit removed and rechecked at the "P" Squadron
Vehicles and Weapons 51
tank park. Next, the armament would be degreased, and a general cleaning of
the fighting compartment would take place. After this, the sprockets, road
wheels, and tracks would be adjusted and repaired as required. Following this,
a general servicing of weapons, radios, and the power traverse would occur.
Any modifications needed would be completed by the 3rd Canadian AFV Sup-
port Unit and the 4th Canadian Armoured Troops (third-line maintenance)
Workshop, working alongside "F" Squadron. Once this step was concluded,
optics, radios, and fragile equipment would be installed or boxed for transport.
Next, all onboard stowage of ammunition would be completed in accordance
with authorized figures. Finally, the Light Aid Detachment (LAD) attached to
"" Squadron would then recertify all the AFVs to make sure they were mech-
anically fit. Finally, the tanks were ready to be sent out?" If fit tanks were not
issued right away, they would be maintained by asth CADR personnel in the
"F" Squadron tank park.
Once an order was received to send tanks forward, the appropriate number
would then be driven by rail or tank transporter from "F" Squadron to the 25th
CADR's corps delivery squadron.? This squadron would then feed the two
forward-delivery squadrons of the 25th CADR. Within their operating bases,
25th CADR squadrons operated "tank circuits" staf at each stop in the circuit
would check over an area of the tank. This repetitive inspection-and-receiving
process at each squadron could take time. While of questionable efficiency, it
was effective for resolving issues with newly arrived vehicles and prevented
these problems from reaching armoured regiments in the field. At any point,
repaired vehicles that had come from the RCEME's facilities could join a 25th
CADR squadron.
To meet demands for new AFVs quickly, 25th CADR squadrons usually had
an AFV float, or balance, that they could draw from; it was similar to the CBRG'S
reinforcement units. This float was the percentage of the total AFVs in service
with the front-line units that a 25th CADR squadron was designated to support.
Though this percentage went up and down with supply and demand, an effort
was made to maintain the desired inventory level to deal with emergencies. This
allowed the 2sth CADR to respond quickly to a recipient unit's requests for large
reinforcements. The best example of this rapid-response capability is "D" Squad-
ron's 10 August 1944 delivery of twenty-two fully crewed variants of Sherman
tanks to the 28th CAR. This regiment had lost forty-four Shermans (various
marks), two Stuart Recce, one Crusader antiaircraft tank, and one scout car in
battle on g August. * Thee, one diate resupply, plus four tanks the regiment had
as a reserve Left Out of Battle contingent, gave it a total reinforcement of twenty-
six new tanks. This number would theoretically make it capable of immediate
