114 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Designated as one of the follow-on divisions that formed the 2nd Canadian
Corps, the 4th Canadian Armoured Division's first elements landed in Nor-
mandy in mid-July 1944. Over the next several days, it concentrated its forma-
tions in the area near Caen. Placed under the command of the znd Canadian
Corps, the division's infantry units relieved those of 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division on 31 July" Once it took its place in the line, the 1oth Canadian Infantry
Brigade continued a chain of costly infantry attacks on the tactically important
Verrières Ridge. Two operations to capture the village of Tilly-la-Campagne,
on 1 and s August, were failures, the attacks bogging down." Following this.
minor actions, the division prepared itself for further offensive operations.
August 1944 would see some of the fiercest combat of the war, at a time when
the division's formation and unit commanders lacked combat experience.
The First Canadian Army's aim during this month was to exert pressure on
the German's right flank while the enemy's left flank was collapsing under pre-
sure from the First US Army's Operation Cobra and the British Second Armys
Operation Bluecoat. To help realize this coal, the division played a maior role
in Operation Totalize. This armoured assault to break the main line of German
resistance, capture Verrières Ridge, and exploit to the south towards Falaise was
only partially successful The ith Canadian Armoured Division did not capture
its obiectives on o August as part of the second phase of the operational plan.
Its advance was halted by traffic jams and strong German opposition, which
inflicted a significant amount of personnel and equipment losses. The heavies.
of these occurred within the 28th Canadian Armoured Regiment battle group
when German armoured forces annihilated the majority of the regiment and
part of the Algonquin Regiment.
Despite these challenges during Oneration Totalize, the division regrouped
for a further push on Falaise. The operational plan for Operation Tractable
called for the division to attack on 14 August from Signolles and then cros
the Laizon River and capture the three objectives of Rouvres, Perrières, and
Versainville. In the actual attack, Perrières and Rouvres were captured, but
Versainville was not reached. It would not be captured because of difficulty
crossing the Laizon River and German resistance. At this point, the German
forces were wealened and conducting a fiohting withdrawal moving pact is
large columns to escane the encirclement near Folice that was being created.
The 4th Canadian Armoured Divicion continued its drive on 15 August, when
the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade captured Épaney?" That same day, the 4th
Canadian Armoured Brigade reached the vicinity of Point 159 near Versainville
but was driven back by strong German opposition, On the morning of 16 August
the division was ordered to crocs the Ante River and then advance east to Trun
The Normandy Campaign 115
to meet units of the Third US Army. Attempting to cross the Ante River at
Damblainville on 17 August, elements of the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade
were forced back with heavy losses?" Diverted to a bridgehead on the Dives
River at Couliboeuf on the same day, the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade
successfully crossed the river. It then attacked east, capturing Les Moutiers-
en-Auge and Louvières-en-Auge with assistance from other units of the 1oth
Canadian Infantry Brigade?2
From 18 to 21 August the division attempted to block escape routes out of
the Falaise Pocket, suffering losses as the German forces tried to fight their way
out. Operating with Polish and American forces, the plan was for the division
to help secure the line at Chambois-St. Lambert-Trun along the Dives River,
blocking German movement east. In chaotic fighting, lead elements of the
division captured Trun on 18 August, establishing a blocking position. Because
ofheavy Allied air attacks and the sheer number of escaping enemy, the division
slowly lost contact with the neighbouring ist Polish Armoured Division?3
In the meantime, this division had captured Points 252 and 262 to the east,
establishing hilltop blocking positions against fleeing German forces and relief
attacks. On the morning of 19 August, the 29th Canadian Armoured Recon-
naissance Regiment battle group attacked and captured part of St. Lambert,
creating another blocking position. Because of increasing enemy pressure, the
often outnumbered Polish and Canadian forces could not maintain a solid
defensive perimeter. Despite the efforts of the defenders, on 20 August many
German units escaped the pocket. The nearly encircled German forces fought
hard to keep viable escape routes open, leading to considerable numbers of
Canadian and Polish casualties?* After fierce fighting, elements of the isolated
ist Polish Armoured Division were relieved by the 4th Canadian Armoured
Brigade on 21 August? The Docket was now firmly closed, and no further Ger-
man forces escaped.
Nearly continuous combat throughout August took a considerable toll on the
division. From the outset, it had been assigned demanding operational tasks
that were perhaps excessive for an inexperienced formation. In the loth Can-
adian Infantry Brigade the Argull and Sutherland Hichlandore of Canad
took 218 total battle casualties between a- Julv and an August In this period
the Algonquin Regiment suffered 244 casualties, the Lincoln and Welland
Regiment 258" Nonbattle casualties were less of an issue, with the Algonquin
Regiment losing twenty, the Lincoln and Welland Regiment seventy-one, and
the Argull and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada into no 7 Though these
personnel were not killed, wounded. or missing they were subtracted from the
infantry companies just as effectively as combat casualties.
