The b
unders
the 'ru
demon
earth' 1
Col
worke
class a
Soldie
militar
Aft
allowe
Many
artific
busin
non-
careel
All
This
Introduction
6 JUNE 1944. A day that witnessed the amphibious landing phase of Operation
Overlord, the Allied invasion of France. British, Canadian, and American forces
pierced German Atlantic Wall defences in five different locations in bitter fight-
ing that lasted most of the morning. By last light on 6 June 1944, the first Can-
adian formations to invade the continent, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division
and the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, were firmly entrenched in their part
of the Allied beachhead. They were the first forces of what would eventually
grow into the First Canadian Army, and they had begun what would be a long,
costly campaign to liberate northwest Europe, where hostilities concluded with
a ceasefire on 5 May 1945.
The Canadian forces' path to eventual victory over the Germans had three
distinct phases.' The first phase was a bitter campaign of attrition in Normandy,
where the Canadian Army prevailed against the strongest German formations.
By late August 1944, these enemy forces had been crushed in the Falaise Pocket.
The second phase then began with a long pursuit across France that saw the
liberation of enemy-held channel ports. This phase concluded with bitter fight-
ing to clear the Scheldt Estuary. They freed the port of Antwerp by November
1944. Following these two costly phases, the Canadian Army assumed defensive
positions along the Maas River. It held these static positions from November
1944 to January 1945. The third phase of combat operations began in February.
During it, 2nd Canadian Corps reunited with the ist Canadian Corps, redeployed
from Italy. The First Canadian Army now consisted of two complete Canadian
corps. Canadian formations within these two corps totalled three infantry div-
isions, two armoured divisions, two independent armoured brigades, and two
army-level artillery groupings.? Each of these formations was near full strength
in early April 1945, and together they made up the greatest Canadian military
force ever assembled in the history of the nation. In the last month of hostilities,
this force relentlessly advanced, sweeping aside all opposition.
The Canadian Army had not always achieved this battlefield dominance.
Before the German collapse in mid-August 1944, Canadian formations in
Normandy faced challenges they had not experienced in Italy in 1943-44. In
June, July, and August, they experienced heavy casualties inflicted on them by
