60 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
forward advanced workshop detachments. These were nonstandard special
teams detached from the workshop to meet a temporary need. They could be
made as large or small as the tactical situation demanded. These teams were
tasked with providing advanced recovery-and-repair services in cooperation
with RCEME's first-line maintenance LADs at the regimental level or remaining
behind a brigade workshop's main body as it advanced. If needed, the forward
advanced workshop could act as the link between the first and second lines of
maintenance, with these two lines taking the lion's share of repair, recovery, and
maintenance duties. 42
The first-line maintenance capability within the combat arms regiments was
the responsibility of the LAD workshops. One was attached to each RCA and
CAC regiment, the infantry LADs being held at the brigade level. For example,
the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade had the following LADs, each manned
by RCEME troops: the 6th Canadian Armoured Regiment contained the No. 54
LAD, the 1oth Canadian Armoured Regiment was assigned the No. 55 LAD,
and the 27th Canadian Armoured Regiment was issued the No. 85 LAD!3
These small, light detachments were designed to be mobile and had a min-
imum number of personnel, vehicles, and equipment. They dealt with easily
correctable problems that AFV and gun crews could aid in resolving within a
certain time limit. They put maximum effort into these easier problems and
backloaded what could not be handled quickly or was beyond their capabilities.
The LADs main duties were light welding, mechanical repairs, and assisting
with maintenance questions. They were spread evenly throughout the regi-
mental administrative ("A," "A2" «B) echelons of their respective regiment.
Vehicles, AFVs, and ordnance backloaded by a regimental LAD for second-
or third-line maintenance would be collected by their respective brigade work-
shops recovery platoon assets and backloaded to the brigade collection point.
This collection point was within the workshop's base of operations or very nea
it. It also worked closely not only with the three regiments of each brigade but
also with divisional troops, such as the field artillery, machine-gun, and antitank
regiments. The LADs from these divisional units would be designated to feed
a certain brigade workshop in the same manner as one of the armoured of
infantry brigade's regimental LADs. An infantry brigade's workshop would col-
lect, repair, or backload all infantry AFVs, vehicles, and ordnance in the same
manner as the armoured brigade workshop.
The second line of the RCEME repair organization consisted of the main body
of the brigade workshop. For example, the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade
had the 2nd Armoured Brigade Workshop assioned to it. Despite the misnomer
the brigade workshop operated in what was considered a divicional-level repair
Vehicles and Weapons 61
area if the workshop in question was part of an infantry or armoured division.
The second-line brigade workshop's main bodies in armoured or infantry div-
isions were located no more than two hours from the location of the LAD. They
were not very mobile and had trouble keeping up with the rapid advances of
the First Canadian Army in August and September 1944.
This was particularly true of workshops operating within the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division. In response, from September 1944, its brigade workshops
were sited near the front. The need for a special forward advanced workshop
detachment was removed, and the main body of the brigade workshop took on
its role. If needed, a rear advanced workshop detachment would remain with
less mobile elements, totally reversing the standard procedure. After August
1944, the three infantry brigade workshops within the two Canadian infantry
divisions also struggled to remain close to the moving front lines. To mitigate
the distances, one workshop's entire main body was always located forward, the
other two located farther to the rear or in transit. The 2nd Canadian Corps
Troops Workshop was also located in the second-line maintenance structure,
providing repair services for corps-level units. The LADs of corps-level combat
units would feed the corps workshop using the same process that the infantry
and armoured LADs used to feed their brigade workshop.
If an AFV or other equipment was sent off strength as a repair casualty to a
second-line maintenance unit, it was taken off the strength of its original regi-
ment. It was now on the strength of the respective RCEME unit, and all further
repair work would be completed by RCEME personnel. 5 The repair process was
quite flexible, and there was no rule that a tank had to return to its respective
squadron or regiment. If a similar tank emerged from the repair-and-recovery
pipeline, it would instead take its place and be delivered by the 25th CADR
forward squadron.
Despite being titled "infantry" and "armoured, the brigade workshops also
worked on AYs and other ordnance employed by the RCAs field artillery and
antitank units. Artillery observation-post tanks, self-propelled howitzers, tank
destroyers, and artillery towers broke down and suffered battle damage at the
same rate as AF Vs employed in infantry and armoured units. If an RCA artillery
AFV was repaired, the designated 25th CADR squadron would deliver it to an
RCA unit in the same manner as it would to an armoured unit. "E" Squadron
was responsible for delivering tracked artillery "A" vehicles directly to the RCA
regiments. The "B' "C" Di and "G" squadrons were responsible for the tank-
equipped Canadian armoured brigades. 46
The third line of RCEME maintenance, under the command of the First Can-
adian Army's deputy director of mechanical engineering, was designated to
