An Army of Never-Ending Strength
between attacking infantry and supporting armoured units and the defensive
positions of the enemy." Furthermore, all Commonwealth artillery units were
entirely mechanized, being either towed or self-propelled, a factor that pro-
vided exceptional mobility on the battlefield. ° Forward observation officers
attached to armoured and infantry regiments would direct fire using either
tracked Universal Carriers equipped with radios or land lines that connected
their positions to the field artillery batteries. By 1943, with a seemingly bottom-
less supply of ammunition at their fingertips, field artillery regiments could
simply batter and suppress German positions with around-the-clock fire plans
prior to an assault.
In a departure from the tank-dominated tactics of 1941-42, which often led
to failure in the desert war, the British began to see concentrated artillery as
essential to all operations, including the use of antitank weapons and allar-
moured fighting vehicles that came under the artillery arm."" If manoeuvring
German armour could be dashed against these gun lines, their strength could
be whittled away to nothing. German defensive positions that needed to be
captured would then be reduced by methodical and concentrated artillery fire,
allowing the infantry and supporting armour to invest them. Should the Ger-
mans mount a counterattack, these same resources would be at the ready to
beat it back, supported this time with newly deployed towed 6- and 17-pounder
antitank guns on any captured objectives. Other direct-fire antitank guns were
mounted on self-propelled chassis, such as the 3-inch SPM Mio (US Lend-Lease
Mio tank destroyer). Combined, indirect and direct Royal Artillery assets woul
launch such devastating fires on the attacking German infantry and armoured
forces that they would have to withdraw or be decimated. As a result, the Ger-
man counterattack on an attacking British combined arms battlegroup began
to be seen not as a cause for alarm but as an opportunity.
Because of these new artillery-centred tactics. Britich combined arms battle-
groups became much more powerful and difhicult to defeat. They supported
indirect-fire artillery assets and sought to defeat the enemy through attritional
means. But there was a price to this operational method: units could only
travel at the speed of their infantry formations. Although the British Eighth
Army did not attack in a blitzkrieg-type manner, effectively encircling and
destroying Rommel's retreating Afrika Korps following its defeat at El Alamein
in November 1942, its forces did not suffer any reverses or excessive losses.
Although the British had tried to match Germany's rapid armoured tactic
earlier in the desert war, they largely abandoned this operational method for a
more set-piece-style operations.
Army Doctrine and Losses 83
Reforms in the Royal Artillery were mirrored within the Royal Canadian
Artillery. In 1944, during training exercises in Great Britain, an attacking
Canadian division or brigade eschewed any surprise manoeuvres utilizing in-
fantry or armour. Their operational planning corresponded to strict timetables
supplied by the divisional or corps RCA fire plan. Lieutenant-General Guy
Simonds, 2nd Canadian Corps commander, was himself an artillery officer and
often worked out the major features of operational plans in the solitary work-
space of his command caravan. He focused on artillery and aerial bombard-
ment as factors on which large operational plans often revolved. As shown in
Figure 4.3, Anglo-Canadian artillery-supported operations were extremely
sophisticated, well planned, and tied to a strict time figure. Illustrating the bar-
rage fire plan for Operation Veritable, which occurred in February 1945, each
line in the figure is a measurement of how far the barrage would lift and move
forward after a timed interval. Canadian artillery-centred operational planning
was dependent on weight being added in the form of heavier British medium
Royal Artillery regiments. In Normandy, the First Canadian Army had at its
disposal three medium (5.5-inch) artillery regiments grouped in the 2nd
Canadian Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA). If more force was required,
British assets would have to be brought in. This is not to say that the 25-pounder
divisional field regiments were inadequate, but larger assets and more of them
would certainly increase the odds of success.54
After August 1944, the lack of German artillery counterbattery capability,
paired with ineffective German Luftwaffe ground attack assets, allowed RCA
artillery units to operate with impunity. The enemy's ability to attack and destroy
their positions was drastically reduced. Given their location on the battlefield,
artillery units were rarely the target for mortar fire in the way infantry units
were. Properly deployed and with their fire adjusted, RCA medium and field
artillery regiments could pound away at enemy positions with little threat to
themselves. This allowed for an excellent ratio of damage done to the enemy
versus casualties suffered by these units." During April 1945, the ist Field Regi-
ment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, suffered ten battle and ten nonbattle
casualties. This was a small number of losses considering the ferocious bom-
bardments this unit unleashed on the enemy. German forces were simply re-
duced to digging in deeper, as there was no other defence against the devastating
and continuous artillery strikes.56
Employment of RCA artillery assets was perceived by the Canadian military
leaders as an essential building block of any feasible operational plan in north
West Europe. This combat arm was the most effective tool to attain results while
