182 Appendices
such regiments raised for the Canadian Army, one for each infantry division.
"B" vehicles consisted of thirty-six cars, of which twenty-four were light recon-
naissance vehicles, and seventy-one trucks in general service and specialist
roles. These totals were supplemented by a further fifty-five motorcycles and
ten trailers. The RCEME type "A" LAD attached to the regiment consisted of
one officer and fifteen other ranks.
Table A1.4
CIC Infantry Regiment, January 1945
Subunits, strength
Tactical grouping
Regimental HQ
officers, and other ranks
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Scout platoon
1 x Universal Carrier
Stretcher bearer group
6-84
HQ Company
Company HQ
Signals platoon
Administration platoon
5-94
Support Company
Company HQ
6 x 3-inch mortars, 7 x 3-inch mortar
3-inch mortar platoon
carriers, 14 x Universal Carriers,
Universal Carrier platoon
6 x towed 6-pounder A/T guns,
Antitank platoon
12 x T16 (gun tractor) Carriers,
Pioneer platoon
10 x 2-inch mortars
7-184
"A" Rifle Company
Company HQ
3 X rifle platoons
1 x light mortar section
1 x Universal Carrier, 4 x 2-inch
mortars
"B" Rifle Company
5-120
As above
"C" Rifle Company As above
"D" Rifle Company As above
Total
38-812
As above
As above
As above
6 x 3-inch mortars, 6 x towed
6-pounder A/T guns, 26 x 2-inch
mortars, 19 x Universal Carriers,
7 x 3-inch mortar carriers, 12 x T16
(gun tractor) Carriers
SOWEeT AC, RG 24, Vol. 13,662, "First Canadian Army A&Q War Diary" December 1944, "Infantry
Division War Establishment Sta Figues, danty BatAlion We mery), DE /233/4, January 1945-
Appendices
183
The Canadian Infantry Regiment was a battalion-sized Canadian Infantry
Corps (CIC) unit made up of a battalion headquarters and six companies as
of January 1945, as illustrated in Table A1.4. These six companies consisted of
headquarters company, a support company, and four rifle companies. Three
infantry regiments made up an infantry brigade. The regiment's role was to
cose with and destroy the enemy. Apart from the carrier platoon, its infantry
companies were lorried and went into battle dismounted.' Major weapons
systems and AFVs consisted of the T16 (gun tractor) Carrier, the Universal
Carrier, the Universal 3-inch Mortar Carrier, the 6-pounder antitank gun, and
3-inch and -inch mortars. "B" vehicles consisted of fourteen cars and forty-
three trucks of various types designed for general service and specialist use.
These totals were supplemented by twenty-seven motorcycles, fourteen trail-
ers, and thirty-three bicycles. RCEME support for the three infantry regiments
was held at the brigade level with a single brigade electrical- and mechanical-
engineer-type LAD.A
The 1945 Canadian Motor Infantry Battalion was a mechanized CIC regi-
ment, as illustrated in Table A1.5. It was set up with one fewer company than
a regular lorried infantry battalion. In January 1945, it was equipped with ar-
moured trucks to form a mechanized infantry force that would accompany
a rapid armoured advance. It consisted of three motor companies, a support
company, a HQ company, and a regimental HQ. Its main role was to close with
and destroy the enemy, but it used mechanized infantry tactics to do so. In-
ital, the motor companies were equipped with M3 White half-tracks, but they
were replaced in mid-1944 with armoured trucks. Two of these regiments were
formed to serve in each of the armoured brigades within the two Canadian
armoured divisions. Motor battalions were not present in Canadian independ-
ent armoured brigades. The battalion's major weapons systems and AFVs
consisted of the Daimler Scout Car, the 6-pounder antitank gun, 3-inch and
2-inch mortars, the Universal Carrier, the Universal 3-inch Mortar Carrier, the
Ti6 (gun tractor) Carrier, and the MMG (machine gun) Carrier. "B" vehicles
consisted of eleven cars and ninety-one trucks that were armoured, general
service, or specialist types. This vehicle pool was supplemented by forty-nine
motorcycles and ten trailers. Unlike nonmechanized infantry regiments, the
motor battalion did have an RCEME LAD attached. The attached REME LAD
type "B" totalled one officer and thirteen other ranks.
The Canadian Machine Gun Battalion as of January 1945 was an independent
battalion-sized CIC support regiment, as illustrated in Table A1.6. There was
one raised for each of the three overseas infantry divisions. As a divisional unit,
this regiment could be split up to support individual infantry regiments within
