Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 159
158 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
returns exist, data on reinforcements and daily casualties per regiment is in-
complete. Daily records are available for each RCA unit in the period from 1
to 21 April.
On arrival in northwest Europe in late February, the sth Canadian Armoured
Division was ordered to conform to the 21st Army Group's staff figures of or-
ganization for a Canadian armoured division. These staff figures only allowed
for one infantry brigade, and the division had been allocated two during its
service in Italy. As a result, the division's 12th Canadian Infantry Brigade was
disbanded and its units redistributed." The Lanark and Renfrew Scottish
Regiment reverted to its original role and title as a ist Canadian Corps-level
asset, the ist Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, RCA. The Westminster Regiment
(Motor) rejoined the sth Canadian Armoured Brigade as its motor battalion.
The 4th Princess Louises Dragoon Guards reverted to its original title, the 4th
Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment. This unit then rejoined its original forma-
tion, the ust Canadian Infantry Division. Like the ist Light Anti-Aircraft Regi-
ment, it had to conduct training and be re-equipped to resume its previous
role. While this reorganization was taking place within these units, the remain-
der of the division continued the process of re-equipping and accepting new
personnel reinforcements.
As of 4 April, the division's personnel strength on its third day of combat
operations in the Netherlands was 750 officers and 19,659 other ranks." At this
point, the division had additional units temporarily attached, and it was 40
percent over the establishment strength of a Canadian armoured division."
At the end of March, all combat arms regiments within the division had high
personnel levels. The znd Canadian Armoured Regiment's strength stood at 38
officers and 679 other ranks, 99 percent of its wartime establishment. The 3rd
Canadian Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment had a strength of 38 officers
and 644 other ranks, 99 percent of its authorized strength.' Units in the in-
fantry brigades also had satisfactory strength levels and had benefitted from an
influx of available NRMA conscript reinforcements. The Perth Regiment, as of
31 March, contained 38 officers and 821 other ranks and was 1 percent over-
strength. Also i percent overstrength, the Irish Regiment of Canada had 37
officers and 822 other ranks. The RCA field artillery regiments of the division
were both strong: the 17th Field Regiment contained 38 officers and 625 other
ranks, 98 percent of its authorized strength, and the other three RCA regiments
were equally close to their authorized strengths."
By 31 March, the division had only just completed its re-equipment process,
so the "A' and "B" vehicles situation report at the end of the month did not
contain the division's returns. However, the non-AFV equipment report of 31
Figure 8.4
Number of Heavy AFVs delivered to the sth Canadian Armoured Division versus
Panther tanks delivered to all German armoured units, March-May 1945
• 5th Canadian Armoured Division
• German armoured units
129
March
April
May
Note: The heavy AFVs were delivered by "G" Squadron, 2sth Canadian Armoured Delivery Regiment.
Soure LAC, RG 24, vol. 4-280 C Squadron, asth Canadian Armoured Delivery Regiment, War
Diary March-May 1945, 1-275; and Martin Block, "Panther Allocation Sorted by Date of Allot-
ment, Panther944 de, from http://www.panther1944 de/index.php/en/
March did contain the division's returns, and the totals reflected adequate inven-
tory levels of heavy weapons, which were s percent over the authorized amounts. »
As part of its re-equipment, the division received deliveries of new and repaired
AFVs from March through May. Figure 8.4 shows the number of battle tanks
delivered to the division in this period versus Panther tank deliveries to the
entire German military for the same period. The disparity in these figures is
not large, indicating that the Allies' vehicle-replacement system was massively
superior. It should be noted that the division was not committed against a siz-
able formation of German armour during its time in northwest Europe, and it
never suffered heavy AFV losses.
On 31 March, the first operational task of the sth Canadian Armoured Div-
ision, newly deployed to northwest Europe, was to relieve the 49th British
Infantry Division in its positions in the Oosterhout bridgehead over the Waal
River. This bridgehead was within a rectangle of land south of the Nederrijn
River. Enclosed by waterways and flooded areas, it formed a temporary island.
Beginning offensive operations on 2 April, the division pushed north in co-
operation with the British to clear the island area and reach the Nederrijn River.
