76 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
What remained of the companies were driven back to their start lines. Canadian
battle casualties in this action were heavy - 139 men." Attacks were more likely
to succeed if an assault force of superior numbers could quickly break into the
enemy's trench system while the German infantry were suppressed by indirect
and direct fire. Using close-quarter techniques, the attacking force would then
either destroy the enemy or force them to surrender.
For these infantry tactics to succeed, it certainly helped to have the most
advanced weapons and armoured battlefield transport. The latter was crucial
for getting an infantry company or platoon onto its objective quickly if it was
under fire. But the Canadian Army was weak in this area. Infantry battalions
were largely transported around their areas of operation by military-patterm
Ford and Chevrolet trucks. In their assembly areas, they debussed and mated
up with armour or other supporting assets. They then walked to the start line
or line of departure for the assault. At the prescribed time, or "H-hour," they
commenced the advance to contact with the enemy. While the Universal (Bren
Gun) Carrier platoon rode along and other carriers took the 6-pounder antitank
and mortar platoons into battle, the remainder of the battalion was on foot. An
infantry company could ride on a tank squadron occasionally, but most of the
time they either marched or were trucked along hard-pack roads to their as-
sembly areas. If the battalion was manning the front lines in defensive positions.
the carriers and the trucks would be deployed far to the rear of the position.
While Canadian infantry and reconnaissance regiments used their Universa.
tracked carriers to good effect, the vehicles were small and not designed to carry
a fully armed section of infantry into battle.* Canadian dismounted infantry
regiments did not have the equivalent of a machine gun-armed American White
M3 or German SPW 251 half-track armoured personnel carrier. These carriers
could carry an infantry section with all its weapons In summer 1944, the two
motor battalions of the 4th and sth Canadian Armoured Brigades were equipped
as such, but only to allow them to follow a rapid armoured advance These
vehicles were limited in their cross-country capability, and having an open top,
they offered poor protection from artillery air bursts and sustained heavy
machine-gun fire. In the way of positive attributes, half-tracks could provide
fire support, increased speed, and some protection to infantry while travelling
to the objective. Similar to what occurred during the First World War, Canadian
infantry took heavy casualties during their dismounted approach to the object-
ive. What was maded was comet to a root too n
providing armour protection against mortar shrapnel, machine-gun bullets,
and near misses from artillery.34
Army Doctrine and Losses 77
A capable infantry-fighting vehicle did not exist in the Canadian inventory
until August 1944's Operation Totalize, when a number of Kangaroos (modified
Priest 105 mm self-propelled artillery with the guns removed and armour plate
added) were made operational. The mounted infantry battalions, which rode
into battle using the Kangaroo armoured personnel carriers during Operation
Totalize, suffered 63 casualties in comparison to the 260 suffered by dismounted
battalions.5 Because of this success, the ist Canadian Armoured Personnel
Carrier Regiment was formed, frequently used, and expanded. Once the Priest
armoured personnel carriers were destroyed or worn out, obsolete Canadian
Ram tanks without turrets were utilized. But their numbers were limited, and
the Kangaroo regiment was shuffled from battalion to battalion, often in support
of British infantry. In December 1944, the CIC's dismounted regiments were
still equipped with a single platoon of Universal Carriers per regiment. During
the same period, the two motor battalions of the armoured brigades had just
fifty-three armoured 15-cwt C15 TA trucks per battalion, having exchanged the
M3 White half-tracks. As of November 1944, there were only two squadrons
of fifty-three Kangaroos each in the ist Canadian Armoured Personnel Carrier
Regiment." These desperately needed carriers were not even fully subordinated
to Canadian command, being part of the 79th British Armoured Division.
From fall 1944 onward, the Universal Wasp II flamethrower carrier supple-
mented the Kangaroo on the battlefield. This fearsome weapon was the flame-
throwing version of the tracked Universal Carrier. It could reduce the enemy's
infantry positions quickly by killing defenders or forcing them to withdraw.
Production challenges encountered in creating an effective three-man vehicle
meant that there were virtually none available for the June and July 1944 battles
in Normandy. As of 31 August 1944, the Canadian Army in northwest Europe
boasted one on strength while its formation's war establishments were author-
ized a total of 132.38
As Table 4. illustrates, infantry weapons varied in quality and performance
in both the Allied and German forces. Some Anglo-Canadian weapons were
not cutting-edge, and this shortcoming arguably influenced the number of
casualties. Infantry section Bren light machine guns with 30-round magazines
were no equivalent in the sustained fire role of a belt-fed machine gun that fired
200-round belts. To protect the light machine gun, riflemen also needed ad-
equate arms. While the Mark 4 Lee-Enfield bolt action rifle was reliable, its rate
of fire was not high. The Sten sumachine gun was poorly engineered and
cheaply made in comparison to the American Thompson or German 9 mm MP
40 submachine guns. Having the proper weapons to conduct close-quarter
