An Army of Never-Ending Strength
exceeded the number of battle losses: 48 battle and 60 nonbattle casualties.
However 107 rainfarcamante Wars disnatched to the RCA radiments, main-
taining their strength during the month.29
Inventories of combat "A" vehicles and heavy weapons within the 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division remained high because operations were focused on infantry-
led attacks, some of which were amphibious. Also, there were a limited number
of routes and nandasded torate that could he uced for mechanized warfare in
tha Dracone Dastatus Ales miasino were a viable number of Corman ar
moured fighting vehicles (AFVs) or antitank weapons, which could be used to
destroy carriers, antitank guns, and tank destroyers within the division. Combat
"A" vehicl losses had been light during the October fighting." As of 31 October,
612. It was 10 percent overstrength in this category. Unauthorized extra "A"
vehicles within the division included four of the invaluable Wasp II flamethrower
As always, there were some shortages. Against an authorized level of twenty-
eight Daimler armoured cars, only twenty-two were present. Of the seventeen
Mio 17-pounder self-propelled tank destrovers that the division was authorized,
none had been issued. The grd Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, was still making
do with tha older Mua 2-inch variante Ofthe 10 T16 tracked-gun troctor car
riers on the war estatet fauce ablatuent four were On strenath Fxtra
nonvehicle maice magnone within the diricion were also at high levels as of a
beavy wennons present compared to its war establishment of 561. Shortage
antiaircraft self-propelled variants taking up the slack.
The 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade had a limited role in the Scheldt fight-
ing becares the terrain wac foadad and erice crossed with candle and dikes. An
armoured sanal. manll Lanarcalled off ta cupport a battalion for , limited
amount oftim a adan ta casther That and crew casualties
ented. The regiments lost at total of ninety-five personnel as battle casualties
during thic month. A total of coventy-two nanhattle casualties were suffered
in the same time period, illustrating the constant drain on the regiments, even
when they were not involved in combat operations. 32
Operating under command of the ist British Corps, the 4th Canadian Ar-
moured Division moved to the vicinity of Antwerp in early October in prepar-
ation for combat operations north of the city. On 9 October, its armoured
Channel Ports, Scheldt, and the River Mass 135
reconnaissance regiment and a company of infantry began operations to sup-
pot the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division. From 17 October onward, the majority
of the division's combat strength was concentrated against the German forces
confronting the Canadian Army's right flank in this area. While the 2nd Can-
adian Infantry Division moved west to attack the South Beveland Peninsula,
the 4th Canadian Armoured Division guarded its flank and pushed north.
Advancing on the left fank of the 49th British West Riding Division, the division
liberated Essen (22 October), Bergen op Zoom (27 October), and Steenbergen
and Hollandsch Diep (4 November).
The division's four infantry regiments took heavy losses during the Scheldt
fighting. The strength returns at the end of October showcase each regiment's
condition during the midpoint of their combat operations, rather than at their
start r conclusion. In contrast to August, all infantry units had received con-
sant reinforcements throughout the month. These reinforcements allowed
theregiments to retain a higher level of combat effectiveness than in Normandy.
The Arevil and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada suffered 186 battle and 64
nonbattle casualties during October and received 18 reinforcements to make
up these losses. At the end of the month, this regiment consisted of 29 officers
and 649 other ranks, 79 percent of its authorized strength. The Algonquin
Regiment took a total of 180 battle and 48 nonbattle losses during the same
month. These loses reduced it to 33 officers and 670 other ranks. It had received
164 reinforcements during this period, enough to keep it at 82 percent of its
war establishment.
The division had faced determined opposition in the Scheldt in the way of
German airborne Fall chirmäger regiments, but these light- infantry formations
were poorly equipped in comparison to the panzer divisions encountered in
the summer Ac evidence oftle diesence total enemy equident destroved
by the 29th Canadian Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment in October was one
8,8 cm antiaircraft gun, one 8 cm mortar, one 7.5 cm Pak 40 antitank gun, one
7.5 cm L/48 gunned Sturgeschültz Ill assault gun, and one obsolete Panzer III
medium tank." While the infantry combat was intense, the enemy did not have
the same capability to inflict high losses on the noninfantry units. As an example,
in October, the 22nd Canadian Armoured Regiment suffered 22 battle and 39
nonbattle casualties and received 129 reinforcements, raising its strength to 37
officers and s77 other ranks, or 8o percent of its war establishment.?' In reviewing
documents on reinforcements allocated to armoured regiments, the totals are
often large without a corresponding increase in regimental strength returns.
This was due to the practice of dispatching personnel belonging to the regiment
to the armoured delivery squadron for further training or to pick up new tanks.
