90 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
In both Italy and northwest Europe, once an objective was captured, an evolved
version of First World War "bite and hold" tactics was utilized. Antitank, ar-
moured, and mortar assets were rushed in to help to create an infantry battalion
or brigade "fortress.""! In Normandy, there was initially a real risk that powerful
German formations would attack and liquidate the Allied beachhead. It was
onto these fortresses that the German land forces were enticed to shatter them-
selves in failed counterattacks. This was an opportunity for Canadian and
British artillery forces to expend the full weight of their defensive fires on the
enemy with coordinated Mike and Uncle targets. These RA and RCA tactics
utilized massive amounts of on-call firepower on a point or area target, tactics
that largely pushed the German 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend onto the
defensive in June 1944, crushing its counterattacks and attempts to gain the
initiative." This practice was successful in destroying German counterattacks
in June but with the caveat that it led to static warfare. Periods of inactivity when
the Allies were between offensive operations in Normandy gave the Germans
time to fortify in-depth defensive zones that could be conquered only with
major losses. They were so strong, in fact, that the Allies turned to massive aerial
and naval bombardments, using four-engine bombers and the guns of battle-
ships on occasion.83
Following the collapse of the German front in Normandy due to attrition,
from September 1944 to May 1945, the Canadian Army was primarily infantry
oriented. Infantry-led offensive operations were tied to elaborate artillery fire
plans designed to annihilate dug-in German defenders. While there were some
operations that were led by armour, set-piece attacks by infantry units with
supporting arms and extensive artillery support were the standard. To be fair,
the flooded Dutch polders and peninsulas of the Scheldt Estuary restricted
armour movement terribly. Individual Canadian armour squadrons were as-
signed to support attacking infantry battalions rather than operating together
in regimental strength. Limited objectives were bitten off and defended in a
hold manner until Canadian units were ready for the next bite. The defensive
hold was supported by tanks, mortars, and antitank ouns which were hurried
onto the objective to stave off the inevitable German counterattack. The de-
struction of the enemy by encircling mechanized pincer movements was no
envisaged, and the terrain rarely allowed for it. This methodical approach by
Anglo-Canadian formations led to repeated set-piece operations, even against
poor-quality German forces during the last two months of the war. For ex-
ample, even though German defences on the IJssel River in April 1945 were
weak, lengthy preparations were made for attacking them.$*
Army Doctrine and Losses 91
Anglo-Canadian doctrine in northwest Europe was the opposite of tactics
being used on the eastern front in 1944 and 1945. In this theatre, armour dom-
inated the attack, and Red Army infantry often specialized in riding on the
engine decks of the Russian T34 tanks. The Soviet commanders conducted the
deep armoured battle, one of extreme penetration and manoeuvre based on
available logistics, opportunities, and attacking the enemy at its weakest point.
Strong artillery fire was present on the eastern front but on a much smaller scale
and between intervals, the guns taking a long time to catch up with the tanks.
On the Anglo-Canadian front, the opposite was true. Armour and infantry
were always within reach of the guns, and a pattern of long-range mechanized
manoeuvre warfare did not occur. Troop density in Normandy and the Nether-
lands stood in stark contrast to the eastern front. The limited size of the area of
operations meant that movement was always observed by the enemy. These
factors in Normandy severely limited the Canadian Army's ability to find a weak
spot in German defences and achieve tactical surprise. Periods of inactivity
would allow each side to build defences in depth, making it difficult for the
opposing force to achieve a breakthrough. Every factor was multiplied in an
ongoing campaign of attrition, and artillery and armour resources from each
side could quickly be brought to bear on the battle.
To summarize, Anglo-Canadian "bite and hold" tactics, with specific object-
ives allotted per infantry battalion, allowed the campaign to proceed at a slow,
steady grind. This grind slowly defeated the Germans in Normandy and beyond
with limited Canadian casualties. The casualties that were suffered were mainly
in the infantry regiments, and they occurred during offensive operations. There
were two main reasons for this situation. First, because of their role as the
vanguard of the attack, infantry drew the most fire. Second, infantry were vul-
nerable to all types of German weaponry while they advanced in open ground.
Noninfantry RCA and CAC regiments suffered significantly fewer casualties
because of their role, tactics, position on the battlefield, and because of the
enemy's ability to attack them.
The Canadian Army quickly learned to maximize it strengths and minimize
its weaknesses while in combat. Following initial challenges in Normandy in
June and July 1944, necessarv modifications were made to place greater emphasis
on indirect firepower and combined arms tactics. Armour would take on a
reduced role and operate within the limits of the infantry and artillery units.
Once these modifications were made, infantry-led combined arms teams exe-
cuted assaults with better cooperation and achieving improved results. In
adopting this method, the Canadian Army sacrificed armoured manoeuvre in
