18 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Figure 1.2
The personnel delivery system, 1944-45
Receiving
regiment
Receiving
regiment
Receivine
regimen
Receiving
regiment
Receiving
regiment
Receiving
Front-line divisional area
Divisional
reinforcement
company
Corps
1st or 2nd Canadian Corps area
reinforcement
company
Canadian
corp
personnel
Canadian
Armoured
Corps
25th Canadiar
Delivery
squadron
Advance
reinforcement
battalion of No. 2
or No. 3 CBRG
Line of communications
rear area
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 10,63, "First Canadian Army Plans Diagram of Personnel Replacement
and Releases, file 215C1.045 (D12).
the summer of 1944, soldiers from other trades were remustered into infantry
regiments after a period of retraining. Nothing else could be done to address
the problem in the short term. In fall 1944, remustering of excess noninfantry
personnel continued, and reinforcements in the United Kingdom and the con-
tinent were retrained to upgrade what infantry skills they had 20
Rapid mass transfers were not an everyday occurrence for the No. 2 CBRG.
This organization had to consistently maintain a float of personnel should an
unforeseen disaster occur, possibly placing several infantry battalions in large
deficit positions. If the reinforcement battalions had given away all their person-
nel at this point, it would have been impossible to respond to such a disaster.
They always had to be ready for the possibility that a military reverse could
occur. Except for the period near the war's end, this need influenced decisions
about the release of reinforcements to front-line units. Aside from the need to
reen an emergency reserve of versonnel in the reinforcement pool, administra-
tive processes and travel times extended the period before a regiment would
receive men at its "B" Echelon." Transfers of over two hundred personnel re-
inforcements in one day were extremely rare.
Personnel Reinforcements 19
To qualify for a large immediate transfer, a regiment's immediate future per-
formance in an upcoming operation had to be in doubt. Once reinforcements
joined their units, they were taken on strength by the regimental adjutant. To
the higher chain of command, they would then appear as part of the unit on
returns for the next day. It is important to note that a transfer of new reinforce-
ments often did not immediately alter the capability of the receiving regiment.
Despite urgent requests for new personnel by a receiving regiment, the same
unit would often knowingly slow down the "arrival" process, taking time to
slowly integrate new soldiers. This action could make the regiment look strong
on paper even when it had not fully reorganized itself to absorb its new strength.
As noted previously, the new arrivals were often given time to acclimatize
themselves within a regiment's "B" Echelon or Left Out of Battle contingents.
Acclimatization prevented unnecessary errors in the field that could lead to
casualties within hours of arrival.23
An important secondary function of the personnel reinforcement system
was not one that its designers envisaged. Recovered medical casualties returning
to their units were separate from new personnel but part of the incoming
reinforcement stream. The return of battle and nonbattle casualties without
psychological problems was straightforward; these rehabilitated personnel
rejoined their units with minimal delay. However, after intense combat oper-
ations, a portion of nonbattle casualties were psychiatric. A segment of these
cases could be rehabilitated through a short rest period close to the front line
in the battalion regimental aid post; others, however, needed further rest. 24 As
part of their medical rehabilitation process, these soldiers were fed directly back
into the reinforcement companies. The znd Canadian Corps reinforcement
company often acted as a tool to extend the rehabilitation period for battle
exhaustion cases. This valuable time was used for rest, therapy, and rehabilita-
tion. Also, if an emergency did occur, the soldier in question would be close to
the regimental or brigade area of operations.?6
The capacity of the reinforcement system to deliver personnel was impressive.
Figure 1.3 shows the number of Canadian reinforcements dispatched to the 21st
Army Group between August 1944 and February 1945. The one blemish on the
overall record was the number of personnel sent in August 1944, which did not
match demands for reinforcements. This deficit stemmed from poor planning
on the part of the Canadian Army's leadership (discussed in the next chapter).
The strength of units was adequately rebuilt in September 1944. All units on the
eve of the Scheldt fighting were close to their war establishment figures. This
rebuilding occurred again in November 1944 following the Battle of the Scheldt.
