Appendices 187
186 Appendices
Table A1.7
Towed RCA Field Artillery Regiment (Infantry Division variant), January 1945
Subunits, strength
Company or platoon
Regimental HQ
officers, and other ranks
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Antiaircraft troop
8 x towed 20 mm antiaircraft guns
RCEME LAD ("B")
8-62
"A" Battery
2 x field artillery troops
10-102
"B" Battery
"C" Battery
Total
As above
As above
8 x towed 25-pounder howitzers,
3 x Universal Carriers
As above
As above
24 X towed 25-pounder howitzers,
8 x towed 20 mm antiaircraft
guns, 9 x Universal Carriers
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 13,66, "First Canadian Army A8 War Diaries" January 1944, Infantry
Division War Establishment Staf Figures field Arier Regiment, Towed WE I1/190 B/1, Efective
30.11.44."
38-638
of a towed regiment went forward with infantry battalion HQs and were
equipped with Universal Carriers. The primary role of the towed field regiment
was to provide powerful indirect fire support at the divisional level. It could
also provide direct-fire support against infantry or armoured targets by firing
over open sights. The regiment also had a troop of 20 mm antiaircraft guns. "B"
vehicles as of January 1945 were 21 cars and 102 trucks of general service and
specialist designs, including 36 artillery tractors. Supplementing this pool were
twenty-six motorecles and twentu-tun trailere The POEMETAD tun, "p" had
a total strength of one officer and thirteen other ranks.
The Canadian self-propelled Royal Canadian Artillery (RA) Field Regiment
armoured division variant as of lanuary tore contained a very liferent war
establishment from a towed field regiment in an armoured or infantry division,
as illustrated in Table A1.8. The main diferences were that all its 25-pounder
howitzers were self-propelled, and it operated a large number of artillery ob-
servation post tanks. The regiment had a total of thirteen of these tanks and a
troop of 20 mm antiaircraft guns. The tanks allowed the forward observation
officers to keep up with the armoured squadrons. This type of regiment consisted
of three batteries and a regimental HQ. It was a divisional artillery asset whose
role was to provide powerful, mobile, and indirect fire support. It could also
provide mobile direct-fire support against infantry or armoured targets by firing
Table A1.8
Set Propelled RCA Field Artillery Regiment (Armoured Division), January 1945
Company
or platoon
Subunits, strength
officers, and other ranks
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Regimental HQ Antiaircraft troop
RCEME LAD ("D")
1 x RCA Observation Post (OP) tank,
8 x towed 20 mm antiaircraft guns
9-60
"" Battery
2 x self-propelled field
8 x self-propelled 25-pounder Sexton
artillery troops
howitzers, 4 x RCA OP tanks
"D" Battery
10-183
"C" Battery
As above
As above
As above
Total
As above
38-609
24 x self-propelled 25-pounder Sexton
howitzers, 8 x towed 20 mm antiair-
craft guns, 13 x RCA OP tanks
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 13,662 "First Canadian Army A&O War Diary" December 1944, "Armoured
Division War Establishment Staff Figures Field Artillery Regiment. Self Propelled. WE 11/190 A/2
over open sights The two self-pronelled RCA Field Regiment's held at the army
level Army Group Roval Artillam, (ACD Al grounings had identical war estab
lishment figures to the self-propelled armoured division variant. In late 1944
there was One within each Canadian armoured division and one ner each
army-level AGRA grouping, for a total of four self-propelled regiments.
vehicles as of late 19a1 were thirteen ears and ninety-two trucks of general
service and specialist types, including thirty-six artillery tractors and thirty-four
twenty-four trailers. The attached RCEME LAD type "D" strength was one of-
ficer and thirty-seven other ranks.
The 1944 armoured division variant of the towed Canadian RCA Field
Regiment was a divisional artillery asset, as illustrated in Table A1.9. Like other
field regiments, it consisted of three batteries and a regimental HQ. The regi-
ment's primary role was providing indirect fire support at the divisional level.
It could also provide direct-fire support against infantry or armoured targets
by firing over open sights. There was one regiment of this type established for
each Canadian armoured division, for a total of two. They operated in conjunc-
tion with the self-propelled RCA field regiments within armoured divisions.
The towed field regiment within an armoured division contained a different
