136 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
The personnel would then return to the regiment as reinforcements when they
had already been part of the regiment. 36
The four divisional RCA regiments' combined casualty totals for October
illustrate a lower casualty rate. All four regiments recorded 36 battle and 49
nonbattle casualties during this month. Against these losses, 102 reinforcements
had been dispatched, maintaining the strength of these units." The 8th Light
Anti-Aircraft Regiment's strength at the end of the month stood at 35 officers
and s59 other ranks, 1 percent above its new September war establishment of
34 officers and 551 other ranks.* Compared to Normandy, enemy AFV, artillery,
and aerial activity on the Canadian front had dropped off considerably during
October and early November. This change led to far fewer battle casualties in
the RCA regiments.
On 1 November, midway through its Scheldt combat operations, the division
reported a total "fit" AFV strength of 247 medium and light tanks." Returns
for 31 October show the division overstrength in combat "A" vehicles: 839 combat
vehicles were on strength against an authorized total of 777, placing the division
8 percent over its war establishhment." Any shortages in certain vehicles types
were made up by extras in others. Some shortages in the armoured and RCA
regiments continued to persist. Against a war establishment figure of sixty Mark
Vc 17-pounder Sherman Firefly tanks, only eighteen were on strength. Seventeen
unauthorized Mark Ic Sherman Firefly variants, which also had the 17-pounder
gun, had been issued to partially fill the shortage. This addition gave the div-
ision a total of thirty-nine 17-pounder equipped tanks, 65 percent of its author-
ized war establishment tank strength. A shortage of armoured recovery vehicle
tanks was still present at the end of the month. Against the war establishment
of twelve Sherman V ARVs, only eight were on hand. None of the twenty-seven
authorized Sherman V observation-post tanks had been delivered to the RCA
field regiments as of 31 October 1944. Fortunately, seventeen unauthorized Ram
observation-post variants had been issued to cover this shortage. As of the end
of the month, the twenty-four Crusader gun tractor towers allocated for the
antitank regiment had still not been issued. The division had also not received
a sizable quantity of Wasp II flamethrower carriers at this point, having only
one on strength.
With the division constantly advancing and rarely suffering reverses, few
heavy weapons were lost between October and early November. Midway through
the Scheldt fighting, the division had excessive inventories." Against an author-
ized level of 198 heavy weapons, 308 were on strength as of 31 October. These
totals indicated a possible change over of equipment for the division or an
administrative reporting error. For example, against an authorized total of eighty
Channel Ports, Scheldt, and the River Mass 137
zinch mortars, the infantry regiments contained 142; fifty-one 6-pounder
antank guns were on strength against its authorized war establishment of
eighteen.
Following the Normandy Campaign, battle casualties within all 2nd Can-
adian Corps-level regiments dropped significantly. Although these regiments
had roles in the conquest of the channel ports and the Battle of the Scheldt in
fall 944, they did not experience the same levels of combat as they had previ-
ously. Due to the enemys infantry often being entrenched and surrounded, the
operations of Canadian antitank, antiaircraft, and long-range reconnaissance
forces was limited. As an example, the role of the RCAs 6th Light Anti-Aircraft
Regiment had significantly changed due to a lack of actual enemy aircraft to
shoot down. In fall 1944, it was available for non-antiaircraft tasks such as
engaging ground targets and security sweeps for enemy stragglers. With the
enemy's ability to attack its positions on the battlefield significantly reduced,
the and Survey Regiment, RCA, suffered only seven battle casualties from
September to November:? While it recorded eight days of enemy air activity
contacts in July and five in August, none were recorded in September 1944.1
Despit high infantry casualties between September and November, the 2nd
Canadian Infantry Division rapidly rebuilt itself once again after offensive
operations ended. As of 3o November, it had few weaknesses apart from a pos-
sible ack of training for new replacement soldiers. The formations of the German
Fifteenth Army opposing the division in the Netherlands were very weak in
comparison. During the fighting in fall 1944, no German panzer divisions had
been deployed against Canadian advances, only weak infantry formations.*
This made a tremendous difference with regard to the number and kind of
Weapons systems that could be brought to bear by the enemy. If there had been
any significant weaknesses within the division during fall 1944, the Germans
would have been hard-pressed to exploit them as they had that summer.
In late November, the division held part of the static northern flank of the
Nijmegen Salient, a bulge in the line created by the British-American Operation
Market Garden in September. Between 10 November 1944 and 31 January 1945,
with the First Canadian Army temporarily ceasing offensive operations, the
division remained in these positions. During this phase, the infantry regiments
were fully rebuilt, the reinforcement shortage having ended by this point. An
average Canadian infantry regiment within the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade,
the Essex Scottish Regiment, contained 38 officers and 818 other ranks, 15 These
figures placed it 1 percent over its authorized strength. Many other regiments
were completely rebuilt in the period from 10 to 30 November and were close
to their establishment strengths by month's end. The reinforcement system
