162 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Firefly, and Stuart battle tanks against a war establishment figure of 261, placing
it 11 percent overstrength. 03
Unauthorized combat "A" vehicles held by the
division included six Ram Badger flame-throwing tanks and twelve Wasp II
tracked flamethrower carriere 104 Manuehicle heavy weanon returns for th
division on 30 April were just as strong as the previous 31 March returns; the
only problem was a shortage ofthirteen 202 Vickers medium machine aunt!"
Once the ist Canadian Armoured Brigade was declared operational in early
April, it was deployed along the Waal River!06 Throughout March and early
new personnel. The brigade's return was not included in the 31 March "A" & "B"
vehicle position report for the First Canadian Army as its refitting process was
still incomnlete 107 Regimental personnel field returns were recorded in the w
diaries, however, and they reflected adequate strengths on the eve of combat
Operations For eyamble, on a1 March +ho 1+ Canadian Armoured Regiment
contained 2o officers and 644 other ranks. oo percent of its authorized strenoth lu
With Belgian and British units attached to it, the brigade held this line while
other ist Canadian Corps units cleared the temporary island area south of the
Nederrin River during Operation Destroyer. Once this area was cleared, Anglo-
Canadian units captured a bridoehend at Arnhem and pushed north of the city
'he 1ith anadian
Armoured Da. ant particinatad in flass anerations k
supporting units of the 49th British Infantry Division.
To facilitate the sth
the brigade tont over its nositione in the island in mid. Anril. During this phase
it also conducted some successful minor operations with Belgian forces. When
hostilities ended the krigade hold positions on the Waal River and north of it
near Opheusden.
Cacualties sal saut to cast Castian As 1 Prigade
during its Deriod af anartiana fran, too Anal bad lourtromoly light. and
in Anil and Mautotal sarcoanal lane within tha regimente were eleven battl
and thirty-seven nonbattle casualties. These figures are low compared to losses
within some austred reciments in summer tou In accordance with th
artillery hacad dant the racist canadene were pascalled off to SunDo
British and Belgian infantry operations. In this supporting role, AFV losses were
period of operations, the brigade's regiments performed well against light
opposition
Although the regiments had begun operations in early Anril. they were sti
receiving new combat "A" vehicles to bring them up to strength at the end of
the month. The three regiments in the brigade received a total of sixty new
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 163
Sherman Firefly 17-pounder variants in March and a further thirty-six battle
tanks of various types in April. 1ยบ Since all three of its regiments were armoured,
thebrigade did not operate any non-"A" vehicle heavy weapons. As of 30 April,
the brigade contained 200 battle tanks against its war establishment total of
226, which was 88 percent of its authorized strength.''' During its time in
northwest Europe, the brigade had not been required to fight any major tank
battes, nor did its regiments regularly face a well-equipped enemy offering
sif resistance. Any casualties that occurred within the brigade during April
and May were quickly replaced, with eighty-three reinforcement personnel
joining the three regiments. 2 At the end of hostilities, these regiments were all
overstrength in personnel. For instance, the 12th Canadian Armoured Regiment
contained 45 officers and 686 other ranks as of s May 1945, making it 6 percent
overstrength. 13
In the final phase of the spring 1945 fighting, the four regiments of the znd
Canadian AGRA followed the advancing znd Canadian Corps into the northern
Netherlands and Germany. Moving constantly from position to position, they
struggled to keep up with the rapid advances of the infantry and armoured
brigades. At this stage, German resistance was so weak that by the time the
AGRA regiments had reached a firine position, the enemy had been overcome
One of the farthest advancing AGRA medium regiments was the th Medium
Regiment, RCA, which ended the war in Hesel, Germany, near Leer.
The is Canadian AGRA units spent most of their existence in support of st
Canadian Corps operations in Italy. As mentioned earlier, once redeployed to
participated in operations in April and May. The ist Canadian AGRA arrived
in Belgium in February and March. This formation consisted of the ist, 2nd,
and sth Medium Regiments, RCA, and the 1th Army Field Artillery Regiment,
4.5-inch guns. The uth Army Field Regiment, RCA, was self-propelled, being
equipped with the Sexton 25-pounder self-propelled howitzer. The four RCA
regimante were deploved to subnor ict Canadian Corne Oberations in the
Netherlands during the 2 to 19 April phase of fighting.
In their operational role, ist Canadian AGRA units supported the Allied
crossing of the Ilssel River in April and the advance to the Grebbe River, where
offensive operations ceased. Because of the enemy forces limited combat ca-
pability, the ist Canadian AGRA suffered few losses during its operations with
the ist Canadian Corps. While the ist Canadian AGRA medium regiments
were combat-capable, they had not been reinforced to 100 percent of their war
