Army Doctrine and Losses
IN THEORY, THE PERFECT army is tactically flawless in its operations, has clear
strategic goals, employs cutting-edge technology, and is well supplied. On the
battlefield, it annihilates opposing forces quickly and suffers negligible losses.
If an army is not superior to its enemy in all areas, it will face challenges.
Exposure to a similar enemy force and its weapons will result in losses in per-
sonnel and equipment. This was the case for the First Canadian Army. Although
the army had significant strengths that allowed it to methodically defeat the
German ground forces - most arguably its vastly superior field artillery tactics
- it also had weaknesses.' German forces exploited these weaknesses, causing
most of Canadas material and personnel losses.
Doctrine is the set of principles that guide how military forces conduct their
battles, campaigns, and major operations. Military tactics is generally defined
as the manner of organizing and employing combat forces on the battlefield; it
involves the application of the four battlefield functions: firepower, mobility,
defensive measures, and offensive shock action. The three traditional combat
arms of the Canadian Army discussed here -the infantry, artillery, and armour
- all had distinct roles to play on the battlefield.
The infantry of the Canadian Infantry Corps (CIC), whose main role was
to close with and destroy the enemy, carried out its missions on foot because it
did not have armoured personnel carriers organic to each of its regiments.
Though each regiment contained tracked Universal Carriers, their numbers
were small, and they carried a limited number of soldiers. The main unit of
manoeuvre for an infantry brigade was the regiment, a battalion-sized unit of
four line companies and a support company, which served as its main sub-
units. These regiments were the basic building blocks of a battlegroup, to which
artillery, armoured, and specialized assets could be added for operations, Using
a variety of small arms and organic heavy weapons, each battalion-sized regi-
ment was extremely powerful in that it could capture and hold ground, de-
stroying the enemy in the process?
The role of the armour of the Canadian Armoured Corps (CAC) was to
destroy the enemy through fire and manoeuvre. Its main weapons systems were
Army Doctrine and Losses 65
various models of the American Sherman tank. Though inferior to enemy tanks
in some aspects of armament and armour, later models remedied many of these
shortcomings, and an abundance of these vehicles made the battalion-sized
armoured regiment a formidable combat force that could destroy the enemy's
armoured, antitank, and infantry forces. Recce units, which were also part of
the armoured corps, carried out the role of armoured reconnaissance with both
tanks and wheeled armoured cars. While armoured forces could not hold
ground alone, they could capture and help hold it in conjunction with infantry
and Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA) artillery forces. Though extremely power-
ful and combat capable, these tanks were vulnerable to enemy antitank weapons
when they were not supported by infantry and other assets?
The artillery forces of the Royal Canadian Artillery were divided into four
main combat forces: field regiments, medium regiments, antitank regiments
and light antiaircraft regiments, Specialist units supported these four main
groupings. The field and medium regiments, with their batteries of towed and
self-propelled guns and howitzers, provided direct and indirect fire support
designed to annihilate and suppress the enemy. The antitank forces, with their
towed and self-propelled antitank guns, worked in conjunction with the ar-
mour and infantry units to engage and destroy enemy armour. The light anti-
aircraft units provided defence against enemy ground attack aircraft. Each
regiment was equivalent to a battalion and could be broken up and detailed
to various infantry regiment-based battle groups. In a large battle space, the
numerous and highly sophisticated RCA field and medium regiments under
divisional and corps command could have their various batteries engaged in
different tasks.*
On the battlefield, the force undertaking offensive operations often suffers
heavier casualties than the opposing or defending force. Most Canadian person-
nel casualties in northwest Europe, as discussed in the Chapter 2, were borne
by the infantry, which was dismounted and exposed to direct and indirect fire,
In summer 1944, the Canadian Army fought arguably some of the best
equipped and experienced enemy formations available in the form of the
German Army and Waffen-SS panzer divisions. At times, losses at the unit
level were catastrophic. After Normandy, the German forces were never again
so consistently strong. Autumn 1944 and spring 1945 saw the Canadian Army
facing a primarily defensive opponent, weak in infantry, short of armour, and
devoid of continuous artillery and air support. The Germans could launch
limited infantry counterattacks, but after August 1944 they did not deploy
enough resources or have a strategie plan to conduct large-scale offensive
