32 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Stuart, was in hospital. He responded to Montgomery's inquiries by stating that
the matter of identifying and preselecting sufficient personnel for remustering
was being addressed. 42
In response to Montgomery's anxious inquiries, in late March 1944 CMHQ
forwarded him a report that verified that the total number of reinforcements
within Britain was sufficient. However, the content of the reinforcement pool
was not satisfactory. Of an authorized level of 23,000 infantry reinforcements
(three months' holdings at intense 20 percent rates under the erroneous 1943
figures), the reinforcement organization contained only 14,500 personnel. Of
this number, 43 percent were either unfit, serving in ad hoc units in noninfantry
roles, waiting to be remustered, or awaiting disciplinary hearings. Thus, the real
number of reinforcements ready to be deployed was fewer than 8,000 out of an
authorized total of 23,000.43
In addition, the practice of dumping unfit or problem soldiers in temporary-
holding units was rampant in the Canadian Army. Thus, this report, which
stated all was well, masked the great blow that had been done to the capability
and strength of the Canadian Infantry Corps. This corps was on the eve of some
of the most challenging fighting the Canadian Army would face during the
Second World War. By robbing it of a large fluid reserve of infantry, other ranks
- the high-ranking officers at CMHQ, London - were condemning it to tempor-
ary weakness if large losses occurred at a rapid pace.
The emergency remustering program, begun in late spring 1944 to enlarge
the reserve of Canadian infantry reinforcements based in Britain, was ham-
strung by the ill-timed creation of further operational units. The and Canadian
Corps was still forming the 1oth Canadian Infantry Brigade for the 4th Canadian.
Armoured Division. As of spring 1944, it was filling out the brigade's three in-
fantry regiments with required personnel. In Italy, the 12th Canadian Infantry
Brigade was being created for the sth Canadian Armoured Division. Thus, the
authorized ceilings for infantry personnel had grown to 57,592 from 51,083 since
January 1944. These building proiects. necessarv as they were, greatly imnaired
the creation of an infantry reinforcement reserve pool.*
Options never exercised included the possible de Pound ment of certain combat
units to reinforce others, the reduction of the establishment of existing combat
units, the reduction in size of headquarters and support units, utilizing excess
air force personnel, or relaxing overly strict recruiting standards for volunteers
Concerning this last point. large numbers of able-hodied men were being refused
entry on dubious grounds, the exclusion of anvone above the age of thirty-seven
and below nineteen being the worst practices. 45
The Sixty-Day Shortage 33
As Operation Overlord approached, a greater sense of urgency took hold. By
the end of March 1944, over 2,000 men had been either voluntarily or forcibly
remustered as infantry. 6 April and May saw the deployment of 5,565 personnel
to the United Kingdom from Canada, and a further 2,000 were transported in
early June.' Montgomery and other senior British generals were well aware of
the potential consequences of inaction, and, in communications to CMHQ
dated 16 March, they categorized the deficit in allocated Canadian infantry
reinforcements as "most serious."48
In the days following the D-Day landings, Canadian combat arms units needed
personnel replacements to cover losses suffered during the amphibious assault
and inland combat. No. 2 CBRG units deployed to France immediately began
providing reinforcements. Initially, there were no personnel shortages within
the Normandy beachhead because of the relatively small number of Canadian
units involved. In June, only the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the 3rd
Canadian Infantry Division were deployed, employing a total of three infantry
brigades with nine regiments. Replacing losses within these regiments was a
relatively small task, and the system appeared to be working with few issues.
Casualties to the end of June were significant but not unacceptable. What
was disturbing was the percentage of losses taken by the infantry. As shown in
Figure 2.1, by 10 July, the infantry had the most battle casualties. The need for
a large reservoir of replacements was apparent.
Once other units, such as the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division and the 4th
Canadian Armoured Division, became operational, shortages in the number
of liquid infantry reinforcements became clear. The scale and intensity of of-
fensive combat operations increased significantly in July and August. All four
Canadian formations could not be sustained with the reinforcements on hand.
Delays occurred as troop ships had to sail from England to reach the bridge-
head, and then the reinforcements had to go through the bureaucratic process
of the No. 2 CBRG battalions. No. 2 CBRG did not divest itself of all infantry
reinforcements: it retained a small reserve in case some large event occurred.
At 21st Army Group Headquarters, Canadian ist Echelon's officer in chief,
Brigadier A.W. Beament, recently transferred from Italy, observed that his
forecasts of December 1943 were coming true. By mid-July, exactly as he had
predicted, there were indications of a shortage of general-duty other ranks
reinforcements. By 15 July, it was confirmed that there were not enough to
meet future demands from all formations. Despite his urgings that by
CMHQ resolve the situation quickly, it could not be accomplished overnight.
On 17 July, Beament's recommendations for mass remustering were passed to
KELLY
LIBRARY
COLLEGE;
