Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 145
144.
An Army of Never-Ending Strength
redeployed to Breda, the Netherlands. On 26 January 1945, the 1oth Canadian
Infantry Brigade attacked the German harbour bridgehead of Kapelsche Veer on
the southern bank of the Maas River!" This limited operation was completed
by 30 January, and there were significant infantry casualties because of tempor-
ary reverses. After this difficult operation, combat for the division consisted of
patrols and raids, often with armoured and artillery support.
Combat "A" vehicle inventories within the 4th Canadian Armoured Division
prior to offense to coring the mere satisfactor A cafe Tanner
the divicion tae Arantenant is sama ataside bad chortagas to athore and
contained a concidorbla continant of authorized vehicles Returne for thie
establishmant of-Q, The nonvehicle weaponry inventories of the division was
also satisfactory at this time, the totals changing little from their fall 1944 levels."8
During Tanuary, the divicion received a combined total of forty-seven new and
repaired term Shermans Sherman Firefly Fireflv17-Dounders, and Stuart light tanks
(all models emolorad) 19 This number was mors then adequate considering the
diricia. hans taxatio from At Lor toss to late lanuary 1945
From Auoust to December 1944 the divicion had been adequatelv reinforce
with new and repaired A FVs via «p" Squadron of the 25th Canadian Armoured
Delivery Regiment As illustrated in Figure 8, the deliveries of new and repaire‹
Pander AucheatTood Lalla Chamants armoured
force in spring and summer 1944, equipping one out of every two battalions in
each panzer rectant in the Copan Anand Waffen-SS. The nurpoce of this
figure ie to Alluctrate the massive cuneriority of the Allies in their ability to suo
alu lare auantitioc of new and ranaired APle to front-line units versus the
utter collapse of Germany's ability to supply her armed forces
Ting thawinter the division had received an adequate number of personne
reinforcements?" While the armoured and RCA regiments remained near their
October or eronal penta tanna tafonte socimento trous at much
hicherlevel. The rainfo amonte dient hed not only replaced battlelasses but
ment, for evamble lost «af narconnel to nonbattle conces hetween Novembe
1oM and Tanner core Rya Tannen, do came regiment had received de re
inforcements bringing its strenath un ta 26 officers and 801 other ranks The
Anana. Dimate Lamente oar the winter diving
a strength of 37 officers and 812 other ranks on the eve of combat operations.
Figure 8.1
Comparison of tank replacement and delivery, 4th Canadian Armoured Division,
to German Panzer IV medium tank production for all German land forces,
August-December 1944
• 4th Canadian Armoured Division
• All German land forces
195
181
180
36
August
1944
September
1944
October
1944
November
December
1944
1944
Source LAC Poet vola "D Saadian seth Canadian Armoured Delivery Regiment, Wa
Nate Tha Canadian tanks Chasman Sharon Cirefly and Stuart models
Diarie" August-November oAd. T-1-49. Tenta. Panzertruppen, voL 2. The Comolete Guide, 203
Appendix Ri «Panzer IV Inuentory. Caine and Reported Losses. August-December 1944%
The Lincoln and Welland Regiment was also reinforced significantly, receiving
a total of 672 new and returning personnel. Despite this total, it was still weak
was the result of heavy casualties in the operation to clear the port village of
Kapelsche Veer in late January 1945. Unlike most Canadian divisions, the 4th
Canadian Armoured Division was not involved in Operation Veritable, apart
from providing support from its divisional artillery.
The winter months of December 1944 and January 1945 were a relatively quiet
time for the corps-level units of the 2nd Canadian Corps. They had sufficient
time to absorb replacements, conduct training, and support patrolling and artil-
lery activity. On the eve of Operation Veritable, all four regiments contained
high personnel levels. The 6th Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, possessed 37 officers
and 724 other ranks, 95 percent of its war establishment. Combat "A" vehicle and
equipment returns for 2nd Canadian Corps troops as of 31 January were satis-
factory. The units contained 267 combat "A" vehicles against their authorized
level of 286, 93 percent of their war establishment. The units were overstrength
