28 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
program was so massive a request it would be the last of its kind foisted on them
for the remainder of the war. King also accepted Major-General Stuarts dubi-
ous assurance that it would not be necessary to utilize conscription to supply
the enlarged Canadian Army in the future. Though not a military man, it cannot.
have escaped King's comprehension that to support such a large organization
in wartime a large numbers of replacement personnel would be needed. That!
this point was not clearly conveyed by NDHQ to the War Committee is troubling
but understandable. If it had been more clearly stated, this fact would have
gradually undermined the ability to ease King and other anticonscription com-
mittee members into accepting conscription. It would have also damaged the
whole bid for an enlarged army. Finally, it is plausible that King was considering
purely political problems at the time of his decision to accept the rapid expan-
sion of the army. His goal, placating the conscriptionist and "total war" political
camps, including some within his own War Committee, had to be achieved
Having dealt with immediate problems, in late January 1942 the prime minister
looked to address future issues. Anticipating the need to use conscripts overseas.
to maintain the war effort, the government conducted a plebiscite to release the
government from its previous promise that enforced overseas service would
never occur. The 27 April 1942 plebiscite passed, and though the province of
Quebec largely voted against it, political resistance was reduced compared to
the situation in 1017-1826 To mollifv Ousbor the gournment stresead thn
conscription was not necessarv at present and might never be needed
Regardless of what this development meant for the future of the Canadian Army.
King had son succeeded politie Foll the 12о
army expansion, new divisions were raised from large numbers of voluntee
Canadian Army (Active) members.
Near the end of this expansion in July to tha endian Army's period of
relative inactivity in Britain ended with the deploument of one infantry division
and one armoured brigade to Sicily. Until this point the army bad not had any
experience with large numbers of battle and nonbattle casualties over an ex-
tended period of combat operations Rattlefield ernerience is an essential factor
in the successful projection of casualty rates. When operations began in Sicily,
projected casualty rates for infantry were extremely unrealistic.
Inaccurate predictions had been made since the establishment of proiected
losses by the Ottawa War Office in 1939. Sent to CMLO London chortly atte
the outbreak of war, they erroneously projected monthly infantry losses that
at their worst, could be 20 percent for "intense activit. " Since the war had ius
begun, these rates were purely hunothetical because no one really knew wh
effect modern weapons or tactics would have. The plan was to keep a
The Sixty-Day Shortage 29
reinforcement reserve of three months' worth of losses at "intense rates" on
standby in the United Kingdom. This reserve of reinforcements would equal
6o percent of whatever infantry personnel were present in operational units.
The reserve would be drawn upon as needed and would be supplemented by
one month's worth of personnel placed forward in the immediate theatre of
operations, for a total of four months at intense rates.28
After the fall of France in 1940, CMHQ, London, perceived that Canadian
forces in the United Kingdom would take on a defensive rather than offensive
role in the immediate future. The British High Command's priority was defence
of the British Isles. In fall 1940, Canadian forces were seen by the British chief
of the imperial general staff, General Sir John Dill, as strategically important
and best used in their current position as a bulwark against German invasion.
As the possibility of immediate German invasion dwindled, it was correspond-
ingly estimated that there would be fewer casualties. It was recommended that
the figure for intense monthly losses be lowered to 10 percent, the same figure
utilized for "normal" monthly losses. These new levels were approved by NDHQ
in August 1940. Three months' worth of reinforcements at normal rates would
remain in Canada so as not to build up an excessive amount of reinforcement
personnel overseas. Within the United Kingdom, it was believed that, should
an invasion occur, the estimated period of fighting would only last a month, in
the worst-case scenario.
The Canadian reserve of infantry reinforcements within Britain was then re-
organized to contain only three months' worth at the new intense rate. Numbers
beyond that would have to be transported from Canada. ° These rates continued
to be in effect until July 1943. Because of this reinforcement strategy, there was
no major influx of reinforcements from Canada to build up a large reserve. In
both January 1941 and January 1942, the question of rates was examined with
reference to the most recent British casualty figures from North Africa." After
researching this data, it was decided that the rates would remain unchanged
and that the amount of reinforcements kept in the United Kingdom would
remain the same.
With Canadian forces set to participate in offensive operations in Sicily and
Italy in 1943-44, measures were taken to revise the casualty rates in the face of
impending combat. Canadian rates were brought in line with British casualty
projections of 20 percent for other ranks infantry.3? These new rates were brought
into effect in July 1943. Because of the relatively small number of forces initially
engaged in operations in the Mediterranean - one infantry division and one
armoured brigade - any casualties incurred would be easily replaced. Although
the number of infantry casualties was out of proportion to other trades, total
