Channel Ports, Scheldt, and the River Mass
Figure P.10 W.L. Mackenzie King shaking hands with J.L.. Ralston at a
banquet celebrating King's twenty-fifth anniversary as leader of the Liberal
Party, 7 August 1944. This photo was taken during the beginning of the
infantry, other ranks, reinforcement shortage in Normandy, Ralston was
just beginning to receive information on the shortage of trained infantry
reinforcements. | LAC 3361540
FOLLOWING THE NORMANDY CAMPAIGN, for the remainder of the month of
August and into September, the Allies pursued fleeing German forces across
northern France. In the course of the pursuit, perimeters were established
around ports on the English Channel that still held German garrisons. Despite
the euphoria of victory that marked the closure of the Falaise Gap and the
subsequent high speed pursuit, there were still instances of heavy combat.
The and Canadian Infantry Division's first large offensive operation after
Faise was the clearance of the Forêt de la Londe on the Seine River. Undertaken
by the ath and 6th Canadian Infantry Brigades, this operation lasted from 27-
29 August, and the six battalions suffered a total of 577 casualties. For a division
already struggling with low strength in its infantry companies, this battle was
especially taxing. Luckily for the division, apart from the unopposed liberation
of Dieppe on 1 September and some minor actions near Dunkirk, it saw little
action in early September. The heavily fortiffed port of Dunkirk was originally
designated to be captured by the division, which, by 9 September, had liberated
some of the surrounding towns. As it advanced across France in August and
early September, German channel garrisons were its main opposition. During
this period, the division continued to carry out operations despite an increasing
shortage of infantry, other ranks, replacements. The worst period for the division
lasted from late August to mid-September, when all infantry regiments were
understrength because of losses in the summer. As illustrated in detail in Appen-
dix 3, the nadir was reached on 3 September, when the division's infantry regi-
ments were short 2,645 other ranks? The division's strength was weaker than that
of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, even though the latter had been in combat
for an additional fifty days.
After some deliberation by 21st Army Group Headquarters, the planned as-
sault on Dunkirk was called off, and the city was to remain surrounded by other
Allied forces. This action freed up the division for future operations north of
Antwerp, Belgium. By 16 September, most of the division had arrived in its
new assembly areas near the city. It had suffered many losses between 15 July
and 30 August and needed to rest to receive and train new replacements. This
