130 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
On 3 September 1944, the division crossed the Somme River and moved north-
east towards the channel ports up to the Belgian border. After advancing to the
vicinity of Boulogne, France, by 5-6 September, the division embarked on a
series of siege operations to capture enemy-held ports. Its first objectives were
to overwhelm and force the surrender of the isolated garrisons of Boulogne
and Calais These operations did not involve a large amount of military risk
because these ports posed no offensive threat. The biggest challenge to Anglo-
Canadian forces at this stage was logistical concerns related to the rapid pace
of their advance.
The division managed to eventually take these two ports with support from
naval and air assets From in to 22 Sentember, after a short siege, the 8th and
9th Canadian Infantry Brigades, in cooperation with British forces, seized
Boulogne and surrounding areas. Because of the concrete fortifications and
heavy artillery available to the surrounded German units, some infantry regi-
ments suffered casualties. Between 25 September and 1 October, the division
moved onto its next objective, Calais. Aided by Allied aircraft that again con-
ducted multiple air strikes, by 1 October the division had successfully forced
the surrender of the German garrison after briefly assaulting some of its fortified
Following the conclusion of the Falaise Gap battles in late August, the 2nd
Canadian Armoured Brigade rapidly advanced towards the Belgian border.
Operating with the grdd Canadian Infantry Division, its regiments crossed the
Seine and continued to pursue the enemy along the coast. In early September,
this rapid advance brought Canadian forces into contact with German garrisons
in the occusied channel ports During these operations, individual armoured
squadrons supported infantry regiments as they steadily reduced these chal-
lenging fortifications. September was not a period of intense armoured warfare,
and the brigade's regiments accepted personnel reinforcements and new tanks
without offsetting losses. The three regiments took receipt of forty-four replace-
ment battle tanks during this month to bring them close to their war establish-
ment figures.'
Despite heavy infantry losses for the 4th Canadian Armoured Division in the
breakthrough battles to Falaise and the Falaise Pocket battles, operations con-
tinued without a break into late August and September. The division swept
across northern France as part of the 2ist Army Group's pursuit of the retreating
Germans. Advancing towards the Seine as part of the 2nd Canadian Corps, the
division crossed the river at Elbeuf on 26 August. Operating on the right flank
of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, it liberated St. Omer on 5 September.
By 8 September, it had reached Bruges, Belgium, and arrived at the Ghent Canal.
Channel Ports, Scheldt, and the River Mass 131
On g-4 September, the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade captured a bridge-
head over the canal at Moerbrugge, but it was forced to relinquish it after heavy
German counteratacks? Further operations led to the liberation of Moerkerke
and Belo. Subsequent tasks during September included patrolling the Leopold
Canal perimeter of the German Breskens Pocket in the southern Netherlands
before being redeployed in October to take part in fighting north of Antwerp.°
The threeinfantry regiments of the 1oth Canadian Infantry Brigade had been
significanty rin forced throughout September." As of 30 September, the strength
of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada stood at 37 officers and
84 other ranks. It had received an estimated 579 new personnel, placing it 2 per-
cent over its authorized strength. The Lincoln and Welland Regiment was not
astrong, containing 37 officers and 785 other ranks. It had received an estimated
408 replacements, bringing it to 97 percent of its war establishment.
The three regiments of the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade also received
new personnel in September 1944 but not as many as in the infantry regiments.
As of 30 September, the 21st Canadian Armoured Regiment contained 36 of-
ficersand s63 other ranks. It had received 63 reinforcements in September 1944,
bringing it to g1 percent of its authorized strength.? The 22nd Canadian Ar-
moured Regiments strength was 34 officers and sul other ranks. This was 79
percent of its authorized strength. It had received only 74 new personnel during
the month!3
As a result of the reduced German ability to attack Canadian units behind
the front, the army-level artillery units of the 2nd Canadian Army Group Royal
Arillery (AGRA) continued to be highly effective between September 1944 and
May 1945 but with far fewer casualties. During the summer, losses in the AGRA
units had increased significantly because of friendly fire in the way of inaccurate
aerial bombing. These types of operations by Allied four-engined bombers were
largely concluded by September. Total battle casualties for all three medium
regiments in northwest Europe from 13 July to 4 October had been 250. Non-
battle casualties totalled 115." Recorded monthly battle casualties for the re-
mainder of the war for the three medium regiments totalled 190. Within this
regiments, the number of nonbattle casualties that required hospitalization
over the same period (October 1944 to May 1945) was an astounding 960.
Personnel replacement data for AGRA units for the period June to September
1944 is inconsistent, but the strength returns indicate that they were adequately
resupplied with personnel. Because the Canadian Army's artillery doctrine
revolved around these units to a certain degree, they could not be allowed to
become weak due to nonreinforcement. As of 26 August, the 7th Medium Regi-
ment, Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA), contained 28 officers and 507 other
