72 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Figure 4.1
Fort Garry Horse two-squadron combined arms tactics with infantry,
Louisendorf, 1945
H
Royal Hamilton
Light Intantry
II
Two Troops of Tanks
Iwo Leading Companies
of Each Infantry
Battalion in Kangaroos
H
H
H
Essex Scottish
Regiment
"B" Squadron
Squadron Headquarters
and Kangaroo Headquarters
'A" Squadron
Remaining Two Companies
of Each Infantry Battalion
on Foot
H
Reserve Troop of Tanks
of Each Squadron
11 =
Royal Regiment of Canada
in keserve
Note: This diagram adequately illustrates the late war final evolution of tank-infantry combined
arms tactics
Source: Fort Garry Horse, Vanguard, 100.
infantry assault could use combined firepower to suppress the enemv. but cir-
cumstances often hampered this tactic. Poor coordination, tank obstacles, et-
fective German antitank fire, smoke from artillery fire, or other factors conspired
to inhibit the effectiveness of the firebase. Regardless of whether the tanks were
involved, an artillery rolling barrage commenced at the attack, matched with
Army Doctrine and Losses 73
concentrations on or near the objective. The rolling barrage lifted and moved
forward at a set pace per minute towards the enemy lines. Once the artillery
fire commenced, the infantry, supported by armour and antitank assets farther
back, began to move. The idea was that the infantry would closely follow the
barrage, just as it did during the First World War, and establish itself in the
enemy trench lines before they could react.
The battlefield could be challenging for Canadian infantry if they were not
part of a combined arms team. If the infantry was on its own and the enemy
continued to resist when the artillery barrage ended, company and platoon
tactics would be used. All light machine guns and mortars would be grouped
together to lay down suppressive direct and indirect fire, forming a firebase.
The remaining force would infiltrate an enemy flank under an infantry company
commander's leadership, forming an assault force. Suppression of the enemy
would allow the manoeuvring sections of this force to use fire and movement
to eventually reach and destroy the enemy infantry positions. Speed and effective
suppression of the enemy were crucial at this stage. If the advance of the as-
sault force was halted or driven back, the attack would likely fail. If enemy ar-
mour or self-propelled guns appeared, an unsupported infantry attack could
easily falter.
The infantry battlegroup, which had attached armour and antitank assets in
supporting roles, was much more effective in operations. Figure 4.2 illustrates
a successful Canadian infantry battalion attack supported by armour and British
Royal Artillery antitank assets. In this assault, which took place on 8 July 1944,
the main infantry force, attacking with two infantry companies for ward, fought
its way onto its objective, overcoming antitank obstacles and an entrenched
enemy. Despite heavy tank losses, the defenders were defeated in detail, and
each trench and bunker position in and around the village was captured.
Following its consolidation on the successfully captured objective, the assault
group was reinforced by antitank assets, namely, British Mio tank destroyers
and the support and reserve infantry company of the Highland Light Infantry
of Canada. By consolidating its defences on its newly won objective, the
Highland Light Infantry, with British Royal Artillery antitank support, could
then fight off a German counterattack consisting of Panther tanks sent to drive
the Canadians back in counteratatack was defeated with high losses inflicted
on the Germans.
The North Nova Scotia Highlanders night attack on Tilly-la-Campagne,
Normandy, on 25 July 1944, illustrates the type of reverse that could occur in
the absence of combined game cunport 31 Refore the assault force could penetrate
the village, it was halted by machine gun and tank fire and then counterattacked.
