104 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
at 70 percent of its war establishment. 15 It should be noted that when this return
was submitted, the unit was involved in heavy fighting. This figure highlights
the losses the regiment had sustained in late July and in its failed attack on
Tilly-la-Campagne on 25 July, when it took 139 casualties on a single day.
July 1944 was also a month of intense operations in Normandy for the 2nd
Canadian Armoured Brigade. During this time, its regiments supported both
infantry divisions in their offensive operations against German positions.
Operations Windsor and Charnwood saw the armoured regiments support the
eventual capture of Carpiquet airfield and the city of Caen. Operations Atlantic
and Spring were only partial successes as the armoured regiments struggled
against strong German positions on Verrières Ridge. All these operations in-
volved costly tank engagements that resulted in large tank and crew losses, As
of 31 July, all three regiments had been brought back up to strength in batle
tanks but were short of personnel.
The 25th Canadian Armoured Delivery Regiment's (25th CADR) "C* Squad-
ron effectively carried out its role of resupplying the and Canadian Armoured
Brigade with new and repaired AFVs throughout summer 1944. During lune
and July, the brigade received a total of 129 new and repaired battle tanks from
this squadron. 1 Returns for 31 July show 295 battle tanks on strength versus its
authorized total of 199, the brigade being 48 percent overstrength in this cat-
egory!' As shown in Figure 6.1, the brigade's AFV strength remained high while
a comparable German units strength dwindled, the Germans being starved of
new panzers and forced to repair damaged ones near the front lines. The figure
reflects only operational Canadian tanks. There were others on strength that
were repairable within one to two days by the LAD in each regiment, boosting
its numbers even higher.
Due to the intensity of combat, personnel losses in Canadian armoured regi-
ments increased rapidly in Tulv 1944. The regiments were still combat effective
but not near their war establishment strenoths in terms of personnel. For ex-
ample, the 6th Canadian Armoured Regiment had been reduced to 38 officers
and 522 other ranks, 81 percent of its authorized strength. The 25th CADR re-
inforcement organization would rectify these losses, but the process took time.
Because of the constant steam of losses sustained in ongoing operations, it was
dificult to maintain these units perfectly ot their establishment levels. These
personnel deficits would onlu be rostitalin fall tou when the number of the
armoured engagements during operations fell.
Mid-July saw the deplovment of a second Canadian infantry division to the
Normandy front. Once it was deployed to the front lines on 16 July, the strength
of the and Canadian Infantry Divician stood at 002 olears and 19405 other
ranks. 18 Despite some minor shortages all combat gums regiments within the
The Normandy Campaign 105
Figure 6.1
Tankstrength of 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade (Sherman, Sherman Firefly, and
Stuart) and Panzer Regiment 3 (Panther and Panzer IV), June- August 1944
2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade
Panzer Regiment 3
Soure: larymowyz, "The Quest for Operational Maneuver in the Normandy Campaign," Appendix
E, "and Canadian Armoured Brigade Tank States, June-August 1944" 336-38; and Zetterling,
Normandy 1944, 315.
division were at or close to their authorized personnel strengths during the early
part of the month. The strengths of two of its infantry regiments taken were as
follows. On July, Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal contained 36 officers and 809 other
ranks, 9 percent of its authorized strength." The Calgary Highlanders person-
nel strength on July was also very high, with 37 officers and 806 other ranks,
also g9 percent of its war establishment. 20 All divisional RCA artillery regi-
ments were also strong. On 1s July, the 4th Field Regiment contained 38 officers
and 633 other ranks, g9 percent of its authorized strength?" On 1 July, the ard
Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment consisted of 43 officers and 802 other ranks, or
98 percent of its war establishment.
With regard to vehicles and weaponry, the division was not equivalent to
the ard Canadian Infantry Division. Most noticeablv. as of Inly 101 it did not
contain any self-propelled artillery pieces or self-propelled antitant ouns The
21st Army Group's "A & 'B' Consolidated Vehicle Position Report" does not
contain a return for 30 June, but one exists for 31 May?" At this point, the division
