40 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
another after re-entering the replacement pipeline?* The US Army also had no
qualms about rapidly utilizing replacements whose infantry skills had eroded
due to inactivity following their initial training. This practice resulted in heavy
losses, but the main goal of consistently high personnel levels within US infantry
line companies was achieved.
Following the successful reconstitution of all its infantry regiments by Octo-
ber 1944, the next hurdle that the Canadian Army (Active) had to jump to
stabilize its infantry personnel situation was the creation of a sizable reserve
of reinforcements in the United Kingdom and Belgium. This reserve would be
maintained so that all ongoing and future infantry attrition could be serviced.
Despite the large number of remusters, in 30 November the army still had
trouble creating this reserve. As soon as infantry personnel arrived in the re-
inforcement system they were being dispatched to the regiments. This resulted
in a gulf between the authorized reinforcement strength and the actual total
reinforcements on hand. Figure 2.4 illustrates the challenge the Canadian Army
faced.
When the shortage ended, the Conscription Crisis began in Ottawa. In Octo-
ber 1944, the minister of national defence returned from visiting the Canadian
Army in the Netherlands and Italy. Meetings during his travels had raised the
concern that if infantry casualties in northwest Europe continued at their cur-
rent pace or if a large military event occurred, the available reinforcement pools
could be extinguished by the end of the year.?" His concerns were based on
uncertainty within the army about whether an adequate reserve could be cre-
ated from volunteer Canadian Army (Active) personnel? On 13 October,
CMHQ Chief of Staff Lieutenant-General Stuart informed the chief of the
general staff in Ottawa that 60,000 to 40,000 more losses could be expected
in the coming months. Stuart made the immediate request for 16,000 more men.
in the reinforcement stream. At this stage in the war, it was taking the army
nearly four months to give an infantryman basic training. Because of the time
needed to get what could only be trained NRMA personnel to the front from
Canada, the question of whether they could be used needed an immediate
Ralston felt that his hand was being forced. He had to argue within the War
Committee that there was no other option but to supply NRMA soldier to fill
the gap. For him, it was unacceptable that the Canadian Army would run out
of personnel it could remuster into infantry reinforcements. After all, there was
a large trained NRMA force that was untapped because of the Liberal govern-
ment's aversion to the overseas deployment of conscripts. After some investiga-
tion, Ralston determined that there was no way the army could say it could
The Sixty-Day Shortage 41
Figure 2.4
Actual reinforcement holdings versus authorized target strengths,
November 1944
35,000
30,000
• Authorized
Actuall
45.000
20,000
15,000
10.000l
5,000
28,950
16.825
2,150
1,089
Infantry officers
Infantry other ranks
Source: Burns, Manpower in the Canadian Army, 97, Figure 14.
fulfill its overseas missions utilizing only volunteers." Members of the procon-
scription camp in the War Committee judged that the army's needs in wartime
were second to the prime minister's desire to maintain national unity. They also
believed that King and other opponents of conscription were refusing to come
to grips with the reality that NRMA personnel would have to be used. With the
War Committee divided over the use of conscripts, Ralston delivered his forced
resignation on 1 November. While King and elements of his cabinet accepted
Ralston's resignation, the reality of the possibility of heavy combat in spring
and summer 1945 remained.
Shortly after the arrival of the new minister of national defence, Andrew
McNaughton, a decision was made on 23 November to send 16,000 NRMA
personnel overseas: 5,000 in December, 5,000 in January, and then the final
6,000 over the succeeding months?" In the end, only a small number reached
infantry regiments in the field. Of the 12,908 who reached the United Kingdom,
9,677 went to the continent, and only 2,463 found their way to the front line in
time to see combat. Split evenly between regiments, this meant seventy soldiers
each, or roughly two platoons worth. The total amount of NRMA casualties
suffered in combat was 313, with 69 fatalities?* The NRMA men's performance
within the infantry regiments was good. If more conscripted men had reached
