148 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Apart from SOMe minor shortages. as of 21 March the division's inventory
levels of authorized maior weadons systems was satisfactory. The division
contained 527 heavy weapons, 93 percent of its war establishment. Some minor
challenges in this area were present. There were only thirty-five medium. 303
machine guns against the authorized level of forty. Only 25 infantry 2-inch
mortare were not cat tichment strenoth of ,0, The division
contained only fifty-four 3-inch mortars against its authorized level of sixty.
While the Canadian Army had no major difficulties equipping its units with
weapons and vehicles in northwest Europe during spring 1945, the opposing
enemy formations facino it did. The state of equipment levels, repair services
fuel subplies, and renlacement conability within the enemy units was far below
acceptable levels." The ist Canadian Infantry Division was lavishly equipped
in comparican and this oars it a lorde degree of suneriority over defending
German units with regard to the number of weapons systems it could deploy
and their effect. Against low-quality entrenched German infantry with little
access to heavy weapons, this factor was devastating. 34
Lador the tamara common Cod Canadian Corns as of , April. the
operation was to atta act into the Netherlands as nart of the ona Canadial
Corn's Obamatias Canaaachat Thaland eleman f tha divicion curcecafnlly
consolidated a bridgehead over the Tecel River on 11 April 3 German comman
and control was dicaranized and on average the anality of aaam fansac facing
minimal casualties Partha. Macao tad in the santia of Analdoorn and
the high ground near Arnhem. At the conclusion of this phase of fighting, the
division reverted totha command of at Canadian Corne Subsequent advance
in mid. Aneil kant do call the ditia at Manafaant Ailank and
Harderuit. sached unite in cunnat of tha livision aided it canid advanc
April oDeratiane 37 During itche of seriod of combat operations the 1st Canadiall
Infantry Division performed well against an enemy that was disintegrating
Once these asaratione a rambletad an in April the divicion baltad af
fensive operations in the western Netherlands. The halt at the Grebbe River line
was arranged so relief supplies could be delivered to starving Dutch civilians
The German occupation forces allowed these deliveries so long as the Allies
advanced no farther west. Given the imminent end of hostilities, this temporary
agreement halted the starvation of the civilian populace and spared the country
further flooding and destruction.
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 149
Despite the short period of time that the division was in combat and the low
strength of the defending German formations, the enemy still managed to inflict
battle casualties. Divisional casualties were largely confined to the infantry
regiments, and their losses were much higher than in the other combat arms.
While casualties were at an acceptable level, on occasion they were still severe,
with German forces dug in and prepared for a Canadian assault.
In the month of April, the three regiments of the ist Canadian Infantry Brigade
sufered a total of 155 battle casualties. The 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade suf-
fered 197, and the 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade suffered a total of 164. The two
regiments hardest hit were the Loyal Edmonton Regiment, with 97 battle cas-
walties, and the Royal z2nd Regiment with 67. Although the war was nearly over,
small pockets of determined German defenders were encountered; these groups
even mounted an occasional counterattack against Canadian positions.
Casualties in April and May were low among noninfantry regiments in the
1st Canadian Infantry Division. For example, the ist Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA,
had only one battle casualty." This points to a scarcity of enemy AFVs in this
sector of the front. The Saskatoon Light Infantry suffered only ten battle casual-
ties, "While the antitank regiment, the machine-gun battalion, and the recon-
naisance regiment were deployed near the infantry positions, the remaining
RCA field regiments were deployed to the rear. This grouping encompassed the
light antiaircraft regiment and the three RCA field regiments. At this stage in the
conflict, there was almost no enemy air activity and little in the way of sustained
counterbatery fire on the RCAs field artillery positions. Accordingly, the 1st Field
Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, suffered only thirteen battle casual-
ties for the months of April and May 1945. The znd Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment,
RCA, suffered only four. These losses within the RCA regiments were negligible,
and tite ta soon tanadad fusss corrying out their missions
Like any other formation in the Canadian Army, the ist Canadian Infantry
care for nonbattle-related causes. Injuries, illness, and battle exhaustion cases
were combined within the category of nonbattle casualties. Battle exhaustion
cases within the division did occur in spring 1945 but were not heavy because of
a decreased level of enemy resistance. The highest levels of divisional nonbattle
casualties were in the infantry regiments. If infantry units were living in outdoor
dugouts, the soldiers were susceptible to disease and physical injuries. The cold,
wet conditions of the flooded landscape provided the worst environment pos-
sible for keeping personnel healthy.
Nonbattle casualties were a constant drain on infantry regimental strengths.
Take three infantry regiments in April and May as an example. The Princess
