164 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
establishments for personnel. For example, on s May the ist Medium Regi-
ment, RCA, contained a strength of 29 officers and 493 other ranks, only 92
percent of its war establishment, and the sth Medium Regiment, RCA, possessed
a strength of 29 officers and 501 other ranks, 93 percent of its authorized person-
nel. It appears that neither of these regiments were a high priority for reinforce-
ments after the 19 April ceasefire in the Netherlands and the imminent end of
hostilities. All four ist Canadian AGRA regiments had adequate inventories
of major weapons to complete their missions. The three RCA medium regiments
contained all 48 of their authorized number of 4.9- and s.-inch guns, and the
lith Army Field Regiment, RCA, contained all 24 of its war establishment
number of Sexton 25-pounder self-propelled artillery pieces.14
At the conclusion of hostilities in May the four corps-level regiments of the
and Canadian Corps were in various location in northern Germany. In April,
all four units had been involved in supporting the Canadian and British forces
that crossed the Rhine River and advanced through the northern Netherlands
and Germany. The oth Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, played a significant role in
the fighting to capture Leer in late April 15 The 18th Canadian Armoured Car
Regiment also took a leading role in the final stages of the fighting, advancing
with the regiments of the 4th Canadian Armoured Division. This regiment cap-
tured Mollberg, Germany, one the farthest points reached by the 2nd Canadian
Corps in its advances. The 1945 fighting in the Phineland the Netherlands,
and northern Germany was often intense, with the German Army occasionally
making a determined defensive efort The four corps units during this period
were just as involved in operations as units within Canadian divisions and in-
dependent brigades. Casualties were beavy. but not as heavy as the fohting in
Normandy. The supply of reinforcements reaching the four regiments during
this stage was sufficient to keep their personnel strengths high. From February
through May, the 19th Canadian Armoured Car Periment accepted a total of
120 reinforcements to cover 28 battle and 10 nonbattle casualties 116 Reflecting
the low casualty levels that went with its battlefield role, the and Survey
Regiment. RCA. received 111 replacements against 60 nonhattle and a battle
casualties. 117
The four corps-level units of the ist Canadian Corps - the ist Canadian
Armoured Car Regiment (the Royal Canadian Dragoons), the 7th Anti-Tank
Regiment (RCA), the ist Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA), and the ist Survey
Regiment (RCA) - had all arrived in northwest Europe between February and
March 1945 as part of Operation Goldflake. Their travel route to Belgium was
the same as the other regiments of the ist Canadian Corps. On their arrival in
Belgium, they began the process of re-equipping, integrating new replacements,
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 165
and reorganizing their regimental structures to fit 21st Army Group standards.
For the most part, they were combat ready at the beginning of April. The one
exception was the ist Canadian Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, RCA, which had
been reorganized during its time in Italy as an infantry unit, the Lanark and
Renfrew Scottish Regiment of the 12th Canadian Infantry Brigade 1ª It was not
neded in this role on its arrival in Belgium and began a reorganization and
retraining program to turn it back into a light antiaircraft unit. Spending April
and May in this process, it did not see action in northwest Europe.
As of 1 April, all four st Canadian Corps-level units contained adequate
personnel levels on the eve of operations in the Netherlands and Germany. As
anexample, the ist Canadian Survey Regiment, RCA, contained 31 officers and
546 other ranks, 92 percent of its war establishment. The inventories of heavy
Weapons and combat "A" vehicles for these four units were satisfactory. On 31
March, the th Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, contained 100 percent of its war es-
tablishment of i7-nounder antitant guns and Mia 17-pounder (self-propelled)
tank destroyers.!19
Two of the four corps units went on to be involved in ist Canadian Corps
operations on the IJssel River area near Arnhem in April. The 7th Anti-Tank
Regiment. RCA. suppOrted * Canadin Armoured Brigade operations south
of the Nederrijn River, south of Arnhem. Some of its batteries took on an in-
fantry role while its self-propelled elements supported the advance of various
Canadian units to the north and west. 20 The ist Survey Regiment, RCA, in its
artillery surveying, flash-spotting, calibration and sound-ranging role sup-
ported all RCA regiments within the Issel River area of operations.!" Operations
for these two units came to a halt on 19 April with the temporary truce between
German and Anglo-Canadian forces on the Grebbe River.
In its role as a reconnaissance spearhead, in April and May the ist Canadian
Armoured Car Regiment was placed under command of the znd Canadian
Corps. In its advance from the Rhine River to the Friesland region in the north-
ern Netherlands, it covered large distances in a short amount of time against
disintegrating opposition. Operating in late April and early May with units
of the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the 4th Canadian Armoured
Division, by the end of hostilities it had advanced from the Kusten Canal north
to Westerstede, Germany.2 During their period of operations, all three ist
Canadian Corps-level regiments performed to a satisfactory standard in their
battlefield roles.
At the end of hostilities, the ist Canadian Corps-level regiments continued
to contain adequate personnel and equipment and vehicle levels. All three
operational regiments had received enough replacements to keep them combat
