Conclusion
THE CANADIAN ARMY's ability to reconstitute itself was one of its greatest
strengths during the campaign in northwest Europe. While German units be-
came steadily weaker, Canadian combat arms units were continually reinforce
to retain their combat capability. In the event that a regiment suffered heavy
personnel losses, it would be out of action for half a week at the most! Vehicle
and equipment losses could be replaced within days? Although it took some
time to rebuild the combat effectiveness of a unit's personnel, actually having
the replacement soldiers quickly in place was the crucial first building block
This Canadian capability could not be matched hu the enemy and was one of
the principal reasons behind its defeat in May 1945. German defences were
continuously ground down by a force whose suberior resources were mated
with an effective artillery-based operational doctrine. This doctrine focused on
minimizing Canadian losses while maximizing the ongoing attrition of the
enemy, a "compassionate attritionis" approach to warfare. Without replacement
resources, German units simply melted away.
While not always efficient, the Canadian Army's approach to the maintenance
of its personnel and equipment inventories speaks of a military culture that did
not view these items as disposable assets but rather as valuable tools to be
maintained. Sophisticated organizations used countless resources to see that
equipment remained operational and personnel levels satisfactory. This was
very much in contrast to the late war attitude of the German military, which
ruthlessly fought formations to destruction in order to achieve dubious object-
ives, then replaced them with other formations when their usefulness was
expended.
Two organizations stood at the forefront of the Canadian Army's effort to
constantly maintain its equipment inventories. The processes of the Royal Can-
adian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers were effective at recovering and
repairing unserviceable equipment, and the asth Canadian Armoured Delivery
Regiment was extremely competent at delivering replacement armoured vehicles
rapidly. This second organization's whole purpose was to maintain the heavy
armoured vehicle strength of all Canadian units, and nothing comparable existed
in the German Army or Waffen-SS. The creation of the Royal Canadian Electrical
Conclusion 173
and Mechanical Engineers in 1944 and the earlier adoption of British Army
recovery-and-repair methods in 1943 illustrate the constant doctrinal evolution
of the Canadian Army during the late war period. The practice of using four
stagered maintenance lines produced the maximum number of repaired ve-
hides and weapons possible in the shortest amount of time. Severely damaged
or broken-down vehicles and weapons were stripped from combat units quickly,
leaving the Light Aid Detachments to concentrate on small repairs. This al-
lowed Canadian combat arms units to retain their combat effectiveness because
they possessed close to totally serviceable inventories of weapons and vehicles.
As an example, by 30 April 1945 the Canadian Army contained a total of 4,588
combat "A" vehicles on strength within its combat arms units, close to all that
could be assessed as operational.' On the same date, the number of Canadian
5,5 inch, 4,5-inch, and 25-pounder artillery pieces in service totalled s10.' Any
shortages that did occur within the First Canadian Army in northwest Europe
were of a temporary nature.
Though most units contained their complete war establishment of equipment
by way's end it was of varving quality within some combat arms units. Though
not the responsibility of the repair-and-replacement organizations, a challenge
that faced the Canadian Army in northwest Furope was the acquisition of ef
tective types of weapons and armoured vehicle technology for its infantry and
armoured units. It is difficult to quantify the limitations inferior technology
imposed on successful infantry and armoured offensive tactics, but the wide-
spread use of this equipment certainly did not aid the army's performance, nor
did it do much to limit casualties within the infantry.
This was an issue that confronted all British and Commonwealth forces, and
there was little the Canadian Army could have done to improve the situation.
While the 25-pounder artillery piece of the Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA)
was a war-winning ordnance, the 75 mm gunned Sherman tank and the Sten
submachine gun were average weapons systems compared to others in the Allied
and German arsenals. They did the job but not as effectively as it could be done.
As was the case within all British and Canadian units, excellent weapons systems
such as the Ram armoured personnel carrier and the Wasp II flamethrower
carrier were rare items at the end of hostilities.' During June and July 1944, at
a time when they were needed the most, no more that twenty-three Sherman
Firefly 17-pounders were available to the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade.
Having adequate personnel levels within all Canadian combat arms units
was a major factor in the successful achievement of their missions. For most of
the time that the army conducted combat operations in northwest Europe, its
units never lacked for adequate reinforcements to replace battle and nonbattle
