88 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Canadian Army to increase allotments of certain types of vehicles or weapons
systems, or more effective variants, it had limited ability to influence these mat-
ters. The British Army was largely in control of what and how much the First
Canadian Army received in northwest Europe, and the 21st Army Group had
strict regulations on what would be contained in the establishment of each type
of combat arms regiment. The British argument for this approach was that
uniformity in unit establishment was essential to the proper reinforcement of
personnel and the maintenance of equipment inventories. While the minute
details of these unit establishments were modified on a monthly basis, general
orders enforced these changes on all units of the same type within the z1st Army
Group. An example of the enforcement of these regulations was the rapid re-
organization of arriving Canadian formations from Italy in 1945 to conform
with the standards in effect.?4
Commonwealth nations such as Canada, New Zealand, and Australia were
dependent on Great Britain or the United States for the design of their most
advanced weapons systems?" There were exceptions, of course, such as the
Canadian-produced Sexton 25-pounder self-propelled gun, but for the most
part their vehicles and weapons were British or of US origin. While it was desir-
able to have more Wasp MK II flamethrower Universal Carriers, Ram Kangaroo
armoured personnel carriers, and larger numbers of advanced small arms, the
availability of these items was limited, and it took time for these items to reach
the front. While Canadian units certainly wanted better technology and more
of it, so did every other Commonwealth army.
Canadian armoured-vehicle and heavy-weapons-systems losses resulted in
a similar reduction in unit combat effectiveness, regardless of how quick a re-
placement piece of equipment was allocated. Given the relative abundance of
Allied armoured vehicles and heavy weapons in comparison to limited numbers
of replacement infantry personnel, units were rarely short of equipment. Bur
how effectively heavy weapons systems such as tanks and artillery pieces were
used depended on the team performance of the crewe Oberating them. For
example, if a tank was knocked out, usually one or two crew members would
be lost. Given the tight-knit camaraderie of tank crews, a reduction of combat
effectiveness would be exnected until new members were dealimatized to com-
bat conditions and the leadership of their tank commander. For the Canadian
Army after Normandy, losses of artillery pieces were rare because of the German
Army's inability to engage in sustained counterbattery fire or air strikes. As
was the case with US artillery crews, the combat effectiveness of the RCA artil-
lery regiments increased over tims 76 Their team performance incrasced with
Army Doctrine and Losses 89
experience, and artillery battery cohesion was not destroyed by heavy losses
and the constant need to integrate and train new personnel.
Compounding these disadvantages was the lack of recent combat experience
within the divisions about to be deployed to northwest Europe. Lessons learned
from Italy and Sicily in the form of reports on operations and enemy tactics
were not passed down rapidly or effectively to British-based Canadian units in
early 1944." Once in Normandy, the British practice of keeping units forward
did not allow Canadian regiments to be easily removed from the line for retrain-
ing in the field. Mated with the erosion of Canadian infantry strength in the
summer of 1944 was the arrival of inexperienced remustered replacements.
These factors led to occasional performance issues in the fall? Problematically,
experienced Canadian personnel remained in Italy while green units were used
in Normandy?» When employed against powerful German units with advanced
weapons and veteran officers, losses were often heavy.
Despite initial operational challenges during June and August, Canadian
formations had achieved sufficient combat experience to allow offensive per-
formance levels to rise in September."' When an all-arms combat team well
versed in assault tactics was employed with heavy artillery support, good results
could be achieved. Infantry platoons with intimate armoured support assaulted
the objective while other tanks suppressed the enemy in a firebase role. The
tanks would move at an infantry pace, following the artillery barrage and using
their machine guns to suppress the enemy. Supplementary artillery tactics ac-
companied the rolling barrage, such as surprise concentrations, air bursts, and
bombardments of all suspected armoured assembly areas and antitank positions.
Intensive counterbattery fire was placed simultaneously on all suspected enemy
artillery and mortar positions. Once the assault force reached the objective, the
tanks could churn up the trenches by turning on their tracks and firing directly
into bunkers and dugouts. They would knock out German antitank guns and
machine-gun positions, protecting the infantry until they were literally on top
of the objective. At this point, the tanks were vulnerable to enemy infantry
antitank teams, so friendly infantry had to be close at hand. All gains would
immediately be fortified by the infantry and their supporting arms, as the
German counterthrust would be expected at any moment. This was a second
victory waiting to happen, as the pew defenders would crush the German
counterattack and inflict heavy casualties.
Canadian Army strategy in northweet Furone was not focused on beino
constantly on the fensive The trancition phase between offensive oneration
was defensive: the focus was on creating "fortress" and "firm base" positions.
