152 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Wheeled oun tractors, second the ath Canadian Reconnaissance Regiments
complete inventory of "A" vehicles is missing from the returns. This regiment
was detached from the division to carry out training during April. If these
two factors are considered, divisional combat "A" vehicle strengths were much
higher. 54
Most At the units involved in combat onerations had adequate inventories o
equipment at the end of hostilities, but some shortages did exist. By May all
eleven authorized Valentine Charger command tanks had still not been issued
to the ist Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA. Present but nonfunctioning within the
same regiment were eighteen Valentine Archer 17-pounder tank destrovers
whose mechani tened cuts never caled durina hactilitiad To pantenet to
"A" vehicles it should not have had. Twenty-four Wasp II flamethrower carriers
and twelve Windsor tracked carriers were on strength within the division but
not authorized The die contined to ho well conclied wil manuehicle.
heavy weapons at the end of hostilities. Inventories were similar to the 31 March
returns, with 97 percent of authorized heavy weapons present.
In late February and early March, the and Canadian Infantry Division had
assaulted the Hockwald Gan in Germany as part of Operation Rlockbuster
Severe resistance was encountered in later phases of the fighting. Despite this
resistance than Ahisatias of Yanton Camany fall to the divicion on 1
Netherlands. It attacked out of bridgeheads over the Rhine River (which had
ban wanted tao Mash) and advances
and Doetincham These onerationsled to a further advance in earlv April tha
war, the division was moved east into Germany, capturing Grossenkneten,
crossing the Hunte River, capturing Oldenburg, and finally taking up positions
on the Wore River These wars the last combat actions of the and Canadial
Infantry Division before the ceasefire on 5 May.
During this lact shace of fobting fam 1 Rehma + e May. the division's
infantey unite sadie hero the mothe afthe diade cacualtiee Dottle cacualtie
Racey Seattlina ten in fierc
combat Le Destront do Moiconnouve suffered afa battle casualties The Queeni
Own Cameron Highlanders of Canada suffered 300 losses 57 Nonbattle casual-
ties continued unabated at roughly the same rate experienced from July 1944
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 153
from these types of casualties. A rear-deployed regiment's personnel had better
mess facilities, shelters, and access to medical care from the regimental aid post
inarelaxed environment. From February to May, the 4th Field Regiment, RCA,
suffered $5 nonbattle casualties.® In the same period the Royal Regiment of
Canada infantry regiment suffered 283.59
At the war's conclusion, the strength of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division
was 974 officers and 16,947 other ranks, for a total strength of 17,921 men."º All
regiments in the division had very high personnel levels. The Royal Regiment
of Canada of the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade had a strength of 41 officers and
834 other ranks, 3 percent overstrength. Although strong, the Royal Hamilton
Light Infantry was percent understrenoth with 36 officers and 796 other ranks.51
Royal Canadian Artillery units were less strong, with the 2nd Anti- Tank Regi-
ment, RCA, fielding 34 officers and 590 other ranks, or 4 percent understrength.
The 6th Field Regiment, RCA, was s percent understrength with 35 officers and
608 other ranks.53
These totals were the result of a sustained effort at reinforcing the division in
the February to May phase of the campaign in northwest Europe. In this period,
the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division was the recipient of large numbers of in-
fantry reinforcements, Many were newly available NRMA reinforcement per-
sonnel from Canada. * While the other combat arms were less of a priority,
every effort was made to keep Canadian Army infantry regiments at their full
authorized strengths. During this period, 417 new personnel were transferred
to the South Saskatchewan Regiment 65 Total reinforcements in the same period
for the Le Régiment de Maisonneuve, a regiment that had been weak after
Normandy, totalled 669 personnel. €
As of 30 April, the division had satisfactory inventories of "A" vehicles and
major weapons systems." The division contained 542 combat "A" vehicles against
a dina teasant over it
war establishment in this catedory. The returns for the end of April were als
and had no serious shortages.
Following the conclusion of its participation in Operation Veritable and sub-
sequent fighting in mid March, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division was re-
deployed back to the Netherlands to prepare for future operations. Combat
recommenced on s April, and the following week saw the division capture the
Dutch towns of Wehl and Zutphen. It attacked again on 14 April, rapidly liberat-
ing the northern Dutch towns of Meppel, Steenwijk, Akkrum, and Leeuwarden.
Elements of the division reached the sea at Harlingen during the same period
