24, An Army of Never-Ending Strength
terms of personnel and equipment the army was near its nadir as an organization
in 1939. It had no strategic plan that clearly and strictly defined what the eventua
size of the Canadian Army should be, how it would be reinforced, and who
exactly would equip it.
During the early war years, the other two services, the navy and air force, were
also competing for resources, personnel, and funding. The Battle of the Atlantic
was in full swing in 1941, and the Luftwaffe was still a powerful force within
western Europe. With these two services fully engaged in escorting convoys
and embarking on the bomber offensive on occupied Europe, the King govern-
ment was in no rush to expand the army's role. Furthermore, while defence of
the United Kingdom was seen by the Canadian public as important, the goy-
ernment judged that public opinion would not endorse the employment of Can-
adian forces in North Africa or farther abroad.' Heavy combat on land might.
also force the introduction of conscription, which at the outbreak of war was
politically unacceptable to King?
The use of conscription in Canada during the First World War had had a large
political impact on the nation. In August 1917, Prime Minister Robert Bordens
government enacted the Military Service Act, which aimed to maintain the
strength of the Canadian Corps at a time when it was facing a severe shortage
of recruits, regardless of success at the front. Over 45,000 personnel conscripted
from 1 January 1918 onward reached the front lines by war's end.* These men
were taken directly from their civilian environment and placed in military
training camps. The cost of this decision was national disunity along ethnic
lines, with anglophone Canadians being overwhelming proconscription and
French Canadians vehemently opposed. Unrest resulted in riots and numerous
revolutionary acts in Quebec. Politically, it damaged the Liberal Party's stand-
ings in English Canada, reducing Wilfrid Lauriers federal Liberal Party to seats
largely within Ouebec after the election of 1017 In 1020. King's Liberal governo
ment viewed even the proposed use of conscription as a serious matter.
Despite King's caution, following the fall of France his government passed
the NRMA on 21 June 1940. The legislation provided human resource planning
for Canadas war effort. Its two main areas of focus were emplovment control
and increasing the level of military cadiness Military readiness involved in-
stituting compulsory national registration, restricting employment deemed
unnecessary for the war effort. and requiring man to cubmit to madiaal treat
ment so that they might be elicibla for military corvion te crostod national service
but with very different aims than the conscription legislation of the First World
War. The act reoistered men and women nationwide and moved than into proper
employment to aid the war effort. It also mobilized Canadians for militar
The Sixty-Day Shortage 25
service, some for only a limited thirty-day period. The NRMA established twin
Canadian armies. The one for home defence consisted of conscripts; the other
was composed of volunteer Canadian Army Active Service Force personnel
and was later designated the Canadian Army (Active). Liberal Party supporters
of the legislation stressed that there would never be enforced overseas service.
While appeasing conscriptionists, the act did not arouse the political ire of
anticonscriptionists who opposed overseas military involvement. Extremely
aware of the damage that conscription had done to both national unity and his
party in 1917-18, King was determined to avoid a repeat.®
When King was forced by military necessity to reverse his decision in fall
1944, the damage to national unity was not as great. The servicemen sent were
NRMA personnel who had been in the army in some cases for several years
instead of new recruits violently stripped from the civilian population. Civilian
men who were not in the army in late 1944 did not have their lives affected by
this decision. This factor was extremely influential in reducing negative political
reaction within Quebec. Furthermore, in 1942 King had put the issue of con-
scription to the Canadian public in a plebiscite, and voters had overwhelmingly
endorsed the idea, giving the government a level of political cover.
Army growth from 1941 to 1944 occurred against a backdrop of political in-
fighting over the issue of conscription. This battle pitted the proconscription
minister of national defence, J.L. Ralston, against the anticonscriptionist forces
within the War Committee, most notably the prime minister and Minister of
Mines and Resources T.A. Crerar. Those in the minister's camp consistently
held onto the main goal of resisting conscription to achieve three main goals:
retain the Liberal Party's hold on power and political fortunes; avoid nationwide
unrest over conscription; and maintain Canada's contribution to the war effort
at a manageable minimum level. This was made clear by the War Committee's
29 July 1941 rejection of the army's requests to increase its size by a full two
divisions. 10
By late 1941, Ralston and others within the War Cabinet were under the im-
pression that the army's leadership was not fully committed to the recruitment
program for overseas volunteers." Canadian historian Richard Walker argues
that this resistance was an intentional move to force the King government into
adopting conscription. " Conscription would give the army the military might
needed to achieve its goals and at the same time make a large force, such as a
complete field army, sustainable. Senior army leadership did not endorse the
concept of the twin armies, one for overseas personnel and one for NRMA
home defence conscripts. At this time, the Canadian Army had the highest
standards for acceptance in the world, and all men under nineteen and over
