30 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
losses for all trades were manageable and within the July 1943 wastage rates.
The eight reinforcement battalions of the No. 1 Canadian Base Reinforcement
Group (No. 1 CBRG) were well supplied with two months' worth of replace-
ments and easily replaced losses. But because of the higher infantry casualty
rates encountered in these operations, it became obvious that 20 percent was
an insufficient number.
The number of reinforcements present in each combat arms trade pool in
Italy and England in the spring of 1944 was influenced by the projected casualy
figures authorized in July 1943. It was important that these projections be coret
or the army would be left with surplus reinforcements in one trade and a short-
age of replacements in another. The calculations were adopted from the British
and had been influenced by the records of the Eighth Army in North Africa.
Because of the fluid nature of the mechanized war in the desert, enemy armoured
forces could appear in unexpected places." Artillery, armoured, and infantry
casualties had been roughly equal; no trade took significantly more casualties.
Rear-area supply services were often just as vulnerable and could be caught off
guard by an enemy advance that happened to break through.
The use of these British figures was a miscalculation because it ignore
the most recent Canadian Army casualty returns from operations in Sicilv and
southern Italy in 1943. Constricting terrain, rivers. mountains, weather condi-
tions, and other obstacles made it easy for the German Army to halt Allied.
advances with well-placed blocking positions at critical points. In difficult ter-
rain, successful offensive operations became dependent on the use of artillery
and innovative infantry tactics to root out determined German defenders This
led to increased casualties in the infantry battalions.
Attempts were made by certain staff officers at CMHQ, London, and the
Canadian Army in the Mediterranean to raice the issue of miccalanations of
the number of infantry reinforcements available. In December 1943, Briga-
dier A.W. Beament, the officer in charge of the ist Canadian Echelon in the
Mediterranean, noticed that combat casualties were cionificantly higher fr
infantry, other ranks, and officers than the projected figures for normal rates
of wastage.3 He came to the conclusion that this wastage would result in a
significant shortcoming in reinforcements in the foreseeable future. This de-
duction led him to argue that personnel in otheo trades should be forcibly
remustered into infantry as soon as possible. National Defence Headquarters
and CMHO, London, refused to validate his view and stuck to the Tuly 1943
revisions?? For the time being, Brigadier Beament's concerns were dismissed
This officer recognized that there were enouch pardonnal in the Canadion Army
to supply infantry reinforcements, but only if they were managed correctl
The Sixty-Day Shortage 31
In fall 1943, the pool of reinforcements within the Canadian Army was not
being managed properly, both in the United Kingdom and the Mediterranean.
Within noninfantry trades, there were miscalculations regarding future casualty
figures, which in turn retarded the growth of a reserve of available infantry
reinforcements. Projected intense rate losses for the Royal Canadian Ordnance
Corps and what would become the Corps of Royal Canadian Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers personnel were projected to be nearly 9 percent in July
1943. This was a gross overestimate of the reinforcements that would be re-
quired. Actual casualties for both corps in the three worst months of 1944 turned
out to be 1 percent of total personnel. & In early 1944, reinforcement personnel
for these corps continued to be trained on their trades when the time could
have been used to effectively remuster them into infantry regiments.
As of 16 March 1944, total Canadian Army reinforcement personnel of all
trades within the United Kingdom stood at 3,597 officers and 36,145 other ranks
identified as fit soldiers. These totals reflected a surplus of 890 officers and
1,790 other ranks over what was authorized by the July 1943 casualty-projection
rates. The number of available reinforcements was never the issue in the spring
of 1944. The challenge was allocating the proper number of personnel to the
correct corps so that the proper numbers of reinforcements were potentially
available - in this case the infantry.
The British Army's pressure on CMHQ prevented the August and September
1944 infantry reinforcement shortage from being far worse. General Bernard
Montgomery, 21st Army Group commander, had taken an increased interest in
the reinforcement situation in March 1944. During that same month, his head-
quarters communicated the possibility to CMHQ that casualties from the initial
beachhead assault of Operation Overlord might possibly be higher than those
forecasted. 1ยบ This caused alarm at CMHQ and NDHQ. Canadian leadership at
this point was slowly becoming cognizant of the fact that there were potentially
far fewer infantry reinforcements than required. Plans were quickly made to
enact a large remustering program. It is troubling that CMHQ was driven into
action by the perception that the one-day Normandy beachhead assault - not
the extended period of high-intensity warfare that would follow - would be the
cause of an upsurge in future casualties.
During further investigations, Montgomery revealed that the Canadian re-
inforcement units in the United Kingdom had a massive shortfall of infantry,
other ranks, when compared with authorized levels.' Also, Montgomery ob-
served that a large number of personnel were attached to ad hoc units and
training units, a state of affairs that made them less ready to fulfill their reinforce-
ment role. At this time, the chief of staff at CMHQ, Lieutenant-General Kenneth
