118 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Luftwaffe. The and Survey Regiment supported all RCA units within the beach-
head as well as British Army Royal Artillery units in its artillery-survey, lash-
spotting, calibration, and sound-ranging role.
Casualties from the summer battles were light for the majority of the and
Canadian Corps units, in comparison to those within the Canadian infantry
and armoured brigades. As noted previously, an unfortunate side effect of the
use of strategic air power as a tactical tool in Normandy was friendly fire, caused
by inaccurate bombing runs It caused many unnecessary lasses among rear
deployed and Canadian Corps troops during operations in mid-August, A ty-
of unit that usually had low battlefield casualties, the 2nd Survey Regiment
suffered fortv-eight battle and twenty-four nonbattle casualties in August B
The majority were from inaccurate Allied aerial-bombing runs. The 6th Light
Anti-Aircraft Regiment suffered twentv-one battle casualties in July. mainly
caused by German air attack and indirect fire.'" In comparison to the low aver
age monthly casualties experienced by light antiaircraft regiments from Sep-
tember 1944 to May 1945, these figures were high.
Although casualty rator in the summer of 1041 wers the heaviest of the war
for the Canadian Army, after 31 August all four 2nd Canadian Corps-level units
were at adequate personnel levels. For example, the 18th Canadian Armoured
Car Regiment's strength was s7 officers and 786 other ranks on 20 August, 98
percent of its war establishment." These personnel totals were taken after its
prominent role in pursuing the defeated perman Army and Waffen-SS forma-
tions across France in late summer. The relatively intact personnel levels of this
unit indicate that the German ground forces in late August were involved in
an urgent withdrawal, not a fighting retreat. The strength of the 6th Anti- Tank
Regiment, RCA, was much weaker It totalled 37 officers and 690 other ranks
as of 26 August." This regiment saw far heavier combat than the other three
corps-level units, reducing it to g1 percent of its personnel war establishment.
This figure was still significantly better than the average 2nd Canadian Corps
infantry regiment in the same period.
With regard to army-level formations and units, upon landing in France, the
2nd Canadian AGRA immediately became involved in artillery programs sup-
porting Anglo-Canadian offensive operations in July and August. The heavy
firepower of its units was instrumental in neutralizing German defensive pos-
itions throughout the Normandy Campaign. In the final two weeks, the regi-
ments moved continuously to keep their guns in range. During the final Falaise
Gap battles, major damage was done to retreating German units by artillery
forward observers directing the AGRA's heavy guns. During combat operations
from June to mid-August, the four AGRA regiments suffered casualties from
The Normandy Campaign 119
German indirect fire, air strikes, and friendly fire in the form of inaccurate
Allied aerial bombing.
This situation changed in mid-August when the German military began its
withdrawal from northern France. At this point, German ground forces and
the Lufwaffe's ability to attack rear-deployed Allied heavy artillery positions
was greatly reduced, and German artillery units lacked the resources and ca-
pability to engage in sustained counterbattery fire. The Allied air forces had
simultaneously achieved such a level of air superiority that the Luftwaffe had
difficulty lunching ground attack operations. As a result, the sole unit of the
2nd AGRA in operation in June, the 19th Army Field Regiment, RCA, took few
losses during the campaign. From June, this artillery unit had been attached to
the rd Canadian Infantry Division as a fourth self-propelled field artillery
regiment. When the three army-level RCA medium regiments that formed
the 2nd AGRA landed in mid-Tuly, the 19th Army Field Regiment was detached
In conclusion, the Normandy Campaign was arguably the greatest test of
Canadian arms in northwest Europe. In the process of besting some of the most
powerful panzer and infantry divisions in the German land forces, the units
of the first Canadian Army at times arcined catastrophic losses While the
reinforcement system worked continuously, there were limits to the scale of
losses it could rani dly make good. The racid and large number of losses tem-
porarily outstripped the capability of the reinforcement machine in Britain,
leading to losses that weakened the front-line infantry companies. However,
these shortages were mitigated by the sheer scale of the total and decisive vic-
tory of Allied arms in late August.
