58 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
This transformation put the final administrative and command touches on
the maintenance process within a fully mechanized Canadian Army. The system
was now more capable than ever of keeping a major percentage of vehicles
and major weapons systems operational. The creation of an entirely new army
corps and the adoption of new repair-and-recovery processes were significant
mileposts in the evolution of the Canadian Army during the Second World
War. Overcoming extreme institutional resistance, former RCOC "E" Branch
officers had finally prevailed.
When conducting operations, the Canadian Army's recovery-and-repair sys-
tem was divided into levels so that no one area would be overstressed by its
workload. If there was an overload at one level or if a task was too complicated,
tasks would be passed to the next successive level, commonly designated as a
line. As illustrated in Figures 3.6 and 3.7, RCEME had four lines to repair mech-
anical faults or battle damage. First line was the organic repair services attached
to the combat arms regiments. The lines that followed took on successively more
difficult and complicated renair-and rehuilding ascion mente Most of the work
Figure 3.6
Maintenance lines, "A" and "B" vehicles and major
weapons systems
Combat arms regiment
First line with LAD
Advanced
workshop
detachment
…iT needed
Second-line workshop
Rear
Workcheni
detachment
(if needed)
Third-line workshop
Fourth-line advanced
base workshop
Source: Grodzinski, Operational Handbook for the First Canadian
Army, 89-90, Appendix E
Vehicles and Weapons 59
Figure 3.7
Recovery-and-repair process, "A" and "B" vehicle and major weapons systems,
Armoured Division
Infantry brigade
recovery point
Armoured brigade
recovery point
Brigade-level area
intantrv briaade
workshop, second line
Armoured brigade
workshop, second line
Division-level area
ivision area
recovery point
Corps-level area
Corps backloading point
(venicles and weapons
beyond repair
in une ne di
Armoured troops
workshop, third line
Army backloading point
(Vehicles and weapons
beyond repair
in the field
Army-level area
Canadian advanced base
workshop, fourth line
(Complete rebuild)
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 10,663, First Canadian Army Plans Diagram of AFV A' Vehicle Recovery,
Repair and Replacement," file 215C1.045 (D12).
in the RCEME workshops and LADs was done prior to or after combat oper-
ations. Enemy action was responsible for only a small percentage of the second
line's tasks. Its workload was divided as follows: mechanical breakdowns (95 per-
cent), battle damage (2 percent), and road accidents (3 percent) " Each successive
line took on more difficult jobs that required more repair hours, more replace-
ment parts, other specialized tools, and more specialized tradesmen to accom-
plish. This system allowed for the repair and recovery of the maximum number
of vehicles in the shortest amount of time.
For example, an "A" vehicle or weapon-repair job that would take more than
four hours was immediately backloaded out of a LAD's area of operations (sent
to the rear). During a rapid advance, the main body of a brigade-level RCEME
workshop could be split into two sections if necessary, establishing rear or
