178 Appendices
Prominent examples are the ist Canadian Armoured Personnel Carrier Regi-
ment and the ist Canadian Parachute Battalion. Certain Canadian regiments
were rare, with only one or two being raised for overseas service. Others, such
as infantry regiments, were plentiful. For example, in May 1945 there were thirty-
three lorried Canadian infantry regiments of battalion strength within the First
Canadian Army.
The figures that follow provide a basic introduction to Canadian unit war
establishments during the Second World War. The war establishment outlined
what exactly the unit was supposed to contain in the way of personnel, vehicles,
and equipment for it to complete its missions. War establishment personnel and
Equipment figures depended on economic production levels, troopavalability,
levels of technology, and fiscal policy. How these war material and personnel
were then organized tactically was driven by army doctrine.? Establishments
for regiments changed regularly as units were reorganized to remedy a deficiency
or meet new demands.
The regimental war establichment fourse that follow due for late todd and
early 1945, roughly the midpoint of the campaign in northwest Europe. Alter
this point, there was little in the wav of drastic organizational changes. Within
the figures provided, the personnel, main weapons systems, and armoured
fighting vehicles (AFVs) of the unit are listed. Not included because of space
constraints are how the "B" vehicles were dispersed within the "Ar" (fighting),
"A2", and "B" (supply and administrative) echelons of each regiment. These
vehicles were numerous and vital for the logistic, administrative, maintenance,
and liaison needs of combat arms regiment in the field. They consisted of every-
thing from jeeps to command caravans to 6 × 4 wheeled drive recovery vehicles.
The total number of small arms and how they were distributed are not in luded
They do include personnel from the Royal Canadian Corps of Signals Corps,
the Royal Canadian Army Service Corps, the Royal Canadian Pay Corps, the
Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps, and the Royal Canadian Medical Service,
among others. These personnel were integral to the medical and administrative
performance of the unit and the maintenance of its equipment, and they are
categorized as attached in the official war establishment figures. Not included
in the regimental establishment personnel totals are the Light Aid Detachment
(LAD) personnel of the Royal Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
(RCEME). They were also vital to the maintenance of unit vehicles and AFVs
and were with the unit constantly. Their personnel totals are listed at the end
of each regiment's description since they were administratively separate.
The 1945 Canadian Armoured Regiment was a battalion-sized Canadian
Armoured Corps (CAC) unit, as illustrated in Table A1.1. Its battlefield role was
Appendices 179
to use its AFVs to defeat the enemy through firepower and manoeuvre. Each
amoured division's armoured brigade and independent armoured brigade were
authorized three regiments, and there were a total of twelve in northwest Europe
by spring 1945. These regiments usually acted independently of one another as
part of combined arms teams. Each regiment had three armoured squadrons
anda headquarters squadron. These squadrons fielded the Sherman 17-pounder
Sherman Firefly tank, the Sherman V 75 mm tank, and the M3 Stuart 37 mm
light tank in the reconnaissance role. In early 1945, there was an equal mix of
Sherman V 75 mm tanks and Sherman Firefly 17-pounders, totalling sixty-
one cruiser tanks. This total was supplemented by eleven M3 Stuart light tanks
in the reconnaissance troop and three armoured recovery vehicle tanks. "B"
vehicles totalled twenty cars, seventy-three trucks and specialist vehicles, eight
motorcycles, and twelve trailers.
The antiaircraft troop was deleted as of
Table A1.1
CAC Armoured Regiment (Armoured Brigade or Division), January 1945
Tactical grouping
Subunits, strength
officers, and other ranks
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Regimental HQ
4 × Sherman V command tanks
Headquarters
11 x M3 Stuart Light tanks, 9 x scout
Squadron
cars, 1 x armoured ammunition
Intercommunication
troop
Admin troop
RCEME LAD ("C")
9-172
1 x HQ troop
5 x tank troops
8-153
19 x Sherman Firefly/75 mm Sherman
tanks, 1 x ARV tank, 2 x armoured
ammo carriers
Total
As above
As above
38-647
As above
As above
61 × 75 mm Sherman/17-pounder
Sherman Firefly tanks, 9 x scout cars,
11 x M3 Stuart tanks, 3 x ARVs tanks,
7 x armoured ammunition carriers
Source: LAC. RG24, vol. 13,662, "First Canadian Army A&Q War Diary," December 1944, "Armoured
Division War Establishment Staff Figures, WWE Il/151/4, CAC Armoured Regiment and Armoured
Reconnaissance Regiment, January 1945.
