108 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
The same letter later states:
8. It is understood that s50 general duty personnel were to have sailed from the
United Kingdom on 21 July 1944, and that 2,000 are scheduled to sail on the
Tuesday next. This should make sso available by Sunday and the balance by
the Thursday next - in both cases, provided the sailings and landings are car-
ried out as scheduled. 31
The 2nd Canadian Infantry Division's weapons and vehicles losses from 20
to 23 July had also been considerable. A large effort was made to replace these
losses, which included in Ti6 tracked gun tractors, 23 tracked Universal Carriers,
3 3-inch tracked mortar carriers, 21 6-pounder antitank guns, 417-pounder
antitank guns, 3 25-pounder howitzers, 47 2-inch mortars, and 153 Bren 303
light machine guns.32
The and Canadian Infantry Division was successfully re-equipped by thend
of the month, as evidenced by its 31 July returns for both major weapon systems
and combat "A" vehicles." At this point, it contained 627 combat "A" vehicles
compared to a war establishment level of 616, 2 percent over its authorized
strength. There were no serious shortages in nonvehicle weapons at the end of
the month. The division at this point possessed go percent of its war establish.
ment inventories for these items. This percentage was largely the result of a
temporary shortage in the area of 2-inch infantry mortars. There were only 226
on hand versus an authorized strength of 283.
The costly battles endured bu the aed Canadian Infantry Division in July were
followed by the division's participation in Operation Totalize on 8-13 August.
The removal of some German formations from the front and a massive airstrike
by Allied four-engined strategic bombers allowed for a successful night attack
by Anglo-Canadian divisions on 7-8 August. After this night attack, a further
large bomber airstrike occurred that saw some regiments of the division take
losses from inaccurate Allied bombing runs. Making contact with the enemy
on 10 August, the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade advanced towards its objectiv
the Quesnay Wood. Two regiments attacked on the right flank of the 4t'
Canadian Armoured Division but failed to capture the wooded area in difficult
fighting. Further participation by the division's brigades in Oneration Tractable
on 13-21 August saw the division's regiments reach the outskirts of Falaise o
16 August.' Up to 22 August, the final Falaise Gap fighting led to major German
personnel and equipment losses as the encirclement closed around them. Intense
combat with German forces seeking to break out resulted in more casualtie
for the division as all remaining escape routes were cut off. 36
The Normandy Campaign 109
Battle casualties up to 26 July had been high within the 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division. There were 6,481 killed, wounded, or missing 3 Despite these losses
and others in August, the reinforcement organization had kept the infantry
regiments combat ready. The 30 August strength returns for two infantry regi-
ments indicate the infantry strength within the division. The North Nova Scotia
Highlanders, a regiment that had been in poor shape at the end of July, possessed
40 officers and 757 other ranks, 93 percent of its war establishment.? The regi-
ment had suffered considerably, with a total of 881 battle and 241 nonbattle
casualties occurring during the campaign." Reinforcements assigned to the
regiment numbered 1,069, sufficient for roughly eight complete new infantry
companies," The North Shore Regiment in late August was also reasonably
strong, with 35 officers and 725 other ranks on strength, 89 percent of its author-
ized strength. This regiment had sustained 821 battle and 233 nonbattle casualties
to this point." It had been very well reinforced by approximately 964 replace-
ments during the June-August fighting." Both of these regiments had suffered
100 percent losses during this period and had been completely rebuilt to near
their authorized strengths.
Battle casualties for the RCA units in the division in July and August had
been light. Total RCA battle casualties for all five regiments in the division to-
talled s61 killed, wounded, or missing. On a day-to-day basis, it was rare for
any one regiment to suffer a large number of casualties. As an example, the war
diarv for the oth Field Regiment renorted only light casualties during its in--
volvement in Operation Totalize, despite some German shelling. "
As of 4 August, personnel reinforcements for the 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division revealed that the cost of battle was being borne by the infantry to a
large degree. Total Canadian Infantry Corps reinforcements sent to the division
numbered 269 officers and 5,618 other ranks, an astounding total equivalent to
forty-nine new infantry companies Other arms within the division received a
total of s officers and 1,045 other ranks.* Not only was the 3rd Canadian Infantry
reinforced while in the field.
Division exceptionally outfitted for battle in Normandy, it was also exceptionally
Major weapons systems and AFV losses suffered by the division were con-
tinually made good during the campaign. * On 31 August the division was in
a satisfactory state with regard to its combat "A" vehicles and weaponry. How-
ever, it was in a state of transition with regard to the number of combat "A"
vehicles within its RCA field artillery regiments. The three field regiments had
exchanged their self-propelled artillery vehicles for towed artillery, which was
superior for indirect fire tasks. The fourth Canadian army-level field artillery
regiment that was temporarily attached to the division in June was removed
