Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 151
150 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Patricias Canadian Light Infantry suffered fifty nonbattle and fifty-five battle
casualties 40 The Dual so Redimant cufford thirtv-one nonbattle casualtie
versus sixty-seven battle casualties." The 48th Highlanders of Canada suffered
Canadian Infantry Division's 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade. These figures
were significant over the long term. Rear-deployed RCA units had better living
conditions in ramaron to than a dug in on the toont Haas They were
also not subjected to sustained shelling in the form of counterbattery fire in
April. The battle and nonbattle casualties of two sample RCA regiments are very
low- the ard Field Regiment cuffered twentv-eight nonbattle and zero battle
casualties during the month." The 2nd Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment suffered
zero nonbattle casualties and four battle casualties. 44
adian formations in March and April were recipients of reinforcements drawn
from conscripted home defence units raised as a result of the National Resour-
ces Mobilization Act (INMA). The resolution of the Conscription Crisis resulted
in large number CADMA narconn being cent oversene to fll the reinforce
personnel in the last stage of the war 45 Regiments could now send colliers or
compassionate leave to Canada and regular leave on the continent and in the
received the following reinfarremente quer in April and Mav. The Seaforth
Highlanders of Canada received is reinforcements against - Q total battle anc
nonbattle casualtio. 47 Ta Dotal Diment received 18- new personne
over the sara.sotal tale lane 48 Ta Dol Can
Adian Regime DeA Ti
the infanter edit can cia. low laccAc Rentcemente for the 15
so fortunew personnel amine fualaccee?
Mandalad a inforcemante in Anil and
May against a loss of five casualties.51
On the last day of hostilities, the personnel levels within the division's units
were satisfactory. Losses had occurred during operations between 11 and 19
April, but reinforcements fill the gaps. Because of the importance of keeping
their units up to strength, a larger effort had been put into reinforcing the in-
fantry at the expense of other regiments. Although not at 100 percent of their
war establishment strengths, the noninfantry regiments were at adequate levels.
Their strengths were not affected drastically by combat operations in April.
Figure 8.3
Batle and nonbattle casualties, 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade, April 1945
Ranie
• Nonbattle
Princess Patricia's Canadian
Light infantry
Seaforth Highlanders
of Canada
Loyal Edmonton
Regiment
Evaluating thre infantry regimental returns for s May, it appears that each
was reinforced effectively during April. The Royal Canadian Regiment's strength
stood at 5 officers and 781 other ranks, or 4 percent understrength. The West
Nova Scotia Regiment's contained 39 officers and 818 other ranks, putting it
I percent overstrength. The Saskatoon Light Infantry's personnel levels stood
at 37 officers and 666 other ranks, which was only 4 percent understrength. Of
the noninfantry regiments, the 4th Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment's (4th
Princess Louise Dragoon Guards) strength was 36 officers and 758 other ranks,
or 3 percent understrength. The ist Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse
Artillery, taken as an example of the three field artillery regiments, posted a
strength of 37 oficers and 596 other ranks. This was 6 percent under its author -
ived strenoth The westest regiment in the division was the ist Anti-Tanl
Regiment, RCA. With a strength of 35 Officers and 549 other ranks, it was 10
minimal role, and parts of some batteries were nonoperational.
In reviewing the heavy weapons and combat "A" vehicle returns for the end
of April, the division's inventories of heavy weapons were adequate, but those
of combat "A" vehicles were low." Against an establishment of 627 combat "A"
vehicles, only 427 were on strength, 68 percent of the authorized amount. This
was due to two factors. First, a total of 120 T16 tracked gun tractors were listed
on the war establishment figures but not issued, the division making do with
