The
under
the 'ri
demo:
earth'
Co
worke
class
Soldie
Af
allow
Many
artific
caree
Al
This
8 Introduction
It would have been more efficient if each No. 2 CBRG battalion were special-
ized for a certain trade and their number reduced. Replacements could have
been kept nearby in large camp environments where their combat skills could
be maintained. Also, the number of administrative moves should have been
reduced. This is exactly what occurred in late 1944, when the personnel re-
inforcement system was reorganized to focus on quickly supplying infantry
regiments with replacements.' But during the summer and fall of 1944, needless
time and resources were spent ensuring that new personnel reached units on a
routine schedule.
During the summer of 1944, the delivery of heavy armoured fighting vehicles
could also have been more efficient. Operations within the 25th Canadian
Armoured Delivery Regiment (CADR) were complicated and overly adminis-
trative. Its squadrons duplicated the mechanical and kit inspection process on
armoured vehicles at each stop in the delivery process until an "A" vehicle joined
a unit? When this vehicle reached the front, it was then checked a final time
by the soldiers operating it. The duplication was needless. Again, once the
machine was rolling and well supplied with vehicles, large numbers of replace-
ments reached regiments on a regular basis.
As these two examples show, the Canadian Army had an extensive adminis-
trative component within its personnel and equipment replacement organiza-
tions. Once these organizations were established and well supplied, they achieved
their main goals in a satisfactory manner. But they were not streamlined
organizations.
Was there a distinct administrative mentality within the Canadian Army that
focused on maintaining the strength of combat arms units at the front? The
Canadian Army's approach to the replacement of personnel and equipment was
similar to that of Britain and the United States. As was the case in their armies,
sophisticated and bureaucratic systems ensured that reinforcements and new
equipment reached units in the field. From 1939 to 1943, the Canadian Army
was not committed to combat apart from two short-lived operations in late 1941
and mid-1942. This nonoperational period led to the establishment of an ex-
tensive administrative and training base in England. Administrative structures
and systems increased in size and sophistication within inistr amounted to a
peacetime training environment.21
Although the Canadian Army took on a major combat role in Italy in 1943-44,
it did so with a limited expeditionary force that consisted initially of one infantry
division and one independent armoured brigade. Because of the limited number
of Canadian formations being deployed, in comparison to the US and British
forces, the army could sive specialized attention to its personnel and equipment
Introduction 9
replacement needs. The force eventually became a complete corps of two div-
isions and one independent brigade, but its losses were still manageable due to
breaks in operations. After gaining experience in Sicily and Italy, utilizing
existing repair and reinforcement processes already present in the British Army,
the army had systems in place for the D-Day landings and beyond that were
effective and battle-tested.
The Canadian Army's battlefield doctrine was, for necessary reasons, based
on British military philosophy, concepts, and operational art. To attain combat
objectives, it focused on the use of equipment and firepower rather than the
expenditure of human capital. The Anglo-Canadian emphasis on use of military
technology was intended to limit friendly casualties and, simultaneously, cause
extreme attrition to occur within the enemy's ranks.? This was a "compassionate
attritionist" approach. Because of the limited number of Canadian formations
engaged in battle, deployed front-line divisions were lavishly equipped with a
complete establishment of the latest weapons and equipment in the Common-
wealth arsenal. Losses in these inventories were rapidly made good. This allowed
the formations to fully utilize a large percentage of their weapons systems on
an ongoing basis, continually hammering away at the enemy with a focus on
his continued attrition.
It should be mentioned that while Canada suffered severe personnel losses
during the disasters at Hong Kong in 1941 and Dieppe in 1942, it never endured
the kind of military disasters that befell certain German armies on the eastern
front from 1941 to 1945. The possibility that a unit would be destroyed was an
eventuality the Canadian Army refused to accept. The reality of total war, prac-
tised on a grand scale by nations literally fighting for their national survival,
was not a challenge that the Canadian military faced in Europe. It was never
involved in a desperate do-or-die struggle with a superior foe in the last year of
the war. The Normandy lodgement, for example, was never in danger of liquida-
tion after June 1944. Personnel and equipment challenges could be administra-
tively managed, and no disastrous event equivalent to the German debacle at
Stalingrad upset the orderly Canadian management of the war. Also, the Allies'
increasing military dominance on the western front from September 1944 on-
ward allowed for a situation where battalion-sized units could be withdrawn
into reserve for training, rest, or partial reconstitution. This rotation was com-
pleted on a relaxed schedule as determined by znd Canadian Corps or First
Canadian Army headquarters.
The key factor that led to the fall 1944 Conscription Crisis in Canada was the
lack of other ranks (nonofficer) infantry replacements. When discovered, this
shortage placed significant political pressure on the Cabinet War Committee
