98 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
designed to mate with and support Canadian infantry divisions rather than act
independently or form their own battle groups based on their armoured regi-
ments. While the brigade headquarters provided an administrative support
function, the regiments were parcelled out, one to each infantry brigade, for
various operations.
Raised in 1941, the ist Canadian Army Tank Brigade was originally one of
two armoured brigades that formed part of the ist Canadian Armoured Division,
which was subsequently renamed the sth Canadian Armoured Division. One
of its three armoured regiments, the Calgary Regiment, participated in the
disastrous Dieppe Raid. Following a reorganization of the division in early 1943,
the brigade became an independent formation. In its new role, its regiments
were to provide support to infantry brigades in battle. Following another train-
ing period in the United Kingdom, the brigade took part in the Sicilian Cam-
paign in July and August 1943. Near the conclusion of this campaign, the brigade
was renamed the ist Canadian Armoured Brigade. Service in Italy continued
until January 1945, and the brigade successfully supporting several different.
Allied formations in multiple operations!" When the brigade was given its nev
title in August 1943, its regiments were renamed the uith, 12th, and 1 4th Canadian
Armoured Regiments on top of the regimental titles already present. At this
point, the brigade consisted of a headquarters squadron, the 1ith Canadian
Armoured Regiment (the Three Rivers Regiment), the 12th Canadian Armoured
Regiment (the Ontario Regiment), and the 14th Canadian Armoured Regiment
(the Calgary Regiment). Like all Canadian armoured brigades, it also had a
Royal Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers second-line armoured
brigade workshop attached. ° In mid-February 1945, the brigade was redeployed
to Belgium with the rest of the ist Canadian Cords as part of Operation
Goldflake. On its arrival in northwest Europe, its commanding officer was
Brigadier General W.C. Murphy. Utilizing the same route as the ist Canadian
Infantry Division and the sth Canadian Armoured Division, the brigade arrived
in Belgium in mid-March 1945.21
Raised in January 1942, the 2nd Canadian Army Tank Brigade was established
with units that were formerly part of the th Canadian Infantry Division. At
the time, the division was reorganizing itself as an armoured division and had
to shed excess units. Deployed to the United Kingdom in July 1943, it was re-
named the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade. The 3rd Canadian Army Tank
Brigade, also an independent formation, was already present in the United
Kingdom Concerned about the Canadian A ends shift ta custain a third i
dependent armoured brigade, Canadian Military Headouarters Tondon broke
up the original three regiments of the 2nd Canadian Army Tank Brigade for
Formations and Their Units 99
reinforcements. The three more experienced regiments from the former 3rd
Canadian Army Tank Brigade took their place. From fall 1943 to spring 1944,
the brigade, renamed the znd Canadian Armoured Brigade, conducted training
exercises for its upcoming amphibious role in Operation Overlord. With
Brigadier General R.A. Wyman in command, the brigade consisted of a head-
quarters squadron and three armoured regiments: the 6th Canadian Armoured
Regiment (the ist Hussars), the 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment (the Fort
Garry Horse), and the 27th Canadian Armoured Regiment (the Sherbrooke
Fusiliers. Structured like the ist Canadian Armoured Brigade, the brigade also
had its own armoured brigade workshop??
Corps- and army-level combat arms units under the command of the First
Canadian Army headquarters and the ist and znd Canadian Corps were in-
dependent of Canadian divisions and independent brigades. These units were
made available to corps and divisional commanders, who could attach them to
their formations on a need basis. These units could increase the combat power
of a division during offensive operations or strengthen its defensive front. Most
of them were part of RCA, and their indirect firepower was utilized to help
implement the artillery-based doctrine of the Canadian Army in the late war
period.
The higher command structures that allocated these units included the First
Canadian Army headquarters, which was formed in April 1942 when the number
of Canadian divisions in the United Kingdom reached the strength of two corps.
It became operational in Normandy on 31 July 1944, and the army's commander-
for the duration of the campaign in northwest Europe was General H.D.G.
Crerar. The 2nd Canadian Corps headquarters was established in the United
Kingdom in January 1943 to command excess Canadian formations not con-
trolled by st Canadian Corps, then destined for the Mediterranean. On becom-
ing active in Normandy during the first week of July 1944, its commander for
the balance of the campaign in northwest Europe was Lieutenant-General Guy
Simonds. The ist Canadian Corps headquarters was transferred back to north-
west Europe from the Italian front in early 1945. Under corps commander
Lieutenant-General Charles Foulkes, it was operational for the final April-May
1945 phase of fighting. 3
The First Canadian Army in the last month of hostilities employed multiple
battalion-sized army-level and corps-level units. As of April 1945, the 1st
Canadian Corps contained the following corps-level units the ist Licht Anti-
Aircraft Regiment (RCA), the 7th Anti-Tank Regiment (RCA), the ist Survey
Regiment (RCA), and the the 7th Anti- Car Regiment (the Royal Canadian
Dragoons).24 At the same point in time, the znd Canadian Corps contained the
