100 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
following corps-level units: the oth Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA), the
6th Anti-Tank Regiment (RCA), the 2nd Survey Regiment (RCA), and the 18th.
Armoured Car Regiment (the 12th Manitoba Dragoons).
Canadian Army-level units were allocated to corps commanders as needed,
but these commanders did not have the luxury of controlling them permanenty.
These regiments consisted of six medium and two army field artillery regiments,
divided evenly into two Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) formations. These
formations, the ist and znd Canadian AGRA, held an awesome concentration
of firepower that allowed for the facilitation of the Canadian Army's artillery-
based doctrine. The and Canadian AGRA was placed in support of the and
Canadian Corps, and the ist Canadian AGRA was place in support of the 1st
Canadian Corps in operations in northwest Europe? The ist Army Group
(RCA) consisted of the uth Field Regiment (RCA) and the 1st, 2nd, and th
Medium Regiments (RCA). The and Army Group (RCA) consisted of the igth
Field Regiment (RCA): the ard. 4th, and th Medium Regiments (RCA); and
the 2nd Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment (RCA) (Mobile). There were other mis-
cellaneous RCA units at the battery level.
The AGRA medium regiments were initially equipped with s.s-inch medium
guns, and the Army Field Regiment was equipned with M- Priest 105 mm self-
propelled artillery pieces. These units contained a total of seventy-two arillery
pieces, the same amount of artillery contained in an infantry division. Buttvo-
thirds of the nieces in the ACP A grouDing were the heavier medium st-inch
guns. Because of the lack of any super heavy Canadian artillery units, the three
5.5-inch medium regiments were the most nowerful artillery regiments in thi
Canadian Army.
All formations, both those dispatched to partake in the Normandy invasion
and those redeployed from Italy in 1945, were fully operational and combat-
ready for the entirety of their deployment veroth west Europe. The organiza-
tion, assembly, equipping, and training process for each formation had been a
long and at times challenging ordeal. But when all were finally united within
two army corps in April 1945, they were the greatest combat force ever assembled
by Canada, superbly equipped with both personnel and the most advanced
military equipment available within the British Empire.
6
The Normandy Campaign
THE FIRST CANADIAN ARMY's reinforcement ability faced its greatest test
during the Normandy Campaign of June- August 1944. The intensity of combat
and losses sustained was extremely high. The Canadian Army's ability to make
losses in personnel good was pushed to the absolute limit. A crippling short-
fall in infantry manpower in late summer 1944 was avoided only through the
crash remustering of Canadian personnel in other army trades in the UK re-
inforcement pools to other ranks infantry. The First Canadian Army was also
fortunate to face an opponent coming to grips with one of its worst defeats
during the war as it barely accomplished an organized withdrawal during its
ejection from Northern France in late August. These circumstances mitigated
any lack of capability on the part of the First Canadian Army, whose biggest
challenge at the end of the campaign was pursuing the remnants of the defeated
German Army.
On the eve of the invasion, in June 1944, every Canadian division in southern
England was fully equipped or very near to it in accordance with war establish-
ment figures for personnel, vehicles, and equipment. Assigned to carry out the
actual beach assaults, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division was significantly better
equipped in personnel, vehicles, and weaponry than the other two Canadian
infantry divisions in England, and it thus had a greater level of combat power.
The major difference in manpower and weaponry stemmed from the attachment
of the 19th Army Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery (RCA), and addi-
tional British Royal Artillery regiments. To provide added mobility, all four
Canadian field artillery regiments were equipped with M7 105 mm Priest self-
propelled artillery pieces rather than towed variants. The RCA Anti-Tank Regi-
ment included a battery of Mio 3-inch self-propelled tank destroyers? These
additions gave the division an extensive mobile, self-propelled artillery and
antitank component that could rapidly disembark from landing craft and sup-
port a quick armoured advance if required.
On D-Day, four infantry regiments of the ard Canadian Infantry Division
successfully assaulted Juno Beach. With significant armoured, air, naval, and
engineer support, they cleared the beaches of German defenders.
These regi-
ments suffered a large number of battle casualties; the greatest number were in
