180 Appendices
November 1944. The RCEME LAD type "C" consisted of one officer and fifteen
other ranks. Identically equipped, the armoured reconnaissance regiment had
the role of aggressive armoured reconnaissance in force as the vanguard of the
armoured division. As divisional troops, there was one armoured reconnais-
sance regiment in each of the two Canadian armoured divisions.
The 1944 Canadian Armoured Car Regiment was a CAC unit employed ar
the corps level as a reconnaissance unit, as illustrated in Table A1.2. It was placed
under the command of armoured and infantry divisions and utilized in this
role. As corps troops, there were only two such regiments employed in northwes
Europe by the spring of 1945, one for each Canadian corps. This regiment was
designed to carry out deep reconnaissance on a wide front during fluid oper-
ations, and it used the mobility of its squadrons to carry out this role. Its organ-
ization consisted of four squadrons and a regimental headquarters. Each of
the squadrons was equipped with a large number of armoured wheeled ve-
hicles of various types. Because of its large pool of vehicles, this regiment could
cover a wide area. Armoured vehicles within the regiment consisted of Daimler
and Humber scout cars and Daimler. AEC. and Staghound armoured cars. "B
vehicles within the regiment consisted of eight cars, twenty-eight trucks, seven-
teen M3 White scout cars, thirty-seven specialist vehicles, and twenty-three
Table A1.2
CAC Armoured Car Regiment (Corps Troops), October 1944
Tactical grouping
Regimental HQ
Subunits, strength
officers, and other ranks
Signals troop
RCEME LAD ("C")
"A" Squadron
Squadron HQ troop
Heavy troop
Total heavy weapons and AFVs
13 x scout cars, 4 x armoured cars,
1 x command caravan
13 x scout cars, 17 x armoured cars
Support troop
5 x recce troops
"B" Squadron
"C" Squadron
"D" Squadron
Total
As above
As above
As above
7-803
As above
As ahove
As above
72 X armoured cars, 65 x scout
cars. 1 X command caravan
Source: LAC, RG 24, Vol. 13,659, "First Canadian Army A8Q War Diary? October 1944, "Corps
Troops War Establishment Staff Figures, 1/36/2, CA Armoured Car Regiment, October 1944"
Appendices 181
motorcycles. The attached REME LAD type "C" consisted of one officer and
fifteen other ranks.
The lanuarv 1015 Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment was a CAC divisiona
reconnaissance asset operating within Canadian infantry divisions, as illustrated
in Table A.3. Its organization consisted of a HQ squadron and three reconnais-
sance squadrons. The reconnaissance regiment differed from an armoured
reconnaissance or armoured car regiment because of its combination of infantry
heary weapons and light wheeled armoured vehicles. If need be, it could act as
an aditional infantry unit while at the same time conducting its primary role
as the divisional mobile reconnaissance force. Its AFVs and major weapons
systems consisted of the Humber Armoured Car, the Humber Scout Car,
the Universal Carrier, the Ti6 (gun tractor) Carrier, the Universal Mortar
Catrier, the -pounder antitank gun, and the g-inch mortar. There were three
Table A1.3
CAC Reconnaissance Regiment (Infantry Division), January 1945
Tactical grouping
Subunits, strength
officers, and other ranks Total heavy weapons and AFVs
Regimental HQ
Squadron
Carrier troop
1 x armoured cars, 9 x Universal
Antitank troop
Carriers, 6 x towed 6-pounder A/T
Mortar troop
guns, 6 x 3-inch mortars, 12 x (gun
RCEME LAD ("A")
tractor) Carriers, 6 x Universal
Mortar Carriers
Reconnaissance "A"
Squadron HQ
9 x armoured cars, 18 x Universal
Squadron
Signal troop
Carriers
Assault troop
3 x scout troops
Reconnaissance "B"
As above
As above
Squadron
Reconnaissance "C"
As above
As above
Squadron
Total
43-777
6 x 3-inch mortars, 6 x towed
6-pounder A/T guns, 28 x
armoured cars, 63 x Universal
Carriers, 6 x Universal Mortar
Carriers, 12 x T16 (gun
tractor) Carriers
Source: LAC, RG 24, Vol. 13,662, "First Canadian Army A&Q War Diaries, December 1944, "Infantry
Division War Establishment Staff Figures, Reconnaissance Regiment, WE Il/251/2, January 1945."
