100|
An Army of Never-Ending Strength
By 3 April, the area was cleared with relatively few casualties." On 15 April, the
division advanced from the British bridgehead over the Nederrijn at Arnhem
and attacked west on the left flank of the ist Canadian Infantry Division. In
quick succession the division liberated Deelen and Otterloo, Voorthuizen,
Putten, and Ermelo.
infantry and armoured regiments Adequate reintorcements were dispatcher
to reblace anv losses that occurred The 22. April strength return for the Tris
Regiment of Canada vanantell firere ond 824 other rankS. 1 nercent over 1t
establishment strength. The RCA regiments also suffered little in this phase of
operations, with four battle casualties and eighty-eight nonbattle casualties
during the division's drive into the central Netherlands. Reinforcements dis-
patched to RCA units in this period totalled 129.100
Onerationch adian Coral barata tha assa Mect fT Tuscht cansed
on 19 April. The ist Canadian Infantry Division relieved the sth Canadian Ar-
moured Division on this demarcation line, and the latter prepared for redeploy-
ment east to the Groningen area of the Netherlands.
On 21 April the division began its move to the eastern part of the Netherlands.
On its arrival near the German border, it relieved the grd Canadian Infantry
Division outside the German occupied port of Delfzil. The division's assigned
task was to coar the port in cooperation with ard Canadian Mtantry Division
fantry Pricad coconlted to or from lanath and conth encountering stifl
combat operatiana fa liticiaL and the cancafire cama into effec
three davs later.
The eth Canadian Armoured Division's regiments had adequate Dersonne
14,188 other rant. 10) Dust its about ass of combat. it was sufficiently re
Percent of their war establishments. During the March to May period, an ad-
equate number of reinforcements were available because large numbers of
NRMA personnel had arrived in Europe. As illustrated in Figure 8.5, the four
infantry regiments were slightly weakened by combat but remained over or
dose ta gas serenad defactor Cano for an infante, battalion enoggel
in operations. The infantry had suffered the brunt of battle and nonbattle cas-
ualties while the division was in combat. The Perth Regiment suffered the highest
losses within the infantry brigade with 8s battle and s nonbattle casualties, for
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 161
Figure 8.5
and 5 May 1945
sth Canadian Armoured Division, infantry regiment strengths, 31 March 1945
863
• 31 March
• 5 May
059
847
819
959
830
911
Cape Breton
Highlanders
Westminster
Regiment
Perth Regiment
Irish Regiment
of Canada
ARROW S" March-May 1945
1-7094-96, 31 March and 5 May 1945.
a total of 138. It had received 6s replacements during April and May, bringing
is strength up to 32 officers and 767 other ranks. This figure was 6 percent under
its authorized strength
The rediments of the armourall. Land the armoured reconnaissance
regiment suffered considerably fewer losses in the same period. The oth Can-
adian Armoured Regiment (the British Columbia Dragoons) had 22 battle and
26 nonbattle casualties. for a total of 48 personnel. In this period, it received 2*
replacements to bring its strength up to 36 officers and 635 other ranks, 97
percent of its war establishment. RCA casualties had been low for the period
of combat operations. The 8th Field Regiment's return on s May shows 39
officere and eQ Athas santre as etrenath. In the period of aberations from
to a April. the regiment cuffered seven battle and twenty-seven nonbattle
casualties.
On 30 April, the sth Canadian Armoured Division had 849 combat "A" vehicles
versus its authorized level of 927, which was 91 percent of its establishment
strength, a shortage caused by a failure to issue eighty-three T16 gun tractors
and Universal tracked carriers. Instead, the infantry and antitank regiments
were making do with trucks and suffered no lack of combat capability during
their dismounted operations. The division contained 289 Sherman, Sherman
