16 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
others had served for some time, possibly years. In view of strains on trans-
portation resources and the necessity of placing personnel where they were
needed quickly, a single administrative process was essential. Thus, all personnel,
both returning and new reinforcements, were mixed together in one pipeline
that stretched from the reinforcement battalion to the divisional reintorce-
ment company.! 3,
The process of determining exactly who would be sent where was made as
simple as possible. Deficiencies at the unit level were tabulated and reported to
Canadian ist Echelon, which in turn ordered the dispatch of the required re-
placements from England. By July 1944, a system like the one already in effect
in Italy had been created in northwest Europe.'4
One Canadian Army trade had its own separate reinforcement process. All
reinforcement Canadian Armoured Corps (CAC) personnel were split away
halfway through the process and attached to 2sth Canadian Armoured Delivery
Regiment (25th CADR) squadrons. This separation was done in accordance
with CAC policy. The 25th CADR delivered all CAC replacements, often as
complete armoured fighting vehicle crews, to the armoured regiments. In this
way, they were guaranteed to remain with the crews rather than losing their
skills during long periods away from their vehicles or during emergency re-
mustering into other trades. Also, if the tanks and the tank crews were isolated
from each other, they both lost their combat power.
In January 1945, the No. 2 CBRG was reorganized to improve its effective-
ness. One large pool of reinforcements was collected in Ghent, Belgium, to
be distributed within First Canadian Army formations. By this point, the
siderably by the opening of the Belgian port of Antwerp. The reorganization
began with the disbandment of all companies except one within the 12th Bat-
talion, which was redesignated the 12th Base Reinforcement Battalion. It was
placed in charge of supplying rear-area Canadian units, Next, the 1oth and uth
Battalions were specialinad to fond fantrumen to infantry regimante 15 Thi
oth Bottalion was reconfoured to feed renlacemente to divisiona - eve units.
and the i3th took responsibility for replacements to Canadian corps- and army-
ALd t This scassiaste la tassaroccianofintasatore
ments which was nereccary herguse the maiority of all battle casualties wer
occuring within the Canadian Infantry Corps and relatively few replacements
were needed within other trades in comparison.
That same month, 2ist Army Group Headquarters directed an advanced
Personnel Reinforcements 17
2nd Echelon. During the night, personnel drafts were created in the reinforce-
ment battalions close to the front, and they were dispatched to the divisional
reinforcement camps by truck in the morning. Within thirty-six hours, person-
nel orders had been filled.!7
In April, the ist Canadian Corps, whose principal formations included the
1st Canadian Infantry Division and the sth Canadian Armoured Division, ar-
rived in the Netherlands from Italy and commenced combat operations. The
headquarters of the disbanded 12th Canadian Infantry Brigade, a formation
that had been created to meet special conditions in Italy, was configured to
form a headquarters for ist Canadian Corps replacements. This group consisted
of three reinforcement battalions and was designated the No. 3 Canadian Base
Reinforcement Group (No. 3 CBRG). With the creation of this organization,
the ist and and Canadian Corps each had their own reinforcement systems.
No. 3 CBRG's battalions were numbered 14 through 16.18
The process of arranging for the delivery of required reinforcement personnel
was administrative. The infantry regiment headquarters requested reinforce-
ments through weekly officer and other ranks field returns. After evaluating the
reinforcement pool and how many reinforcements other regiments required,
Canadian 2nd Echelon would decide what could be spared, when, and to what
regiment. This decision was often influenced by corps-level general staff, as
certain units slated for operations had to be as strong as possible.
Figure 1.2 illustrates the route that reinforcement personnel took to get to
their combat arms unit. For example, on arrival in France in July 1944, Canadian
general-duty infantry reinforcements were processed through the 21st Army
Group reception camp's Canadian section. From there, the soldiers were posted
to a No. 2 CBRG reinforcement battalion. They then moved to the No. 2 CBRG
advanced reinforcement battalion. From there, they were moved to the corps-
level reinforcement company. Following this, they were sent to the divisional-
level reinforcement company. Personnel would then be transported to a regiment
within a brigade but not to their designated infantry company immediately.
The new arrivals spent time either in the regimental "B" Echelon (supply and
administration) or Left Out of Battle grouping to allow them to acclimatize to
conditions at the front. Following a short period, they would be posted to a
platoon within a rifle company. Including shipboard transport from the United
Kingdom to Normandy, reinforcement infantry soldiers had a total of eight
moves between different camp organizations."' At various waypoints within the
reinforcement process, a soldier could be redirected if requirements or the
situation changed. During the general-duty infantry reinforcement shortage of
