116 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
The number of reinforcements dispatched to the infantry regiments was
insufficient to cope with the losses. In June, the Canadian reinforcement pool
of trained infantrymen had not been strained because only the 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division saw action in Normandy. But by 1 August, the infantry com-
ponents of both the znd Canadian Infantry Division and 4th Canadian Ar-
moured Divicion had joined in combat operations. Faulty planning on casualy
rates by Canadian Military Headquarters, London, had led to an insufficient
pool of infantry replacements being established. This error was compounded
by the performance of a bureaucratic personnel supply system that had a start-
ing point in England. As a result, a large percentage of the infantry replacements
that could have been posted to Canadian formations were located across the
English Channel during crisis points and not immediately available. The chal-
lenge of providing rapid reinforcements of infantry, other ranks, for all three
Canadian divisions, at the rate they were demanding them, proved to be impos-
sible. A crash program of remustering took place during summer and early fall
1944, but it could not occur fast enough to solve the problem.
This shortage of infantry replacements for the th Canadian Armoured
Division occurred at a most inopportune moment. During the critical final
August battles to secure the Falaise Pocket, the division was asked to advance
in a dynamic fashion using its armoured and infantry forces. For these oper-
ations to succeed, the division's infantry strength had to be maintained. The
exact opposite occurred, and temporary shortages resulted The Aravll and
Sutherland Highlanders of Canada received twenty-four personnel reinforce-
ments during August.* By 30 August, their strength had shrunk to 24 officers
and s28 other ranks." The Algonquin Regiment recorded 36 new personnel
joining the regiment during the same month. Its strength was reduced to 36
officers and s71 other ranks by the end of August' Luckily, the enemy forces
facing the division in late August were on the verge of general disintegration.
This offset the weakened state of the divisional infantry regiments and allowed
them to accomplish their objectives.
The RCA divisional regiments had suffered considerably fewer casualties, and
their personnel levels were still at acceptable levels at the end of the summer.
Total consolidated battle casualties for all RCA regiments within the division
for the month of August were 257.' Most of these losses were concentrated in
the front-line sth Anti-Tank Regiment. Its strength had shrunk to 34 officers
and 634 other ranks as of 26 August, 86 percent of its war establishment. Some
regiments were largely unaffected by the fighting. The 8th Light Anti-Aircraft
Regiment's strength on the same date was 40 officers and 821 other ranks, 99
percent of its authorized strength.*2
The Normandy Campaign 117
The division's inventories of combat "A" vehicles had been reduced by heavy
losses in August but were still large at the end of the month." As of 31 August,
the division fielded 809 combat "A" vehicles against a war establishment of 840,
96 percent of its authorized strength. Despite a constant repair-and-replacement
effort, some vehicles, missing due to mechanical failure or enemy action, had
not been replaced. The number of Mark Ve and Ic 17-pounder Sherman Firefly
lanks had increased to twenty-eight by month's end. This was a marked increase
from the 31 July totals, but the armoured regiments were still short thirty-two.
There was also a shortage of armoured recovery vehicle tanks. with only eigh
Sherman III ARUs on hand versus the authorized strenoth of fourteen. There
Were also shortages of AFVs in the RCA regiments as of 31 August. These regi-
Ments were short artillery observation nost tanks. having only eighteen Ram IT
tanks instead of the twenty-seven Sherman III variants that were authorized.84
While some ongoing shortages did exist, the division had been extensively
losses. "D" Sauadron of the 2sth CADR delivered 123 Sherman, Sherman Firefly,
and Stuart tanks to the division in August. This subbly kept the armoured regi
ments overational in the face of covere losses dup to antitank fire and mechanical
failures 85 This figure was enough to nearly re-equip two Canadian armoured
regiments and reflects the high rate of losses during this period.
Losses inflicted by enemy action or mechanical failure on nonvehicle weap
31 Aunt Anu Weapons systems that had been lost or broken during this period
had been renlaced. The infantry and artillery regiments continued to contain
near perfect levels of all their authorized nonvehicle heavy weapons. Unauthor-
ized overages in antitank guns included one extra 6-pounder and one extra
17-pounder.®6
Held at the and Canadian Corps level, the 6th Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA;
the 18th Canadian Armoured Car Regiment (the Manitoba Dragoons); the 6th
Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment. RCA; and the 2nd Survey Regiment, RCA, landed
in Normandy in mid-July and became operational shortly afterward." As of
mid-july 1944, they were up to strength and contained their full war establish-
ments of combat "A" vehicles and equipment." All four units were committed
to operations shortly after their arrival in Normandy. The 6th Anti-Tank Regi-
ment was involved in combat immediately, supporting Canadian forces attacking
Verrières Ridge in late July 1944. Given the static nature of the fighting in July,
the 18th Canadian Armoured Car Regiment was assigned limited mounted and
dismounted reconnaissance duties and suffered continuous losses. The 6th Light
Anti-Aircraft Regiment was immediately engaged in combatting a very active
