38 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
been in the army for more than a year, a quarter under three years, and some
were highly trained specialists. It is highly likely that all had the training needed
to take on their new role. 4
Was this always the case, even in the summer of 1944? Usually, the key deter-
minant was the amount of time the reinforcement had been a designated "in-
fantry, other ranks, reinforcement." If the soldier had been "in the system" for
over a year as a rifleman, the likelihood that he would perform at an acceptable
level on infantry, other ranks, the battlefield was high. If he had been remustered
from other trades, it was likely that large portions of his time had not been spent.
in infantry training at a high level. Personnel from the Royal Canadian Ordnance:
Corps and the Corps of Royal Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
remustered in spring and summer 1944 were given crash conversion training
NRMA home defence conscripts, some having been in the army since 1939, were
trained to an acceptable standard.66
Units that received these personnel often implemented supplementary train-
ing to ensure that no one soldier's training standard was overlooked Receiving
units in both Italy and northwest Europe often held new reinforcements for up
to four days, but not less than twenty-four hours, during which they would
review each soldier's documents, examine his personal equipment, and issue
any missing kit. New members were then given a "smartening up drill" consisting
of "general tactical hints" and supplementary weapons-handling tests. Tf there
was time, the new soldiers would also be instructed in unit tradition, drill and
saluting practices to instill unit pride and maintain discipline. 7
How did the personnel replacement record of the Canadian Army compare
to those of the British and American armies? Like the Canadian Army, in the
last year of the war in northwest Europe, both allies had significant manpower
challenges that centred on infantry replacements. While the US Army success
fully combatted the effects of attrition in the last year of the war, the British
Army did not continue to make good its losses. Britain's replacement system
was similar to Canadas, and it was likewise effective in reinforcing units that.
suffered personnel losses. But like the Canadian system. Britain's was onlv ef
fective ifit was well supplied with new Dersonnel Rumid-ian the number o
new infantry recruits and remustered army personnel desionated as denlos
able infantry was dwindling, At this point, the British Army had two complete
field armies fighting the Germans, one engaged in Italy and anther in France
Though these field armies contained Commonwealth divisions and separate
Commonwealth corps, reinforcements were scarce. Making matters more chal
lenging, these two armies did not encompass numerous British units that mad
The Sixty-Day Shortage 39
up parts of other British armies in the Far East and Middle East. By 1944, infantry
units were taking 80 percent of all combat losses within the British Army. High
losses sustained by the British between September 1939 and August 1942 in the
Low Countries, France, the Mediterranean, and the Far East had been severe.
Over 326,877 troops had become casualties or prisoners of war. British infantry
units accounted for 51 percent of this total.68
During the Normandy Campaign, the British Army rapidly consumed what
was left of its deployable infantry, other ranks, reserve. By the end of August,
most of one complete British infantry division, the 59th, had to be broken up
to provide reinforcements to other formations. The breakup of this division was
followed by a second, the soth, in late November 1944.6ยบ The disappearance of
these two complete divisions led the British Army to depend increasingly on
Commonwealth formations during the last year of the war. Despite its chal-
lenges, the Canadian Army never had to break up a single infantry regiment,
never mind a full division, to provide replacements.
Military historians such as Carlo D'Este have questioned whether the British
military successfully managed its personnel near the end of the war?" It had
large numbers of personnel attached to training and territorial infantry units
throughout the United Kingdom that could have been utilized for replace-
ments." However, the fitness and age of these personnel may have limited their
combat capability. Other untapped areas consisted of surplus Royal Air Force
and Royal Navy personnel that could have been ruthlessly remustered as infantry.
Also, a strict adherence to the territorial and bureaucratic regimental system
impaired Britain's employment of personnel where they were needed in the
shortest amount of time.
The US Army also suffered heavy infantry losses in northwest Europe; infantry
battalions in Normandy suffering 90 percent of their total battle casualties in
the bocage terrain. However, the Americans were far more effective than the
British in maintaining the strength of infantry battalions engaged in combat
operations. Infantry and armoured divisions forming in the United States were
cannibalized ruthlessly, destroying what progress they had made in their train-
ing programs. Despite this, the number of operational American combat div-
isions in Europe grew exponentially in the final year of the war. Large surplus
reserves of personnel in other trades were raided on a regular basis. Also, there
was no adherence to a regimental system that would take personnel from certain
regional areas to supply certain regiments. This approach was alien to the cor-
porate personnel management style of the US military. A former casualty
returning from hospital from one infantry battalion could easily wind up in
