170 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
to incorporate them in the division. Adequate numbers of new "A" vehicles and
heavy weapons were also received, bringing the inventory levels considerably
closer to their authorized levels.
From mid-October to the beginning of November 1944, improved combined
arms tactics and the attrition of the enemy allowed the division to be continu-
ously successful in its operations. The Canadian Army's effective personnel- and
equipment-reinforcement processes allowed the division to maintain its strength
during this period. When major operations resumed in February 1945, the
division had a high level of combat capability due to its being well equipped,
well trained, well rested, and experienced. During its advances in the last two
months of the war, it captured a large amount of enemy territory. While excel-
lent training, tactics, and operational planning all contributed to the success of
the division, its military effectiveness was dependent on more than these factors.
Having adequate numbers of personnel and sufficient inventories of vehides
and weaponry provided it with the tools it needed to defeat the enemy consist-
ently during its operations in northwest Europe.
The second division to arrive from Italy, the sth Canadian Armoured Div-
ision, was extremely effective in its short period of combat in northwest Europe.
Well supplied with both personnel and equipment, it lacked none of the tools
needed to carry out its missions once these assets were in place. The division
did face a challenging reorganization and re-equipment process on its arrival
in the Netherlands, but it carried these tasks out in a reasonable amount of time.
All regiments had satisfactory personnel levels, and reinforcements were rapidly
fed into them to counter any shortage because of battle or nonbattle losses. Once
it was deemed operational, the division advanced rapidly against an enemy that
was disintegrating. During its combat deployment in April and May 1945, the
division liberated large portions of territory throughout the eastern Netherlands.
All six armoured regiments of the ist and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigades
adequately supported infantry operations in northwest Europe during their
service within this theatre. During this time, Canadian armoured tactics evolved.
The armoured squadron became an integral part of the combined arms team
rather than the foremost echelon of the attack. Battalion-level infantry attacks
were adequately supported by tank firepower. In this way, vehicle and tank crew
losses were reduced, the infantry was adequately supported, and the squadrons
preserved their strength to fight off the inevitable German counterattack.
Both independent armoured brigades were constantly reinforced with new
and repaired AFVs while they were in the field. Sufficient reserves of replace-
ment tanks and adequate recovery, repair, and delivery systems allowed the
An Assessment of Canadian Formations
regiments to maintain adequate tank strengths. Personnel levels in the armoured
units were rarely an issue. Unlike the infantry, there was never a serious defi-
diency in the number of Canadian Armoured Corps reinforcement personnel.
The army- and corps-level units of the First Canadian Army in northwest
Europe were utilized in operations to the same degree as similar units held at
the divisional and independent brigade level. Since none of the units were in-
tantry and several were usually deployed to the rear, these units had, on average,
lower levels of casualties. But the casualties they did suffer were on par with
other regiments of their type. The 6th Anti-Tank Regiment, RCA, saw continu-
ous combat in Normandy and experienced the full force of German armoured
counterattacks near Verrières Ridge in July 1944. Its casualties were similar in
number to other antitank regiments held at the division level. Though the ar-
moured car regiments did not have prominent roles in some of the most difficult
battes, they did lead the pursuit of the German Army across France and kept
continuous contact with the retreating enemy. In April and May 1945, these
units advanced over large areas of enemy-held territory following the German
disintegration in the last weeks of the war. The firepower of the medium regi-
ments of the Army Group Royal Artillery were instrumental in gaining victory
in the Normandy Camnion and successfully supported operations to the war's
condusion. Not being part of a division's order of battle, corps- and army-level
units were shuffled to divisions where the fighting was the most demanding.
Their continue rein forcement with new person combat "a venedes anc
heavy weapons kept them operating at a high level that ensured the successful
completion of any mission they took on.
In conclusion, what became the First Canadian Army in northwest Europe
successfully maintained all its formations, negating the effect of personnel,
vehicle, and major weapon systems wastage within its combat arms units engaged
in offensive and defensive operations. These formations at all times maintained
their integrity, cohesiveness, and a high level of combat capability.
