70 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
ability to bail out quickly under fire and shelter behind the burning hulk. With
a crew of five, this quick-exit technique limited casualties to only one or two
per Sherman destroyed. Despite losing fifty-one Shermans during the attack
on Le Mesnil-Patry, the 6th Canadian Armoured Regiment lost only eighty
personnel." Given that the total crew strength of the knocked-out tanks num-
bered 255 potential casualties, the losses could have been higher. Because of the
weakness of their tank's armour, crews began to weld on extra track links?* If a
firefight broke out, commanders were often cautious due to the German ability
to destroy a Sherman with one round. This led to a preference for over watch or
ambush tactics rather than an advance to contact; superior numbers of Shermans
were arranged to effectively smother a German armoured counterthrust against
a newly acquired objective.25
In summer 1944, because of shortages, the Canadian Army could only field
one Sherman Firefly per three or four tank troops. The 17-pounder Sherman
Firefly tank cannon was the only armament that had the penetration power
to destroy a German Panzerkampfwagen VI Tiger Ausführung E (Tiger I) or
Panzerkampfwagen V Panther A and G (Panther) tank at medium range. It
could also destroy a German Panzerkampfwagen IV (Panzer IV) or Sturmge-
schütz III assault gun easily at long range. However, the Sherman Firefly also
had negative attributes. It had excessive fuel consumption, engine iscues and
main gun misfires. The lack of an effective flash suppressor and smokeless
powder led to large muzzle flashes when firing, which blinded the gunner as to
the location of fall of shot. This made correction difficult, which could be fatal
in a tank firefight. Also, the Firefly initially did not fire high-explosive shells,
only armour-piercing antitank rounds. This limitation made it near useless in
reducing enemy infantry positions. Despite this, other tanks depended on the
Sherman Firefly for success in long-range firefights with German 7.5 cm high-
velocity cannon-equipped armoured vehicles, as the short-barrelled low-velocity
75 mm-gunned Sherman was not as effective.26
Canadian offensive armoured operations in the summer of 1944 could be
delayed or halted by the Germans skilful antitank defence and devastating
counterattacks. The apparent inability of Canadian armour to decisively attack
and destroy German armour and antitank guns has led some prominent
Canadian military historians, such as John English, to label the CAC as the
weakest of the Canadian combat some 27 ma do evadderatin hat this
impression was fuelled by a battlefield doctrine that did not place large num-
bers of tanks in the vanguard of the attack. The technical inferiority of Allied
tanks when compared to their German counterparts also inhibited offensive
Army Doctrine and Losses 71
tactics and forced a reliance on infantry and artillery support in certain tactical
situations.28
The logical solution to this challenging situation was fielding combined arms
teams of armour, infantry, and antitank forces, superbly supported by artillery
and air assets. These infantry-led groupings could be used to capture limited
objectives, never outstripping supporting indirect assets or the reserves ability
to join the battle. These tactics were more polished after Normandy, and
when all elements were adequately represented there was a high chance of
success. Later actions near Bergen op Zoom, the Netherlands, and Louisendorf,
Germany, in 1944-45 are examples of successful combined arms tactics involv-
ing armour. Figure 4.1 illustrates the advance to contact formation for the Fort
Garry Horse (1oth Canadian Armoured Regiment) while supporting the 4th
Canadian Infantry Brigade during operations in the Rhineland. Taking place
near Louisendorf, Germany, from 19 to 20 February 1945, it was one of the last
tank battles of the war for the Canadian Army, and it destroyed significant
numbers of counterattacking German tanks and self-propelled guns of the
German Panzer Lehr Panzer Division. In this action, the Canadian combined
arms task force seized its objective and then defeated repeated German
counterattacks.?9
Fighting closely with the armoured forces were the infantry foot soldiers of
the Canadian Infantry Corps. Allied success in offensive operations in 1944 was
often achieved through overwhelming force. However, the more personnel a
commander employed in a given area, the higher the probability of casualties.
Canadian infantry actions in Normandy and beyond were often characterized
by the leadership utilizing minimum infantry force against enemy units de
ployed in depth. Increased artillery firepower would make up for a lack of in-
fantry numbers and reduce casualties. Rather than a whole brigade attacking
with a numerical superiority of at least three to one, a single infantry battalion
would assault an obiective, often held by a complete enemy battalion. This attack
would be made with two companies up front and two to the rear. The battal-
ion's heavy weapons would be held ready should an armoured or infantry
counterattack appear. As of October 1944, the support company of an infantry
battalion was 7 officers and 184 other ranks; an individual infantry company
comprised s officers and 120 other ranks. With only two companies up front,
the attacking group that made first make contact was not the full weight of the
85o strong battalion but rather 18 percent of combat personnel. "
The tactic of the direct-fire firebase, a firm part of modern Canadian Army
doctrine, was not often utilized. Tanks concentrated at a right angle to the
