68 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
once been the dashing and at times solitary vanguard of the attack, after 1942
the Royal Armoured Corps became part of combined arms task forces. Armour
properly supported the infantry and worked closely with other assets to use its
firepower to defeat strong German resistance or stubborn counterattacks to
regain lost defensive positions.
As of May 1944, the Canadian Army had not fought a major armoured en-
gagement in open country or desert terrain, locations where the advantages of
long-distance tank gunnery could be utilized to maximum effect. Although
Canadians had fought in Sicily and Italy, fluid armoured operations over large
distances were a rarity in the hilly and broken terrain of this theatre. And the
combat experience gained in Italy remained in Italy, as none of the ist Canadian
Corps armoured units fought in Normandy.
As a result, by spring 1944 Canadian armoured regiments in the United
Kingdom had no combat experience advancing as the offensive vanguard. When
this was attempted in Normandy, German antitank fire dealt large casualties
to Canadian armoured squadrons equipped with inferior technology.?
Following several intense armoured engagements in June 1944's Normandy
bridgehead battles, the armoured regiments were tasked with supporting of-
fensive operations to capture Carpiquet airfield and Caen in early July (Oper-
ations Windsor and Charnwood). In these battles, many tanks were destroyed
or damaged. Fighting on and around Verrières Ridge south of Caen in late July
again led to heavy losses!" Here, as in other earlier engagements, the Germans
took advantage of good tank country by employing their panzers' long-range
main armament and 88 mm antitank guns.
The German Army could capably defeat the Allied armoured attacks because
of its experiences in the USSR beginning in 1941. Reverses such as the 6th
Canadian Armoured Regiment's failed attack on Le Mesnil-Patry, Normandy,
on 11 June, demonstrated the difficulties Canadian armour faced when assault-
ing prepared German defences.* This is not to say that the Canadians did not
carry out assaults in a determined manner. Up to the closure of the Falaise Gap
on 21 August, Canadian armoured regiments led fifteen major attacks. Some
were executed successfully when combined arms tactics were utilized and in-
fantry, antitank, artillery, and air assets were present. But when Canadian armour
took a more forward or independent role, it often suffered severe losses due to
enemy antitank gun fire. 15
This issue was especially prominent during the oth Canadian Armoured
Regiment's attempt to capture Carpiquet airfield and the outskirts of Caen on
7 June. In this case, the temporary loss of artillery support significantly
Army Doctrine and Losses 69
contributed to armour's challenges during the mobile tank battle.16 This was
not an exclusively Canadian problem, and strong antitank defences posed a
serious obstacle for German, American, and British armoured forces in
Normandy and beyond. Because of these challenges, the scope of Canadian
armoured objectives in late summer 1944 was limited by the range of the guns
and the infantry's ability to keep up. To go beyond the limitations of the First
Canadian Army's artillery-based doctrine would risk disaster.
During the later stages of August 1944's Operations Totalize and Tractable,
the armoured regiments of the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade were asked
to manoeuvre rapidly in a fluid situation that demanded aggression and initia-
tive from all squadron commanders." The operations were temporarily blocked
by weak German armoured forces and held up by traffic jams. The brigade's
performance was lacklustre because of inexperience and a large number of of-
ficer casualties. During Operation Totalize, when fighting near Rocquancourt-
Cintheaux on 9 August, several 22nd Canadian Armoured Regiment command
tanks were destroyed. The loss of a squadron commander and two troop leaders
at the forefront of the battle significantly degraded command and control 18
This newly deployed formation was fighting its first battles in August at the
vanguard of the First Canadian Army's advance. To ensure success, the Canadian
Army needed an abundance of experienced armoured regiments in this role,
not ones carrying out their first combat operations."
Without intimate artillery and infantry support, Canadian tanks were vulner-
able to all forms of antitank weapons. Canadian Sherman 75 mm and 17-pounder
Sherman Firefly variants were susceptible to high-velocity German armour-
piercing antitank rounds. The Sherman's armoured plate was not angled enough,
hardened enough, or thick enough in its frontal areas. Operational research
reports found it took on average 1.63 hits to destroy or knock out a Sherman;
91.2 percent of Shermans with gasoline engines quickly burned out? When
German fire hit the internal hull shell racks, it caused catastrophic explosions.
Also, the Sherman's profile was too high, and it lacked a 360-degree episcope
cupola that the commander could see out of without exposing his head."
The vast majority of casualties for the armoured crews occurred on the assault
or in fending off German counterattacks. When not engaged in offensive oper-
ations, armoured squadrons were placed in defensive positions or in leaguer,
an administrative grouping for refuelling, maintenance, and rearming. Few
losses occurred during this administrative tactical grouping. Because of the
crew's ability to use the tank as protection, losses from all forms of indirect fire
were light.?" If the tank was hit during combat, CAC crews developed the
