84 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
Figure 4.3
Barrage fire plan, Operation Veritable, 8 February 1945. This fire plan was an
evolution of the First World War's moving barrage.
53 DIV.
February 1945
Source: LAC, RG 24, vol. 14319, "and Canadian Army Group Royal Artillery, RA, War Diary?"
keeping casualties to a minimum It could simultaneously dostrov enemy fo
tifications and impede all observed batlefield movement within the combat
zone. Its flexibility coeed and nower arabled infantey antitant and armoured
units to gain their shiectives and hold them naninet enemy counterattack s
The employment of "Uncle" "Victor" "Valen" and "Ar" fire-nlan tactic
meant military leaders could coordinate increasing levels of massed firepowe
for a single purpose in a short amount of time. The Poval Artillery had many
Army Doctrine and Losses 85
different tactics to mass fire during the late war period. A Mike target was a
concentration of fire by all guns in an artillery regiment, an Uncle target was a
concentration of fire by a division, a Victor target was a concentration by an
entire corps, and a Yoke target involved fire by a complete AGRA. 58 Not to be
forgotten is the "Stonk" (standard regimental concentration), a brief and sud-
den bombardment, often used on targets of opportunity or for defensive pur-
poses. This defensive fire concentration, which involved two batteries of a
regiment firing on assigned map squares and a third battery superimposed on
these squares, was absolutely devastating. It could also be delivered quickly. An
RCA field artillery regiment could respond to a call for fire within three minutes,
and a corps-level grouping of Anglo-Canadian artillery units (Army Group
Royal Artillery) could respond in less than thirty minutes."
Air support is an important factor to consider when reviewing Canadian
military operations in northwest Europe, RAF 83 Group and later RAF 84 Group,
composite groups of the 2nd Tactical Air Force of the Royal Air Force (RAF),
were successful at providing tactical air support for the First Canadian Army
in the last year of the war. German logistical and operational movement during
daylight hours was terribly inhibited. Air support from the RAF and the Royal
Canadian Air Force (RCAF) was also crucial for softening up German defensive
positions. The breaching of Dutch dikes by air power was critical to flooding
the German Scheldt defences in September and October 1944, making the con-
quering of this area easier in later battles.
By fall 1944, a sophisticated system for providing tactical on-call air support
to First Canadian Army operations was in place.'* RAF 84 Group - the composite
group of Polish, Norwegian, British, and other tactical fighter squadrons flying
Spitfire, Typhoon, and Tempest fighters - had its headquarters adjacent to the
those of the First Canadian Army. At meetings held the night before an oper-
ation, army headquarters staff met with 84 Group staff in a joint conference.
The senior representatives of each service discussed the need for air support,
reviewed weather reports and other pertinent data, and made decisions about
what support would be allocated where and to which operations. On the front
lines, an RAF Air Support Squadron Unit and its subordinate forward control
pilots would liaise with Canadian Army brigade or battalion headquarters to
make on-the-spot decisions regarding the direction of air power assets during
the course of the operation. 62
The ever-present Typhoon fighter bomber was a great asset, not for its rocket-
or bomb-carrying capability but for its four 20 mm automatic, wing-mounted
cannons. It was these cannons that struck the rear decks of German armour in
