66 An Army of Never-Ending Strength
operations against the Anglo-Canadian front. The Allies held the initiative and
could choose when and where to attack, fighting the war at their own pace.
The First Canadian Army was one of the last of the great British imperial
armies. British and Canadian organization, doctrine, and equipment were in-
tended to be identical. This goal was enhanced by the fact that Canadian units
were completely equipped with British and American war material, to the same
standard as the British Army. Canadian officers were also influenced by their
having been under British corps command during operations in Sicily and in
Italy in 1943-44. In the spring before the invasion of France in June 1944, the
divisions of the znd Canadian Corps had conducted intensive training. These
exercises were supervised by the 21st Army Group commander, British Gen-
eral Bernard Montgomery. As part of his role as commander, he sought to
ensure that the proper steps in Canadian Army doctrinal evolution took place.
This training inculcated the British method of warfare within Canadian corps,
divisional, and brigade headquarters staffs. During this period, Montgomery
developed capable Canadian officers and culled those he found lacking. He was
influential in developing the most promising officers, especially 2nd Canadian
Corps commander Lieutenant-General Guy G. Simonds.
In 1941-42, the German Afrika Korps had repeatedly defeated the British
Eighth Army in North Africa. The lessons learned and the arrival of Genera!
Montgomery as commander in the summer fundamentally changed the way
British forces undertook operations. It was these changes that allowed future
Anglo-Canadian armies to defeat the German Army in northwest Europe. In
spring 1944, Canadian doctrine on UK training grounds was correspondingly
transitional. New operational methods stemming from 1943 successes in North
Africa were implemented in the United Kingdom as Canadian training mirrored
that of the British.
One of the largest changes the British Army made was to its operational
method concerning the tactical employment of armour. Between 1939 and
1943, the leadership had encountered serious challenges with design, production
levels, transportation to the front, and battlefield performance. British tank
design and production methods had stagnated in the inter war years? By 1941,
German tanks were more manoeuvrable and had higher speeds and better
armament. In comparison, Britain's main gun armament was significantly in-
ferior, and it was slow to catch up to German advances, such as the high-velocity
gun equipping the German Panzer IV Ausführung F2.
Expanding wartime tank production took time and significant resources, and
the resources allocated to it were inferior to those devoted to warship and
Army Doctrine and Losses 67
aircraft production. This situation did not change much during the war. Skilled
labour and precision machine tools, vital for the production of weapons systems
such as tanks and artillery, were not present in the United Kingdom in the
numbers needed, and the equipment and skilled labour that was present was
devoted to the needs of the Royal Air Force and Royal Navy® Also, tanks that
could have been employed by the British Army or its Commonwealth allies
went to Russia in the decisive period 1941-43. From the outbreak of hostilities
until December 1941, only 479 Cruiser-type and 1,375 Infantry-type tanks were
produced within British factories' These amounts were insufficient to equip
British and Commonwealth forces in the Middle East, meet planned arms ship-
ments to the USSR, and, last but not least, equip Canadian and British formations
deployed to defend the United Kingdom.
The tank supply situation changed radically with the entry of the United States
into the war in January 1942. It took time for the Americans to reach optimum
war production levels, but the US economy began to reach full production
capacity in mid-1943. Lend-Lease - a US government program begun in March
1941 to assist the defeat of Germany and Japan through the distribution of fuel,
food, and war material - resulted in additional numbers of armoured vehicles
and artillery pieces appearing in Britain and the Mediterranean by 1943, equip-
ping new British and Commonwealth formations destined for the invasion of
Europe. Also, at this point, the British Cromwell, a new cruiser tank, and the
American Sherman tank were beginning to be available in large numbers, As
of 1944, 41 percent of the British and Commonwealth armoured vehicle needs
and 47 percent of their medium artillery needs were being met by the United
States!" Although the tank-supply situation had improved significantly, the
challenges of 1939-43 had made a huge impact on the doctrine of the British
Army and its Commonwealth partners.
The lack of a superior tank design that could defeat German armour and
antitank defences on the battlefield led to a high number of Allied losses and
battlefield reverses when unsupported armour was utilized as the vanguard
Between 1941 and 1912, these losses could not be replaced rapidly because of
the problems of production and getting tanks onto the battlefield. Though these
problems were solved by the American entry into the war, British and Com-
monwealth forces in North Africa began to utilize infantry to lead attacks, with
supporting armour following at a distance. In this manner, armoured losses
were minimized, and operational success rates were boosted through a combined
arms approach, Once per infantry captured an objective, the armour worked
closely with powerful artillery and antitank assets to defend it." Where it had
