150
An Army of Never-Ending Strength
The next operational phase for the division was its role as an exploitation
force after the success of Operation Plunder, the 23 March Anglo-American
assault crossing of the Rhine River. Operations began on 24 March with the
divisional artillery supporting Canadian forces advancing north of the river.
Redeploying north into the British bridgehead over the Rhine at Rees, the
began with some elements advancing north from Terborg on 1 April. Further
advances from Zaham ac the riaht fank of and Canadian Corns resulted i
the capture of a bridgehead over the Twente Canal at Delden by 4 April." The
Dutch town of Almelo was subsequently liberated by the division the next day
after a brief period of fighting. Other parts of the division then advanced north
recitance at this utat wa Lacmind diceronined Monnen and a Li lochead
Quer the Eme Pider trous been ta centured he the dividing on 6 Ann
Attacking from the vicinity of Sogel, the town of Friesoythe fell to the division
on 14 April German resistance at Edewechterdamm between 15 and 17 Apri
delayed the division's crossing of the Kusten Canal. A bridgehead was eventually
secured at the cost of heavy infantry casualties." This fighting was followed by
crossed the Ane Diver on 21 April. The s Mav ceasefire found the 4th Canadiar
Armoured Division sixteen kilometres north of Oldenburg, Germany.
The losses cuffered by the infantry regiments from February to ADri were
not as high as in summer 1044, but they were still considerable.* The Argvll
a catacolland ase nonbattle
battle cacualtice The stronath of each regiment at the end of April reflected tha
an effective reinforcement system was in place With newly ailable stocke o
NRMA soldiers reachina the division, there were no shortages of personnel &
The Arovll and Catherland Hicklandere af Canadde ctrenoth as Of 30 April 194
was 40 officers and 8ea other ranks. 5 percent over its authorized strength. It
had received a total of 707 replacements over the last three months. The Lincoln
period. This brought its unit streneth to 38 officers and 816 other ranks, 100 per-
cent of its war establishment.
The De, sociments sufara fa cacualtied hotween February and Ancil 8
Total losses in the four regiments within the division were up battle and 382
Ments Aurina tie time Acafar Andl for pyamble. two RCA regiments had
Veritable, Blockbuster, and War's End 157
each received an adequate number of reinforcements. The 23rd Field Regiment
feded 3 officers and 6o1 other ranks, 98 percent of its authorized strength.
The sth Anti-Tank Regiment contained 33 officers and 680 other ranks, 92
percent of its effective strength.
The regiments of the armoured brigade and the armoured reconnaissance
regiment also suffered low levels of casualties in the last three months of the
War Between February and April, the 28th Canadian Armoured Regiment
suffered a total of 132 battle and 21 nonbattle casualties. The 29th Canadian
Amoured Reconnaissance Regiment had 60 battle and 102 nonbattle losses
during the same period. These low losses indicate a reduced enemy antitank
defence capability. Also, a greater number of Canadian tank crews at this stage
were equipped with more effective AFVs than had been available in Normandy,
giving the crews a fighting chance during tank versus tank engagements and
lowering the number of battle casualties.
The division's strength on s May was 977 officers and 17,619 other ranks.* Its
infantry regiments were all near their authorized strengths." During the last
three months of the war, an extremely large effort was made to adequately re-
inforce these units. At the end of hostilities, the Lake Superior (Motor) Regiment
contained 34 officers and 830 other ranks, i percent over its establishment
strength. The armoured and RC.A regiments personnel strength returns wer
also high. The zist Canadian Armoured Regiment contained 37 officers and
648 other ranks, 100 percent of its authorized establishment. The sth Anti-Tank
Regiment was the weakest of the divisional RCA regiments. This unit was not
ahich priorit far rainformante and cuffarad for later ecualtiee than th
other ranks, 92 percent of its war establishment.
The division contained many combat "A' vehicles on 30 April." On this date,
it had ano combat "A" unhidlac an strenoth vercue ite authorized number of 845
The divicion wae 9 percent overstrenath in this category. Despite the excessive
Sharon Firada tonto codes the divicion had increased. but the numbers stil
ninety-six tanks, only eighty Sherman Mark Ic and Vc Fireflies we
Unauthorized vehicles on strength included thirteen of the very valu:
Il tracked flamethrower carriers. The number of nonvehicle weapon:
within the division was also high as of 30 April."' A total of 277 heavy
were on strength versus an authorized total of 283, 98 percent of the wa
lishment figure in this category. There is a significant lack of daily data
divisional RCA regiments between 22 April and 5 May. Although weekly
