pg_0021.pdf:
27 Amd My Maintonence Project - 2na Baltion.
OVERLORD
TOP SECRET
Copy No....
64
Section 18
SALVAGE
2.
3.
4.
5.
9.
POT,ICY.
Early and accurate reports of the locations of valuable salvage are essential.
Units will collate all infornation and forward it to Bde HQ at every
opportunity.
Salvage is not exclusively the responsibility of salvage units.
All troops will
in recovering salvage.
Troops will take every opportunity of
collecting salvage into dumps and preventing pilfering of captured material.
The capture of naval equipment will be reported at once to Be HQ or to
nearest Naval IO, who will arrange for its disposal.
The capture of air
equipment will be reported at once to Bde HQ who will arrange for its
disposal,
Captured enemy aircraft in
good condition will be guarded until
responsibility
can be turned over to an air technical intelligence section.
NEW TYPES OF EQUIPMENE.
The importance of new enemy ecuipment both for technical examination and
training for operational use cannot be over emphasised.
informed by technical intelligence staffs as to what items of captured
equipment are new items,
and will advise commanders accordingly.
Commanders
will be responsible that all such equipment is adequately guarded until
handed over to technical intelligence staffs who are responsible for its
examination and disposal,
equipment falling
into this category will not be destroyed
unless there is an immediate
likelihood of its being recaptured by the enemy.
EVACUATION.
Empty cartridge and shell cases will be boxed wherever possible and returned
to ORD.
Other salvage,
incl, empty jerricans not required for refilling, will be
back loaded to B.M.A. in returning unit tpt.
RETENTION.
Units will not retain equipment or other stores except where deficiencies
in their authorised scale of equipment can be met from this source.
Captured MT will only be used by units if deficiencies exist on WE.
details of such appropriations will be immediately reported to Bae HQ and
the vehicles will be taken on charge in the normal manner.
Scrounging and pilfering will be treated as serious offences and rigorous
disciplinary action taken.
It is imperative to avoid the
reduction of load-
carrying capacity by piling vehicles with captured equipment.
DESTRUCTION
Captured enemy equipment will not be destroyed unless there is danger of it
falling into enemy hands.
Reports of destruction of equipment will be rendered
to Bde HQ.

