pg_0026.pdf:
- 2 -
(f) Subsequently.
When A.D.S. are stabilised,
evacuation will be normal, i.e. R.A.P.
- C.C.P. - A.D.S. - F.D.S. At the F.D.S. cases
unfit for evacuation
overseas will be retained; those fit for
evacuation to UK will be sent
to No. 1 Casualty Evacuation Post, open by H + 4 hrs.
(8) 11 It. Fd. Amb.
(i)
RoA.M.C. Orderlies will land on each of 3 M.14s of Arma Regts
landing on first tide, also on 3 ton lorry of Bde H.Q.
landing on third tide.
(i1)
One sec lands on D + 2.
(iii) Build-up to Light Scales on D + 6.
STRETCHERS AND MEDICAL STORES.
Bde first line tpt lands 90 stretchers, each with 3 blankets, on first
tide. These will be retained for own use and replaced as necessary from
B.M.A.
6. Unit medical stores will be loaded on two amn M. 14s of each Armd Regt
as well as on R.M.O.'s in order to spread the risk of loss. Stores on
amn M. 14s will be dumped at Bde umn dump whilst these are clearing
porpoises, and collected when M. 14s are released from this for use of
R.M,Os.
7. Medical stores will be available on D + 1 from OBD in B.M.A.
GENERAL.
8. Units will carry, on the scale of one per tank, pennant shaped signs
painted with the letter "W" in red on a white ground.
These will be
erected as need be to mark nests of wounded and facilitate collection.
9. Before leaving vicinity of R.H.Q., R.M.O's will obtain leave to do so
from O.C. unit. This will only be
given when justified by
such as a likelihood of casualties in one particular sq and
not elsewhere.
10. R.M.O's will arrange with Adjt or other officer at R.H.Q. for D.R. or
Scout Car to inform nearest C.C.P. or AoD.S, of location of RoA.P.
an amb, car or cars are required, and to lead them forward to R.A.P.
11.If the location of the R.A.P. permits,
and a battle is in progress, an
ambulance car will be maintained forward at R.A.P.
12.0s,C. Echs will keep themselves informed of the location of nearest
medical posts and units, and of motor amb, convoy routes in their vicinity.
13. The location of any bodies trapped inside tanks will be notified to Bde H.Q.
14. HYGIANE.
It is
imperative that the rules of hygiene and sanitation are mintained
from the outset.

