pg_0002.pdf:
ents (Sec. 36), and
his representatives.
war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-
- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C-
Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.- Omitted.
ParA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iri) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174):
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
of mobilisation or
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
ordinate command
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of
f each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iti) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA 6.-
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a va aary for the preceding month will
se forwarded on the first day of the succeedig month direct to the officer i/c G.H. O
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry, armoured or infantry brigade
or higher formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c
G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months
to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for
safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or order
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if
Instructions regarding
summarles
are
Ion thiv
C2119.
Intellrence
prepared in
229331
cover
manuseriou
Month and Year. JUNE
1944
Place
Date
Hour
відется
WAR DIARY
or
Army Form C. 2110.
13th Bn. (Lanceshire)
ParaG - Ref
Unit....
Regin
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
It.Col. P.J. LUARD..
Delete heading Ret as PRANCE 1/2.006heets 40/16 VE & IN
References to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
RANVILLE
6
0050
0230
0300
0320
0510
0600
0855
0900
100
1020
1032
forming part
- NORTH Of RANVILLE, near CAEN, Dept of CALVADOS.
Bn moved off from R.V,, having rallied on the Bn hunting horn
for Lancaster, and formed in Companies:
Village of RANVILLE now cleared of enemy. Very few enemy were
as from infm received from inhabitants,
it appears that
the main body of the enemy were away, and that the majority of
those left behind departed
with all speed when they saw
Those PW taken were wounded and seemed very
Identification from PW, dead and documents, was 7/II
Pz Gren Regt 125.
Glider party arrived on L.Z. 'N'
now cleared of poles by 'A'
Party consisted mainly of A/Ik guns, which moved rapialy
British aircraft observed attacking posns in area LE PLEIN -
Patrol to HEROUVILLETTE reported village in enemy
received from Bde HQ that news from seaborne tps
have broken through first line of defs.
12 Para Bn outpost heavily mortared.
FReY y attacked by
40 men and 3 S. • guns.
'A' Coy's last IMG wiped out.
WAR DIARIES SEOTION
No.
2 0 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Wt.47724/993 2.000,000 3,18 W. H. & S. 51/6375

