pg_0040.pdf:
V10323 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
37
CHAPTER 4
THE PURSUIT
19. GENERAL
160. The object of pursuit is the final annihilation of the
enemy forces.
Many of the problems will be similar to that of the approach,
but, since enemy resources are likely to be reduced and his
morale lowered, greater risks can be taken. Pursuing forma-
tions can be handled more boldly, since the danger from
counter-attack will be smaller than during the approach.
161. It is likely that the enemy air forces will be greatly
reduced in strength, and his anti-aircraft defence disorganized ;
the effort of the pursuing aircraft can, therefore, be fully
exerted without risk of great loss. It is during this phase that
effective and sustained air action may well turn the enemy
withdrawal into a rout; special care, however, will be neces-
sary in defining the bomb-line.
162. Part or the whole of the forces originally collected for
the pursuit may, however, have been used in the attack.
Hence it is likely that some at least of the pursuing force will
be exhausted; there will be a mental reaction to overcome
after successful assault; there is bound to be a certain measure
of disorganization, and regrouping will be necessary.
ONE OF THE FIRST DUTIES OF ALL COMMANDERS AFTER
ATTACK IS TO OVERCOME ANY MENTAL OR PHYSICAL REACTION
AMONGST ALL RANKS, and by their own example of energy
and determination to instil into them the realization of the
vital necessity for, and urgency of, further effort.
163. The plan for pursuit will be influenced by the following
factors :-
(a) The early acquisition, and stocking, of forward airfields
or landing grounds is essential if the full offensive
power of the air forces is to be maintained.
(b) Touch must be maintained with the retreating enemy
by direct pursuit.
(c) The surest method of bringing the enemy to a halt,
and of making him fight, is to delay his retreat by
cutting his lines of communication, and by seizing
defiles in his rear. Full use should be made of air-
borne forces.
(d) Mobile forces used for parallel or indirect pursuit must
be self-contained in all respects for several days.
V10323 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

