pg_0017.pdf:
V10323 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
14
formations as much as possible from administrative work, to
utilize available transport and local or captured resources to
best advantage, and to maintain adequate reserves where they
are most needed.
55. It will be necessary to make a careful appreciation with
regard to water obstacles in order to arrive at a sound bridging
plan.
9. CONDUCT OF THE APPROACH
56. Whatever the nature of ground or the armament of
either side, the main considerations which follow will guide a
commander as to the method he adopts.
Information
57. Throughout the approach the collection of information
of every nature is of importance. The enemy must be closely
watched; the condition of forward communications and
landing grounds, and the resources of the country through
which the advance is taking place, must always be reported
immediately.
The means of obtaining this information include air recon-
naissance, the bold use of reconnaissance units, forward
reconnaissance parties, particularly engineer, signals, and
administrative, and possibly parachute troops.
58. As the advance progresses detailed ground reconnais-
sance will be gained by driving in enemy covering troops.
On occasions higher commanders may require information
which can be obtained only by the employment of specially
allotted forces. Fighting, in fact, is very often the only
means by which vital information can be obtained, and situa-
tion reports must be regularly rendered.
59. Continuous engineer information from all arms is
necessary to enable the commander to allot engineer resources,
particularly of bridging, according to the needs of the various
formations.
Frontages
60. The frontage of advance can be decided only after
consideration of the following factors :—
(a) The more enclosed the country and the more routes
that exist, the smaller is the front that can be
covered by a given number of aircraft or ground
reconnaissance units.
(6) If the advance is carried out on broad fronts with
adequate lateral communications, deployment for
V10323 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

