pg_0028.pdf:
V10323 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
25
approach. The immediate task will now be to concentrate
required resources at the selected point of attack.
111. The detailed problems that will arise are :-
(a) The arrangements for immediate supply to forward
troops on capture of objectives, and for maintenance
of formations or units to be used for exploitation and
pursuit.
(6) The development of the area to improve traffic routes
and water supply.
(c) The location and concealment of additional troops.
(d) The collection, and possibly dumping, of ammunition.
(e) The economical control of transport required for troop
movement and for the collection and distribution of
stores.
(f) The disposal and replacement of casualties to personnel
and equipment; plans will be based on the estimates
of casualties given by the operational staff.
(g) Salvage of our own and enemy equipment.
(h) The disposal of prisoners of war.
Reserve
112. All units and formations will maintain a reserve, which
may be used :—
(a) To reinforce and exploit success.
(b) To assist in the consolidation of an objective, or to
take over an area from assaulting troops.
AS SOON AS A COMMANDER HAS COMMITTED HIS RESERVE,
HE MUST IMMEDIATELY INITIATE ACTION TO BUILD UP A NEW
ONE.
113. It is unusual to keep reserves of artillery out of battle,
but the fire plan should be so organized that some artillery is
always given superimposed tasks. Its fire can then be switched
to other targets as required, thus forming a reserve of fire
power additional to any support from aircraft that may be
available.
114. Administrative reserves, especially of transport, are
essential.
Intercommunication
115. Effective control by commanders will depend on effi-
cient communications. Flexibility can be achieved only by
careful signal planning and by the maintenance of an adequate
signal reserve.
During the preparatory period communications should be
V10323 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

