pg_0063.pdf:
V10323 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
60
Axis of attack
275. To ensure maximum co-operation, tanks and infantry
should attack on the same axis.
It may sometimes be
impossible to avoid launching the bulk of the infantry on a
different axis from that of the tanks, but this increases the
difficulty of providing adequate support for both arms, and
the tanks must generally be provided with some close infantry
support on their own axis.
Covering fire
276. The artillery fire plan will be designed to give maximum
support first to the assault groups then to the leading echelon
of the main attack.
Covering fire for the supporting echelon, other than for
the protection of flanks, cannot be prearranged; this echelon
must therefore rely on its own resources. For this reason
it is vital that the distance between the assaulting and sup-
porting echelons should be kept as small as possible so that
the latter can take full advantage of the disorganization
caused by the fire plan for, and by the action of, the former ;
the supporting echelon will also then be able to assist the
assaulting echelon with covering fire.
Consolidation and reorganization
277. As successive echelons reach the final objective the
majority of the tanks will rally, positions being consolidated
by other arms. Some tanks will initially remain in hull-
down positions within the captured area to afford support
to the infantry against tank counter-attack pending the
arrival of adequate anti-tank gun support. All units will
reorganize preparatory to further offensive action.
49. THE ATTACK BY INFANTRY WITHOUT TANKS
Organization and conduct
278. The tasks of infantry in the attack are the assault,
mopping-up, and the provision of local and main reserves.
Definite units or sub-units will be detailed for each of these
tasks in the initial orders for the attack.
279. Since the defended area will be protected by anti-
infantry obstacles, and as it will be abnormal for the artillery
to cut wire, specially equipped assault groups will generally
be required to lead the attack. Whether these groups form
part of the main assault units, or whether they operate
separately to capture a bridgehead, as in the case of tank
attack, depends on the nature and extent of obstacles to be
V10323 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

