pg_0034.pdf:
V10323 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
31
arms and anti-tank guns, or the artillery, of the defence at any
moment.
The pre-arranged counter-battery fire plan will be designed
to bring intense fire to bear on located hostile batteries.
It
may be the more effective if, before engaging enemy
guns,
heavy fire is put down on hostile localities with the object of
ensuring that enemy detachments will be manning their guns.
Arrangements will be made to engage hostile batteries,
located by artillery reconnaissance aircraft during the attack,
either by artillery or by aircraft.
134. Forward observation officers.-Forward observation
officers will accompany the assaulting troops in armoured
observation posts.
Other artillery officers may control fire
from air observation posts.
They will have a call on a definite unit or sub-unit of
artillery which will be superimposed on the tasks of other
units, so that no gap is left in the covering fire if these officers
use the artillery allotted them for special tasks.
135. Forward moves during attack.—Guns should be kept ir.
action in their original positions for as long as possible, but
sufficient guns should be moved forward in time to give
effective support by observed fire during the later stages of the
attack, and for exploitation.
Anti-tank artillery
136. Attacking troops will be liable to immediate counter-
attack by enemy tanks at any period of the attack, but
particularly during pauses between phases and on reaching
the final objective. The task of the anti-tank artillery in the
attack is, therefore, to provide continuous support during
and after the assault, particularly on the flanks.
Some anti-tank units will be amongst the first troops to be
moved across obstacles to support the bridgehead position.
They will normally be placed under command of leading
formations, and may be employed in close support of infantry
for the destruction of brick or concrete works as a secondary
role.
Light anti-aircraft artillery
137. This artillery will be used under centralized control
for the protection of airfields, field and medium artillery areas,
debussing points, assembly areas, and defiles leading to the
concentration area.
138. Some light anti-aircraft artillery may be decentralized
to attacking formations for the protection of gaps made
V10323 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

