pg_0064.pdf:
V10323 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
61
crossed. In any event it will generally be necessary to leave
engineers and infantry covering detachments at selected gaps
to widen these in order to facilitate the movement of reserves
and transport.
The main assault units will have their own local reserves
equipped vite he capons required for immediate con-
280. A second echelon whose role is to mop up and to guard
the flanks will follow the leading assault units.
Some
engineers will be required to accompany the mopping-up
parties to deal with obstacles and booby traps.
281. The final echelon will be the formation or unit reserve
in the hands of the commander of the assault force.
Cover
282. If attack is by day it is very important that assembly
areas and forming-up places, and also the approach to the
start line, should be covered from ground observation, in
order to avoid heavy casualties from the enemy defensive.
fire.
The start line should, whenever possible, be square to the
objective because, whether attack is by day or night, visibility
will be poor and changes of direction must be avoided.
Leap-frogging
283. Separate formations or units will often be required for
the capture of successive objectives.
The most careful
arrangements are necessary to avoid confusion and undue
delay if one unit has to pass through another. The commander
of the unit passing through must be given all available
information, and maximum support, by the unit passed
through.
Covering fire
284. The neutralization of flanking weapons may be of more
importance than that of the weapons in the path of the
assaulting troops. Barrages must extend well beyond the
narrow front of attack, or concentrations of HE and smoke
must be stepped up on the flanks. Machine-guns will be
extremely useful for this flank protection.
FOOs will not necessarily remain with unit or sub-unit
headquarters, but will usually move on a selected route
giving the best observation over the front of attack. Com-
munication will be maintained by wireless with the head-
quarters of the unit supported.
V10323 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

