pg_0032.pdf:
V10323 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
29
Field and medium artillery
123. THE CONTROL OF ARTILLERY SUPPORT WILL BE CENTRAL-
IZED IN ORDER TO ENSURE TIAT ARTILLERY FIRE IS USE) IN
MASS. The great inherent flexibility of artillery fire power,
used with imagination, will allow it to be applied aggres: ively
both in the counter-battery role and against hostile defences
or concentrations of tanks and reserves. Surprise is assisted
by the use of predicted methods for engagement of targets
and by concentration of fire from dispersed positions.
127. The early deployment of survey units is always
desirable to reduce to a minimum registration by shooting,
and to enable flash spotting and sound-ranging to begin
early.
128. Covering fire.—In principle covering fire should be
controlled by observation.
In practice, for any large scale
attack, a timed programme is essential.
Covering fire may take the form of a barrage, of concentra-
tions, of smoke screens, or of a combination of all or any of
these.
The time required to stage an artillery fire plan will depend
on the availability of large scale maps, the simplicity of the
plan, facilities for observation, whether or not guns are already
in action, and the accuracy required.
129. Barrages.—A barrage is the most effective form of
covering fire if the enemys dispositions are not accurately
known. It ensures that all ground over which the attacking
troops are to pass is subjected to some measure of fire. In
addition to its lethal effect, a barrage has a considerable
screening and moral value. It is, however, expensive in
ammunition.
Barrage plans must be kept as simple as possible; compli-
cations not only increase the time required for preparation,
but also may mislead the attacking tanks or infantry, who
depend largely upon the barrage to assist them in maintaining
direction.
130. Concentrations.—Timed concentrations
of fire on
selected areas are more effective and economical than barrages,
provided that the enemys dispositions are known in con-
siderable detail or can be estimated with accuracy.
The artillery plan must be sufficiently flexible to allow of
impromptu concentrations engaging opportunity targets
without delay.
131. Smoke.—When the number of guns, the quantity of
ammunition, and the time available do not permit of an
effective HE barrage being fired, and when the enemy
V10323 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

