pg_0039.pdf:
V10323 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
36
methods employed will be more deliberate and the resources
required will generally be on a far larger scale.
157. The attack on each successive objective may require
the special training of assault groups and prolonged preparatory
fire by artillery and bombing by aircraft. Elaborate con-
solidation involving the fortification of an objective may be
necessary before the assault on the next can be staged.
On the other hand, although operations will be more
deliberate, exactly the same qualities of speed and determin-
ation are required of the assaulting troops as for attack against
hastily prepared defences.
Night attack
158. The following rules will be observed when carrying out
attack by night :—
(a) THE PLAN MUST BE SIMPLE; there can be no com-
plicated changes in direction, reliefs, or leap-frogging
of units.
(b) Objectives will be strictly limited and clearly defined.
(c) Unless the ground is well known, or accurate large
scale maps are available, reconnaissance by junior
leaders, at least up to the start line, will be carried
out.
(d) The plan will be worked out in great detail, but this
must not conflict with simplicity in both the plan
and orders. Before large-scale night attacks suffi-
cient time must be allowed for rehearsal of the
operation.
(e) The operation must be timed to allow for the consoli-
dation of objectives to be well advanced before first
light.
Rules particularly applicable if night attack is
carried out by tanks and infantry
(f) The axis of tank attack will be free from tank obstacles.
(g) Tank units will move in close formation, their pace
being regulated by that of the infantry.
(h) Artillery covering fire and direct air support will
generally be used to deaden the sound of tanks. A
barrage is useful to guide the tanks on to the objective.
(J) Pin-point tail lights will be used, and a system of light
signals between tanks and infantry arranged.
(k) The majority of the tanks will be clear of the objective
by daylight.
159. Artillery fire may be useful for indicating objectives,
and tracer for marking the axes and flanks of the attack.
V10323 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

