pg_0046.pdf:
V10323 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
43
The unarmoured wheeled vehicles are largely tied to roads
or tracks, and the cross-country capacity of tanks is limited.
Hence speed is largely dependent on good going.
191. Whatever may be the task or role of the division, the first
stage towards success will nearly always be to make some move
to induce the enemy armour to react as desired. These moves
may be to threaten some ground of such tactical importance
that the enemy will use his armour to protect it, or to seize
and deploy for battle on such ground, in order to force enemy
armour to attack to regain it. Sometimes a move may be
designed to draw and retain the enemy armour away from
the main battle.
If the task allotted is to destroy un-
armoured formations, headquarters, or units in harbour, the
division must first secure a firm base on tactically important
ground, from which to operate and upon which subsequently
to reorganize.
The seizure of tactically important ground is not an end
in itself but has as its object the maintenance of the initiative
and its denial to the enemy.
Night movement
192. It is likely that, in all phases of the offensive, major
movement will be by night. Concentration before attack will
often be completed before first light, and enveloping move-
ment either during major attack or during pursuit must
generally be concealed by darkness. Whenever possible,
careful reconnaissance should be carried out before a move-
ment by night. Movement by night is exhausting to com-
manders and troops, and distances covered will only be small.
It is for consideration whether night movement is in effect
worth while and, if it is decided upon, whether or not vehicle
lights should be used.
26. THE ARMOURED RECONNAISSANCE UNIT
193. The main task of the reconnaissance unit is to supple-
ment distant and medium by close reconnaissance. Close
reconnaissance will be particularly necessary before attack,
and for this purpose sub-units may be placed under the
command of the leading brigade.
The unit will often be included in the divisional advanced
guard, but sufficient enhoured dare must always be retained
to ensure that full battle reconnaissance can be carried out
for the armoured brigade before an engagement.
27. THE ARMOURED BRIGADE
194. The strength of the armoured division lies in the use
of the armoured brigade concentrated and supported by the
V10323 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

