pg_0033.pdf:
V10323 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
30
dispositions are not accurately known, concentrations of HE
and smoke will often enable the best use to be made of the
artillery support available.
Smoke screens may be used to conceal the actual frontage
of attack or to provide artificial defilade for flanks. They
will be required in most large scale attacks, and are often most
usefully employed at short notice in support of armoured
units.
The use of smoke is largely dependent on meteorological
conditions and the configuration of the ground. Unless both
are favourable, there is a risk of the attacking troops being
blinded. This may be acceptable for infantry, but will
generally be dangerous for tanks because visibility may be too
restricted, and also they may become silhouetted against the
smoke. Whenever smoke is to be used, an alternative method
of support will always be arranged in case conditions suddenly
change, making the employment of smoke undesirable.
As a rough guide one troop of 25-pr guns can provide an
effective screen 900 yds in length in favourable conditions.
In preparing a smoke plan, a commander should give full
consideration to the possibility of allotting the whole smoke
task to the RAF. Not only will this free the artillery for HE
tasks, but it may produce much better results.
Smoke is useful as a means of indication; for example, it
may be used to synchronize action by all arms, or to mark
inter-unit boundaries, etc.
132. Avtillery support of tanks.—When tanks are leading
the attack, support must be designed primarily to protect them
from the fire of anti-tank weapons.
Consideration must,
however, be given to the protection of the infantry who
follow by neutralizing the flanks and enemy OPs, and by
engaging automatic weapons sited in depth.
Anti-tank guns of the defence will remain silent until the
last moment; they will be sited in positions defiladed from
the front. Hence it is unlikely that the positions of many
will be known, and therefore a barrage will often be desirable.
Since, however, the anti-tank gun is a direct fire weapon, it
can be neutralized by smoke alone when conditions are
favourable.
133. Counter-battery fire.-This is an integral part of covering
fire, and its effect will depend on the cunning employed in its
application.
The number of guns allotted to counter-battery work will
vary during the phases of the attack, and will depend on the
number of hostile batteries located, on air support available,
and on the relative importance of neutralizing either the small
V10323 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

