pg_0065.pdf:
V10323 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
62
50. ATTACK IN ENCLOSED COUNTRY
285. The methods described above are applicable to
country where movement is not greatly restricted or observa-
tion particularly difficult.
When attack must be carried out in towns, woods, or other
types of enclosed country, although principles remain the
same, the detailed planning and execution will vary con-
siderably, and the assaulting troops may require special
equipment.
Furthermore, reconnaissance must be more detailed and
will take longer.
286. The use of tanks will be restricted, and the full power
of the supporting arms will probably be difficult to produce
owing to the scanty information obtainable of the enemy
defences, and to the poor observation facilities.
Hence, attack in enclosed country is normally the task of
infantry, who must obtain the fullest value from their own
weapons for close support, and whose success will largely
depend upon their skill in minor tactics. The close co-opera-
tion of engineers will be essential.
287. The choice of objectives is governed by the same
considerations as in any other type of warfare, but there will
be many more stepping-stones, or intermediate objectives,
to be secured before the final objective is gained. It is
important that each objective should be allotted to a definite
unit or sub-unit. The distance between objectives must
generally be strictly limited, since the lack of observation and
information will often necessitate a short initial programme of
support and a new plan on the capture of each. Immediate
consolidation of captured localities is most urgent.
288. Inter-communication will be difficult, and. more
reliance will have to be placed on line telephony and runners
because it is likely that visual and wireless communications
will be restricted.
289. The attack must be characterized by the initiative
and infiltration of small units. There will generally be
ample cover within the defended area, and the gaps between
posts and localities cannot usually be covered adequately by
the fire of the defenders.
Success in attack will, once the plan is made and the attack
launched, depend much more on the resolute leadership of the
junior commanders than on the control exercised by higher
commanders.
V10323 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

