pg_0031.pdf:
V10323 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
28
Tanks
122. Tanks of whatever type play a predominant part in
the attack, whether it be initially, as against a hastily pre-
pared position, or in the later stages, when their action may
turn a success into a victory or an enemy reverse into a rout.
By fire power combined with armour and mobility, tanks
offer a threat and weapon of the first magnitude against the
defence in all but a few types of country.
123. Because, however, of their great value to the attacker,
it is important that their limitations and requirements should
be fully understood, so that they should not be lost in attempt-
ing to carry out tasks for which they are unsuited.
The following are points of special importance :-
(a) They are susceptible to ground. While most types of
ground are passable, yet on suitable ground tanks
can achieve much better results than on unsuitable.
(b) They must not be launched against located minefields
unless arrangements have been made to deal with
the mines.
When minefields are likely to be en-
countered unexpectedly, the means for dealing with
these must be at hand to the tanks.
(e) Fine sor other an the attackuse of the threat offertanks
as for other arms.
tanks, the enemy is always likely to organize a strong
anti-tank defence with
guns
defiladed and well
concealed. Supporting fire must be adequate and
concentrated to ensure that these are neutralized.
(d) Tanks in action are very blind. Other arms co-
operating with or supporting them must take imme-
diate action to deal with opposition that is affecting
tanks.
124. On reaching an objective, tanks must be relieved by
infantry with the least possible delay. The period of waiting
on an objective for relief is one of special danger to tanks,
a danger which is only to a degree lessened by the nature of
the armament of the tanks and the facilities afforded by the
ground for the taking up of hull-down positions.
Having been relieved by infantry, tanks may however be
required to remain at hand until the infantry consolidation
has progressed enough to meet an enemy counter-attack.
125. In the later stages of an attack tanks may most
advantageously be used to attack enemy troops from the flank
or rear, or to destroy enemy headquarters and groups of
unarmoured vehicles.
V10323 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

