pg_0043.pdf:
V10323 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
40
177. The more rapid the enemy's withdrawal, the greater
will be the pursuing force's dependence on good administrative
arrangements to maintain a quick advance. Administration
must not, therefore, be allowed to suffer owing to an in-
adequate allotment of signals resources.
178. Strict wireless control will be an essential for parallel
pursuit. Without it, there is the danger of the enemy ob-
taining the warning which may enable him to prevent his
withdrawal being turned into a rout.
CHAPTER 5
COMMAND AND CONTROL
23. GENERAL
179. No commander can direct operations without reliable
and continuous information. Higher commanders will rely
on reports and appreciations from subordinate formation com-
manders, on the intercept services, on tactical reconnaissance
by aircraft, and on reports of liaison officers. Commanders
of divisions and brigades will rely to a greater extent on
reports from forward troops.
180. In mobile and fluid operations the commander who
is fighting the tactical battle-usually the corps or divisional
commander-must be able to give quick decisions in sufficient
time to influence the fast-moving battle. However detailed
the information and perfect the plan, it will be impossible to
foretell the course of events-where unexpected success will
be achieved or enemy weakness disclosed. Except, there-
fore, in attack against weak opposition where the final objec-
tive can be gained in one operation, every offensive plan is
likely to require adjustment during the battle-or the lower
commander may have to frame entirely new plans to exploit
opportunities presented for the achievement of the main
object.
181. Commanders should therefore be well forward in the
offensive. An important attribute for a h gher commander
is that nice judgment which will enable him to foresee the
crises of the offensive battle and to be at hand at the right
place and time to give an immed.ate decision when speed in
seizing an opportunity may be decisive. Thus corps or higher
formation commanders will at times have to form a tactical
headquarters well in advance of their main headquarters in
order to control the battle.
V10323 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

