pg_0051.pdf:
V10323 (50) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
48
CHAPTER 8
ATTACK AND PURSUIT
37. PREPARATION FOR ATTACK
213. The armoured division, owing to its extreme mobility,
can engage, or disengage from, the enemy with greater ease
than can other types of division; nevertheless its correct
positioning and grouping immediately before a major engage-
ment is vital. The enemy force may be armoured and equally
mobile; therefore any mistake made initially will be difficult
to rectify.
214. When opposition is light, or when the ground affords
specially good opportunity for manœuvre, it may be possible
to launch the armoured brigade straight from its approach
dispositions. More often it will be necessary to check the
advance, concentrate, and mount a co-ordinated attack based
on the latest available information.
Unless this deployment phase is carefully controlled, the
armoured division may be committed to battle piecemeal
rather than on the co-ordinated plan of the divisional
commander.
215. The armoured brigade will normally move to the
attack from a strongly held pivot which should be occupied
at great speed. The normal principles for defence will apply
to the pivot; a large degree of decentralization will be necessary
initially, and co-ordination must follow later. It is important
also that the field artillery should be provided with suitable
positions and be covered by infantry.
216. Since the armoured division depends for success mainly
on exploitation tactics, very detailed information is required
of the enemy dispositions, particularly of his anti-tank guns
and mines, which are the main dangers against which the
armoured brigade must be guarded. The employment of tanks
for this detailed reconnaissance may force enemy anti-tank
guns to open fire, thus disclosing their positions.
38. THE ATTACK
Frontage
217. Unless the opposition is known to be slight or the
enemy can be out-manœuvred without direct assault, it is
imperative that the attack should be delivered on a narrow
front supported by the whole of the resources of the division.
The division will often attack on a front of not more than
1,000 yards.
V10323 (50) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

