pg_0025.pdf:
V10323 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
22
(1) Administrative planning will be concurrent with oper-
ational planning, so that resources available are used
to the best advantage for the maintenance of the
attack.
(k) Definite orders will be issued whether captured equip-
ment is to be destroyed at once or salvaged.
15. PLANNING AND PREPARATION
The time factor
95. The greater the anticipated opposition the more time
will be required for preparing an attack, but the more time
taken in preparation the better organized will the defence be.
Therefore it is imperative for the commander to weigh up the
relative value of time to himself and to the enemy, and to
decide at once what time is available for preparing the attack.
96. Before a major attack can be launched time will be
required for the concentration of the necessary troops, and
possibly for special training and rehearsal; ammunition and
stores must be collected; communications may have to be
improved; special stores may be required by assault detach-
ments; overprinted and enlarged maps may be necessary.
Reconnaissance and information
97. The reconnaissance plan will be based on the time
available for preparation, and on what further information is
essential before attack can be launched. Ground reconnais-
sance by junior leaders of assaulting arms is generally essential,
but often the information received from air reconnaissance will
be sufficient for the formulation of the plans of higher com-
manders. Sometimes it will be impossible even for junior
commanders to view the ground, because such reconnaissance
may prejudice the necessary degree of surprise.
98. The more organized the defence the more detailed is the
information required by the attacker. Time, and if necessary
some degree of surprise, may have to be sacrificed in the
collection of information concerning protective obstacles and
the dispositions of support weapons.
On some occasions information may be obtained rapidly by
the action of a few patrols, from reports of observation parties
or posts, or from recent tactical reconnaissance reports from
aircraft. On the other hand some information that is essential
to enable a commander to decide his plan may take several
days to collect, and fighting may be necessary to obtain it.
V10323 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

