pg_0042.pdf:
V10323 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
39
21. ADMINISTRATION
Transport
169. The maintenance of effective pursuit will depend largely
on the ability to provide the required transport, particularly
for those formations which must be self-contained for several
days. To collect this transport higher commanders must be
ruthless in cutting down all unessential unit and formation
transport.
Every available vehicle must be used to the maximum,
and captured transport must be collected and formed into
units as soon as possible.
170. Air transport is likely to be even more valuable in
pursuit than in the approach.
Supplies
171. Forward administrative areas will be formed in
succession to keep pace with the advance, and to reduce as
far as possible the turn-round of formation transport.
172. Special parties will be provided to take over supplies
captured intact, and orders should have been issued for forward
units to report immediately the location of dumps, especially
of petrol, water, food, and medical supplies.
Salvage
173. The main duty of salvage units will be the collec-
tion and repair of
vehicles and equipment.
Certain
items will be particularly required by the army for the main-
tenance of rapid pursuit, and the orders to salvage units
must include a priority list of such items.
Administration of the occupied area
174. A separate administrative organization will often be
required to deal with the civil administration of the area
occupied, until a more permanent system can be installed.
22. INTERCOMMUNICATION
175. In general the considerations which govern the pro-
vision of efficient signals communications in the approach are
applicable to the pursuit.
176. In view of the potentialities of well-directed air support
in this phase, the careful allotment of tentacles and the pro-
vision of adequate ground communications for the RAF are
matters of first importance.
V10323 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

