pg_0066.pdf:
V10323 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
63
51. THE PURSUIT
290. Both the mixed division and the infantry division
may be required to carry out direct or parallel pursuit, when
greater risks can be accepted than during the approach
phase.
291. The main problems will be the provision of troop-
carrying transport for the force used for parallel pursuit, and
the employment of the tank brigade.
Owing to the need for speed the force used for parallel
pursuit must be entirely mobile and may well be an infantry
brigade group including a strong proportion of artillery and
engineers.
Transport for infantry may consist of troop-
carrying vehicles, or it may have to be improvised. Whether
or not the tank brigade is used for parallel pursuit depends on
the speed of the tanks with which the brigade is equipped and
whether transporters can be used.
292. Direct pursuit will be organized on a broad front, and
the same principles apply as in the advance. It will be usual
to move weak in front and to move up the tank brigade by
bounds in rear or on the flank of the division, according to
suitable available routes.
293. In any type of country the task of clearing forward
routes will be extremely heavy. The withdrawing enemy will
probably employ large-scale demolitions, the country may be
devastated, and a large number of unmarked minefields will
be laid.
Both the direct and parallel pursuit forces must therefore
be strong in engineers, and the bridging problem will require
careful appreciation, centralized control, and co-ordination.
294. The troops of both types of division may be extremely
exhausted after the attack, but they will often be required to
follow up a beaten enemy immediately in direct pursuit.
The tempo of direct pursuit is of even greater importance
than that required for parallel pursuit; the enemy must be
given no respite, and touch must be maintained.
Therefore
the last ounce of strength must be extracted from every man,
to ensure that the pursuit is conducted vigorously and
remorselessly-the quicker to defeat and finally to destroy
the enemy
(18502) G.115 21,000 6/43. K.H.K. Gp. 8/7
V10323 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

