pg_0054.pdf:
V10323 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
51
the objective, it will usually be impossible to locate all mine-
fields by previous reconnaissance. It will be normal, therefore,
to allot engineers to this brigade to deal with unexpected
minefields. •
229. Destruction of enemy tanks.—The enemy must be
prevented from recovering his disabled tanks and, unless
orders to the contrary have been issued, specially equipped
engineer parties will be provided for their immediate destruc-
tion. Alternatively they will be destroyed by fire from our
own tanks at a suitable opportunity.
230. Flank demolitions.—Engineer parties working with the
infantry and anti-tank guns may often be required to carry
out flank demolitions and to lay minefields in order to block
any counter-attack by enemy armour. The latter task will
not, however, be confined to engineers.
Air support
231. The speed and range of the armoured brigade in attack
will sometimes make it difficult to provide adequate and
continuous artillery support. Under these conditions direct
air support, including the provision of smoke, should be used
to supplement or replace artillery support.
It will be difficult
to fix pre-arranged targets, and squadrons in support must be
directed on to targets as the attack develops; suitable
targets will often be reported by tactical reconnaissance
aircraft.
232. In attack against hastily prepared defences direct
support will be valuable when used as an additional artillery
weapon. It will be particularly useful to assist in breaking
up and disorganizing the enemy forming up to counter-attack
a pivot, or to bolt enemy tanks occupying dominating ground.
Holding the battlefield
233. The dissipation of the tank strength of the division
must be prevented by the recovery and rapid repair of all
disabled tanks. This can only be done if the battlefield is
held sufficiently long for the workshop echelons to perform
their tasks.
Tanks will always be first in priority for recovery.
234. Recovery units must often work on, or in the imme-
diate vicinity of, the battlefield, and their protection will be
sufficiently assured if the area is dominated by the armoured
brigade, which must itself be within supporting distance of
the pivot.
V10323 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

