pg_0023.pdf:
V10323 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
20
priority of requirements, and therefore the positioning of
bridging equipment in the order of march, is difficult to
determine.
86. Bridging equipment should be kept as far as possible
under centralized control, and circumstances alone can decide
what, if any, additional initial allotment to divisions is
desirable, and where the bulk of the bridging equipment
should move.
Water
87. In certain theatres water requirements of personnel and
vehicles will be a major administrative problem. The provision
of water is an engineer responsibility, but its carriage and
distribution is the responsibility of the administrative staff.
It is a fixed demand, but may often necessitate much additional
transport.
Medical
88. In the approach the medical services will deploy the
minimum number of units in order to keep the maximum
resources in hand for rapid treatment and evacuation of
casualties once the main battle is joined, but a field ambulance
section should move well forward in every column.
The sites for advanced or field dressing stations should be
chosen as suitable for expansion and for subsequent use by the
larger units coming up in rear.
Recovery, repair, and replacement
89. The rapid recovery, replacement, and repair of vehicles,
especially tanks, is most important to ensure units being at
maximum strength for the main battle.
Tank delivery units must move well forward, and crews of
tank casualties must be sent back to these units to man
replacement tanks. The welfare of their crews, away from
their own units, is important.
90. Forward repair and recovery units must maintain their
mobility by leaving all repairs, that cannot be carried out
quickly, to be dealt with by main workshops moving up in
rear.
The energies of the former will be devoted primarily to
clearing the roads, but such recovery as is possible will be
forward. The location of recovery posts must be clearly laid
down, a proportion being the selected future sites of main
workshops.
- 13. INTERCOMMUNICATION
91. The centralized control and the free and rapid passage
of information so necessary in the approach can only be
V10323 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

