pg_0022.pdf:
V10323 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
19
Traffic control
82. Centralization and co-ordination of all traffic control
resources is essential for the efficient moves of large forma-
tions, whether within or outside striking distance of enemy
ground forces.
Efficient traffic control depends on a careful appreciation,
the provision of good communications, a liberal distribution
of traffic maps, and adequate recovery arrangements.
Supply
83. The main problems of supply will be the provision of
petrol for mechanized columns, of ammumtion, particularly
gun ammunition of all types, and of bridging material if
many wet or dry gaps have to be crossed. Special arrange-
ments may also have to be made for the supply of water.
The provision of vations is less likely to present difficulty:
During the approach, forward administrative areas will be
established, from which formation transport will draw sup-
plies. In these areas will be located the administrative units
for recovery and maintenance, including tank delivery and
reinforcement units, workshop units, and personnel reinforce-
ment units. Such an area should be controlled by the highest
formation possible in order to economize in troops required
for its protection.
Each area requires its own commander
and staff with the necessary means of communication and
transport to ensure adequate control.
Petrol and ammunition
84. The requirements of petrol and ammunition will vary
from day to day according to the distance travelled and the
opposition encountered. Centralized control of administrative
units carrying these two commodities is necessary to ensure
economy in transport.
The formation of forward petrol and ammunition points
will generally be necessary to maintain the speed of advance.
Mobile petrol and ammunition detachments may have to be
provided for formations detailed for special tasks.
Dumping of ammunition should be avoided until prepara-
tions for the main attack begin.
Bridging material
85. The provision of adequate bridging material at the right
time and place requires considerable foresight and intimate
co-operation between the operational and administrative staffs
and the engineers.
Requirements for bridging wet gaps should largely be fore-
seen, but there will be a number of dry gaps resulting from
enemy demolitions which cannot be estimated. Hence the
2a—18502
V10323 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

