pg_0006.pdf:
V10323 (5) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
3
5. Immediate strategical objectives may be :—
(a) The capture of an area or bridgehead to act as a firm
base for further offensive action by one or all of the
armed services.
(b) The securing of airfields from which the air forces can
support or conduct operations.
(c) The seizing of vital ports and centres of communica-
tion to facilitate the strategic plan for the destruction
of the enemy forces.
(d) The seizure of important industrial and agricultural
areas to augment the resources for the successful
prosecution of the campaign or to deny them to the
enemy.
6. Immediate tactical objectives will include the seizing of
advanced landing grounds and of vital ground from which
attack can most effectively be staged, or which will provide the
best pivots for armoured action.
7. The destruction of the enemy army will generally be
achieved at less cost if frontal attacks against organized
defences are avoided and envelopment rather than penetration
is carried out whenever possible. The enemy must, however,
be contained in front if he is not to withdraw troops to avert
the envelopment.
8. Whatever the strategical or tactical objectives may be,
the ultimate object of destroying the enemy armed power
must be the basis on which all plans are prepared; the
maintenance of this one object will alone bring success. The
mere seizure of country or ground is not an end in itself.
Surprise
9. Strategical surprise may often be difficult, if not impos-
sible, to obtain; but tactical surprise is always possible and
plans must always be framed to achieve it. Surprise depends
on good information, rigid security measures, a sound cover
plan, speed in concentration and in execution of plans, and
above all on forethought and preparation.
10. Surprise is impossible without reliable, up-to-date
information. Since very detailed information is desirable in
the planning stage, some degree of surprise may have to be
forfeited owing to the time required for its collection; but
once operations have started the time factor is all important,
and individual commanders must never delay action because
their information is incomplete.
1a—18502
V10323 (5) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

