• 0.
NOISTATO
/EMN/aM/SH
60
a'M/97
As above all wiring of camps and briefing contres (ie anywhere where
briefing will take place and OVERLORD
documonte, maps eto will be housed) will
be completed by 21 May.
Any difficultios in provision of wire will be notified
to this HQ immediately.
Passes
(a)
A uniform pass will be issued to Corps and Divy by Second Army.
This
pass entities anyone; who can sacisfactorily prove his military identity,
It is essential that all details of
it this is not done
the rosult will be interinable delays, as statio staffs are being
instructed to invostigate all such cases.
The passes will NOT be
handed over from one offr to another bui are for specific individuals.
b) Appr O shows the distribution of pasces:
acknowledgements will be made
to this 3Q by a12 indi duals co whom a pass is issuede
acksonedgement vill be sont through normal. chantals all will include
the individuals rank and name typed in block capitals as well as his
signature.
Any urwanted passes will be returned to this id forthwith.
Drivers
In many camps vehicle standings are unforturately outside the sealed
perimeter.
As one of tho most iuporbant principies
of sealing is that no
unbriefed person nay come in contoot with a briefed person, this introduces a
serious complication.
The following will be tho procedure to maincain;
waterproof and guard vehicies.
(a) Drivers will live, sleep and eat in sealed camps.
When required to work on vehicles, they will be marched to their
vehicles, wooke and.
be marched back to the camp
continously under
the eye of an officor.
This of course applics to RENE waterproofers.
(c) In order to guard the vehicles first residues, who will be remaining
in prosent locations, will be
(i) Tn Southern Command acconodated outside camps throughout
Southern Command: all such vehicle standings are provided with
tonts, foeding,washing and latrine facilities for this purpose.
(ii) In SE Command either accomodated as in (i) above or, where
the
vehicle standings are so close
to the camp as to be
safe for
then guards will bé found from inside the camp
(St Cormand and 185 Inf Bde are reconnoitiring now to duternine
into which category canps fall).
(i1i)
Eastern Cormand and London District will be treated as Para (i)
above,
It is considered with exceptions below that fow if any drivers need be briefed
beyond the detail shown in para i8b.
AVNE and Flail drivers
Di deivers
RM Armd Gp Sp drivers
Bulldozor ARV ete drivers
Intrance and exit to Camps
For all ranks the procedure will be as below:
(a) 111 will have to prove thoir military identity by the normal docy
