INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations. topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
creation of the particular command or appointment by
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
ili) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
personal staff.
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
ept from the first day of embodiment
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
oh su, arit will, eferre, through the usual channels, to the Under Secretary of State (S.D.),
for reference.
and Pa provide data diony is eate ase objece into furients li toy training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
their fo it this comman in as a rons ade commend to include in the war dierie ce
in regard to me ors, oter , cathe, the dia a and insenservice ice eration vaida
ater for the History of the War.
or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above). Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copier important any relevant demarificial eters y rodea devil er contions
hev should be included).
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
on A C. iT. Vil te entered up day, each tray in a red ey tin of petite to peepie,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows : —
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H Q
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a diary :-
(i) Ima deistons tak, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(i) Rate cation in the cementatue it or ot toenty-on he read present dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the spence No. he the one enever secord te stout at the infoon in one tearder
INT
M. 122831
Month and Year...
Hour
Ist
Feb 1944+
Many more W.O.U.M.'s 1
Units and Ama Car Res
8th And Bde - one of
• ESTT/M/DaY/CHO
command. Discussed the
Five more Railway wgns arm
received - No guntowers yet ar
Spoke to Mobilisation Branch, C.O... -
Bde. Arranged for two Qlls of 8th and Bde to proceed to Domington on
5th to check their C1098 Equipment.
A. D. O.S, visited Dump and arranged
with REs to repair lavatories and alter lights.
One railway truck fron C.0.7, Old Dally.
Unable to visit Units, car off road. A.D.O.S. visited Siding, 3 truck.
being cleared, all fron C.O.D. Old Dalby.
Moved to new location at Landsdome House, Newmarket
Spoke to B.O.W. 0;
8th ma do to resonal equipment for his units proceding satisfactontay.
TOMS MONOT
• SIt IN 00990E
Weather still wet.
sent "squatT
