Daturn by (20/11/2025 12:49:28
ИЛАОБЛЛЯ
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(ili) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NotE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
cept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
or regards casualties the names and he mee di
in adition in number it on the . of Co changes in stores, transport d be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to to should be entered up, not in the erder given ty, it te a time they
PARA. .—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
or reterence.
( cry cd artie eat on ration draw, by about no comator
Copies on dies wil be made in the last copie eat thing the authen ie relies
(See F.., Volundiaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
tri ret one any dea al rade de comed to include in the war darie ol
vell as material likely to be of value
in A c. diary wil is entered ted daly hack tracy in and etey the oficer detailed to keep it,
From a car diary is an olence under the Official Secrets Acts
nd retention of appendices, maps, é
or other pe on menta be mindedle hot the offer who miato the cant dies in the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARa. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) me detaint os ders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and isued,
(i at saties in the cement fur un the pat rent, four hour and present dispositions.
(ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the SPECIAL NO. The The i need told le tie time the ive to tie to it to ins
WO 171/360
B.LoA.
Month and Year. JULY 1944
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMAD™
SECRET
Dry but cloudy until eveni
Depot and 2 Sub Depot Reser
Subject: War Diary•
To : The Under Secretary Of State,
(RoRecords),
Special. Visited S.T.S.D. St
sending lorry this pom. Visit
Rum ration authorised.
H.Q. 30 Corps
Troops Ordnance
ADOS/30/14
AUG 44•
the duplicate copy for
lost op to the one the it ge 1 on to gother
Fine - Visited A.D.0.S. Dump -
A.D.0.S.
30 Corps - Visited 30 Corps Ira
Heavy rain until 1400 hrs then c.
15 AUG1944
Major Assemblies. Visited 55 F.M.
Dump - no general stores of any us
_ roops.
Sub Park to collect some tyres that
-saDle. Visited D.D.0.S. 30
Corps. 0.0. to 17 A.OaD, for sone urgent requirements.
Rained all aome fine pom. onwerds.O.0. to BAYBUX for LuP. of urgent oook-
ing utensils. Residue of Unit arrived ex UK, now complete with personnel
A de
and vehicles. Visited D.D.O.S- 30 Cotps. Visited 149 In° Ord Sub Park,
WL. 47724998 8,000,000 8/43 W. H. aS. 61/6875
Closure S
S
9E
WO 171
Return b
9991969
