NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Optated coper porting Pate out inportant can post factor atop int
!
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
S or folares catalies the na no and ra nb of.
in set to the nunse of tithon the of loversan stores, transport, be.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
LuN T TE to to should be mered up, not in the eater (i aren i ve tit be the time they
representatives.
r diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
) Ace of each full retin . ang an ei, veel ay the cust votine of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
is tents ed up day, each entry ractial a by the if et detailed to keep it, on.
A Card Ty is to te neted that the citation Adi retention of appendices, maps, etc,
of other pete menta he made de, hit tie ofice he de inis to the the die a the co.
entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparE a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Imp decisit osters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
(i Dare tables in the care on large mits or ot foremations are of assis reser
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See FA. Vola dinies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned.
SPECT NO. The the in entered should be the time the frem in thered red
Month and Year. March, 1944.
Hour
INSCH,
Aberdeenshire.
4.th.
5th.
1800.
7th.
8th.
th:
11 th.
-4t.2:
toth:
18th.
19th.
20th.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C.
Unit 172 Infantry Brigade Company,
S. C.
Commanding Officer Major HA. Cardr, 1
D.. 5.9:
References to Appendices
Heavy snowfalls
Sxercise "PRIGABOUT" cancelled as for as field ork is concerned.
Paper
to be carried on.
Offra conference held by O.C. at 1 700 hrs.
IpeTCARdunil started at 1630 hours..
2 Dvrs of Home Details posted to Mobile Pet Filling Centre.
"FRIG BOUT! cease fire.
Capt Finnigan of 4 M.T. Inspectorato Branch, RASC attached until 10th. for
inspeotion of Unit vehicles.
Inspection of Unit vehicles by No. 4 ILT. Inspectorate.
p" Pl carried out a night exeroise foming potrol and supplypoints.
Lt Chase & 2/Lt Carter proceeded on leave.
M.T. Inspectorate concluded the
inspection of Unit vehicles:
It Knott & Capt East returned from leave.
"A" Pl carried out a night exercise.
Iit SIG Hughes posted to 48 Div Tps Coy RASO wef, to-day as a Capt 1/e Weps.
Coy HQ Exercise inthe field in conjunction with skeleton Pl HQs.
Instruction in bloyd Carrier driving commencod far 12 seleeted Durs of the foy.
that letter of i get fat pronation accinationg & noculations of -
all personnel of Coy brought up to date.
"A" Fl carried out A.P.
"B" P1 carried out A.P.
Comp Pl carried out BBP.
"A" F1 form AP.
HQ & "A" Sten firing on ranges.
Brons & Stens fired on ranges. 00, GuS & Pl representatives vieit G.1098-
packing demonstration.
Range firing continued.
Hout Chose & 2/ht Carter returned from leave,
It Chase attached to HQ RASC
Wt.41080/TR00 600,000 12/11 W.II,& S. 51-4070
WAR DIARIES SECTION
17 PR 1014
C. 4Q 01d & helen
ments
or full
1 your Bulk Order are g
e requested, or they
our documer
quire at the
wasned:
