36), and personal
- representatives.
ar diaries will be
cept irom the tirst day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Nome CAy quet ho dout whether or no, a ta dhary should by obst a mat
The War Mill, Loons. W
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
.. ail he entered be noi, ha
ach entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
he extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
ParA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(1) Important osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
i Dare taties in these of due to at torenty-fos to of assis present disposition:
larch tables in the c
se of large units or of fo
ill) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
E mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
dinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number
i ada ton the nase of then anks followers and of ares, ta sport, be.
of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war der or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
lace
Aldershot
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
(1) Genervather vin ordered, the tie saloo a man diary to the preeding a tch on
be forwarded on
he first day of the
e succeeding month
cer 1/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
ransmission to the rded within
aries of units wider-Secretary
SPECT NOT The time entered seould be the time the formation vor, it mea
ee an ene text
WAR DIARY
mid for
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Month and Year. June, 1944.
(Erase heading not requirad).
Army Form C.
Unit... 1.72 Company, R.A.S.C. (Inf Bde)
Major L.A. Cardy.
Commanding Officer.
References to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
Residue
Camps visited by C.R.A. of Static Camp staff.
H Hour
including gliders crossed Aldershot on way to France.
Weather
not good for invasion-
th.
D Day.
The Allied Expeditionary Force invaded France between 0630 & 0730 houra.
Large forces of eirbraft
too much wind.
Baye aux capitred.
Landing of reinforcements through beached
7th.
Heavy fighting round GARN,
continued steadily.
Weather continues dull vith some wind & rain.
Heavy bomber forces passed
overhead on way to France.
leather very cloudy & rainy holding up bombing operations by the R.A.F.
Schr
9th.
Ist rosidues of Infantry of the Residue group left Aldershot for the Marshalling area.
Weather still dull,
Ast ult F1 of 1T2 Coy moved to embarkation area.
cloudy with rain.
Torche
Strength of armoured forces in invasion area increased on both sides.
Weather not improved.
+ 11 Rosidues of Gunners loft for Embarkation areas.
1.2th.
Capure of C RENTAN by the A1li98..
14th.
Warning order for movement of D + 10 Residues party of 223 Fa Amb received.
15th
Visit to 3 Div Residues of General Sir Harold Franklyn, C. in C. Home Forces,
accompanidd by G.O.C.,
S.E. Cond & G.O.C. Aldershot District.
1.6th...
Torning order for D + 11 Residue party to move to Marsholling Area.
1 /th.
19thv.
0730
D + 11 Residues moved out to Marshalling Areas at Southampton.
Imbarlation of D + 11 Residues delayed owing to rough ser & weather.
20th.
Vehicle with compo packs & M/Cycles of D #11 Residue (172 Coy) burnt out
in Marshalling axea camp.
Replacement affected.
21 st.
Bad weather & high wind further delays embarlation of D +11 residues.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
22nd.-
Imbarkation of D + 11 residues still delayed.
New address allocated to Residue parties in Marlborough Lines, aldershot.
27th.-
News of capture of CHARBOURG by the allies.
5 - JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Move of 48 Coy RASC to Morshalling Area postponed 24 hours.
29th. 2330-
48-0oy RASC
loft 1dershot for Merchalling Area. This was aD + 17 Residue
Company•
No news of movement of the 1 72 Coy RASC D + 17 Residue.
30th:
One•
OR, posted to 30 PH.U, as Med, Cat, C.t.
Vt.41080/1900 600,000 12/41 W.H.& S. 51-4070
/our Bulk Order are
equested, or they
ur documer
