var diaries will be
kept from the first day of empoument.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Not i er questio to dont whether or o, a war diary should be list to bai.
The War Ofile, Locter, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and to provide data
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
anga tsation de data mistration!
which to base inture Improvements l diny lanuts, ceuphtenty
1. Call be entered be dal, hath a try ration a by tie if of depaid to, nep it, o.
om a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Act:
VoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande:
r other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.-0mitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
renanne a clary —
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Daily locations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
il) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
exact hour of important occurrences, factors aftecting
mobilisation or
perations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
mportant phases.
nate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
ficers and the number of other tanks of tolards casalties the names and ranis of
ollowers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given ahove but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
er or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or relerence.
iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
r unit includino anv sketches or man
elating thereto, to supplement the account (
perations furnished in the text of the diary
*, ly above. ADvencices will be
to apend an eace mil have this descript of tea in naming the autior. Reterences
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
wo months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices
to the officer i/c
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
The the tot enered siould be the time the siren in therer, it real
17ce0 0/72
ZLT 0H
-реолог
•78.12
1006
1404
1781
•4494
9764
•U761
0010
•4711
14701 MINE TANI
•476
6180 *478
0001
• 479
775
•pus
0004
1OH
HOSNE NUINI
YUNIDIYO
