NotE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
TON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
!
(v) Che in the binger of ofter ranke
in addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viri) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or Fo to thou a te mered up, not ta verdes i can h vi ht st the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
!
(1) one of care fal reton ATe. Wing the pet. real ay he cure protion of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reference.
numbered, and each
to appendices wilbe madio in the tor destine Are maing the Appo. Born be
(See F.., Volume lanies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
Ar. Cal be tre up dily, hach he ey initial andy the of et piled to, meep it. on.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Ind decist osters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(ii) Daily locations.
Rar ais in Morement turither of rent fos heur aid present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the see No. The the in entered should be the time the siven in there, it reach
BELT
Month and Year...
February, 1944.
Place
Date
Ist.
5th.
3th.,
10th...
11th.
INSCH.
15th.
16tk
48th.
1000
20th.
zist.
+430
jrd.
4th.
WAR DIARY
Army Form C.
Unit. 172 Infontry Brigade Conpany,
s.c.
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Commanding Officer. Major L.A. Cardy, R.A.S.0.
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
vaterproofing of vehicles (stgge A carriod out in preparation for loading trials.
Last of waterproofing.
completed on 12 vehicles from each Tot Platoon.
Practice loading of L.0.Ts
pas taco 11od ut lost mimute orane to bad meath Risc.
with vehicles at Fort George and landing at Naim - this
Posting order for 2 M.T. (pls received fran Ha.
24 vehicles de Waterproofed.
this Unit allotted 150 vacancies on the
21 amy Group.
0.C. proceeded on Exercise
"CROWN" as an umpire at "Sector Stores Dump".
Exercise
"CROWN" terminated..
0.I, attended Div Ondrs Conference on Exercise "CRONN".
Liout, Keane proceeded on leuve. officers Conference held at Coy His by 0C.
Platoon exercise by night involving establishment of A.P.
Capt. Griffiths attended umpire's conference for Bercise
"ANCHOR" at
Cameron Barracks, Invemess..
Officers
Capt. Griffiths left for exercise awa
Conference hold by O.C, at Co-OT. Unpiza on Banise "ANOR"
Lieut. Cameron proceeded on leave.
* day for Exercise "ANCHOR"...
D + I day Exercise "ANCHOR'.
Exercise cease fire
at
1000 hours.
Cipt, Griffith retumer to-dy 100t3on
Vt.41030/ 1D00 600.000 12/41 W.IT.& S. 51-4070
1944
.1944
ments
rfull
our documen
quire at the
your Bulk Order are g›
requested, or they
"oned:
