322
The Lifeblood of War
terrorists into Europe. As a quid pro quo for allowing free passage,
Greece is left undisturbed by any but her own indigenous terrorist
groups. To assess these last two as a threat to world peace and stability,
is over-egging the cake, but they do pose a threat to harmony, which we
define as a state of good order in which all inhabitants of all nations
regardless of creed, colour or race may go about their lawful business,
in peace and quietness, enjoying the fruits of their labours.
All these factors have led NATO to re-align some of the Alliances
contingency plans on to a South-North axis, while retaining a
capability to meet an East-West threat.
The British Reaction
To meet the scenario outlined above, the British began to restructure
their army along the lines suggested by Richard Simpkin.® It will be
apparent to anyone who has read Simpkin, that the author has drawn
heavily on this work. He makes no apology for doing so. In examining
the support required for the war of the future, one has to start
somewhere, and Simpkin has produced by far the best appraisal of the
likely shape of future war. The British re-organisation began as soon as
one armoured division was withdrawn from Germany, the necessary
planning having been put in train well before. The opportunity for a
complete re-think of the size and shape of the Army, and indeed the
Royal Navy and Royal Air Force, at this watershed in history was too
good to miss. Fortunately, servicemen, officials and politicians with the
at the and intellectual ability to take the necessary steps were in place
at the time. The suggested new organisation is discussed in outline
below. The changes are radical, but it is nonsense to imagine that the
army we have today can be retained intact, if withdrawn from
Germany. There simply is not enough room for another 55,000 troops
and their equipment in the barracks and camps in the
United
Kingdom, let alone the training areas. The sheer impossibility of
maintaining a Corps of armoured and mechanised formations in the
United Kingdom alone calls for a different organisation. Should, post
Scene Two, an eventual withdrawal from Germany not come about,
there is still a need to restructure the Army to take advantage of the
increasingly greater power and potential provided by imaginative use
of the helicopter.
A New Look for the British Armed Forces?
The early gurus of armoured warfare in the 1920s, especially Fuller
and Liddell Hart, conjured up visions of fleets of armoured fighting
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
323
vehicles (AF Vs), manoeuvring over the ground like battle fleets at sea.
The Second World War, and other wars since have shown this notion
to be largely an illusion. The flaw in the AFV-playing-ships-at-sea
theory is that seas are flat. Except in the roughest weather, ships can,
within the constraints of navigational hazards, go where they like
without diminishing their speed and changing their tactics only to meet
the imperatives posed by the threat. Very few parts of the world's land
surface present a sea-like appearance. The Russian steppe might do so,
but, as the Germans discoverd between 1941 and 1944, even the rolling
steppe can be transformed into a sea of mud by spring thaw and
autumn rain, and in winter, the snow brings its own problems t
ground-borne vehicles. Some deserts may have considerable stretch
of flat, firm going, which allow vehicles to manoeuvre at high speed
But they also have much larger areas where the terrain is intersected by
deep wadis, rocky escarpments, boulders, salt marshes, and huge sand-
seas. These last may look like the sea, but there the similarity ends.
trafficability over the rolling dunes, to all but specialised vel
varies from difficult to impossible. The terrain of Europe be:
similarity to the sea whatsoever; rivers, woods, hedgerows, b
forests, mountains,
large conurbations, and in the North, fic
present an endless series of obstacles that range from trivial
challenging.
The Increased Role of the Helicopter
The arrival of the helicopter has given the soldier the opportunity to
move over the ground, in the way that a ship moves across the sea (only
rather better and at a higher speed), riding over the waves' of the
terrain, mountains, woods, rivers, marshes, conurbations, and so forth.
As Simpkin says, the helicopter allows troops to use the ground
tactically without depending on it for mobility. To date, the drawba
of the helicopter has been its vulnerability, and limited payloac
However, recent developments in helicopter design point the way to
considerable improvements
in both these areas.
Experience with
succeeding generations of helicopters since their arrival on the scene in
the early 1950s, has led many military men to think in terms of what
helicopters can do now, rather than what they will be able to do very
soon, and the quantum jump that might be possible in the early part of
the next century. The imaginative use of the helicopter might also
drastically improve the linear speed of a land force, which van Creveld
discusses in such an interesting way in Supplying War.' We shall return
to this point later.
