348
The Lifeblood of War
10. The Shorter Oxford Dictionary Vol. Il gives the origin of the word Quartermaster
as a naval petty officer who attends to the stowing of the hold. By 1600 the military
meaning was an officer attached to each regiment with the duties of providing
quarters for the soldiers, laying out the camp, and looking after the rations,
ammunition, and other supplies of the regiment. Now logistics is taken to cover all
supply, movements, and administrative matters, including medical and welfare.
Chapter 2: The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice
AD 1918
Shaw, Supply in Modern War, p. 1.
2. Engels, Alexander the Great and The Logistics of the Macedonian Army, pp. 23 and
119. Marius reduced the numbers of animals by having the soldiers carry their own
cooking utensils and provisions, and hence they were called Marius's Mules. Both
Marius and Philip made these reforms for similar reasons; to increase their armies'
speed and mobility and to reduce the numbers of animals in regions where they
were difficult to acquire and feed (Author's addition).
3. Josephus, The Jewish War, p. 196. In his account of the Jewish War of AD 66 to 73,
having described the weapons with which a Roman infantry soldier was equipped:
together with saw and basket, axe and pick, as well as strap, reaphook, chain, and
three days rations, so that there is not much difference between a foot-soldier and a
pack mule!' As Marius had carried out his reforms (Note 2 above), about a
hundred years before Josephus was writing, it is unlikely that this comparison was
Vl121nal
4. Engels, p. 24, Note 39. If the Macedonians carried their arms and armour on pack
animals, and if the average weight of the soldier's panoply was 30 lb., and there
were 50,000 troops in the army, their combined panoply would weigh 1,500,000 lb.
This would require 6,000 animals to carry it, and 240 additional animals to carry
their grain ration for one day. All these additional animals, or their equivalent in
carts were not required by Alexander.
5. Engels, p. 24, Note 40. According to Xenophon, carts would not only require
drivers, but a quantity of lumber for replacement parts, skilled carpenters and tools
for repairing them, and a shovel and mattock per cart, probably for road building.
Only a limited number of these would be needed by Alexanders force.
6. Lane Fox, Alexander the Great, p. 280. Before leaving Meshed on his march to
Afghanistan and the Hindu Kush, Alexander set an example of reducing baggage
loads: 'all excess baggage was piled on to wagons and massed in the centre on the
camp: Alexander then set fire to it, his own wagon first, the others only when his
example had been observed. From now on, pack-animals would serve as transport
on roads too rough for wheels.
acquiesced in the sudden loss of their
luggage, knowing that Alexander had suffered too; at least they were allowed to
keep their native concubines'. Author's comment Many armies in antiquity appear
o have had a commonsense approach to the question of the needs of the soldiers,
regarding it as perfectly normal that healthy young, and indeed not so young, men,
need regular intercourse with women, not just the sexual variety, but for the special
companionship that a woman provides, which enriches and fulfils. In this respect
ancient armies were less burdened by the baggage of hypocritical values which
have been, and are, borne by later armies.
Engels, p. 26, Note 3.
8. Engels, pp.
21-22.
9. Engels, p. 61.
0. Lane Fox, p. 133.
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
11. Lane Fox, p. 140.
12. Engels, p. 112.
13. Engels, p. 19, has excellent tables showing the correlation between the numbers of
pack animals and the endurance of armies in antiquity. He concludes that nine to
ten days is the maximum that an army could exist without resupply, and before
men started to starve. It would, for example, take 40,350 animals to carry 15 days
ration, and 107,600 for 20 days. It is doubtful if that number of suitable animals
existed in the whole of Greece. One day's supply of grain for 40,350 horses would
weigh over 200 tons, and unless it could be transported by water, there would be
little possiblity of it reaching the animals overland, since it would have to be carried
by other pack animals who would be consuming the supplies they were carrying.
14. Keegan, J., The Price of Admiralty, pp. 46 47. 'HMS Victory was designed to store
enough biscuit, beef and beer for 850 men for four months and enough powder and
shot for estimated expenditure in a three-year commission. A great deal of
necessary maintenance
—repairs to sails and "setting up" the rigging-
-was carried
out daily at sea as a matter of course? Keegan goes on to illustrate how fast, potent
and logistically sustainable a man-of-war was compared with contemporary
armies:
'Napoleon's Army of the North of 1815, that destined to give battle at
Waterloo, took 366 guns of 6-pounder to 12-pounder calibre into the field.
The force of artillerymen needed to work this cannon park numbered 9,000
and the train of horses to draw it, its ammunition limbers and its supply
wagons at six horses to a train some 5,000. Horse fodder, at 20 lb per horse per
day, amounted to 50 short tons (2,000 pound tons, rather than 2,240 pound
tons —Author's note), a supply which also had to be collected and transported
at heavy additional cost in human and animal labour. By contrast, Nelson's
Trafalgar fleet of twenty-seven ships mounted 2,232 guns, of which the lightest
was 12 lb. in calibre and the heaviest 68 lb. The force of men needed to work
this cannon park, at twelve [men] to two guns (since only one broadside was
manned at a time) was some 14,000, their daily supplies, some 3 lb. per man
(liquids, which had to be transported at sea as they did not on land, added
another 8 lb.), while the motive power to manoeuvre the whole artillery force
and its crews (though not the attendant capital costs) came free. In short, the
gun power of Nelson's Trafalgar fleet exceeded that of Napoleon's Waterloo
army six times; and if it had had to be transported by land—at a speed five
times less it would have required over 50,000 gunners and 30,000 horses, as
well as a daily supply of some 300 short tons of fodder and 75 tons of food; the
comparable daily intake of solids and liquids aboard Nelson's fleet was
70 tons. In brief, six times as many guns, of much heavier calibre, could be
transported daily by Nelson's fleet as by Napoleon's army, at one-fifth of the
logistic cost and at five times the speed?
15. Keegan, p. 119.
16. This can be useful, even in peacetime; for example just in the Author's experience
alone, in 1967/68 after the British withdrawal from Aden, a task force of never less
than one strike carrier with a full complement of aircraft, one LPH (aircraft carrier
converted to carry 700-800 marines, guns, vehicles and helicopters), and escorts
was kept at sea in the vicinity of South Arabia on two separate occasions, each of
two months. All supply was by the underway replenishment group (URG). On the
second occasion, the task group was out of sight of land from clearing the Malacca
Straights to returning. In the Falklands warships were at sea for considerably
lon 20l•
17. Oman, Charles, History of the Art of War in the Middle Ages (Methuen, London
1898, reprint 1979), p. 83.
