350
The Lifeblood of War
Oman, p. 222-223.
Oman, p. 250-252.
20. Van Creveld, Command in War, p. 27.
21. Clausewitz, On War, p. 320. 'Baggage, in point of fact, rarely had any influence on
movements;.. so the Seven Years' War produced marches that have still not been
surpassed: Lascy's, for instance, in 1760, in support of the Russian diversion
towards Berlin. He covered the 2zu miles .
..in ten days a rate of 22 miles per day
which would be astounding even nowadays for a corps of 15,000 men?
22. The War of the Rebellion, Vol. XIX, Part 1, PP. 10-11 and 13-14. In both armies,
from regimental/battery level upwards, excellent records were kept, a combination
of what we today would call war diaries and after-action reports. The Confederate
Official Records were captured at the end of the war, and with their Union
compiled into / volumes
forming what
be the most
comprehensive account of any war in history, in one publication, as seen through
the eyes of commanders on both sides from army commanders down.
23. The War of the Rebellion, Vol. XIX, Part 1, pp. 97-98. A report on p. 96 in the same
volume, by Brigadier General Rufus Ingalls, the Chief Quartermaster of the Armm
of the Potomac, speaks about the problems of supply at long distances from
railheads of rivers:
'Our trains (wagon trains) at this time could not carry supplies of provisions
and short forage for the army, with the necessary ordnance, hospital stores,
camp equippage, etc. for more than six or eight days. A wagon drawn by six
mules over good roads can haul 1,200 short rations of provisions (bread,
sugar, coffee, salt, and soap) and six days of grain for mules. Over hilly or
muddy roads the weight would be correspondingly reduced. It can thus be
easily seen how far from depots an army can be supplied by wagons. When
supplies in trains (wagon trains) become exhausted, an army must be at or
near another source of supply as a matter of course.
24. One of his soldiers remarked years after the war that whereas it took Moses forty
years to get the children of Israel through the wilderness, 'Old Jack' would have
double-timed them through in three days on half rations!
25. The War of the Rebellion, Vol. XXV, Part I:
p. 197. The Report by Brigadier General Warren, Chief of Topographical
Engineers describes the route and the weather; the road was a crooked one,
through forests, and very muddy
at about the same tine it began to rain.
in his. Colonel Dana commanding the 143rd Pennsylvania Infantry includes
in his report the observation; 'The experience of the late movément, if I may be
pardoned to
allain, lurnishes
strong evidence that only in critical
emergencies should men be compelled to carry, in addition to their usual
equipments, including 60 rounds of cartridge, eight days' rations.'
p. 396. Rations on the man were; three days cooked rations in his haversack,
and five days' hard bread, coffee, sugar and salt in his knapsack.
(Author's comment, the rations must have been fairly sparse, or amazingly light, or
both. A present day infantry soldier carrying eight days rations and his ammunition
load would have around 100 lbs on his body). Five days' beef on the hoof marched
with Hooker's army (p. 396. This was about 312 head of beef cattle per corps). The
crossed
reserve ammunition was carried on pack mules. Only a small number of wagons
Rappahannock to Chancellorsville. Hooker stipulated (Part II of
Volume XXV, p. 262) that trains (wagon trains) were to be left behind, only two
ambulances and one battery were to accompany each division, and the few wagons
were only to carry forage for the animals.
The War of the Rebellion, Vol. XXV, Part I, p. 551, report by Brigadier General
laylor, commander 1st Brigade, 3rd Division, Sth Corps.
351
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
27. Luvaas, A Prussian Observer With Lee.
28. Luvaas, G. F. R. Henderson and the American Civil War.
29. Luvaas,
A Prussian Observer
With Lee, p. 116. The work was entitled Der
Burgerkrieg in den Nordamerikanschen Staaten.
30. Although the Austrian musket was vastly inferior to the Prussian needle gun. The
latter was actually inferior to the French Chassepot rifle.
Luvaas, A Prussian Observer With Lee, p. 112.
Van Creveld, Supplying War, p. 106.
33. Van Creveld, Supplying War, p. 102.
34. Van Creveld, Supplying War, p.
118.
35. Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers, p. 240.
36. For a very full account of the difficulties encountered by the Germans, and an
analysis of the causes see Van Creveld, Supplying War, pp. 109 to 141.
37. Even then, the Confederates were unable to use captured Spencer repeating
carbines in any numbers, once any captured ammunition was expended, because
they lacked the special cartridges and had no metal for their manufacture.
38. Lachhman, Singh, Indian Sword Strikes in East Pakistan, p. 166. In the 1971 war in
East Pakistan, Major General Singh commanded the Indian 20th Mountain
Division, which experienced some of the hardest fighting. He records: It is of
interest to know that shell injuries, compared to the bullet injuries, were high and
most of these injuries were the result of air bursts'. At one stage, when his division
had 634 wounded, there were 316 shell, and 262 bullet injuries. The Pakistan Army
in East Pakistan was not particularly lavishly supplied with artillery.
39. The Story of the Fourth Army in the Battle of the Hundred Days, p. ix., discussing
the advisability of accepting the Armistice before the Germans, falling back on
their own frontiers, stiffened their resistance, and prolonged the war; it was a
physical impossibility for at least the British Armies to continue their advance
rapidly and in strength and to immediately follow-up their successes. Had they
done so, they would have starved'.
40. It is difficult to express it better than van Creveld, Command in War, p. 190,
'Strategically, the rise of the gasoline-powered motor vehicle meant that armies
were now released from the tyranny exercised over them by the railways since the
days of Moltke and Grant. The result was a tremendous gain, not so much in the
linear speed or in the number of ton/miles lifted (for both of which purposes
the railways, so long as they are free from air interdiction, have retained their
superiority to this day), as in the flexibility it provided'.
Chapter 3: Three Campaigns in a Global War
1. Donnelly,
The Sustainability of the Soviet Army in Battle (SSRC C53),
po 233-236.
2. Alstead, Ten in Ten, A Study of the Central Region Transport Capability in Crisis
and War.
Terraine, The Right of the Line, p. 263 quotes Richards and Saunders, The Royal
Air Force 1939-45 (HMSO 1974).
. with the approach of D-Day a rapidly spreading paralysis was creeping
over the railway network of the Region Nord. When that day dawned, 21,949
British and American aircraft had cast down a total of 66,517 tons of bombs
on eighty chosen targets... The movement of German troops and material
by rail had thus become a matter of very great difficulty and hazard, and this
well before any landings had been made. Such trains as ran moved very
were forced to make long detours and travelled only at night. The
enemy had no freedom of movement in a large part of France and Belgium'
