294
The Lifeblood of War
Operational planning consists of an intimate blend of tactical and logistic
thinking to carry out strategic concepts. This unity and coherence is essential to
swift, decisive military action in any type of human conflict
.. in combat the
logistic support that may be considered inadequate by a timid or mediocre
commander may be adequate for a bold and competent commander who
understands the nature and source of flexibility, provided he has adequate control
of a flexible logistic system.' 10
Does a NATO commander of a multinational force have unity of
command and adequate control of the logistic system, let alone a
flexible one? The NATO Logistics Handbook lays down two principles
which were set out in two sentences in the North Atlantic Council
Resolution of 23 February 1952:11
First sentence: The responsibility for logistic support to national component
forces will, in general, remain with the responsible authorities of the nations
concerned.'
Second sentence: The responsibility for co-ordination will, however, rest with the
Supreme Commander and with his major subordinate commanders at the
appropriate levels.
At first glance these are comfortable words because any unease that
might be engendered by the opening sentence, with its implication that
national authorities have a free hand to decide on the level of support
for their components, is assuaged by the mention of co-ordination in
the second sentence; and it is this that we will address first. Co-
ordination can mean all things to all men: from the mere passing of
information, to the issue of firm direction, but as the NATO handbook
says, both are wrong. Under the NATO agreed definition of co-
ordination, the co-ordinator has the authority to require consultation
between the agencies involved, but does not have the authority to
compel agreement. It is not therefore surprising that without the power
to enforce agreement, logistic co-ordination is at best patchy, and at
worst non-existent. And logistics is, after all, the creation and sustained
support of forces and weapons to be tactically employed in order to
gain strategic objectives. 12
So, for example, if one corps's national logistic capacity becomes
critically low, the Army Group headquarters may recommend a
reallocation of stocks between National Logistic Support Commands
(NLSCs). If the other national authorities involved refuse to transfer
stocks, the Army Group Commander has to refer it to the Commander-
in-Chief Central Region (CINCENT), who then negotiates with the
Ministries of Defence concerned. Thus tactical and logistical responsi-
bilities are separated and command is divided, contrary to lessons
learned from previous campaigns. It is proper to ask how plans can be
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
295
made without control of logistic support. The problems which arise
from the lack of comprehensive planning may result in the deferment or
even abandonment of a military operation. Because neither CINCENT
or the Army Group Commanders in the Central Region have at their
disposal logistic command elements, logistic units, logistic troops or
stocks. Despite the fact that tactics and logistics are inseparable,
neither the Army Group Commanders, or any other NATO land
commanders commanding more than one national component, have
the power to employ or re-deploy nationally provided operational
support capabilities or resources. They can only monitor them. Th
same is applicable in the Southern and Northern Regions. So in fact t
Army Group Commanders may command the troops, but they do i
have under their hands the 'beans, bullets, and fuel', or the means
moving these commodities. Therefore they do not command the troops
in the full sense of the word. They are commanders in name only. 13
Only national corps commanders have the wherewithal with which to
plan and conduct their parts of the land battle. The Army Gro
Commanders may be forced into reacting rather than acti
Alternatively, the Army Group Commanders may arrive at decisio
by considering only tactical facts with no logistic input: or may obtai.
information from National Logistic Support Commands who cannot
apply any tactical weighting to their advice and data. The result is likely
to be that the redeployment of formations to maintain cohesive balance
or build-up for a counter-attack, for example, will be made almost
impossible because higher commanders,
that is the Allied com-
manders, do not have adequate logistic information on which to base
redeployment and reinforcement decisions; and even if they had, they
lack the means, and as we shall see shortly, the system and stocks.
Problems of Incompatibility
We now return to the first of those two sentences from the NATO
logistic handbook; 'Logistics is a national responsibility'. What started
as an obligation to provide adequate resources to support operations
in particular NATO Regions and Allied Commands has, with the
passage of time, become an excuse for NATO inaction and national
failure to meet their commitments. Incompatible logistic systems
abound.
There are two points of view, and one grey area. The first point of
view is held by those who consider logistics so inextricably involved
with national sources of money and material that it can never be
