312
The Lifeblood of War
fighting, long after the soldiers of the Alliance were reduced to using
their rifles as expensive clubs for lack of anything to fire. It is for
precisely this reason that the only NATO capability the Soviets feared,
and fear, is its battlefield and strategic nuclear weapons. Without these,
the Soviet Army could have overrun Europe long ago. According to
Donnelly, they also have an inferiority complex about the West in
technical matters. ** If the West can develop the technology to produce
a new family of weapons and equipment, which enables it to guarantee
mass destruction of Soviet equipment by conventional means, and if
the West can integrate new technology on command, control, and
movement so that it can get within the Soviet 'command and control
cycle', to bring the new family of weapons to bear in the right place and
time, the Soviets would have little chance of success. But this technical
lead has not yet been achieved by the West.
Some Implications of Force Reductions
For this reason a zero option on battlefield nuclear, and chemical
weapons is very much in the Soviet interest. As indeed are conventional
force reductions. As pointed out earlier, mutual force reductions which
would reduce force density on the battlefield favour the attacker.
Economies can be achieved by the Soviets while actually enhancing
their relative capability. There may be no point in them building more
tanks. It might be better to invest the time, research and development,
and funds in the search for new weapons and equipment; faster and
more lethal helicopters, precision guided munitions, better command
and control systems, and so forth. By reducing manpower in their fully
deployed first category formations, there will be savings in equipment.
The stockpiling of this modern equipment will allow their 2nd and 3rd
category mobilization formations to be better equipped.
Conventional force cuts should in no way reduce the Soviet ability to
form mobile and air-mobile groups. If NATO and the Soviet Union
agree to a zero option on battlefield nuclear weapons, and mutual force
reductions, the Soviets would still have the capability to penetrate as
far as the Rhine, if not further. The likelihood of this and other
implications for the West is discussed in the next chapter.
10
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars
and Their Support
*To prepare for war in time of peace is impracticable to commercial representative
nations, because the people in general will not give sufficient heed to military
necessities, or to international problems to feel the pressure which induces readiness.
Mahan
"It would be nice to say that we won the war (the cold war) because we are so good, but
we won because the other guy had so many problems.'
Commander-in-Chief Allied Forces Central Europe
addressing the Royal United Services Institute 20 June 1990
An Unequal Contest and an Unchanged Threat?
We have now seen how logistics has an impact on the conduct of wars
in the past, and the possible influence on a war that never happened. In
order to look at logistics in armed conflict in the future, it is first
necessary to examine the possible shape and size of armed forces, and
likely strategic, operational and tactical concepts.
If conventional war between NATO and the Warsaw Pact had
broken out in the days before the Non-Soviet Warsaw Pact powers
had so clearly shown their reluctance to become involved, the Soviets
could have won merely by sustaining the conflict long enough at
sufficient intensity, to ensure that the West ran out of supplies. It is
likely that they would have done more than that, and the NATO
strategy of holding forward in response to understandable German
political pressure, would have served to speed up the process of
defeat. In short, as has been discussed in the last chapter, NATO did
not, and still does not have, the logistical capability to win a
313
