The Lifeblood of War
prerogative of those who pay the piper, they would also call the tune.
However, although the strategic plan was never radically changed, and
the Burma option went ahead in the form originally envisaged, the
uncertainties at the highest planning levels were to have logistic
implications, mainly decisions on resource allocations to the South-
East Asia theatre of operations.
At the SEXTANT conference in Cairo in November and December
1943, a strategic red herring appeared on the planning scene in the war
against Japan, which was to militate further against firm direction on
the course of future operations, and hence resource allocation. The
staffs considered that because of the higher priority of the war against
Germany, the British co-ordinated advance on Burma, still in the plan,
would not take place in time to synchronise with the American advance
across the Pacific. This led to the formulation of the 'Pacific Strategy',
under which the British Main Fleet would operate with the Americans
in the Pacific (this eventually partially came about when a British
Carrier Battle Group transferred to the Pacific in 1945). In addition,
while conducting a holding operation to contain the Japanese in South-
East Asia, a force of six British divisions with appropriate air support
was to be transferred to Australia to support the American main thrust
across the Pacific.
There were a number of arguments in favour of continuing with
plans to invade Burma and eventually Malaya: in Assam and Burma
the Japanese were already being engaged on a scale bigger than that in
any other theatre; any diminution of effort in this area would be
perceived by the Chinese as withdrawal of support and might lead them
to make a separate peace; the rice, oil, tin and rubber from Burma and
Malaya would be valuable assets to regain; and finally, entirely a
British dimension, and one not subscribed to by the Americans, the
recapture of former British possessions by British forces was of
paramount importance. The major factor in favour of the 'Pacific
Plan', was the prospect of exchanging a protracted slog, involving large
forces and complicated logistics, through the inhospitable terrain of
Burma against a very tough enemy on ground of his own choosing, for
the flexibility of the island-hopping air-sea war in the Pacific, which
maximised the Allied advantages of naval and air supremacy. At the
Cairo conference, the Combined Chiefs of Staff made no decision other
than to: approve the Pacific Plan in principle as a basis for further
investigation and preparations subject to final approval of the
combined Chiefs of Staff. Although the decision
was deferred,
preparations to implement either the Pacific or the South-East Asia
Three Campaigns in a Global War
strategy had to continue. The delay continued for another eleven
months, until September 1944, and was to lead to a series
administrative problems, culminating in the risk that if a decision was
not taken, the necessary logistic preparations for either course would
not be made in time.20
The nub of the problem was that the two strategies were mutually
exclusive and the logistic support for one could not apply, except in a
limited way to the other; and time and assets were short; time to build
up the base, Australia or India; and assets, particularly specialised
shipping, landing craft, and equipment. In Australia, port facilities
were good but the distances were enormous. Communications were
complicated by the differing rail gauges of the State railways, and
accommodation for troops and storage spaces would have to be
provided and built by British resources, since the small population of
was already fully mobilised, and there were already
considerable American forces based there. As we shall see shortly, India
had problems of a different kind. In early 1944, the Minister of War
Transport represented to the British Joint Chiefs of Staff that even after
the defeat of Germany, then set for October 1944, there would be
insufficient shipping released to implement the Pacific Plan because of
the great distance to Australia and the long turn-round. Not until the
OCTAGON conference in September 1944, was Mountbatten given
the orders by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to go ahead with the South-
East Asia plan. By which time, the British were following up the
retreating Japanese on the western borders of Burma. The timing of the
decision is interesting, just before Operation MARKET GARDEN,
which Montgomery confidently predicted would lead to the end of the
war in Europe in 1944.
Assam and Burma: The Impact of Geography
We must now return to the campaign in Assam and Burma, which
was being fought for over two years whilst the Joint Combined
Planning Staffs were planning and their Chiefs deliberating.
The main base for this campaign was India. Except to provide large
numbers of volunteer soldiers for the Indian Army in the First World
War, that conflict had passed India by. To begin with, it had looked as
though the pattern would be more or less repeated in the Second World
War. Formations stationed in India, both British and Indian were
shipped to the Middle East Theatre (Egypt and Iraq), and a departure
from the previous war, Malaya. A good part of the logistic demands for
SONY
