190
The Lifeblood of War
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
191
outcome of the war. But, under the surface the situation was
deteriorating rapidly; there were three reasons.
Early days of United States helicopter support for the ARVN. Unloading rice and other supplies at base camp. Unitec
The Situation Deteriorates
First, the ARVN exemplified the saying that there are no bad
soldiers, only bad officers. The hardy Vietnamese peasants made good
soldiers, fighting well in the French Army and in the Vietminh and Viet
Cong. On the whole, for reasons that have already been explained,
their officers were appalling.
Despite encouraging reports on the
performance of the ARVN, sent to Washington by Harkins, the
commander USMACV, most of these did not reflect the actual
situation on the ground. For example, the battle of Ap Bac, which took
place on 2 January 1963, was reported back to Washington as a
success. Whereas the United States Army adviser attached to the
ARVN 7th Infantry Division, who had mounted the operation,
reported a dismal failure. The village of Ap Bac, 40 miles south-west of
Saigon, was held for a day by 350 Viet Cong guerrillas equipped with
States adviser on left of picture (The
small arms and one 60 mm mortar, against a force four times its size,
consisting of one ARVN battalion, two Civil Guard battalions, a
parachute battalion, and a company of infantry mounted in M-113
armoured personnel carriers, supported by mortars, artillery and
ground attack aircraft (ARVN infantry and marine battalions were
small by British standards, usually about 350 at maximum strength).
The ARVN attacks were faltering, the leaders cowardly, from the
Divisional commander down. Eventually, having held off the ARVN
all day, the guerrillas slipped away under the cover of darkness.
Throughout this disgraceful episode, the American adviser,
an
exceptionally brave and forceful officer, tried to get the ARVN
divisional commander to mount an attack, in vain. The following
morning, 7th Division shelled the empty village, and followed this up
with a half-hearted probing attack.
The ARVN soldiers never
penetrated the village, and for days Harkins believed, and announced
to the press, that the guerrillas were surrounded. This pusillanimous
showing was typical of many ARVN operations. Diem did nothing to
help. Indeed, wishing to preserve the ARVN intact as the principal
bulwark against a coup, he constantly exhorted his commanders to
avoid casualties.
Second, the Strategic Hamlet scheme, which herded villagers into
areas where they would, in theory,
be immune from Viet Cong
intimidation, proved to be largely a wasted effort. The Viet Cong easily
