308
The Lifeblood of War
accordance with their first principle of rear support; while adhering to
the principles of centralised planning, forward positioning of support
units, and a priority system of supply. Second, they are continuing to
supply the Afghan army; the latter are trained in Soviet methods, and
the success or otherwise of the government will turn to a large extent on
their ability to keep their forces supplied and that part of the
population under their control.
The battle in Afghanistan was, and is, for control of the lines of
communication. At its peak, the combat forces of the Soviet 40th Army
in Afghanistan consisted of 103rd Guards Airborne Division, 201st
Motorised Rifle Division, 5th Guards Motorised Rifle Division, an air
assault brigade, three motorised rifle brigades, two attack helicopter
regiments, two transport helicopter regiments, three motorised rifle
regiments, and a rocket launcher regiment. These amounted to 80,000
men out of the estimated total of 130,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan
at their peak strength. The 40th Army Deputy Commander for the
Rear, with Army Headquarters in Kabul, was responsible for the entire
logistics and supply operation in Afghanistan. He was also responsible
for rear area security, tasking support units, and allocating deployment
areas to these units. He co-ordinated rear area command and control
with the Chief of the Rear of the Soviet Armed Forces in Moscow.38
Centralised planning did not preclude flexibility in the Soviet logistic
system in Afghanistan. Indeed it enhanced it. Soviet logistics were
adapted to meet tactical changes resulting from much experimentation.
As we have seen, the Soviet priority of supply for general war is:
ammunition, fuel, technical supplies, rations, medical supplies and
clothing. This priority was amended to reflect the situation, and
expenditure rates, as follows: fuel, technical supplies, ammunition,
rations, medical supplies and clothing. Mechanical handling equip-
ment, improved palletisation and packaging, and containerisation, all
enhanced the logistic capability of 40th Army. Rear Area Command of
40th Army was also responsible for the support of the Afghan Army,
and a large slice of the civilian population. Virtually every item had to
come from the Soviet Union, including wood for cooking. 39
There were, and are, virtually no railways in Afghanistan.
limited road network was, and still is, subject
The
to ambush and
demolition by the Mujahideen rebels and impassable in winter in many
areas. The Soviet use of both long and short range air transport was
therefore of prime importance. Many outposts depended entirely on
helicopters for supply. However, there was also extensive use of road
transport in areas where this was possible. The characteristics of the
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
309
campaign—a high rate of movement, mainly logistic, and a lower
intensity of combat, led to fuel being the most important commodity,
and so assuming top priority. Fuel consumption was some 30-50 per
cent higher in the mountains of Afghanistan than on the Russian
steppe. To meet this high consumption, the Soviets built a tactical
pipeline from the Soviet Union to Kabul. But convoys of fuel bowsers
and helicopter-lifted pillow tanks were also needed to supplement the
pipeline, and transport fuel to locations in the field. 40
The principle of forward repair also operated in Afghanistan, and
only a minority of vehicles were back-loaded for repair in the Soviet
Union. Damaged vehicle collection points were established whenever
possible. If evacuation was not feasible because of the tactical situation,
every effort was made to destroy the equipment by fire to avoid it falling
into the hands of the Mujahideen. 41
Because of the sensitivity of the Soviets to reports on casualties in
Afghanistan, the medical services received little publicity, and it is
difficult to judge their effectiveness. However, reports were received
that the standards of hygiene of the ordinary Soviet soldier were so low
that outbreaks of hepatitis and dysentery reached epidemic propor-
tions. This led to special measures being taken to control health and
hygiene in Soviet units.42
On
the whole the
Soviet logistic system performed well in
Afghanistan. There were no rear areas, which in itself is not unlike the
Soviet perception of modern combat elsewhere. Sustaining an army of
120,000 men in such a hostile environment, as well as coping with an
upsurge in demand for specialised items such as flak jackets, water
purification tablets, and manpack radios, to name but a few, would
pose a challenge to any logistic organisation. The point is that the
Soviets did not withdraw because they were unable to support their
force in Afghanistan logistically. Their system showed itself to be
inherently flexible.43 The Afghan Army, which has inherited the
system, seems to be confounding those who prophesied a quick
collapse following the Soviet withdrawal. The Soviets learned many
lessons from the Afghan experience,
and no doubt,
using their
analytical system, will discard those they feel inappropriate to a war
against NATO, retaining or modifying those that they judge to be
apposite.
NATO'S SUSTAINABILITY
How much sustainability has NATO? The agreed stock level is
30 d
Many nations do not stock to even that level, but to examine
