Acknowledgements
Shore, is reproduced with the permission of the publisher, The Marine
Corps Historical Center, Washington DC, and the Director of Marine
Corps History and Museums, Brigadier General E. H. Simmons,
USMC (Retd). Major General Lachman Singh Lehl has generously
allowed me to quote from his book Indian Sword Strikes in East
Pakistan, published by Vikas Publishing, New Delhi.
I am grateful to Mr Michael Willis of the Photographic Department
of the Imperial War Museum, and Helen Menzies of the Hulton
Picture Company for their patient assistance in finding photographs to
illustrate the book.
I would especially like to thank Brigadier (Retd) Bryan Watkins of
Brassey's. His profound knowledge of military matters, coupled with
his extensive experience with sword and pen, made working with him a
most stimulating and enjoyable experience. He suggested a number of
textual amendments, all of which have been included.
Jane Harper was a tireless assistant, without her help progress would
have been considerably slower. Her comments and criticisms of the
typescript as it progressed were of inestimable value, as was her support
throughout.
Finally I must emphasise that except where I quote another source,
all the opinions expressed in this book are my own, and I take full
responsibility for them.
Preface
The genesis of this book was back in late 1986, when I was about to
leave the Royal Marines, and Professor Freedman asked me if I would
research and write on the subject of logistics and armed conflict in the
modern age. I readily accepted this offer, which among other things,
would give me the opportunity to join the Department of War Studies
at King's College London, a chance not to be missed. It was also a
challenge to write about something that has attracted so few other
authors, and yet is so central to the success or failure of any campaign.
It was a subject about which I knew nothing during the early part of my
career. It was only after graduating from the British Army Staff College
at Camberley, that I was forced to take an interest in what, hitherto, I
had regarded as something strictly for quartermasters, or blanket
stackers'. I was posted to the headquarters of the Far East Land
Forces, based in Singapore, on the staff of 'Q' Operations, the staff
branch responsible for seeing that the logistic plans and operations in
the theatre meshed in with the operations requirement; and for
directing the efforts of all the theatre logistic services to that end. The
colonel at Camberley responsible for my division commiserated with
me on my ill fortune in not landing one of the more glamorous
operations jobs, and I agreed with him. I could not have been more
wrong.
At the time, the campaign of confrontation with President Sukarno
of Indonesia was reaching its climax, and Q' Operations was kept very
busy indeed ensuring that the supply system responded swiftly to the
many demands. No sooner was the campaign over,
than the
withdrawal from Borneo was in full swing, and, as usual, long after the
captains and kings had departed, the administrative services were still
toiling. Riots in Hong Kong were the next to demand the attention of
