The Lifeblood of War
premium. It could be argued that with a greater use of helicopters, the
need for ferries and bridging equipment, and mine clearing will be
reduced. This is so, and is why the savings to be made by reducing
heavy armoured units, will include the equipment which gives them
mobility; including tank transporters. However, there will be a neea to
lay and clear mines, and sappers and plant will be required for rapid
construction, of helicopter and VSTOL aircraft hides, short strips, fuel
and logistic installations, rapid light bridging (of the Medium Girder
Bridge type that can be lifted in under a Chinook), clearing booby
traps, and in out of area operations, digging wells for water, and
construction tasks, perhaps in support of the civil power. Engineer
brigades would be equipped with plant, and rapid mine dispensing and
mine-clearing systems. As much as possible of these equipments should
be capable of being underslung beneath a heavy-lift helicopter, or
transported by FLA tactran.
Heavy Lift
There would be a need for a heavy-lift helicopter force to be held
centrally for logistic support. Aircrews and maintenance personnel, as
with all other helicopters in support of the land battle, would be
provided by the Army Air Cavalry. But the heavy-lift helicopter force
would be part of the transport of the Royal Logistic Corps (RLC).
Meeting the Cost
The total helicopter requirement for the British Forces would be
about 1,000 compared with about 700 at present. How this increase
would be funded is beyond the scope of this book, but suggested areas
for savings include: dispensing with all main battle tanks; reducing the
size of the Regular Army, including disbanding all Gurkha units;
reducing the size of the Royal Air Force by removing all helicopters,
and re-roling much of the cavalry to fly helicopters; shorter careers for
officers, within a reduced army fewer officers as a percentage of the
total, and less senior officers; reduced naval manpower. If Britain had a
force of around 1,000 helicopters, and not counting the 60 Chinooks
which do not rate as combat helicopters, this would represent 49 per
cent of the number (1900) of combat helicopters, that each group of
countries belonging to the same treaty of alliance, is allowed to station
in Europe under the proposals on CFE, submitted by the member
nations of the NATO Alliance, at Vienna on 13 July 1989.10 The final
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
331
allowance would depend, among other things, upon the political and
military position of the re-unified Germany; the agreements on the size
of her armed forces, and their role.
Time Now for a Radical New Appraisal
While continuing to be stationed in Germany, following withdraw-
als under a CFE agreement, the members of the NATO Alliance should
grasp the opportunity to implement a radical revision of plans for the
employment of the new-look British Army of the Rhine (BAOR), and
some of the other national corps, including changes in deployment
areas. This should be made possible once the withdrawals of portions
of other national contingents have taken place; perhaps one American
corps, the Canadians, a French division and so forth. The present
peacetime location of BAOR is an accident of history; the British were
on the left flank of the Allied advance through North-West Europe, all
the way from the Normandy beachhead in 1944 to the surrender of the
Germans in May 1945. The British Zone of Occupation became the
British deployment area, which it shares with three other corps,
Belgian, Dutch, and West German. Deployed, as was alluded to
earlier, like a layer-cake, with no operational doctrine to bind them
together, these corps offer a would-be attacker the opportunity to
direct his assault at the weaker layers, or between layers. The Soviets
regard the British, Belgian, and Dutch corps as the weaker members,
and the Germans and Americans as the more formidable." Northern
Army Group (NORTHAG), which contains the three weaker corps,
and one strong one, is deployed on the most likely axis for a Soviet
attack. It would make strategic sense to adopt the 'currant bun'
deployment, again alluded to before in this chapter, to balance the
distribution of strength, between Central Army Group (CENTAG)
and NORTHAG, at the same time creating a strong reserve with
excellent mobility; the lack of which has always been one of NATO's
most serious weaknesses.
At present it takes 96 hours to commit a reserve corps to battle, and
while it is moving, on tracks and wheels, across the rear of other corps
to its battle position, crossing their main supply routes (MSRs), it
effectively shuts down their logistic support for up to 36 hours, thereby
endangering the very formations it is endeavouring to support. Moving
on six major routes, and with no enemy interference (a pious hope in
war!), a corps takes more than 24 hours to drive past a point in
columns nearly 400 kilometres long. 12 There is a further problem,
