236
The Lifeblood of War
The Operational Area: A Land of Rivers and Swamps
As the quote at the beginning implies,
Bangla
Desh is an
unpromising country in which to campaign. Most of the country
consists of an alluvial plain formed by the deposits of three great rivers,
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra/Jumana, and the Meghna; and their
numerous tributaries. In the monsoon the bigger rivers are so wide,
they are more like vast, flowing lakes, in places too wide to see from
bank to bank. Even in the dry season they can be up to five miles wide.
The countryside is criss-crossed with a maze of small channels or
nullahs, as they are known on the sub-continent. Even after the
monsoo a, when the larger rivers are flowing within their banks, ans
army moving across country is faced with a seemingly endless
succession of water obstachpuny coss. The soil on the plain, several
hundred feet thick, is a mixture of clay, silt and sand. The water table is
very high, so while the surface appears hard in the winter after the
monsoon rain has drained off, in most places it would not bear the
weight of medium tanks. On the map the maze of rivers is as confusing
as the way in which they change names. On entering Bangla Desh from
Assam, the Brahmaputra becomes the Jamuna. Soon the Brahmaputra
reappears, splitting off from the Jamuna to flow to the East of the
capital, Dacca. The Jamuna joins the Ganges northwest of Dacca; at
which point the Ganges/Jamuna combination becomes the Padma.
The Meghna, having joined Brahmaputra south-east of Dacca, flows
into the Padma. Dacca is at the southern end of a lozenge shaped island
about 150 miles from North to South, and 50 miles from East to West
at its widest point, bounded by the Jamuna, Padma and Brahmaputra
rivers. Numerous small rivers split away from the main rivers to form a
vast
delta of mangrove swamp,
islands and tidal creeks;
the
Sundarbans, on some maps, the 'Mouths of the Ganges'. Apart from
the hills in the Chittagong district, which rise to 1,200 feet, the only
other high ground is the plateau north of Dacca, which varies from 40
to 100 feet in height.
The rivers in Eastern Bengal had played a vital part in the logistic
support of the British in the Burma campaign, and little had changed in
the intervening twenty-nine years. The transport and communications
of Bangla Desh were, and are, shaped by the rivers, which play a major
part in the movement of goods and produce. The local population
depended on boats and ferries for normal movement. Bullock-carts
could be driven across the rivers and nullahs at carefully selected fords.
Most movement was by bullock-cart, bicycle, and motor-cycle.? The
War in a Snipe Marsh
railways and roads roughly conform to the line of the major rivers,
which run generally north-south. East-West movement, other than on
river tributaries, and by ferry, is difficult even in peacetime. In the war,
which was about to begin, the transportation of large numbers of men
and equipment was made infinitely more arduous because so many of
the bridges had been blown by the Mukti Bahini during the resistance
campaign. These random, and unco-ordinated demolitions were
sometimes more of an obstacle to their
deliverers than their
suppressors, and were proof that the Mukti Bahini lacked direction.
The Indians Re-Group
Considerable re-grouping within the Indian Army was necessary
before a campaign in Bangla Desh could be undertaken.
Eastern
Command, which would be responsible for conducting operations, was
geared almost completely for mountain operations in the Himalayan
border region, or for internal security duties in NEFA. The formations
were all mountain divisions, and equipped accordingly; they had no
bridging equipment and no armour. Their artillery was mainly pack or
light towed pieces, unsuitable against concrete pill-boxes and heavily
fortified bunkers which the Pakistan Army had been constructing in
Bangla Desh. Most important, Eastern Command did not have the
necessary transport for logistic support of operations in riverine
terrain. By denuding other fronts, armour, including two regiments of
PT-76 Russian amphibious light tanks, and medium and field artillery,
was attached to Eastern Command. Bridging resources were built up to
allow Eastern Command to lay 10,000 feet of bridging.
A Joint-Service Command
An inter-service joint command was set up in Headquarters Eastern
Command, with Air Force and Naval representation; a new departure
in India, to judge by the comment: 'Unlike in other wars, the Indian
land forces operating in Bangla Desh were not deprived of close air
support while the Air Force fought its own battles in the air.?'s This
command arrangement was to pay dividends.
Pakistani Incursions Into India: The War Begins
By November,
the fighting between the Mukti Bahini and the
Pakistan Army in Bangla Desh had led to several border incursions
