110
The Lifeblood of War
the forward gun. Within an hour, 33 tanks had passed through the
Task Force position, in two waves. The first wave cut the telephone
wire from the infantry to the guns. The radios were wet and functioning
badly, and by 11 a.m. ceased working altogether.
The tanks
approached
the battery, with hatches closed, but
fortunately did not leave the road to overrun the position. The 105 mm
howitzers fired at ranges of 150-300 yards as the tanks went by, but the
shells had little effect. Three bazooka teams from the battery gamely
took on the tanks, but caused no damage. Finally one tank was
immobilised when a 105 mm shell hit its track. By the time the second
wave of tanks approached the battery, most of the gunners were badly
shaken and started to run off the position, leaving only officers and
non-commissioned officers to man the guns. Again, except for disabling
another tank by blowing off its tracks, the HE rounds had little effect on
the tanks. However, this time infantry were riding on some of the tanks,
and the HE shells were very effective in blowing off and killing or
wounding most of them. By 10.15 a.m. the last of the tanks had passed
the battery position. Later it was discovered that they were from the
107th Tank Regiment of the 105th Armoured Division, in support of
the North Korean 4th Infantry Division. By good leadership, Perry
persuaded most of his gunners to return to the battery position. The
battery had destroyed or immobilised four tanks out of the 33, which
was quite creditable considering how little HEAT ammunition they
had, and the ineffectiveness of the bazooka. The tanks had destroyed
one gun, and damaged another, killed or wounded twenty infantry-
men, and destroyed all the marked vehicles behind the infantry
position. Only Perry and one other were wounded in the battery
position.
About an hour later, a column about six miles long, consisting of
trucks and marching infantry, led by three tanks approached the Task
Force position. Later it was confirmed that they were the 16th and 18th
Regiments of the 4th Infantry Division. When they closed to within
1,000 yards, the Americans opened fire with mortars and machine
guns, causing considerable damage and casualties. Artillery fire would
have been more effective, but there was no communication with the
guns, and Smith assumed that the battery had been destroyed. After
attempting a frontal attack, the North Koreans began working round
the flanks. Smith decided that with ammunition running low, he had no
option but to withdraw.
A withdrawal, in daylight, in contact is a very difficult operation at
the best of times, and this occasion was no exception. Task Force Smith
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
suffered its heaviest casualties as it withdrew. Without artillery support
to keep the enemy from harassing the troops as they moved back, the
withdrawal became a shambles. When Smith arrived at the battery
position, he was astonished to find so few casualties and all but one of
the guns in working order. The battery, on being ordered to withdraw,
abandoned their guns, although the vehicles left further down the road
were undamaged. Some of the infantry took off their boots and
abandoned their weapons, in order to run faster. Initially, 185, out of
the 440 infantrymen in the Task Force, and most of the artillerymen got
back to the American lines. A few others trickled in over the following
days.
The Price of Complacency
In company with the remainder of Eighth Army, Task Force Smith
was not mentally or physically prepared for battle, and for that
responsibility lies with the battalion commander, and on up to
MacArthur the Commander-in-Chief. Walker had instituted a training
programme for the Eighth Army in Japan in the summer of 1949, in an
attempt to shake the troops out of the comfortable ways they had
acquired on occupation duty. When the Korean War started, most
units had carried out battalion training, although some had failed their
tests. Higher level training had not been carried out. Nor was the Task
Force logistically prepared. Not only was much of their equipment
obsolete, but no arrangements had been made to resupply small arms
and artillery ammunition. It takes a brave, well-trained, and motivated
soldier to stick it out against armour, without armoured support of his
own. If his anti-tank weapons consistently fail him, he will rapidly see
little point in remaining to hold the position. The responsibility for
ordering the Force to carry out such an impossible task, out on a limb,
with so little support, lies with the commanders in Korea at the time.
The responsibility for allowing the US Army's equipment to reach such
a parlous state stretches back to the department of the Army, and
Congress itself.
As the American troops fought a series of delaying actions, in a
rapidly deteriorating situation, it became apparent to MacArthur that
Eighth Army would have to take over running the war in Korea.
Accordingly,
Walker was appointed ground force commander; but
without being relieved of his responsibilities in Japan. Thus Walker
now found himself coping with a war on one land mass, including all
the ramifications of logistical support, while administering occupation
SONY
