332
The Lifeblood of War
inherent in the time it takes to deploy the reserve corps: the commander
has to decide 96 hours (four days) in advance where he wishes to
commit it. One's only comment is that if the members of the Alliance
seriously believe that this was ever a viable operation of war, then here
is yet another example of collective cognitive dissonance. Airmobile
formations, for the reasons discussed earlier, provide the key to unlock
the problem of increasing the linear speed of armies, which has
remained low hitherto, despite the invention of the internal combustion
engine and the track. So, once rotary-wing equipped, the British
brigades, including the parachute brigades, would be better employed
by being held back as part of an Allied Airborne Army, which
supported by fighter-ground-attack fixed wing aircraft, would move
fast to block and destroy enemy thrusts.
The Need for a Drastic Overhaul of Logistics
What is also clear is that the logistics is a national responsibility
doctrine must change as soon as possible. It never made military sense,
for the reasons explained in the previous chapter. If the currant bun
operational concept is adopted, national formations will be reliant on
each other for support, including logistics, which as was shown earlier,
is not possible even as things stand today. To rectify this, a twin track
approach is required.
Standardisation and Compatibility
First, a far greater emphasis on co-operative defence equipment
manufacturing projects. Costs of equipment should thereby be cut,
which, in itself, is reason enough for going in this direction without
delay. But there are also compelling operational arguments for such a
love.
Without standardised equipment, compatible spares and
interoperability, tighter co-ordination of logistics within the Alliance
can only be marginally improved. The picture in the area of co-
operation has not, up to now, been particularly happy. In the last two
years alone, six major NATO collaborative defence projects have run
into difficulties, mainly through one or more partners dropping out. 13
The sorry state of co-operation within the Alliance is well illustrated by
the lack of any airborne battlefield radar system within the armouries
of any of the nations. The Alliance suscribed to the concept of Follow-
on-Forces-attack (FOFA), to hit the Soviet ground forces well back,
with non-nuclear means. But without airborne battlefield radars to
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
333
identify and locate the enemy while he is well back, the Alliance paid lip
service to the idea, because NATO commanders were effectively
blindfolded and unable to put the concept into practice. The
technology exists to produce a system, or range of systems, but there
has been little progress towards production, although the requirement
has existed for about 15 years. Hand-in-hand with more collaborative
arms production, is the need to develop the industrial means to
produce ammunition in large quantities, at short notice. Stockpiling is
expensive, prone to obsolescence, and may be forbidden by CFE
agreements.
A Tighter and More Integrated Structure
However, the provision of NATO forces with standardised, or
compatible equipment, does not of itself guarantee a co-ordinated
logistics system, able to react to the army group commander's
operational plans, although it will be vastly easier to accomplish than it
is at present.
So the second track, running parallel to greater
collaboration in defence manufacturing, is a need to institute a far
tighter and more integrated structure, to tie up the logistic support of
the Alliance. This will require wholehearted support by all nations in
the Alliance, because it will mean some loss of national control over
resources.
The Emphasis on Reinforcement Rather than Stationed
Forces
The political advantages of smaller, multinational forces stationed in
Germany must not be overlooked. There will undoubtedly be an
increasing resentment among the local population at the continuing
presence of large, high profile national formations. Most of this
resentment can be defused by the deployment covered earlier.
However, if the bulk of national forces are based in their own countries,
rapid re-deployment will be necessary if the concept is to be credible. As
far as the United Kingdom is concerned, the ability to fulfil the
commitment to reinforce the mainland of Europe, would be enhanced
by possessing a largely rotary-wing army, with a substantial airborne
element, and no heavy AFVs. Helicopters can fly across the Channel,
the North Sea, or for that matter across Europe to the Southern Flank,
while shipping for the light mechanised brigades, artillery brigades, and
engineer brigade would be a fraction
of that required for the
reinforcement of BAOR now. We will be turning to intervention
