194
The Lifeblood of War
Chaos on the Move
The troop build-up in that first year was so rapid that it bore all the
hallmarks of an 'off the cuff' operation. The order and counter-order
experienced by the ist Air Cavalry Division, may have been
exceptional, but they illustrate the logistic problems encountered in
moving a formation without adequate shipping and full briefing to all
concerned, to a destination which has not been reconnoitred properly.
The division consisting of over 400 aircraft, mainly helicopters, nearly
16,000 men and over 1,600 vehicles was lifted to Vietnam in the carrier,
USS Boxer, three Military Sea Transportation Service (MATS) ships,
and
several Liberty ships.
Despite
the protestations of senior
commanders within the Division, that loading should be tactical, the
Division was loaded administratively to save shipping, with men and
equipment crammed into ships wherever there was a space. (Tactical
loading demands that men and their equipment,
tanks,
guns,
helicopters, vehicles, travel in the same ship, and that unloading can be
carried out in a sequence that allows every unit to start fighting the
minute it gets ashore). Half way across the Pacific, the commander of
the Air Cavalry Squadron (a nine hundred man strong heliborne
battalion), received a signal from the divisional task force commander
already in Vietnam, telling him to be prepared to fight his way ashore,
on the orders of somebody in Heaquarters United States
Forces
Vietnam. The Squadron's 90 helicopters were in the Boxer and all three
MATS ships. All the vehicles and administrative personnel were spread
among half a dozen Liberty ships, whose position was unknown to
him, and with whom he had no means of communicating. All he had
with him was 600 men and their personal weapons. He set to and made
what plans he could.
When he called on the Master of the ship, to ask him to break out the
scrambling nets so that the men could practice on them, he was
informed that not only were there no nets on board, but that he was
unaware of the sailing destination. Wherever it was, he was convinced
that he would be able to discharge alongside. The commanding officer
of the Air Cavalry Squadron finally persuaded the Master that his
destination was Vietnam, and his port of unloading, Qui Nhon
harbour where there were no facilities for discharging a ship of his size.
Fortunately for the Air Cavalry Squadron, there was no opposition on
the beach, and never had been. Lighters were used to land the troopers
from their ship at her anchorage. 32
It was to take until the end of 1967 before the ten ports used by US
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
195
Forces in Vietnam were fully operational. In 1965, at the most critical
time in the troop reinforcement, deep draught ships could wait up to 20
days for a berth, three years later, the average was less than two days.
The Blessings of Total Air Superiority
Despite the many problems encountered by the logisticians, and
some close calls in 1965 during the build-up, there are no recorded
instances of operations being constrained by lack of logistic resources.
Indeed, supplies were lavish, and the section on subsistence in the
volume on Logistic Support in the Vietnam Studies proudly reports:
'US Soldiers in Vietnam ate well. Ice cream and eggs to order were not
uncommon items at fire support bases. Extensive
use
of large
refrigerators, refrigerator vans, and helicopters permitted the troops in
the field to enjoy garrison type rations on an almost routine basis.
The key to this extraordinary effort lay in the helicopter and the
tactical transport aireraft, the most notable being the Army C-TA
Caribou and Air Force C-123, augmented by the C-130s of the Air
Force. Tactical transport aircraft lifted only slightly less tonnages than
all the helicopters, both Army and Marine 33 Operations which the
French would have found impossible to support logistically ten years
earlier, were made commonplace by the helicopter and tactical
transport aircraft.
Neither would have been effective unless the
Americans had total air superiority. Ground fire both en route and on
landing zones, dropping zones, and airstrips was often a problem, but
the air line of communication did not have to contend with the threat of
inderdiction by fighters. Aircraft, including helicopters, could therefore
fly high to avoid flak, so that there was nowhere in South Vietnam over
which the Americans and their allies could not fly. 34
Road and Rail Movement
Despite the picture of this as a helicopter war, roads and railways
also had a part to play. By mid 1966 Westmoreland directed that more
use was to be made of roads. For example, in 1968, motor transport
moved nearly ten times the tonnages lifted by helicopter. Although the
railway system had been seriously disrupted by the Viet Cong, the
Americans made considerable efforts to repair it and improve its
capacity. Hundreds of thousands of tons of rock and gravel were
transported by rail to airfield and port construction sites, and to road
improvement locations. 35
