256
The Lifeblood of War
and-a-half days to a hospital ship. She was fitted with a helicopter pad,
and had all the public rooms converted to provide an operating theatre,
wards, intensive care unit, burns unit, X-ray department, ophthalmic
department, dental surgery, dispensary and pathology laboratory.
Two special de-salination plants were fitted. Her hull and superstruc-
ture were painted white with large red crosses, and extensive external
lighting was fitted. The 13,000 ton ferry Norland was converted to a
troop ship and fitted with two helicopter pads, flight and communi-
cations facilities, extra fresh water make-up, and RAS gear. One of the
most unusual ships to be converted was the Stena Seaspread, designed
as a 9,000 ton multi-purpose North Sea oil rig support ship. Her new
role was as a forward repair ship, so she was fitted with workshops,
machinery, a mobile crane on deck, extra generators, air compressors,
spares and other stores. Additional accommodation was added for the
Fleet Maintenance teams who were added to her ship's company,
together with messing facilities for 500 men. Two helicopter pads were
titted, and 100 tons of additional ballast. Such was the speed of the
operation, that she arrived in Portsmouth from the North Sea with
divers still in the decompression chamber.
Aircraft Transporters
Four large container ships were converted to aircraft transporters.
First was Atlantic Conveyor (15,000 tons and longer than a light fleet
carrier), converted in 5 days to a Harrier and helicopter transporter.
The main work consisted of clearing obstructions from the upper deck
and strengthening hatch covers, provision of protection from the
elements for aircraft on deck by using containers in the form of pens,
two helicopter landing spots, accommodation for 100 additional
people, and RAS and RO equipment. Fuel cells were installed in the
adapted containers, and provision made for refuelling aircraft on deck,
liquid oxygen for the Harriers, and fresh water for washing down all
aircraft. Atlantic Conveyor was intended as the aircraft repair ship with
a team from the Royal Navy's Mobile Aircraft Repair Transport and
Salvage Unit embarked. The huge space below decks was filled with
stores, including engineer plant and equipment to build an airstrip
within the beachhead in the Falklands, and tents for 4,500 men. It was
the intention that this should be offloaded in the beachhead anchorage
through the stern doors. These had been strengthened to enable them
to be opened at sea and used as platforms for helicopter transfers. Three
further ships, Atlantic Causeway, sister ship to the Conveyor, Contender
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
257
Bezant (18,500 tons), and Astronomer (28,000 tons), were converted in
a similar way, but with increasingly sophisticated facilities.
Beans, Bullets and, Especially, Fuel
Fitting, loading, and despatching ships was only the beginning. At
the height of the war, a total of 26 warships and 54 STUFT were
deployed in the operational area, with a total of 25,000 men ashore and
afloat. Every bean, bullet, and drop of fuel had to come down a line of
communication 8,000 miles long.
Naval spares,
food, and stores
constituted in excess of 900,000 different line items (i.e.: over 900,000
different types of equipment and spares from socks to screws). To
these must be added the lengthy list of land force items. RAS(L) by day
and night enabled ships to remain at sea for weeks without coming off
station. On one occasion a RAS by a Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) fleet
tanker lasted for twenty-six and a-half hours, refuelling a succession of
warships. RAS(L) lasting several hours were commonplace. But the
fleet tankers themselves needed replenishment. The Task Force sailed
on 6 April 1982 with sufficient fuel for its immediate needs. However,
the fuel 'pipeline' 8,000 miles long needed to be kept filled. There were
two problems: to procure a sufficient volume of fuel, and to find
shipping to transport it. The first was solved easily; the glut of oil on the
market at the time enabled the speedy purchase of the necessary large
quantities. Eventually fourteen commercial tankers were chartered to
provide the supply chain. All were fitted to receive the RFA tankers'
abeam rigs, enabling them to replenish from the commercial tankers.
As with fitting helipads, it was not sufficient just to supply the RAS rigs
to commercial tankers; communications fits operated by RFA officers,
and RFA deck and engineering officers were also needed.
Repair of Battle Damage at Sea
Battle damaged ships, 8,000 miles from home need repair if they are
to survive, especially in the great Southern Ocean, the roughest waters
in the world. After South Georgia was retaken, Stena Seaspread
initially called in at the old whaling stations of Leith and Stromness,
abandoned twenty years before. Stromness had been the repair base for
the whale catchers, and there was a wealth of steel and other repair
material for the taking. Stena Seaspread eventually moved forward up
to the Carrier Battle Group operating area.
