146
The Lifeblood of War
was no terrain that the Vietminh would regard as so vital, that it
warranted being held at the risk of the destruction of their Main Force
units. But there was a commodity that was indespensable: rice; as well
as feeding the soldiers and porters, it was the currency in which they
were paid. Goods and services provided by the local communities were
also reimbursed in rice by the Vietminh. He saw that the French
strategy of holding a ring of forts around the Tonkin Delta was a waste
of effort, if nothing was done to pacify the area itself, because the
Vietminh guerrillas controlled it, the millions of people, and, most
important, the huge quantities of rice. If he occupied and pacified the
Tonkin Delta, he could undermine the Vietminh logistically. He would
deny them reinforcements, taxes, and, most important, rice. If he could
starve the Vietminh Main Force, they might have to come out and
fight.
Alessandri set about pacifying a small area at a time; a patch first,
then several patches; linking up patches, and steadily increasing the
spread of patchwork. The French troops held off the Vietminh, while
local non-Communist Vietnamese cleared the patch. Giap responded
by guerrilla war in the Delta. Peasants by day, and guerrillas by night,
the local forces laid ambushes, carried out small attacks, terrorised the
local population, eliminated traitors', and never stayed to fight it out.
Although at first the pacification programme, the first of many in
Vietnam, appeared to be working, it failed. First, there were not
enough French troops to prevent the Vietminh guerrillas from
infiltrating back into a cleared patch; and the French Government
refused to supply more. Second, the French made no attempt to win the
support, and hearts and minds of the Vietnamese people. To them, the
Tonkinese were rice producers, a source of taxes and recruits. The
French had nothing to offer them, except continuing as chattels in a
French colony. The Vietminh had plenty to offer, in the longer term,
independence, but here and now, Vietminh assistance with the harvest,
backed by a constant stream of propaganda; and the ultimate
persuader, threats, kidnapping, and assassination. Alessandri's strat-
egy came very near to its aim of drawing out the Vietminh Main Force.
The reinforcements to the Main Force dried up to a trickle, and rice
supplies to the Vietminh outside the Delta were cut in half. Rations
were reduced to the extent that in some areas the Vietminh faced
starvation. Giap and Ho began to think that a major offensive would
have to be mounted in the Delta, despite it having little chance of
success; but they hung on in the hope that the situation would improve.
They were saved by the event that solved most of their other logistic
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
147
problems: the Chinese Communists closing up to the northern border
of Vietnam.
Ignominious Defeat
The French still hankered after the big set-piece battle in which they
could out-gun the Vietminh, but instead, by the end of 1950, they had
lost, or evacuated, all the posts along the northern border of Vietnam.
In doing so, they handed Giap a logistic prize, huge quantities of food,
clothing, and medical supplies, tons of ammunition, thirteen howitzers,
125 mortars, 940 machine guns, 450 trucks, 4,000 new submachine
guns, over 8,000 rifles, and thousands of gallons of petrol. 10 The
French, besides losing 6,000 men, had handed Giap enough equipment
for a complete Vietminh division. 1 "When the smoke had cleared, says
Fall, the French had suffered their greatest colonial defeat since
Montcalm died at Quebec.'12
Giap Threatens the Delta: The French React Under a
New C-in- C
At the end of the year, Giap posed a threat to the Tonkin Delta, by
moving his divisions south. Carpentier, his morale sagging after the
disasters of the year, contemplated withdrawing to the eighteenth
parallel, only sixty miles north of where the border between North and
South Vietnam was eventually to be. Giap was indeed considering a
quick attack on the Delta, but he realised that his logistic system based
on coolies, was not capable of stocking the new supply points required
for an offensive by the end of 1950. So he postponed the offensive. The
first stage, on 13 January 1951, ended in a defeat for Giap. Despite
Chinese assistance, his men were still short of rice, and his army needed
recruits. The solution to both problems lay in controlling a substantial
area of the Delta. Two other factors led him into an attack on the key
French position at Vinh Yen: the arrival of a new dynamic
Commander-in-Chief, General de Lattre
de Tassigny, and the
increasing flow of American equipment to the French. In the end,
French airpower, including the use of napalm, and the ability to
reinforce by air, and, perhaps, the personal intervention at a critical
stage in the battle by de Lattre, swung the contest in his favour; but
only just. Giap also missed several chances, and did not grasp the
command and control of his divisions firmly enough; he still lacked
practice in the co-ordination of a multi-formation battle.
