58
stage had been achieved in landing techniques and considerably more
needed to be done in a number of areas, from staff work to the
development of suitable ships and craft, before undertaking an assault
against serious opposition. In six days Z Beach achieved an offload of
11,245 deadweight tons, Y Beach achieved 1,204 deadweight tons over
the same period, while X Beach managed only 429 deadweight tons,
albeit in four days; the total offload rate over the three beaches
averaging 2,182.09 tons per day. On the first six days of the Normandy
campaign, before the artificial Mulberry harbours at Port en Bessin,
and Courseulles were functioning, an average of 5,871 deadweight tons
were landed over the three British beaches, a testament to the progress
made in the eighteen months between the two operations. 10
The landings on the three eastern beaches, code named, Apples,
Beer, and Charlie, with the aim of seizing the port of Algiers,
undamaged if possible, were successful. Within eighteen hours of the
first craft touching down, the fighting was over, and Algiers was entered
at dawn the next morning. Again, it was fortunate that the French had
been disinclined to offer much resistance, because the combat team
tasked to assault Beer Beach, actually landed at Apples Beach. The first
man to arrive on Beer Beach was the officer responsible for movement
control, not usually in the first wave of craft! He had landed miles away,
and, having called in at Apples Beach to get his bearings, walked to
Beer Beach; followed three hours later by his assistant and the beach
group who had done likewise. The confusion on this beach was made
worse by a request to give 'absolute priority to the offload of artillery
and anti-tank guns'. This delayed the unloading of all ships, without
speeding up the landing of 'the absolute priority equipments'; the usual
consequence of tinkering with the unloading sequence at the last
minute. Fortunately, the only opposition on this beach was a large
crowd of enthusiastic spectators, whose misdirected efforts at assist-
ance hindered the task of developing and improving beach exits.
The German reaction to the landings was, as always, rapid. The first
manifestation was the bombing of Allied shipping in Algiers bay, soon
after they had sailed in early on D + 1. The Headquarters ship of the
Eastern Task Force was one of the few that entered the port that day,
because worsening weather kept the majority of shipping out in the
bay. Landing craft were unable to reach them because of the sea state,
so unloading was delayed until the following day when the weather
Three Campaigns in a Global War
moderated. By now it was critical to get aviation fuel to the fighters
which had flown into Maison Blanche airfield from Gibraltar; without
it, there would be no fighter cover over Algiers bay and harbour.
Eventually 100 tons of fuel were delivered by the afternoon of D + 2.11
German countermoves were not limited to air attacks. The Allies had
hoped that with the impending surrender of all French Forces in North
Africa becoming increasingly likely, the whole of French North Africa
from Casablanca to Tunis would come under Allied control. They
hoped in vain. As the British 8th Army, fighting a thousand miles to the
east, could have told the Allied Force Headquarters, if they had asked,
that however empty of Germans and peaceful the scene appeared to be,
if they were touched in an area important to them, their response was
swift and violent. They immediately flew troops into Tunis and Bizerta
in an attempt to forestall the French defecting to the Allies. 12 This
move on the part of the Germans transformed the campaign from
virtually a picnic to a tough six month long contest in the rain, mud,
and mountains of Tunisia.
Opening the Ports
To counter the Germans, it was decided to move the British 78th
Division east into Tunisia with all speed, starting on 11 November
(D + 3). This had an immediate effect on the unloading of supplies at
Algiers. Two platoons of transport vehicles already working in the
docks, were re-allocated to 78th Division to assist with their move. The
only replacements available were French commercial chain driven,
charcoal burning trucks. They continually broke down, and were
highly dangerous working among stacks of fuel and ammunition
because they showered red hot sparks indiscriminately. More serious
was the limitation imposed on the maintenance and reinforcement of
78th Division by the distance from Algiers and the single railway line
that ran east into Tunisia. Plans had already been made to sieze the
port of Bougie, 150 miles east of Algiers on 11 November. But this was
not nearly far enough to the east to take the pressure off the railway. So
General Anderson, commanding British 1st Army, who was respon-
sible for this phase of the operation, decided to open the port of Bone.
On 12 November, a combined assault by British commandos and US
Rangers, landing from two destroyers, and a British parachute
battalion, dropping on the airfield, took Bone without any trouble,
forestalling a German parachute operation planned for the same day.
The opening of Bone, and subsequently Philippeville, made a vital
