306
The Lifeblood of War
unfamiliar equipment in the time available. However, stocks of
captured food, fuel, transport, engineer plant, accommodation, and
water are very important ingredients in Soviet logistic planning. They
do not see repair and maintenance of captured vehicles and plant
posing much of a problem over the short period for which they would
be used. Again, their planning is based on Second World War
experience. Donnelly points out that despite the Wehrmacht having a
serious fuel shortage in 1945, in the battle for Berlin almost half the
Soviet Ist Guards Tank Army's fuel was provided from captured
Repair and Maintenance
The repair and maintenance system in the Soviet Army has been
briefly mentioned earlier. It was arrived at as a result of the Soviet
demand that battalions, regiments, and divisions should be highly
mobile with great firepower. They also recognise that rear support is
essential if momentum is to be maintained. So, although the organic
logistic support at division and below is light, considerable support
facilities are concentrated at a higher level, with all the advantages
discussed earlier.
Repair
and maintenance and, as will become
apparent later, medical support, is also centralised to a degree that is
unusual in other armies.
Because they failed to appreciate this, the
Germans in the Second World War underestimated the repair facilities
available to the Soviets on their main axes.34
In designing their repair system, the Soviets have used the analytical
approach noted earlier. One conclusion they have reached is that it will
be very rare for fresh equipment to be fed into their formations at any
level during the course of a battle. The only source of replacement for
damaged equipment will be from operational reserves, or equipment
repaired on the battlefield, or at higher formation. The repair rate
achieved in the Second World War was remarkable. It was not unusual
for a formation to end a battle with more armoured fighting vehicles
(AFVs) than it had at the beginning. Each vehicle having been knocked
out on average two or three times, and each time been repaired to fight
again. Overall figures from 1941-45 show that 60 per cent of all AFVs
bringing armies up to strength just before an operation, and 85-90 per
cent joining during battle, came straight from repair workshops.3s
Within all formations at all levels, there is a reserve of AFVs which can
be deployed to restore the viability of a unit or formation. Repair bases
will be well forward, and move to keep pace.
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
307
Medical
As with equipment repair, medical battalions would be moved to the
areas of greatest casualties. It is Soviet policy to treat casualties as far
forward in the casualty evacuation chain as possible. Although medical
supplies have the lowest priority in the Soviet Army, it is not true, as
was noted earlier, to say that casualties are left to die for lack of a
system. There are medical orderlies at company level, and medical
personnel at every level above. The Russians realise that it is important
to treat the wounded quickly and efficiently, not only to maintain
morale, but also in order to return as large a percentage of treated men
as they can to the battle as quickly as possible.36 The medical
evacuation system is not unlike that practised in Western armies.
A Soviet View of NATO's Equipment Repair Policy
With this equipment repair policy in mind, it is interesting to look at
the equipment design and maintenance practices, and NATO strategy
in the Central Region through Soviet eyes.
They draw three
conclusions. First, in their view, an army whose policy is to withdraw,
or is forced to, will be unable to recover its equipment for repair, and
will therefore lose combat viability far quicker than an advancing army
suffering the same, or greater rate of loss. Second, it is counter-
productive to have equipment that needs much maintenance at unit
level, because in war at high tempo there will not be time to carry out
maintenance. Once this is accepted, equipment can be designed in such
a way that overall costs are cut, and units can be more 'teeth' heavy.
Third, and flowing from the first conclusion, a defensive strategy aimed
at wearing down a Soviet attack, could end in defeat for the defender,
unless his capacity for restoring combat losses greatly exceeded the
attacker's. In Soviet eyes, it is the rate of combat losses which is critical.
Which is why the only capability possessed by NATO which has ever
worried them is a successful mass use of nuclear weapons. 37 If NATO
were to acquire improved conventional weapons well ahead of the
Soviets, that also would cause them considerable concern.
Soviet Logistics in Afghanistan
Before turning to look at NATO sustainability, it is worth glancing
at Soviet logistics in the recent Afghan campaign. It is interesting for
two reasons. First, because it shows that the Soviets are capable of
tailoring their logistic system to reflect the actual situation,
in
