318
The Lifeblood of War
forces, other national contingents must continue to be stationed in
West Germany.
Certain features of the Alliance will probably have to change. It is
likely that for political reasons the strategy of Forward Defence will be
abandoned. Forces stationed in West Germany will have to be
acceptable to the local population. In this respect, multinational
formations have the best hope of acceptability. Furthermore, these
formations benefit smaller nations who find difficulty in providing
large contingents, and at the same time they avoid the singularisation
of Germany. For such forces to make military sense, the smallest
building brick should be brigade or division, with the exception of the
covering force discussed below. Furthermore, interoperability must
become more than just a catchword. There will be a need for logistical
systems, weapons, ammunition and equipment to be standardised, or
at least compatible. Multinational forces will cost money to begin with,
which is why, if they are adopted, there will be no peace dividend.
With the abandonment of Forward Defence, should go the layer-
cake deployment of NATO forces in West Germany, to be replaced by
what has been described as the 'currant bun' deployment. Most
forward would be a multinational Covering or Guard Force consisting
of units from all the present nations represented in the Central Region.
The purpose of this Covering Force would be to signal vigilance and
NATO solidarity. It would require a surveillance and reconnaissance
capability. Further back would be a Rapid Reaction Force consisting
of multinational formations, able to deploy to areas identified by the
covering force. In depth, based well back, in many cases on their own
soil, in Belgium, Holland, France and the United Kingdom, would be
the national formations of the Manoeuvre Force. Finally, Reinforce-
ment Forces would be based in the United States and Canada. Because
the threat of regional conflict in Eastern Europe has increased, an
uprated reinforcement capability outside the Central Region is
required. In addition, the need to reinforce both the Northern and
Southern Regions remain, particularly the latter for reasons which will
be explained later.
In addition, each member of NATO is likely to perceive some threats
through a different set of strategic spectacles from its neighbour, or
allies. There will be threats that are perceived to be common to all, for
which common security measures will be necessary. But there will be
others which will not fall into this category. Some nations may find
common cause therein. For example, the United Kingdom and France,
who is not even a member of the military structure of NATO, as the
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
319
only two European powers with a nuclear capability, and each with a
healthy out of area intervention capability, might wish to pursue a
common theme; different from, although not necessarily at odds with
other European countries. To put it bluntly, we simply do not know
what will happen; not that we ever did. But later in this chapter we will
discuss what and where these threats might be.
The ability to meet the deployment outlined above, pre-supposes
three key elements: mobility, flexibility, and reservists. To meet the
unexpected, a nation must have forces that are flexible. It will be too
late to change organisations, let alone equipment, when the threat
materialises.
design forces for this situation requires a nice
judgement. Let us look at the problem through the eyes of the United
Kingdom.
Focusing on the United Kingdom
If the United Kingdom, as part of a defence alliance, is to maintain its
readiness in the face of growing pressure on defence budgets, coupled
with increasing public demand for force reductions, it is faced with
some questions. Does it strive to improve present systems, in support of
current strategy and operational concepts, including considerable
expenditure on enhancing the key area of sustainability, in which in
company with the rest of NATO it is so weak? As we have seen, modern
war is such a voracious consumer of material, that it is probably
beyond the economic capability of the West to maintain present
standards of living and expectations, and at the same time stock for the
level of sustainability needed to have a chance, using conventional
means, of containing Soviet aggression in Europe, even vouchsafed a
far longer warning time than hitherto. Any Western government
attempting such a policy would be committing political suicide. Does
the United Kingdom, recognising that there are insufficient stocks of
ammunition, to service all the weapons it plans to deploy, reduce 'teeth'
without cutting the present 'tail', thus avoiding the need to increase
stock holdings and turning CFE to its advantage? Does the United
Kingdom do nothing, other than meet NATO CFE proposals? In
which case it should be borne in mind that as presently organised,
forces and equipment withdrawn from Western Europe, and perhaps
disbanded and disposed of, would be impossible to reconstitute, let
alone re-position in time to counter aggression.
There could be
advantages in withdrawing equipment from continental Europe but
not disposing of it. For example, there have been suggestions that the
