The Lifeblood of War
and a war';* to Montgomery: 'during the last war 80 per cent of our
problems were of a logistic nature'. Rather than a lack of knowledge,
the problem may lie in a reluctance to acknowledge the importance of
logistics in war and the need to lay sound foundations for supply in war
while at peace, including a sound set of principles. This is partly what
Thorpe was driving at. While tactical and
abounded, there were no principles to guide the logistician. Some
writers have criticized Clausewitz for paying lip service to logistics.
This is too dismissive. In On War, he has chapters on; 'Camps',
"Marches', 'Billets', 'Maintenance and Supply, 'Base of Operations',
and 'Lines of Communication'. These, like most of the work, draw
heavily on the experiences of Frederick the Great and Napoleon. He
uses lessons from the past to illustrate such problems as the increased
sickness rate in armies that have abandoned tentage in order to
increase their mobility; and the wear and tear on soldiers on long
marches, and in a long war. He outlines four methods of supply; the
advisability of fighting in someone else's territory, and thus eating at
their expense; and recommends that one does not stay too long in one
place lest supplies run out. He mentions the dependency of the army on
its base, and that supply is easier in defence, provided adequate
preparations have been made. The need to make arrangements for
stocks of weapons, ammunition, and equipment is also given a line or
two. It is when he starts philosophising on the relationship between
supply and what we would call the concept of operations, that a note of
what in the British Army is called 'G snobbery'S creeps in.
In his chapter on supply® he asks the question:
. whether war governs the supply system or is governed by it? We would answer
that at first the supply system will govern war insofar as the other governing
factors will permit; but where these start to offer too much resistance, the conduct
of war will react on the supply system and so dominate it'.
Having discussed how many men and animals can feed from given
areas with varying sizes of population, taking into account towns,
roads, rivers and so forth, he launches into another question:
•All this will indicate the general influence that questions of supply can exert on the
form and direction of operations, as well as the choice of a theatre of war and the
lines of communication.
How far their influence will extend, and how much weight should in the final
analysis be attached to the ease or difficulty of supply- those are questions that
will naturally depend on how the war is to be conducted. If war is to be waged in
accordance with its essential spirit with the unbridled violence that lies at its
core, the craving and the need for battle and decision then feeding the troops,
although important, is a secondary matter. On the other hand, where a state of
equilibrium has set in, in which the troops move back and forth for years in the
Principles: The Disciplines of War
same province, subsistence is likely to become the principal concern. In that case,
the quartermaster general becomes the supreme commander, and the conduct of
war consists of organising the wagon trains.
His contempt for commanders who allow such situations to occur
comes through, even in translation from German to English!
It is nevertheless important to remember that these chapters form part
of Book Three, and the whole work, except Book One should be read as
notes, or a draft. Even so Chapter 14 in Book Five is more specific on
supply problems than anything in Jomini. It is conceivable that had
Clausewitz lived to completely revise his work, the chapters which
cover what we would call logistics, would have been revised and the
emphasis changed. He might have given more space to logistics, and
provided more solid data. But this can only be speculation, and there is
a lingering suspicion that logistics would have been relegated to the
blinding glimpse of the obvious department by Clausewitz; '... in
about the same relationship to combat as the craft of the swordsmith to
the art of fencing'?'
Jomini's Definition
Jomini, who had served as a staff officer to Ney in Napoleon's army,
was the first to define the art of logistics. He set down logistics as one of
the six branches of the military art, the other five being; statesmanship in
its relationship to war, strategy or the art of properly directing masses
upon the theatre of war, grand tactics, engineering (the attack and
defence of fortifications), any minor tactics. He does not, however, use
the word in the sense that we would use it today. His definition: logistics
is the art of moving armies. It comprises the order and details of marches
and camps, and of quartering and supplying troops; in a word, it is the
execution of strategical and tactical enterprises® sounds almost right to
modern ears, until we read the chapter on logistics. It then becomes
apparent that he is talking about the whole gamut of staff-work involved
in campaigning. Of the eighteen principal points he includes, less than
half are what we today would call logistical. And when he enlarges upon
some of the points, it is only when he speaks of depots and material, that
he covers matters which a modern military logistician would recognise as
being in his department. In his examples he strays even further from logis-
tics, into the realms of strategy and grand tactics, or the operational art.
The reasons are two-fold. First, by including the phrase it is the
execution of strategical and tactical enterprises' in his definition of
logistics, he is as it were, hooked on his own definition. Second, and
