140
The Lifeblood of War
supply lines and depots; cover which the Vietminh, the Viet Cong and
the North Vietnamese Army used to their advantage. Bamboo, shrubs,
and grass, even in the more open areas, provided numerous excellent
ambush positions and impeded movement. The Ca Mau Peninsula, at
the southern tip of the country, is an expanse of stagnant marshes and
low-lying mangrove forests, impassable except by small boats, and the
hide-out of guerrillas for most of Rounds One, Two, Three and Four.
Diseases flourished: principally, malaria, dengue, cholera, hepatitis
and typhoid. Between 1950 and 1954, about 25 per cent of French
Union Troops were debilitated by schistosomiasis and leptospirosis.
Communications
Vietnam had a number of ports, although as will be explained latei,
not all were fully developed. In Round One, the most important was
the Haiphong port complex, supplying the French. In Round Three the
dependence of North Vietnam on one port complex was a major
military weakness, ready for exploitation by an enemy. The road
system was underdeveloped, mostly tracks. The few main roads were
cut by demolished bridges, in the mountains by landslides, and
everywhere overgrown and potholed. There was one railway line, built
by the French, running from Saigon to Hanoi, and on into China.
Unsurfaced roads quickly became quagmires in the rains. Floods
following rain in the low-lying areas prevented cross-country move-
ment by wheeled vehicles, and even tracked vehicles became road-
bound.
Typhoons endangered shipping at
exposed anchorages,
snapped ship-to-shore fuel lines, and halted unloading. The dry season
brings clouds of dust churned up by helicopters, vehicles, engineer
plant, and aircraft. This permeates everywhere, most significantly
engine intakes and the moving parts of equipment, clogging and
causing damage.
The Early Pattern of the Wars
This is not the place to discuss the years leading up to the start of
Round One, the French/Vietminh war. Until December 1946, the
Vietminh had openly maintained large self-defence forces in Hanoi and
the major cities and towns, and had campaigned on a political rather
than the military front. Suffice it to say that after the breakdown of
political negotiations, because the French were not prepared to grant
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
141
the Vietnamese full independence, the French drove the Vietminh out
of the cities and villages into the mountains and jungles. The French
held the populated lowlands, while the Vietminh withdrew to the Viet
Bac. The French sought to defeat the Vietminh quickly, before war-
weariness at home, the weak economy, and world public opinion
forced them to give up. At the outset the war was one of colonial re-
conquest. It therefore damaged the French in the eyes of their own
allies, principally the Americans, who were suspicious of colonialism.
The war became respectable, indeed even 'sanctified' to use Fall's
expression, when the North Koreans invaded South Korea, and the
French battle with a Communist enemy could be portrayed as part of
an Asia-wide strategy: defeating Communism from Korea to Malaya,
where the British were combating Chinese Communist guerrillas. This
change of perception, which the French politicians did not hesitate to
exploit, invoking the bogeyman of a communist dominated South-East
Asia down to Australia, led to a huge influx of American equipment. It
did not alter more key factors such as terrain and geography,
particularly the ability of the Vietminh to train and find sanctuary in
China from 1949 onwards. From 1953, the cease fire in Korea allowed
the whole Asian communist war effort to concentrate on the struggle in
Indo-China.
The Vietminh wanted a long war to exploit the French weaknesses,
and to give themselves time to build up and equip their forces. In
choosing this strategy the Vietminh were opting to follow a classic
principle of war, perhaps, with surprise, one of two key principles: take
advantage of your own strengths and the enemy's weaknesses while
negating your own weaknesses and the enemy strengths. From 1947,
therefore, the Vietminh tried to avoid major actions involving their
Main Force units, while Regional and guerrilla units harassed the
French. The French strategy, on the other hand was always aimed at
bringing about one big battle which would dispose of the Vietminh
Main Forces once and for all. The main battlefield in Round One was
North Vietnam, the Red River delta and the area to the north and west.
Operation LEA: October 1947
It is worth looking at the first attempt by the French to destroy the
Vietminh main force in October 1947, because it encapsulates the faults
in French strategy and tactics that were to be repeated time and again.
The French commander-in-chief, Lieutenant General Valluy was
under pressure from the government to achieve a quick result. But even
