178
E3 En
EMB
The Lifeblood of War
AININE MARIE
17 Mar (abandoned)
Ет3
GARRIFI LE
15 Mar (fell)
SPARROWHAWKI
Main Airstrip
HUGUETTE
33 33
CLAUDINI
BEATRICE
DOMINIQUE
ELAINE
Ет.3
113 813
E3 13
Auxiliary Airstrip
ISABELLE
03
French strongpoint
Go 3 E Jungle-covered hils
Approximate Scale
3 Miles
MAP IX Dien Bien Phu March 1954.
Kilometres
179
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
Its Flaws
There is nothing wrong with this recipe for defence, provided all the
ingredients are to hand. A number were missing on this occasion. For
reasons which have already been given, the French bunkers did not
have enough overhead cover. So the defenders were pulverised, by the
Vietminh artillery and mortar fire; which caused many casualties and
dazed many of the survivors, reducing their effectiveness when the
attackers closed in. Furthermore, without adequate overhead protec-
tion, the French could not resort to the time-honoured practice of
bringing down their own artillery and mortar fire right on top of their
own positions, to catch the attackers as they milled about looking for
bunker entrances, in the time consuming business of fighting through
and clearing a position. Next, the layout and dispositions that Castries
had chosen, particularly the wide dispersal of his guns, did not always
allow him to concentrate fire where it was needed, nor mount counter-
attacks quickly enough to hit the enemy while they were still off
balance. Finally, the French counter-battery fire was ineffective,
because the Vietminh had not sited their guns in groups, behind hills, in
the conventional manner. They had dug them in on forward slopes,
contravening all the principles taught in every other army in the world,
in single gun emplacements or earth casemates. These could often be
reached from the back of the hill by means of a tunnel. But in almost all
cases, the gun could be pulled back from the firing point if it came under
fire or air attack. The positions were well camouflaged by under-
growth, bushes and trees, which had been left undisturbed. Groups of
guns were defended by anti-aircraft positions similarly sited and
camouflaged. Guns so positioned could be directly aimed at their
targets. Only an army with a vast pool of labour could afford to
construct what Navarre later called a "human ant hill' and make a
shambles of all the estimates of our own artillerymen. It was the major
surprise of the battle'.26
Beatrice
It was a surprise that was not revealed in its entirety until 13 March
1954, when at night-fall,
after an
hour
of fire directed at the
emplacements before last light, Beatrice, held by 3rd Battalion, 13th
Demi-Brigade of the Legion, was hit by two regiments of 312 Division.
By day-break, after a desperate fight, during which the commanding
officer and his entire command post staff were killed at an early stage.
