292
The Lifeblood of War
course we must remember Clausewitz and his 'friction': weather,
terrain, snow, dust, frost, and 'General Mud', will tend to clog the
wheels literally and figuratively, making nonsense of the logistic
calculations of the staffs, without any effort on the part of the enemy.
Erroneous forecasting as to the nature of the battle may have an
equally catastrophic effect. If, for example, having prepared logistically
for a battle of movement, the opposite happens; as was the case in
Russia in July 1941 when Rundstedt's Army Group South, having
loaded its supply vehicles with ammunition and fuel on a ratio of 1:2,
found itself fighting hard and moving slowly, which led to drastic
shortages of ammunition. By 1 August, this Army Group had only
about one sixth or one seventh of its basic ammunition load ®
Alternatively, the Soviet Army Rear Commander who commits his
vehicles to the road loaded with ammunition for a planned artillery
barrage in preparation for a breakthrough will look very foolish if, at
the last moment, no breakthrough is needed, but instead the enemy
withdraws and a rapid pursuit commences, as happened to 6th Guards
Tank Army in Manchuria in 1945.
In the Second World War the Germans were, generally speaking,
better disciplined and less prone to the wasteful habits of the United
States and, to a lesser extent, of the British Armies.
They
were,
therefore, able to exist on far fewer supplies than the British and
Americans. A German division, albeit smaller, consumed 200 tons per
day, compared with about 700 tons per day for a British or American
division. Even so, a major reason why the final German offensive in the
West, in the Ardennes, ground to a halt, was the lack of fuel (although,
at one time, they were, in fact, within a few hundred yards of 3 million
gallons of fuel on the Walmes-Malmedy road, which would have gone
a long way towards solving their POL problem).® Enough of historical
examples.
NATO Logistic Planning
Let us turn to NATO logistic planning as it stood at the time of
writing (Summer 1990). It is not the intention to dwell on the problem
of outloading stocks and moving them and personnel across to
mainland Europe, SACEUR's Rapid Reinforcement Plan (RRP). A
recent study,° concluded that if adequate time is available (some would
say a big if'), the RRP will work; although the figures are impressive,
with 1,000 American sailings to Britain and Europe, 2 million tons of
freight to the United Kingdom and 10.5 million tons of freight and
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
293
1.4 billion gallons of fuel to Europe. However, there are still some
snags. Studies carried out on the effects of activities that would have
had to be carried out concurrently with the RRP, such as the
evacuation of dependants from the British Army of the Rhine, and the
recall of units away on training, at Suffield in Canada and in other
locations, throw doubts about whether the system would have borne
up under the strain. For example, the British national option for
reinforcing Germany with the 2nd Infantry Division in advance of
SACEUR's RRP, might have clashed with the arrival of the III United
States Corps an event that would have tied up a great deal of rolling
stock in Germany during the movement of pre-positioned stocks. It
was not known whether this meant that ist British Corps would have
been unable to load their stocks on to wagons until the American corps
had completed its moves. There was therefore a paradox which could
apply in the future the greater the speed and success with which the
United States reinforced Europe, the greater the potential clash of
priorities.
But on the whole, the staff work has been done, and provided the
potential enemy did not interfere (another big if"), and the weather is
reasonably kind, what is in effect a 'get you in service' logistic plan
would probably have worked. But, one has misgivings that for a plan
made in peacetime, without the pressures associated with planning in
war, the result is not all that convincing. It has that shop window' look
about it which permeates so many NATO plans and activities. Behind
corps' rear boundaries, where the national Lines of Communication of
five member
nations pass through the Low Countries,
with an
alternative through France, the 'tram' lines, are more like a "big bag of
spaghetti, according to a recent Quartermaster General of the British
Army. Having arrived, would the logistic plan have worked when
battle was joined? The first problem was, and is, the lack of a NATO
operational doctrine from which the logistic doctrine should flow. But
the matter of an operational doctrine is outside the scope of this book.
Instead we will ask three questions in the present tense, since, at the
time of writing, the forces were still in place:
a. Is the logistic command and control satisfactory?
b. Is the logistic system satisfactory?
c. What is the sustainability of NATO forces?
Command and Control
First, command and control.
