134
The Lifeblood of War
before the central position fell. Only seventy men from the whole
garrison found their way back to the French forces in Laos. Round one
in the Vietnamese struggle for independence was over. General Giap
had won a crushing victory, and part of his country. The French had
lost the whole of Indo-China' to a man who ten years before had led a
platoon of ragged guerrillas in the jungles just south of the Chinese/
Vietnamese border; a man, who despite his boast to Le Clerc in 1945, I
have been to a military academy—that of the bush and guerrilla war
against the Japanese', had little experience, but learned fast?
Giap was born in 1912, and his early years were influenced by his
father's loathing of the French. In 1924 he entered the Lycée National
at Hue, a recognition of his intellect. At 14, he was exiled to China for
revolutionary activity, where he first met Ho Chi Minh (see below). At
sixteen he returned to Hue as an underground member of the Tan Viet
party, who were almost, but not quite, communists. His part in an
abortive uprising earned him a spell in jail. Here he met the girl who
was to become his first wife. In 1932, the French allowed him to take the
Baccalaureate at Hue, and enter Hanoi university, where he gained a
Bachelor of Law degree.
An avid reader of military history and
communist theory, in his day, he was considered one of the most
brilliant students at the university.
After qualifying he supported himself financially by teaching at a
private high school. A former pupil remembers how he could draw on
the blackboard every battle plan of Napoleon in the minutest detail,
and was known as 'the general'. By this time Giap had joined the
communist party, and when it was outlawed by the French in 1940, he
was forced to flee to China to escape imprisonment. His immediate
family were not so fortunate. His wife and daughter, his father, two
sisters, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law all died in prison, or were
executed by the French before 1943.
In early June 1940, Giap again met Ho Chi Minh, who despatched
him to the Chinese Communist headquarters in Yenan to study politics
and military techniques. But before he arrived, his orders were
changed. Ho Chi Minh, realising that the defeat of the French army in
France would change the situation in Indo-China, told Giap and other
Vietnamese communists in China to return to Vietnam. Here he set up
his first 'self-defence unit', ambushing a few French patrols, assassinat-
ing reactionary Vietnamese officials, and spreading propaganda.
In December 1944, Giap was ordered to form the first of the Vietnam
Propaganda and Liberation Units, the forerunners of the People's
Army of North Vietnam, the North Vietnamese Regular Army. This
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
135
combination of a military and political force was a feature of the North
Vietnamese Army. With these units, Giap began his career as a leader
of organised military forces, and played a leading part in the almost
bloodless seizure of power throughout North Vietnam in August 1945.
It must be emphasised that his military experience at this stage was
miniscule, less than most platoon commanders in Western armies in
1945. Therefore, despite profound study of the great masters of military
strategy, including Napoleon and Lawrence of Arabia, it is remarkable
that he could have propelled himself to the equivalent of a four star
general in the short time he did. It is a tribute to his power of intellect,
ruthlessness, and above all ability to learn, albeit painfully and at great
expense in terms of his soldiers' lives. The strategy for the war he was to
fight was hammered out with Ho Chi Minh and Truong Chinh. The
latter was the Vietnamese communist party's leading theoretician, and
converted Giap to communism in 1937.
Ho Chi Minh was a founder member of the French communist party
in 1920, and went on to form the Vietnam Revolutionary Youth
League among a group of Vietnamese exiles living in Canton. From the
training school for cadres established by Ho Chi Minh in Canton,
graduates returned to Vietnam to organise cells in their home districts.
In 1930 the first attempt at overthrowing French colonial rule in
Vietnam was suppressed with great brutality. In 1941, in a cave in a
remote part of north-eastern Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh founded the
Vietnamese Independence League (Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh
Hoi or Vietminh), aimed at attracting all who opposed the French and
the Japanese, the latter having taken control of Indo-China following
the fall of France. After a spell in a Chinese prison, Ho Chi Minh was
released to take charge of all Vietnamese exiles in China. In March
1945, the United States Army Air Force contacted him to ask him to
provide intelligence and assist in rescuing downed Allied pilots in
return for communications equipment, medical supplies and small
arms. This initial contact was expanded towards the end of the war with
Japan, to include co-operation between the Vietminh and the United
States Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the forerunner of the CIA and
special forces. This OSS/Vietminh co-operation, which on the whole
was not a success, was to lead to French assertions that had the United
States not armed the Vietminh, the guerrilla war would have been
easier to contain; not easy to prove, but an ironic twist in the light of the
subsequent involvement of the United States in Indo-China.
Space does not permit a complete review of the French/Vietminh
war; eight years. But as the title of this chapter implies, it was a war in
