266
The Lifeblood of War
The Logistic Concept
The logistic concept was based on keeping supplies afloat in the
beachhead area in order to save time, ship-shore movement assets
spent in unloading, and to avoid a large dump ashore. Hardstanding
and space was at a premium, even at the most promising location, Ajax
Bay. Furthermore, it was the Brigade Commander's intention to make
maximum use of the sea flank for the movement of supplies, to cut
down on helicopter lift. As part of the re-stow, the Logistic Regiment
loaded two Landing Ships Logistic (LSLs) Sir Galahad and Sir
Percivale with two days' stocks of combat supplies for the Brigade,
mainly ammunition of all natures, packed fuel, and rations. (One day's
supply for the Brigade was based on the Daily Combat Supply Rate,
one DCSR weighed 95 tons). A further four days and sixteen days were
held on RFA Stromness and MV Elk 18 respectively. Once Stromness
had offloaded 45 Commando, she and Elk could, if necessary, be held
off, at the outer edge of the TEZ, until their stores were required. At
which point empty LSLs could steam out to meet them to replenish, or
Stromness and Elk could enter the beachhead and replenish the LSLS
there. This allowed a flexible logistic plan, providing for two possible
landing options, as well as dividing the assets in case one of the LSLS
was sunk. SS Canberra was designated as the Main Dressing Station
for the Brigade. Casualties would be evacuated to her by helicopter,
and subsequently to the Uganda. However, a Field Dressing Station
(FDS) was to be landed, capable of holding casualties for up to six
hours, and carrying out stabilisation and resuscitation of casualties,
should immediate evacuation to the Main Dressing Station from
Regimental Aid Posts (RAPs) be impracticable for operational or other
reasons. This was the grand conception; we shall see how it worked in
practice.
Five LSLs with the majority of the Brigade's logistic personnel, and
the Commanding Officer of the Logistic Regiment embarked, sailed
from Ascension on 30 April. The main body of the Amphibious Group
waited for the arrival of 2 Para Battalion Group, coming south in the
MV Norland, MV Europic Ferry, and a follow-up contingent of the
Commando Logistic Regiment, under the Regimental Second-in-
Command, in HMS Intrepid (the second of the two Landing Platforms
Dock (LPD), the specialised assault ships. Headquarters 3rd Com-
mando Brigade was embarked in
the first, HMS Fearless (see
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
267
FIG. 8.2 LPD docked down, stern gate open, two Sea King helicopters on
flight deck (IWM).
FIG. 8.3 Fork-lift truck and LCU (IWM).
