326
The Lifeblood of War
troopers. These would be from those guards and infantry regiments
retained on the regular establishment.
The logistic services would
amalgamate into a Logistic Corps.
The Reserve Army and a New National Service
The remainder of the infantry would become territorial battalions,
solely for home defence, but not organised as the Territorial Army is
now. There would be a regular cadre of officers and NCOs, but there
the similarity would end.
The bulk of officers, NCOs and soldiers
would be conscripted part-timers, as part of an overall scheme lor
compulsory universal service in a variety of public services, for all men
and women in the country. As far as the new territorial forces were
concerned, after a period of initial training, part-time soldiers would be
required to attend evening drills, week-end camps, and longer periods
of training. These would not, as now, be voluntary events, with the only
sanction being non-payment of bounty for back-sliders, or discharge
for persistent non-attenders.
Offenders would be charged under
suitable legislation, and fined or imprisoned. The period of service
would be for five years.
Officers
Again, as suggested by Simpkin, the officer corps of the Armed
Forces, particularly the Army and Royal Marines, would be drastically
marced to 5 or 6 per cent of total strength, instead of 15 per cent or
more. Handing all helicopters to the Army would not reduce the
overall number of aircrew. However, provided that the Army retained
the NCO aircrew category, it would reduce the officer numbers in the
Royal Air Force, and overall officer aircrew at a stroke. Careers
guaranteed up to fifty-five years of age should be abolished. The notion
of a second, third, fourth, and so on, career is already accepted as
"normal' throughout the nation. There should be more 'sackings' for
culpable failure or incompetence. This would allow fast promotion for
those with real ability. A smaller officer corps, and shorter careers,
should release funds to pay salaries competitive with industry and
commerce, thus attracting first class men and women. There should
also be fewer generals and their equivalent. For example all brigades
could be commanded by colonels, as in the Israeli and German armies.
One argument put forward for retaining such a high proportion of
general officers, or their equivalent ('stars'), is first, to provide a
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
327
worthwhile career structure in terms of status and cash, to aid
recruiting, and second, to persuade the better officers to remain. The
first point is probably lost on potential officer recruits, few of whom
join with their sights set on high rank. Whereas quick promotion for
the gifted few, and good salaries for all, would satisfy both those who
place a higher value on the 'brass' in their pockets than the brass on
their shoulder or sleeve, and those who put job-satisfaction above
monetary reward.
Reducing 'Stars'
The 'star' reduction should start at the top. To have a five-star officer
as Chief of Defence Staff, the only one in NATO, devalues the rank
enough. But to hand a marshal's baton, or its equivalent, to every Chief
of Staff of Navy, Army, and Air Force on retirement, after honourable
but uneventful service, makes a mockery out of a rank that should only
be awarded as a result of successful command of an army, navy or air
force in a protracted campaign of national importance in a major war: a
Wellington, Montgomery, Tedder, or Cunningham. In the recent past,
and increasingly in the future, most, although by no means all, of the
recipients of the marshal's baton, or the naval or air force equivalent,
have not, and will not have commanded so much as a platoon, aircraft,
or ship's boat, in any sort of campaign throughout their career.
Organise for the Most Dangerous Threat
All the formations described below, and the marine commandos,
must be capable of operations at all levels of intensity. It will be noted
that there are no specialist 'Out of Area' troops.
The concept of
formations earmarked and equipped solely for low intensity operations
is a relic of post-colonial days, and is inappropriate in the face of
potential enemies with well trained and lavishly equipped armies. A
formation on the lines of the pre-1982 British 5th Infantry Brigade (see
Chapter 8), has political sex-appeal, because it is cheap. It is of no use in
anything other than an internal security situation; it lacks punch and
staying power for lack of equipment and logistic support.
A Parachute Capability
The rationale for maintaining two parachute brigades is for
operations that require the seizure of an objective beyond the range of
helicopters. The brigades would include light mechanised vehicles, and
