225
Port Said & Port Fuad
224
The Lifeblood of War
GOC Southern Command, to whom Sharon had handed over
command a few months before, chose the pre-prepared site at
Deversoir for the crossing. The plan was approved by General Bar Ley,
plucked out of retirement and his job as Minister for Trade and
Industry, and sent down to oversee Gonen after the debacle of the 8th
October counter-attack.
Deversoir offered three advantages. First, the Great Bitter Lake
would protect the left flank of the crossing. Second, there were better
opportunities for manoeuvre south of Ismailia than to the north of the
town. Finally, this crossing point was near the junction of two Egyptian
armies, and air reconnaissance showed that neither the home nor far
bank of the Canal was occupied at this point. Two bridges were moved
up from their storage sites to a position codenamed Yukon about
15 kilometres from the crossing point. One consisted of a pontoon
bridge in nine sections, each of which could be used to ferry tanks
before being linked up to form a bridge. The other was a prefabricated
span 170 metres long. Before the war, the road to the crossing point
had been prepared with minimum grades and sufficient clearance on
each side to allow bridges and bridging equipment to be moved to the
site. As with other pre-prepared crossing points, the brick surfaced
"yard' was at the end of the access road, just east of the canal.
Operation STRONGHEART
In outline, Sharon's plan for the crossing, codename STRONG-
HEART, consisted of diversionary attacks by the bulk of two
armoured brigades against the southern flank of the Egyptian Second
Army's positions, just north of the Great Bitter Lake; aimed at
deceiving them into thinking that the Israeli aim was to roll up the
defence line from the South. These attacks would also clear the way to
the West Bank of the Canal. This would allow the parachute brigade,
who would be following in half-tracks, to cross the Canal and the
Sweetwater Canal, which runs parallel a few hundred metres to the
West, in rubber boats. Followed by tanks ferried across on pontoon
sections, the parachute brigade would stake-out a bridgehead about
four kilometres square. The pontoon sections and the prefabricated
bridge would be towed by tanks the 20 kilometres from Yukon to the
Canal.
Hard Fighting and a Threat of Failure
The operation, starting on the night 15/16 October, was a success,
but it came close to failure for two reasons. First, the Israeli bridging
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
illery Roac
Secondary
nrust
Firdan e
Firdan Bridge
Cairo
sraeli crossiny
25 Egyptian
Gidi Pass
+- Cairo
To Ras Abu
NOT TO SCALE
Israeli crossing and exploitation
Israeli strong-points (Bar Lev Line)
Israeli cease-fire line
Counter attack by Egyptian 25th Armoured Brigade
MAp X The Yom Kippur War. The Israeli Crossing of the Suez Canal.
