114
The Lifeblood of War
tenuous, thus weakening in fighting power."1 As Eighth Army, until
now made up of three badly mauled divisions, was preparing to fall
back behind the Naktong, reinforcements were arriving from the
United States and Hawaii, in the nick of time. The North Koreans
suffered heavy casualties in men and materiel in the advance and in
their attempts to break through the perimeter in
August and
September. Although American air interdiction of the North Korean
lines of communication was not particularly successful, it was a long
overland haul from Wonsan, where most Russian supplies came in by
sea from Vladivostok, to the Pusan perimeter.
Build-Up
Holding the port of Pusan was the key to the success of the defence of
the perimeter. It was only about fifteen miles behind the crucial
Naktons and Masan sectors of the perimeter. During the period 2-31
July, a total of 309,314 tons of supplies and equipment were unloaded
at Pusan, a daily average of 10,666 tons. During the final half of the
month 230 ships arrived and 214 departed. 12 The airlift of critical
supplies reduced as sealift began to meet demand. Railways also played
trata part. A 'Red Ball Express, using express trains, was organised to
transport urgently needed items, which ran from Yokohama to Sasebo
in a little over thirty hours. Here supplies were loaded aboard ships,
which arrived at Pusan the following morning, under two and a half
days after the supplies had left Yokohama. From Pusan two main rail
routes ran to the railheads behind the battle front. In July, 350 mixed
trains ran to the front, carrying freight and men, and 7i troop only
trains. The trains returning included 38 hospital trains carrying 2,581
sick and wounded, and 158 wagons loaded with personal belongings
stripped off men by their commanding officers in an effort to trim loads
to the essentials needed in battle.! 3 The Korean railways had been built
by the Japanese, an important factor when it came to repair and
replacement. Spares and replacements, including locomotives and
rolling stock, could be air or sealifted from Japan.
The Red Ball Express was so successful (on 25 August it delivered
949 tons) that it eliminated the need for nearly all the airlift of supplies
from Japan to Korea. It was not only far cheaper, but more reliable.
However, this put the Air Force nose so out of joint, that the
Commander Far East Air Force complained to the Army, that they
were not using the Air Force's 200 ton daily capacity. After some
negotiation, a formula was agreed whereby the Red Ball Express would
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
115
SEA OF JAPAN
38th Parallel
YELLOW SEA
100 Km
50 MIs
‹ xx Pusan Perimeter
* American Thrust Lines
American Landings
Corps
MAp IV Korea 1950-53.
