270
The Lifeblood of War
Land over 200 feet (approx
SOUTH ATLANTIC OCEAN
Villes
East Falkland 1982
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
271
However, the number of Argentine air attacks throughout the day led
to the decision that all non-essential ships, including Canberra and
Norland, would be sent out of the anchorage under the cover of
darkness, to join the Carrier Battle Group well to the east. The LSLs
were to remain, offload, and sail to the East on completion. The plan to
use Canberra as a floating FDS had to be abandoned. Before she sailed,
as much as possible of the FDS had to be unloaded to the mutton
factory at Ajax Bay, the only possible place in the beachhead. Norland
offloaded the Parachute Clearing Troop (PCT) of 16 Field Ambulance.
There was insufficient time to get all the medical personnel off
Canberra, and she sailed off with part of a dressing station and a
complete Surgical Support Team (SST). One SST belonging to the
Commando Brigade was still in HMS Hermes, where they remained
until the end of the war. Canberra and Norland also took with them the
unit stores of two commandos and both parachute battalions. They did
not see most of them until after the war was over. These stores ranged
from vital replacement battle batteries,
to first line stocks
ammunition not carried on the men, such as mortar, Milan and
Wombat anti-tank rounds, and a complete resupply of small arms
ammunition. Also in Canberra when she sailed were 90,000 rations,
enough to feed the Brigade for eighteen days. As a consequence the
Logistic Regiment immediately had to start meeting the urgent
demands of units deprived of their own back-up supplies, while at the
same time working round the clock to offload the LSLs and STUFT.
... and Hence on the Final Outcome
Fortunately, on the first day, the Argentine Air Force concentrated
their attacks on the warships in San Carlos Water, and Falkland
Sound. Not one logistic ship, STUFT or troop carrier was hit; had the
Argentines sunk several of these, the logistic situation would have been
very serious; although it is difficult to be specific about what effect such
sinkings would have had on the eventual outcome. Major factors to
take into account in any assessment, would have been the types of ships
sunk or destroyed, numbers of casualties, quantities and types of
supplies lost, how many craft and Mexeflotes were damaged or
destroyed, and the effect these losses had on British public opinion, and
hence on the Government's will to continue the war (the most
damaging to the landing forces would have been substantial losses of
fuel). Once the bulk of the men, equipment, SAMs, and guns were
ashore, with enough ammunition to defend the beachhead, and with
