240
The Lifeblood of War
railway and road communications were much as the British had left
them, as described in Chapter 3, in the section on the Burma campaign,
and the best of these were inside Bangla Desh. However, unknown to
Pakistan intelligence until the end of October, Eastern Command had
improved the existing roads and tracks, and built new ones; stockpiled
supplies; and moved in logistic units.
Pakistani Defensive Measures
Niazi deployed in strength on the western border, opposite Calcutta,
and in the North-West. As more information came in about the Inchan
build up in the East, Niazi built a string of strongpoints on the border
With Tripura; his main concern the vital Dacca-Comilla-Chittagong
road and rail link. The north-east sector was least strongly held. His
policy of holding as much territory as he could, with the bulk of his
forces committed forward in a rigid form of linear defence,
was
probably based on a belief that the Mukti Bahini's aim was to carve out
a belt of territory all along the inside of the border, and follow up by
declaring a liberated Bangla Desh with its own government, as a way of
gaining international recognition. He may have assumed that India
would support this limited plan. He would have done better to have
based his defence on the formidable river obstacles, finally concentrat-
ing on the close defence of Dacca.
The Indian Plan
The Indians well aware that time was not on their side, had to attack
with such speed that the Pakistanis would be unable to fall back on the
great river obstacles, and in particular to Dacca. The rivers Jamuna,
Ganges and Meghna were very wide, and the approaches to them
marshy. If the Pakistanis were allowed to withdraw in good order, they
could turn Dacca into an island fortress. The Indians had an additional
reason for a quick finish to the campaign in Bangla Desh; the mountain
divisions must be back on the frontier with China as soon as possible.
In the past the Indian Army had favoured the set-piece battle, a steady,
phased advance,
with
re-grouping
at appropriate stages.
anticipated a similar approach on this occasion. However, Lieutenant
General Aurora decided that he must get to Dacca within 15 days,
before the Pakistanis could pull back and form a strong defensive
position. His plan was to contain the Pakistan strongpoints on the
border, and by-pass them with mobile thrusts. Each corps would
War in a Snipe Marsh
241
strike in this way, with a minor thrust in the North-East. The objective
of all three corps was Dacca. There was to be no rigid plan, he would
exploit whichever axis looked the most promising. It was a bold
concept to put into effect in terrain so unfavourable for mobile
operations. The Pakistanis were a formidable enemy, at least as good
as the Indians. Success would demand the highest standards of
leadership, skill and logistical expertise.
The Indians Strike
On 4 December the Indian Army struck across the Bangla Desh
border. From east of Calcutta,
2nd Indian Corps thrust for the
Madhumati river, a tributary of the Ganges (Padma) linking it with the
Sundarbans. This would serve two purposes: cutting off the Pakistanis
from withdrawing across the river, and making for Dacca; and cutting
the railway. The Pakistani static defence layout enabled the Corps to
bypass opposition and press on fast. Infantry brigades moved off the
main roads, across the paddy and using small tracks. Local transport in
the form of rickshaws, bicycles and carts, willingly lent by the
population carried some of the immediate supplies. Resupply was by
airdrop. At times the troops ate local produce; harking back to the days
of foraging, except that in this case the Bangla Deshis were only too
happy to provide what they could. Jessore, a stronghold held by an
infantry brigade group supported by tanks, was bypassed in this way.
To everybody's surprise, the garrison fled.
On 33rd Indian Corps front, two brigades struck south, making for
Dinajpur and Rangpur, critical road/rail junctions. 20th Indian
Mountain Division thrust east through the salient opposite the
Pakistan village of Hilli. Some of the strongest resistance by Pakistani
troops was encountered in 33rd Corps's sector. In particular, while part
of 10th Mountain Division raced ahead, having bypassed Hilli, it took
four days of hard fighting to capture the complex of bunkers and pill-
boxes. The Pakistanis had stocked their strongpoints with four weeks
worth of ammunition, fuel, and rations; and had no plans for
resupply.
Logistical Problems
The account by the commander of 20th Indian Mountain Division of
his logistic problems in India before his division started its advance is
interesting. Once in Bangla Desh, the roads were far worse:
