The Lifeblood of War
undisciplined, armed mobs, which at that stage, lacking training, they
were. Eventually, the soldiers of both sides were to become as good as
any in the world. However, Schiebert, an intelligent and energetic
officer, did not lose interest and published a number of accounts on his
return to Prussia. He was particularly impressed by the support given
to the Union Army by the Union Navy, not only tactically with fire
support, but logistically, thereby enabling the Union Army to solve
formidable supply problems. His report on how the Union Army
railway repair battalions (an American innovation), kept the railways
working so efficiently, inspired the Prussians to create a similar Field
Railway Section in 1866. He probably saw more fighting than any of
the other foreign observers, and his studies were wide ranging, and not
confined to the effect of rifled artillery on masonry and iron, on which
he had been sent to America to report.
European Reactions
In Germany
The appearance of Schiebert's main work on the American Civil
War, 29
in 1874, touched off a train of writing and comment in
Germany. There was general agreement with his views, his superiors
being particularly impressed by the significance of Northern industry,
the role of sea-power, and the new technology.
However, by this time, the Germans had been involved in two major
wars of their own, both highly successful from their point of view; the
Austro-Prussian war of 1866, and the Franco-Prussian war of 1870.
Both were short, the former lasted five weeks, and the latter seven and a
half months. Considerable preparation had preceded both campaigns,
so different from the American experience. Schiebert had failed to point
to any lessons of the Civil War that would benefit the German Army,
which in its turn came to the conclusion that they need look no further
back than 1866, when, as they saw it, the needle gun, and Moltke's
strategy, had revolutionised warfare. 3º Furthermore, the problem that
increasingly obsessed the German General Staff, was how to cope with
a two front war, highly likely in the future because of the manner in
which the major powers in Europe were forming alliances. The recipe
for success, they perceived, was thorough preparation, swift mobilisa-
tion to beat the enemy to the 'draw', and relentless prosecution of the
campaign to break the enemy's will in a series of decisive battles. They
had, after all, done just this twice within a period of five years. They saw
little to learn from a war which had started with no preparation, and
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
dragged on for four years
with dozens
of bloody but indecisive
engagements. By 1880, the American Civil War was no longer studied
in the German War Academy. The energies of the Historical Section of
the German General Staff were engaged on producing a multi-volume
history of Frederick the Great's campaigns. These, and Napoleon's
and, of course, Moltke's, were studied at length by German officers.
The battlefields were close at hand, and accessible for staff rides, which
were an important ingredient in the education of every German officer
Who aspired to high rank.
The Germans were not alone in ignoring the American experience.
Brialmont, a Belgian engineer and general, paid lip service to the
defensive power of trenchworks during the American Civil War in his
book on fortifications, devoting most of the contents to analysis of the
campaigns of Condé, Turenne, and Frederick the Great. In one
chapter, 'The Instances of Fortified Fields in Battle', he does
mention one Civil War battle. His examples were taken from the
campaigns of Napoleon or earlier. 31 His recommended system of
defence relied on a liberal distribution of forts over the countryside. He
was the creator of the Belgian forts of Antwerp, Liege and Namur,
which fell quickly in the first few days of war in 1914. The trench
systems which soon appeared on the Western Front, and elsewhere,
proved more difficult to overcome.
In Britain
The British, along with most others, were dazzled by the Prussian
victory over the French, and study of the American Civil War was
dropped from the Staff College curriculum. Only with the arrival of
Colonel Henderson on the scene, towards the end of the century, was
interest rekindled. To begin with, the thrust of Henderson's writing
drew parallels between the American Civil War, fought mainly by
unprofessional volunteers with a leavening of regulars, and the likely
British experience in a future war. He intended his works to provide a
practical guide to tactics for the Volunteers, the forerunners of the
Territorial Army, so that in the event of war, they would at least be
mentally prepared to face an army of better trained continental
conscripts. His best known book, Stonewall Jackson, continues with
this theme, although much wider in scope, and embracing generalship,
