250
The Lifeblood of War
force which he had advised would be required to retake the islands
"without commitment to a final decision as to whether or not it should
sail" ›3
3rd Commando Brigade: Preliminary Moves
While all these preliminary moves were taking place, 3rd Com-
mando Brigade Royal Marines, the force which would have to land and
retake the islands, and without whom the sailing of a task force, except
as a gesture, would be nugatory, were blissfully ignorant that their
services
might be required.
The commanding
officer
of one
commando, it is true, had been warned in vague terms that his
commando might have to travel to the Falkland Islands, to pre-empt
an invasion.
However, he was not allowed to make any preparations, including
Soon the requirement was reduced to a company.
bringing his men to shorter notice, nor was it revealed how the
commando, or the company, would get to the scene. Even in a ship
steaming all the way at 30 knots, the journey would take over eleven
days, and a more realistic time would be fourteen to sixteen days. The
airfield at Port Stanley was too small to take long range transports, and
at that time British C-130 aircraft, capable of landing at Stanley
airport, were not fitted with air-to-air refuelling (AAR) probes. The
only way to Stanley by air would have been via Argentina. Soon the
commando was stood down. Howevet, part of the Commando Brigade
Air Defence Troop, with their Blowpipe shoulder-launched surface-tO-
air missiles, was warned that they might be needed. The problem of
their method of transport to the Falklands was also left unresolved,
leading to facetious speculation that they might travel on Argentine
civilian airlines, posing as musicians, with their Blowpipes in double-
bass cases. By 31 March, the day that the Prime Minister held her
meeting, the Air Defence Troop had been stood down. That evening
the commander, 3rd Commando Brigade returned from a reconnais-
sance in Denmark for a NATO exercise, to be informed, for the first
time, of the orders and counter-orders issued to some of his units over
the preceding two days; and that none of his brigade was required. The
brigade stafi, also unaware of what had been going on in England,
remained in Denmark to complete the reconnaissance. On 1 April,
two carriers, HMS Hermes and Invincible, were ordered to come to
48 hours notice for sea. Third Commando Brigade was still at their
normal seven days notice for operations and starting to go on leave.
Whether deliberate policy or an oversight, failure to issue any kind of
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
251
warning order to 3rd Commando Brigade was unpardonable. Even if a
limited number of key people had been told, the four days before the
Argentine invasion could have been put to good use, and avoided some
of the scramble that ensued, particularly logistically.
The Lack of a Mission, Contingency Plans and Adequate
Warning
On 2 April, the order did come, at first in the form of a telephone call
to reduce the notice of the Brigade to 72 hours, and eventually in a
signal ordering it to load into shipping and sail South with all despatch.
At this stage no mission was given, and the problem of translating
political intent into military action, that was to persist until well after
the landing on 21 May, first reared its head. There were no formal plans
to cater for the possibility of having to retake the Falkland Islands after
their seizure by the Argentines, or anyone else. A contingency plan is
useful because although it is unlikely to provide the planners with all
the data required when the emergency arises, it is quicker to amend an
existing plan than design one from scratch. This particularly applies
when time is short, which was the case with 3rd Commando Brigade,
whose key staff did not return from Denmark until the evening of*
2 April.
Loading: The Price of Expediency
Loading for an amphibious operation is best carried out in the
following sequence: identify the mission, find out as much as possible
about the enemy (intelligence), make the plan, and stow the ships so
that men and loads will come off in the sequence required to meet the
plan. Unlike a peacetime sea-transported move to a port, where the
marrying up of men and equipment can be done on arrival, ships for an
amphibious operation must be combat loaded. Men, their equipment
and ammunition must travel in the same ship, in formed units, thus
enabling them to start fighting without delay on arriving at the beach
or landing zone. The unit must be able to disembark in the right tactical
sequence and grouping. Contrasted with non-tactical, or administra-
tive loading, combat loading tends to make less economical use of the
space available in transporting ships.
No mission had been given, and there was little intelligence about the
enemy. For good political reasons, there was no time to do anything
other than load ships quickly, and get them away as early as possible,
with as sensible a mix of stores and troops as could be achieved based
