204
The Lifeblood of War
of supplies were spewed out of the tailgate. Under their parachutes they
floated down through the haze. Dropping by instruments, the average
error for drops was only 133 metres. If the pilot could see the DZ, it was
even less: 95 metres.
Helicopters and C-123s continued to land at Khe Sanh, despite the
mortaring and shelling and the shooting down of one C-123 on the
approach, killing the four crew and all 44 passengers. The C-1235
needed less than half the strip to land and take off, and were invaluable
for casualty evacuation and flying in reinforcements. Helicopters could
not only land at Khe Sanh, but were also used to supply the hill
outposts, cut off from the main base and too small for paradrop of
supplies. During the siege, 12,430 tons of supplies were delivered by the
Air Force C-123s and C-130s (8,120 tons by paradrop, LAPES and
GPES, 4,310 by aircraft landing at the strip). This is not the complete
picture for deliveries by transport aircraft, because the USMC C-130s
also played a vital part, but their records show the tonnages carried
throughout I Corps area, and do not break down the figures to indicate
the amounts delivered to individual bases like Khe Sanh. In addition
Marine helicopters carried 4,661 tons of supplies, much of which was
delivered direct to the outposts from the Logistic Support Area at
Dong Ha.
The 'Super Gaggle'
The helicopter deliveries to the hill outposts were a triumph of
organisation and an example of the close co-operation that occurs
When a service owns its own air force. The air wings of the United States
Marine Corps (USMC), unlike some air forces in the past, did not
relatiate their strength by conducting a private war wish, bore no
relation to what was happening on the ground. A typical resupply
mission would include 12 CH-46 helicopters, each carrying 4,000 lbs of
supplies underslung. Flak suppression would be provided by 12 A-4
Skyhawk ground attack jets. Four UH-lE gunships flew shot gun'
behind the CH-46s. Control was provided by a TA-4 overhead. All
aircraft were flown by Marines, and the whole effort was nicknamed the
Super Gaggle'.
The timing of a 'Super Gaggle' was critical. The TA-4 pilot initiated
the run. Having flown over the landing zone and judged the cloud base
high enough for the A-4s to provide suppressive fire, he gave the 'go'.
An H-hour would be set, and the 'Super Gaggle' began. Twelve A-4s
would launch from Chu Lai. Simultaneously between 12 to 16
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
205
helicopters would launch from Quan Tri 100 miles to the north. The
helicopters would fly to Dong Ha and pick up their loads, which were
already laid out in nets. The trick was for all aircraft to arrive over the
objective on cue. First the A-4s would hit the enemy flak positions with
napalm and iron bombs. More A-4s would follow spraying tear gas.
Just before the run-in by the helicopters, two A-4s laid a smoke screen
corridor. While the helicopters ran into the landing zone, four A-4s
with bombs, rockets and cannon provided flak suppression. Because of
visibility and hilly terrain, once the heavily-laden helicopters commit-
ted themselves to the run-in, there was usually no chance of turning
back if the flak was not completely suppressed. But the crews could
comfort themselves that following on their heels were the gunships,
ready to pick them up, if they survived being shot down. These tactics
were so successful that only two CH-46s were shot down during the
run-in on 'Super Gaggle' missions; and their crews were immediately
rescued by the escorting gunships. It all sounds more orderly than it
looked:
*Only those who have experienced the hazards of monsoon flying can fully
appreciate the madhouse that often exists when large numbers of aircraft are
confined to the restricted space beneath a low-hanging overcast. Coupled with this
was that the fluffy looking cloud around Khe Sanh housed mountains which ran
up to 3,000 feet Even though the missions were well co-ordinated and executed
with a high degree of professionalism, it often appeared that confusion reigned
because planes were everywhere. A-4s bore in on the flanks of the approach lanes,
blasting enemy gun positions and spewing protective smoke; Ch-46s groped
through the haze trying to find the landing zones; the hornet-like UH- 1E gunships
darted in from the rear in case someone was shot down; the lone TA-4 circled
overhead trying to keep his flock from running amuck."
But madhouse or not, the air supply of Khe Sanh was a far cry from
the gallant but desperate efforts of the French Air Force, dropping
small quantities from C-119s and creaking C-47s, at ever increasing
heights over Dien Bien Phu. American logistic power, coupled with the
fighting spirit of the Marines, enabled the defenders of Khe Sanh to
hold out until relieved, without losing one outpost; and confound the
doom-mongers of the
media,
and
other amateur
generals. The
Americans suffered 205 killed and 852 wounded at Khe Sanh, winning
the battle; the French lost nearly 10,000 men, dead, wounded, and
taken prisoner at Dien Bien Phu.
Giap's Oversight?
One unsolved mystery about Khe Sanh remains. Water for the ba
was largely supplied by the small Rao Quan River which rose?
