160
The Lifeblood of War
Again logistics decided the outcome. Giap was unable to recruit
porters from the Laotians, who were lazy and loathed the Vietnamese.
Because the onset of the monsoon would exacerbate his logistic
difficulties, and, for lack of cover against the rain, jeopardise the health
of his troops, he withdrew to Vietnam in early May. He left elements of
one division to keep the French occupied, to recruit Laotian guides,
and to stockpile rice. Had he been able to capture Na San, which he had
planned for his logistic forward base for the invasion of Laos, it is likely
that he would have had fewer logistic problems; it was not so far to the
east as Moo Chau which he was eventually forced into using for this
purpose. Nevertheless, not only was his invasion a strategic success,
N
FiG. 5.1
French Air Force C-47 unloading Vietnamese soldiers in Laos for
operations in the Plain of Jars 1952 (Keystone).
but also a considerable logistic achievement. His regiments covered
about twenty miles a day on the mountain tracks of Laos. To keep up
with and support them,
200,000 porters
marched over the same
tortuous paths. In the face of this astonishing rate of advance, the
French
dithered, and what Montgomery would have called
"wet
henned about', unable to make up their minds what to hold in Laos,
and what to abandon.
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
161
The French Bait Their Trap
The campaign of winter 1952 and spring 1953, including the invasion
of Laos, confirmed to Giap that his strategy, referred to earlier, was
correct. The French, however, came to different conclusions.
They
rightly perceived that Giap now had the capability to mount a serious
invasion of Laos, and reasoned that the best way to counter this was to
establish a strong base astride Giap's invasion routes. From their
experience at Na Sang, Louang Prabang and Jars Camp, they deduced
that a fortified camp could be supplied by air deep inside enemy
territory, and be made sufficiently strong to hold off any Vietminh
attack. They believed that Giap would attack this camp, as he had at
Na San, particularly if it was across his logistic line of communication.
With careful siting, such a camp might be the bait which would draw
the Vietminh into the great set-piece battle, where their Main Force
divisions would smash themselves to pieces on the rocks of the delence,
while the French Air Force pounded them from the air. They found the
camp, but before they were ready for the set-piece battle. It was in a
small mountain valley, which in English is 'seat of the border county
administration', in Vietnamese, Dien Bien Phu. It led to their defeat
and the loss of Indo-China.
Navarre Relieves Salan and Giap Re-Arms
In May 1953, General Navarre relieved Salan as Commander-in-
Chief Indo-China. He found himself faced with a situation that held few
prospects of an honourable solution, let alone a French victory, Giap
now had an offensive capability of eight or nine divisions. Vietminh
morale was high, staffs were well versed in co-ordinating the activities
of two or more formations, and the Main Force divisions had
American equipment, some of superior quality to the French, thanks to
the Chinese who had captured large quantities from American and
South Korean forces in Korea. Of particular importance, Giap
acquired further supplies of artillery, heavy mortars and anti-aircraft
guns. Although not fully appreciated by the French at the time, Giap
had spent the early part of 1953 improving his logistic capability.
Roads in the Viet Bac were improved, and the Chinese had provided
600 trucks, the majority with Chinese drivers. The force of porters was
expanded until it numbered hundreds of thousands.
In addition to his Main Force troops, Giap had at his disposal about
