6
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez:
The Yom Kippur War 1973
'The desert a tactician's paradise, a quartermaster's nightmare?
Attributed to a German General
The crossing of the Suez Canal by the Egyptian Army and assault on
the Golan Heights by the Syrians on 6 October 1973, took the Israelis
by surprise; a classic case of cognitive dissonance.' Grave mispercep-
tions over Arab intentions, partly a result of overconfidence, led them
into not believing what their intelligence was seeing. The same
overconfidence combined with faulty command procedures resulted in
the Israeli counter-attack, on 8 October, ending in, what has been
called, the worst defeat in the history of the Israeli Army. Labelling it
thus is a comment on the extraordinarily high standards in the Israeli
Army, and its hitherto unbroken record of smashing victories. Most
armies would have called the events of 8 October a set-back; serious,
but not catastrophic. Eventually, after winning a tank battle in the
Sinai, greater than any since the Second World War,? the Israelis
the Can the Canal into "Africa, as they always called the West Bank Of
the Canal. A bitterly fought defensive battle on the Giolan, followed by
a rapid follow-up, ended in the Syrians being pushed back so far
beyond the original frontier that Damascus itself seemed threatened.
This chapter
will concentrate on the Sinai campaign,
because
logistically the Syrian front presented few problems, at least insofar as
the Israelis were concerned.3
The war is interesting logistically for two reasons, both concern
consumption rates; men and supplies. First men; in 19 days of war, the
Israelis suffered more than 11,000 battle casualties, including nearly
3,000 dead. It has been calculated that taking population differences
220
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
221
into account, this represented a loss rate over 30 times as great as the
American loss rate in the Second World War; although Israeli
battlefield loss rates for each unit per day were considerably lower than
comparable American loss rates. It is no consolation that the Arab loss
rates were twice that of the Israelis. A tiny state with a small population
cannot afford to lose manpower at this rate for long. The effect on the
commercial and social fabric of Israeli society, of having so much
human resource tied up in defence is profound enough without the
added burden of high casualties.4,5 Extend the period of conflict, and
the drain on a critical national resource, manpower, might become too
hard to bear. This has always offered a possible strategy for the Arab
states; to fight a long war with the aim of gaining their ends by grinding
down the Israeli will to resist a possibility that the Israelis have not
been slow to recognise. Hence their system of rapid mobilisation and
their strategy of seeking to take the war to their enemy with the aim of
securing speedy victory.
A Questionable Plan
Bearing this in mind, the operation plan adopted by the Israelis for
the Sinai theatre after the war of 1967 was questionable. The Bar Lev
Line, named after the then Israeli Chief of Staff, was neither a trip-wire
nor a heavily fortified system with mutually-supporting positions.® By
seeking to fight as far forward as possible in the Sinai (on the Syrian
border they had no choice), the Israelis were contravening one of the
two great principles of war, alluded to earlier: the need to take
advantage of your own strengths and your enemy's weaknesses, while
negating your own weaknesses and your enemy's strengths. The
Egyptians having brilliantly applied the other enduring principle,
surprise, by crossing the Canal and staying to fight, the Israelis were
forced to supply their forces in the Sinai over a line of communication
200 miles long. Their reservists had even further to go after mobilisa-
tion, and therefore took longer to reach the battle area than their
normal mobilisation plans envisaged.
In this forward battle, the Israelis were largely denied one of their
hitherto decisive weapons, close air support.
Long range Egyptian
surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) were able to engage Israeli aircraft from
the West Bank of the Canal, out of range of Israeli artillery. Shorter
range SAMs deployed on the East Bank, behind a screen of SAGGER
wire-guided missiles and RPG anti-tank weapons, also took their toll
of Israeli aircraft. Against a screen of anti-tank weapons, without close
