182
The Lifeblood of War
example in this book, of underestimation of ammunition expenditure
by commanders and staffs. But any commander with three months to
prepare before he is besieged, who lays in only six days stocks of
ammunition deserves to be censured in the strongest terms. Navarre
and Cogny are also to blame. It is a measure of the deficiencies in the
French logistic system that this was allowed to occur. Air resupply built
up the stocks again, but careful ammunition
conservation
was
necessary thereafter.
The Vietminh used the period to dig over 100 kilometres of trenches,
encircling the main position, and isolating Isabelle. Elaine, Dominique
and Huguette were next on Giap's agenda. Castries withdrew to his
bunker and according to some accounts effectively relinquished
command, although he remained as the channel through which orders
and information passed back and forth between the garrison and
Hanoi. Langlais took over the day to day running of the battle, assisted
some allege, by a 'mafia of parachute and Foreign Legion officers, of
whom the foremost was Bigeard, commanding 6 BPC. Cogny, now
aware of Castries's shortcomings, and in an agony of guilt over his part
in the bungled concept that he could see was leading to disaster,
contemplated parachuting into Dien Bien Phu to take command. He
was rightly dissuaded by his staff.
Bigeard's Attack
All was not gloom at Dien Bien Phu during this time. Bigeard was
Driened by Castries to destroy some nests of flak guns to the west of
Dien Bien Phu. This was probably at the insistence of Cogny, or Nicot
the air commander at Hanoi. Bigeard selected the cream of the garrison
for this enterprise, 6 and 8 BPC, 1 BEP, and a Foreign Legion Infantry
battalion, supported by all the tanks and artillery in the main position,
and air support. The attack was a brilliant success, seventeen flak guns
were destroyed, 350 Vietminh killed, and ten captured; for the loss of
twenty French dead and ninety wounded. Surprise, one of the two
working principles of war, was the key to success. The Vietminh
believing that the garrison was totally demoralised, were caught
napping. However, although the sortie was no doubt good for morale,
the loss was a drop in the ocean to the Vietminh. They had a total of
eighty 37 mm and one hundred 0.50 inch flak guns around Dien Bien
Phu.
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
183
Giap's Phase Two
Phase Two of Giap's offensive started on 30 March and lasted until
30 April. First he aimed to capture the strongpoints on five small hills in
Elaine and Dominique, to the east of the main position. This part of the
battle lasted until 5 April. Giap did not completely succeed in taking all
his objectives, thanks to the self-sacrifice and spirit of the defenders
under the inspiring leadership of men such as Langlais and Bigeard.
The battle ebbed and flowed, as the French fiercely counter-attacked
every Vietminh penetration. At the end of this phase, French radio
intercept heard Giap ordering his rear bases to speed up the flow of
reinforcements to make good his losses. For the French there was a
small reinforcement in the form of 2nd Battalion 1st RCP. They were
dropped at night, using the whole camp as a DZ. There were
surprisingly few casualties. Giap ordered renewed sapper operations to
reduce the distance his assault troops would have to be exposed to
French fire.
From 5 April to 1 May, the battle took on a First World War texture
with waterlogged trenches in all directions, wire, mud, sap and counter-
sap operations. Attacks and counter-attacks were brisk and bloody,
biting off small areas of ground, which changed hands, often several
times. The French succeeded in taking back part of Elaine lost to Giap
at the beginning of April. Giap's attempts to retake it were thrown back
with huge losses. Cracks began to appear in the Vietminh morale,
which is not surprising. By mid April the Vietminh losses at Dien Bien
Phu had reached between 16,000 and 19,000 men, the equivalent of the
rifle strength of the three Vietminh infantry divisions taking part in the
battle. Like the defenders, the besiegers lived in the mud and filth of
flooded trenches. Perhaps the most serious cause of low morale was the
virtual absence of any medical service. To care for 50,000 troops
besieging Dien Bien Phu, the Vietminh had one surgeon and six
assistant doctors. Infection and gangrene must have taken a huge toll in
the unsanitary aid stations, and it is likely that more men died after
evacuation than on the battlefield. Giap responded with orders to
shoot men who refused to attack, pep talks, and moved the equivalent
of two fresh regiments to join him from other areas.
Giap now turned his attention to Huguette, on the west side of the
main position. By 22 April, half of the area had been overrun. This
reduced the size of the camp to about a two kilometre square. Vietminh
flak covered the whole area, and many of the supplies and men droppe
into the garrison fell into enemy hands. By now, 2 BEP, the last form
