136
The Lifeblood of War
which logistics decided the outcome. Giap defeated an army led by
experienced and well trained
generals, and well
supplied with
equipment by the most powerful nation in the world. Nor was the
quality of the soldiers at the disposal of the French generals, the
instruments through which they implemented their plans, a factor in
their defeat. The French Expeditionary Force was composed entirely of
volunteers,
Foreign
Légionnaires, parachute battalions, marines,
colonial battalions, Africans, and last, but not least, Vietnamese units
led by Frenchmen.
Admittedly, the
100,000 strong
Vietnamese
National Army, not to be confused with Vietnamese units in the French
Expeditionary Force, was of little use because of desertion, recruiting
problems, and poor leadership. In 1947, the early part of the war, the
French had about 115,000 troops in all of Indo-China. They were well
equipped, the soldiers were well-trained and experienced. Their leaders
had been tested in battle. However, there was a serious weakness, one
that was to make a significant contribution to eventual defeat. France,
weakened economically and psychologically by her defeat by the
Germans in 1940, rotten at the core, plagued by a seemingly endless
procession of governments, never supported the war wholeheartedly.
Her political leaders lacked the will, and this manifested itself in an
unwillingness to provide enough troops and money.
The Vietminh were numerically superior in North Vietnam, in
Round One the vital area, although the size of their forces was never
exactly known, then, or until the end of the Fourth Round in 1975. But
they probably had about 50,000 in Main Force Units and some
30-50,000 in Regional Forces and guerrillas. * Despite their numerical
superiority, the Vietminh, from Giap to the newest guerrilla, were
inexperienced and under-equipped. They had no artillery, no air force,
no armour, no signals organisation and, above all, no logistic system.
The largest unit was a battalion of about 1,000 men. The Vietminh were
untrained in operations of over battalion size, as were their com-
manders in handling more than one unit. They had four
great
advantages. They were fighting for their own independence, and had
the majority of the populace on their side. This, combined with
excellent propaganda and indoctrination gave the Vietminh high
morale. Second, the large size of the area and the unwillingness of the
French government to supply sufficient troops made control of the
countryside very difficult. If the French tried to control the whole
country, they would be spread in penny packets and defeated in detail.
If they concentrated round the key areas, they abandoned the country-
side to the Vietminh. Third, they had a base area adjacent to China, the
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
137
Viet Bac. Here they had a training area, a potential logistic base and a
safe zone for the Vietminh government. Fourth, the terrain and climate
favoured guerrilla operations and defence. The Vietminh knew the
country and were acclimatised. It is worth digressing for a moment to
look briefly at the geography and the physical and climatic features of
the country, not only do these have an effect on tactics, but also on
logistics.
The War Zone
Indo-China (and in none of the Rounds was the fighting confined
only to North and South Vietnam), is larger than Burma. The
Juxtaposition of Vietnam (where most of the fighting took place), with
Laos, Cambodia and China endowed the Vietminh with priceless
advantages. In Round One, Giap could draw French troops away from
Vietnam by threatening Laos and Cambodia. In Rounds Two and
Three, the inability and unwillingness of these two countries to deny
the North Vietnamese use of their territory, handed
Giap base
sanctuaries and two lines of communication, along which the Viet
Cong and the North Vietnamese operating in South Vietnam could
receive huge quantities of supplies-the Ho Chi Minh trail running
down the Eastern side of Laos and northern Cambodia, and the lesser
known Sihanouk Route from the Cambodian port of Sihanoukville,
where eastern
bloc ships
unloaded supplies,
which were then
transported via Phnom Penh to extensive base areas just inside
Cambodia. The proximity of China on Vietnam's northern border was
even more important, and particularly when the communists arrived
late in 1949. China is a mortal enemy of Vietnam, as she has been
through most of history, but in the period 1949 to 1975, China was
perfectly happy to support the Vietminh, and later,
the North
Vietnamese, if it meant weakening the West, and in particular, the
hated Americans. The Soviets took a similar view, with the added
incentive that a strong, independent, pro-Russian Vietnam would act
as a very effective distraction to the Chinese.
Geography
Vietnam is about 830 miles from North to South, and varies in width
from 50 to 300 miles. Its shape has been described by Giap: stretching
like an immense "S" along the edge of the Pacific, it includes Bac Bo or
North Vietnam, which with the Red River Delta, is a region rich in
