360
The Lifeblood of War
captured, was the second busiest port used by the United Nations (see below for its
unattractive characteristics). The tidal basin built by the Japanese could berth up
to nine shallow-draught ships, but deep-draught ships had to be unloaded into
lighters offshore. Other Korean ports came nowhere near Inchon's capacity.
13.
Badly trained or inexperienced troops will often carry too much when first
committed to battle. The peace-time habit of not carrying a full ammunition load
Without the weight of live
on field training has much to blame for unis.
ammunition, for which blank is a poor substitute, because it is lighter, the soldier
gets a false idea of how much space he can allocate to personal comforts as opposed
to essentials. As he hardens under operational conditions, he finds he can do with
food, water, weapon
fewer and fewer extras, learning to exist with the minimu
and ammunition, and enough clothing and protection from the weather to survive;
this last will vary according to the climate.
+. Appleman, pp. 209-201
5. Gough, p. 24. As noted above, Colonel Curtis claims to have thought of it first
However, if the Inchon landing had been studied, as Curtis claims, all the factors in
its selection should have been available to the planners, obviating the discusious
which took place at various levels when MacArthur proposed the amphibious
hook. Unless, of course, the study had become lost in the mass of paper in
Washington, which sens highly ineficient, but not beyond the bounds of
possibility; and not only in the Pentagon.
16. Appleman, pp. 498-499. There are no beaches in the landing area, only wide mud
flats at low tide and stone walls at high tide. The flats would not support a man on
foot. The main approach from sea is by two channels 50 miles long, and only
36-60 feet deep. The Flying Fish channel, used by big ships is narrow and twisting,
hazardous even in daylight. Tides in the restricted waters of the channel and the
harbour have a maximum range of more than 31 feet. Some of the landing craft
required 23 feet of water to clear the mud flats. The larger landing ships (Landing
Ships Tank LST) needed 29 feet. The Navy settled for 23 feet of tide as the critical
point needed for landing craft to clear the mud flats and reach the landing sites.
This meant that men and supplies could be landed only from the time the incoming
tide reached 23 feet, until the outgoing tide dropped again to that level; a period of
only about three hours. Troops ashore would then be unable to be reinforced until
the next high tide about eleven to twelve hours later.
The combination of the right tide and daylight, needed for the transit of the
channel, occurred only on 15 September, 27 September and 11 to 13 October. The
sea walls that fronted the landing sites were 16 feet high above the mud flats.
Except at high water, these presented a scaling problem. As the first waves would
land before high tide in order to use the last two hours of daylight, ladders were
needed, as were grappling hooks, lines, and cargo nets.
The initial objective of the landing force was to gain a beachhead at Inchon city
(population 250,000). A battalion would land on Wolmi-do, an island which
dominated the approaches to the main landing sites, at 06.30. An eleven hour
pause would follow, to allow the right tidal conditions, before the main landing at
17.30. The Inchon
trea was very heavily built-up. and easily defended.
17. Appleman, pp. 493/495, a message from MacArthur to Washington on 8 Sep-
tember included the following:
The envelopment from the north will instantly relieve the pressure on the
south perimeter and, indeed, is the only way that this can be accomplished
The seizure of the heart of the enemy distributing system in the Seoul area will
completely dislocate the logistical supply of his forces now operating in South
Korea and therefore will ultimately result in their disintegration. Indeed this is
the primary purpose of the movement. Caught between our northern and
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
361
southern forces, both of which are completely self-sustaining because of our
absolute air and naval supremacy, the enemy cannot fail to be ultimately
shattered through disruption of his logistical support
18. Huston, pp. 156-157. Probably no single item of supply received more attention in
the support of operations in Korea than ammunition. Total stocks often fell below
the ninety day level of supply, and sometimes well below the safety scale of sixty
days. There were three contributing factors:
(a) The very high rate of fire needed to break up mass attacks.
(b) That there were no ammunition production lines of any consequence in
the U.S.A. For example, no 105 mm ammunition had been produced since
1742.
(c) It took about 18 months to establish production lines.
19. Appleman, pp. 639-640. For example the Imjin River rail bridge spanned a river
1,600 feet wide, and requird a length of several thousand feet of earth fill in its
approaches. To provide a road bridge across the Han River, seventy C-119 aircraft
flew in a pontoon bridge from Japan. This made up a 50 ton floating bridge,
140 Tect 10шlk.
20. Schnabel, pp. 260-261. Xth Corps staff had prepared a study discussing the
Marine advance which read:
*As the 1st Marines move towards Changjin (Chosin) they will tend to be
extended. The left flank of the Marines will be on the mountainous ridge that
divides the watersheds of the peninsula. It is generally impassable for heavy
military traffic. However prisoner reports show that the 124th CCF (Chinese
Communist Forces) Division entered Korea at Manpojin and is now in the
Chosin Reservoir area. If the 1st Marine Division attacks north beyond this
route well ahead of the Eighth Army it will be vulnerable to attacks on its flank
and rear.
In the light of this assessment, it is difficult to understand why Almond pressed
Smith to advance without due precaution.
Smith had no illusions. Speaking to Rear Admiral Morehouse, the chief of staff
to the Commander Naval Forces Far East, he expressed frank concern over what
he considered General Almond's unrealistic planning and his tendency to ignore
oncilly
capabilities
when he wanted a rapid advance.
In a
letter to the
Commandant of the Marine Corps he admitted that he felt that Almond's orders
were wrong. 'Our orders require us to advance to the Manchurian border.
However we are the left flank division of the Corps and our left flank is wide open?'
He pointed out that there was no Eighth Army unit closer to his flank than eighty
miles south-west. While Xth Corps, according to Smith, could assure him, when it
is convenient', that there were no Chinese on his flank, he observed, 'if this were
true, there would be nothing to prevent Eighth Army from coming abreast of us.
This they are not doing.
21. Schnabel, p. 273.
22.
Ridgway, M. B., The Korean War, pp. 85-87.
23. At this point it is convenient to refer to the non-communist forces in Korea, as the
United Nations forces. By June 1951, all ROK formations were under command of
Eighth Army. The only major non-U.S. or ROK formation was the Common-
wealth Division, made up of British, Australian, Canadian, New Zealand and
Indian formations and units; 24,000 strong at its maximum. At between 4,602 and
5,455 strong, the Turkish contingent was the next largest after the Commonwealth
Division. For similar reasons of convenience the North Koreans and Chinese are
referred to as Communist Forces, unless it is necessary to distinguish between the
24. Schnabel, p. 399.
