156
The Lifeblood of War
operation (code named LORRAINE) started, the parachute force of
three battalions was dropped on to dropping zones across the river
from the objective, Phu Doan. The river craft arrived on cue and began
to ferry the parachute soldiers across to seize the undefended objective.
The leading tanks of the overland element arrived two hours later. All
had gone amazingly well, so far. After a thorough search, the French
found a moderate amount of equipment, but not sufficient to justify an
operation by the equivalent of two divisions. 19 Salan now ordered a
task force consisting of five battalions with strong armoured and
artillery support to push on, still hoping that he could capture a big
supply depot and force Giap to withdraw.
Giap had correctly discerned the French intentions at an early stage
in Operation LORRAINE. He assessed that the main striking force
was road-bound, and that its very size presented a logistic problem to
the French; this would limit the depth to which the French could drive
into the Viet Bac and that they would be unable to reach two key
logistic bases; Thai Nguyen and Yen Bai. He would therefore not react
by withdrawing. He wished to stay in the T'ai country for political
reasons, and to use it as a base for operations in Laos. He gave orders to
his reserve, two regiments, to stop the French advance from reaching
the two bases, at all costs.
Withdrawal and Failure: Logistics Dictate the Outcome
The French task force advanced, with light opposition, to a road
junction about fifteen miles from Yen Bai, left a battle group of armour
and infantry on the junction as a block, and pushed on, finally reaching
Phu Yen Binh, 40 miles from Phu Doan, and almost 100 miles north of
the de Lattre Line. At this stage, Salan ordered the whole LORRAINE
force to withdraw to the de Lattre Line. In bypassing Yen Bai, the
French were admitting to themselves that they did not have the
strength and
resources to take the town, and that Operation
LORRAINE was therefore a failure. Only by taking Yen Bai could they
have forced Giap to withdraw, by not doing so, they as good as told
him that the whole operation was a feint which would not require him
to change his plans. Once again it was the imperatives of logistics which
played a large part in the French decision. The supply of 30,000 men
accompanied by a large number of vehicles, tied up almost the whole
air transport force in Indo-China (about 100 C-47 Dakotas); and
consequently other areas, particularly the forts south of the Black
River, were starved of re-supply. To take Yen Bai would have required
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
CHINA
chiem nod
Na san
O Nov 52
BATTLES OF 1952 & OPERATION LORRAINE
Viet minn attack
MAP VIII
Operation LORRAINE 1952.
157
endears
Son lay t
