278
The Lifeblood of War
was for control of the air, so that large-scale ground operations could
be conducted outside the air defence umbrella. Until then, movement
forward was restricted to a comprehensive reconnaissance programme,
designed to prepare the way for the advance to the high ground,
Including seizing Teal Inlet as an advanced Brigade Maintenance Area.
A Devastating Loss
On the night of 25/26 May, Atlantic Conveyor was due to arrive in
the beachhead, with her valuable cargo, including four Chinook and
five Wessex helicopters, and the engineer plant and equipment
intended for the construction of the airstrip at Port San Carlos. The
heavy lift helicopters would allow the move of the Brigade to the
Mount Kent area to begin the next night. The reconnaissance was in
place, on Mount Kent, at Teal Inlet, and on key high ground
overlooking the route. As the Brigade staff were putting the final
touches to the plan for the move, they were informed that Atlantic
Conveyor had been sunk, only one Chinook, away on a mission,
survived. This helicopter spent the night on HMS Hermes, and few
into the beachhead the next day, although it was not made available for
landing force tasks until 29 May.
With this Chinook arrived a
detachment to support and maintain it. However, the maintenance
they could effect was minimal since they arrived without spares, tools
and documentation; all these were at the bottom of the sea. Two night-
qualified crews came ashore, and they and their one helicopter were to
provide a sterling service.
The aircraft flew 109 hours without
servicing, and carried impressive loads. For example, one Chinook
could lift three 105 mm guns, and 22 soldiers in one sortie. Other loads
included 81 men, all standing up as in the underground in the rush-
hour, and on another occasion, 64 casualties. Four of these aircraft
would have made an enormous difierence to the waging of the land
battle.
The sinking of Atlantic Conveyor was the most serious loss of the
war. Because of the ship sustainability problem alluded to earlier, and
the effects of weather on the landing force, it was essential to bring the
war to a successful conclusion as soon as possible. The means to do so,
trebling the helicopter lift, and the plant and material for speedy
construction of a forward airstrip, were removed at a stroke, as were
large quantities of tentage to provide cover from the elements for the
landing force. Finally, she could have provided a back-up deck in the
event of one of the carriers suffering damage, or at a pinch, acted as a
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
279
carrier, if Hermes or Invincible was sunk. So her loss, while removing
the means to speed up the operation, made an early termination even
more imperative.
The airstrip at Port San Carlos was eventually built, thanks to the
ingenuity of the Royal Engineers, using matting intended for runway
repair at Stanley; a commendable effort without the plant for
construction.
The Land Battle Continues
Notwithstanding these drawbacks, the orders to move out of the
beachhead were not rescinded, and a raid on the settlements of Darwin
and Goose Green, cancelled through lack of helicopter lift was ordered
to be re-mounted and amended to include the capture of these places.
This is not the place to discuss the wisdom or otherwse of the demand
that the two settlements be taken, suffice it to say that it was a diversion
from the aim of getting forward to the high ground west of Port Stanley,
and delayed that move considerably, because during the two nights and
two days that the battle, and the preliminary moves occupied, most
medium lift helicopter effort was diverted in support of the battalion
engaged in the fighting. Nevertheless, a commando and a parachute
battalion moved out from the beachhead on foot, at the same time that
the other parachute battalion set off for Darwin and Goose Green.
Fortunately they were not involved in any fighting, nor did the
Argentines attempt even the smallest attack on the long files of
marching infantry. If they had, the logistic support of troops engaged in
fighting would have been very tenuous. As it was, many men ran out of
rations, not for the last time.
A Damaging Airstrike in the BSA
The logistic support for the Goose Green battle was interrupted by
an Argentine air strike on the BSA, which apart from killing 7 men and
wounding 32, demolished all of 45 Commando's Milan missiles and
firing posts. Of more immediate importance logistically, the air strike
destroyed 200 rounds of 81 mm mortar, and 300 rounds of 105 mm in
netted loads waiting to be lifted down to the gun and mortar positions
supporting the battalion. The outcome was that the battalion's mortars
ran out of bombs at a crucial stage in the battle, and there were grave
shortages of 105 mm ammunition on the gun position, resulting in the
weight of fire laid down being far less than that required to be effective.
The shortfall could not be made good during the battle, in daylight,
