The Lifeblood of War
120,000 men and arrived in Vilna with 30,000. Few were lost in the
fighting. The one logistic problem neither had to face was ammunition
supply. The rate of useage was still low, and was to remain so for
another hundred years.
The War Between the States
The American Civil War is of considerable interest to the student of
the military art in a number of ways. To the contemporary observer
there were four particularly significant pointers to the future, all with
logistic connotations. The first was its context. Two determined
adversaries, with space in which to manoeuvre, reasonably competent
generals, large populations from which to recruit armies, and the
means to equip them, all creating the conditions for a long war. Battles
may be lost by one side or the other, but the war will end only when one
side perceives the impossibility of sustaining its war-fighting capability
in terms either of material, or of the will of its soldiers and population-
in some cases, both. The logistic lack of preparedness of both the Union
and the Confederacy contributed to the length of the war. Each was
able to trade space for time while they armed. Had one side been in a
position to equip a large army on the outbreak of war, and to maintain
it, the advantage so gained might have enabled that side to win the war
more quickly.
The second pointer, which follows from the first, is that after the
industrial revolution, fighting between mass armies recruited from
large populations, even armed with the relatively crude firearms of the
mid-nineteenth century, will result in heavy casualties in men, horses
and equipment. If the arrangements to collect, evacuate and care for
the wounded, including the supply of drugs, nursing staffs and doctors,
do not take account of this, the medical services will be swamped, with
an adverse effect on morale. Systems to replace all these casualties take
time to set up.
Without pre-war logistic planning, the flow of
replacements forward will be held up until the necessary organisation is
put in train. In the days of the Civil War this would have included a
number of measures, for example: the training, equipping and
movement of fresh manpower; a remount procedure, breaking-in new
horses and mules, and the provision of the necessary harness; the
manufacture of the whole range of war material, from large cannon to
the smallest spare part, and the means of delivery into the hands of the
soldier. Now, as then, delays will be further exacerbated if the
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
armaments and equipment industry is slow to gear itself up to meet the
vastly increased demand; even more so if such an industry does not
exist at all and has to be created from the ground up.
Third: the importance of a strategy which takes account of logistics,
not merely one's own, but the adversary's. Lee and Jackson were the
masters of the operational art. But the war was won by the logistic
capability of the North, able to arm and sustain its armies, and
eventually to maintain Grant in his strategy of relentless pressure on
Lee. Grant 'fixed' Lee so he could not detach troops by rail to reinforce
the Confederates facing Sherman in Tennessee and Georgia, and later
in the Carolinas. Sherman was left in overwhelming strength to
demolish the South's vital
railway communications, supply and
manufacturing centre of Atlanta, before cutting loose from his supply
base and advancing on a front 50 to 60 miles wide, feeding his army by
foraging; destroying and confiscating all resources and property that
might be of any military value to the South. Spread over a wide swathe
of countryside, with about a twentieth of his army committed to
foraging, and with an increasing number of stragglers looting, he was in
no position to fight anything other than skirmishes, nor did he have to.
Sherman's virtually unopposed march through Georgia from Atlanta
to Savannah, so beloved of the apostles of the 'indirect approach', and
held by some to have decided the outcome of the war, was made
possible by, and was an adjunct to, the main campaign in Virginia.
Without Grant's unrelenting pressure on the Army of Northern
Virginia from May 1864 to April 1865, Lee could have concentrated
against Sherman, and perhaps defeated him.
Sherman's less famous march, from Savannah, Georgia to Golds-
boro, North Carolina was a far more arduous affair. He marched his
army of 60,000 men a distance of 450 miles in fifty days, of which ten
were allocated to rest. Although he encountered little resistance from
the understrength Confederates under Johnston, his advance was
slowed by heavy rains. He was able to make good use of the Union
command of the sea to shorten his supply line. He switched his supply
base from Savannah 250 miles north to the port of Wilmington, and
subsequently a further 100 miles to New Bern harbour. A railway ran
inland from each, cutting his axis of advance. Johnston's attempts at
concentrating and reinforcing his army by rail, using troops from
Tennessee, were frustrated because he was competing for space on the
lines that were also supplying Lee.
Which brings us to the fourth pointer; in this, the first major war in
which railways played a significant part, the commanders on both sides
