The Lifeblood of War
dissemination resulted in it failing to reach people who might have
taken some action. Although there had been border incursions, and
talk of a North Korean invasion was frequent at intelligence briefings
at United States Far East Command Headquarters in Japan, the
United States was far more concerned with communist activities in
the rest of the world, principally South-East Asia, and especially
Indochina. Because the intelligence picture of a North Korean troop
build-up did not fit the preconceived ideas being held by the United
States Government and its military advisers, it was discounted, with,
as so often happens in this type of situation, plenty of rationalisation.
The reasons ranged from the belief that the South Koreans were
prone to cry wolf, to the assessment that the North Koreans would
continue to employ guerrilla and psychological warfare together with
political pressure, rather than overt use of military forces. Ulti-
mately, it was academic that there was an intelligence failure, because
the United States had no plans to counter an invasion. The only
contingency plan was to evacuate American nationals from South
Korea.4
The Republic of Korea (ROK) Armed Forces were in no state to
hold an invasion by over seven well trained and equipped North
Korean divisions, including 150 T-34 tanks, and supported by a small
tactical air force. The South Koreans had no tanks, no medium
artillery, no heavy mortars, no anti-tank guns, no fighter or bomber
aircraft. Ten old F-51 Mustang aircraft had been delivered that
month, but no South Korean pilot was yet qualified to fly combat
missions. The ROK Army supply of artillery and mortar ammunition
would be exhausted within a few days. As a final piece of self-delusion,
the United States military did not recognise the inferiority of the
ROK Armed Forces and, right up to the day of the invasion, believed
that if the North Koreans attacked they would easily be repulsed by
the ROK Army. This view was shared by no less a person than the
Chief of the United States Korean Military Assistance Group
(USKMAG).
The political and military discussions that eventually reversed the
United States policy not to keep a foot-hold in Korea, following a
personal reconnaissance and report by General MacArthur, the
Commander-in-Chief Far East, need not concern us. Eventually,
permission was given to deploy ground forces from the United States
occupation troops in Japan, as well as the naval and air forces already
sent to cover the evacuation of Americans from Seoul and Inchon.
The four divisions that formed the United States Eighth Army of
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
107
occupation in Japan in 1950, were understrength, undertrained, and
unfit. Their mental and physical state of mind is summed up in the
official history:
... the command was flabby and soft, still hampered by an infectious lassitude,
unready to respond swiftly and decisively to a full-scale military emergency.
The logistic situation was as serious. Out of the 226 recoilless rifles
(RCL, anti-tank guns) on Eighth Army's establishment, they had only
21. Of the 18,000 jeeps and 4 x 4 trucks, 10,000 were unserviceable, and
of 13,800 6 x 6 trucks only 4,441 were in running order. Supplies at
hand in the Far East at the beginning of the war were sufficient only to
sustain troops in peacetime activities for sixty days. Levels in various
supply classes ranged from 45 to 180 days, with the majority falling into
the 45 to 60 day range. Supplies in the pipeline amounted to only a
trickle. While large quantities of equipment from de-activated units
were available, most of this material was unserviceable, and repair
operations could do little more than supply the current needs of the
occupation forces. A significant portion of the repairable equipment
had to be taken back from the Japanese Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, to which the United States Government had given
large stocks of surplus property as a stimulus to the Japanese economy.
Rectifying this situation was made all the more difficult by the repeated
assumption by American policy makers that the Korean War would
end in six months. The attitude of mind of many officials in the United
States to this state of affairs can be summed up by the remark ascribed
to a Pentagon budget expert, when asked how long the war would last
and how much it would cost. 'Oh about two or three months or so. It's
hard to talk about cost at this stage but I would say that it would be
approximately the expense of one or two military exercises. We'll use
up some left-over World War Il ammunition and supplies' Although
the source for this statement cannot be found, and it may be
apocryphal, it is nevertheless accurate in one respect: the age and state
of repair of the ammunition and
equipment, with which the first
American troops went into battle in Korea. This lack of preparedness,
and unwillingness to set matters right with the minimum delay, lay in
the assumptions by military planning staffs after 1945, that the next war
would be a repeat of the Second World War. Build-up would be slow,
with large-scale overseas deployments beginning two
years
mobilisation day. To put it crudely, because the Korean war did not fit
the preconceived idea of what the next conflict would be like, it was not
recognised as being 'the next war',
SONY
