358
The Lifeblood of War
Kelewa taken 2 December 1944.
Shwebo and Ye-U taken 2-10 January 1945.
Mandalay taken 20 March 1945.
Rangoon taken 3 May 1940.
27. S. & T., Vol. II, p.102 gives the reasons:
(a) It was expensive in tonnage, as one-third of the weight was supply
dropping equipment, and the percentage of breakages and losses rose to as
much as 25 per cent.
(b) It was expensive in aircraft, owing to the time spent circling over the
dropping zone, and the fatigue of the plots.
(c) It required a very high standard of training and co-operation from the
pilots.
(d) It took a long time to collect a large drop.
(e) Troops were necessary to protect the personnel collecting the drop and
also possibly as labour.
28. S. & T., Vol. II, p. 100.
29. Terraine, p. 365. In October 1941, on the eve of the British CRUSADER. Rommel
had lost 63 per cent of his supplies crossing the Mediterranean.
30. Kennedy. The Rise and Fall of The Great Powers, pp. 443-444.
31. Army Administration Vol. I, p. 62.
Part Two
Chapter 4: Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
1. Appleman, Roy E.,
The United States Army in the Korean War, South to the
Naktong, North to the Yalu, p. 102.
2. Appleman, p. 488.
3. Schnabel, James F., United States Army in the Korean War, Policy and Direction:
The First Year,
pp. 63-64.
4. Gough, J., US Army Mobilization and Logistics in the Korean War, p. 24, however,
quotes a claim by Colonel Curtis, U.S. Army (Retired), who was in the plans
division of G-4 (Logistics), Army General Staff, stating that in 1948, a series of
logistic studies were prepared that included one for an invasion of South Korea
across the 38th Parallel. According to Curtis, he prepared a strategic concept that
called for a retreat to and defence of the Pusan perimeter, build-up and break-out,
and an amphibious landing at Inchon to cut the enemy supply lines. The purpose of
these strategic logistic studies was to 'ascertain in advance what unusual logistic
requirements could be expected in various potential theatres of operations'. Curtis
claims that other sections of the General Staff concurred in his strategic concept,
but does not make clear whether logistic plans were ever made to support it. Only
thorough archival research will prove whether or not there were logistical plans for
he Korean War. If there were, it seems strange that they were not pulled out and
dusted off. Furthermore, for there to have been such plans, operational plans, or at
cast concepts, would have had to have been written first. The logistician does not,
as a rule, plan in an operational vacuum.
5. Lessons from Korea, 1954 (The Infantry School Fort Benning, Georgia), (TDRC
No. 4259), starts:
The infantry has learned many lessons from its military operations in Korea.
These lessons were learned mainly through mistakes made on the battlefield.
It is enlightening and disheartening-
to note that these errors were often the
same as those described in World War Il combat reports, which suggests that
this article might be more aptly titled "Lessons Relearned in Korea."
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
359
and continues by cataloguing the shortcomings of the United States infantry in
Korea, including: poor standards of training; a universal distaste for night
operations (a shortcoming quickly recognised and seized on by the NKPA and
CCF); lack of discipline; lack of aggressive patrolling; and poor ammunition
conservation. It also notes that for lack of spares, helicopter serviceability was
poor; some aircraft being downed for months, so that out of the five helicopters per
division, it was normal to have only two available.
6. Schnabel, p. 60. Appleman, p. 180, also notes the same in rather more detail, when
discussing the performance of the 24th Infantry Division in the first months of the
war.
'The basic fact is that the occupation divisions were not trained, equipped, or
ready for battle. The great majority of enlisted men were young and not really
interested in being soldiers. The recruiting posters that had induced most of
these men to enter the Army mentioned all conceivable advantages and
promised many good things, but never suggested that the principle business of
an army is to fight
The author's comment on this is to say that recruiting posters rarely portray the
truth in this respect. Herein lies a potential problem in most volunteer armies, or
navies for that matter. A number of British naval ratings when war looked likely in
the Falklands in 1982, were on record as saying that they had not joined the Navy
to go to war! No such remark was recorded in the case of the commandos and
parachute battalions. It would seem therefore that the T'm only here for the beer'
syndrome can be overcome by training. This, of course, is the responsibility of
officers at all levels.
7. Schnabel, op. cit., p. 59. Also Appleman, op. cit., pp. 113/115 for examples of the
shoddy state of U.S. Army equipment, and lack of stocks.
Some vehicles would not start, and had to be towed on to the LSTs when units
loaded for Korea. The worn tyres and tubes were soon destroyed by the rough
Korean roads. The 25th Infantry Regiment reported that it had only 60 per cent of
its establishment of radios, and that four-fifths of them were inoperable. The 1st
Battalion of the 35th Infantry had only one RCL, instead of six; none of its
companies had spare barrels for machine guns, and most of its rifles and carbines
were unserviceable. Some categories of ammunition were in short supply.
There were no C Rations (ration packs designed to be stowed in the soldier's
equipment and provide one day's meals for one man) in Korea, and very small
stocks in Japan. Arrangements were hurriedly made to ship ration packs from the
United States. Meanwhile, the United States troops in Korea existed on Second
World War K rations.
8. Victory, P, The Commonwealth Artillery in the Korean War 1950-53 (TDRC
No. 8137), p. 1.
9. Hastings, Max., The Korean War, p. 85.
10. Appleman, pp. 248-249.
11. For example, in October 1810, Wellington falling back deliberately on the Lines of
Torres Vedras and supplied through the port of Lisbon. And, Rommel operating
at the end of a long line of communication against the British Eighth Army on the
Alamein position in July 1942.
12. Gough, p. 17. Pusan was an excellent harbour with deep-water dock facilities. It
could berth nearly thirty deep-draught vessels, and unload twelve to fifteen LSTs
at once. This produced a daily discharge potential of 40,000 to 45,000 tons, but
problems of cargo handling and inland transportation reduced the actual capacity
to about 28,000 tons daily. Over the period of a year, 1951, the port cleared an
average of 14,000 tons per day (Huston). Masan, twenty miles west of Pusan,
could provide deep-water berthing for only two ships. Inchon, when it was
