196
The Lifeblood of War
Problems of Adjustment
To begin with there
were hiccups, of which the worst was
ammunition supply. Again this was a product of the hurried build-up of
troop levels, staffed by a headquarters that lacked logistic staff officers,
in a country with few facilities. In Vietnam, ammunition was supplied
in push packages; as were other commodities. 36 These were standard
packages made up some years before and based on the Second World
War and Korean War experience. The ammunition packages con-
tained a mix of ammunition designed to meet a pre-determined
expenditure rate. Other packages contained spares, food, clothing and
so on. Each package was tailored to meet the requirements of a
particular unit or formation. As their name implies, these packages
were pushed forward to meet the anticipated demand. The disadvan-
tages of this system were that if demand exceeded what had been
planned, there were shortages, and if expenditure on some ammunition
natures and logistic items was lower than anticipated, there was a
likelihood of storage locations being inundated with
unwanted
supplies.
These problems were aggravated in the
case of the
ammunition push packages in the early days of the American build-up.
When 173 Airborne Brigade arrived at Tan Son Nhut airport and
immediately started operations, they found that not only were they
consuming ammunition faster than the rate for which their packages
were designed, but their packages contained obsolete items such as
3.5 inch rockets, and anti-tank ammunition for guns that were no
longer in service with the US Army. To correct this,
255 tons of
ammunition was flown directly from Okinawa to Tan Son Nhut, using
all the available transport aircraft in the theatre for seven days.
From April to July 1965, the ammunition situation was 'chaotic.
Push packages arrived before units, and units were diverted elsewhere
from their designated disembarkation points, while ammunition piled
Then the beach, or in hired sampans and barges on the Saigon river.
The problem was compounded by the delayed arrival of the necessary
logistic units to manage the procedures for receiving, storing, issuing,
and requisitioning ammunition. Eventually, with the establishment of
Headquarters United States Army Vietnam in July 1965, order began
to appear.37
Air Supply in the Forward Areas
In the early days there was disagreement, mainly within the United
States Army, on how far forward the USAF should supply. This came
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
197
to a head during the 1st Air Cavalry Division's operations to relieve the
ARVN base at Plei Me in the highlands around Pleiku, culminating in
the battles at the River Drang (la Drang), near the Cambodian border.
The first head-on confrontation between American troops and the
regulars of the NVA. At the outset, the divisional commander, Major
General Kinnard, wanted priority call on the USAF to supply direct to
his divisional base at An Khe. But Westmoreland decreed that the
division would use the normal request system. 38 Shorn of the USAF's
logistical support, Kinnard was forced to
send his own cargo
helicopters and Caribous back to Qui Nhon and Nha
Trang,
respectively 50 and 130 miles away, at a time when he needed them all
to lift forward to Pleiku, where his troops were engaged in battle.
On 25 July, as the Ist Air Cavalry Division's operations gained
momentum, Kinnard's Caribous and Chinooks laboured to supply
Pleiku, lifting 513 tons from An Khe, Qui Nonh, and Nha Trang. The
next day, fuel stocks at Pleiku fell to 7,000 gallons, against a daily
consumption rate of 70,000 gallons. On that day (26 July), only 18 out
of the 30 Chinooks in the division were able to fly. Clearly, the scale of
the airift had to be enlarged; particularly as on that same day
Westmoreland ordered the division to seek out and destroy the NVA
retreating from Plei Me; an order which led to three weeks aggressive
airmobile warfare in the la Drang valley. The USAF lift started before
dawn the following day, but consumption outran supply. Within two
days, Ist Air Cavalry Division reported zero gallons of Jp-4 (fuel for all
aviation turbine engines), on hand to support operations'. However,
within three days deliveries reached three-quarters of the daily rate
requested, thanks mainly to the impressive lift capacity of the great
workhorse,
the C-130 which could carry fifteen
500 gallon
fuel
bladders. At first, fuel deliveries were to Pleiku, but soon the USAF
started taking fuel bladders to a four thousand foot long dirt strip at
Catecka Tea Plantation, ten miles forward of Plaiku. This strip became
the division's helicopter Forward Operating Base (FOB) and refuelling
point, thereby drastically reducing the need for the division's Chinooks
to be employed moving fuel bladders from Pleiku to the FOB, releasing
them for other tasks. Ist Air Cavalry Division reported later that the
USAF transport stream into Catecka 'was certainly one of the biggest
Godsends of the whole exercise (sic)
otherwise we would have ha
grind to a halt for lack of fuel' 39 The USAF delivered 5,400
support of 1st Air Cavalry Division, a daily average of 186
which 58 per cent was fuel; an indication of how vorach
helicopter consumes fuel. The success of that operation did
