298
The Lifeblood of War
conventional weapons is increasing. The long war theory is not new,
the Soviets have acknowledged for some years the need for being
prepared for a war that lasts for at least a year. Soviet military scientists
appear to see no contradiction between the anticipation of an extended
conflict on the one hand, and the likelihood on the other, that the new
systems would dramatically increase
the tempo of conventional
operations. They have apparently concluded that the combination of
attrition, interdiction of forward-deploying forces, disruption
of
control, and simply, the increased complexity of operations, may entail
shorter and more intense
battles,
but longer wars. There is no
contradiction in this assumption. Consequently, regardless of whether
the war is nuclear or conventional, 'it is necessary to be prepared for a
long, stubborn, and bitter armed struggle? One could argue that the
recent pronouncements by Mr. Gorbachev, and events in Eastern
Europe, have made this so unlikely as to be no longer worthy of
consideration. However, the NATO military have to prepare to face
the likely enemy's potential to wage war, dealing in capabilities and
possibilities. Whatever Gorbachev says or does, the Soviet General
Staff's duty will be to continue to be planning to fight and win a war.!9
Furthermore, the path of perestroika is a rocky one and even the
boldest optimist would not deny that Gorbachev's own position is
highly vulnerable.
Viability
Assuming that the Soviets retain a war-fighting and offensive
capability, would they propose to support a long war? What is their
Sustainability? There is no such word in the Russian language. The
word most closely equated to the NATO definition is Viability', and
they use it in a much broader context to include (and the list is not
exhaustive): training; the quantity and quality of. weapons and
equipment; the organisation of formations, and the various arms and
services; as well as supply, reinforcements and repair. The word
"Sustainability' carries a connotation of the supplying of material
needs. Whereas in the Soviet Army a whole range of subjects, that in
NATO armies are the exclusive domain of the operational staffs, are
closely integrated with logistics to constitute the viability of the army.
Differences in the Soviet approach to assessing the problem go further
than that. They rely on a scientific system of battle planning to reduce
to a minimum the uncertainties of conflict, in all the disciplines,
including logistics. They also take great pains to use military history, or
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
299
military experience, to analyse wars, post-1941, including the various
Arab/Israeli encounters, the Falklands and their own operations in
Afghanistan. By a combination of historical and technical analysis they
arrive at a detailed and quantitive assessment of battlefield needs,
including the stress of battle on the men.
They
also
have a
comprehensive and common military doctrine, and standing operating
procedures throughout the Warsaw Pact. None of these advantages, as
we have already seen, are enjoyed by NATO.20
Categorisation of Reserves
Based on their past experience, the Soviets divide their reserve stoc
into four categories: emergency, mobilisation, strategic and
reserves. Emergency reserves are located with deployed ground f
and are to be used for the immediate conduct of military operat
Mobilisation reserves are to be used to replace combat losses. Strate,
reserves are under the control of the General Staff, and are not plannec
for early use. State reserves are those resources over and abo
the
stockpiles under military control. Strategic and state reserves
adequate to supply the armed forces continuously until indust
to expand its production and meet wartime demands. Based
Second World War experience, this is likely to be 90 days sur
ammunition, fuel, technical supplies and other items. 21 The expe
enormous. Translated into NATO terms, the cost of one day's wort.
ammunition for 1st British Corps is in the order of £200 million.
The System of Supply
Do they have a supply system? Is it still as reported by Fitzroy
Maclean in 1945?
.. we emerged on to the main road and joined a continuous stream of Red Army
trucks, tanks and guns flowing northwards into battle. One thing in particular
struck us now, as it had struck us from the first, namely, that every Soviet truck we
saw contained one of two things: petrol or ammunition. Of rations, blankets,
spare boots or clothing there was no trace. The presumption was that such articles,
if they were required at all, were provided at the expense of the enemy or of the
local population. Almost every man we saw was a fighting soldier. What they
carried
with them were materials of war in the narrowest sense. We were
witnessing a return to the administrative methods of Attila and Ghengis Khan. 22
Soviet divisions still have a mobile, streamlined, logistic tail. The
bulk of logistic resources are held at Army and Front level, whose
headquarters have the responsibility for supply forward, 'two down' if
