The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
The Lifeblood of War
discovered that although the use of railways speeded up the movement
of troops and supplies, the lines did not always run in the direction that
the commanders would have wished. Soldiers could not fight from the
wagons, and once they de-trained, their speed of movement was at a
foot pace. Likewise, supplies had to be transported from the railhead to
the consumer. How much could be lifted forward, and the time delay
from railhead to soldier, depended on a number of factors, including
the distance to be covered, the road system, or lack of it, and the
quantity and lift capacity of wagons and availability of prime movers-
horses. McClellan's Army of the Potomac in the Richmond Peninsula
campaign of 1862 had intended to use the Richmond and York River
Railroad as the line of communication for the advance on Richmond.
Supplies were landed at the White House on the York River and taken
by rail to the point where they were transferred to wagon to supply the
army. To begin with the operations of the Army roughly followed the
line of the railway, so the railhead was close up behind them. As the
Confederates reacted, particularly after Lee took command, and
summoned Jackson up with his troops from the Shenandoah Valley,
McClellan found himself operating off to one side of his chosen axis
astride the railway. His troops were at times six or more miles from the
railhead, a modest distance. The Army of the Potomac numbered
105,000 men, and 25,000 animals. Six hundred tons of ammunition,
food, forage, medical and other supplies had to be forwarded daily from
White House to the front. After a short rail journey, supplies were
unloaded, without benefit of mechanical handling equipment, on to
wagons for onward movement. The roads were few, mere tracks, often
running with water acting as channels draining the swampy forest that
covered a good part of tidewater Virginia in 1862. When McClellan
realised that far from capturing Richmond, he was being outma-
noeuvred by Lee and Jackson, and in particular his logistics base at
White House was threatened, he decided to shift his base to Harrisons
Landing on the James River. He was faced with the problem of moving
something in the order of fifty to sixty days rations, about 25,000 tons,
to the new location. To his credit, he succeeded but only because the
Union Navy had total command of the sea, and the supplies could be
taken by water.
The inflexibility of a large army tied to the railway for its supplies is
again illustrated by McClellan's situation after the battle of Antietam,
when urged by President Lincoln to advance on Lee's lines of
communication. If Lee were to disregard this menace, and cut in
between McClellan and Washington, Lincoln suggested that the Army
FiG. 2.4 Union logistic base for the Peninsula campaign of 1862 in Virginia
(Mution ricture company)
of the Potomac could turn around and attack Lee in the rear. 22 Lincoln
had failed to realise that Lee had so disposed himself to take advantage
of such a move, and had further taken the precaution of organising a
secondary line of supply; McClellan had not. Depending on a single
railway, the Manassas Rail Road running south-west from Alexandria,
for his supplies, he could not switch his large army on to a new axis as
easily as his President imagined.
Some idea of the measure of
