The Lifeblood of war
tion, caused a waste of limited transport resources and proved that there was
no proper stan contor or pronues.
vale, who went on to become Eisenhower's chief of administration at Supreme
Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) for the invasion of North
West Europe and the subsequent campaign, was not anti-American, although the
tone of the entries in his diary would suggest otherwise. As an outstanains
logistician, ne was outraged at what he saw. On the whole, the Americans were une
worst offenders. But at this stage of the war their army, mostly consisting or not
particularly well trained and disciplined draftees, under inexperienced officers, had
a great deal to learn about the realities of tactics and logistics. Tactically, they
improved to become as good as any under some outstanding generals suen as
Patton, Collins, Ridgeway and Gavin, to name but a few. This was not always the
case logistically. As late as 1944, there were instances, particularly in Patton's U.s.
3rd Army, of employing highly unorthodox methods to obtain supplies, including
hi-jacking trucks and removing the fuel, see Van Creveld, Supplying War, op. cit.,
p. 221 for comments on waste.
10. Dally maintenance means exactly what it says: the ammunition, fuel, food and
other supplies needed to maintain operations on a daily basis. I his will be based on
the size of the force in technical logisue terms.
'the dependancy'), and the
the rates at which.
inticipated intensity and type or operations, and nence
ammunition will be expended, fuel consumed, vehicles and equipment needing
repair or replacement. Almost the only commodity which can be provided for with
absolutely guaranteed accuracy is rations, for obvious reasons.
it the stalls
underestimate the intensity of operations. and are mistaken about the form they
will take, some commodities will run short, and reserves, if there are any, will be
consumed. The rate of build-up of reserve stocks, to meet the higher expenditu
ate of intense operations associated with an offensive, will be critically affected if
there is insufficient margin in the transport system to allow both daily maintenance
supplies and an element of reserve supplies to be lifted forward each day. Hence the
importance of improving the lines of communication from the situation in the first
two months of the campaign when only 3,750 tons a day could be lifted forward,
1,750 tons a day short of the lowest daily maintenance requirement in April, let
dione une need to move a dally average of 2,040 tons of reserve stocks lorward al
ne same ume.
17. S&T Vol. 1, p. 283. As an aside it is interesting that the standard resupply of 1/tn
United States Airborne
Division at the Khine Crossing in March 1945, was
270.54 tons a day, of which ammunition of all natures including mortar and gun
immunition for guns up to 10 mm callbre, made up 214.94 tons, l.e. 19 per cent
immunition. (HQ lst Allied Arborne Army Report on Operation VARSITY, The
Rhine crossing—
Appenaix Kesupply and Casualty Evacuation).
o. terraine, p. 594, and p. 598. He is quoting here from Air Historical Board/
II/116/22 p. 111, and Appendix to Air Historical Board/II/117/11(A), as well as
Slessor, The Central Blue. A recent re-assessment of the effects of Operation
STRANGLE (Edward Male, New Look at Strangle, Military Affairs, Vol. 52, No.
4, October 1980, pp. 1/6-184), does not undermine Slessor's argument, summar-
ised in his hnal sub-paragraph. Research by Male shows that the Germans faced
serious logistic problems, but admits that STRANGLE did not achieve what it set
out to do: to force the Germans to abandon Rome for lack of supplies. He offers the
following reasons:
1 ne
Hilles.
Lnot for the first or
last time-
author's comment .
inderestimated the German reaction, which included making most of their
noves at night. On one occasion Von Senger moved the whole of his Corps
across the entire front of German 14th Army, to check the advance of the
357
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
U.S. Vth Corps. On another the Herman Goering division made a move by
laylight in response to an urgent operational situation, and air attack falled to
stop them.
(b) The Allies overestimated the supply requirements of the Germans, who
were able to exercise economy measures, particularly in rear units.
(c) here was no co-ordination between Allied ground operations (DIA-
DEM), and air operations (STRANGLE), to ensure that maximum pressure
was exerted at a time when the enemy was having maximum logistical
ficulties.
(d) The Allies underestimated the road transport available to the Germans.
Jally transport returns, passed by signal and picked up by ULIKA, only
included ngures for divisional and corps transport. Keturns giving ngures or
oad transport under the control of the headquarters of the two field armies,
lUth and 14th, were not passed by signal, and were not, therefore, picked up
by the intercepis.
(e) Bad weather grounded the medium bombers for at least half the time.
(t) Finally, the terrain favoured the defence, and delaying actions, which could
be conducted without high ammunition expenditure.
Therefore there was no collapse of the German logistic system, despite it being
virtually defenceless against air attack, having almost no fighters, and fak
protection only around a tew strategic bridges.
19. The British found themselves in the same position on the Western Front in the
period 1914-17, and indeed to a lesser extent until the end of the First World War.
1o begin with, they were so vastly inferior numerically to the French that there was
no question of pursuing a private strategy, they simply lacked the means. From
1917, following the French Army mutinies, and the need for the British to shoulder
the major burden of the offensives on the Western Front, they had more say in
strategy, but were not in any sense able to conduct it in isolation.
20. Admin. Planning, p. 40. 'The absence of a decision during most of 1944 was to
present a series of administrative (logistic) problems that seemed almost insoluble.
In fact, during this period the Principal Administrative Officers Committee on
more than one occasion deemed it necessary to warn the Chiefs of Staff that, unless
a decision could be given, there was a risk that the necessary administrative
preparations could not be made for either course in time.'
The Principal
Administrative Officers Committee was a sub-committee of the British Chiefs of
Stall, consisting of the Fourth Sea Lord, the Quartermaster General, the Air
Member for Supplies and Organisation, and a representative of the Civil
Ministries. They were responsible for advising the Chiefs of Staff on all inter-
service logistics matters, except personnel, medical, and legal.
21. Transportation, p. 180. Because of the Japanese threat in early 1942, Calcutta was
virtually closed as a port for a time, throwing an additional burden on the other
ports and railways in India.
22.
Admin. Planning, p. 42.
23. Admin. Planning, p. 79. The roads to the Arakan front were also difficult to build.
There is a story, probably apocryphal, but nevertheless making the point, that
when the Quartermaster General (a four star general), visited the Arakan front in
1944, on leaving his car at the road-head, he was informed by the Corps
Commander of the order that everyone going forward was required to carry a
basket of bricks to help in the making of the road; he complied.
24.
25.
Movements, p. 420.
Wingate is alleged to have decreed that: "no patrol is ever to report that the jungle is
impenetrable, until they have penetrated it.'
26. S. & T., Vol. II, p. 93 gives the following dates for the progress of 14th Army:
