12
The Lifeblood of War
and camels, that accompanied armies as they grew in size and
sophistication. In summer, these
animals soon overgrazed the
immediate area of the army, creating the need for foraging patrols to be
sent progressively further and further afield. In winter, grain had to be
provided from local resources or brought in. In one of the last wars in
which animals still played a leading part, the First World War, whilst
the British shipped 5,253,538 tons of ammunition, including over
170,000,000 shells, to France, the greatest single item shipped consisted
of 5,438,602 tons of oats and hay. In this respect, the First World War
was no different from the wars of antiquity, although it differed vastly in
another logistic aspect, a huge increase in ammunition supply, thereby
heralding a new era of warfare.
Alexander The Great of Macedon
Philip of Macedon, and his son Alexander advanced the art of
logistics considerably. Philip, realising the limitations imposed on his
mobility by large numbers of pack mules and wagons to carry baggage
and supplies for the soldiers and their women, made the soldiers carry
their own kit and some rations, and banned the women. His example
was followed by Alexander, and, two hundred and fifty years later, by
the Roman consul Marius, whose soldiers called themselves 'Marius's
Mules'2,3. Other armies in Alexander's time eased their soldiers' loads
by providing a large baggage train of carts and pack animals,
accompanied by drivers and other followers, including forage cutters,
women and, in that pre-birth-control age, hordes of children. The load
carried by Alexander's soldiers only marginally reduced their daily
mileage and some of that load could be dumped when fighting; as
modern infantry divest themselves of rucksacks before assaulting an
objective. By having fewer animals, the problem of providing forage
was reduced. + The fewer the number of carts, the less of a hindrance
they became in rough going, there were less drivers to feed and a
reduction in the number of spare parts to carry or make out of local
wood; this last was a genuine difficulty in the treeless terrain which was
Alexander's objective. Despite his policy on reducing carts and
baggage, Alexander was, however, more lenient than his father over the
question of women accompanying his army; which was sensible in view
of the length of time his soldiers were away from home. Not only was he
demonstrating his care for his men by allowing them to keep their
women; but also, because he liked and respected women, it is possible,
that he neither wished his army to abandon their women to their fate,
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
13
400 A
FIG. 2.2
Roman Army transport animals. Drawings from Theodosian's and
Trajan's pillars. Animal transport would remain important in many armies
until after the Second World War (Hulton Picture Company).
