222
The Lifeblood of War
air support and neglecting the use of artillery to neutralise these
weapons, the Israelis lost 100 tanks in the first day's counter attack, and
about the same number on the second day. Manpower losses were
correspondingly high. Their strategy could have condemned them to a
war of attrition, had the Egyptians played a stubborn waiting game
behind their defences. The reasons for the Israelis selecting such an
operational concept are beyond the scope of this book to discuss, as are
the ramifications of both the late mobilisation and move forward of
reserves in the Sinai. They are well covered in a Staff College
Camberley paper on the subject.?
The construction of the Bar Lev Line had also resulted in the
destruction of an asset which Herzog claims the Israelis would have
found useful during the mobilisation period. When they captured Sinal
in 1967, a railway ran from Gaza to El Arish. They tore it up to use the
sleepers and rails in the Bar Lev Line defences. Had they left the railway
line, and extended it with spurs, they could, according to Herzog, have
saved much wear and tear on armoured fighting vehicle (AFV) tracks
and engines, which, in the absence of rail communications, had
perforce to motor the whole way to their battle positions. Some AFVs
broke down and blocked the roads, further delaying the arrival of
reserve units in Sinai.' However, it could be argued that such a railway
system would have been vulnerable to Arab commando raids, and its
protection a liability that outweighed its usefulness; besides re-
imposing the tyranny of the railroad. 10
The Advantage Switches
However, on 14 October,
the operational situation changed
dramatically, when the Egyptians advanced beyond the defence line
they had established east of the Canal. This attack out of the
bridgehead was made despite the opposition of the Egyptian Armed
Forces Chief of Staff, General El Shazly. Plans had been prepared for
such a move well before the war, despite Shazly's protestations. But he
was overruled by General Ismail, the Egyptian War Minister. Shazly
says that he was ordered to implement the plan on Sadat's orders to
take pressure off the Syrians. According to him, Shazly was made the
scapegoat after the war for the disaster that followed, on the grounds
that he was hot headed. But he seems far too astute to have believed
that the offensive had any chance of success." The boot was now on the
other foot. It was the Egyptians who were being ambushed by well sited
tanks. In this situation and on the move, their SAGGERS and RPGs
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
223
were mostly ineffective. Particularly as the Israelis had formulated
tactics for dealing with these weapons, using artillery and machine guns
to neutralise or destroy them. With few SAMs to cover them, the
Egyptian armour was heavily engaged by the Israeli Air Force. This
was the battle the Israelis should have aimed to fight in the first place,
wating for the Egyptians to advance into the trap. 12
The Impact of High Losses and High Expenditure Rates
High losses of tanks, and the rate of expenditure of ammunition and
missiles, on both sides, led to the need for rapid re-supply of the
protagonists' stocks by the two superpowers. Just how vital this was to
the eventual Israeli success is a matter for conjecture, but is an
interesting line to pursue in the context of Israeli action as the war
unfolded. On 8 October, within two days of the start of the war, the
Israeli Government had informed the Americans of their need for
equipment and ammunition to replace the losses of the first two days
ighting! However, those losses did not deter them from planning to
cross the Canal and carry the fight into enemy territory. Herein lies an
interesting tale. When Major General Sharon had been GOC Southern
Command, before retiring to go into politics, he had prepared a
number of places on the Israeli side of the Canal as potential crossing
sites. At each of these the embankment, at last 20 metres high and
10 metres thick, 4 was thinned out so that gaps could be bulldozed
through to allow the abutments of pontoon bridges to be constructed.
A large area behind each of these points had been surfaced with bricks
to provide about 700 metres by 150 metres of hardstanding, where
engineer equipment could be concentrated. These hardstandings were
covered with a thin layer of sand to conceal them from the Egyptians,
and surrounded by a sand rampart to provide cover from view and
fire. 15,16
The Israelis Plan to Cross the Canal
Sharon, back from politicking, and now in command of 143rd
(Reserve) Armoured Division, was selected to lead the crossing. His
division consisted of three armoured brigades, having exchanged his
mechanised brigade
101
another
armoured brigade
with 252nd
Armoured Division. He was also reinforced by a parachute brigade, in
the infantry role. He would be followed by Major General Adan's
162nd (Reserve) Armoured Division. Major General Gonen, now
