144
The Lifeblood of War
130 miles, then the Vietminh dug in for a stand. It took three days of
bitter fighting before the Moroccan soldiers of the leading battalion
from the Regiment Infanterie Coloniale du Maroc (RICM), joined
hands with the paratroopers who had held out on their own for nine
days.
Groupement C, the southern pincer, prevented from getting further
than Tuyen Quang in craft, landed and advanced to their objective on
foot. However, before they could encircle the area, the Vietminh pulled
out to the north-west. One month after it began, operation LEA was
terminated.
It was followed by another month-long operation, north-west of
Hanoi, in the same style, involving a similar size force, with the same
result. The only success that year was achieved by two
mountaineer battalions. Fighting in their own mountains, which they
knew considerably better than the Vietminh, and receiving intelligence
from their fellow tribesmen, they cleared the Vietminh from their
homeland between the Red and Black Rivers, and kept them out for
nearly five years.
Withdrawal to the Lowlands
The French pulled back to the lowlands, leaving a string of border
forts which achieved nothing but preserved the illusion of French
control along the frontier with China. They even kept the garrison in
Bac Kan until August 1948. It was a logistic burden and contributed
nothing to the conduct of the campaign. Beyond the range of its guns, it
controlled nothing. Although the Vietminh guerrillas continued to
harass the French in the Tonkin Delta and waged a campaign of terror
and propaganda to win over the local population, the Main Force units
withdrew into the Viet Bac. Giap realised that the Main Force units
would be the principal instrument with which to defeat the French.
Although they had done well so far, they had glaring deficiencies in
organisation,
command, and, above all, logistics.
He grouped
battalions together into regiments, and eventually divisions.
He
created a staff system copying the French and American general staff
with its four principal divisions? But without an increased logistic
capability, these reorganisations would be wasted.
An Army Based on Porterage: The Vietminh
The equipment in the Vietminh units at all levels was a hodge-podge
of French, Japanese and American (parachuted in during the Second
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
145
World War). There were few spares and little ammunition. He had a
handful of captured trucks, but no spares or fitters to maintain them.
Giap's solution was to set up factories in the Viet Bac. From producing
grenades, rifle ammunition, mines, and a few light machine guns, they
progressed to making some
120 mm mortars.
However,
heavy
equipment, such as trucks, and guns of all calibres and types and the
ammunition for them, was beyond the capability of this 'cottage
industry'. Had the Chinese Communists not arrived on the border in
1949, the campaign in Vietnam would have taken a very different
course. The Chinese supplied the
bulk of the
equipment and
ammunition, but only as far as the border. Distribution was Giap's
problem, and he solved it by using a resource of which he had, it not an
inexhaustible, at least a very large supply; human porters. It has been
said that the extent of this effort was never fully understood by the
West. This may be so, but given the length of time that the two
campaigns lasted, it is difficult to understand why. It was well known
that Giap was using porters, and the enormous scale of the effort in
human terms, albeit expressed loosely, thousands of porters', was a
constant ingredient of briefings, certainly in Round Three when the
Americans were fighting the war.?
Even when the Vietminh had thousands of trucks, a vast army of
porters carried supplies to Giap when he defeated the French at Dien
Bien Phu, and supplied the
Viet Cong
and North Vietnamese
formations as they closed in on the cities of South Vietnam for the Tet
offensive of 1968. Like the animals in Alexander's army, the porters ate
what they carried, with two added disadvantages; unlike a horse or a
mule, they could not supplement the fodder carried with the arms by
grazing, nor could large parties of porters be fed by foraging without
antagonising the villagers on whose good will, or at least passivity, they
depended, and possibly betraying their presence.
On a long trip, the
porters ate 90 per cent of what they carried. But despite these
disadvantages, the system worked.
First Efforts at Pacification
In late 1949, and early 1950, General Alessandri, put in command of
Tonkin by the French Commander-in-Chief, Carpentier, changed the
thrust of the French effort in the Delta. Alessandri realised that the
notion of a quick decision achieved by enticing the Vietminh on to a
piece of ground which they could not afford to lose, fixing them and
defeating them in a great, devastating battle was a pipe dream. There
