304
The Lifeblood of War
use of railways to assist with the huge movement problem. They
recognise that railways are vulnerable to interdiction and have a repair
system to cope with damage. Although the capacity of the Soviet
Military Transport Aviation (VTA) combined with Aeroflot, is
considerable, the tonnages it can move are a drop in the ocean when
seen in the context of the vast logistic requirement, in the order of
35,000 tonnes per day per Front; 30 and most of the VTA is likely to be
earmarked for airborne operations. Nevertheless, it is probable that
airlift would be used to move vital supplies, such as fuel, to formations
to maintain momentum, and where there is no other way possible. To
this end, the old MI-6 Hook helicopter had been converted into a flying
fuel bowser for the rapid refuelling of forward mobile units. In order to
spread the load and avoid putting all their eggs in one basket, Soviet
commanders and their staffs are trained in formulae which enable them
to arrive at the right mix of road, rail, air and pipeline for the movement
of men and material to ensure that they arrive at the right place on
cue. 31
Fuel Supply
It was noted earlier, the Soviets believe that fuel would form well
over S0 per cent by weight of all supplies in an offensive, about
20,000 tonnes per day
per
Front. According to Russian
press
comments, a Soviet commander's nightmare is to have his successful
advance or pursuit halted at a critical moment because he has run out
of fuel. To cater for this problem, the Soviets have an efficient system
which reflects their concern that fuel, or lack of it, should not be a
limiting factor in their operational style. Over the last few years they
have used a range of rubber fabric reservoirs from
4,000 to
260,000 litres capacity, which can be loaded on to ordinary task
vehicles. Some of the larger trucks can carry twelve times as much fuel
in these reservoirs as in cans or drums. If a crane is available, the
reservoir can be lifted off and dumped, freeing the truck for another
task. Fuel economy is taught at all levels, from drivers of all types of
vehicle, to officers planning deliveries of supplies, to ensure that
whenever possible, vehicles with the lowest fuel consumption are
employed for logistic loads. 32
To move fuel to Army dumps and airfields, tactical fuel pipelines are
employed. Specialist Pipeline Laying Troops are dedicated to this task.
Pipelines can be laid across country, but it is more common to lay them
alongside roads and tracks.
Weather and terrain will have
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
305
considerable effect on the speed at which the system can be
constructed. In favourable conditions a pipeline battalion employ-
ing a tracked pipelayer could lay up to 25 kilometres of pipeline a
day. With three or four battalions supporting an army (a typical
allocation), each laying pipe in its own sector, a total of 75 to
100 kilometres a day could be achieved. The Soviets acknowledge
that laying, operating, and maintaining a fuel pipeline in an
operational environment is considerably more difficult than might
appear at first glance.
Action by the enemy, or damage to the
pipeline by their own vehicles are but a few of the problems to be
overcome. In mountainous terrain, pipe sections have to be shorter,
and steep gradients demand special pumping techniques. Additional
hazards include rock and snow avalanches, sections washed away by
streams and rivers in spate, and pumps freezing. In other situations
sand and gravel may cause pump failure. However, despite these and
other challenges to be overcome, the pipeline can deliver 20,000 gal-
lons of fuel per hour over considerable distances, leaving roads and
transport assets free for the movement of other supplies.
Where
roads are few, and very congested, as they are on the Northern
Flank, the effort involved in laying and protecting a pipeline might
well be repaid.
An Accent on Conservation of Supplies
The need to conserve all manner of supplies, and to make do, is
inculcated into every Soviet soldier.
What appears to be a pro-
gramme of constant nagging to reduce waste in peacetime
1S
probably
good training for thrift in war.
Despite
the rising
expectations of the Soviet citizen and soldier, they would not expect
the lavish supplies of non-essentials enjoyed by the United States
Army in Korea or Vietnam. And one suspects that in the Soviet
Army, in wartime, the sort of logistic vandalism encountered by
General Gale in Africa, described in an earlier chapter, would end in
the offenders being summarily shot.
The Soviet literature
logistics in war is constantly ramming home the message that there
will never be enough of the essentials, nevertheless, the mission must
be accomplished.
Foraging has been mentioned earlier. The Soviets do not plan on
the use of captured weapons and ammunition, it is so difficult to predict
how much will fall into their hands in working order, and because of the
problems, alluded to earlier, of training men to use all but the simplest
