238
INDIA
The Lifeblood of War
INDIA
ighata.
BANGLA
100 Miles
100 Km
MAP XI Bangla Desh 1971.
ASSAM
INDIA
• RaU
War in a Snipe Marsh
239
into India by Pakistani troops, either in hot pursuit of guerrillas, or in
the course of attacking bases adjacent to the Indian border. In addition
there had been a number of violations of Indian air space, and shelling
of Indian villages by Pakistani forces. Many of these incidents had
resulted in casualties to Indian civilians and soldiers. Indian forces did
not do more than push back these attacks, and on one occasion
advanced a few kilometres into Bangla Desh, before retiring again.
However, on 3 December 1971, preceded by an ineffective attempt at a
pre-emptive air strike on Indian airfields, Pakistan attacked in the
Poonch and Chhamb sectors on the Western Front. The Indians, who
were not taken by surprise, halted these attacks, and followed up with a
series of limited, but bitterly contested offensives. They succeeded in
pinching off a number of salients, and gained some key features
overlooking Indian positions. In this way they neutralised the Pakistan
Army in the West, leaving the way clear for an Indian offensive in the
East.
The Indians Prepare to Invade
General Aurora, the commander of India's Eastern Command, had
three corps with which to attack: 2nd Corps between Calcutta and the
western border of Bangla Desh, 33rd Corps on the north-west border,
and 4th Corps on the eastern border.
addition he had a
communications zone headquarters on the north-east border which he
intended to use as a mobile operational formation. It was clear to the
Indians that speed was of the essence, the Pakistan Army in Bangla
Desh must be defeated before there was diplomatic or physical
intervention by Pakistan's two allies, the United States and China.
Bearing in mind the need to impose the maximum delay, General
Niazi, the Pakistan commander in Bangla Desh, had adopted a plan
which involved blocking all routes of entry by India, by occupying
strong defensive positions close to the border on all road approaches,
and making best use of the terrain which greatly favoured the defender.
The greatest threat lay on the western and northern sectors, because of
the road approaches from India, and the direction of flow of the major
rivers.
Also, the Indians had located their major logistical and
communications infrastructure in the West and the North-West.
Communications on the Indian side of the border did not favour a
thrust into the North-East of Bangla Desh. The threat to Bangla Desh
from the East was not at first thought to be great, mainly because of the
lack of logistic facilities in the Tripura area; or so Niazi believed. The
