166
The Lifeblood of War
to bear on the base, neither was his logistic system capable of keeping
his guns fed with shells.
The Garrison Drops In
On 20 November 1953, as the Dakotas carrying 6th Battalion
Colonial
Parachutists (6 BPC) and 2nd Battalion,
1st Regiment
Chasseurs Parachutists (2/1RCP), were approaching the DZs at Dien
Bien Phu, an emissary from the National Defence Committee was in
Navarre's office telling him that he would get no further reinforcements
from Europe; he would have to do as best he could with what he had
already. He then asked Navarre if the French should start negotiating
with the Vietminh now, or wait for a more favourable military
situation. Navarre suggested that negotiations should be delayed until
spring by which time the situation should have improved.
The landings of the leading battalions went well, despite the usual
chaos of parachute assaults. However, both battalions were battle
experienced and led by formidable commanding officers, which was
just as well, because the Vietminh were in greater strength than the
French had bargained for. That afternoon 1 BPC dropped to reinforce
6 BPC, and together they attacked the village of Dien Bien Phu held by
a battalion of 148th Vietminh Regiment, an artillery battalion, a
mortar company, and an infantry company from another battalion.
Because 2/1 RPC had a scattered drop and lost most of its radios, it was
not able to put in the cut-offs in time to prevent most of the Vietminh
escaping, but they left about ninety dead in the village. The next day Ist
Foreign Legion Parachute Battalion (1 BEP), 8 BPC, an artillery
battalion, heavy equipment, and Brigadier General Gilles,
the
parachute force commander dropped on to the Dien Bien Phu DZs. On
the third day the final parachute battalion of the assault force, 5th
Vietnamese Parachute Battalion (5 BPVN) dropped.21
A Change of Command as Giap Reacts
Giap reacted to the French move by ordering three divisions to move
to Dien Bien Phu, and another division plus the 148th Regiment to
attack the French fort at Lai Chau, forty miles north of Dien Bien Phu.
Despite being warned of this by intercept of the Vietminh radio
network, Navarre, believing that Giap could not logistically support
four divisions on operations, convinced himself that the threat to Dien
Bien Phu consisted of only one division. So when he visited the airstrip
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
167
for the first time, he deduced that the camp would be an ideal base for
mobile defence using light tanks flown in parts and re-assembled on the
spot. Navarre and Cogny decided to replace Gilles, who had a heart
condition, with a thrusting cavalryman, Castries. What is interesting is
that Cogny, who, unlike Navarre, believed that Giap was moving on
Dien Bien Phu with four divisions, should have supported the
appointment of the dashing Castries, when he knew perfectly well that
once the Vietminh invested the camp there would be no more forays,
the garrison would be under siege. Indeed, he issued orders which
reflected this view.
Navarre's Directive
Navarre produced a directive which included his acceptance of a
battle being fought in North-West Vietnam, centred on Dien Bien Phu,
which he ordered to be 'held at all costs'. In doing so he clearly
continued to hold to the opinion that for logistic reasons only one
Vietminh division would invest Dien Bien Phu, which would constitute
no greater threat to the garrison than at Na San earlier in the year. He
would not, therefore, be departing from his strategy of avoiding a
decisive battle in the North in that campaigning season. As he saw it, he
was merely defending Laos with his hedgehog, while going ahead with
his plan for the major offensive, Operation ATLANTE, between Nha
Trang and Da Nang in Annam.
Lethargy and Logistic Weakness
A curious lethargy seems to have overcome the French command in
Indo-China in the interval between the seizure of Dien Bien Phu, and
the start of Giap's offensive, a period of three months. In December the
French made two sorties from Dien Bien Phu. The first, an attempt to
link-up with the remnants of the Lai Chau garrison, as it withdrew in
the face of 316 Vietminh Division, was beaten back with heavy losses.
The second, to meet a force moving north to Dien Bien Phu from Laos,
succeeded but only because it met no opposition. Both had been efforts
to show that Dien Bien Phu could be used as a base for offensive
operations. Actually they showed the opposite. The country with its
limestone difis and dense jungle made movement extremely difficult.
and the enemy was too strong.
The French did not possess the
equipment, principally fleets of helicopters,22 which would have given
them the necessary mobility to overcome the terrain difficulties
