The Lifeblood of War
While the operational staff of 1st Army at Constantine was immersed
in the details of the battle in Tunisia, its administrative staff at Maison
Carrée was equally immersed in the problems of Allied logistics. The
tasks were inevitably contradictory at times, and the operational stafis
ordered moves which were not under the proper control of the
logisticians. The same applied to supplies. No sooner was order
beginning to appear, than 1st Army suffered reverses in Tunisia, which
led to demands for reinforcements, ammunition, and fuel, particularly
aviation fuel. The climax was reached when orders came from 1st Army
that absolute priority was to be given to 25-pounder gun ammunition,
and that until further notice nothing else was to be discharged from
ships, moved or unloaded from wagons. The situation off Algiers on
D-day was repeated on a vastly greater scale. Ships not unloading
25-pounder ammunition remained full, wagons in transit were
uncoupled and left, the whole line of communication became slowly
paralysed. Senior officers descended
unannounced on ports and
railway yards, demanding the reason why a ship or wagon not carrying
25-pounder ammunition was being unloaded or moved. A railway
transport officer at Duvivier was ordered to rejoin his regiment for
disobeying the absolute priority order. Chaos reigned which affected
not only the British, but also the American ground and air forces in the
Control Restored
Fortunately, a firm hand was about to grasp the logistics helm.
Major General Gale, Eisenhower's Chief Administrative Officer,
arrived in Algiers in early December, and although AFHQ were not
planned to take overall command untl 1 January 1943, Gale saw that
the crisis was too serious to be ignored, stepped in and ordered that his
staff take action to put matters right.
Immediately they ordered that every wagon was to be unloaded
when it reached the railhead, irrespective of its contents and for whom
the load was intended. Every ship was to be unloaded likewise and
without regard for the priority of its cargo. No wagons were to be
loaded at the base for four days, and all loaded wagons were to be sent
to their destination railhead as soon as possible. It was expected that
the four day embargo would have to be extended, but, in the event, it
proved unnecessary thanks to the hard work of all the staffs concerned.
The logistic staff of AFHQ, under the direction of Gale, had taken
control not a moment too soon. This breakdown in logistics was not
Three Campaigns in a Global War
the sole contributor to the failure to take Tunisia 'on the run', indeed by
the time the crisis came to a head, it was already too late. Tunisia could
only have been taken quickly had a number of events gone differently,
among them: perhaps bolder use of airborne and commando forces to
sieze the key airfields and deny them to the Germans; slower reaction
by the Germans; better weather; quicker and more positive action by
the French. The breakdown demonstrated that considerable logistical
reorganisation was required for the large scale offensive that would
now be necessary to dislodge the Germans.
In January and February, the Allied fighting units held the line in the
appalling weather in the mountains. The Allied airforces operating
from weatherbound strips in the mountainous country could not
compete with the Germans using dry airfields on the Plain of Tunis.
Some reverses were suffered, and the better formations, such as the
themselves being rushed to plug gaps, or shore up their weaker
brethren. Meanwhile, the reorganisation and redeployment of the
Allied forces in North Africa went ahead. It was clear that the final
assault on Tunis would be a combined effort by Allied forces in North
Africa and 8th Army who were approaching from Tripolitania.
Headquarters 18th Army Group was set up to command ist and 8th
Armies. But it was realised, that with entirely independent bases and
lines of communications, one stretching back to Algiers, the other to
Tripoli and beyond, the Army Group headquarters could not hope to
be responsible for the logistics of both armies, and therefore it was not
attempted. This account follows suit, and is restricted to the logistics of
Stabilising Measures and a Near Disaster
As well as reorganisation, a certain amount of 'logistic education'
was also put in train by Gale to promote the principle of economy. He
wanted to cut down on wasteful overbidding and pilfering, both of
which were eating into the reserves he was trying to build up for the
forthcoming offensive. He and his staff were highly successful, but they
found some appalling cases of waste. He also found that merging the
American and British staff system had its frustrating moments. 15
By February, not only had work been carried out to improve some of
the roads, but the American locomotives and wagons ordered before
the campaign had started to arrive at Oran. Their move forward into
SONY
