The Lifeblood of War
FiG. 2.11 First World War, Western Front. Man-handling an 18 pounder
out of mud, Poelcappelle (IWM).
only in the British Army, and no other, and then only in the last few
months of the war, the redeployment depended upon horses pulling
guns and limbers, and pack mules, floundering through the morass.
For this reason, attacks were plodding, with long pauses between
phases in order to drag up supplies. As the attack lost momentum, the
enemy falling back on his own logistic dumps and supply system,
operating over largely intact roads and railways, could react, and bite
off salients, often pushing the attacker back.
It was the enormous logistic problem, and the lack of radios to
command large bodies of troops, that gave the First World War on the
Western Front its ponderous look, until Haig's great offensive from
July to November 1918. It was not, as many authors have maintained,
the stupidity of the generals on both sides.
1917 and the Arrival of the AEF
The entry of the United States into the war created a special problem
for the Allies as it soon became obvious that they were not only quite
without any proper system of supply but lacked the guns, tanks and
vehicles that were an inescapable part of war on the Western Front.
The French and British made good these deficiencies, at considerable
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
FIG. 2.12 First World War, Western Front, Battle of Arras. Re-aligning the
trail of an 18 pounder. The ammunition piled on the left is a modest stock,
representing a fraction of the requirement for a sustained battle. Moving even
this amount for several batteries, over the terrain in the previous pictures is a
major undertaking (IWM).
cost to themselves. The Americans had not even got draught horses for
their new-found artillery and the British gun teams in France were
reduced from six horses to four to help meet the requirement. But it was
the inadequacy of the American logistic system which was to create the
greatest difficulties for the American Expeditionary Force (AEF). In
some units in the Argonne, the troops were approaching starvation
point before things were put right. It was in no small part due to the
Herculean efforts of Brigadier General George Marshall (later to
achieve such fame in the Second World War as Chairman of the
American Chiefs of Staff) that AEF was finally put on to a sound
logistic footing. How, the reader may well be asking himself, was it
possible for this almost incredible lack of logistic foresight to have
occurred? Quite simply, the answer lay in a political exchange between
the British Prime Minister and the President of the United States.
Lloyd George, devastated by the loss of infantry on the Western Front,
appealed wildly to the President for infantry in the largest numbers he
could provide. Thanks to lack of any proper system of liaison between
the two armies, it was infantry of which the AEF was chiefly composed.
In these days of sophisticated joint-staff planning and high level
