7
War in a Snipe Marsh:
Bangla Desh 1971
*While Bangla Desh might be a paradise for waterfowl, it must be a nightmare for a
campaian planner.
In March 1971, East Bengalis serving in the Pakistan Army in what was
then East Pakistan, mutinied and formed the Bangla Desh Liberation
Army, with the aim of freeing Bangla Desh from Pakistani domination.
The Indian Government recognised that the situation might call for
intervention, however, there were a number of factors which argued for
delaying any action until mid-November. First, the Indian Armed
Forces'®
expansion and re-equipment programmes,
although well
underway, needed several more months before completion. Second,
because of the internal security situation in West Bengal and in the
Mizo Hills in the North-East Frontier Area (NEFA), the Indian Army
deployment was unbalanced. Three divisions deployed near the Bangla
Desh border were committed on aid to the civil power duties, without
their heavy equipment. Additional formations needed to be brought in,
and a new operational and logistical infrastructure provided. Third, air
bases needed to be developed for operations in Bangla Desh. Fourth,
any attempt by India to carry out even limited action in Bangla Desh
Would invite a riposte by Pakistan in the West; probably an attack on
Kashmir. So action by India must be delayed, until reinforcements
could be moved in, particularly on the lines of communication in the
sensitive Jammu and Kashmir sector. Fifth, the Freedom Fighters in
Bangla Desh, the Mukti Bagini, were in some disarray after Pakistani
Army operations aimed at their elimination. Time would be required to
re-fit and re-train the Mukti Bahini, if they were to be employed as an
adjunct to Indian operations.
Sixth,
234
most important,
the
War in a Snipe Marsh
235
monsoon, due in April or May, would make ground and air operations
in Bangla Desh almost impossible; and at the same time melt the snow
in the mountain passes on the Chinese/Indian border, risking
intervention by the Chinese while India was otherwise engaged. The
ground in Bangla Desh is not dry enough for mobile operations until
mid-November. The passes on the northern border are not blocked by
snow until some time later. Therefore India had to bide her time until
November 1971, at the earliest.
For a time there were hopes that the Mukti Bahini, with support from
India, in the form of sanctuaries within her borders, arms, and training,
might defeat the Pakistan Army and free Bangla Desh. However, in
common with most, if not all, resistance movements faced by a well
equipped and ruthless army of occupation, backed by an equally
ruthless and determined government, the Mukti Bahini had no hope of
winning. Guerrilla or resistance movements only succeed when their
activities are carried out as an adjunct to, and closely co-ordinated
with, the operations of a conventional army. It matters little whether
the conventional army is indigenous, or from an ally. History is full of
examples: the Peninsular War, the Arab revolt, the French Resistance,
the Yugoslav Partisans, the Partisans in Russia. The Mukti Bahini were
badly led at all levels, and disorganised. Lacking an overall com-
mander, there was no co-ordinated plan. At no time did they come near
to ejecting the Pakistan Army. The value of the Mukti Bahini lay in
creating the conditions which led to brutal Pakistani repression, this in
turn enabled the Indians to intervene in Bangla Desh, to the mutual
benefit of the Bangla Deshis and the Indians. When the Indian Army
eventually moved in, the Mukti Bahini's most valuable service was as
guides and intelligence gatherers?
The Aims of Indian intervention
The political objectives given to the Indian Chiefs of Staff in the event
of an intervention in Bangla Desh were:
To liberate Bangla Desh as quickly as possible.
To fight a holding action in the West and in the north if attacked.
To make limited gains in the West, as a bargaining point in case a Pakistani
surprise attack succeeded in capturing any part of Indian territory.
When war came, the Indians achieved all three. But this chapter will
concentrate on the first, because it is the most interesting from the
logistical point of view.
