274
The Lifeblood of War
Fortunately signals to Moore were copied to Thompson, who acted
on them as if he were the action, rather than the information addressee.
The change was made on D-1, when Moore joined the liner Queen
Elizabeth at Ascension. In retrospect, Moore believes he and a small
tactical headquarters, should have joined the amphibious task force by
parachute from a C-130 just before D-day.1ยบ He could have used the
command facilities in the other Landing Platform Dock, HMS
Intrepid. The change of command structure required him to command
a land battle, 4,000 miles away, although getting closer daily, from a
passenger liner with no command facilities. The concept might have
suited naval command by remote control, designed for operations at
sea, but was less than satisfactory for a land battle. A further
complication arose, as soon as the Queen Elizabeth sailed from
Ascension. It transpired that for technical signals reasons, Moore
could not communicate with Thompson, and, except for scraps of
information gleaned from the maritime communications network, was
almost totally ignorant about what was happening in the beachhead,
and unable to influence events, until he arrived on D+9.
Helicopter Tasking
For the first few days, helicopter assets were very short. Of the eleven
Sea Kings and five Wessex with which the Amphibious Group arrived,
one Sea King was permanently allocated to supporting the twelve
Rapier sites with fuel for their generators, and providing an immediate
maintenance team to keep them in action. Four of the remaining Sea
Kings were fitted to allow them to be flown at night with Passive Night
Goggle equipment. They spent most of each night inserting Special
Forces and other patrols, and, except in an emergency, were not used
by day, to allow crew rest and servicing. This left a total of six Sea Kings
and five Wessex for logistic and tactical tasks every day. However,
many more helicopters at this early stage would have led to another
problem. Until the Emergency Fuel Handling Equipment (EFHE),
could be installed ashore, helicopters were restricted to refuelling on
the one-spot decks of LSLs, or the two-spot decks of the two LPDs in
the anchorage. This was time-consuming, and frequently interrupted
by air raids.
The twenty-one light helicopters of the Brigade Air
Squadron were also competing for this fuel.
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
275
Fuel Distribution
There was no shortage of bulk fuel, the problem was to get it ashore
and distributed. The EFHE had departed in the holds of the STUFT on
the evening of D-day, and was subsequently distributed to other ships.
When the ships were sailed back to the anchorage off the beachhead,
not all the parts could be found. It was eventually assembled, thanks to
the ingenuity of the Royal Engineers, initially using just a towed
Flexible Fuel Barge (Dracone), connected to the shore by pipeline.
Work-boats towed the empty dracones out to a tanker in the
anchorage to be re-filled. Eventually the combat engineers of the
Commando Engineer Squadron were able to install a system of flexible
tanks on shore to which the fuel could be pumped from the dracone,
and stored. When the airstrip was established at Port San Carlos, this
facility dispensed up to 50,000 gallons of aviation fuel (AVCAT) to
Harriers and helicopters each day. However, it was not to achieve this
fuelling rate for some time, and all fuel, not just AVCAT, formed the
critical path' in the whole pattern of supplying the land battle. At Ajax
Bay, which held all types of fuel, including drummed AVCAT, there
were other problems. The Logistic Regiment's Petrol Troop, being
Reservists, were not mobilised, so other men had to take their place,
and learn about fuel management on the job. To them fell the time-
consuming business of filling jerricans from the bulk containers on the
podded trucks. The podded trucks would be embarked on Mexeflotes,
and taken to a ship carrying the relevant fuel, diesel oil (dieso), petrol
(CIVGAS), or AVCAT. This would be pumped over in a hose to the
pods. On completion, the podded trucks would be driven off the
Mexeflote into the beach support area (BSA) at Ajax Bay, where the
logistic organisation was established under the Commando Logistic
Regiment. Despite the shrewd move by the commanding officer of the
Commando Logistic Regiment, in insisting on taking 4,000 additional
jerricans from the depot at West Moors before leaving the United
Kingdom, an acute shortage of these cans was yet another obstacle to
be surmounted in the struggle to keep the landing force supplied.
Although the most voracious consumers of fuel were helicopters and
Harriers, others needed CIVGAS or dieso. On rough terrain, the
BV202s drank fuel at a high rate; even when stationary, the engines in
command BVs had to be run frequently to keep the radio batteries
charged.
Raiding craft, used for a multiplicity of tasks, mainly,
although not exclusively, tactical, needed frequent re-fuelling.
The
generator by each of the twelve Rapier firing posts had to be kept
