226
The Lifeblood of War
equipment was bulky, and their pre-war plans had envisaged bringing
it forward to one of the Bar Lev strongholds before assembly. They had
not bargained for a 20 kilometre tow under artillery fire. Second, the
Egyptians had far stronger forces on the right of their Second Army
than the Israelis expected; in the order of two divisions. These troops
resisted stubbornly, and mounted vigorous, but unco-ordinated,
counter-attacks. There is little doubt that if the Egyptians had
recognised the true nature of the Israeli operations, they had sufficient
force on each side of the Canal to crush them. However, the Israel
diversionary attacks kept the Egyptians deceived for more than 24
hours.17,18
Sharon Begins to Cross
To add to the Israeli problem, the delays caused by these two factors
were aggravated by heavy Egyptian artillery fire on the road and road
junctions, which were clogged with traffic, thanks to inadequate trafic
control by the Israelis.l9 However, by dawn on 16 October, the
parachute brigade was across the Canal unopposed; there were no
Egyptian troops opposite the crossing point; and the tanks of one
armoured brigade began to be ferried over. But the bitter fighting
during the night by the armour to clear the way, and hold open the
corridor on the East Bank, had resulted in 300 Israeli dead, and 70 out
of Sharon's 280 tanks destroyed. The Egyptians lost about 150 tanks.
During the morning Sharon suggested that Adan should now follow
him across the Canal, apparently unaware of the precarious situation
behind him. Gonen brusquely rejected Sharon's suggestion. In present
circumstances, the logistical requirements of two divisions fighting
west of the Canal would be beyond the capacity of the ferries and any
airlift arranged as a back-up. Indeed, unless the corridor could be
widened, and kept open, it was doubtful if Sharon, with less than half
his division, could be kept supplied. This led Bar Lev to order that no
more men or tanks would cross the Canal until the situation improved.
At about midday, the Egyptians blocked the two roads to the crossing
point. Sharon was cut off. Nothing loth, he sent out a raid to disrupt the
Egyptian SAM sites, and destroy supply dumps on his side of the
Canal.
The Bridges Move Forward Under Fire
All that day and for most of the night, Adan's division fought to drive
two corridors to the crossing point and move the bridging forward. By
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
227
3 a.m. the 17th, the bridges had not moved for 24 hours. The parachute
brigade attached to Adan, sent by him to open the route, had been
pinned down north of the road, attempting to clear the Egyptians from
a group of buildings known to the Israelis as the Chinese Farm. 2º Just
when the whole operation looked close to failure, with Sharon isolated,
reconnaissance sent forward by Adan reported that the yard at the
crossing point was clear of enemy. The Egyptians, their eye taken off
the ball by the fighting round Chinese Farm, had omitted to hold the
yard. At dawn on the 17th, the pontoon sections arrived in the yard,
and Sharon's sappers started building one bridge. The prefabricated
bridge would have to wait until the second route was open.
Further attacks by the Egyptians on the corridor ended at about
midday on the 17th, when a final attempt was bloodily repulsed and the
remnants of an Egyptian brigade withdrew to the high ground to the
north to lick their wounds. They still held Chinese Farm, and from
here, and the high ground, could sweep the corridor with fire. But at
least the way through to the Canal was secure. In the 36 hours of
fighting,
about 250 tanks had been destroyed, two-thirds of them
Egyptian, in an area approximately seven kilometres by three.
At around 11 a.m., Adan was joined at his headquarters by the
Defence Minister Dayan, Chief of Staff Elazar, Bar Lev, and later, by
Sharon. That Adan was able to fight his division, while distracted by a
conference is a tribute to his powers of concentration and ability as a
commander, a quality he was shortly to demonstrate again. The senior
visitors arrived fully convinced that the crossing operation would have
to be called off, but found that suddenly the situation was much
brighter. One bridge was almost across, and the other would be
arriving at the Canal bank before long. After a short altercation over
whether Sharon's or Adan's division
would break out of the
bridgehead, once both were across complete decided in Adan's
favour—a new distraction thrust itself on the meeting.
Counter-Attack from the South
A dust column to the south, clearly visible to the distinguished group
at the conference, was reported by Israeli observation posts as about
100 T-62 tanks. It was the Egyptian 25th Armoured Brigade, heading
in the direction of the crossing point along the eastern side of the Great
Bitter Lake. Adan was now faced by a battle on two fronts. Excusing
himself from the meeting, he dashed away to beat off the new threat. In
the path of the Egyptian advance were the remnants of one of Sharon's
