The Lifeblood of War
more important, in his day, the dividing line between what we would
call the operations staff and the logistic staff was not so clear as it
became in the latter half of the last century. To begin with, the chief of
staff and subordinate staff officers, were almost solely concerned with
the supply and movement of armies in response to the commander's
strategic, operational, and tactical plans, often drawn up by the
commander alone, and frequently kept to himself. The quartermaster
general was in effect the chief of staff. This persisted, in name only, into
this century. Ludendorff's title, as chief of staff to Hindenberg, was First
Quartermaster General; because in Germany, quartermaster generals
were directors of military operations. As Jomini himself points out:?
But when war began to be waged without camps, movements became more
complicated, and the staff officers had more extended functions. The chief of staff
began to perform the duty of transmitting conceptions of the general to the most
distant points ...
Therefore, despite Jomini's including logistics as one of the six military
branches, by his treatment of the subject in his work, he actually confuses
the issue by bracketing logistical with operational and intelligence
staffwork. It is not, therefore surprising that military men in the years
that followed were more impressed with Jomini's strategic and tactical
advice than what he had to say about logistics, which in practical terms
was remarkably little; even less than Clausewitz.
Jomini gives no logistical diagrams, as companions to his detailed
tactical drawings; no principles; no equivalents to his maxims on lines of
operations and the like; no logistical lessons, or pearls of wisdom. The
logistician would search in vain for the nineteenth century version of the
modern weight and balance tables, with fuel consumption, weight and
distance parameters, for a move by helicopter. There are no helpful
statistics giving the daily consumption of water and fodder by mules,
horses, donkeys, elephants or camels; or the balance to be struck between
the number of animals taken and the forage and fodder requirement; and
consequently the need for additional animals to carry the fodder; who
themselves need feeding. Although Jomini was widely read for his advice
on tactics and strategy, there is nothing sufficiently substantial to give a
lead to others to write on the subject, or invest logistics with the same
fascination that strategy and tactics has for most soldiers.
The Principles
If principles are what we seek, first the word itself. 'Logistics' derives
from the French 'maréchal de logis' in Louis XVI's army, in English,
Principles: The Disciplines of War
quartermaster 10
general (logis
means lodging or quarters). The
maréchal de logis was responsible for the administration of camps,
billets and marches. The maréchal general later became responsible for
all administration and, as has already been noted, was sometimes
employed as a chief of staff. Although the term was dropped in the
French Army, after the French Revolution, the word Logistique
remained in use. It was picked up by Jomini and used rather loosely to
cover staff work, some of it not logistical. The budding logistician, or
general for that matter, might well ask for a few principles to act as
'markers' when faced with mobilising an army, planning a campaign,
battle or minor skirmish. He might find the 'Principles of Administra-
tion' as laid down in the British Army Pamphlet 'Administration in the
Field', as good a guide as any, because they are applicable at all levels
from a nation preparing for war, to a company commander planning a
training exercise. They are:
Foresight
Economy
Flexibility
Simplicity
Co-operation
Or he might prefer to turn to the United States Army where there are
no less than nine principles:
Logistics Intelligence
Objective
Generative Logistics
Interdependence
Simplicity
Timeliness
Impetus
Cost-effectiveness
Security
It is obvious that there is a similarity between the two sets of
principles. Without Logistics Intelligence it is difficult to bring
Foresight to bear in forward planning. Similarly, it is necessary to have
a clear and attainable Objective, such as the development of logistic
plans for the transition to war phase in Europe; or the reinforcement of
Northern Norway during a time of tension. The application of modern
technology to meet the logistic support requirements of armies in the
field requires Generative Logistics. The use of airlift in a number of
campaigns, from the First World War onwards, is a perfect illustration
of this principle. Finally, still in the 'Foresight' department, Inter-
dependence requires that each part of the logistics system must be
