208
The Lifeblood of War
enveloping movements, with a combination of armour, infantry, and in
the case of the 'Fish Hook', heliborne troops landing in the enemys
rear. Most of the enemy fled, and the big battle did not materialise.
What fighting there was ended after the first three days. The Central
Office for South Vietnam (COSVN) which was thought to be in the
'Fish Hook', had slipped away in mid-March, perhaps in anticipation
of an invasion of Cambodia, but huge quantities of stores and acres of
camps, hospitals, and bunkers were discovered. This area had been a
sanctuary for years, to which the Viet Cong and NVA withdrew time
and time again when things got too hot in South Vietnam. Evidence of
re-training camps and political indoctrination centres abounded, with
ranges, lecture halls, pamphlets, and other training material. One
complex, typical of several others, was discovered by an American air
lavalry unit, and dubbed the "City. It had 182 storage bunkers each of
1,280 cubic feet capacity, 18 mess halls, a training area, and a small
animal farm. It covered approximately three square kilometres, and the
storage depot was capable of rapid receipt and issue of large quantities
of supplies. From captured documents it was apparent that the "City
had been in operation for at least two and a half years. The haul of
weapons it yielded was enough to equip an NVA regiment. 46
In one depot, new communications equipment was discovered by
another air cavalry unit, an indication of the speed with which the
operation had been mounted, forestalling the removal of even high
priority radios. In other depots, trucks, and major assemblies and
spares for trucks were found. Ist Air Cavalry Division alone unearthed
305 trucks, and evidence of heavy recent use of trucks on the roads
showed that these were merely the ones that were not driven away
Wad the attack started. The logistic system in Cambodia was vast, and
had the capacity to move thousands of tons of supplies by truck from
Sihanoukville, to the depots near the border. A network of roads
connected the supply points, and there was evidence of an extensive fuel
and repair organisation. The NVA had come a long way since the days
of the all-coolie transport system, although porters were still used in
vast numbers.
The Americans withdrew at the end of June, and the ARVN forces
remained for a little longer. The border bases were razed by plant flown
in by the American heavy lift helicopters and C-130s, to hastily
constructed strips. The quantity of weapons captured overall was
immense, surprising even the Americans. 47 The raid on Cambodia was
a success. It did buy time for Lon Nol to build up his forces, and the
equipment losses and disruption to the logistic system, including the
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
209
loss of the use of Sihanouk ville, set back the NVA invasion timetable by
anything up to two years.48 The Ho Chi Minh Trail now became the
sole line of communication from North Vietnam through Laos to the
NVA in South Vietnam.
Disturbing Signs of ARVN Logistic Weakness
Although the ARVN units on the raid had shown up better than
expected, there were disturbing signs of weaknesses in a number of
areas. They relied heavily on American artillery and air strikes, and
without the latter it is doubtful if they would have succeeded. But most
revealing of all, poor logistics brought much of their armour to a halt
for lack of fuel, spares, and forward repair capability.
Useable
armoured vehicles were pressed into service to tow the broken down
ones, further reducing the availability of 'runners', and often wearing
out the tower, producing two break-downs for the price of one.
Lam Son 719
After the success in destroying the Cambodian base areas, Abrams
realised that there would be enormous dividends to be gained by a
repeat performance on the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Success would mean the
severance of the only NVA line of communication to the South. The
ground part of the operation would have to be an ARVN only effort,
since a recent Senate amendment banning American ground troops
from entering Cambodia or Laos without Congressional approval. The
North Vietnamese were not slow to sense their vulnerability. The
Cambodian operation seemed to indicate that the Americans had at
long last moved the goal posts in this game, and might well invade
Laos, or even North Vietnam. Perhaps Giap did not believe that
Congress would be wet enough to enforce its ban. So he established 70B
Corps to take command of the three NVA divisions in Laos, the
demilitarised zone (DMZ), and southern North Vietnam. Route 9,
which ran from Khe Sanh across the Laotian/South Vietnamese
border, led to Tchepone, the logistic hub of the NVA in Laos. The NVA
prepared the road inside Laos for ambushes and demolitions, pre-
recorded potential helicopter landing zones as artillery targets, and
moved much of their supplies out of the area.
An operation, codenamed Lam Son 719, was devised, involving
three ARVN divisions advancing to Tchepone astride Route 9; the
Americans to clear and hold the section from Khe Sanh to the Laotian
