124
The Lifeblood of War
They had a new commander, Lieutenant General Ridgway; Walker
having died as a result of a traffic accident. X Corps and ROK I Corps
had completed their withdrawal from Hungnam, and come under
command of Eighth Army. Largely because neither the Chinese nor
North Korean
forces attempted any serious disruption of the
operation, the withdrawal from Hungnam was a model of organisa-
tion. In all 105,000 troops, 98,000 Korean civilians, 17,500 vehicles,
and 350,000 tons of bulk cargo were evacuated, in 193 shiploads.
Given carte blanche to employ the Army as he thought best, Ridgway
set about restoring morale, which was about to suffer yet another blow
when the Chinese mounted an offensive at the New Year.
The 1st United States Marine Division, which included the 4lst
British Commando Royal Marines, and the British and Common-
wealth Brigades were among the only, if not the only, formations whose
morale was not sagging after the events of the previous weeks and
nonuns.
Ridgway, a great commander and soldier's general, went on an
immediate tour of the battlefield to see for himself the state of morale.
He knew that he would never get a feel for the situation second-hand.
Eighth Army's fighting spirit and its pride in itself must be restored
before it returned to the offensive. Everywhere he went he found a loss
of confidence and lack of spirit. (He makes it plain that the Xth Corps,
Which included the Ist Marine Division had not re-joined the Army at
this stage). Leaders at every level were unresponsive, surly, and slow to
answer his questions.
subaltern:
He could not help contrasting this to the way a young British
totted down of a knoll to greet me when he spotted the insignia on my jeep. He
saluted smartly and identified himself.
Ridgway knew that the British Brigade had only a few men to cover a
wide front, and that a Chinese attack was expected hourly. He asked
the subaltern how he found the situation:
'"Quite all right sir," he replied quickly. Then he added with a pleasant smile, "It is
a bit drafty up here"?
Ridgway's comment in his book is:
"Drafty was the word for it, with gaps in the line wide enough to march an army
through.
Ridgway set about putting matters right. As well as insisting on proper
standards, and sacking those commanders who did not come up to
scratch, he made changes that soldiers, particularly in the bitter winter
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
125
weather, could appreciate. He ordered that hot meals were to be sent
lorward as far as possible. He took to carrying a supply of gloves with
him, to hand to soldiers who had lost or torn theirs.22
for the next six months, as offensive was followed by counter-
offensive, the United Nations23 line moved to and fro, as far south as
Osan, and back, just north of the 38th Parallel. From the end of June
1951, despite violent but sporadic fighting, except for small gains and
losses of ground, the line remained static while Armistice negotiations
dragged on for two years. Ridgway has given logistics as one of his
reasons for not wishing to pursue the Chinese further north, and close
up to the Yalu again, when it appeared they were on the run, and short
of supplies in June 1951. He was sure that the Eighth Army could have
driven the Chinese back however, it would have greatly shortened the
enemy supply lines and greatly lengthened our own'. 24
Positions Stabilise and the Logistical Situation Eases
Once the positions stabilised, supply for the United Nations forces
became easier, although there were still problems. The logistical effort
in Korea depended on the railways, and on any given day in 1951, there
were likely to be more than thirty trains despatched from Pusan, about
three-quarters of them carrying supplies to forward railheads. Each
train consisted of twenty to forty wagons, carrying about 500 tons of
freight an average distance of 100 miles. About twenty-five to thirty
miles behind each division was a supply point which held a three to five
day stock of supplies. Behind this was a back-up point which also held
three to five days' stocks. Further back again was a regulating point
holding two days' stocks on rail wagons. Movement forward from
supply points to divisional dumps was under divisional control by
truck or train. The problem facing the Military Railway Service was
twofold, a shortage of rail wagons, and one third of these sitting idle,
sometimes for weeks at various points between
Pusan and the
railheads. The establishment of intermediate depots between Pusan
and the frontline would have alleviated this situation, but this was
never done.
More reliance on road transport would have helped, but was difficult
to implement. The road network in Korea was poor, and remained so
despite engineer effort. Also, considerably less trucks were allocated to
Eighth Army than were warranted by experience in the Second World
War.
More trucks would have cost more in terms of fuel and
maintenance; rail transport was more economical. However, truck
