The Lifeblood of War
FiG. 3.7 Air re-supply by C-47 Dakota, Burma (IWM).
On to Rangoon: A Triumph of Air Supply
On 4 April, with 300 miles to go to Rangoon, logistic imperatives
began to drive strategy. The American Dakotas which provided the
bulk of the airlift, were due to be withdrawn to China in June. Much of
the road network was of fair weather standard only, and the monsoon
was due in early May. It became necessary to take Rangoon at all costs
before the monsoon. It was decided that a combined sea and airborne
operation should be mounted by 15 Corps from the Arakan to capture
the port. On 3 May the assaulting troops from 15 Corps captured
Rangoon, while the leading division of 4 Corps, 17 Indian Division,
was still 30 miles from the city held up by demolitions, mines, and mud.
4 Corps, in its 300 mile dash for Rangoon, had been supplied entirely
by air, which, taking into account the support by air of the other two
corps, constituted the biggest air supply operation in any theatre in the
Second World War?® On no occasion was the advance delayed for
lack of ammunition and stores for the battle. Forward troops were on
reduced rations, because of the need to carry the maximum number of
days food in trucks between airfields, to dispense with the need for air
Three Campaigns in a Global War
dropping. In the last stage of the advance, and until Rangoon was
restored to a working port, thanks to a combination of the monsoon
arriving two weeks early, rendering all airfields south of Meiktila
unusable, and an increased expenditure of ammunition and fuel, all
troops were on half rations for 34 days. The inability to use the airfields
meant that for a period 4 Corps lived on a supply drop of 175 tons a
day, instead of 450 tons.
Victory: The Pay-Off for a Rigorous Application of
Logistic Principles
It is not the intention to continue this account of the Burma
campaign after the capture of Rangoon, except to say that the logistic
problems did not disappear with the opening of the port. The lack of
aircraft, now removed for tasks elsewhere; lack of all weather airfields
nearer than 300 miles, and even these were often unserviceable because
of the early monsoon; and the loss of supplies on air-drops for lack of
airfields, led to considerable shortages. In 4 Corps rations were at less
than half scale, and even then there was little spare tonnage for fuel and
ammunition. Fortunately only one of the divisions in the Corps was
actively engaged, and that at low intensity. Despite a huge air lift
capacity, air superiority, and all the other advantages enjoyed by the
Allies, they had driven the campaign in Burma to its successful
conclusion only by the most rigorous application of logistic principles.
It must also be said that 14th Army was fortunate in its commander,
General Slim, thought by many to be the most successful fighting
general produced by the British Army since Wellington. For three and
a half years his army fought the longest continuous campaign against
by far the largest body of enemy in the war against Japan. In doing so
he inflicted upon the Japanese the greatest defeat in a land battle they
had ever suffered. More Japanese troops died in Burma than in the
whole Pacific campaign. 14th Army was one of the most remarkable
armies ever seen for the variety of races which its soldiers represented:
providing rations acceptable to the plethora of different religions and
castes among the Indian troops alone was a logistic triumph in itself.
But this represents only a fraction of the many logistic achievements of
Slim's Army.
SONY
