328
The Lifeblood of War
so obviate the need for parachute soldiers to land right on, or close to,
their objective; necessary at the moment,
because once
down,
parachute soldiers have the mobility of the boot, and the firepower and
protection of non-mechanised infantrymen. In essence, an airborne
operation would begin by dropping one or two battalions, with a few
light mechanised vehicles, to seize an airstrip, or suitable flat area, Into
which would fly FLA tactrans with vehicles, guns, helicopters, and
men. The brigade would then set off for its objectives). FLA tactran
will be designed to carry in the order of 25 tonnes over a range of 2,000
to 2,550 nautical miles, and with air-to-air re-fuelling (AAR), over far
greater distances. This aircraft is not vastly different in size to the RAF'S
stretched Hercules Mark III, but would achieve much greater airlift
and efficiency through modern technology and design. It is possible
that an Osprey type tilt-rotor aircraft with the same payload and range
capability as FLÀ tactran, including AAR, will be developed in the
future. If this happens, the need for parachute soldiers, except in small
numbers for special operations, will disappear.
Air Assault Brigades
Air assault brigades could comprise around two thousand men
(including supporting arms), with about 130 helicopters. The heli-
copter force consisting of sixty attack machines (tank equivalent), forty
assault machines (infantry fighting vehicle equivalent), and twenty fire-
Apport helicopters. At first the attack helicopter would be the Apache
AH-64, or its equivalent. However, this aircraft only goes part of the
way to meeting the requirement to replace tanks by helicopters.
Eventually it should be superseded by the Main Battle Air Vehicle
(MBAV), a true replacement for the AFV. As Simpkin explains,®
modern technology in the form of centrifugal contra-rotating rotors to
reduce rotor diameter and eliminate the tail rotor, and the increasing
payload of helicopters, allowing selective armouring, should make an
MBAV more than just a science-fiction pipe-dream early in the next
century. The principle task of the air assault brigade would be to
spearhead counter-attacks, seize ground of tactical importance, and
mount deep operations.
The infantry fighting helicopter should be able to carry a section, be
selectively armoured, and be equipped with weapons to lay down
suppressive fire, and possibly be able to defend itself against an attack
helicopter. Fire support helicopters could be equipped with multi-
barrelled rocket launchers.
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
329
Light Infantry Brigades
The light infantry brigades would consist of three infantry battalions,
with artillery, engineer, and logistic support. Helicopter lift for the
infantry would be in the form of forty unarmoured helicopters of the
Blackhawk type, per brigade. The type of gun with which the artillery
was equipped, would dictate both the type and number of the
remaining helicopters within the brigades. If the artillery regiments in
these brigades were equipped with the new Ultra Light 155 mm
howitzer being developed by Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineers Ltd,
additional Blackhawk type helicopters would suffice for lifting both
guns and ammunition. However, if a gun as heavy as the present FH-70
was retained, there would be a need for more heavy-lift helicopters of
the Chinook variety. The role of the light infantry brigades would be as
follow-up forces in amphibious and airborne operations, or to tackle
light opposition in minor out of area operations.
Light Mechanised Brigades
Light mechanised brigades would consist of a mix of tracked light
AF Vs and infantry fighting vehicles, all capable of being slung under a
heavy-lift helicopter, or transported in FLA tactrans. Their fighting
vehicles would have a mix of fire-and-forget missiles, conventional
guns, and heavy machine guns (these possibly of the chain gun type).
These brigades would have no organic helicopter support, other than
reconnaissance machines.
They would have artillery and engineer
support. The gun selected for the artillery supporting the
light
mechanised brigades would depend upon whether a track-mounted
heavy mortar or light howitzer, for example the ultra light 155 mm, can
be developed. Another solution would be a towed piece, which could be
lifted by a Chinook as an alternative means of moving it into position.
Artillery
The artillery brigades, necessary to thicken up the fire-power, of the
other brigades, would be equipped with Multiple Launched Rocket
System (MLRS). The rockets
would include 'smart' ammunition
capable of destroying armour. Smart ammunition would also form a
proportion of the shells and bombs with all artillery and mortars
organic to brigades. MLRS can be lifted by Chinook.
Engineers
The cry 'in war there are never enough sappers', is more than just a
cliché. In every conflict, at whatever intensity, engineers are at a
