336
The Lifeblood of War
correct fuel, which might be re-routed, and pump-over to EPHE type
installations flown in for the purpose. Fuel for amphibious operations
should pose less of a problem, provided that the necessary tankers and
pumping equipment exist, and are in the right place.
Ammunition
Ammunition would be another major item. Again, it is less of a
problem in an amphibious operation, with the proviso that enough of
the right shipping and ship-shore movement assets are available.
Within Europe there are a number of options for moving the back-up
supplies of ammunition, not flown in with the force. Resupply could be
by air, road, rail, or sea; depending upon the operational deployment
area. With a move away from tank ammunition, and towards smart
artillery and mortar ammunition requiring less expenditure to damage
the target, there is a possibility that ammunition tonnages will be
reduced in future.
Countering Instability Both In and Out of Area
In areas where there is little or no logistic infrastructure and poor
communications, and accessible by sea, an amphibious force based on
shipping with its heavy lift capacity may provide the answer. These
forces, provided that they are correctly configured and stocked, are
inherently more flexible logistically than airborne forces, or ground
forces supported by airlift, or on long overland lines of communication.
It is here that the marine brigades would come into their own.
However, in many
instances a combination of amphibious and
airborne forces would be the best solution, with the bulk of the heavy
lift being seaborne.
The increasing threat to world stability and harmony posed by some
nations around the Mediterranean basin, and in the Middle East, has
been touched on earlier. The threat varies from the support
of
international terrorism, which is at the bottom end of the spectrum,
and is a menace to harmony, rather than world stability, to nuclear or
chemical blackmail which carries with it considerable perils for peace.
We will return to terrorism later, and consider the upper end of the
spectrum first.
In Area
The Southern Flank of NATO is particularly vulnerable for the
reasons touched on earlier. Because it is only possible to hazard a guess
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
337
at the place and timing of a threat to a Southern Flank nation, it is
difficult to draw up detailed contingency plans. The answer is the rapid
reaction and flexibility conferred by a rotary wing and parachute
capable force, supported by a tactical air transport force. If there has
been sufficient warning time, a marine brigade could be deployed by
sea to stand-off the threatened area, either to make the initial landing in
support of the threatened region, or reinforce the airborne force.14
There will be no question of stockpiling, so logistic supply is likely, in
the first instance, to be by air. Later, both sea and overland lines of
communication may be usd.
Out of Area
For operations 'out of the NATO area', the methods of supply
discussed above would still hold good. In addition, the United States
has pre-positioned stocks in Diego Garcia to support operations in the
Indian Ocean littoral. Provided these continue to be maintained, and
there is compatibility and standardisation, there is no reason why the
British, or any other NATO nation should not use them if taking part
in an operation alongside the Americans in this area. Both here and
elsewhere, these operations
might
include
combating guerrillas,
possibly at the behest of a state whose existence is threatened by a
guerrilla movement, and because it is in the West's interest to become
involved. Although such suggestions are not fashionable at present,
political fashions change, as do economic imperatives, and it would be
foolish to state categorically that it would never happen.
Guerrillas and Terrorists
It is necessary to distinguish between guerrillas and terrorists,
because confusion exists in some minds as to which are which. This is
because in both official pronouncements and in the press, the terms
'terrorist', 'guerrilla', 'commando', 'urban guerrilla', 'gunman', 'urban
terrorist', and others, are sometimes used in the same statement or
article as if they were synonymous. As Walter Lacquer says, the main
culprits in this respect are the 'simplificateurs terribles' in the media. He
goes on to say:
The essence of guerrilla warfare is to establish foci, or liberated areas, in the
countryside and to set up small military units which will gradually grow in
strength, number, and equipment-
from squads to companies and regiments,
eventually to divisions and armies, as in Yugoslavia and China in the Second
World War (and Vietnam, he might have added) in order to fight battles against
