126
The Lifeblood of War
convoys were used, sometimes as an 'informal distribution system'
calling at the depots in and near Pusan, by-passing the regular
distribution system, in an effort to obtain supplies more quickly. These
expeditions led to hoarding and waste.
Forward of the roadhead, often well behind the front line, supplies
were carried by Korean porters. Using an A-frame, each was expected
to carry fifty pounds ten miles daily. There were few helicopters
avallable before 1953, and these could lift only light loads. Some air-
drops were carried out, mostly by aircraft based in Japan, since there
were few airfields in Korea, and this proved very expensive. Pack
animals would have solved some of the problems of supplying forward
units, but there were few available in Korea, and expense, again,
precluded their importation.
This inflexible logistic system, with overdependence on railways, was
adequate for the situation over the period of stalemate after mid-1951.
But in the opinion of General Taylor, who took command in early
1953, although Eighth Army 'achieved a tactical mobility which
allowed it to shift its reserves readily to meet threatened points along
the immediate front, it depended for its mobility upon an elaborate
supply system which would have been most difficult to displace if our
forces had been required to move rapidly forward over considerable
distances into enemy territory'. So it is perhaps fortunate that the aims
of the United States government with regard to Korea, did not include
an advance from the general line reached in mid-1951; Eighth Army's
logistic system may not have been able to cope.
Operation STRANGLE
It is instructive to look at United Nations efforts to disrupt the
Chinese supply system over this same period of two years between July
1951 and the signing of the Armistice. Starting in August 1951, the Fifth
US Air Force under General Everest concentrated its efforts on the
interdiction of railways, bridges, roads, marshalling yards, and supply
points, in an attempt to slow down the flow of Chinese and North
Korean troops and equipment. The rail interdiction programme was
given the codename STRANGLE; whether the selection of this
particular title was a conscious decision or not, it was an unfortunate
choice being identical to the codename used for the 1944 rail
interdiction operation in Italy, about which Slessor had expressed
doubts.?* By October, American intelligence reported that the lines
127
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
FIG. 4.2 Bridge in North Korea after an air strike (IW M).
were being destroyed faster than the Communist forces could repair
them. At first the main bombing effort had been directed to the rail
bridges, but the Communists became adept at repairing or bypassing
the damage. They stockpiled spare bridge sections by the key bridges to
speed up the repair. The Americans retaliated by switching to cutting
the railway at several points along its length, which had the effect of
slowing down repairs. The United States and British Navies also
assisted in railway cutting operations, using carrier-born aircraft,
commando raids, and gunfire, the latter mainly on the East coast where
for many miles the line ran close to the sea. As the effort was stepped up,
it took the Communist forces as much as three days to repair breaks in
the rail system that had previously taken only one.
Despite this, rail traffic continued to move, and the line of
communication was not cut. The Communists managed to bring
forward winter clothing to the troops, even though it had to be carried
by porters. Interdiction made supply more difficult but not impossible.
The ingenuity of the Communists was one reason for the failure of
Operation STRANGLE to live up to its name. For example at an
important rail bridge north-east of Pyongyang, pilots kept reporting
the bridge out of service for lack of two spans. Only after a night
photograph was taken, was it discovered that the Communists fitted
