228
The Lifeblood of War
armoured brigades, still on the East Bank. After some rapid
redeployment, Adan reinforced this depleted brigade with two tank
battalions from one of his own armoured brigades, to act as a stop, and
swung another armoured brigade round to hit the Egyptians in the
flank. By 4 p.m., 86 out of the column of 96 Egyptian tanks had been
destroyed in less than an hour. 21 Adan led his tanks back to refuel and
re-fill with ammunition, before taking his division across the Canal.
Adan Crosses and Moves South
His troubles were not over. At 9.30 p.m., after driving over the
pontoon bridge at the head of his division, he pulled his armoured
personnel carrier (APC) off to one side to watch the column cross. To
his dismay he saw that only two tanks had joined him.
Egyptian
artillery fire had broken the link between two pontoons. Adan now
ordered the ferries to start carrying his tanks, and sent for a bridge-
layer tank to fill the gap in the pontoon bridge. By dawn on 18 October,
Adan's division had joined Sharon in the bridgehead.
FIG. 6.1
Pontoon bridge across the Suez Canal-Israeli logistic vehicles
crossing into Egypt (Popper).
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
229
All that day, Adan enlarged the bridgehead, to enable his tanks to get
out into the open desert beyond the green belt which extends each side
of the Sweetwater Canal. Meanwhile a strange convoy was creeping
towards the East Bank of the main Canal. Like worker ants moving the
body of a large insect, the 170 metre long preconstructed bridge was
towed and pushed by ten or more tanks.22 More tanks, anti-tank guns,
and anti-aircraft guns provided protection. By early evening the
convoy reached the Canal bank, and just after midnight, the bridge was
open to traffic. The Egyptian artillery had the original pontoon bridge
registered precisely, and were causing considerable casualties. On 19th
October another
pontoon
bridge was built just north
of the
preconstructed bridge, and the corridor on the East Bank was widened
by Israeli attacks pushing the Egyptians back about 8 kilometres.
Starting on 19 October, Adan eventually joined by Magan's 252nd
Armoured Division,23 struck south heading for Suez. Sharon pushed
north towards Ismailia.
The purpose of the southbound thrust was to encircle the Egyptian
Third Army located in Suez town, Port Tewfik, and then to move on
the east side of the Canal going north to the southern end of the Great
Bitter Lake. By 22 October, both divisions, having secured the vital
ground of the Geneifa Hills (about a third of the way on the axis to
Suez), had advanced to within 15-20 kilometres of their objectives, but
well to the west of the Canal. At this point Adan considered that, for
logistic reasons, he had to clear the route that ran through the green
belt between himself and the Canal. To winkle out SAGGERs and
RPG-7s concealed in the bushes and undergrowth would require more
infantry than he had available. During the night of 22/23 October, he
received infantry reinforcements, mostly from the Syrian front which
had stabilised, transported by helicopter and bus;
but no further
armoured fighting vehicles. However, he had captured some Egyptian
APCs. Grouping his infantry reinforcements with two battalions he
had received earlier, to make up a brigade of five battalions under his
deputy commander, he gave them the captured APCs. It is a measure of
the flexibility and standard of training of the Israeli army that, having
re-grouped units switched from a front 450 kilometres away, and re-
equipped them with captured and unfamiliar APCs, they could be
pitched straight into battle without undue pause. One ventures to
suggest that no other army in the world, save the German Panzer and
Panzer Grenadier divisions of the Second World War, could have done
likewise. Leaving most of his infantry, and one armoured brigade to
clear his chosen line of communication, Adan charged south, with
