188
The Lifeblood of War
form of sea pay' was received by everybody in the Navy, irrespective of
whether or not they did time at sea.
Training under these conditions was often a farce. The commandant
of the ARVN basic training school, through which all recruits for the
Army, for both regular and reserve units passed, was described by the
United States Army Attaché in Saigon, as a pompous, fat, stupid man
.. who will do anything to increase his personal fortune.' He was
reported to be financing a brothel run by his mistress. His brother
generals were scandalised; not by his business involvement with
whores, that was commonplace, but because he flaunted his relation-
ship with the madam. It was not surprising, therefore, that at a lower
level, standards that Vietnamese officers had learned in Army schools
in the United States, were instantly dropped when they arrived back in
South Vietnam.29
The difficulties in equipping and training the ARVN were aggra-
vated by differences in opinion on its role, and hence its organisation.
The problem was that there were two types of adversary: a potential
enemy, the NVA increasingly organised on conventional lines; and an
actual enemy, the Viet Cong, at that time a guerrilla force. General
Williams, the commander of the USMAAG, was of the opinion that
countering insurgency was not the primary business of the AR VN. The
outcome was that although Williams denied that the ARVN divisions
were carbon copies of their American counterparts, they were actually
very alike in organisation. Although the divisions were designed to be
superior in firepower to the NVA formations, they were intended to
fight in jungle, swamp, and mountains. Thus Williams maintained that
the soldiers in the divisions had the same foot mobility as a guerrilla.
This was a delusion, because although the riflemen could move on foot
away from roads, their guns, mortars, the ammunition for these, and
their general logistic back-up could not do so; the divisions were
therefore road-bound. This divisional organisation, and the advice on
which it was based, were symptomatic of a serious deficiency; the lack
of any Counter Insurgency doctrine in the United States Army in the
1950s. When eventually the ARVN, contrary to Williams's advice,
deployed against the Viet Cong, they were able, despite ponderous and
bungled operations, to deal them some heavy blows and severely
dented their organisation and morale. It was at this point, with the Viet
Cong organisation seriously weakened in some areas, that Ho Chi
Minh issued the directive, referred to earlier, on the future course of the
war. Despite this being one of a number of key policy decisions in the
course of the thirty year long war in Indo-China, the insurgency was still
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
189
containable. By March 1960 the armed strength of the Viet Cong in the
whole country was only between three and four thousand.3° The
insurgency was not contained because the ARVN was incompetent,
corrupt, badly led, lacked motivation, had been penetrated by Viet
Cong agents and had low morale. Like most armies, the ARVN was the
mirror image of the society from which it came; in this case the corrupt
Diem régime which was ill-equipped morally and politically to cope
with a burgeoning social revolution throughout the country.
1961: The First American Helicopter Units Are
Committed
By late 1961, there was every prospect of Viet Cong victory in South
Vietnam. At this point President Kennedy made the decision to
commit US helicopter companies to South Vietnam. He had jibbed at
the introduction of US ground troops, and had settled for the
helicopter-only option. It was a decision which was to lead eventually
to the commitment of United States ground troops to the war. To begin
with, the introduction of the helicopters on the battlefield took the Viet
Cong by surprise, and for several months the ARVN inflicted a series of
heavy defeats on them. These operations were at the lowest end of the
scale of airmobile operations. The helicopters were used as 'battle
taxis', there were no heavy lift helicopters to move guns and logistic
loads, and no armed helicopters to give fire support. Reactions to
intelligence were slow and the intelligence itself often flawed. The
American advisers spent much time training the South Vietnamese
troops in command and control of heliborne operations,
ordination of fire support and the bread and butter skills of airmobile
soldiering. The ARVIN soldiers were hesitant and lacked drive, but
once again Giap was caught on the hop, as he had been by French
parachute operations, by a weapon of which he had no personal
experience. This state of affairs did not last for long. The Viet Cong
soon learned how vulnerable the helicopters were to ground fire,
particularly if unsupported by armed helicopters. Instead of running,
they fired at the troop carrying helicopters, ambushed the landing
zones, or retired to mountainous and jungle areas outside the
operational radius of the obsolescent H-21 helicopters. Nevertheless,
the battle seemed to be going the ARVN's way for a while.
The
USMAAG, now renamed the United States Military
Assistance
Command Vietnam (USMACV), began to feel optimistic about the
