260
The Lifeblood of War
of the task force carriers from Portsmouth, would have been mortitying
for the Navy and the government, apart from delaying her passage
south. Five Chinooks were embarked in Atlantic Conveyor, one being
flown off at Ascension to assist with lifting stores to ships as they
passed. In one day 350 tons were taken out; the main limitation to
Chinook operations was the inability of ships' crews to clear the deck of
such huge loads before the arrival of the next. 12
... and Tankers
Nine RAF Harriers (GRs), fitted with AAR probes, flew from the
United Kingdom to Ascension, fuelled by Victor tankers en route. The
journey took nine hours and fifteen minutes. They, and eight Sea
Harriers (SHARs) which had flown out, supported by air tankers
earlier, joined Atlantic Conveyor at Ascension. Air tanking also made
possible the two Vulcan attacks on Stanley airfield, the Nimrod patrols
as far south as South Georgia and off the coast of Argentina, and the
C-130 air drops to the ships in the Total Exclusion Zone (TEZ), within
200 miles of the Falkland Islands. The surveillance sorties by the
Nimrods lasted for between seventeen to nineteen hours and required
up to twelve Victor tankers to provide fuel twice outbound, and a top-
up during the return trip. The Nimrod could spend about four hours on
station. The air tanker proved itself a significant force multiplier.
A Council of War
Having glanced at the logistics of the air and sea war, it is time to
return to the landing force, and their logistic problems. Starting on
17 April, the ships of the Amphibious Group began arriving at
Ascension Island. Among the first was HMS Fearless, a Landing
Platform Dock (LPD), the headquarters ship of Commodore Clapp,
commander of the Amphibious Task Group, and Brigadier Thomp-
son, commander of the Landing Force Task Group. 13 The same day,
Admiral Fieldhouse arrived by VC-10 with Major General Moore his
land deputy and Air Marshal Curtiss his Air Commander. Admiral
Fieldhouse chaired a council of war on board HMS Hermes, at which a
number of matters were raised, and decisions taken on some. It was
decided that:
1. Admiral Woodward was to press on with the Carrier Battle Group to attempt
to win the air and sea battle before any amphibious landing took place. He was
also responsible for inserting special forces patrols to reconnoitre a number of
locations at the behest of Clapp and Thompson. Meanwhile, the Amphibious
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
261
Task Group would remain at Ascension and carry out a much needed re-stow of
men, stores and vehicles.
2. Any landings would be carried out on East Falkland, and proposals for landing
on West Falkland were rejected. Exactly where the landings on East Falkland
would take place depended on a number of factors, including beaches and enemy
locations. Special forces patrols would be tasked to report on these, among other
things. Meanwhile Clapp and Thompson would prepare various options for
landing areas.
3. The Commando Brigade should be reinforced, and arrangements for this were
already in hand. The reinforcements included another parachute battalion,
another battery of light guns, more medics, another troop of engineers, more
Blowpipes, and another flight of light helicopters. The Brigade strength with these
reinforcements would be around 5,500 men,
including live commandos or
battalions, twenty-four 105 mm light guns, eight tracked armoured reconnais-
sance vehicles, a battery of Rapier surface-to-air missiles (SAM), fifteen light
helicopters, and a logistic regiment.
4. The air battle would be won before the amphibious operation took place. This
was categorically stated by the Task Force commander, Admiral Fieldhouse, not
for the first time.
It was agreed that:
1. The Amphibious Group needed more ships, some of which were en route
already, but others, such as another LPD, should now be sent south.
2. With the Argentine forces on the Islands assessed as being around 10,000
strong, of which about 7,500 were believed to be in the Stanley area, at least
another brigade was required to even up the numbers.
This would require a
divisional headquarters to come south to take command of the two brigades. The
second brigade was the 5th Infantry Brigade, stationed in the United Kingdom.
At this meeting, Woodward stated that from about the end of May
the severe South Atlantic weather and pace of operations would begin
to take their toll on ship serviceability. He forecast that by mid-to-late
June, equipment failure on the majority of warships with the original
task groups would cause severe restrictions on
their operational
capability. This naval sustainability limitation was ultimately to have a
profound effect on the land battle.
The Chain of Command
By this time the chain of command had been established as follows:
All task group commanders reported direct to CTF 317 at Northwood.
Admiral Woodward was NOT the task force commander, although he
was senior task group commander, and had some co-ordinating
responsibility.
The table below does not show two other task groups which do not
concern us: the South Georgia Task Group, and the Sub-surface Task
Group.
