The Lifeblood of War
Japanese busy in Assam and Arakan, would assist Stilwell in taking his
objectives.
Japanese Plans
The Japanese were planning too. Mindful that their overall aim in
the region was to secure the best terrain from which to defend Burma,
General Kawabe, the Japanese commander, saw that he could achieve
this if he shortened his long and vulnerable main defence line on the
Chindwin on the central front by advancing to capture the Imphal
plain and Kohima. He would then control the few approaches from
India through the mountains. In his eyes he would also be better placed
logistically. The large rice crop in Assam would feed his army, and he
could supply himself from the British dumps and bases at Manipur
Road, Kohima, and Imphal. The British, denied these bases would be
forced back to India. At the same time he would be astride Stilwell's
lines of communication, forcing him to withdraw from the northern
front. Finally, by capturing the airfields in Assam, he would stop the
airlift over the 'Hump'. As a deception, Kawabe planned to advance in
the south, in the Arakan, in February, threatening Chittagong and
Calcutta, in sufficient strength to force Slim to reinforce the Arakan
from the central front, 300 miles away, thus weakening 4 Corps, on
whom the main attack would fall. In the Arakan, he also planned on
living off his enemy. So on neither front did the Japanese plans have any
solid logistic foundation. They relied almost totally on capturing
British stocks, and until they did, on both fronts they would be
extending their own lines of communication in difficult country, and in
addition on the central front, across a large river, the Chindwin.
The Value of Timely Intelligence
Allied intelligence assessments gave Slim forewarning
of the
Japanese intentions, and he amended his own plans accordingly.
Deeming the central front the most vital, he decided to withdraw
4 Corps to the Imphal plain and there receive the Japanese attack in the
best position for defence. Logistically it would give him an advantage,
his lines of communication from his railheads, airfields, bases and
supply depots to forward troops would be shortened. He ordered
15 Corps, in the Arakan, to hold its ground, warning the corps
commander that not only would he not be reinforced, but, in addition,
he was to stand by to send reinforcements north to Imphal; once the
Three Campaigns in a Global War
southern Japanese offensive died away. Stilwell and Wingate were to
proceed as before.
The Japanese Offensive in the Arakan February 1943
On 4 February the Japanese offensive in the Arakan started. They
cut the lines of communication of 7th Indian Division, and surrounded
the administrative area. However, neither withdrew. Administrative
areas had by now formulated a defensive tactic which involved setting
up a perimeter defence, known as an Admin Box, and dominating the
surrounding area by patrolling. All administrative personnel, including
clerks, and coolies, were armed and trained to shoot. The Admin Box
put up such a stout resistance, that the Japanese utterly failed to supply
themselves at their enemy's expense. It was air supply that made this
stand possible. Men knew that if they stayed and fought, they would be
supplied with food and ammunition. During the 17-day siege 3,000
tons of stores were dropped. Acting on intelligence, and anticipating
the attack, ten days supplies for 40,000 men had been accumulated near
the airfields, and aircraft warned for the task. It cost the Japanese
nearly 8,000 men, and by the time the starving survivors retreated, the
myth that they could live for long periods on a few handfuls of rice and
local resources had been exploded.
Wingate's Second Operation
Meanwhile the Allied plans went ahead. Wingate's part in these was
to capture and dominate the whole of the Indaw-Katha area down to
the 24th Parallel, which he would hold until relieved by the Chinese
under Stilwell and by 14th Army. It is worth covering these operations
in sufficient detail to see how they fitted into the overall Allied plan as it
actually unfolded; they were to point up a number of lessons, not least,
one of logistic priorities.
The penetration took place in three phases. First, an approach
march by 16th Infantry Brigade. Second, the fly-in of 77th Indian and
111th Indian Infantry Brigades to three landing zones, nicknamed
Broadway, Piccadilly and Chowringhee. Third, a follow-up air-lift by
14th Infantry and 3rd West African Brigades. The brigades were to
establish strongholds, based on an airstrip through which they would
be supplied. From the strongholds, 'floater' columns would operate to
harass the Japanese lines of communication, and at the same time
SONY
