The Lifeblood of War
CONCLUSIONS
When the Second World War came to an end after the dropping of
the atomic bomb on Nagasaki on 9 August 1945, the logisticians could
congratulate themselves on their achievement, without which Victory
could never have been attained, but they could not rest on their laurels.
While the operational staffs could perhaps unwind a little, the
logisticians had, among other things, to provide fuel and food to
populations, as well as the occupying troops; move large bodies of men
back to bases, and finally to their home countries; ship stores home, or
dispose of them. The Allied logisticians triumphed over difficulties by
the determined application of the principles of Foresight, Economy,
Flexibility, Simplicity, and Co-operation. Had they not done so, the
undeniably greater logistic potential of the Allies over the Axis forces,
in terms of lift and supply, could not have been brought to bear so
effectively.
Unlike the Germans or the Russians, the Americans and the British,
in their campaigns against all the Axis powers, had to cope with the
complexities of combined operations, joint command, long vulnerable
sea lines of communication, and all the problems associated with beach
and port operating. Twice only, the campaigns in Tunisia, and in Egypt
and Tripolitania, were the Italians and the Germans to face similar
problems, with far shorter, direct sea lines of communication across the
Mediterranean. Although these were subject to Allied air and sea
interdiction,29
the Germans, too, in their turn, were able,
appreciable periods, to deny the use of the Mediterranean to the Allies,
thanks to airfields in Crete, Sicily and Italy. Furthermore, in German
eyes these campaigns on the North African littoral were sideshows, and
at a pinch could be abandoned without jeopardising the eventual
outcome overall, whereas to the British at least, they were crucial to the
conduct of the war. However, the cost to Hitler in terms of the loss of
manpower he suffered rather than surrender in North Africa was by no
means negligible.
The Japanese were in a different position altogether from their Axis
allies; driven into expanding south into the Pacific and south-west into
Southeast Asia, as a result of being on the horns of a logistic dilemma,
expressed by Paul Kennedy thus:
Seen from Tokyo's viewpoint, however, the decision to expand southward was
utterly logical. The West's embargo on trade with Japan and freezing of its assets
in July 1941 (following Tokyo's seizure of French Indochina) made both the army
and the navy acutely aware that unless they gave into American political demands
(.e.; wind up the campaign in China - Author's emphasis) or attempted to seize the
Three Campaigns in a Global War
101
oil and raw materials supplies of Southeast Asia, they would be economically
ruined within a matter of months. From July 1941, therefore, a northern war
against Russia became virtually impossible and southern operations virtually
The Japanese thus extended themselves strategically and logistically
for ammunition, equipment and other warlike stores, although not fuel
and food. However once they had staked out their claims, they were in
essence on the defensive, and to apply the necessary overwhelming
force', the Allies, and the Americans in particular, had to haul their
men, beans, bullets and fuel at least as far from the home base as did the
Japanese, and maintain the pressure against a fanatical enemy until he
was, in Churchill's words, 'ground to a powder'.
Logistically, as in every other way, the Second World War was by far
the most testing war in history. The combatants had learned
considerably in the five years following the remark by the then Major
General Paget in 1940:
It has become the habit of the British Army in recent years to assume that what the
Civey al Sal con ere to be political grous aloney did exit, administra-
Because of advances in technology, notably in specialised shipping
and craft, transport aircraft, and motor vehicles (both tracked and
wheeled), and always provided there were enough of these assets,
supplies could be carried forward to keep up with the tempo of
operations in the Second World War in a manner that had been
unattainable in the First. Technology had not yet progressed to the
stage where equipment was so complex and expensive that cost was a
limitation on the numbers that could be produced. The quantity of
tanks, guns, and aircraft that a nation could produce were a factor of
the state of its industry, coupled with its access to raw materials.
Experience had shown that industrialised nations, even when submit-
ted to intensive bombing, could manufacture enough to keep abreast of
the expenditure of supplies (the most important being ammunition),
and replace losses in equipment. In this respect, the United States, who
had by far the greatest industrial base, and were never bombed,
outstripped all others. The rate of attrition of supplies was never a
problem for the United States, nor its allies. Neither was the fighting
SONY
