362
The Lifeblood of War
25. Hermes,
W. G., The United States Army in the Korean War, Truce Tent and
Fighting Front, p. 105.
26. See Chapter 3.
27. Hermes, p. 195, quoting COMNAVFE, Command and Historical Report, Feb. 52,
pp. 1-4.
28. Hermes, p. 319, quoting USAF Historical Study 127, United States Operations in
the Korean Conflict 1 July 52-27 July 53, p. 26.
29. Hermes, p. 196, quoting Air Interdiction Program in HQ Eighth Army, General
Administration files, March 52, Paper 21.
30. Hermes, pp. 511-512.
Chapter 5: Insufficiency and Superabundance
1. French Indo-China consisted of the present countries of Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam.
2. Roy, The Battle of Dien Bien Phu, p. 315.
3. The French Army in Indo-China was a colourful mixture, reflecting its peculiar
heritage and tradition of colonial service. Historically French conscripts served
only to defend their country. Forces to serve outside Metropolitan France were
raised either from Frenchmen, and, in the case of La Légion Étranger, other
Europeans as well, volunteering specifically for service overseas,
or
from
volunteers from France's numerous colonies. The regiments of the French Foreign
Legion; Régiment Etranger d Infanterie (RE), and Régiment Étranger Parachutiste
(REP, need
no introduction.
But for example: Batailions de Parachutistes
Coloniaux (BPC) were manned by Frenchmen; Régiment d'Infanterie Coloniale au
Maroc, by Moroccans: Infanterie de la Marine, by Frenchmen serving in a
egiment that had long since severed its connexion with the sea, and was
exclusively recruited for service overseas. The officers for these 'colonial' forces,
including the Legion, were exclusively French regulars, products of the French
Military Academy, St Cyr. In this book, the term 'French troops' includes men of
all nationalities serving in the French colonial army. from Moroccans, Viella
mese, Laotians, Cambodians, Europeans of every race, including ex-SS Germans,
to Frenchmen. The term Vietnamese troops refers to the Vietnamese National
- To V..
4. The Vietminh, and later the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong, had three categories
of fighting units. Although the proportions of man and woman-power assigned to
each group was to change as the years passed, the groupings never did. They were:
(a) The Main Force units, in Round One, the regular units of the Vietminh
fighting the French. In Round Two, the regulars of the North Vietnamese
Army and the Viet Cong engaging the Americans and the South Vietnamese.
These units were well led, well trained, and brave. Their size grew from
platoons in 1944, to divisions. corps and Fronts (a Soviet expression denoting
a group of armies operating on a particular front). Eventually, they were
equipped with armour, artillery, aircraft and anti-aircraft guns and missiles.
They always came directly under the commander-in-chief of the army, or a
Front or area commander.
(b) The Regional or Local forces were second line troops found from a
province or district. The Regional forces were further subdivided:
(1) Provincial forces, about battalion size, reasonably well armed, recruited
from, and operating in, their province.
(2) District forces, less well armed, recruited from and operating in their
district.
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
363
Local forces were commanded by the Commander-in-Chief and controlled
through the Interzone which included several provinces. Early in Round One,
the Vietminh had five Interzones, but later redesignated them Military
Regions (MRs): four in North Vietnam, and one, MR V, in the north of South
Vietnam. In Round Two, another nine MRs were set up in the rest of South
Vietnam. The Regional Forces varied in performance, but were essentially
ight infantry, carrying out reconnaissance and screening tasks for Main
Force units, and ambushing and attacking enemy troops when they invaded
heir tactical arca.
(c) Guerrillas or Popular Forces, raised by hamlets and villages and sub-
divided:
(1) The Dan Quan, consisting of both sexes and all ages, and without any
fighting capability.
(2) The Dan Quan Du Kich, consisting of men aged 18-45 which carried
out combat operations. They were without uniforms, and ill equipped.
They worked in the fields by day, and occasionally attacked enemy
outposts at night.
Controlled by the Commander-in-Chief through the Interzone/MR, province
and district, the main task of both groups of Popular Forces was to lay booby
traps, and act as intelligence gatherers and porters for the Main and Regional
Force units.
The recruiting and training system was interesting, and innovative. All soldiers
started as guerrillas.
The best men were sent to Regional Forces for further
"blooding', the most capable being further promoted to the Main Forces. So Main
Forces received a trained, and often very experienced recruit. Its disadvantage was
that when Main or Regional forces had taken heavy casualties, guerrilla units were
milked to provide reinforcements, sometimes at the expense of their own fighting
capability.
Davidson, p. 35, The Military Art, p. 79.
6. Fall, Street Without Joy, p. 17.
7. Personnel G1; Intelligence G2; Operations-
-G3; Logistics
8. At least at those attended by the Author, both as a logistic staff officer in the British
Army Far East Land Forces Headquarters in the period 1966/67, and as an
Assistant Secretary to the British Chiefs of Staff Committee in 1970/71.
9. Davidson, pp. 59-60. Giap's figures for loads are interesting, quoting O'Niell,
General Giap- Politician and Strategist, p. 72:
A man could lill . •
. 55 lbs of rice or 33-44 lbs of arms and munitions over
15.5 miles of easy country by day, or 12.4 miles by night; 28 lbs of rice or
22-33 lbs of munitions over 9 miles of mountainous country by day, or
7.5 miles by night. A buffalo cart could move 770 Ibs over 7.5 miles per day. A
horse cart could move 473 Ibs over 12.4 miles per day.'
10. O'Ballance, The Indo-China War 1945-54: A Study in Guerrilla Warfare, p. 118
and Fall, Street Without Joy, p. 33, who gives mortars.
11. Davidson, pp. 76-77, gives late 1949 as the date when Giap organised his
regiments into divisions. Although the Author would respectfully submit that
Davidson's statement that the division is the smallest unit to combine all ground
arms, to maintain itself, and to fight independently, is not strictly correct; a brigade
group can do all these things.
Giap formed five divisions, of which the 308th
became, in Davidson's words, 'one of the élite divisions in the military world'.
12. Fall, Street Without Joy, p. 33.
13. De Lattre's strategy was aimed at increasing French offensive strength to enable
him to seize the initiative from Giap. Because the French Government would not
provide additional troops, he had to reduce the number of French troops in static
