The Lifeblood of War
to ensure the survival of Byzantium for almost another four hundred
years.
The Crusades
The appeal, in 1095, by the Emperor Alexius to the Pope for
assistance in clearing Anatolia of Turks, probably in the hope of
attracting a few thousand mercenaries, was to set in train a series of
Western European expeditions to the Eastern Mediterranean; the
Crusades. Although there were other campaigns waged under the title
Crusade, against the Slavs, the Moors, and the Cathars, we are
concerned here only with the campaigns in Asia Minor and Palestine.
For not least among the many skills which Western Europeans
acquired in the East, was a quantum leap in various branches of the
military art.
The First Crusade
The First Crusade, from 1096 to 1099, which ended in the capture of
Jerusalem, started inauspiciously. The main contingents from Nor-
mandy, England, France, Flanders, Germany, and Norman Sicily,
grouped under no less than ten leaders, made up an indisciplined army
of about 50,000 which at times was no better than a rabble. Its
organisation, or rather lack of it, was a reflection of the state of the
military art in Western Europe at the time. Although religious fervour
and a wish to free the 'Holy Land' from Muslim rule motivated many of
the Crusaders, it is also likely that the possibility of carrying out new
fiefdoms was not too far beneath the surface in the aspirations of a
significant number of those who marched under the banner of Christ.
From the beginning, there was friction within the army, and distrust
of the Byzantines, which was returned. The Crusaders were unenthu-
siastic at being used to restore lost Byzantine territories, and, in return,
the Emperor had no interest in the recapture of Jerusalem. This mutual
divergence of views was to have adverse effects on this and most
subsequent Crusades. The First Crusade nearly came to grief twice
through lack of a supply system. Whilst besieging Antioch the
Crusaders nearly starved, only being saved by the unexpected arrival of
small English and Pisan fleets, which captured two ports and brought
provisions. After capturing the city, the Crusaders were besieged in
their turn and, cut off from their ports, almost starved a second time.
However, inspired by the discovery of a holy relic, they sortied and
defeated the besieging army.
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
In the following year, a much reduced army advanced south along
the coast to Jaffa. They appeared to have learned the logistic lessons of
the preceding years campaigning.
There was far more co-operation
between national contingents. This time they had the benefit of the
Pisan fleet sailing parallel to their route to provide logistic support
close at hand. That is, until they turned inland to Jerusalem. Here they
were too small in numbers to blockade the city completely, so the
defenders, who more numerous, could not be starved into submission.
In addition, the governor of Jerusalem had taken the precaution of
driving the flocks of goats and sheep and the herds of cattle from the
countryside into the city, as well as laying in large stocks of food. He
sent an urgent request to the Caliph of Egypt for assistance. The
Crusaders were desperately short of water at this time, because the
governor had also poisoned most of the wells outside the city. There
was no food to be had locally, and their supply line to Jaffa, 30 miles
away as the crow
flies, was far too long for them to control
continuously. For logistical and tactical reasons, time was not on the
side of the Crusaders. Whether it was these imperatives, or the urgings
of an ancient Christian hermit who lived near the Mount of Olives, that
persuaded the Crusaders to mount an assault as soon as possible,
without siege weapons, is not clear. Perhaps their belief in the hermit's
pronouncement that, armed with faith in God, they would be
victorious was enough to persuade them that they had nothing to lose
by making the attempt. Unfortunately, faith alone was no substitute for
the right equipment, and although the Crusaders' headlong attack
overran the outer defences very quickly, they were unable to scale the
inner walls. They lacked sufficient scaling ladders to get enough men on
top to swamp the defenders, and had insufficient fire power, in the form
of missile throwers, to keep the defenders' heads down. After enduring
three hours under a hail of arrows and stones, the Crusaders withdrew.
Their gloom at this reverse was lightened by the arrival of the English
and Genoese fleets at Jaffa, loaded with food and war material. But
convoying it to Jerusalem was a time consuming operation, expensive
in manpower and animals, and the stocks were enough to last only a
short time. More serious was the problem of finding enough stout
timber to build assault towers to roll up to the walls. Eventually, the
nearest suitable timber was found in wooded hills near Nablus, fifty
miles north of Jerusalem. Transporting it to the scene of operations was
yet another drain on manpower and animals. The painfully slow
procession of Muslim prisoners and pack animals dragging the huge
baulks over the rough terrain would have been a tempting target for an
