154
The Lifeblood of War
French received over 130,000 tons of equipment including 53 million
rounds of ammunition, 8,000 vehicles, 650 combat vehicles,
aircraft, 3,500 radio sets, and 14,000 automatic weapons. Part of the
difficulty in supplying the French was the enormously long line of
communication stretching back from Haiphong and Saigon across the
Pacific to the United States. The MAAG suggested to the French that
they manufacture simple items in Vietnam.
There was
ample
manpower, wood and coal in-country. With simple American machine
tools, the Vietnamese could make cartridge clips, tinned rations, tyres
and tubes, webbing equipment, camouflage nets and small arms
ammunition, and probably at a lower cost, because Vietnamese
workers were paid less than their counterparts in America. The French
were unenthusiastic, partly because they did not wish to lose control of
the distribution of military equipment, which might find its way into
the hands of the Vietminh. But their main concern seems to have been
to ensure the continued dependence of the Indo-Chinese on France. In
the end nothing was done to set up a local military equipment industry.
However, Giap was right to be concerned about United States aid to
the French, and to accord it a high priority among the factors to be
taken into account in deciding on the timing of his offensives.
Contemporary observers attribute the narrow French victories in the
first half of 1951 to the arrival of American equipment and weapons;
although there was at least one occasion when only the personal
intervention of the Commander of the USMAAG produced the
supplies to the hard-pressed French in time to avert defeat. 18
Giap Re-Organises and Re-Equips
By the time the monsoon ended in September 1952, Giap had
increased the number of his main force units to six infantry divisions,
four independent infantry regiments, and six independent infantry
battalions. The Chinese had equipped all these units with plenty of
machine guns and mortars. Giap also formed a heavy division which
provided support to the infantry formations. For this purpose the
division was equipped with 120 mm mortars, 105 mm howitzers, and
anti-aircraft guns of 20 mm and 40 mm calibre. His main force units
totalled about 120,000 men. Regional troop strength was about 75,000
and guerrillas about 200,000. The French, including the air force and
navy, numbered about 90,000 men. The Vietnamese National Army
was about 100,000 strong, but of very little use. Giap could use his
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
155
entire main force of 120,000 men for offensive action, whereas the
French, hampered by having to deal with guerrillas in their rear, and
with large numbers tied to defending the de Lattre Line, could find only
about 50,000 men for an attack.
He Strikes Again
Giap had learnt from his reverses the previous year, and from the
Hoa Binh battle. Most important, he must not attempt to attack the de
Lattre Line, where the French enjoyed all of the advantages. He must
exploit the French weaknesses: their inability to logistically support a
large force more than a few miles outside the de Lattre Line; the
political compulsion to defend friendly tribes such as the T'ais and th
Muongs, and supporters, such as the Catholics; as the distance awa
from the Delta increased, so the effectiveness of their offensive air
support diminished; and, finally, of all their soldiers
deployed
throughout Vietnam, they could spare less than half for an offensive.
With these points in mind, Giap selected as his first objective the string
of forts along the Fan Si Pan range of low mountains between the Red
and Black Rivers. The tribal capital of the T'ais at Nghia Lo was the
key post along the ridge. To the south of the Black River the French
had another string of forts. The French had to react to any move by
Giap in this area. As soon as they discovered the direction of his
offensive, they dropped a colonial parachute battalion to cover the
withdrawal of the scattered detachments manning the forts to the Black
River. In the ensuing battle, Nghia Lo was overrun, and although the
parachute battalion fought with great bravery and skill, it was
destroyed. Fortunately for the French posts on the south side of the
Black River, the Vietminh offensive began to run out of steam, because
Giap's logistic system could not keep pace with his advance. He halted,
then bypassed the forts, to overrun the small garrison of a place called
Dien Bien Phu.
The French Strike Back: Operation LORRAINE
After reinforcing the forts bypassed by Giap, the French struck out
for his supply base in the Viet Bac, using about 30,000 men, all the
mobile forces they had available. They hoped to force him to withdraw
by threatening to cut his logistic line of communication. The French
plan was complicated, and involved a number of inter-connecting
moves; overland, by river, and by parachute. Twelve days after the
