212
The Lifeblood of War
and controlling helicopters. Infantry/tank co-operation was poor.
Training would have sorted out these deficiencies, but the training
standards of the AR VN were little better than they had been in the mid-
1950s. It was too late to start learning the tricks of the trade locked in
combat with the battle-wise NVA formations. Having advanced about
half way to Tchepone, President Thieu of South Vietnam, ordered the
Corps commander to halt. He feared heavy casualties before the
election which was due soon. In any case, two of the divisions, the
airborne and the marines, were his insurance against a coup. It was
Diem at Ap Bac over again. Thieu interfered constantly, his final folly
to order two battalions to fly forward 65 kilometres to Tchepone as a
publicity stunt. They had to be quickly withdrawn a day later to avoid
being wiped out by the NVA.
While the ARVN troops waited, all momentum lost, the NVA
moved fast to destroy them, eventually assembling over four divisions,
with tanks, artillery, and large numbers of flak guns. When the ARV.N
started to withdraw losses were high, on both sides. The ARVN were
ambushed, and helicopters were shot down as they evacuated the
troops.
The Americans lost
108 helicopters
destroyed and 618
damaged. The losses on the NVA side were huge, caused by American
B-52s and fighter ground attack aircrat. The Ho Chi Minh Trail was in
full operation a week after the ARVN withdrawal.
American Culpability
Apart from the ARVN faults, the Americans must also bear a share
of the wane or be taure on tans son he. The hangou
assessments were far too optimistic, despite there being indications that
the NVA had been warned in advance of an assault into Laos of the
DZ. Even before the NVA started to move in reinforcements, there
were sufficient forces in the area (22,000 men) to provide formidable
opposition to the three weak ARVN divisions of doubtful fighting
quality. Route 9, which had been assessed as a suitable axis for armour,
turned out to be a neglected forty-year old, single lane road with high
shoulders on both sides and no manoeuvre room. As units advanced
they found the area pockmarked with huge bomb craters, undetected
earlier because of the dense grass and bamboo. The armoured vehicles
were therefore restricted to the road. It was like the operations
mounted by the French all over again.
It is possible that none of the mistakes and deficiencies above would
have mattered, but for the greatest error on the part of the Americans
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
213
and the AR VN: failing to appreciate that, for logistic reasons, the NVA
were compelled to fight for their bases in Laos. There is a reason for this
misappreciation; never before in Round Two or Three had the
NVA/VC fought resolutely to defend their base areas. But in all
previous cases, although the base areas had been important, they had
not been absolutely vital to continued NVA/VC operations in South
Vietnam. The Ho Chi Minh Trail was the only line of communication
to Cambodia, southern Laos, and South Vietnam. Had the ARVN
succeeded in cutting this life-line, destroying existing stocks, and
stopping the flow of supplies for three months, the logistic build-up for
the NVA offensive planned for spring 1972 would have been set back to
the extent that the offensive would have been unsustainable. ARVN
success would have inflicted a crushing defeat to the NVA, and bought
time. Time to continue with Vietnamisation, time to keep the
communist forces off-balance while the American troop withdrawals
continued uninterrupted. Giap could not afford a set-back of these
dimensions; logistic imperatives drove him to defend his line of
communication and his stocks with all the power he could muster.
Spring 1972: The NVA Offensive
The NVA spring, or Easter offensive of 1972, started on 30 March.
They deployed a conventional army of about 120,000 men in fourteen
divisions and twenty-six independent regiments supported by masses
of tanks and artillery, a force equivalent to twenty divisions. The Viet
Cong played almost no part. A massive re-equipping programme had
been instituted in the NVA. Russian T-34 and T-52 tanks, surface to air
missiles, and 130mm guns poured into North Vietnam.
NVA
formations in Laos were recalled, reinforced, re-equipped and
retrained before returning to their jumping off positions for the
Offensive. Giap planned a fast-moving, modern war, using tanks,
artillery and infantry. He lacked only air support. His concept was
three simultaneous attacks. In the north his objectives were Quang Tri
City and Hue, with the aim of expelling all South Vietnamese troops
and authorities from the two northern provinces of Vietnam. If this was
successful, he would extend the border of North Vietnam as far as Da
Nang. In the centre, he planned to cut South Vietnam in two along a
line Kontum-Hoai Nhon. In the south, three divisions would advance
on an axis Loc Ninh/An Loc to threaten Saigon, while another division
attacked in the Mekong Delta to seize rice and territory while tying
down the ARVN troops, and preventing them reinforcing elsewhere.
