The Lifeblood of War
formations shipped from India to the Middle East, were met by that
theatre, whose lines of communication stretched back to Britain, round
the Cape of Good Hope, but did not include India. The same applied to
troops from India stationed in Malaya. Most stocks, particularly the
heaviest item, ammunition, were shipped direct from Britain and, until
the fighting started, consumption was low. With minor exceptions,
India only fitted into the logistic framework when supplying troops
stationed on the North West Frontier and the understrength division
not suring to
in Burma; and here again, consumption was low.
Historically, the threat to India had always been perceived as coming
from the North-West. The railways were orientated to cater for this.
Before the Second World War, no thought had been given to India as a
base for operations elsewhere, least of all towards the East. Early in the
war, bases and depots had been built to serve Bombay and the North-
West Frontier. But there was no such infrastructure to supply military
activity on the eastern frontier.
The onset of the war with Japan saw a fundamental change. As a
consequence of India becoming the base for South East Asia Command
(SEAC), fighting the campaign against the Japanese in Assam, Burma,
and the Far East, the logistic system had to be completely re-orientated
and vastly expanded. Geography, as ever, was crucial and it is
necessary to examine the terrain and climate in Eastern Assam and
Burma in some detail, and the communications in India, if the
problems facing the Allies, particularly logistical, are to be properly
understood.
Eastern Assam and Burma
Just south of the great Brahmaputra river, which flows in a generally
south-westerly direction through Assam, lie the Naga hills, with
Kohima as the administrative centre of the area. South again is
Manipur State, whose capital is Imphal, and further south still, lie the
Chin hills. Between the Brahmaputra valley and the River Chindwin iS
a wide mountainous belt rising to 13,000 feet. Imphal is situated on a
large plain, 40 miles from North to South and 20 miles from East to
West, surrounded by high hills. In the monsoon, May to September,
most of the plain becomes a swamp. The hills west of the road running
from Kohima to Imphal and to the south, are high and form a natural
barrier to military operations. East of this road, the terrain is lower,
and more open. The scale of the country is remarkable. The hills are
high, and most are covered with dense jungle, the valleys are deep. Even
Three Campaigns in a Global War
tracked vehicles were roadbound until engineer work was carried out.
Until jeep tracks were made, loads could only be carried on mules, or
by men; and movement was very slow.
As an example, the Chindits,
Major General Orde Wingate's deep penetration force, marching
across the grain of the country, including some not very protracted
fighting, took five weeks to cover 140 miles in 1943.
North Burma is formed by the Irrawaddy basin, and its tributary the
Chindwin. To the west lie the Chin and Naga hills; in the north, in the
region of Myitkyina, the terrain is mountainous; and more mountains
lie to the East, forming the watershed between the Irrawaddy and
Salween rivers. There are scarcely any roads. The mountain ranges,
densely covered with jungle, run from North to South, with swift rivers
flowing in deep ravines. Sometimes the valleys open out into thickly
wooded plains, dotted with low hills. South of Mandalay and Shwebo
the country is arid, with sparse vegetation. East of the Irrawaddy, from
below its junction with the Chindwin, and west of the Mandalay-
Rangoon road, as far as Tharrawaddy, lies the Pegu Yomas range,
rising to 3,000 feet. South Burma, from the lower Salween to Malaya, is
tropical rain forest country. In the Arakan, the features run from North
to West and South to East. The flat river valleys are intersected by
chaungs (streams) and rice paddy. The valleys are passable to vehicles
in dry weather if the banks round the paddy are flattened. But in the
heavy monsoon rains, the muddy fields are impassable to wheels or
tracks. The chaungs flood, overflowing their banks, and as they are
fringed with mangrove swamps, ferrying in craft is the only practicable
way of crossing. The steep, razor-backed hills are covered with dense
forest.
Because the lie of the land in Burma runs from North to South, the
communications follow the same direction. Waterways were the chief
means of transport. Before the war, steamers ran up as far as Bhamo
and to Homalin on the Chindwin. A railway ran up the centre of the
country from Rangoon to Mandalay, where it branched off to Lashio,
Myitkyina, and Ye-U. Lines also ran from Rangoon to Bassein and
Prome, and to South Burma. Two motor roads ran from Rangoon to
Mandalay; one alongside the railway, and another on the eastern bank
of the Irrawaddy. Another ran from Mandalay to Lashio, and north to
Join the Burma Road, through which the Allies had sent supplies to the
Chinese, until the Japanese reached it; and about which, as we have
seen, the Americans were so exercised. From Mandalay, an all weather
road led to Myitkyina, and unmetalled roads to Sumprabum and
Mogaung. Apart from these two, there were only tracks in North
SONY
