16
The Lifeblood of War
about to break, and wells could be dug on the coast. He could not carry
the 52,000 tons of supplies overland, for after nine days the animals
would have consumed it all, and the 30 lbs carried on the man would
also have been eaten. 13 The bulk of his provisions would therefore be
carried by the fleet, which would sail along the coast keeping pace with
the army who, in their turn, would be responsible for supplying the fleet
with water. Alexander set out in mid July, but the fleet never arrived off
the coast. Unknown to Alexander the monsoon which provided the
water, had prevented the ships from sailing, and would immobilise them
until October. Alexander could not stay where he was in the hope that
the ships would turn up, the area was already devastated, and for all he
knew the fleet destroyed by the Indians. He could not return to Pattala, a
journey of nearly 300 miles over territory which had been stripped bare,
and would not support an army of 87,000 infantry, 18,000 cavalry and up
to 52,000 followers. He marched through the inland inhabited regions of
Gedrosia, where some fodder was available; but lost three-quarters of his
army in the deserts of the Kolwa depression between the central and
coastal Makran ranges. He eventually arrived at Turbat, where the
remnants of his army were able to gather sufficient supplies for the march
to the coast at Pasni. From here he marched to Gwadar, covering
136 miles in seven days. Now, at last, they could re-provision.
Logistics the Key
Alexander's strategy depended on logistics, indeed his mastery of it
allowed him to conduct the longest military campaign in history. At the
farthest point reached by his army, the river Beas in India, his soldiers
had marched 11,250 miles in eight years, and there were three more
years and many miles of marching before the campaign ended. Success
depended on the ability of his army to move fast by depending on
comparatively few animals, the use of the sea wherever possible, and
last, but not least, good logistic intelligence. Advanced information
about routes, climate and resources in the country he was intending to
move through were critical to his plans. When his intelligence failed, in
the case of the monsoon-bound ships, which he had not foreseen, the
results were near disaster.
The Changing Scene at Sea
Alexander's exploitation of the weakness of the contemporar
warship discussed earlier, is of interest; lack of endurance was inh
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
in its design. Fighting ships were even more difficult to sustain
logistically than the armies of the time. The broader beamed, more
seaworthy merchant ships of antiquity, and those in the centuries to
come, could carry enough food and water to sustain their crews for
several weeks, but were unsuitable for the fighting tactics practised in
the Mediterranean then and for nearly another two thousand years,
into the sixteenth century. As John Keegan has pointed out, 14 it was
not until the European powers on the Atlantic seaboard put artillery in
the stout, broad-beamed, deep-bottomed merchantmen of the early
sixteenth century AD, thus combining fighting and logistic capability in
one vessel, that ships became instruments of remarkable endurance
and hitting power. They reached the pinnacle of their logistical
potential in the Napoleonic Wars. In the mid-nineteenth century, the
adoption by navies of a new means of motive power, steam, and coal
fuel, considerably reduced the endurance of warships. For example,
Keegan says15 that HMS Dreadnought carrying 2,000 tons of coal,
had an endurance of five days at 20 knots. However, warships were still
able to carry ammunition for their guns, and food for the crews, over
considerable distances at a higher speed than horse-powered armies,
and hence, despite the need for coaling stations, they were logistically
more independent than armies. The conversion to oil fuel increased
endurance by about 40 per cent, because of its greater efficiency as an
energy source.
The coming of the fleet train and underway
replenishment techniques from oilers and stores ships in the Second
World War endowed navies with as great endurance as in Nelson's
time; except that his ships could stay at sea for years, with longer
intervals between dockyard
maintenance periods
than modern
warships. Resupply at sea (liquids) and resupply at sea (solids),
RAS(L) and RAS(Solids) in sailor's jargon, provides almost every
commodity required by a fighting ship: from fuels for the ship and its
aircraft, to missiles, food, and spares, from the smallest silicon chip for
a fire control system, to a complete replacement turbo-jet engine for
the ship's main propulsion system. RAS and the ability to distil water
for drinking and other uses, enables even a complex modern warship
to remain at sea for months, her endurance limited only by that of her
crew, and those portions of her hull and machinery that cannot be
repaired except in a dockyard. 16 Since the sixteenth century, navies
have been considerably easier to maintain, and are logistically more
flexible than armies. Which is why this book concentrates on land force
logistics, they are more difficult; and explaining why is the reason that
the narrative has jumped forward 2,000 years. It is time to return to it.
