tho b21dg0,
flak bunits-
transport
Ken me Ding ton
os binotar contanted to pror mentang to the angelong Hers aloes
abo on air cotivity was ise in increason sonta those davis and man
rond Grave Briagos were made
wore nost diffioult to pion
stantone with now mating theis
tho weather was-poor and it seemedras though
thoms lot an hocel eated, dospite nost determined. ors
mis transpont deter with the nece.
furthernore
the out ting of the road. had meant the cassation, of
togother with the prisonors a
novod short alatanco to the Bast to the villato
riled fron the
Point in the noaby fiolda
Horost at one af
PHASE VII -NGTADIS
the road tovaras GRAVE. But this vas
At about 1700 hr's a tonuous my-train of Dakotas towing, &liders va
soon approaching, tron the south-west and it was with sone surprise the
rive saw the gliders detached ovor the location md to cono circling do
Jow over the fields and holges to cotic to rast in the fiolds all now
They proved to be an incrion Brigre of roinforcenerts, and pro
de ansive/offonsive positions they took up on de-planing showed that
nistook us for enomy
troops at first.
lator they said thát they hi
expected British troops to be so far furrard.
told that they would be landing in enony held territory, and thus hat
Thoy were cheerfilt
ana biter unloođing their ton
and anti-tank guns in a vory short space of time they were to be sion
that there were more further forward;
marching away, to their appointed rindez-vous - leaving their gliders
scattered by the score like giant chrysals over the flat Dutch field
Composite Platoon had now discovered a better bulk-breaking places
this Joality whitst supplios vere still being dram fron oss.
24/26 Se During this portod tho vohioles thich had trangonted to
Prisoners, to BOURg TWOOID had linked up tath our forkshops Platon,
and had returmed, with sarin prea colum, loaded vith supplios, m
the flanking fornations having now comple
that i no i ta op one the counter to sore dopt on orie
side of tha road, but thors had not boon a rapid or comfortable. iou
since they had been 54 hours in makint the journey as againstiour c
27, and they, spoko of the lugo nuber of dostroyed "soft" vohicles
at the side of the ronds in the VECHEL scotor.
But the feeling of isolation was gone.
The nowspapers fron hone brought up by the APO showed that the
Division had "hit the news", and the work of the RASC during the ri
operation had been very favourably commented upon,
A Gornan train had been discovered on a siding at NIJMEGEN and th
news quickly travelled.
It vas not surprising therefore that sevar
usoful oddments fron the train found their way into the Coyts posses
On the evoning of the 26th oneny aircraft droppod flares overhad
and it seemed as though sone borbs would follow suit since it hadb
difficult to canpuflage the vehicles in such open country.
it appared that the Hun was looking for the GRIVE bridgo and on seou
the black and whito stripos on the adjacont glidors realised his mis
for, after dropping two bonbs a little var off and dropped flars o
CHASE VILI - "A DURCH INAD"
The Division was now regrouping and this nocessitated a further
my from tho to on tho, and on the bonies of th Moo
Were now been on to t at WICHIE
This proved a good location from the supply point of viow as wo
canvas which was quite comfortablo while tha
But towards the end of
weather remained reasonably
toratod and the orchard and fields bocane hopeloss t
our stay in this location the weather deter
"Д" and "B" Platoons
time their vehicles noved out, and
Finally it become
nocossary to pook nost to vohiolos on the roads, and as many too ne
possible vent to tave in the bare and outhouses.
the coy location, now that proviously occupiod by the Mobilo
(now situated in NIJMEGIN).
Despite the fact that theso ultimately
proved unsuitablo, the chartoring of the bargor becano the subject of much
nautical it throughout the Division.
So far as Admin Area was concerned.
Atta ts open ottom not vote tort, to in to to 01s,
and the Coy was to be styled "waterbomo".
But whilst no order was given
to "splice the mainbraco" frequent insuos of run were nade during this
At the beginning of Novenber short leave to BRUSSELS and ANTWERP was
This was very ood news, for there were many who wished to
revive hoctic associations with the gay, but rather hungry capital.
was a six hours journey by ICI to both places but all who went declared
that it was well worth whilo for the sake of 48 hours spent in civilization
There was a Corps cinona at WIJCHEN to which nerbers of the Coy coula
Not least of the Coy achiovements whilst at KRISPOHL Was the construction
Everett way" as a traffic circuit for vehicles reporting to the Supply
point in the Coy location.
This becane the Burna Road for Divisional
Bricks and rubble were brought fron
unit transport,
and under the direction of the Chief Engineor (personified
by Capt Strango) and a host of willing (?) workers this Dutch Watling
street nade steady progress.
The draining of the Pontine Marshes was no
no or not out hot hat of to thing the hot doing tie me
by his able assistants, cutting the ribbon in the presence of the dedicate
and of the cup that cheers.
Whilst BRUSSELS becane increasingly popular for 48 hrs leave the cummil-
ative offect of "y" weapon activity on ANTWERP rather took tho gilt off
leave in that vital port.
On such a visit Dvr, Palmer was the subject of
a "near miss" and escaped with injuries which however were serious enough
to take hin to hospital for a while.
Workshops Platoon made a valuable contribution to troop welfare in
this location by the construction of ano bed, flat, folding for ench mon.
Invostigations into the nutritive value of ary food had sceningly
discovored that cortain vitanins vere present in insulficiont quantities;
despite the fact that fresh rations were now in issue, and thenceforth
poculiar snelling vitanin pills becane a regular issue.
Musecun
(7182)
