splinters trom the concentrated A fed on the good ten cout South of
Whilst Divisional armour was ongaged.
the faotory aroas of COJTUMBIBTTES
shalla were in the mont of daning an
Locality and on froguent occasions the supply Point personnel vere
of the supple Column set were rather perturbe
location; supplies being dram first from SOMERVIEU and later fron a point
ign Pletoon was detacied irmediately on arrival to 535 Coy RASO and open
ated across the CAY Canal to Forward Petrol Points.
Unfortunately for
al thougi verious of its
mongst other things, no. they were faring,
Dare st he period Dr Shith Ji, becone - frost our casualty by xa
civing wounds - though not of a serious nature - fron a mortar bomb which bura
near his vehicle whilst on a Forward Point.
I his we were in tias location AKS gave several film siows in the bam
Going vo in a i all its of tine voxy concentrated Admin Aroa lich
on hit 1,10 at do to colonel at i to on one on ties days
amived there just in tine for some shelling which caused several casualties
Dir 1Q was not a partioularly healthy place at that tine.
The weignt of the british attrac was now being shifted West to the
CAUNOT area, and the coy noved during the day to a new location
in the village of SECQUEVIL-IN-BESSIN, the size of nich name belied the
The G-O-C, Guaris amoured Division visited the COY in this
All that night the roads
were famed with amour and transport moving through BAYEUX to the South-west.
The weatner was fimly seitled and as to remin not and fine for several weeks
to come, giving the Allies excellent opportunities to Laplay their ground and di
strength for the vital break-out from the briagehead.
PHASE III - "INIO THE BOCACS".
wertook the Coy column during this nove, this location proved picturesque bus
noisy, since ve were in close proximity to the gun positions of 8 AGRA who
were in the act of putting corn a heavy berrage on enemy positions to the South-
East, These gun-flashes attracted eneny aircraft by night and the dropping of
anti-personnel bomos made the many deep shelters in the neighbourhood a valuable
The Coy moved to the south of ST,MARITY DES BESAGES through heavily dan-
aged and mined areas,
Coy mine detecting personnel were sent forward
with the O0ts Recce Group to clear the new locality.
Large numbers of dead catt
in the fields made the hot Sumer air heavy with the unpleasant odour of decaying
The now empty peasants!
cottages presented a pathetic sight, for in tho
that vere not destroyed there ves much evidence of thoir hasty flight from the
battle which had so recently scourged this region.
Flowers dying in unwatered
vases, beds left unade, a little grease in a frying pan white on the cold ashes
of an unkindled fire, Snall signs were these but they told a poignant tale
oft-repeated talo. The operation to heal wounded France was a painiul one.
The follows noming Coy HQ noved several miles furthon
CON OF BE DIS MASOOTS,
The foivara location had proved alnost impossible
area were streaning along the roads, togetner
pitiful bundles of bedaing and salvaged possessions.
noved agein todar - this tino to a lorner
i can at an hat dan hit, thon too ti
large number of enem stragglers vas reportod to do in a big
on receiving a report fra: a civilian that several more Ger
been seen making thoir way into the woou, a searching patrol
Cooquerel and Call Sutter as organisou and sallied forth.
tiis proved an aboltito attempt begause
aal tho sial nubers of the baron dot of it
went in the next lar and made a raal job
Meanwhile, the net round the large Geiman forces in the FAl
ences of such a state of affairs.
fact.
On one such day as this Dur Lewis, a DR on Composite strength
bean detached to 153 ra Regt RA for sone vodes, tumed up vith a tale of
woe and not a little shaken.
His woe was caused primarily by the loss
of his money and some personal affects, ana secondly by the i
in a forvara section Il of VIRE a colum of half-tracks and SP guns whic..
he was accompanying were baily ambushed by enery Panthers.
cycle, fron nich he had temporarily detached hinsele, becane very closel
associated with an 88 mm shell. and emerged nuch the
10 AUG Through the hilly wooded country of the Bocage the Joy moved dur
to a new location in an orchard and open fields bordering
Quot 3 miles North of VIRE.
It was perfectly quiot from an enemy point of
the fine weather and besport themselves on occasion in the river. I-
Coy vas not ablo to enjoy ezclusive occupational rights here since no
were sharing our location with an Anty doy PASC (mion as it happene
was under the co nant of Major Stewart who was well-inown to the co.)
which was feeding the guns of 8 AGRA. Supplies vere being ram fron
DINY BOCAGE with the Supply Point in the open fields by the river.
distilled in plenty.
drint, who, ignorant at first of its potentialities, vero inoccod for e
six before they realised it.
About this tine there cane into operation a portable shower bath for
the use of the dou, conceived in the minds of the fitters attached to
HQ Platoon. This proved a great success and a boon to the unit as a
nole. With mat pride would Aanin HQ be infomed that the Cor would
not need the MobileBath allocation in view or the Coy using "private
During this hot dusty weather, bathing becane a matter os
even groater iportance than usual and many fortis of individual ingenui..
directed to a sinilar end were in evidence.. Another rather extraordina
affair was a petrol and oil cooker producud for the use of the Officers:
Mess. As a result of hearty efforts of sone of the Coy's hidion resurve
In due course its valls becano adorno?
rth large-size caricatures of the Moss Menbers by CS. Sutter.
Filin shows wore provided in and zear the Coy location by AKS - tho
chief films being "Story Weather" and "Rendon Harvest".
the reverse of a "randon" harvest that was being gathered from the To
PLEASE KITI
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(2875)
