raito datly supply Point or dion of
to aton a the day the the
and replenishment made fron GOCH.
units were being held in the Coy
the Divistonts part in tho
of 20, Major-General: Al7 an Adair Viatetito
the WESEl, bridgehead, our
coy.
HAST XIV -
HOVER THE RHINE THIN LET US GO!"
the blow was struck!
The evening of
heard to be followoa by a thupicrous atillery barrage which continuea for:
mont of a dunt vitaties rosad:
The sky to the Daste!
the enemy's
the accomot
anxiety was betrayed by,isinga
it men hate to tie it bank of the yes detend to stone
flaresiew was tason:
and even stooping to macint-gunning the Coy location - of whiph a
Throughout Di tur tir clear sity lumed with Allied aircraft of all types
continuously.
black heart of camany - thon the order should come.
Rations in issue had
always in the past, boon a good indication at times like there of the shape of
Pacts raciong which had been scheduled for issue on 25 Mar
rote not issued as expected, and througiout the weekend 207/25 wur tresh ratione
continued.
We were to wait a little longer it seemed.
It was said. that the
roads had been cratered also,
heavy bombing of the Instern bank of the Rhine had been so saturating that the
the time being, not practicable.
and the passage of
tanks in any number was, for
The muble of the distant suns continued, and by night the luftwaffe made
pitifully, though fortinetely none the less, lechlo attempts to interfere viti
ting traffic on the roads ena bridges.
on 25 Me a sudden order as received during the aftemoon for seventoen of
our three-tonners to be de'achod to 310 COY RASC to supplement their progenem
ot 25-pounder ammunite diming on the gim-sites.
days.
This work lasted for two
Tras made fron 130 DIP MUTAN.
On 30th replenishmens
Almost exactly one week after 2ist Army Group had made their crossing
The British hring?
head now strotched to within 15 miles of BOCHOII and MUNSTER and was completely
unassailable.
We had been standing by since the 28th ready to move, and othor
units such as Div "B" Tche an ind Omarton ingineers started to occupy the loc-
ation before we moved outs
"I hour for the Coy was altered almost hourly in
a most "Wolf! Wolf!" fashion. The "Nosmos" lay completod except for the dete
and time.
The "Nosnos" were a feature of most Coy moves.
These fanous
documents giving the particulars of the route to be followed, and other such
and opot (inth a pen of voi eg to the the, toy to i hot to bo hong
column, to be conolided by thei lowest blow of all - an exhortation not to smokc
Hence,
after the well-leon conédianothese route cards were always referred to ci
the "Nosios",
But Nose unt have proferred the daylight for he seldon turned
up at the platoons for a git movemeni
When the order aid athally come sone wee caught on the wrong foot, such as
the man, lot him ve anonynous, who was shaving, and the Chief Clerk who was
caught twixt pedal and saddlo of the cycle he was using.
He was last seen by
a greatly amused 535 Coy redalling at tor speed in the wake of the convoy.
Most unorthodox!
This was as 1630 hrs.
Wor Muscan
штел
† 15284
78(7183)
U LIM
