a road loading to a part of the city bolioved to be still in enery
was hoard approaching which proved to bo an Irish Guard's tank with about 40
inhabitants on top singing tho appropriato song of ripporary to tho accompaniment
of an accordion.
Some of the 5th Guards Armourod Brigade HQ tanks were lod
a vory protty girl clambored on to the back of the tank and said "We are now going
fire",
The crowd then foll back obodiently, the big gun roared and tho crowd closed.
in again voicing thoir approval.
CRESTS
$
It was impossiblo to find out the true position in the town until dawn.
Wircloss touch was vory difficult owing to tho usual olectricnl intorforence of a
groat city and linison officers hut no hopo of roturning.
if nover strong,
was troquent, mony prisoners were taken and
Tank casualtios from onony or mechanical failure were noglig-
iblc.
Tho 2nd (Amoured Rocco) Wolsh Guard's Cromwells had by thon corpleted about
400 miles in six days.
Thus was BRUSSELS Liberatod and the nost optimistic hopos of the previous
night fulfilled,
Tho unrestrained happinoss of the whole population proved beyond
doubt the torror and cruelty of the Gorman, occupation ana the
loyalty and fortitudo
of the Bolgian pooplo.
+6++++++++++4++5494445+44+x#+-947
On Saturday evoning a Divisional Signals officer visited the DOUAI
tolephone exhange and asked to bo put through to BRUSSELS.
put through to the BRUSSELS exchange who told him that the Gormans were
thoir hoavy equipmont.
He aslod the operator to worn the Patriots that it might
be possible for the Allios to roach the city on Sunday evening.
Monday 4th Soptenbor 1944
prances
manner during the hours of darleoss through the ovorwhelming crowds.
decided to send the two Gronadior Bottalions to liberate LOUVAIN.
A town which
many of the troops taking part know and likod well for they passed that way at the
bogining of the war and were delightod at tho opportinity to return and free
their frionds,
Some opposition was oncountorod,
the bridges were prepared for
domolition but wore scined in time and tho town was soon reported to be in our
While this wes boing corried out so successfully, the Divisional Commander
drove into BRUSSELS in his Cormond Tank escorted as
ever by his troop of Cromwells,
the thoroughbrods of all tanks and by a troop of the Household Cavalry who had
played such an important part in the provious days advance.
The Belgian Brigade
followed to roturn in triugh to their capital and for many of them to their
hones oftor four weary yoors and lastly the rest of ivisional HQ with the
giant deVs reschbling more than ever elephants in some atraun procession.
I route had been preparod by the APM but the crowds were so dense that it was
only with difficulty that the procession kept on its true course - not that
would have mattored for evorywhere the welcome was the same,
I have never seen such
crowds oxcopt at the Coronation and almost every house and
certainly every child
corried a flag and the tanks and following vehicles soon began to resemble a concours
d'eloganco on the Riviern with flowers and stroamers and fruit of every kind.
It vos an unforgettable soone for us all, a wonderful tribute by the people of
Belgiun to the British and Allied Arnios, a wonderful homecoming to their own
It is indeed a beautiful city and La Grands Place with the historic Hotel
Vile where the Divisional. Commander called to pay his respects to the gallant
Burgonastor,
is without doubt the most perfect in the world,
The whole day
sconed unreal but to onter La Grande Pioco is to look right into the past, to
rotam to the XVth and XVIth conturies for the only false note was the clothes of
of the poriod.
the inhabitants - it would have beon less strange had they been wearing costines
As we neared the Royal Palace sudden air bursts from German 88s in the
Toret de Soigns boyond, scattered the crowds and reminded us once more
although the hoart of Belgium was now freo, the German oppressors must be given
no respite but must bo pursued to their very lairs.
RETURNS AREA
(1811 sm
TO THE DOCUMENT
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
PLEASE REMEMBER
