and North of ARRAS - rich in monorion for tho mambors
the BEF
a distance of 52 miles.
horso-drawn
or tho
caronses of horsos bocame
scores of fine beaste
Bight
companied by the manglea
vangoful iphoone on their
italof was not so baily.
comparatively untouciled.
opposition.
arivod at ROCHTTNOOURT about middo, ted late afteroon
it was found possiblo to arange
for those
visit to the famous VIMY RIDGE Memorial to Canaiian cou rago which
or port a son hours in ARrAS arterwardo
- making a
wolcons break after wooks of
continuous work.
PHASE T - "BRUSSEIS!"
3 SUPP
Dain found the loading olomonts of the Livision tundoring out
and Liberate FRUSSES.
tomporarily, as it did anta scenes of unparalluled oxcitemens and
joy and domonstrations of affection from
tho dolighto
3elgians.
In its nore humble way the Coy nade its on liboration and had a
groat day as a result.
During the morning, in fine weather,
the dcy maved ip to the
Bolgian frontior along the main road and then turned ist along shock-
ing minar roads in the frontier rugion to a pleasant i ocation in the
ground of a chateau in the village of BRAFFE, a few miles to the
South of TOURNAI on the TOURNAI-MONS road.
All alont the route
specially in Bolgium, the folk of overy village turd out in front
of their housos and showered fruit and flowers into t is cabs of the
vehicles.
In a]1, by the tine the Coy arrived at BI WE the column
rosembled more a "Concourg d'Flogance" or "La Battail La des Flours"
of Southern Irance than an RASO Supply Coy•
Ho were tho first Allied troops to enter this neis
bourhood, and
within an hour or so of entering
the locality, report came in of
numerous eneny troops still in the vicinity.
DefencE posts were
irmediately set up at strategic points on the roadsta manned by
Whilst our
PLAT and Bi.
RASC and armoured elements of 268 Ewd Del Sgn in Aim I Area gave
battle and captured a sizeable batch of prisoners.
zhuring the night
a very dejected-looking Gernan was brought to Coy HQ by the sentries
and he was despatched to the POW cage.
The chateau
itself was used,
on the invitation of its occupants,
for the officors
Mess and every
member of the village engorly sought guests for tea ir supper or
to sleep the night.
Such cafes us were open welcon it in our troops
and many had a very enjoyable evening.
letters wer to be seen many
months later going to and fron various addresses in FARFE.
It was
a i do i to do cha du the on no way er the fat viti
the exception that there was no interference fron thi
Supply Point was hold, as also on the previous day, iu it outside HAI.
The camp had buzzod during the previous evening witi a runour that
and immediately
Whilsi this proved to be a mone mirage, we: were at loast
moving into a southern suburb of the city ind thus hopes of a visit
to the now gay capital were only a little roduced.
Having left the village the Coy turned right along tie "route
nationale" towards the capital and shortly was joined bj, its escort
of a troop of Cromwell tanks from 268 Ewd del Sgn for there was
still considerable likelihood of the road seing out by onemy pockets.
The road was lindd with flags from every possible window and other
troops
tho pooplo of TOURNEFFE: spoko
it was not long beforo
of those anongst its personnel.
in tho oorly
there also if it were at all possible.
ever to
int nant, tet end that thing to rach the nty, tho hot ming day.
a wook's holiday
fron work to onjoy tid never-to-bo-forgotten
taking exactly
to the bost of thoir nhility - and what, doility!
Liboration
cad nan to the conto a situation for that caviary to on ho
Every khaki- and bluo-
that
the applicants?
Tho poopla voro proud to air thoir Inglish and to
thoir pre- ar oxporioncos of and contucts with Fritain md the British.
public offlinto verg quito a namul thing, and many miny rod-faced
through tho
and solf-consciously
hotol or private house in ordar to celebrato the occasion.
onbarrassing to the majority?
Many Prionds wore made in the very short
spacc of ting tint could bo spared for such a visit, evon though here was
a soldier's drean of Olympus come truo!
aty won its loftier positiot - the vorut instance albeit of the comparat-
the sight of the burning Palais du Justico dominating the
ively little anagod city - and the kowlouge that the forward eloments of
the Division had alroady gone in pursuit of the late socupiurs of the city,
brought one back to roality and the real job in hand, in spite of the
efforts of Bacchus to deny that this was so.
Tos, the troops that hart made, all this possible had stready novod out -
they could not tany to enjoy the lighter moments of modur war, and Come
troops vere taking their place in aocordongo with tho goneral, castrari
movement.
The next moming the Joy was to nove out, also, hosding for moater and
more exciting adventrues.
TASE VI - "CANAS. AND A CORRIDOR."
With a total of 400 miles travolled in oight doys alroady behind it, the
Coy movod out of TOURNEPPD through Souther BURSSInS via the Foret des
soignos, in pouring rati, on to the LOUVAIN road.
Hore a considerable
delay occurred, caused by the enemy temporarily outting the route and.
necessitating some Divisional amour rotuning to ronove this obstacle to
our "soft" vehiclos.
IOUVAIN, well-known to tho Guards in 1940, was
found to be badly danaged though its fino Hotel de Ville - rather similar
archipscully to its more fanous brother in BRUSSElS - was practically
unscathed.
Along the road were the now familiar wrecks of smashed and
burt-out German chicles which hail been caught in sevoral. days! successful
straffing by 2 TAF.
Civilians wore endeavouring (aftor thriftily renoving
all useful itans)
to clear the vreckage from the roads and fron the track
of the light railway which is a feature of all Bolgian nain roads. However,
these obstacles causod only slight dolay to our now fast-moving colum,
which was still being showered with fruit and flowers by the exoited.
roadsido spectators.
Meanwhile, as the Coy turmed off to its new location, the formaru
supply Point vehicles were returming from the point further Last along
the road in the dircotion of BRINGIN, to harbour with the fuy in its
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(LEE) SL
