__on Sundere_2rd September_1944.
On the afternoon of 2nd Sept. the Corps Commander issued his orders and
the Divisional Commander hold a conference in the evening of the same day at
Divisional Headquarters,
then on the western outskirts of DOUAT,
having arrived.
there that afternoon from ARRAS.
The Armoured Brigade harbourdi on; the aero-
drono about 2 miles furthor to the West and. 32nd Guards Brigade were not far
from Divisional Headquarters with a battalion Group in DOUAI itself.
The conferonce was held in a tent betwoen two. ACVs just as darkness was
falling.
The Divisional Commander did not take long to give out his orders -
"My intention is
to advance and liberato BRUSSELS," and he added, "That is a
grond intention".
As to the method.
There were certain limiting factors.
An airborne
oporation had been plannod to procede our advance and in order that a bombing
programne might be carriod out we were not allowed to cross the start line
north-oast of DOUAI beforo 11 o-clock and possibly later.
The airborne forces
were to seize cortnin bridges on our route,
in particular at TOURNAI, as well
as strong points on a larger plan to cut off the Germans rotreating from the
If the airborne operations were cancelled then we could cross the start line
as soon aftor first light as possible.
the wind was increasing and heavy squalls could be heard and ofton felt in the
iven then it scomed most unlikely that the weather would be favourable
for the luckless airborne forces who had waited so long for their opportunity.
It must be confessed that the majority of those at the
opposition likely to be oncountered did not warrant the use of cirborne
troops mis liko some precious vase, once droppod, cannot be
dropped again
without very considorable refitting.
However these thoughts were mainly due
to our tremendous anxicty to get away to a good start and to reach BRUSSELS
rather than criticism of the high command who usually prove right in the end.
Specd was essential and any serious opposition must be by-passed.
Divisional Commander was most anxious to move on two centre lines, and, in order
to achiove this, two routes were found which varied from single track rough frontier
roads to the great highway running into BRUSSELS from the south-west. :
For the first time the battalions were divided into regimental groups - on
the left centre line the order of march was one squadron 2 HCR, 1at (Motor)
2nd (Armourca) Grenadier Guards Group, 5th Guards Armourca Brigade Tactical HQ,:
1st ( Armourca) and 5th Colastream Guards group followed by one SP battery 21
Anti-Pank Regiment RA and 153 Field Reginent RA with Main Brigade HQ, and support-
On the right contre Line two squadrons 2 HCR, 2nd (Armoured Recce) Welsh
Guards and Ist Welsh Guards group,
32 Guards Brigade HQ group including
tank battery, MG Company and 55 Field Regiment RA; 3rd Irish Guards and 2nd
(Armoured) Irish Guards group, 21 Anti-lank Reginent (less three battories) ,
Divisional Headquarter Group
and RE companies and lost, but very far from loast,
231 Infantry Brigade group with their Welsh Guard Comnander, Brig.Sammy Stanior;
and including a Brigade of the Belgian Army.
MONCHLIN, LESDAIN, ANTOING, and at last,
Right centre line, RACHES, ORCHIES,
Bricfly the routes were as follows the route nationale LEUZE, ATH, ENCHIMN,
HAL, BRUSSELS - the left centre line MONTCHEAUX,
RUMES, TOURNAI, METTES, CONTREPRE, LESSINES,
TOMBERG and the capital. The
PONT A MARQ, CHINACHI, BACHTY, st
US Army (XIX US Corps) were on our right, the 11th Armoured Division advancing
on a parallel course on our left with ANTWERP as an ambitious objective.
The distances were about ninety miles on each centre line and all left the
conference with determination to reach the objective but possibly in their
innermost hearts considorable doubts as to whether such a distance through a
country occupied by the ency was really possible in the ever shortening September
Obviously much would depend on demolitions.
It was felt that it would need
considerable opposition to hold us in a role which we had practised both on
oxercises innumerable and fought so often in our dreams, when opposition is
casily and so heroically overcome.
Parly on Sunday, 3rd September, cane the welcome news that the airborne
opcrations were cancelled and H hour would be at first tank light.
For once every man knew the objective, and everyone from the much maligned
sanitary man to the tank cormanders felt a
taking pant in such on ananatian
considerable excitement and pride in
pamela
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
TO ME ON IS ORI
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
