Bardo
1530 has md tho first flight not considorablo
tho ayso wall ma fron tho
rst war mribel til about three mon por bont
the flat oxposod narahlond.
fort during the
mannot and evontually all woro forciad acroad.
Although casualties
laza on do voly shore nource, was nost auccosaful as won
but stody progrous was mindo
sniping ond sio11
Taro an most articult stroot fighting:
thor now so
supporting each otias a thoy were ono battalion,
throughout the day hinderor te:
long and so succossaully as a perfoot tomm, ably supported by thi
camand of vicery coos no unise tinatory was ared while gallantly loading the
Corpony attacked from
fort this reachua and sitor mnitillery and mortar concentration th
the left working through the houses to
the Auricons on their right.
Aftor vory fiorce fighting the fantross and roundabout area was cleared,
bridge from the north atter hard fighting.
had been waiting for
cond-in-command ol the squation in the fifth tank,
0 the 2nà (Armoured) Grenadiors conmanded by Serjoant
a scout cor with the monumental task of locatins
the hide with Poter comington one
and a Sapper officer
and noutralising
Some valuable intormation nad; the received iron the Dutch patriots in
loading troops commandod by Sorjoant
one of the most tonso moments of the tax.
flames of the burning holeyes of NIJMECEN making it assume even vaster
Robinson with all guns firing
but what was far more
3 and at abf moment some unseen hand might wrock not only
British Arborne Division at ARNHEM.
all hopes of reaching the hard pressed
as it crossed and recrossed the bridgo.
important, Tracer could be seen veaving fantastic
very vantage point even from the
topmost girders of the bridge.
stealt on tell to thest beloven sever san below.
The German defenders fired from
on the bridge
perator lilled at least one
Many were killed
cank commander,
Serjeant Pacey,
even the wireless
Germen with mas pistt out oi the port hole while the
fired his Bron fron the turret.
continued its dash,
northern side and net the gaitint Amerzcon torces a short distance beyond.
concrote wall built right across
bridge and stered through one of the
the approaches to
the bridge on the
tank crossed safoly and romained alone
fortunately with few casualties,
tree tanks following were inoded out, to guard the northern end until reinforcments
The Sapper offioor was able to suek out his charges;
to lay the charges for atons set o explosive cranbers in we math buttresses were
great care had been taken
charges had been laza runnistole tuld width of the briage under the second
span from the northorn ende
The charges wore connected up and were sufficient to
destroy the span.
Some idea of the size of the bridge and the number of the defenders is shown
by the fact that the sapper officer end his troop tool over seventy prisoners while
searching for charges nainly in the rooms which were built into each buttress and
ron the full width.
The tric roason for the failure to blow the bridge may never be known.
steted that thoy expected it to be blown on the provious Monday.
The total force
h01ing NIGi and particularly the bridges wore soid to nuibor sone 2000 of which
a large proportion vero killed or taken prisoner.
Many came from the SS and these
nore mainly used to strengthen the morale of the forces holding the bridges.
vere organised in groups but isolated groups who had no knowledgo of their neighbours
and no guiding hond from above.
It was probably this lack of central control that caused the bridge to be left
Let us assume that the fateful hand controlling the lever feared for the
safety of his comrados on the southern bank and then for the safety of his own soul when
he found the tanks upon him.
Whatever the renson the bold attack had succeoded - an epic example of Allied
cooperation undor the most difficult conditions and leaving only one more river to
cross for the rescue of the British Airborne troops and the final assault on Gernany.
On this memorable day also, at 1400 hours a troop of "Q" Battery, 21st Anti-
Mank Regirient under Capt, A.V.V.Beaty were send by the Cormander 5 Guards Armoured
Briguo, who vas anxious about his right flank, to contact the Cormander, 508 Battalion
of the Moricon forces. Near WYLER NEER the troop encountered 35 Germans who surrena:
The men of this troop were thus the first British troops to cross the German frontier
during this war,
15284
8(7782)
