SuppLies
it religious
housct some 20,000
not a moment
operations
collection of
doy at HELMOND and delt
on the tro to c tan
of tilts and super-tructures fi in the vohicles to facilit
Armoured Div Sab Park au LIAN.
this actai] necossit
tank tracks.
the uninitiated but it can bi
the removal of ties an upon tructio
a vearisono task since gu
to the 20pt at take
the superstructure seidon coincido exa - 1--
ith those in the
Than it ts a job tuat he do nor tang than many ex
of those
Those details wore followed on top soul by a further che of twenty-seve
throo-tonners for the
Bu the of to date 1ot lino and trio drys ma line ratio 1 For all units sa
alleotion of Compo Packs from the 3SD EINDHOVEN for i
AI] now seened ready
Tras tri Alica hands from NaUG do the Swiss Pront 2.
for groat news to brer do sirce the West bank of the
Woula the
our l trove to in the "last roat heavo! so
not phase be the last?
Ivoryone could ta see saying "Let.
A roL Iy Sino spell o
1am oloar weather ind settledhi, to prociain that spring tith the impart.
allity of the Seasons haa cone even to this stricien count..
in Force was maling such hay as it wished, whilst further louth the Amer
having dleared the lifel, had nor swegt ovor the lost uie to capture
the trappea enemy divisions.
Nevartheless, on our front the miting contimed, and evey day the dan-
to-dusic smoke-screen could be scen vising fron the British all Canadian-hld
But administrtive activity was raising its head meanisie.
Having just
Guard sucossfully from threatoned postings of Captis Strango and Bedror
ware confronted by another surprise,
The Tons-amed staff in England radi
out once wore to pluck Lin stoos fron of midst ta transplant him in an
Intentry Training establishment in the Isle of Man.
This hc ever, was the
socond of the occasions men the scent of the hunid jungle at losphere vas
detocted - since already fow NOOs in the forms of MSS. Anthon Stolartin,
(pI. Huteninson, and "Pooman had receivc novificution that they mst ho
themselves rondy for rostings under the mysterious "pickford" Scheme.
of co "You're for Turna!" Mary of Arhom had often declared that BIA 2150
moant Burna Looms cad - ve started to wonr whether there night not have
for once, ar elemed of truth in her dulce; lispings.
FMC
17ET
AND
IS LENISHMENT
Impanal
Wai
Миесин
ши у
25284
(1182)
