cancollad his fire plan.
and it was nocossary to "rocular
across on rafts.
The attack hoover not connidorablo
pour mloux sautor!!
1140a cortec to spacing.
tho DUKla but sonie of the sugplius were
British Airborne troops.
to his driver ond said,
and a broach was made through which
causing considerable
With comendable prosonoa of mind
the column of this Junglo
of the Dorsots crossod undor
ropped off.
"Don't look now but we
nockod out at short rune.
A messago was
in the roar corder of
nd tour ponters ran into the ditch in thot
column continued followad by
are boing followo
an ambush of plats was quickly
DR warning an offloor
In duo courso the still unsuspacting tigers appoarod ana the landon
into it and the remaining Tigor
A roport was roostrod in the asturnoon that our lines of commundoation had
out py su tones and intantry botween VEGHEL
thich had been withdraw to rest south of NIMICIl - a brigado of 43rd Division
The Grenadier Group
taken over the bridgohong, - wore at unco ordored to retur and olear the
Actuate the cheny contras bac littlo opposition vas encountered,
lane surerted by the colostroan croup who wore to wort east of vacHel.
up from ViCHEL.
two groups ronaldo tan this dea having made contaot with l RUR pushing
tay rapid durance telere must be an ever present threat to the namow
west trying
the supply lifoline, not only from the
In country such as this
but from the rescue parties
German forces trapped to the
approaching fron the cast.
contre Lino, to bronic out t takos considorablo tana una tay troops to beration tha
of guarding them aimost impossible.
gop anch the caste of che suppede servaces became oven more diffioult and the task:
that of the fighting troops.
But the fortitule of the RASC drivers 1s as
the constant threat of
the night of 19th Septurer losing 19 petrol and 7 ammmition trucks, there was
They had been heavily bombed at E'INDHOVE
so many mies with so stile roat during the auvance through Belgium and Holland.
attack from the flank and no supply column can have drivon
Saturday, 23rd Santember 1944
A day of low cloud and intorittont rain.
bridgchoad and got more reinforcements through to the Polos.
43xd. Division extended the
Coldstrean Groups remained near UDEN;
Walsh Guards Group extended the NIJMEGEN
bridgohend on the cast side.
Irish Guards group remained in the bridgehoad.
Towards evening the weather began to cloar and long linos of Dakotas with
gliders in cow could be seen approaching fron the south-west bringing much naoded
reinforcononts to the 82nd US Airbore Division and Starlings passed oves and on
to the still hard pressed British airborne forcos beyond the Noderri in.
again at ARNHEM the flak was
intense and the Stirlings sulfered severe losses for
they flew in at vory low altitude to make curtain of dropping the surplies on our
troops, without attempting to clinb or evade the flak until their duty was done.
The bravery of these pilots can seldom have been excelled.
sunday, 24th Septomber 1944
A very cold day giving an unpleasant warning that winter was not far away and
that winter in Germany is certain to be severe, but how much nore unpleasant for
Soon after breakfast a force of some 30 assorted German, fighters attacked the
One bomb actually hit the roadway at
bridge, some in quite a determined manner.
the southern end of the bridge but caused very slight danage.
A bridge built to
withstand the swollen water and ice floes of the winter Rhine can surely survive al:
but the largest bonbs.
69th Infantry Brigade of 50th Division cane under comand and at 1600 hrs
A persistent and accurato
started an attack to extend the bridgchead to the east.
gun shelled the souther approaches to the bridge causing more inconveniones than
damage.
The 32nd Brigade Group (Grenadier Guaras and Coldstrean Guards Groups) remain-
In the evening the lines of communication were again cut.
ed in the VECHEL area.
Monday,
25th Septenber 194
The Last Yorks (69th Brigado) under command attacked successfully the village
Of BEWMEL taking 80 prisoners and killing some 40 Germans.
Shelling of the bridge continued with considerable accuracy but little damage.
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
E87A
