Bostdos this splondid achievement the reoording of the
arrival of tho
of Dur Parlott pierced the blackaess of the night and tie Imapsaaked hiker
hutta ate dumine rophy, and, ad to ahould have said, "vas hoolod in a
20 AFR
To donato paratio a no, a got be of dirton alond ya astor a
bunal of thirty a more would lave been easy enough but no-one was really
That was nothing terribly exciting
hat this day in lit the vath ve it and vot con frequent
as contrary
provious six months on the
Bit nation to not i gia to it th hi vast i rio too not Do oro
and few probably had
ho to that lat on in ho hot of she, that ben ta to pt
rain and mid of Holland for instance.
large Garman town - very similar to that of our native land with the rich green
of its fields and the gontle undulations of the terrain.
We missed however,
the hedgerows which now in Britain would be full of strange surprises and
nesting birds.
Here we found the fields large and unfenced, and woods exten-
sive and common as opposed to the paris-lice scenery we had grown to know at
home.
What German civilians there were, and they were chiefly women, seched
also to possess many characteristics of our on people.
But our newspapers
vere currently showing photographs and articlos on the ghastly discoveries
and shocking sights ot the concentration camps of which those of BRiSTl and
BUCHHNWATD were but two examples.
Here it would seem that beasts, perhaps
homosesual perverts, and not men had held unfettered control,
but these devils
were germans and were but the ryde manifestation of this double-faced nation.
The war was going very well and we were full of hopes of an early finish.
The Russians had launched their rent offensive aimed at BERLIT and the East
bank of tic R.Elbe - and an early link up with the Anericans on these part-
icular fronts was expected.
Meanhile our Division hat out the BREMEN-HAMBUEG
Autobahn and was pressing into the peninsular betireen these two great ports
at the head of wich stood CUXAVEN:
Patchy opposition was being net mainly
from scattered enemy battle groups of Parachute troops, ss.
resistance hardoning with closer prosinity to tie two ports, and Marines with
The area here
Sometimes they can of their own volition, sometimes information from Alliec
eX-POW
would lead a small armed party fron, the Coy to a hideout and a few
more bedraggled disillusioned Germans would troop in.
Here they would be
searched and then taken off to a Cage.
On 22 April Capt. Vinden going forwar.
accompanied by an armoured car, to recce a position for a Forard Supply Point
reaped 19 prisoners whom he hondod over to the Torthumberland Fusiliors who
thus had to carry these Nortic babies.
On 21st a forward supply Point for wits of 5th Gis 3de had been held on
the SOLTAU-VISSELOVIDE road about three miles west of the former place, where
the usual one day's compo wes issued.
Replenishment was being made from the
NO at SOlTAY, now noved un fron sUlli.
PHANTS XIX -
"TATE JAST DRUST"
the Reace Group loft at 0830
about seven miles
south of tine
These to days vere uneventful fron
a military point of view.
3/24 AF2 Both days the Supty Point was held in the Bat, replend eliment beil
Eurapa as an a frigitiul mess.
nan and vomen vero benaring ostrated well and tolerantly consider dos
i groanies the nei suffered during the bast vans,
There were recrinsnat
job was to
report to 12 corps fox the puposo of roving BiD from VOs to SOlA!
beavy loads for transportation.
toice several days, for a BSD is no small affair and entails ver
In the matter of supply it is the ling pin ti
vizen the elastic linos of the Dividional supply columns are indirectio atte
and there is only a certain dástance that can be covered without, straining ti
transport systen to brucking point.
Pon a ch the BSO at bia gin a na, at ran on one, arabia to ate.
of novement to the west, North or Best, in whichever of these directions our
It mate terget shoula lie, - and there vore not many possible torgets lott so
there were those vio favoured a thrust into Demark to enjoy a final taste o?
the joys offered by the role of liberator, mut as jet the libe lay between us;
and the Russians were already coming up from the south-dast at a crading pac-
this of course, was not a matter for us to concern ourselves ith, but it des
snotcho state of mind in nich ve found uselves.
We found ourselves paye
ally at the base of the small uninteresting peninsular Iring betiean BRat
and HANBURG, and both of these places vera closely invested briotion tomatica-
driving with our Division into what appeared to us to bo. a oul-de-sac. Rat.
a disappointment and an anti-climax at this stage sf the wer, then we ware
accustomed to speedy forwar dasies, now to be dented ths exciting "swanning'
povenients of our neighbouring forations.
The vacillating attachment of om vehicles to and from 704 Coy com-
pleted another cycle at 0530 irs on this date by the reporting of
six of our vehicles to this ner-born sister Coy.
three hours later replen-
ishnent of compo or alternatively 1. day's fresh rations was made from 122 F
at SOIMAU.
At 0900 hrs the supply Point for all units was hela in the BED:
and. fresh rations as well as Coupo were issued.
whilst we were in Gernany any particular loontion usually yielded someth
of interest in its vicinity.
Souetines it had been a German dump or a facto
and now on this occasion it was a buried, cache of licquers and such miscellar
items as typewriters and other office equipnent..
but there was no explaining some of the discoveries of ar.
every Admin office had a typewriter and the siministrativo efficieney of the Co-
junged by the qualitr of the tools at least, coula be expected to soar by locs
and bounds.
MHS on.
Михски
nt 15284
78(7182)
RETURNS AREA
TO THE DOCUME
