cloudioss do;
-too good to be tario.
At to be trio is tito irone count do futo aicht, ma with t
an astonishing nuner of ships standing occuphoro
upon hundreds
tug and tho
oven sailor landing-crait.
and the olattoring of the micior vinin feat that vo had made
ho could not miss!
During the afternoon of tho noxt
and we clambered don tho jarambling nots
and landing craft tirin mahore a tha the rocont salo, we landod anymanod,
to sa st up to th i hid at tone into then ratter arart astor
stage 1 of the de waterprooting process.
There tho voltales would stop and comploto
It was then possible to drive
oathedral town of BAYEUX, on 2' Jun,-
The rainder of the Priority Party, which had kicked its heels
Try-shod on Sun Boach and proceeded to the location.
a anothut zight on boar? "Hort forld" and "Ocoan vagrant", inmodiately
ai sembarked
Supplies were being drawn fron the BSD at SONMENLaU.
FHASE II - "NORMANDY"
This period was used to get acclimatised and to propare fully
Considering the size of the bridgehead life was
the only ovidence of battle being in the sounds of
units landed, the roads bocame more and more congested.
were hard nt work in the vicinity making bye-pass roads round BAYEUX and
laying pipe-lines for oil supplies fron the little port of PORI-EN-BESSIN
ready for future operations.
Theso pipelines vure later to be extended
right across France into Bolgiuns
Our fighters were already flying from
small londing strips within the bridgohuad.
BAYUUX itself remained out
of bounds to personnel of the Coy.
on 28 Jun the coy suppliod a document for the formation of a small
west of CARN,
This Coy was undor the corand of Capte
with Capt.
Hall and Set.Matson ann, Coil. "oodhood in tho HQ.
some 7 nilos to the caut of tho parunt So y looation, with forward Supply
Points near BRETLETTE
During the evening of 29 Jun a largo force of RAF Lancasters passod
over the Coy location to bomb concuntrations of enemy armour in the woods
around VILTURS BOGACH some 3 or 10 miles to the South.
As othor units constituting Ainin Area had now arrived in the
bridgohuad tho Coy moved carly in the noming to a new location about 2 miles
to tho East of BAYUX. This loention consisted of wheat fields and
Hore the Divinion, less 32 Bdo, was concontrated within a very
mall mua - tank ribbod shouldura with pack ration dumps - and accordingly
the fur fiold tracks which passed through thune fivlds bocame very busy
with troffic of all linds,
The whoat, mturing with the rain and brilliant
But the dust was also a
and fitters were
busied with the construction of trailers and vinas vere officially termed
mobile offices"
Pade rations vore in issue and the EBP ras an open field. supplies vese
being draim still from the BaD at SOMERVIEU, hence the longest part de
"grocer's round" was negotiating the BAYSUX Brass, and the ever-increasing
congestion of the roads.
Whilst in this lobatim the doy was doined by several perrinent detachments.
As the doy was now working on a "cormodity" basis a mall force of Supply
Clerks
and Issuers was attached fror. 310 Coy
and this eased the burden of
Composite Platoon considerable. Hore so wus this additional strength
appreciated later in the year when the issue of fresh rations to part or
the hole of the Division mes made becana a frequent occurrence.
Next to arrive were the posten • or nore correctly the Postal Section RE,
under the inperturbable Sst.Hennessey.
Here vas a welcome andition indeed!
Henceforth 224 Coy could be sure of setting its nail quiakly and before anyone
olse in the Division for that nattered the Fustal Order Department was to
one currency whilst in a country to mich that currency did not aiply.
Many
hundreds of Postal Ordors were issued for the FRI A/c during the wecks before
Christas when the account was being built up to stard forthcoming expenses.
Then there were the three Signallers zoming the crew of the Sup Col Set
working on the Ainin net which accompanied all forward Supply Points and
rendered very efficient service. They had periods, of course, when they were
existence (not to be confused with the Aldershot establishment!) were not
themselves in & position to throw stones.
A section of Add CMP were then abtached for the purpose of moting the
Supply Point circuts and the control. of traffic using them.
And then, as thouga all vero envious of 224 Coris mode of life, the RADO
were noxt to send their ropresentatives in the for of Sst. Sinden and his
merry men, to man the ADOS Dir, unich Lalco the other detachments, tas to
cling to us lice a musclo to a rodi. Speaking of muscles, there mas later
a FI. Insuructor personiried by Sat justr Morton, who apeared on occasions
like a bolt from the blue, though on the whole he remained fairly quiescent.
Meanwhile, Mesors. Stanhope and Hill detached as DRs to 21st Anti-Tanl:
Regi, vere having sono exciting operionces in thoir nortor-ridden part of
the front and brought back muy luriü stories of a horrizio nature. Durs.
porter and Cox wath Div 20 had similar stories they told.
16 JUL Today the Coy Ronique Party under the connenü of Capu. Fuggle
arrived fron the beacies, having spont the last tiree sooks in the
luxuries of BRIGION and HOVE.
simultonuously, the Coy cevachment to the
Composite Coy operating with 32 Gas 3de retumed to the fold. their independ-
end role having been completed.
However, thoir halt mas but a brief one since
on the morrow the coy was to move.
War Muscun
5284
(7182)
RETURNS AREA
TO N
