WIZE and UDm - all,
Tra at tot ovario that to co
the Rhine WESt INSTER
completoly destroyba
tail
goene
transforming the commonest of
the
was for instanoe in beasta into
was mistaken by many
large units.
ro and the poo a tenot of its lana to dory the blast of bombs
about rendering it inadvisable to wander about meven
There was little
space in the
vere loaded to capacity - maires, the Supply vehioles carrying
was their normal load.
though
Perhaps it was not
vehâcles themselve
that the supply Officer cast a longing eye
and particularly the one from which the grunt of
In the airection of thou
rising
"domestio" vehicles,
could be heard,
sto a tiny tas aurora by a tank COllisporter making a diversion over the
being no other acoamodation.
who had arrand earlier in the day with the recce
so, no moto on for the night under their ventoe to
the afterman from a lifted "p" mine Ivans on, her
Fortunately his injuries proved later to be less serious that was
verge.
though he was evacuated to England.
first thought,
Set-Neal who was standine
by him escaped injury,
The Car roso to an eat breakfast in very point doming units Bat
field close to
the Coy location,
Aarn Area units West of the Rhino dren
Thas was held in a
169 FC at RIESS.
In the afternoon
and it was at first thought
Group went forward North of
ISSETBURG on the AATTEN road,
Told have to be sent forvard also, the
but this proved unnecessary.
that mine detectors
received the
previous evening
ablo to ada the knolodge that amid had aten bean liberated.
Division had taken atteN, te wiero hom
lade by the Division were the odd scraps gleaned tom ration IsUrest bivas
silence was in force on our front and the
only news we could get of the prono
coming to the Supply Point,
and was meeting some opposition and blown bridges.
It seemed that the Division had now advanced over 75 miles from the Rhine
the eneuy including paratroops were giving themselves up and Dutch civilians
However; large numbers o
now armed alter the manner of the old Maquis were rounding them up - very much
like the old days of the SEINE.
It 1900 hrs the Coy noved to HElDEN on the Dutch-German frontier arriving at
Here there were some buildings and the Coy clept the nigit
here tas a number of civilians about, and being seated on the
don with these people would be regaried as an act al fratamiretion or of -
pathy for the unfortunate North Hollanders.
It had proved a cold dull day-
very unsuitable for air support.
Knowing the distant objective assigned to
the Division the weather tas doubly disappointing for it could do no other then
sloir its advance thus giving the enemy time to effect demolitions - and this he
doing in no uncertain manner.
This "last heave" of the var was developing into a great race.
the Americans were making rapid progress further South against weaker oppositic
and it was only natural to hope that our objective could be reached with roon.
But whatever might be going on further forward the Div is ral
certainly cramed with traffic and our moved from location to location were neo
essarily at very slow speed and mostly in the failing light of these Easter
For it was Baster after all, though there was Little evidence of it
in aither the weather or the furious bustle that was going on in the Westphali.
So ended the month of March,
Sold April, besides the cuckoo, bring the Dove of Peace to Europe?
"TROTATORS ONCE MORE"
to me cite the citance thore as no sound of was
some bedraggled civilians came into the location for informatio:
Do HOLD de collecting place for
they said that they were Italian prisoners of war and were on their way t
a matter forow ea confecture as to how Italians beceno prisoners of ware
How easy is it for the fortunes of Germany's satellites to
danged overns at as the pillers of ill-gained might are caught in tine
reat 1630 hrs cane the order for the coy to move - this timo to EGBURGi
a small conmunity
sone miles to the North of GRONTO.
jouney for its slowness but brightened by the faot that veneze now movin?
and in the place of the dull acquiescence
GROENLO was passed in the dark, and shortly afterwards the Coy entered its
nevi location in farmyards and surrounding roads.
It seemed very dark at 0700 hrs as the vehicles noved out to the
supply Point near our location, but this was because of the change
to DBS! (or zone 'b' time as we knew it in the Aruy) during the night anu
the dull rain-laden clouds of the moming.
such news as we had of the Division's auvance was that it was making
good progress towards the much-bombed DOPTUND-EMS Canal, and BRIEN.
Having issued one day's compo rations at the sup pt.
column proceeded to Phas to draw the deficiency thus - en.
day our officer strength was returned to normal by the arrival of lieut.
Gordon PASC to take the place of Iieut.Stokes postea sarlier last month.
Here was an old friend vion ve had known at THORNTON-In-DALE and whom we.
vere gladnto welcome back.
This time he came more heavily burdened
in addition to his second "pip" he noi had our "A" Platon to shephera.
The location was compact consisting of farmyaras and the appropriate
The local populace was glad to see us, and we hoped that
although it was again an expensive time for cigarettes and chocolate,
welcome given us was more than "cupboard love".
Northern part of Holland and the district was fairly tell stocked with
Some of the people there had come from other parts of Northern
Holland less fortunately situated from the point of food - one woman spoke
of having walked all the way from AMSTURDAM - a journey which had taken
ner a month to complete.
ing considerable privation.
it was good to be able to speak,
to to this ten do thang thing to
Language of signs, to civilians once again.
By the disappearace of the Recce Group in its habitual headlong dash
the th to , th a a that a stay in to bo a host it avert.
ant an per tn day, but i thou on not that a boon tha gie, i notor
cycles always moved as though the Hounds of Hell were at its heels, and
those in the rear had the greatest difficulty in maintaining the necessary
In reversal of the quotation from "Horatius" one could not hel
but think that probably those behind cried "Back!" in reply to those in
front crying "Forward!"
But as it happened we were to stay put for the night, and were to move
at an early hour the following noming.
At 0600 hrs the Forward Supply Point column moved out to ENSCHEDE -
a large Dutch town now greatly excited, for they had been liberated only
the previous day.
The Coy moved at 0630 irs in heavy rain, but as due preperations had been
made the night before all vehicles left the location without much diffioult..
The old Arabic saying "The dogs bark, but the caravan moves oni would seem
nicely appropriate to such an event.
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(2827) S
18250
