irect trus
suns out tree
ricis
2°01 00 100!
212209002
.: Bendo Not
dano
010D IE
"0/6
1218
a date tarta
020 01$
Rosiddi
JaK
afficult until nowvitanding strips could be
necess while the now high
TAN 190g and ME 109g appeared
yombe on passant.
Ning be on thi 1 257 son
guesda, 26th Soptembox 19lk
c abste able flourian and tread trot de
go mable no conna sence but it litos to do a heat entire an
Barbutton whach had crossed. to hola
many swant this rivor.
open the flankes of
About: 2000 mon were successfully orrounted unlor very diettart conditions,
mint chose massing are either prisoner or hidden by the over helpful Dutch
story of this most gallant ontorpriso la woll known and it is hoped that
But the loss of so many durageous and highly trained men was not
for they had succosafully l tha off a vory lorge force for a considorablo und
vital period and theso troops would otherviso have proventod the
Nishan bridge and mup tho crossing of the Warl a major and vory
airborno
than it might have boon,"
Thuzo on bo no question that all wa humanly possible a vs doo
forcos at APril and in one respoct thu oporation was
and vital bezages of Grave and NIGEN vero capturod intoot.
for only one briage ind been blown
had boun dostroyod a dolay of sovoral days was inevitable.
was was due primarily to the difficult country through which we had passod making
tank doployent ampossiolet tact which was fully apureciated boforuhand;
the onomy foxcos which wure parhaps toro nuncour than anticiparen
skillfully nandied to couse mosamun deloy to our advanco, a comparatively dini
task in this conlisod countary.
On this day the Gronadiors ouriod out a most succussful action at HEsSOR
aptering 120 paises with vory fui ensultion supportial ustin
ceili and cheerilinens by Bob Horo's battory of thu Loicestorshire Icononxy.
This offioor is imom to tho Caronadions asiajor Stone
actions fought by the Cronadzor Group would have been impossible without tho da
and many of the succossful
of his most accurato guns.
Wednesday, 27th Septombor 194k
This vas an unfortunto duy for the 1st (Motor) Gronadiur Guards as an unlucky
"short' fron a l.2" mortua onusca considorablo casualtios.
Such accidents are
incvitablo and the Northumborland Fusiliors had always providod most valuable support
with their NGs as well as the mortars which alas, number only four.
On the sane day a platoon was ambushed nea' HEESCH coming undor very hoavy NG
firo iron close range.
Nigel Baler and three guardamen escaped from the ambush and
returned with carriors and two tanks under Petor Prescott to rescue ten of the
An attompt was made to bonb tho bridge with two pilotless JU 88s reloased by
However when released the planas seemed. to be in some doubt as to their
terget in the absence of thoir accustoned guiding hand and crashod noistly but
harnlessly for from the bridge.
Thursday, 28th Soptembor 194t
At dawn a detornined attack on the bridge was made, probably by jet-propelled
aircraft diving out of the sun.
Theso obtained a vory near miss at each bridge
dislodging one section of the frail milway bridge from its seating and cousing
slight danage to the more robust road bridge.
There was little activity as far os the Division was concorned.
were harboured in an outwardly poaceful clearing on the western edgo of the forest
which lies to the south of NIJMIGIN, wore most accurately shelled during the night.
An unfortunate incident which coused Divisional HQ particular concern as Corps HQ
were our imnediate neighbours.
There can be little doubt that their secluded position was given away by sane
fifth columists who must inevitably abound so near the German border or by one of
their own men left hiding in the woods for this very purpose.
Corps HQ left the next day for a healthier place and tho
doparted for we had the satisfaction of hearing the enemy continue to shell am:
onpty and Corpsless clearing during the next night.
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
