Tuosday, 5th September 1944
Divisional HQ thad harbourod in the Paro Royal imediately in
front of
the
Palaco and the Divisional Cornander
of the battalions
possible.
(Armoured Recce) Welsh Guards were
vory confortable
which appeared
As we arrived there was
the
Germans
once nore
into
tho
streets.
Late tour was started by the Brussels Radio from a famen
report
and
was Boon denied,
I cannot
inagine
opportune nonent for peace
colebrations, but for,
of us believea she news.
After
lunch orders cane
if an hot we were entire
our advance and the Divisional
Cormander held a conference at nine in the evening at Divisional
it was due to begin a paraffin lomp on the table on the tent which
joins ACVs 1 and
3 and foris the Oporations Rood low seconds the
started to splutter and set fire
the huge
operations nap.
tent had caught and within
minutes both AVs were blazing.
and "I" staffs watched the loss. of many
the conference was hold punctually in the ness tent sonewhat interrupted by the
jangle
of the local fire enginos.
A fow days
Inter ve were anused to read in a newspaper that as darkness fell
tho sly was lit by a huge bonfire which the local populntion had lit in the
public garcons to colebrate their liberation.
6th September 1944
The orders were
to continue our casterly advance and to seize the bridge over
tho. Albort Canal at BEERINGEN.
The Division started at first light and good progress was made.
HQ were onco again the recipients of a farewell almost as enthusinstic as their
It is perhaps unjust but invitable that such reward should not befall
troops but at least it is rare for any HQ to receive any form of flattory
and the tribute is to the troops as a whole - not to the hub alone.
The advance to the Albert Canal was swift and such little
appeared was quickly overcong;
on several occasions our troops were hindered.
by the enthusiastic crowds.
But the 2nd Houschold Cavalry found all bridges
over the canal blown and guarded by the eneny.
The flags of DIESI were even more numerous and more magnificent than those
the st Welsh Guards reached BEFRINGEN they found a wooden bridge
replacing the ola bridge blown eurlier in the war.
The bridge is high with
the houses of the village close up to it on either side.
blowing it again had been only partially successful.
spans was intact the charges having failed to explode, the other two charges
had exploded but the spans were only danaged and it was possiblo in theory to
cross on foot with core.
In practice it was impossible owing to fire fron
the eattern bank.
The Welsh Guords node a plan to cross by boat and assault the bridge fron
Half an hour before zero hour a very brave patriot igoed
across the bridge waving a white handkerchief and reported that
The Welsh Guords therefore charged precariously across
the bridge and established a bridgehend,
The local bargees on their own initiative marshalled their barges.
from as for as 3 kilonctros,
nd anchored them across the canal about i mile.
to the north of the wooden bridge.
Nine barges were required and the two
outside barges ran up a flag from the masthead.
A gap of about 15 feet remained
on the weater side and this was bridged most ingeniously with telegraph poles.
Inc main idea was to strengthen the hatches so that jeeps and even trucks and
carriors might drive across.
In the meantime the Soppers set to work to rebuild the official bridge, a
difficult operation as it is often simpler to build a fresh bridge than to modify an
cxisting onc.
Thursday, 7th September 1944
During the previous night resistance stiffened and the enemy began to shell
and nortor the bridge which was completed by dawn in spite of this opposition.
The tanks of the 2nd (Armoured Recco) Welsh Guards crossed and heavy casualties
were inflicted on the Gernons, estimated at 400 prisoners and 500 killed.
Friday, 8th Soptenber 1944
From prisoners it was learnt that the Germans had decided to hold the line
of the Is, ert Canol at all costs and they vere quick to bring reinforcements to
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(28TF) St
18740 7
