Paste 29th Septombox 191e
the night of 28/29th September suddon
railway bridge was
as blown across the tougher road briage.
explosions were heard fron the
to be destroyed while a gap
time a mystery and was the subjoct of considorable
of this disastor romained for
gone Later in the day it becone known that the dango was caused by amphibious
party consistod of twelve nen who had comploted a bridge blowing course
at VENICE at which it is presumed they obtained a "Distinguished" qualifioation.
oan only hope that they had practisod on bridgos of thoir own construction
and that the boautiful alidgos of that most lovely city have been
destroy the road bridge
For this task their party had been divided into two consisting of eight men
and four men for the more fragile railwoy bridge.
Lashed together:
consisted of two torpedoes 12 feet in longth and 2ft 6 ins wide
There were three such charges each manned by four men.
tight fitting rubber suits with flappers on their foot to assist
suming and steering and thurs ore able to subnorge if they wished by moans. of
a mask with an air container.
They thus resembled a cross between a Merman and
They were launched some five miles above the town and ovontually reached
thoir respective bridges.
It was intended to fix the torpedoes vortically to
the buttresses at which position the timo fuse would cóno
into operation.
to the strength of the current this provod to be impossible and thoy wore moored
horizontally alongside the buttresses, an emergency igniter being fitted,
wit he men then swam off downstream.
They had intended to land at oCHriN, then in enemy hands, a few milos below
NIJMEGIN.
For some reason, possibly faulty map reading (which if difficult in
daylight on roads must require romarkable skill submerged in a river on a dark
night) or perhaps exhaustion, they energed too soon and were captured by some
astonished loyal Dutch end handed over to the 4,3rd Divisional Recco Regiment,
Ten were captured, one other is belioved to have boon shot and of the twelith
there is no trace and ho was presumably drownod.
Only one of the charges beneath the road bridge exploded.
watched with considerable anxiety by those above who by then knew
that if a rise or fall of the river caused the torpedo to tilt vortically,
they and the bridge might well do likewiso.
Finally a vory brave and skilled
naval officer ensured that the charge should remain silent.
The gap in the
bridge was soon closed by short spans of a Bailey bridge.
The courage and skill of this enterprise shows to what ends the Gernans will
go to accomplish a task which they consider essential for the defence of Gormany.
*+‡‡‡
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
T8K7
hut
