PRELUDE
...••
dawn is still to hours away and it is dark and wet under the
beeches of the long tristing drive sloping down from the main road to
the IIs11.
Scenes for a filin about the Sudanese war had been made here they
say, but this is 2 later var nich has already lasted nearly five years.
Through the stillness cones a roaring sound.
It is coming from
A white-clad
What is this?
And cooking so early?
Now lights have appeared in other huts,
and voices - gruff sleepy
voices - float through the dam June morning air.
in the valley this time.
That would be the Hall.
Din figures can now be seen running about with towels over their
shoulders - the camp is astir!
What is this that goes on at this hour?
Ah! These noisy fellows must be NCOs - must be Corporals - too
early yet for Sergeants!
The timy clang of mess-tins proclains
But it is quite a way down the hill and we are in time to see heavily
Inden figures making for vehicles standing like green ghosts with
wite-starlike eyes under the fresh-green trees.
Carry ny kit over to your vaggon." An! yes, that must
ba the Stamajor; those last pints at the "grown" and the "Cross-in-Hand""
vesterday evening were not good for his liver.
engines splutter and settle to a roar in the
warming up process.
clad figures are foring up in threes and shortly disperse to the waiting
A car roars past, and a North Country accent pierces the general hun
Doors slam, engines "rev" and the car moves off up the
hill followed by the vehicles from under the trees.
Slowly they pass round the comer towards the Park gates - one, two,
three, four - count is lost as motor-cycles roar past.
The last vehicle
on ng tiny sin the san the cham al-bum sit kines, to soug
noming rain.
The cook returns fron the doorway of the cookhouse to his fire.
"Jolly good luck to than" says he, thoughtfully and slowly stirring the
"And who were they, and where were they off to?" asks our enquiring
nint hat vas the first part of 22, Coy - off to France" mumbles the cooks
absently, as if in answer to our thoughts .....
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
