Trosday, 12th Soptembor 194/4
Soon aftor dayiroal a hony concontration by the modiums and 4,2" mortars
f the hortmmbertond ruszters was put down on hachter wich provee nost
succossful.
1gt Welsh Guards attackod
supported by 2nd (Armoured Reace)
Welsh Guards who fired at any house suspected of holding enomy.
In this woy
tho villnge was at last cleared.
The village of HECHTEL,
aron the houses being sot well apart excopt at
although small in population, covors a considerable
the main cross roads.
The attack was
corried through with groat determination and with comparat-
ively light casualtion considering the difficultius of this typo of
tho
Ustinacy of the defonders, mony of the sS troops having received a personal
mcasage from
the Fuhrer telling them to hold out to the last man
round,
There were sone
the number of last rounds
was not counted.
Tn ma sto at to number on, on i too g 1ht man tho
main road at last cleared.
During this engagonent the 2nd (Amoured. Recoo) Welsh Guards firod 1300
rounds of 75 m1.
The Divisional Commander returned later
in the day to BEERINGEN bridge
roport to the Commander-in-Chiof the progross of tho fighting and to hear tho
prospoct beforo us
Wednesday, 13th Soptcriber 19144
The Corps Cormander visited all the battalions in the Division; and not as
many of tho officers as was possible.
joining 30 Corps on the Seine, the
Division had been
in action and on the novo almost continuously and General
lorrocles had not had the opportunity of mecting thom
congratulated the
battalions on
the success of thoir rocent actions which he described as brilliont
he addod, ho seldon used.
14th to 16th Septonbor 19/4
The following three days were spent as far as possible in rest,
and gonorally proparing for tho momentous tasks that lay ahead.
69th Brigade
command assisted in holding the bridgehead and this allowed many of our own
troops' to be withdrawn.
sunday 17th Soptembor 19114+
• It become lown on the provious night that opcration 'Markot Garden'
("Morkot! the airborne and "Garden' the ladd side of the operation) was now
definitoly ion' for the norrow.
The true direction of our advance had been
masked by castorly feints by
11th Armoured Division.
For the same reason we could
not extond our small bridgehead in a northerly direction towards EINDHOVEN for
fear of blowing the gaff and the bridges.
It was however
appreciated that the
cnemy ,
even if he did not know our
intontions, would and indeed had closed and
tightened the ring round the DE GROOTE bridgohead.
The weathor wos for once favourable after so many disappointments, often
when the airborne troops wore actually in their aircraft waiting totake off.
The main dropping zones were to be
I - 101 US Airborne Div
(1) about four milos north of EINDHOVEN to seize the bridge over the
canal at ZON and then to advance and take EINDHOVEN.
(2) between VEGHEL and ST ODENRODE with the object of are turing the
bridge at VECHEL and,
(3) in the area north of ZON with the objoct of capturing the
ST ODENRODE bridgehead and taking over the ZON area.
II - 82nđ US Airborne Div
in the GRAVE area to seize the important bridge over the Maas,
North of MOOK
South-east of NIJMEGEN with the object of dominating the high
wooded ground in that area and then to advance to NIJMEGEN.
British Airborne Corps HQ vere to drop also in this area.
III - ist British Airborne Division north of the Nederrijn west of ARNHEM,
and north of ARNHEM with the object of seizing the bridges over the
Noderriin. The Polish tirborne Brigade was to land later south of
With YouR docume
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
28EF) St
118250
