Tho bridgăng way woll forward in tho column and the ORE hoped that
would to ronay
by 0600 hours.
Divisional Hondquartors novod
the bridgo
afterwards a
It was a fine starlight night with no moon.
honvy bonbing
just before dark over the Dutch frontier.
Tho bridge was undonagod but a lnage nurbor
one road wiron, an the abones of our personal, a litti done.
attack was nado onstho Escaut bridge and
rosete 12th Soptembor 194t
at 0610 hours.
tho bridgo was comploted atrost oxictly on schodule and the first troops crosse
Tory good progross was nade as tho airbome
clared the route.
the three dodges me supera jo: us not only run ur titanate objectivo
the Grendior Group was loading and soon reached tho first of
but Fron tho lot British fixboro Division at ENTi
The GRAVE bridge ovor
Ravor Maas consists of nine someone deotal longth of about 250 yarnd US Mirbore
the low-lying country on cither side
and a Brigade of
ivicion mi sands aborted the civenes successilty capure the bridge intact -
a vory fine porformanco.
Everyone was irprossod with the murican airborne troops.
exporicnce, mony having dropped in the in'-ial Normandy landings and carlier in the
They had considerab:
Moditorranoan oporations.
About noon tho Divisional Cor ander not Goneral 'Boy! Browning, cormanding
by our own Corps Cormander.
irbome corps at and us airborne lavisional Headquartors where he was soon Joined
The headquarters was
in the forest on the high ground
some five miles south of NIJMEGEN and onty three miles fron the German border.
airbore landings vory littlo dofinite infornation as to the
of any o the divisions was wailable and this lack of news,
warness counction with thoir Fos and with no othor means of cormunication
rumours of ovory kind.
The airborne Listson Officors were unable to
was supplemented by
availoble the situation was obviously very serious.
It vas thon loamt that tho 82nd US Airbore Division hola only part of
NIJIN+ad had not been able to approach the bridges owing to their very
erablo othor comitients which includod not only the holding of tho GRAVE bridge
after its initial coituro but also the seizure of the high wooded ground to the
southmoast of NIJMIGIN and holding the
Iropping zones,
force had not arrived only the first lift being available owing to bad weather:
It is not clear why no troops were dropped on the first day botwien the Waal and
the Noûorri in as it would appoar that this country which fors and island,
onster for airborne troops to dofend being alnost imprognable
to tank attack and
would givo access not only to the southum md casior approaches to APHEM bridge
to the opon and northern end of the great NIJMEGEN bridge,
mastor key to the whole enterprise.
Doubtless the high command who alone knew the
full frets and difficultics had excellont reasons for not doing so.
Tho situntion then was that although good progress had been made only one of
threo groat obstacles had been crossed and while Tac R reported the bridges to
be intact it was surely only a matter of time before the Germans would order the
bridges to bọ blow, md the ist firborne Division wore still the wrong sido of
the two groat Phiné
trivers with no immodiato threat to the rear of the German
dorences of the NIJMIGEN bridge.
Sono description of the country which lay choad is here necessary.
OF NIECEN Lios on the south brnh: of the Waal which is tho true Rhine,
river divides near the Dutch border and the lesser rivor flows south of ARNHEM
and formed the third obstacle to our advance.
and railway bridges at
NIMIGHN lie to the north-east and north west of the town rospectively and form
the only crossings over the river for some 20 miles.
The modern;
wide and noble road bridge has a total length of 2000 feet with
a contral span of 800 feet with four snaller spans supported on four massive stons
buttresses,
The bridge is built on high ground and dwarfs the town itself, evn
the nighty Rhine seons insignificant at least at this time of the year.
a fine viewpoint to the lowlying marshy country to the north.
The more humble
railway bridge suffers by comparison if not in length but will take one ray traffic
although the centre span blown in 1940 forms a weak and rather uncertain link.
Both bridges were difficult to approach, the station lies to the south of
the railway bridge and it is bounded on the west by a dock, on the east by
buildings.
The road bridge is more open to the cast, ornamentai gardens and a
roundabout lio to the south and it is dominated on the south-just by an old fort
while houses and even a bundstand have been carefully transformed into strong
points with loopholes, slit trenches and a deep, if waterless, moat on the
south west side.
Such was the task ahead and it was inown that the enemy held a considerablo
bridgohend nd would fight with fanatical desperation realising that is loss
night woll lead to the fall of Germany itself.
cument
78(7182)
