It sochea too much to hope what the Railway Bridge would also
fall into our
evening of the 19th "A" troop of No 3 Squadron of
(Amotred) Grenadier Guards commanded by John leville
supported by a platoo
Gronadium Cards working in close cooperation with a company of
nortoals had fought their way forwyd through the narrow stroots separating
She Mailway beidso from the station until they reached the approachos to
bridge is built high above
Said sado ovarlooeing all surrounding strents.
the river with an embanknent approaching it
Thon a position was reached covering the Artdgo, anti-tank guns opened fire-
ossible until the Americon forces who had crossodlly boat on the previous day
fort and owing to the exposod position no further
progress was
could atlack from the northum ond.
The defendors then found thonselves isolated
bridge lusole and the attaciters had the satisfaction of inflicting very hoary
Casual tito tho onomy as thuy were
167 dead Germans were
the southern approaches and sono 250 on the American end of the bridge.
the reason for failure to blow this bridge is that the
15o Latoà on to briaro
itsolf and purhaps the men rosponsible preferred being taken
risoner to une bosstore roprisors in the next worse from nis srienos wo might
thus become unwallingly airborne.
II loss spectacular this most diffioult operation nad been carried out with gro
akill for the loss of only one tank and with romancubly for infantry casualtics.
Irish Guards Croup took ovor the advance from tho Grenadiors but the ton
miles still soparating us from ARNIM proved even more dirticult to
appeared from the
high bridge.
The country was so lowlying that the main road vas
bitilt on an enbankment moling it quito
impossible for tanks as it coula bo dofondod.
with the minimun of anti-tank guns and very fow defenders.
Actually order had
been restored in the onemy's ranks and a defence line to
constrict our bridgehead
had alroady buen hastily preparca,
The tons could not deploy off the road and
once again vonvoro in the position of n boxer with one hand tiod behina him,
infantry attemptod to outflank but were not sufficiently strong to do so.
advance continuod the noxt day, two 88 mns, seven 75 ums and the tracks of a
possible Tiger wore revoaled.
Towards evening sone of the Polish Airborne Brigade who had been delayed by
poor weather, dropped south of ARNHAM.
A welcome sight in an otherwise disappoint-
In the ruming tho Adjutant RE of the 1st British Airborno Division acrivod
having crossed the Nederrijn,
made his vay through the eneny territory during the
night tal finally contacted the Anoricans to the north of the Nijmegen bridge.
most gallant entorprise.
He brought the disquictening nows that the Brigade holding the north side of th
The airlanding
ARNIUM+road bridge could not be expected to hold out much longer:
brigade had triod to fight their wy through the town to their aid but had suffered
very heavy casualtios.
The remaining
forcos were being gradually constricted
and were holding a position west of the town near OOSTERBECK.
They too were short
of supplies but had inflicted severe losses on the enamy and could continue for a
limited period.
The dropping of supplies had been only partially successful,
as the weather had been very bad,
the area on which the supplies must fall was
very smell and flak was intense causing severe losses to the Stirlings and their
brave crows who wore forced to fly at such low level that the aircraft wore most
vulnerable.
A bright interlude in an otherwise dark day wos provided by the enterprising
2 HCR who on receiving a report from one of their patrols of a steamer flying the
Nazi flag toving threo barges, positioned their amoured cors to intercept,
The Division's first naval
aging the steamer and sinking the three barges.
engagement and a signal wes made by Divisional HQ to splice the mainbrace.
Friday, 22nd Soptember 1944
A troop of 2 HOR taking advantago of the early morning mist slipped through
the German dofences and joined the Poles who were now established on the south
bank of the river and wore able to report on the conditions of the British Airbore
Division.
Division to break the main enemy defencos and allow a battle group supported by
tanks of 8th Arnoured Brigade to escort DUKWs carrying the necessary supplies for
tho 1st Airbore Division.
The route chosen lay about three miles west of the
main road, the latter boing too strongly hela and too difficult to assault in the
timo available.
Unfortunately when the Houschold Cavalry troop got through it was considored
probablo thut the enomy had withdram and the Cormonder, 43rd Division, in order
