Than, tho
a anall
tracks.
or intan voro
a tratior for thoir own on of iát.
an extraordinary collection
at a later dato whon
roquirod a Chrysler
saloon oile
colour from
shining black to
much servico.
a convortod Gomin trailer - to mention only a faw instances of our indebtua
the Gozman Arny.
Moro ware to follow later.
Iloquers, cigarottos
and tobacco, also
many case of cigars.
a co a thin the ri a gutty, the lost on sono
yut includod some reasonably goo
and sone
of tho wines wore of wind good houses and includod Benedietquers
Orange Licquer, Cointreau, Hennossey's Three Star Brandy etc.
vero found soveral crates of tinned
The Coy
had the job of sorting these supplics for tho Division, and naturally tho
sorters had a fiola day.
MaJor Donnis, tho sonior supply Officur was in
charge of procodings, which rather cramped the style!
As to what use uso
Moanhilo the Division was fighting a tough but successful battlo for
the orossing of the Albert Canal but a short distanco aay to the Bast.
Vexy shortly a bridgohead had been gained at BERINGEN and by 8 Sop tho
Division was pushing on for its next objectivo - the Escaut Conal.™
With these water crossings (and thoir blown bridges of course)
1poPai2y stowing the impetus of tho Divisions advant, tha nat cay
nove as but a short one compared with the earlier onos there a distanco of
50 to 70 miles in one day was common enough.
Hence, today the Coy moved
out to take up its position in a fir wood just off the main road E of
At this location such transport as was available was put into
use for the conveyance of prisoners to rear areas.
Another short nove today brought the Coy to within 4 or 5 milos
15 Sno Becaut era, hono ti Division had nov gainod a to 7 bidschoad
on the East bank, in the noighbournond of TrASMIR.
Just to the south lay
wine of four days! bloody battle a few an-
HECHIEL was to ronain a constant factor on the routes of t'u lon
transport for some nonths to como.
The country in this area was sonewhat
reminiscent of the heaths of East Anglia where the Division had done much
of its advanced training during the sumer of the previous year.
Sounds of the battle for the Iscaut Canal floated over the heather and
fir woods all day, and at night enemy aircraft made frequent appecrences
In at, endeavour to contain the bridgehead.
During our stay here as much
maintenance as possible wes being carried out on the vehicles, and the
tripephrt platoons were busy bringing in four days' reserve rations for tho
next stago of operations.
To cap this M.T.I.B. graced us with an all-
onquiring visit - concluding that interrupted by operations at LAIGLE way
Great ovents often cast their light beforo then, and a general feeling
and vulnerable.
Een deo transport and wolfare officer
This was quite a unique occasion as the RASC was to
Thus we tomp ran ty bat "At
porsono Lc noved out of tie Location at 1100 has, having stood by since
on the road - in faot wo wore to spond 27 hours on the road for 2o
JoLey of 5120:
no ago on to locat on to baton, of the roy, tado
of our lato start.
The colum moved on with the clatter of the SP guns
no homonts nonto the more familiar hun of our tyres.
The Dutch frontier boing cossod, the town of VATKINSWAARO sOOn cano
into sight and the flags hanging from the houses changed tron the red,
black and follov of Belgiun to the red white, and blue tricolour and
orange banners of Holland.
Civilions, more stoioal in their outlook
than thoir nore notional neighbours, ere to be seen sporting orange
armbands and othor itans of dress of tho same colour. a
ary in France and Belgiun.
North of this town an incident ocourred which nearly resulted in a
state of affairs atin to temporary chaos.
Whilst the Coy was halted
vy the tin i ho man i do rentin bo the a bao in on on
ist (afteraads declara to be a fifth-colunist,
the other Coys"; and a score of other identities) roared down the road
from the opposito direction shouting "Turn round, German tanks are conting
down the road!"
The impression given was that at least 10 Tigers were
approaching at very short range.
The sight of the armoured cars turing
round, though solely for the purpose of taking up defensive positions
for covering the colum, apparently confirmed the urgent warning. The
loading vehicles turned round, and within a few seconds the whole of the
Coy was heading in the opposite direction.
Surely the most rapid
deployment (?) In RASC history!
this turn-round
00 had sent DR Brown to the control car of 2 HOR to enquire as to the
origin of such an order, and was setting about the roorganization of his
The information was incorrect and the colum was quickly sot
in motion in its original direction.
This incident gave a nasty turn to the residents of VATKENSWAARD for
they innediately hauled in their flags and querulously asked what thoy
They were quickly reassured.
distance away.
Deep fir woods lined the road casting an ominous gloo.
over the scene - we imagined that large enemy forces could have been
concealed therein,
The column stopped for a "brew" just short of EINDHOVEN in the vil
of AAIST, just as the sound of approaching airerit was hourd.
TO THE DUS
RETURNS AREA
78(7182)
48250
Document
