La tho MATATSE paakot, at this, has Just over the hills to the Basti
coy noved a
considorablo distan de to tAiGlid
of the Bocage
railway bridge
stith the platoong
(Which with CAM was to
or th would shortly no carvine rail
2025 man toes ta cone ta the vaco of the advancing arios.
remain our only major
mellent tashrone unne pound in onofusion in the rields hichor up tho
fran the location, and wilst any
• inüividual harvasts vore made, and
100 an expedition under Cart. Stransors enthus sion guidanco sather a
to daris the nuch coveted "strange stai was not mado as expectedl
or Pect-rithin the Division.
nilst in this location terrorary transort arrangements were brought intr
I order to freu Divisional RASC transport 30
it could assist with the "leap-frogging" of the MC fron BAYKuX to
cy this period, the traffio on the roads vas so intense trit amangemente
crazy petrol.
unt first line transport under Capts. Jurtis and Hall was usod to
not to be nade ity the marinens for the sharing of ow maintenance routes
a transla vas spocially regulated. In order to avoid confusion and delay.
it ma mic to great loap fastard tot vat to ba cected
a tit the crony was withdraring in over increasing disorder through the
mouth of the FATAISE Gap.
Dails our Iphoms and fighter-borbers coula be
seen fling in to the front to execute their deadly work.
The heavy fighting
So DAE and to briltiant right-hook of the Americans from AVRAClaS were nom
jiclaing nassive returns.
2252 IV "THROUGH DIS GAP. OVER THE SPINE, AND FAR AWAT!
23/30 AUG The chase was on!
Our Division was in hat pursuit of the re-
treating Ith cry over the
ground here F.M. Ronel had reporteal
not tus tenth at the hanis of Spitfires of the RAf. For the next three weels
the cor was ti be almost continuously on the nove, and for the drivers of the
tuo transport platoons that vere still with the Cor there was to be lattle reg
But it was work into which all entered with great heart, and work done with
zest is never arduous.
On the noming of 30 Aug the Cor noved out in the fist
rain for seteral trocks. Light was breaking as our colmn passed through Firs
nadiac good speed eastwards.
Treats of enemy tanks and transport lined the
zc i; md every major cross-roads was a seene of chaos as a result of a
Jesperate rearguard action.
Every railway station was a nortuary of Frenc
roiling-stodi, every ton and village a mass of ribble and wrecked hones.
occasional fields the charred wreckage of a luitwaffe fighter forned the
grave of another of Goering's hopes to sten the pover of our air supremacy.
Crossing the R.Hure the column clined the escarpment forming the easter
hinterland to harbour for the night in the grounds of a spacious convent in
520 Village of MERCY near OUIBEC COCURET - an island of firm ground in a
sea of mid.
The Forward Supply Point had been held in the roads nearby
cerlier in the day, since our supply voicles had been sent forward early thai
10:26. On this day a distance of 55 rules had been covered.
31 LUG At about 1900 has on this sumy noming the doy moved out on to the
road down to the SEINE.
The road and fields on the gentle slope down
to 'he river and the town of VERNON where the bridge tas, were pock-marked vit
shell craters bearing evidence of the desperate attempts of the enemy to deny
two river to us.
The town itself was badly knocked about and the road and
wil bridges had been blown, and now in their places were our Bailey bridges.
brißge high above the river.
Liter travelling a distance of 40 miles the Coy harboured for the night in
the village of MOULIYCOUPT betwen GISOPS and GASNEY. The location was by no
wans an idol one since being on the side of a hill, access for the vehicles
na sorewat difficult and the OC's jeep sew much heavy work that afternoon
bong the leden three-tonners over the steeper stretches of the lane leading
amb those were straitors was discovered in tho
at any time that the
found the Coy
and
on the movo
the đam of tho are t our thought cho nint on hiện
at lodst high
ground -
the North
France.
There was accordingly littlo time in which to
over these fiolds of North-West
the night and most slopt in the opon.
oroct shelter
As Luck would have
it,
notorious mud of Flanders.
bacause of a tractic jam, and many in the column were able to
no a tho
unique French ouston of shaving the heads of the "collaboratrouses" on
the balcon ui the Hotel do ville to tho tune of the vocifurous crowe
which one watched with mixed foelings - tho more imaginative mis
have declared that thay could also henn the clinking
spectators of the guillott.
3a tho
upon this foudal rite with slight disgust.
gaus of the Revolution, whilst most looked
This surmary justice somed
rather barbaric to the averago Inglishnan, proferring
as he does,
the cold
verdict of the court to the hot-tempered decision of the mob. But how
should we have acted undor similor circunstances?
Many Frenchmen,
Belgians and Dutch were later to say to us "You English may be
fighting
and beating the Boche, but you do not know hin - you have to live under
him to do that!"
On passing the former German airfield at BEAUVAIS, now being converted
at top spead for use by the RAF, we wore able to gain a good impression
of the canouflaging ability of the luftwaffe personnel and of the e:tonsive
measures that he had been forced to take to protoot his aircraft when
grounded from attack by our planes. Most of the permanent hangars and
operational buildings had been covered with a suporstructuro to give the
gonna to a ho ten suit to a this go sit cover a
with canouflago netting strung over toll polos.
Ivery day British Infantry and members of the fFI were bringing in
groups of the chony found hiding in the woods - nany gave themselves up
voluntarily and whon they did this they showed a preference to surrender
to the Inglish Tony rather than to the FEI, whose vengeance they greatly
feared.
As soon as transport became available these prisoners were
being sent back to nore rearward arcas.
The Liberation of France was proceeding rapidly - now to be capped
by the Liberation of PARIS.
Our two Supply Officers - C pus. Vinion and Higgins came and wi
night like wllso my and as their shadowy forms pass
night they night be heard to mutter listrectodly "56 '
i4man; 153 still
to draw - my God - what a war!"
Supply clerks . the midnight oil -
Lovely suppers they cooled!
The replonishment colum would go back 50 miles or so to draw; and
the Forward Point would be 50 or 60 miles in the opposite directions. It
was certainly quite a job.
Once daylight had broken the Coy did not tarry long in its open
location, for orders had done through to move soon after first light.
The Forward Supply Point vehicles had alreaiy gone some hours before.
The next location proved to be at ROCHTINCOURT - a small village to
War Musecun
in then
RETURNS AREA
(7182)
st
5284
