soarcely had, ve amived before vehicles
BIE XVLIT - "212-305, HARSHIRE HOG!"
under the command of
for the move
scheduled for 1130
a tho day tras loating sued to.
tio Reploni simont dott noa gone dorm to
point in the BBP
to Load withh one day's pack and
firty or so milos.
involvod a journey of some
hon a longtiy
The usual romarks were
our wait was passe
dos, assistud by our detached composito personol mánistered the needs of 110
SULDGIN vas the soone of our replonishment at 1030 hrs.
We now hourt.
of a motorcycle accident on the night's jouros, and vas nov tuated up in a
field operational.
carpet-bombed by the RAP leaving a regular pattern of sandy water-filled crater
ouriosity was the dury aircraft of lath and papier-mache fasnioned to the shep
on tie field, and the hangers a series of tristed skeletons.
An occasional
or JU. 88s and other two-engined planes.
The roal artiole haü boen parked in
90 i and alearings in the coniferous furost Iring on the wastorm outsici
But those had not escaped lue attention for thoy now laid lif
roasted vultures amidst the silent unneeding forest with the elaborate anour
setting strung taut high above as though to hide the final ignominy of the
Luftrafto from the all-seeing PAF.
Sono marvelled at the sicill and magnitude of Garan carouf lago; but instead
Dong a co man th chi n tu bi th on of an All vistory stoad
and USAT had been prolific nothers,
as they had also boen flourishing underta
whistling bonbs, and the
personnel bombs.
vroaked and blackened pointod uselessly and bl
at the Allied sly in wich now a lark was singing in pure clean air no longer
polluted by Nazi terror.
This silent, dosoluteù field, fron which even the cheap gilt of 1940 trium.
had faded long ago, seemed as a symbol of the decapitation of the Gernan Chiner
by the Allied Bellophron.
The furious ride of the Tallyrie had been crude and
slo compared with the grace and speed of our modern Pegasus.
Arother lengthy halt between YBCHTA and SULINGh meant that duck was already
gathering before we had passed the half-way point on our journey, though a ti
stor ned laid the dust on this now busy road,
3y 0330 hrs an the morning of 18th April we were crossing the pontoon briüge
now spanning the wescr.
This river, though sall compered with the Rhine, 21
to be a considerable water obstacle and the making of a temporary bridge had
necessitated the construction of lengthy approaches.
The speed at which the
Sappers work and the thorouginess of it never failed to inpress us. Every arm,
of course, plays its part in an advance but the contribution of the Sappers is
The moon, in its first quarter, had disappeared long before we rolled into
HASSBIRGEY near 0400 hrs.
In the darkness, and in our tiredness after the lon
But when the ho
and the clean sandy soil that formed a carpet beneath.
In view of the fine
wreather, and the proposed shortness of our stay, only one house was requisition
so we lived in the open and it was good to do so.
had slarmed and tont-flaps had olosed.
was in the process of being carried out. That was the form, the drill
fact!
The cools hai scarcely called the faithful to tu.
on an eruption of dust
Coy rested: on tenterhooks
had bean the last Coy to move thus amriving in the dark, and now that we were
We seemed to lose in either case.
th it to to no to tart a to do not son to lo i hitti can
exemplified by the Lichten Moor, and but a short distance from the HAMBURG-
HANOVER Autobahn about nine miles South-west of SOIlAU.
The journey was a fast one by recent standaras since the distance of thirt.
five miles was covered by 0630 hrs when we pulled into KROGE.
But to say thi
it had been a snooth one would be a mis-stateneit since the road hal been etica-
sively cratered especially round by bridges which were, of course, usually
the false dawn of a searc
a tributary of the larger weser.
nich are publicised, but these lesser bridges are oqually as important, and
often far more difficult in proportion, since the strength of a chain is tact
of its weakest link,
and so it is of course, with roads.
Turning north over
the bridge we looked back over the bleak sandy heath and saw the winking liguts
of the convoy snaking into the distance like those of a popular seaside resort
before the war.
left in the latter place.
The road varied between the brick rubble of the
a to i sent no to ta to de, ander not a tan troadam, but aliveys
KROGE lay in a shallow valley in this now undulating country, and a collection
of farm buildings of pleasing deep-eaved architesture set amidst flowering trees
anc. the shooting corn, made a picture of restful peace until our vehicles
charged in and by their blend of khaki male it one of war.
The Supply Point openeü shop at 0800 hrs, and all wits, mart from the
distant Admin Area, reported with their faithful consistency as though they
had found a grover who held daily bargain sales and, once registered, would
not give him up.
Here again we found the now familiar posse of Russian and Polish, and French
ex-POW and forced workers standing about watching the sights of their liber-
ating Allies at work.
A mingling of Russian and Polish girls enriched the
local population of this "No Fratting" land.
At about mid-morning it gave tiro Russion ex-POWs much satisfaction to
report that three arned SS men including an officer lurised hereabouts.
a very high-ranking motorised (two jeeps) patrol that set forth in search of
this desperate band, but on retum it looked a bit cressfallen since the
mackerel had proved to be but two miserable civilian-dressed sprats which
squirmed uneasily in the fast-hauled not.
But the alloged officor had eluded
us with the dertness of an eel, the heel!
Wor Мисип
Document
5284
(7182)
