a gatly docorated, unnated Oristmas 1000a
though perhaps cola, ainingenali in the contre or
Od and his offioons malcing the rounds of the tables.
snocaine poured from cavernous jugs into hundreds of emptring mugs be
his loquaciousness marred by constant and raugous
shoacingly inebriated mamber on the Floor!
Meanihile more
в Дал 0 .
On Boxing Day snow began
freezo misture vas instituted outside Coy IQ on which a
as kopt for any signs of its freezing.
constant water
ties were thus averted.
its history.
now situated.
of which the Church vas a beautiful example,
But Tine had left it in possession of many fine old but
t for ma weds sainst the invading forces, and successfully bargain
for terms.
This triumh was largely
due to the formidable earthronica
On New Year's ive and also on the following night a dance was held
the Totel de ville and uns well attended by the doy, whose dancers fo
wever that the dancing of Belgium was decidedly different from our o
No jitterbussing here!
Bi the hospitality of the people of til rag
unlimited and the lads were enjoying themselves here more than at any
previous place, or at any later one either.
1944 was over!
witnessed a great change for the betier in Allied fortunes, and tho
It had been a most eventful year and had, of course.
we had said the sane on one or tro previous New Year's Eves, this time it
enemy staggering back into his shrinking Reich on all fronts.
must be that the New fear woula bring total victory over Germany.
none veil ta 1944, and ve felt that 224 Coy had fulfilled its share.'
We hAa
no time during operations had the Division wanted for food, no matter what
the di louies might have been, and ou vehicles had run to schedule
carrying out a variety of jobs in addition to that of feeding the Division
There vere those vehicles attached to Div Ho. those running daily on
and heavy runs. for ADOS, the detachment to the Ingineers which hau been
varnly comented upon by the Sapper Transport Officer for the cheerful
and efficient nanner in which details had been carried out.
And guards
for the drivers were coming round frequently too,
and were to continue so
for many months to come.
But it was all part of the job, and anything
that helped to bring about the defeat of Germany and bring nearer that
precious "piece of paper" was worth it!
"ATILATTA
As ve pause trist the rears it would be churlish to omit mention
of 224's pets.
There was a more or less permanent strength of one dog ant
tro bitches, with scores of temporary attachments which for the purposes of
this chronicle must be onitted.
"Ginger" - takes pride of place in this roll of honour by length of contin
service alone, if nothing else.
she, a small and (naturally) ginger spec
of terrier vas on the strength of workshops. She was an old hand and ver
experienced of the "Facts of Life",
She joined the Cor in the weston day-
and had soldiered on ever since.
Whilst faithful to a degrée to her inne
late nasters, she as decidedly internationally minded - no colour bar
there!
fer love life must have been inmense, for having presented tha
with innunerable litters in England she was not slow to form an Intenti
Cordiale of heroin, and no doubt sooner or later some long low German Fou
come her way - or would she too, refrain from "fratting"?
Mext, nervously and arrayed in bespotted virginity, Freda stepped on the
scene one Autum day, at the end of a long leash descending from a great
height.
Boasting a Balkan pedigree, she possessed a regal gait.
A quiet
character this with an orderly mind - returns could come and go before her
eye and she would not bark a vord.
Next to receive his cue vas Phillip - a Frenchman dragged from a northern
street.
He became an HQ dog - the dog! He had many masters - the number
of his mistresses vas never known. Front-seated during Coy moves, beaush.
ioned by night, his was a life of luxury.
not gog th can in co tho
no pounds circums)f course, or death -
"She knew none of the groon trench fields that Pupert I had knorm;
ungry Dutchman!
created rabbit history by
for a revealed hop nobo sailo no he true he body to 400e a
+ to tan a manh, at cat, a oleo on the ta to sea :
a kidney ho i to as many sallows.
alt this rhoumatic old man possessed a gargantuan appetitoy:
Acutely conscious of any deviation in
o10ur from khaki he vas allergic to civilians who, though German, presented to
His master, if master he hai,
sall I now gave you that will please your obedient gentle heart? A nico juic
Dear Carl, sweet Carl!
triumphed by size
What command.
No, ivil liams, no?
civilian shall it be, or just a cast-off hind-quarter from the butcher's slab?
Don't shoot him yet, he's ballast for the Humber!
9 4 5
JANUARY
PHASE XI - "IOD, SNOW AND DOODLE-BUGS".
Tho commencomont of the iK leave schome found the weather at its worst, and
those later reporting back said that the train journey fron BOURG TIME to
MALs in (then) unhoated trains lasting 16 hours,
was the worst part.
The state of the roads, alturating between thick snow and glassy surfaces
as making transport a sticky business, and vehicles proceeding on detarts had
to 3001 out at the transport Offico, where Iom Ranson and his minions "the petil.
wallahs",
allo: for the difficulvies of the roads.
checked the slowing pulse of the transport veins, at an earlier hour to
Whilst the number of Accident Reports
roceived at coy office showed a marked increase during this teacherous period, it
as hi the stand of diving with the that nothin
for every task vehiclo was continuously in use.
The large anount of traffic on
the roads fooding tho counter to Pundsteat's offensive also contributed to the
airficulties.
blows nobody good!
15 becane a familiar sight - those for BRUSSHIS apparently passing to the
south of the town, with those for ANTWuRP to the North - at least that was the
interpretation we gave to these sights.
One or two fell in the neighbourhood
but no casualtios were sustained by the Coy.
Filn shows were given by the Film Unit in IEAU and we were able to attend
cinema and ESA shows at the Div Club in TIRLEMONT - the large sugar-refining
factory in this town being the site of the Mobile Bath Unit.
Is seens that every positive must have its opposing negativé as was borne out.
during this month when we lost one Sgt. Major and shortly after gained another.
OsM sutter who had been with the Coy since November 1941 when it was re-organizer
at WESTON-SUPER-MARE had received promotion to RSM and was posted to a General.
Iransport Coy stationed at ANIWERP.
Questions put to him good-humouredly as to
hot he would deal with an "incident" arising fron V 1 and V 2 activity were not
wel] received however!
Ho had actually left the Coy on the 6th, and for the
noxt fortnight the identity of the new Sgt.Major was concealed by the deep admini-
istrative grooves of "the usual channels". In the meantime, Sgt. Cullen assuned
cratunile croim and laurels in his own inimitable manner.
Eventually CSM
Barlow arrived on the scene, and we realised that in him, we had, at least, been
saved from a fate worse than death.
Questions plied in the Sgts' Mess revealed.
that his former unit was an Ambulance Car Coy which had followed (mostly follower.
in our footsteps from France to NIJMEGEN.
Thenceforth the all-embracing arms
of 224. Coy would weld him into the whole.
Vor Musecun
cument
25284
78(7182)
