- 13 -
ovor the briage a turn to the right shortly brought the coy
one Loentiton in opon flolds at OV ASSIStE
and, thorofore
Within vio
of tho Rolohs-
had loft. us
a two tanks belonging to
us as additional protoction.
Fight tho sorios of actions whiah untaintoly gainod, the broat
bridge
WAAT, at NIJMECEN
the road
to the mon at ARNHEM, still howovor, out off from offootivo
This had, boon tho
wuce suporvia-
the roadfor thenselves amongst tho
whilst our people, with the morious' pornission did a littlo
sorting
a aged ones,
During the evoning infortion was rocolved thu the onury had launch-
od an attack on tho FINDHOVIN GRAVE road in tho oron of Vachut thoroby
outting what boono to be lenown din the dotly nowspapes doe
the "supply
In fact, for thu noxt fow days the roan was to be closed
1nurge numbers of "soft vohiolos wore toakod. out.
with the
road ouc,
although sono Divisional amour had boon sunt back
to doal vith the situation it ras tov practicable to sond our vehicles
for ration replonishiont from BOURG IACPOID as hud. boen plannod.
- In fact,
the rond ind beon out but a for noire after wo had traversed it apart fron
some another sinll unit, we had buon thu last to troval that belonguered
road.
This produced a looling uf isciation and Aiso a sonso of thenkful-
noss that vo had boot able to get unrough d all.
It was indood fortunate that a large
Goran food Lump was discovered
in a faotory at OSS - a town sone 1o miles to the Toot ca CRAVE and 3 milos
Fron tho centre làng, for yath to roul cut and rolanishuent Fron BOURG
TEOROID toporarily out of the quoraton RASC vas ruered to dra its
Divisional supplies fron this Dum.
Many storios wore told of strange adrontures at OSS, for the onony was,
for a short tine, also using it ni a supply base and ofton was the tolo
ropeatod of how we would draw in the morning and the Gerans in tho
afternoon or vice vursa.
"B" Platoon drivers went down there fully prepared.
for a small scale battlo during the first day ur so, for it was lnowm
that the neny thousands of Gumans subroating tron south-rest Holland had
roceived their ordors to draw fron oss.
Lecordingly HQ Squadron fron
Division was sent don in comany with Coldstroans to "clean up the
charge of the place becue nore certain as to gon
It was said at the time that there was sulricient foou in the factory to
feed the whole of the Second Amy for many wooks.
Most of the food was
of Dutch origin and therefore of good quality.
Even during the time whor
the frotory officials weru in"a quandary as to the nationality of theis
titimate custonors they were propared to issue any quantity of foodstuifs
provided they obtained a roceipt for the sane!
4 complication arose
hore for the supply staff since all the quantitios vore in Continontal
measures such as kilogrames etc., but this difficulty was soon renoved
by the operation of the simple rule that practico makes perfect.
Apart
from the Divisionnl units to be supplied thero wore also othor odd units
who drow rations from the Coy.
Among prisoners taken by the Division woro sovoral non who had beon"
bakers by trado,
the Coy therefore transported Goran flour to NIJMEGIN
and the prisoners were again enployed in their corroct trade.
The broad
thus baked yas then distributed through tho coy Supply Points, naking a
pleasant change fron the "hard tack" of the previous weoks.
The Supply
Point was being hold daily in the Coy luention at this tine.
The sight of stirlings flying North with reinforconents and supplios
16 "ARNHEM became"a contion sight"on unch occusion whon thur was goot Myin
weather, and it was possible to traco thui flight nearer ARNHEM by tho
Wor Musecun
ment 25284
lis
78(7182)
