to tho that vi that bout in
- our a rate spott out
made mun not comfortable by the acquisition
of theso usorul itoms.
Tho down never slo to take advantage of lis
was encountered, in keeping civilians iron walking about
i spit or endless signs bearing the mystic words "Toegans
situating - they a t
besioging us fron every.
analy sont allocations to the Co, waich had supplied aruns and the
30127 For 32 Gas Bão.
At 1400 hrs to Coy was asied to supply twonty targe-tonners for tho
But these were tiring days and the fact that there was no
together made an darly retirement to the "pit" a very attractive proposit-
PHASE XVI - "ACROSS WESTPATTA"
The Supply Point in the park for all units including lamin Area,
no longer being supplied by 704 Coy, at 0800 hrs heralded the
second and latter morning in HISCHiDE.
We read in the papers delivered
to-day that INSCHIDE had been liberated - amazing! Considering the dis-
tance now to be covered the mail was coming and going with remarkable
speed - a great tribute to the efficiency of the Any postal Service and
to our particular attachment - an efficiency which the queer noises and
fitful propulsion of the APO's "Horse-box" did their best to deny.
At 1200 hrs the Recce Group was called upon to go forward to find yet
another resting place for the Coy, while the Replenishment colum as on
its way back from ISSELBURG with another load of Compo packs - 14 loaus of
which were then dumped in the pavilion for the time being.
to act as a forward reserve.
Shortly after, the oruer was receive for the coy to move at 1600 ars.
a time nich, on this occasion, was not to be altered.
Accordingly the Coy moved out at the appointed hour and after quite o
fast journey crossed the German frontier for the last time and entered e
farn set amidst thick rocds just short of the German town of NORDHORN.
The farmer here was a German and employed & Butch staff.
This German Was
given a good "character by the Dutch employees who said that he had
always treated then well both before end during the war. Thus, whilst he
and nis fanily were removed to another house, orders were given that his
house and property were to be scrupulously respected. The Dutch were
instructed to lear a piece f range ribbon to differentiate them from
our present route.
During ting evening "Batt's Cafe" provided the unit with a Wist Drive
da from a dorman store in WORDHORY.
in a narqued man attle orated for tho purpose, using sumitro transport-
move the next day.
1 mot hr sa tra FEE rosemblans Covent Garden once
the Supply Point.
i tries it all unit trude, vent trion nod, daningth to
ning led with the roar of engines being tested vere familtar enough sounds:
Workshops very al ays busy since the shortes lato of sarnes engines and
transport oquimont nodied continuous nursing to maintain the best possible
particularly busy.
tere still not worleing to perfection apparently since they still attracte
a am 11 knot of tinaring fitters and electricians.
the himping of paciss on the Supply Point had hardly ceased when the
Replenishnent Column arrived from ISSTLURG with more paces fos all units
other than Adinia mao wore to enjor the privilege and comparative Intury of
fresh rations by their issue on the following day's Point.
By afternoon the cold air of the woads had been warmed by dis bright
sun sending a lifo-bursting light through the shaded groves, and many of
the lads were to be seen busy about domestic aotivities. Equipment was
being cleaned, the "smally""
jobs of painting on vahicles and tunts vore being completed.
toods were quict and no wind stirred the green-tipped branches - nor were
there yet any inhabitants of the bird boxes which suened to hang from ever;
1 Forvard Supply Point was sent out at 300 irs to SUDIONS - a fe
& leS biort of tical, and the Point for rumining units folloved in tie
BBB an hour later.
Nail was distributed at 0900 hrs and with it the nevspapers from
home dated 7th April bearing long columns on the Division's operations in
breacing out of the Rhine briagchend - the "Daily Mail" evan going so far
as to print a life-sized "hye" shoulder-flash on its front page. Having
been accustomed to a complete blackout on individual fornation's perfon-
anoes in the newspapers and on the BBC the new departure of giving such
most imagine that Sir James Grigg in a formal sutting of red tape had
ariced "Go the whole hog, blow the gaff, let all now be revealed!"
But it was heartening that this should be possible sinoe it showed
To bong but in th i cay thing go tint th don are to d ro paition.
TO RETUN
WITH YOUR DOCUMEN
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
118790
