so far as
Pao odiotino - a lited distribution was i do.
autobaimen and this
In Britond toe
tho
Whatever was happent,
and no longer did io feel that a
p1 1/e Belita was rather a disillusionea man, for in his capacity he gane
and he sould never ba
sure whigh it would be,
rades singe they had done much to entortain us from Normandy to Gerany,
eften wondered what the Horny! of the last war would have thought of the so-
don the canned produets of our time,
27 - 30 AM During this period replenisment fran the fue at SOTAY scurod
each morning at 0850 hrs, with compo and FOR being drawn on ecen
secasten end alse ens cach mening the Supply point for all units was held in
the coy losation, at 0900 hmg.
But whilst sonditions within the Coy mignt have remained fairly quiet at
thas time the rohicles attaghed to 704 Coy were covering a great mileage and
their drivers were getting little rest.
The journey from the Divisional area
down to the uk railhead at GENNIe tas a long one of approximately 280 miles
Each trip took nearly 24 hours, so our drivers were
more or less living on the job.
The result was that drivers and vehicles had
So it was that whilst six three-tenners returned from
70y Coy on 27th, nie vere sent back there on the following day..
however, the route was altered and leave persomel for the UK were travelling
That would be a velcome innovation
since leave personnel were now leaving the unit four days prior to their sailing
date, and that coupled with the increased leave allotments now being received,
was placing an appreciable strain on unit man-power.
Not that anyone would
have dreamed of complaining of that for the cause was of the best.
During the afternoon of 28th the Co, moved out from WESTERVESEDE and travella
Forth for about 20 miles to the new location recced two days previously at
GR. MECKEISEN.
This was, as usual, a snall villege consisting of scattered
farms, and the Coy layout was ver much the sane as countless others in Germa.
he usoù for our offensivo, va could not hule but look upon to them tate
on the ovo of tho fade wonth of Mey wo found too Dirision vitian sey had
being rapidly cared up.
to surrender to Britain and Anarica to the enclusion of Russia,
Naturally,
this had been refusad, but the eyes of the world were centred on the fomeys
At the sane time doy office was very busy enacting the Age and Service Groups
signifying as it daa an
Maront na, boon o common elego of the nor say to don an tie set da nil te
o uncomplimentary characters, but not so noi, for long service neant a high
pluce in the queve for the retur home.
The nanth opened with the news that hitler and mussoline were-doad!
This news, which would have been classed as stupendous in the carlier
days of the war now left us quite cold, since the war had reached a stage now-s
were the lives of these two undesirables could have liutle or no bearing ca
the courso.of she war in Europe.
Bigger and more important news was that of
the Unconditional Surrender of all Gornan forces in Illy and parts of Austria
to Field Marshal Aluzander. This force totalling a million men of all arns
and some of the best reanining to the Reich, had by their aet provided coucrete.:
evidence of the dissolution of Germany.
Even bigger news was expected hourly.
for at this stage of affairs anything could happen.
so far as our pivision was concered operations were totally unspectaculer.
Having neared the and of the peninsulor between the weser and the Ilbe ve hau
become what the Gemans night have called a "pocket division". Resistance
was scattered ani vas provided by polyglot undts of Morines, SS, and Hitler-
jugend. "scholars" - small of body and equally small of mind.
though our mission wder 12 Corps was completel, for today to returned to our
almost nacive 30 corps.
the morning, completed the Coy's military operations for the day.
ES rations wore still being issued - perhaps soon all would be receiving
fresh rations!
After breakfast Sgt. Duan and a posse of B' Platoon men were sent off
• 5
to STADE to mount guard over wine stocks discovered in the neighbour-
these consistud of sone 20,000 Sottlos of port, shour, ote which were
to be sorted and distributed throughout the Division - some hovever on repay-
mont since some was of private stock and not wehmacht property.
What a pity
Won Muscan
Docume
+ 15281
78(7182)
EN SIN
