Locality
Bolgium was clear of the enemy again and it seaned that
could not be
much longer protracted.
- 22 -
But up in the Forest
to the accompaniment at a banand of hundreda
(tho Reichswald) something was stirring! It wast
and was vat to rudoin the coy
the doy moved to duIJK on the West bank of the MAAg - a few miles North
Workshops Platoon was left behind in SOHAIJK for this
That was excellent.
Private bit votia school, sea other buildinge for ta to a nimodation
damaged village.
until the next
which would take us into
that was inevitable.
Stone Ire to intoned see a cat en the uth until further notion
n oly Point was held daily for Admin units a a Forwerd Point to buzc
drawn fron Bilk.
The BEP was in n burt-out factory building where
eins the dropping waters of the MAlS loy the dark mads of the Reionsala Forer
BARtO NASSAU A an island Of Belgian soil in Holtond,
Sends mine the inhabatants of TAX te notfully Bid, the cor "au
a e11o4 handa, and this rat to be our last postion, for the tane borne ne
tantot as it moved out via ST. TROND. DIHST, and TURNHOUT to
nitri do carman.
The Coy, was
liberater countries to becone the ocoupiers of the Third Reich.
so sind thore?
soon we should be leaving the friendly civilian populations of
ma the Postal Unit contred on the BRP at
rated in this and its sistere Slage of BAARLE HERrOG Wth Composite Platoon
What shoula
ALPIN some fivo miles airay.
Supplios were being drawn fron EINDHOVIN and then later from BUlk whilst the "
halê the coy was in Belgiun and the
other in Holland,
The plot was
A curious state of military dispositions now occurred when we moved out
Supply Foint was held in TILBURG.
The people there spoke of spending five long days
The two BARIas had been the scene of bitter street fighting during the ma
OW during the morning, and the forward units - chi fu 12 Rde - moved
from the cauldron of the WiSh bridgehead, their work successfully completei.
rious october then the onemy was being pushed away from the Scheldt Estuary.
nilst the fighting raged relentlessly northwards.
and nights in the cellars
But the 10te oota as world of tie RASO, like vonants, le never done.
The route lay via the GENNEP Bridge, GiNNEP and MATERBORN.
TO GENNEP Bridge proved to be, as usual, a Bailey in this case laid acros
the pillars which formerly had supported the railway bridge.
further to the SW by powerful AA barrages which were so enficient that we sa
vere passing Overhead with almost monotonous regularity to be
Te now. resided on the. V.1 zomits miNIak and these nory contraptions:
met a little
fuiously to roct a sturdier
ine - obviously with a view to hastening later heavier supplies
many exploded in mid-air.
This was merely a marking-time position for the Coy sinde other units ven
on the move, and this made oh mis-stration rather difficult, bit It was not
lestruction or severe damage during the heavy fighting.
last for long.
after a mile or so farm buildings and houses bore large signs in Cerman script
PHASE XII. "NOT HOLTAND AGAIN!!!
created to boost the morale of the Wehrmacht's frontier defenders with such mis-
informed slogans as "with the Fuhrer to Victory!" and of course the inevitable
who was now acting OC, Coy in
The recco carried. out carlier in the day by
one Guard - You are now entering Germany!"
one people, one fuhrer!" Then followed our own signs doclared "Be on
the absence of Major hoves on leine
This was really a great moment,
you thilst we vexe very fan from being the first troops to ass the frontier,
Capt Strange, damari billets and we noved straight into them.
thể sight of the Reich. Chenzo vas synbolic of stepping on amassite fronte the
in England,
Long steep cour of Allied hopes ana ambitions.
The road, busy with the traffic
rain and mud with which we had bwome accustone to associate this part of the
location of the previous October and November at WIJCHEN;
light the terrain becas familiar to all, Iot we were but a lew miles from ou
and especially the
Of the Siegfried Line there was littl
Supplies vere still being drawn fron Brik near FINDHOEN.
to see, perhaps because this section had been a more recent extension and consist
supply Point for 32 Gas Bie 1 ope ZIg to the South of the Reichswald Forest ar
mainly of carthworks concoalad in the forest, but a large sign triumphantly
hold in NINEGEN and a Rear Pount for 5 Gds Bae In VUGHT near TJ.BURG., When
noclaimed "Hore was the Siegfried Tine" and then another adding "The Washing".
To this latter was attachoù a line boaring a notley amay of nether sarments of
32 Bac later engaged enemy paratz zuarin their briâgehead opposite WEsEr the
doubtful. cleanliness.
Forvard Point vas shiftod to GOCH and still later to wiEZE.
Thus 221, Coy hat
one of the unsung heroes of this war was the roadsido signwriter. Who come
already nade its firsi crossing of the Reich Grenze - at least Its first ind
poiso this happy band of toilers which variously entreats, varns, orders, or
operational role of an RASC Coy though our valiant infantrymen in the Series
humours us on the centre and maintenance lines with its breezy messages?
Battalion last December had held positions inside Gormany.
entreaties are often touchins, its warnings tense and urgent, its orders ourt,
Later in the month the forard supply Point only was required, other issug
and its humour direct.
Always it assumes that the average man has his share o
being made fron the Coy location,
the BRP in SCIATeK was situated in a ston
munon-sense - its sis remind him to use it!
depot which though rather small was admirable otherwise for our use.
The location was at BlYHRSKOF - a straggling farming community made more
It hac
raised floor and accordingly a raised platfor running outsido which greatly
straggling by bitter battles - about three miles South of CIEVE and about six
miles from the Rhine.
The recce had taken full advantage of the limited
facilitated loading and unloading operations.
AKS gave several film shows in the school occupied in part by Ho Plation
accommodation available in the form of houses and farm buildings and the Coy
quickly settled in.
cookhouse, and it was thus now possible to drink one's tea whilst gazing at t
This process was made easier by the general absence of
civilians but encumbered by the frightful litter scattered by the advance troops.
It was all very reminiscent, however, of the old Normandy days - everywhere the
fosholes, mortar craters, cartridge oases and ammmition hoxes - the flotsam and
stay in SCHAIJK and this was well supported,
SCHATJK vill long be renembered by the Coy for its abundance of eggs.
The civilians, mostly old, crippled, or in bad health, seemed to want to be
was no linit to then, largely because of the general lack of trangrort in lib
friendly - as well it might pay them to be since they were luckier than those
od Holland that could be utilised for such fragile but beneticial foodstuff.
that remained in the shrinking Reich east of the Phine.
could imagine that gladly though these eggs were given us, how much more satis
lony is quick to forgive and forget, as the Germans might remember from World Wer
faction it would have given all' concerned if they could have been sent to the
But of an evening a bright red ball of light followed by a straight white
unfortunate Dutch of Northern Holland, where, under the spiteful German ocati
vapour trail could be seen to the West streaking up into the purple sky.
Another V.2! For London, or Antwerp?
The same old Germany, fawning in captiv-
the population was known to be in dire straits for food as well as fuel,
By now the offensive through the Reichsald hai penetrated to the Rhine, ani
ity, but a faun at heart.
Daily the Allied radio reminded us "No Fraternization!" - surely after five
tho Anerican Ninth Army also under I.M.Montgonery's command had swept throught
years of war such a warning should not have been necessary - but it was!
capture COLOGE and BONY, whilst a large portion of the enemy's best troops s
loccod in the bloody struggle in the north uninst the British and Canadians.
Cy tho tast bringohead remined to bo cleaod, and this job vas being ner
Lessly carriod out,
• War Muscan
15284
79(1182)
chanen
