VIIA which had very
Division and tho
recently boon the soone of howy fighting
overad heard that our advande
fanatical Porachute
Division.
road. we were to
- 52 -
of tol 802 201 tito voide all too willingly to any varthunhile arencondo
now moot to note
nea
other trees lining the
with attentiont
Marching hoveront rates rould mank
The country through which ve
oat.
the rear whon we coulà indulge fit peacaful contemplation of suon t
athat which as yot denied us the port of BRewIn for instance.
hit ma tan at on to by a co it in a to got ng
and đead it had to bo - as deaù
do it hate no pool de a loven a tho soma of uniformed
result at first was probably a comical mixture of the tro.
I tine ovent in show in an
so miles along the road to BRin.
It now appeared very liltely that the doy would move forward on the
mozrow, for the Recue Group had been told to hold themselves in readiness
to nove.off at 0700 hrs in the morning.
barn adjoining the Burgamaster's house.
ratch a film in the company of cows anu one large disconsolate bull.
On this next move the Film wit was to travel in our convoy; this
was a new practice, making our colum more "sosmopolitan" than ever as
we now had Signals, RACC, and RE as well as our own vehicles.
At 1800 hrs a further Supply Point for Admin units was held whereby
the rations which would have been issued on the following day for con-
sumption on the hext were issued in advance because of the impending
FIASE ILI - "HERPHNVOTE AND ONIERS"
15 APR
The Recce Group swirled out of the farm gates at 0730 hrs.
It
was no. the ouston for Sgt. Watson to travel forward with this
Group as he acted as interpreter for the 0C in arranging billets in ner:
areas, and making such adjustrents with the civilian population as was
necessary.
Often it was politic to remove the civilians from certain
buildings and areas required for the Joy's use,
In these areas there
were very few English-speaking people and thus his services becane inval.-
uable.
A Forward Supply Point had been sent on to BAKUM, south of CLOPPIN-
BURG, just after breakfast in order to open there at 1000 hrs, with pack
rations in issue for the forward units.
At 1100 hrs the Coy moved out to the new location which proved to be
aIso in BUKUM. The mute lay via mall villages, which purely for acad-
ing Russian, Polish or nerely prisoner of War.
land there-
formerly occupied countries of turope, who together with the POW reluct-
antly had laboured to the dictates of thair swaggering overlords.
they were froe with the happiness of deliverance in thoir oyes -
Now
other fasten o of the entitudo of tho choico of a crusader s shielt are
the insignia of the Second Army.
Bakul was only a shall village, and being in a cormunity in which
being no other building of note.
fine weather such as we were now enjoying;
it bore little sign of
COy HQ was in a
The BBP was again in a farnyard, and a
The population showed
signs of wishing to be friendly, and this attitude was the cause of a new
word coming into use in the Company vocabulary - that of "fratting" being
The absorbtion of this word into
16 AFR At 0630 hrs twelvo three-toners vero despatched to INSCHaDE to
nove RAOC Stores to the ADOS Dump in the coy location.
of bread only was mado since a reduction of one day's holding of packs in
second line was made.
The weather renained fine and life in the village was peaoeful. The
Liberated prisoners lolled about on the corners enjoying their ner-founa
freedom and dreaning of their homelands as they idly but interestedly
watched our transport roar dustily by.
Various odd Gornan soldiers were brought to the Coy il, one coming in
under his on stean, or rathor snoke, having confortably equipped hinsoli
with a pipe which he smoked contentedly and continuously whilst patiently
awaiting for transport to move him back to the world unlown beyond the
German frontier.
Another prisoner arrived and becane quite a nuisance
mpenel
/ Mar Musecun
TO KEIUM
WITH YOUR DOCUMEN
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
