sort dia
Potatoe
2o90o.on
ONE CO
10- 524
Sonatard
what:
LUNG DiS
c piles
i too st
LEN AN
rive
Difficult wooded country lay ahead and the Household Cavalry were fired on soon
after rejoining the main road in a
However, they moved round right handed
EXCEL and OVERPRIT until they could see the canal bridge which they
reported intact though strongly held.
The plan was for the Grenadier Group
to lead following the track to the
to work thoir way down the main contro line while the Irish Guards Group
west to follow a parallol course until the narrow bridge was crossed and then
following as far as possible
the route already takon by the troop
the Houschold Cavalry.
that one or other of the groups might
reach the aroa of the canal whon
their ordors were to endeavour to rush
but the enemy were very disorganised and the defenders of
the bridge lew that theirs was
last remaining bridge over the canal and that
and some tanks
remained on the wrong side at BOURG LEOPOLD
many of their
and particularly at HECHTEL.
fateful decision to blow bridges does not
rost entirely on the courage
initiative of the man who presses the button nor
on his immediate local commander
on some very suparior officor often
with only a very confused local knowleage.
The gamble was well worth while.
The Crenadior Group fought
their way north until they reached the level crossing
and cross roads only a mile south of the bridge.
Here the eneny had decided to
stand for the road was flaniod on oither side by fir woods making it almost
impossible for tanks to doploy.
This group. was very exportuncou thus type or trang and nac turmer a very
to pin with the
strong combination.
nour Irom the Iront wit
0.3 Squadron who were in the lead while the King's Company under Nigel Bake
and No. 1 Squadron under James Bowes Ion were to work round by a track through
The position was very strong
the ermy were
surprised by tho outflanking
after vory fiorce fighting seven anti-tanic guns (mostly 88 mm),
ono SP gun and
three tanks were Inocked out and many Germans killed, the road
being complotoly blocked by burning vehicles.
In the meantime
the Irish Guards were
making very rapid progress and as
darkness bogan to fall had worked round to the right and reached the factory
area south-east of the canal bridge.
Like many canal bridges,
bridge was very high, anyone crossing would be silhouetted against the sky while
tho approach road sloped up stoply making surprise very difficult.
The plan decided on was to cover the attack with fire from tanks to the
west of the factory (south-east of the bridge).
The infantry were to work'up
as ncar as possible to the bridge on cither side of the main road while a troop
of tanks was to be concealed just off the main road ready to rush the bridge as
fast as possible followed by the infantry.
A Sapper officer, Ronnie Hutton,
was detailed to follow immediately behind the tanks to cut the wires and remove
A verey light signalled the start of the attack and soon after covering fire
had been opened an 88 mm gun guarding the approaches to the bridge was knocked
out and its attendant ammunition truck set on fire.
The exploding shells made
the attack even more hazardous while the flames lit the whole area of the bridge
and doubtless added to the confusion of the defenders.
Three other 88 mn's were
positioned covering the northern end of the bridge supported by infantry with
spandaus.
The attack evidently took the enemy by surprise and the tanks and infantry
were over the bridge and attacking the enny positions before the defenders were
aware whether the rumbling tanks were their own retreating or ours attacking.
They were not left long in doubt.
The complote success of the plan and its execution is shown by the fact that
Irish Guards suffered only three casualties - none fatal,
David Peel who conmanded the assaulting squadron was unfortunately killed.
on the following day.
Monday, 11th Soptember 1944
"To bridgehead was this day extended and strengthened patrols crossing the
Dutch border only two miles north of the Escaut bridge.
Unfortunately SP guns
approached the Irish Guards positions south-west of the bridge probably with the
insention of crossing and not with a counter-attack role.
On finding it held
they opened fire with HE.
David Peel having knocked out one SP gun was killed
while trying to locate the other - a great loss to his regiment.
HECHTEL still held out although completely surrounded. It was decided to
withdra our troops during the night from the outskirts to enable the artillery
and 4.2 mortars to fire as it was appreciated fron PW reports that a considerable
number of encry was involved,
Our on Divisional Artillery was then deployed forward of HECHEL covering
the brigehead and it was decided to call on the support of mediums of 11th
Armoured Division.
voner
War d
Misecun
cument 15284
7g 1182
