NONESOR
020602
and, chas
matteriors
piotro wit
on't
931009
EO.:
tong
+ ov
5
for a ring round the bridgchandi
In apito of this
the bridgehead was
widenod but nortaring and shellfiro becarso houior,
suspacted
large slag hamp suppliod their OF and a fow well dirocted shells confirmed this
and silenced the guns for a whilo.
Tho local barge bridge in praticular cone under hony fire boing cloar
tho village and in full vion of the enory.
However even if only a few jeops
Infantry crossed it sorved the nost useful purpose
of divurting enemy fire.
Ond berge ins eventually sunle and this bridge abandoned.
Bth Armourod Brigade crossed the bridges in the afternoon
Royal letherlonds Brigade Group took over the irmodiato
fron tho Irish Guords.
It was the intention for the 8th Arnoured. Brigade
let through if possible in the direction of OSTRAM to go to the support of
bridscheed over the Albert Conel to the north-west and wore being hard-prossod
troops of the s0 NorthumbranDivision we had lone sun beateness
to mintain it.
Tho Coldstruon Group fought their way townrds BOURG IROFOLD nocting
rosistance at HEPPEL.
The Walsh Guards continued towards
HECHTCL but there was
an ever prosent threat to the Irish Guard right flunk at HeLCHEWREN.
Tho main opposition cane from parachutoloss parachutists into whose ranks
many of the luftwarfe and, appropriately enough,
their ground staffs had been
impressed - non who nade up for thoir lack of military training by an abundance
of fanatical zeal.
Seturday. 9th Soptorbor 1914
It appoared that many reinforcenents had reached the anony during the night
and there wore many unsuccessful counter attacks during the day, the heaviest
being towards ovoning at HECHrET.
During the noring an ambitious party of one officer and forty mon attempted
to got through to the bridge
the north-vost.
itsolf by approaching long the canal bank fron
Unfortunately some of then reached the barge bridge and destroyed
sono thirty vehicles of the "4" Echelon of 8th irmoured Brigade before they then-
solves were entirely eliminated.
8th Arnoured Brigade itsolf had becn unablo to get through towards GHEEL
and come undor comand Guards Arnoured Division.
th Coldstreon Guards attacked HaPPEN đung tho noming nhich they capturda
ut suffered rather heavy casualties.
supported by a few tanks.
The enony attacked HECHIEL from the east but although two platoons of the
gallant *X: Company of the Scots Guards (who had recently come under cormand ist
welsh Guards) were temporarily isolated,
Guard battalions knocked out three Jagelpanthers (88 rm guns nounted on the fornia-
able Panther chassis).
lay in wait for it in the woods to the south of the main HECHTEL - BOURG LEOPOLD
road and after half an hour tho monster cane rumbling down the road to be shot up
by its intended victin at 50 yas range.
1ith Armoured Division were brought up to clear our right flank which task
they accomplished with great success capturing a large number of prisoners
particularly at HELCHIEREN.
10th Soptember 1944
The position Was that while the irmediate IMPINGEN bridgchead was vory
securoly held any strong my ockets remined.
The country we had now
reached was the Belgian Aldershot with their main barracks to our left front
at BOURG IFOPOID, still in enemy hands, ond everywhere sand dunes, heather and
fir trees which secn destined in every country only for the improvement of
military skill although the Brigadier reported two blackcock which have long since
flea from our own Aldershot croa.
The draggling village of HECHIEL some 3 niles east lay astride the centre
Line and for this reason was still very strongly held by the enemy, the garrison
being strongthened by stragglors fron the woods.
Our imnediate objective was the bridge over the Escaut Canal at DE GROOT
about 10 miles north of HECHTEL and only 3 miles from the Dutch frontier.
The Divisional Commander decided that HECHIEL should be by-passed to the
that the chance of a surprise capture of the bridge outweighed a possible
threat to our co munications,
A troop of the Houschold Cavalry found a way
round, a rough sandy track through the sand dunes which crossed the main road a
mile west of HECHTEl and rejoined the main centre line some two mides to the
Before doing so a small and boggy stream crossed the track at right
engles with only a single narrow bridgo over which all tanks and traffio must pass.
ocument 25284
78(7182)
TO THEO
RETURNS AREA
