Tuesday, 5th September 1944
Divisional HQ thad harboured in the Paro Royal timodiately in front of the
Palace and the Divisional Cormandor
drove out to visit as many of the battalions
The 2nd (Armoured Reoce) Welsh Guards were in tho vory confortablo
golit club on the outskirts of the Foret de Soignes, a lovely course which appearad
As we arrived there was a curious runour that the Germans
to bo perfectly kopt.
had capitulatod swept through the town and joyful crowds flocked once nore into
The runour was started by the Brussels Radio from a falso report and
I cannot imagine a more
of us believea die news.
celebrations, but fow, if my hot we were to tinu
our advance and the Divisional
Cormander held a conference at nine in the evening at Divisional HQ.
it was due to begin a paraffin lamp on the table on the tent which joins AOVs 1 and
3 and fors the Opcrations In a few seconds the tent had caught and within tho
tho huge operations map.
minutes both AlVs were blazing.
The "G" and "I" staffs watched the loss. of many
of their personal belongings and much of their labour with remarkable calm and
the conference wos held punctually in the ness tent sonewhat interrupted by the
jangle of the local fire engines.
A fow days lnter we were unused to read in a newspaper that as darkness fell
tho sky was lit by a huge bonfire which the local population had lit in the
public gardens to colcbrate their liberation.
6th Septembor 1944.
The orders were to continue our casterly advance and to seize the bridge over
tho. Albert Canal at BEERINGIN.
The Division started at first light and good progress was nade.
HQ were once again the recipients of a farewell almost as enthusinstic as their
It is perhaps unjust but invitable that such reward should not befall.
the lading troops but at least it is rare for any HQ to reccive any form of flattory
and the tributo is to the troops as a whole - not to the hub alone.
The advance to the Albert Canal was swift and such little
opposition as
appeared was quickly overcone;
on sevoral. occasions our troops werc
by the enthusiastic crowds.
But the 2nd Houschold Cavalry found all bridges
over the canal blon and guarded by the enony.
The flags of DIEST were even more numerous and more magnificent than those
When the ist Welsh Guards reached BEERINGEN they found a wooden bridge
replacing the old bridge blown carlior in the war.
The bridge is high with
the houses of the village close up to it on either side.
blowing it again had been only partially successful.
Gernan attempts at
The central of the three.
spans was intact the charges having failed to explode, the other two charges
had exploded but the spans were only danaged and it was possiblo in thoory to
cross on foot with core.
the eastern bank.
In practice it was impossible owing to fire from
The Welsh Guards mode a plan to cross by boat and assault the bridge from
the eastern side,
Half an hour before zero hour a very brave patriot raced
across the bridge waving a white handkerchief and reported that the Germans were
leaving the village.
the bridge and established a bridgehead,
The Welsh Guards therefore charged precariously across
to the north of the wooden bridge,
outside barges ran up a flag from the nasthead.
Nine barges wore required and the two
on the wester side and this was bridged most ingeniously with telegraph poles.
A gap of about 15 feet remained
carriors night drive across.
Inc main idea was to strengthen the hatches so that jeeps and even trucks and
In the meantime the Sappers set to work to rebuild the official bridge, a
cxisting onc.
difficult operation as it is often sinpler to build a fresh bridge than to modify an
Thursday, 7th September 1914
During the previous night resistance stiffened and the enemy began to shell
and mortor the bridge which was completed by dawn in spite of this opposition.
The tanks of the 2nd (Armoured Recca) Welsh Guards crossed and heavy casualties
wore inflicted on the Germons, estimated at 400 prisoners and 500 killed.
Friday, 8th Soptember 1944
on panche
RETURNS AREA
TO THE DOCUMENT
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
PLEASE REMEMBER
