FIT
8 -
Who main objoct of those landings was to "facilitato the passago of
It was thus hopod by this ostrenoly bold plun to reach the
with the utrost spood and thoruby out off all Gorman forces in the
Our objectivo for that
capturo VAIKBUSWAARD and if tinabormittod to advenco to the EINDHOVE arca.
but tho nost irportont task wut que broak the onony's soal around the briagohoad.
Tho Trish Guards Group Wore to lend the
advance and as zero hour approached
Linod up on the road with infantry on the tanks of the second squadro.
honvy barrage lasting sone twenty minutos
plan and nept low over the leading
squadrons of Typhoons took up
range becano too guat for the guns tanks firing their connons and there suitabla
trogots agpocrod,
their terrifying rockots.
RiF squadron londor in a contact cor with
The lyphoons were controlled by an
the leading tanks.
fluorescont penols,
as an cosy and dazzling aid to recognition.
lonting squiron advanced woll neeting little opposition the Gormans
boing svidontly in thoir holes but as tho barrngo coasod thoy ro-appoarod and
11o tanks of the second squndron wore imocked out in quick succossion by 88 mms
and bazookas.
Ivo battalions of 50th (Northubrian) Division wore following tho loading
troops and cleared the opposition on the
very sinilar to Pirbright
with hoathor and fir
The country ves extreholy difficult for tones, aitchos and soft ground, making
doployment almost impossiblo.
road was excellent but obviously a single
voll sightod anti-tink gun may hold up the whole avance for some considerablo tine.
But the lyphoons wore nost successfull and
tho Irish Guards had reached VATKENSWAARD
Double sumer tine ended the previous night and night fell with
unoxpected suddennoss.
The Gernan Commander at EINDHOVN rang up the Tom Clork
at VATKENSWAARD tolling him to
tell the Gorman Garrison to hold on at all costs -
a nossage which he took gront delight
in delivering to the Irish Guards.
Divisional Headquarters moved to
the factory area south-east of DE GROOTE
A dosolate sandy waste.
During the night the area was shelled and
mortared fortunatoly with little danage
accompanied, quite unnecessarily, by
vory heavy rain so that little sleep was possible.
18th Septenbor 19424
News of the progress of the airborne troops was very vague.
Their Liaison
Orficer and our HQ could not establish contact but it was rumoured that they had
not reached EINDHOVEN.
Eventually a message
cane through asking for a telephone
call to be put through to ZON 214•
This was
done and an American major answered
the call and inforned us that the
bridge at ZON had been blown when their troops
were only 200 yards from it.
was able to give the exact width of the gap and
to say that their own sappers were
preparing the approaches.
At VALKENSWAIRD the centre line
split.
The Irish Guards were to continue
north while the 32nd Guards Brigade Group with the Welsh Guards leading turned
east towards LtENDE,
and HElMOND,
Both groups soon met opposition the
Trish Guards boing held up at MIST and the Welsh Guards south of KINE.
It was
imperative to reach EINDHOVEN before dork so that contact with the Americans coula
be mado in daylight and thus the fears of a battle with our own Allies avoided.
The Houschold Cavalry managed to by-pass BINDHOVKN to the west and were soon
in touch with the ericans.
When the Irish Guards were held up the Grenadier
Group followig endeavoured to follow the Houschold Cavalry by going west but
although they net only light opposition from the enemy, the bridges over the
for some days,
Towards evening it seemed doubtful whother the leading troops could reach
WINDHOVEN, and the conal bridge at ZON seomed very remotic.
The Irish Guards had by
then reached a point about threo miles south of EINDHOVIN but were again hold up
by several anti-tank guns and concrete strong points forming the southern defences
to the town.
A conference was then held at the Irish Guards HQ in a thatched modern house
with a well kept lan leading to a swirming bath very similar to the type of houses
near Sunningdale with heather and fir trees beyond the garden.
An artillery
concentration was arranged which was most successful and knocked out three anti-
tank guns and caused the defenders to flea.
Wu Irish Guards were thus able to continue into EINDHOVIN where they joined
the Americans and reached the canal at ZON as darkness was falling, the inhabitants
and the Americons being delighted to see them.
Muscan
25284
78(7182)
