18 -
uns giving trouble and tho
or till029
is tor complimentod, by tho Battalion Com 8pA
trooperiondo of mr.
Budiura in the prosunco of Platoon roprusontativos.
drorped was nogligible,
V. 15 bogan to alo thoir apparanco, but rono
foll in tho locality.
Or 16 Dog Ton Pundatoät launched his offonsivo in the Ardennos full of
nigt: nopo and anbition, and the nows of this vas received very favourably
apparently by the High comand,
The Hun had come out of his conorote
hol] iu the siogfried lids- mihis will nock months off the warl they
said.
PLASS A - "RUNUSTNOT, BEGINS, AND CHRISTMAS"
A strong zour had circulted in the casht at me vore to novo
i " "rest" aren and it was thought that this misht be nonr to BRuSSEls.
though BRUSSELS was hardly syncr mous with rost - but the next threa days
vere to see several noves, and whilst the ultimate location proved, in most
sonsos to be a "rest" area, it was rather different from the idea conjured i
must largoly have been the German "Western Offensive".
the ninds of wishful thinkers. Undoubtedly the cause of these several nove
st lưg r hint of 19/20 Doo tho Coy noved from the factory some tho
I DWA HASSLE tO LANGDORP, a S1011 vilLago Lying some 10 miles or so to
the North-vast of LOUVATN.
The Coy haa noved in two sections and by tho
tino that the second section arrived dawn was not for off.
tits curly hours tho chiof thing that attractoù attontion tas the light on
cookhous fires buming on a small groon in the villago - which indicated
that a welcome neal was on the way.
already been dubbed "Buzz-Bomb Alley".
That our stay in TANGOR? was to be but a short one was indionted early
on by the OC's ioparturo on route to recce a now location, and therefore
orders to move thure wore expected to come through at any time
Runous of ca peatroops boirg dropped in this arva to add, as the
Hun dearly hoped, to the alloged confusion wrought by his BRUSSELS-and-
TWARP-taking offonsive vero talked of, and whilst small parties of
in actual fact, have been dropped none paid us a visit.
The afternoon of the 20th was disnal as the Coy pulled out to move
South-cast to WILDERIN, north of ST. TROND.
Meanwhilo Composite Platoon and the supply staff were having a complicatol
tine in arronging the delivery of the "goods" whilst contonding with these
sudden moves,
In fact the position of supply loads, reserve rations, and
the finting of the necessary vehicles to nove them, were always probions
vaici hai to be solved whon the doy was moving loontion.
To the casual
observer of the vehicle strength it might hare scenedrapparent that there
cloud always bo pienty of trunsport available, but in vow of the nurbers
of voliclos imriably on dotaoment to RA, RE, and the blanicet lorrios
md so hums Ohmpagno Charliots megons the situntion was soldon casy.
phone on gu, on, at a goalong to
happened that parta of tue Distaren
like tine man on the flying trapeze.
the Coy accounts also.
then the Coy had originally passed out of Pance
But tinereafter the process of frontier hopping caused complic-
pocasiond tien a at did ne
It was a difficult matter to gauge future requirements on many
did happen that the Coy would be paid in Dutch cur-
church mice as a result.
Inter it would nove into Belgiun and be poorer
This was probably the nysterious cause of "Doctor" Joll's remarkable
loss of hair in recent weeks, and his persistent irritability in dealing
vith his unfortunate clientele!
Composite Platoon had some farm buildings fox
whilst "A" and "B" Platoons were soon settled in
nany private houses in the village, vith their vehicles parked in the
were to stay thus for several weeks during which time the
rigatly so, a shift to better accomodation.
some three miles to the west.
HQ, Composite, and Worl shops Platoons moved into the large LEAU
A large mill in the town provided excell-
the mill for drawing units.
a nunnery where they vere shorm nany kindnesses by the Mother Superior and
sisters; others were billetted in private houses in the town.
situated down by the railvar station in a former Guest House - this was
also the site of the Officers' Mess. At first signt this building appeared.
to have a very convenient central heating system, bui on closer inspection
it was found to be more central than heating since the boiler possessed
an irreparable crack.
The Coy was now well sproad out hit being confortahly accommodated and
adequately connected by telephone by the never-resting Cox and Howell, it
settled down fpr Christmas and Winter with a capital "y".
We were now just within the belt of the enemy's forward diversionary
operations wich consisted of the dropping of soldiers, agents and sabot-
eurs by parachute well beyond the flanks of his Western Offensive.
agents, though dressed often in American uniforms were quickly rounded up,
and many on being questioned admitted to having no set plan to carry out.
However these parachutists were being continually reported in the vicinic
and the Coy maintained strong guards and road blocks on all the roads in
its "sphere of influence".
Apart from one or two searching patrols sent out
by Admin IQ no incidents occurred.
in the neighbouring town of ST. TROND
however, a number of these people were rounded up by the Americans, and
one norning our supply vehicles on their way to draw from the BSD at
Cer Dunos Ba a loon antaier naluly walling down one of
te busy streets, to be taken a few minutes later by the Americans.
A cold spell of unbroken frost was quick to descend a day or so after
our arrival in INAU and we, like the rest of western Europe, were to
experience one of the coldest winters for many years.
the trials and tribulations of the indefatigable infantry fighting Rundste.
offensive to a stondstill in the Ardennes further South.
But Christmas was at hand, and it alvays having been the policy of tho
Coy, vhilst in Ingland, to provide a big communal Christmas dinner for all
personnel, it was determined that this recora should not be broken.
Hence arrangements were made with the Anericans in ST. TROND for the
taking over of a large hall in their area for Christmas Day in which to
hold the dinner.
Accordingl,, Capt Bedford with a legion of helpers
sallied forth to get things organized. As a result, when the Coy arrivéd.
at the hall on Christrias Day it found a very good diner ready for serving
Wor
Мижин
284
cument
15
78 (7182)
His
TAN
