or to not 1500 pm chin vat
certain anount
for lamin units) fron trestld where they had loaded ot
the t shore now remained in formany any our or persong, other than
Hisenhover had declared as much in a ricent broadoast.
At noon also & groat sirl of dust and roar of exhausts indioated,
hat the Recce Group had shot off once more - to come to rest in LANGIN
some 6 miles NE of INGEN.
Baak with the coy vehicles were being loaded once more, and this
tino it was not to be in vain.
But 1 seemed that another shortage of
indicating something of interest in the vicinity.
Mean nile representatives from the platoos had stayed behind in
TAGaN in possossion of the not location for it scend that in suon
cases the arbitrary mile of possession being nine points of the law
fully applied and such acquisitions vere jealousy guarded until the
arrived of tie full coy strength made it impregnable against infronge
ment by other "nobs".
The route to LANGal was quite straight-lorard despite the varyi
Weart" and "Spade" signs erected by Corps - for a route on
chi, tre tot so any or ges those card" signs seomed vell suited.
It lay through NORDHORN, and the more battle scarred LINCHN, for it was
at tits latter place that bitter lighting haù ocoured for the crossing
of the DORTMUND-ES Oanal.
Along the route there were many blown bridges (the enemy had made
good use of demolitions) now replaced by the ubiquitous Baileys.
Shattered timber baulks indicated the exit of many improvised road
blocks - reviving menories of our on island defence schanes of 1940/1.
The approaches to the new bridges had, by force of circunstances, bean
hastily constructed fron any available materials - mostly brick rubble -
and the subsequent heavy and constant traffic had reduced these to
powdery ruts which had to be taken very slowly. There were some civ-
Ilians in the tons - some vere to be seen marshalled under armed guard.
ready to be marched aay to a "screened personnel" or "displaced persons"
collecting point.
The Cor had moved out at 0030 hrs and arrived at LANGEN just
before dawn, the distance being anout 23 miles.
far yard now accommodated the Coy and the layout was practically ident-
ical with the former one.
The farm belonged. to the Burgomaster, a
co operative individual who had lived in COLOGNE diring the British
Occupation last tine, and having had two British Sergeants billetted on
in know the faix dealings of the British.
31
am and hit fontly Peon his nouad in order that to
It was neconsory to
let la not found acoodation oleover on oila bone
bott nata a ople ation of corpo and treati rationa rat nada, Bron
ENSCHIDE.
breath of wind or a cloud in
This vas a nost pleasant place anhanced by the fine day without
of Spring bursting forth on the troes and siruba.
the sly, and the fresh green and blosson
1y favo German paratroopers ma, ben in be that bu
The wann
seened. far
and it sooned diffioult to beliove that but three days previous
car and other precious possessions with their
oligan lo the Division was pushing on for BRainY
with our comrades dinars the isort Rete the ote an eatent
for this great German port and U-Boat base.
11/12 AFR Whilst striking advances were now being made on the central
BRUNSWICK, and a scare of other large Gorman tons,
and souther sectors of the wester Front engulfing HANOVER,
our Division was
neeting fanacical resistance and continuous denolitions on the hard
rpad to BRAINT. But sio/ly the gnany was being ground down and each
ley useful aivances vere nade and lily we expected to be
ordered to
nove forvard since already we were nearly 40 miles behind our advanced
troops.
on both days the Supply Point was held as on the 10th in the
coy location, and replenishent nade from ESCHEDE.
This being quite a restful poriod, comparativaly spealing, a mainten-
the a n hot i be con to do antonion to tino min-
tonance of vehicles.
But whilst a lull in the speed of operations
goy as a hole enjoys a genoral holiday.
Just the reverse in faot.
During continuous movement of the Coy other work was necessarily
neld up and a lull nerely neans that an opportunity to make up leo-way
on such work is presented.
It will be obvious that Workshops, for instance, ars mablo to cary
out the heavier repairs during fruquent noves, since the unloading and
and setting up of the necessary equiment takes considerable time, quite
apart from the period required to strip down the larger components to
prepare for work to be done to them.
Boots are always wearing out, and clothing does not goi snarter with
wear - hence a "restful" period means a flur of work for the cobblers
and the tailor.
The dark intricacies of Ary administration continue to weave new
patterns, entailing additional returns, correspondonce and often general
reorganization as a result. Every rember of the unit is a potential
source of work therefore to Company Office which is not, as some might
ta, hot a point tablo pha ton to to trans do
hours of 0300 to 0700, it is true that it usually is as calm and serene
as a summer night on the river enjoying the atmosphere as of willows
dipping into clear cool water, but thereafter it can become at any moment
convulsed into spasmodic or prolonged contortion.
A bad borly morning
liver can do much to disturb the serenity of life for a start, sending
a bustle through the misty noming air.
The staccato percussion of an
"Orderly Roon" may prelude a fanfare of strident notes, calling first
upon one or the other, or even all!
Ensuing novements encompass mail,
consored and unconsored, coming and going; leave with its multitudinous:
directives and anxious enquiries; pay, with allotments, remittancos,
income tax, credits, promotions and reversions; postings, pid fords,
Pythons and all the other snakes in the grass.
These are but the usual
sections to which must be added the oporational items of maps, nessages
moves, and last but unfortunately by no neans last, the telephone
TO THE DOG
RETURNS AREA
78(1182)
118290
