An account of such an oporation must invitably bo incomplote.
offuct two sinultaneous oporations were in progross, on each contre
Thoro was considorable friendly rivalry betroon tho
two Brigados as to
which would bo the first to ontor BRUSSELS, a rivalry which increased as
the distance grow less.
Divisional HQ wore frequently referrod to as
Stewards and a definite finishing post fixed where the two
centra lines
met in the city itsolf.
The following doscription is takon mainly from
2 HOR crossed the start line at 0650 hours on tho loft and 0700 hrs on
the right with the difficult task of screening the two Brigados, a task they
fulfilled most admirably throughout the day.
2nd (Armourod Rocco) Wolsh
Guards on tho right crossed the start line at 0724 hours and 5 Guards Arnourod
troops on the luft at 0800 hours oxactly.
From then on the
story was much the sane on each centre line - small eneny pockots of rosistance
("pochos des Boches" as one of our less fluent officors described then) at
nostly in villages or cross roads and consisting of a fow anti-tank
Tho corbined infantry and tank groups quickly dealt with these while the House-
anto and about 100 infantry hioh ho Houschola Cavalry report a and the houd.
hold Cavalry were often able to deal with the smaller strong points themsolves,
by outflanking ana shooting thon up from the rear,
this thoy did with particular
success near ENGHEIN.
The Gronadior Group not the first strong point near
PONT A MARQ consisting of six anti-tank guns and infantry,
and liquidated it with
the loss of only two tanks.
The Welsh Guards group met similar opposition at
and other onemy posts were encountered near GRAMMONT and at the approaches
to BRUSSELS on the left centre line.
To those following, the progress and fortunes of the leading troops was
apparent all along the route - burning trucks and cars, overturned carts with
luckless dead horses which had been stolen from farms
and Germans still lying
where they had been killed,.
small parties of prisoners in the capable hands of
the patriots, who vero muca with veapons of every type, rifles, shot sunsthe
knives, bayonets and invariably stick grenades stolen from the Germans.
amour was moving so fast that the
"armce blanche" as the patriots are called,
proved invaluable not only in guording prisoners - a problem which is almost
insoluble on such occasions - but in clearing snipers and holding bridges
until the 231st Infantry Brigade could take over and mop up the arca as far as
was possible in such a rapid advance.
In addition the local inhabitants on
their own initiative turned out with spades to repair the roads where the tanks
had turned, making progress difficult for the less agile wheels.
It was at one time doubtful whether BRUSSELS could be reached by dark and
the Divisional Cormander did not wish the tanks to enter except in daylight.
right who were then slightly ahead.
miles short of BRUSSELS on
right their loading patrols were at ENGHIN.
some oppeeition;
the left but were moctingth Guards Armoured Brigade
about the sano time reported that they had sent out a special flying patrol
not a rita idea achi. 66 out 231 this pay on wot tollorado
which was now cleared up.
at 1850 hrs the Grenadiers had reached the point two
miles from BRUSSELS where the 2 HCR had been held up and wure making a plan to deal
with the opposition.
two miles short of the objective.
By 1915 hrs, 32nd Guards Brigade reported their leading troops
At 2000 hrs the 2nd (Armoured Recce) Welsh
Guards reached the winning post having had a clear run at the finish and at the sano
timó the 1st (Motor) Grenadier Guards entored the outskirts of the city to attack
the anti-tank screen blocking their centre line which they dealt with most effectively.
And so both Brigades entered the city as darkness was falling to be greeted by
the inhabitants in a manner witch can never have been equalled.
Fortunately in the
capital itself opposition was slight, a small party of Germans held out in a building
near the palace but they were quickly blasted from their refuge by the guns of the
A lone Gorman tank was destroyed in the Rue de la loi and there remained
a fev parties to be cleared up by our own troops or by the patriots before they slunk
out of the city like rats leaving a burning rick.
As darkness fell the capital was lit by a full moon and by the flanes of the
burning Palais de Justice which the Gormans had set on fire.
The crowd finding that the Germans had gone produced the flags which they had
been preparing since 1940 and many hung thom in front of their windows so that the
lights shone through from the rooms behind. The crowd was so great that the tanks
foind it very difficult to get through to their allotted places guarding the exit
and entrances to the city.
Tra tank stoned the crowd alamhaned shaand
TO RETUR
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(<8IL) 8 ti
