waterlogged.
Now orders cane through
Month order ons out and the canadians vore contng int
PHASE DX - "FRONTIARS"
to the Division, and by the third woek of s
19 NOV
THOVEN and Hot to Disa
different names for the
Maas-Mouse,
a Little confusing at first
feature warehen in Rome
Do as it of our intomatil a quatte men we reached cermany.
t case of
dous - we peace not ay ath
DITSAN had been liberated lt the Anoricans several Weeks befor
tho coy that vat ting that the willo of the Coy was to be billotto
that was fully apreciatod.
- 17 -
of bulk-breaking;
hard standings for many more vohloles
in another pont of the fat and them t
area
COY HQ
was ideally situatod in the administrative buildings where some
the Dutch offiaials had masted their offices for our uso - they were
Later turing our stay theso officials arranged
foasted them,
for which
since at all hours of the day and night they would arrive for
slept happily in some of the
eventually toak over a gary n the village and during off-duty
"Q" is blantets.
Supplies were being drawn fror Occas HMO at BYSDEN - a large 0011t
Just to tho Host of tho MASHYCK-MAASTRICHI main road - which was an
It the doy had been Carter Paterson's it could not have revoived
vequests for transport tron mall traders in the vicinity, for Belg
site of the Mobile Bath mit.
in common with all the other liberated territories had been almost y
and such railvays as were roni
Heath Robinson
contraptions as remained on the road were as patheti
were laughable.
no little man was particularly arous to tran
reforred him to somebody else!
tons of applos to BRUSSELS - he was passed on to Civil Affairs who d
Club in GETiN on the othor side of the river,
Division had lost no time in setting up a very comprehensive Divi
shows that they put on there it came as a shock on the first. ooosto
and on attending the
hoer the Dutch national anthem played at the conclusion of the perio
as one is not in the habit of going into another country for an even
ontertainment.
We English with our ingratond insularity aro inte
the average,
to regard the crossing off frontier in much the same
outlook on the post-war Europoan scone.
At this time tho majonity of the Division vas on tho other sid
river, son boing in Holland and sono in cotany, for horo at to ki
of th "Maastricht Arpondix" the throe countries were very closoly!
ena vith the house being in flood the availability of tho BaRe tre
traffic becane nore and more doubtful cach day, and many i the the ce
thon our colins travelling to the forward Supply Point held daily
had to melo a considorable dotour by way of the bridges at MASTS
although tho BBP vas woll situated in school buildings in DISt
transport difficultios ousod by the fast-flowing Mouse constitut
large fly in the Supply ointens
Thus on the noming of 24 Nov the Coy was ordered to novo:
(the bridge over this high-dyked waterway being lnown as the "Doul!
and took up its quartors in the Fertilizer Factory of the Dutch st
Mines near GILETY.
Those industrial plants were not fully working
the Germans in their rotroat had taken avay with them a vital lint
the productive cyclo of the factory - a snall quantity of platim
as a oatylist in the cheniel reactions réquired for the manufact
this important itom in Dutch agriculturo. At the moment the congr
and storage of nitrogen was the chief activity hero.
these cooks!
A most unfortunate accident ourrod in the BUP at the end of November
the doy by his death was a real one.
Whilst in this losation two imortant things happened.
place a leave schone to the Uk was announced by which eight clear days
In the first
would be onjoyed at hone.
given during the first to months to morbers of the Priority Party.
solution as by ballot, proferent by the
witnin taro months, but on caroful considoration it was obvious that
this could not bu, and would take at least six months.
damago was done anu nany foleoly raisod hopes wore dashod.
However, the
three weeks.
vAn other ranks for this purpose.
The Coy was required to provido two officors and thirty-
contribution to this happy band of warriors wore!
Those who represented the Coy's
Capt. Curtis (Bn HQ)
lout. Mulryon (Platoon Officer) Sgt,Oullon (Platoon Sgt); dpl.Powoll,
I/Gpl. Boultwood,
CSM. Sutter.
This episode warrants a separate history of its own, representing
as it does yet another example of the over-increasing variety of the
RASC's dutios, but it is only possible hore to give but a brief synopsis
of the three exciting wecks involved.
Let it bo said straight away that the Coy detachment did particularly
well and discharged their dutios like veterans of the Line.
The pesitione
manned. were situated around a wooded featuro known as Pan Handle Wood,
with the enewy entrenched before a small village a fow hundred yards
away.
This scend was to be found in tho GETTIRNKIRCHEN area in the
valley of the notorious River Roer - notorious because of the great
trouble its dammed stretches had given both the Amcricans and ourselves.
When manning the forward positions our lads lived through the long-draw.
out hours in trenches, only hopping out during darkness.
They spoke
of the necessity for quietness and patienco, for the slightest light or
sound by night, or movement by day would bring down a hail of mortar
bombs directed by direct observation from a mill in the village.
They
could soe enchy moving about in the village at times and by night coula
hoar a farnerts horse-dran tunbril coning into the village at certain
orion one was in spot on axisten at but intone a trot of hand,
Hore was no dranatic
shrouded in silence in which at one nonent not a shot or sound as to bo
heard though one false move could bring down explosive death in the
next.
as thoy were in the application of their infantry training in an aotual
theatro, showed that they could do it.
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
(285L) 8L
