- 40 -
capitulation cane a nunber of bottles
So mart too hot a then, he thu had tiro doen of an amoured car to recompany
ou Ibrard Supply Points, and during tie evening of the 4th a small tank chum-
ed
its way into
the tanyard with lieut Mountford at the stearing levers.
new addition to 224 Coy's, armoury!
queer that having come all this way through the crises of the west-
m Front fighting we should now receive such protection for our columns when all
official fighting had ceased.
But he
But ie fere to move again; the Ruce Group had left during the norning ana
returned with the toeful tale that having found "smashing billets" in STADE
on the banks of the Elbe Estuary, they had discovered also that the occupiers,
ThicK, another insignificant village about 10 miles Swof StADE.
5 MAY At 0930 irs the gor colm pulled out of GR. MaCKELSHN en route to tine
nety location,
ex-Gernon onassis, aid not, in audicion, to extraordinary towed vehicles of
weighty construction which had every sembalnce of being the product of an
most night to, for did the noisit and thair total absence of
The supply vehicles had already, gone forwerd, to operate the Point in the
hen location at 0900 rs.
The weather mad kind enough to grace our arrival vith a seasonal (?)
shorer of rain and hail.
Soneone had said of British weather that we did not
have clinate bit just samples of weather, and that wisecrack seched to apply
equally well, to the Nordic spring.
The wet cold day was capped by the bright news of the surrender of twa.
(the erect identity of, ich not even he could now have exact knowledge) that:
resistance to the Western illios was hopeless, but they must, at all costs,
continue tho struggle against the Russions.
with the first part of this decree we couldn't help thinking that he was a
uy, we thought, and let us have our VE Dey?
Littlo misdvized vida regard to tire latter, of nocent wooks, and particular
Iy of the last fen dos the lucky ones about to go on leave to Britain had been
wondering whother they would have the good luck to be at hone when the "Cease
Fire" as soindad, so that they, as well as the citios, could get properly:
"Lit up",
situated in t 2s trational
Joy location visen a jeep
To Grening of ting stil no name to an stunate otton dost to
the
Cp1.J011, the entel unit medico, hestened to the scone and rene
18790
fore trus and that Mr-Churchill would be speaking on the norton.
1to to ted definitely that the following day would be victory in the evenin
or Vi-Day as it as sloganised.
This was excellent news and ve ture naturally
But sonehow it cane as on anti-clinar - perhaps it was decause
we had been expacting this news for so long.
renier in Italy and then in i Surope - all only a week or loss ago, and thus t
nous of final complete Unconuitional surrender cone just as a maiter of foot.
It was not at all as we had expected 16, but that is so foten the way, antic. -
ation forms a large part of the event ite-lf.
Iuring the evening "B" Platoon left
Also re heard that our final rendezvous was to be in the
OUXHAVEN area at OPhIRNDORF.
The Division was already moving thither and ne
expected to follow suit on the 9th.
our job, and a big one, would bo to tea
over an enery food dump and feed therefrom the complete 7th Gemen Parachute
Division which had laid awn (albeit very unmillingty) their ams in that regio:
The German ex-troops would be using horse-dram transport, and Geran civilion
labour would be utilised; this was welcone since now we were to revert to a Cui-
osite Coy and voulu be deling in petrol end amunition as vell as spelier,
there would be aple worit to leep these Germans busy.
PLAST ME - WE DAYY
not a cloud in the sky, and not a breath of wind noved through the trees.
day horonised with our spirits, for despite the war against Japan, it was as
though a great ugly burden had been lifted from the world.
Apart from the impecoable weather and the inner rejoicing within every beauy
this day was not narked by any external difference from any of the tireo muni
and thirby-odd days which had passed since "D" Day the previous June.
Point and Replenishment continued, as did all the other hundred-and-one jobs?
the sanitary man continued with his thonless and unthanted tasks, the fittors
fitted or unfitted, the issuers continued to issue, and the drivers trove;
verdly it vas all the sane, no excitenant, no denonstration of happinoss or
need to mention it by nare, for it was Debobilization.
None were under any
misapprehension as to the speed of their roleaso, for this time contrary to
Torld Ver I, complete rangonents had boun maid and all knew more of loss wi
stood.
It was the age and service froup now which mattered above all
Tho fathur of all within the Cor in this iportant matter was
must Foster - he warrants his none in full - with the glorious Group
Tuber of 9, Nb.9 was always associated with speedy release in the Amy an, wer
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
