3
Bridgehead Battles
A myth that has persisted over the years is that D-Day was a success largely because
of Adolf Hitler being asleep on the morning of D-Day and his orders not to be
disturbed resulted in the German counterattacks being delayed. While it is true
that Hitler was asleep, the counterattack was deliberately delayed and was due to
the success of the Allied deception operation regarding the location of the landing.
A convoluted German chain of command in France and Germany also contributi
significantly to the confused and uncoordinated counterattacks on D-Day itsel.
The Seventh Army in Normandy and the Fifteenth Army in the Pas de Calas
were part of Army Group B in northern France, which was commanded by field.
Marshal Rommel. A second Army group, Army Group G, had been set up l
May 1944 to defend the south of France. Field Marshal von Rundsted, as the
commander-in-chief of all forces in France, commanded both army groups and
reported directly to the OK W (armed forces High Command) in Goraly. the
training of the panzer divisions in France was the responsibility of P'anzer Grupp
West under von Schweppenburg.
Rommel, since assuming command of Army Group B, had disagreed with both
von Rundstedt and von Schweppenburg as to how the panzer divisions should be
used when the expected landings came. Kommel wanted the reserves to be located
close behind the beaches to be able to quickly counterattack when any such assault
was at its most vulnerable in the first few hours after landing and before signed
numbers had been built up and defences fully established. Von Rundstedt and von
Schwep unburg were of a different view and thought that the panzers should be
concentrated for a decisive blow when the Brsh intentions were clear and the
frontline was out of the range of British naval guns. Rommel objected to thi
strategy on the basis that any movement of the panzer divisions would be subjec
to interdiction by Allied aircraft, which controlled the skies and any delay in at-
tacking would allow the Allies to strengthen their positions in the beachhead. The
personalues or rommel and von schweppenburg clashed severely and me mir
ent strategies were a major topic of discussion amongst the senior Army Group »
officers. Von Schweppenburg seems to have been jealous of Rommels lept
103
Bridgehead Battles
and direct access to Hitler, once describing Rommel as merely 'an experienced
tactician'' General Guderian, the inspector general of panzer troops, supported
von Schweppenburg, as did von Rundstedt, so Rommel was
the only advocate
of the strategy of keeping forces near the coast. Von Schweppenburg was bitter
that the dispute was never resolved by Hitler and that Rommel was not directed
by Hitler to follow OKW orders. Despite personal appeals to Hitler by Rommel,
a single strategy was never decided upon by the OKW and the reserve panzer
divisions were divided up between the two proponents of the debate. Army Group
B under Rommel in March 1944 was allocated the 2nd, ll6th and zist Panzer
Divisions. The four other panzer divisions in France, the 17th SS, 12th SS, Ist SS
and Panzer Lehr divisions, were designated as a strategic reserve under OKW
control, and therefore Army Group B could not call on these units without the
express authorisation of OKW and Hitler. This compromise by Hitler pleased no
one and resulted in the reserves being controlled by himself and OK W both many
miles away from Normandy. In a final kink in the chain of command, the SS
panzer divisions in the reserve were trained by Panzer Gruppe West, controlled by
OKW and under the control of SS administration offices.
The potential location of the landings was a difficult problem for OKW - the
coastline from Brittany to Normandy to Calais had to be defended without any
precise knowledge of where the Allies were going to land. There were not enough
panzer divisions to locate one on the coast behind every possible landing site, so
a mobile reserve had to be maintained.? The suggestion by General Markes of
XXXIV Corps of destroying the port of Cherbourg to deter the Allies from even
contemplating a landing in Normandy and thus raising the probability of landings
at Calais was never adopted by Army Group B.
ritler was still up in the early hours of 6 June when the first reports of Allied
parachute landings began to come into the OK W headquarters from Army Group
B. Hitler was entertaining Joseph Goebbels and his wife, and was apparently very
televed that the waiting to do battle with the British and Americans appeared
to be over. Even more pleasing to Hitler was that the Allied activity was centred
on Normandy, which he had predicted only six weeks earlier to von Rundstedt,
who was convinced the landings would be in the Pas de Calais? Hitler seemed
to have completely lost sight of the fact that Germany was already fighting a war
on two fronts and the Allied landings would open a third front that would strain
Germany s resouices to the utmost. Before retiring at about ooo nous, muder den
strict instructions that the panzer divisions in the states reserve were not to be
deployed without his specific authorisation atter a reconnaissance later that morn-
o, which would provide a better picture of the overall situation. With that, fer
reüred to bed, taking drugs to enable him to sleep.* Hitler was not alone in going
to sleep; so did Field Marshal Keital at OKW and Hans Speidel (the Chief of Staff
to Rommel at Army Group B), as both believed that the paratroops were merely
a diversion. Speidel did, however, finally telephone Rommel on leave in Germany
at lors hours. Von Rundstedt was sufficiently alarmed by the reports coming in to
