182
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
anticipated and was now crammed with soldiers, tanks and guns with little room
for the construction of extra planned airfields.
To achieve the port objective, FUSA needed to capture more of the Cotentin
peninsula at least as far south as Avranches in order to provide more room to deploy
Patton's Third US Army before it attacked westwards towards Brittany.
American history over the years has downplayed the importance originally at-
tached to Bradley's offensive, preferring to focus on the later breakout achieved in
Operation Cobra. This has been done by separating Bradley's July operations into
two phases: firstly the advance to St Lô and then the breakout. In fact, they were
two operations with the same objectives after the first breakout attempt failed.
General Bradley recalled:
By July 10 we faced a real danger of First World War type stalemate in Normandy.
Montgomery had taken the northern outskirts of Caen but the city was not by any
means in his control. The airfield sites still lay beyond his grasp. My own breakout had
failed. Despite enormous casualties and loss of equipment, the Germans were slavishly
following Hitler's orders to hold every yard of ground. '2
Bradley's FUSA breakout operation on a broad front required his three corps to
attack one after the other; VIII Corps began its attack on 3 July and VII Corps on 4
July; XIX Corps did not begin their operations until 7 July. Opposing XIX Corps
initially were units of the 17th SS Panzer and the 27sth Division as a part of
Kampfgruppe Heintz. A panzer regiment from the newly arriving 2nd SS Panzer
Division was also attached to the 17th SS Panzer Division for armoured support as,
despite being called a panzer division, the 17th SS actually had no tanks apart from
three companies of assault guns. The division had eighteen Stug Ills assault guns
left of the original forty-two, having been fighting since D-Day.
After the 30th Division had made reasonable advances during the day, having
crossed both the River Vire and the Vire-Taute canal as well as capturing St Jean
de Daye, General Bradley ordered the grd Armored Division to be pushed through
the 3oth Division and to make a drive to the high ground south-west of St Lô.
CCB, organised in three task forces, beg. to move at 1930 hours on 7 July and
the leading elements crossed the River Vire at Aire. Task Force X received small-
arms fire only dooyds south of the crossing and discovered that the 3oth Division
had not advanced much further south than that point. All three task forces de-
cided to harbour in the vicinity of the east-west road between St Fromond and
Le Dézert.
The Germans recognised the threat from the American advance and scrambled
to bring in reinforcements to block the advance. Units from the 2nd SS Panzer
Division, including the 6th Panzer Company of the 2nd Panzer Regiment plus
a battalion of panzergrenadiers and engineers, were committed to the area as
Kampfgruppe Wisliceny to which the troops of Kampfgruppe Heintz were sub-
ordinated." In its battle against FUSA, Seventh Army insisted on deploying the
183
Battle of the Hedgerows
and SS Panzer Division units piecemeal to support other units and the division
was never committed in Normandy as a complete unit, much to the chagrin of
its commanders. '4
The next day, 8 July, was notable for the tremendous confusion in the XIX
Cops advance. The original XIX Corps plan had been for CCB to proceed
through the three regiments of the 3oth Division by using the east-west road to
sifan de Daye and then turn due south along the road to Pont Herbert while
theinfantry were ordered to keep the roads clear for the tanks. However, in view
of the limited ground that the 3oth Division appeared to hold south of the River
Vie and that the Germans were likely to be covering the one good road in the
are, rather than use the road to move due west to St Jean de Daye, General Leroy
Mason ordered CB to advance cross-country in a south-westerly direction. This
unfortunately meant that the CCB would be trying to advance across the direction
of the infantry attack.
Aro64s hours, CCB Task Force X (2nd Battalion of the 33rd Armored Regiment)
began its advance and almost immediately ran into five Mark IV tanks from the
and SS Panzer Division. D Company of the znd battalion were leading and went
Into action:
During their first fifteen minutes of combat, a tank crew commanded by Sgt. Dean
Balderson knocked out three German Mark IVs. Balderson pulled out of a small
orchard at dawn, and his gunner, Cpl. "Swede" Anderson, immediately spotted the
enemy. Four Kraut tanks were in position on the road ahead, their guns pointed in the
opposite direction and evidently waiting for another company of the grd to advance.
Anderson's first round, an HE, caught the nearest Mark-IV Aush on the turret, and
things began to happen. The enemy tank blew up in a sudden gust of fame and black
smoke! Immediately afterwards, the remaining Jerry vehicles were alert and moving.
Excited, Anderson called for an armor piercing shell, but his loader, Ptc. Bill Wilson,
threw in a second HE. This shell duplicated the first, and a second Mark-IV blew
up. Wilson found an AP round for the third shot, and Anderson sent this projectile
crashing through for number three. Three enemy battlewagons in less than fifteen
minutes of combat! Sgt. Balderson and his crew decided that war was a soft snap.
Another week of fighting convinced them that it was just the opposite.
Atter this brisk early morning action, during which the and batados lost the talk
for the destruction of the five Mark IVs, the difficulties began. The men and tanks
of CCB set about advancing methodically through one neid aner abouter, oly to
encounter men from the and Battalion of the Igth Infantry Regiment trying to
enter the same field from a different hedgerow. Wild, confused firing took place,
with tanks firing at friendly infantry in the hedgerows and vice versa. To add to the
confusion, the grd Battalion of the 33rd Armored Regiment was then ordered to
cross into the small bridgehead over the River Vire using the same bridge at Aire
the rear echelons of CB were using. A single tank battalion with a boyd spacing
