312
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the battle in France. Only two US divisions had been identified (3oth Division and
part of the 3rd Armored Division) in the area and an early morning fog was forecast
to provide additional cover. The Luftwaffe had promised 300 fighters to protect the
advancing armoured columns?
American Preparations
Ultra intelligence, which had the decoded intercepts of both Hitler's orders o
2 August and von Kluge's reply next day, provided Montgomery and Bradley win
a complete picture of the German intentions. Therefore every disposition made
by Bradley from 4 August onwards was made with the impending counterattack in
mind. Bradley's dilemma was whether to maintain the advance south by the Third
Army and risk it getting cut off if the German attack was successful or switch to
the detensive and forego the possibility or encircuing the sevent silly sume
issue was that Bradley did not want to reveal the source of his concerns about:
a German attack and did not even warn his senior commanders. A compromise vas
reached whereby Bradley decided to halt some units, ostensibly to rest and reli,
while on S August, after a day's rest after capturing Mortain on 3 August, the Ist
Division, with CCA of the 3rd Armor Division, was directed to advance south
towards Mayenne.
e fter two days' rest, the 3oth Division took over responsibility for Mortan on
the evening of 6 August and the ist Division withdrew, leaving the 3oth DIVisiok
to occupy its positions.
The 3oth Division had been attached to three different
waps in the three days prior, Which is evidence of the uncertainty lite too
command, and its eventual deployment was directly in the path of the intended
German attack.
Meanwhile, CCB of the 3rd Armored Division, which had been attached to me
4th Division advancing to Villedieu and St Pois, was ordered to rest on 6 August at
Reffuveille after reaching Le Mesnil Adelée across the River See.
The commander of the 3rd Armored Division, Leroy Watson, Dad been te
lieved and demoted on 30 July by General Collins and was not replaced until
7 August by Maurice Rose from CCA of the and Armored Division. I neretore the
3rd Armored Division HQ had been inoperative since the end of July and remained
that way throughout the Avranches counterattack.
While CCA of the 2nd Armored Division was attached to a battalion of the
soth Division fighting around Vire, the remainder of the 2nd Armored Division,
including the 67th Armored Regiment, was attacking south-east on 6 August from
St Sever Calvados towards Champ du Boult as a part of XIX Corps. Having su-
ceeded in this task, the division was relieved at 1800 hours by the 28th Division
and put into reserve around St Sever but was placed on alert to move the next day.
It was expected that by the evening of 6 August the ist Division and CCA
3rd Armored were to have captured Barenton during their advance to Mayenic
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
313
Barenton was briefly held, but the infantry were ejected from all but the southern
outskirts of the village by a German counterattack and it was planned to resume
the attack next morning. Because of the gap that would develop between the US
forces in Mortain and those approaching Mayenne, General Collins of VII Corps
requested that XIX Corps transfer the 2nd Armored Division to him to support the
Ist Division drive south-east from Barenton. This was approved by Bradley, and
Brooke received his orders late on 6 August for a move next day?
The ist Division and CCA of the 3rd Armored Division then continued their
rapid advance south and reached the Varenne River, 25 miles further south-east at
Ambrieres, on their way to link up with the Third US Army at Mayenne. At mid-
night, all VII Corps units received a warning from VII Corps HQ that a German
attack was possible within the next 12 hours as German units had apparently been
spotted from the air. ° The Allies also had complete decrypts of Luftwaffe signals
regarding the proposed operation, and this allowed the British and US Air Forces
ample time to make plans for the next day.
7 August
The German attack by the panzer divisions started at midnight as planned but with-
out the additional Ist SS tank battalion for the left flank attack of the 2nd Panzer
Division, which was reportedly delayed until dawn by an aireraft crashing on its
column and blocking the road. In order to try to achieve surprise, the attack began
without any preparatory artillery bombardment.
The 116th Panzer Division was already fighting before the attack began and,
lacking the element of surprise, was unable to advance along the northern bank
of the River See towards Le Mesnil Gilbert with its depleted forces towards the
objectives of Hill 211 and La Mardelle,
north of Cherence.
The XLVII Panzer
Korps commander leading the attack, von Funck, contacted Hausser on the even-
ing of 6 August to say that the Ti6th Panzer Division had not released its Panther
battalion for the attack (which was untrue) and that its commander should be
relieved because of his defeatist attitude. Having detached the tanks as ordered, the
TIth Panzer Division had no more than twenty-five tanks operational and lacked
the numbers and firepower to advance."
The right flank attack of and Panzer Division, reinforced with the Panther bat-
talion from the rioth Panzer Division (Kampfgruppe Schake), advanced quickly to
Le Mesnil Tove after passing through Belle Fontaine. The 39th Infantry Regiment
from the US 9th Division were in Cherence, attacking north-eastwards towards
Gathemo, and heard tanks moving towards Le Mesnil Tove before calling down
artillery fire on them. The regiment's roadblock at Grand Dove was quickly de-
molished by the German advance, which cut off the three infantry regiments to the
north from their divisional HQ, anti-tank gun company and artillery."3
