370
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
high-velocity armour-piercing shells of the few Tigers, Panther and Jagdpanzers
lurking in the area.
Operation Tractable, in spite of its apparent shortcomings, did finally cause
the thinly stretched German lines to break. However, this was not appreciated
by Simonds and the 4th Canadian Armoured Division remained stationary for
I6 August; it took a phone call from Montgomery to Crerar to get the division
moving again. Further German casualties were enough to reduce the already de-
pleted fighting abilities of two divisions to almost nothing; the 85th Division was
all but annihilated and the 12th SS Panzer Division was reduced to little more than
a battle group. The tanks of Kampfgruppe Wunsche had been either destroyed or
surrounded, having to fight their way south-eastwards to where the new German
lines were supposed to be. The surviving Tigers of the 102nd Schwere SS Battalion
reassembled near Vignats, south east of Falaise. This success of Tractable owed
more to the material superiority of the Canadians than any tactical genius on the
part of Simonds. The armoured breakthrough in phalanxes was successful, but the
amoured regiments lost so many tanks crossing the river and on the other side
that their effectiveness the next day was severely impaired, as most regiments were
down to half strength or less. Losses in the armoured brigades of men killed or
wounded were high.
Officers
Other ranks
Killed
Wounded
BCR
GGFG
CGG
FGH
1st Hussars
Killed
Wounded
10
13
17
11
13
27
28
32
14
56
109
Following the phone call from Montgomery to Crerar, Simonds in turn ordered
the 4th Canadian Armoured Division to get moving." However, the division did
not advance at all that day and it was not until 0330 hours next morning that
a squadron of the South Albertas moved off with the infantry of the Algonquin
Regiment to Damblainville.
Meanwhile, a further attack on Point 159 was made at 1400 hours by the tanks
of the Ist Hussars and the Regina Rifles in tandem with an earlier thrust by the
Sherbrooke Fusiliers and 4th Infantry Brigade of the 2nd Division along the
Route Nationale 158 to Falaise, and this made good progress. By 1130 hours, the
Sherbrooke Fusiliers tanks and infantry had entered Falaise, and by 1900 hours
Point 159 had been secured. Two Tiger tanks and some ist Company Jagdpanzers,
which were hull down on the reverse slope of the Point 195 feature, made life very
Operation Tractable
377
dificult for the Hussars' tanks: two tanks were knocked out and one damaged, and
the Jagdpanzers claimed another eight Shermans?
Detailed records for the 4th Canadian Armoured Division have not survived but
before the operation, the division reported 259 tanks fit and on 16 August there
vite only 194 fit, sixty-five tanks having been knocked out or damaged.* In the
Foot Guards, No. 2 Squadron was reduced to four tanks, and No. 3 Squadron had
only one officer left and a similar number of tanks as No. 2 Squadron. The next
day the Foot Guards got five replacement tanks but were forced to operate on
a two-squadron basis until the end of the month. The losses in the 2nd Canadian
Amoured Brigade were even higher; on 13 August the brigade had a total of 134
shermans and twenty-seven Fireflies fit in the thiee legment, and on to augus
tea Apaconly had a total of seventy-three fit Shermans (plus fifteen damaged)
and twelve Fireflies (plus one damaged) $ Therefore the brigade had lost more than
titty Shermans and twelve Fireflies. A and C squadrons of the Ist fussars each
had only four tanks operational, and the regiment could barely held a complete
squadron. Total Canadian losses in Uperation tractable were more than ilo tanks
Operation Tractable Losses
Sherman
Vc
15
11
14
M5
GGFG
CGG
BCR
SAR
1H
19
FGH
SFR
11
18
Total
92
Following Uperation Totalize, the strength of the i2th so Panzer Division had
been severely reduced. At the start of Operation I ractable the division nad no more
than thirty-five tanks and self-propelled guns - ten Mark IVs, fifteen Panthers and
ten Jagdpanzers. At the end of 16 Augusty Afucvision had lost a further twenty
tanks and there were only fifteen tanks Or du types Operational. At least weve
Panthers and three Jagdpanzers were destroyed.
the SS Tiger battalions also lost several of then tanas. due does madamen lost
three Tigers while the 102nd Battalion on 1] August had seven Tigers operational
and seven in short term repair, lost at least to get the deals had lose
only thirty-five tanks compared with the more than 100 lost by the Canadians, but
unlike the Allies, there were no replacements for the German tanks. Tiger tanks
Were harassed continuously from the air and supplies of ammunition and fuel were
increasingly difficult to find, resulting in several tanks having to be abandoned or
blown up by their own crews. The 12th SS Panzer Division had virtually ceased to
