20
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
third battle group, Kampfgruppe Luck. The second kampfgruppe was Kampfgruppe
Rauch, which was largely made up of the 192nd Panzergrenadier Regiment; both
Kampfgruppen Oppeln and Rauch had the objective of breaking through to the
coast at Lion sur Mer. The 22nd Panzer Regiment was not at full strength as the
2nd Battalion had just replaced its captured French tanks with Mark IVs?4
The twenty-five tanks of the 2nd Battalion attacked first, travelling fast as they
had been ordered not to stop until they reached the coast. As the tanks approached
Biéville-Beuville, they were spotted by the waiting tanks, 6-pounder anti-tank
guns of the and KSLI and a troop of Mios of the 4ist Anti-tank Regiment on
reaching the western end of the anti-tank obstacles. The Shermans and anti-tank
guns immediately opened fire, knocking out four Mark IVs. The German charge
came to a sudden halt, and the tanks sought cover behind a ridge while they
awaited the arrival of the Ist Battalion. When the formation was complete (about
fifty tanks), the attack pushed into the cover of woodland and continued moving
northwards towards Le Landel. Two troops of A Squadron of the Staffordshire
Yeomanry moved to intercept them when they emerged from the woodland and
No. 1 Troop knocked out four more Mark IVs when they reappeared. Again,
the Germans continued their charge to the beaches but diverted farther west of
Perier sur le Dan. Three Sherman Vc (Fireflies) and another Sherman from B
Squadron that were guarding the right flank then engaged the Germans, knock-
ing out three more tanks? The Staffordshire Yeomanry tanks, particularly the
Fireflies, were well sited and were able to aim murderous long-range fire at the
German tanks. Kampfgruppe Oppeln, faced with this unexpectedly strong opposi-
tion and having lost thirteen tanks, broke off its attack? However, elements of the
192nd Panzergrenadier Regiment, advancing to the left of Kampfgruppe Oppeln
at the same time, made it all the way to the coast at Luc sur Mer, where they linked
up with several German strongpoints at about 1900 hrs. The counterattack of the
21st Panzer Division had struck straight into the gap between the British forces in
the Sword sector and the Canadian troops in Juno. At about 2100 hours, a huge
formation of Allied planes towing gliders and carrying supplies for the paratroopers
at Benouville thundered over the German panzergrenadiers, who, believing they
were in danger of being cut off, retreated from the coast after leaving a company of
men to reinforce the radar station at Douvres.37
This was the Staffordshire Yeomanry's final action of the day as the rest of the
105th Brigade, after a failed attempt to cross the anti-tank ditch and advance into
Lebisey wood, decided not to push on as the outcome of the German attack on
their right flank was unknown. The Staffordshire Yeomanry tanks went into har-
bour for the night at Biéville-Beuville. The British effort to take Caen had been
ettectively halted by the 2ist Panzer Division. It was the closest the British would
come to Caen for another four weeks.
Staffordshire Yeomanry casualties were very light in terms of tanks, with only
five lost that day from the regiment; but seven men were killed and three wounded,
with seven more missing.
27
D-Day Tanks
Juno Sector
The sector designated Juno ran from Courseulles to St Aubin sur Mer and was the
planned landing place for the Canadian 3rd Infantry Division. The two main land-
ing beaches, codenamed Mike and Nan, were centred on the small seaside town of
Courseulles, with its harbour built either side of the mouth of the River Seulles.
The Courseulles defences included mines, barbed wire, fortified houses and several
ither side of there
bunkers. The Canadian division was to assault the beaches with two brigades in
a two-up formation with each brigade being supported by an armoured regiment
from the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade. Their primary objectives were to es-
tablish a bridgehead as far inland as the high ground in the area Evrecy-Colomby
sur Thaon-Anguerny, seize the airfield at Carpiquet and guard the left flank of the
soth Division landing on Gold. Eventually, the division was to be prepared to seize
the bridges over the River Odon west of Caen.
The landing time for both armoured regiments was H-s minutes to allow the
tanks time to engage and knock out the defensive fortifications and protect the
the giment do is mim
AVREs clearing gaps in the beach defences for the infantry arriving behind them
at H-hour. Both regiments had only received their Sherman tanks in May and
barely had time to learn to drive them. The Stuart M3 light recce tanks issued
to the Fort Garry Horse were driven for the first time on the way to the loading
hards for the landing craft. Canadian REME (Royal Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers) personnel of the Ist Hussars had worked 24 hours a day 'like Trojans'
to prepare newly arrived tanks for the invasion. This late issue of tanks gave the
Canadians little time to train with live ammunition, waterproof their tanks and
participate in amphibious exercises such as Exercise Fabius III.
H-hour on the Juno sector beaches was the latest of all the Allied beaches in
order to allow the tide to cover the many rocky shelves offshore. The landings were
originally scheduled for 0735 and 0745 hours for Mike and Nan beaches respectively
but were then postponed by a further lo minutes because of the bad weather, which
had contributed to a navigational error by some of the landing craft, particularly
the LCTs carrying the AVREs destined for Mike beach, which had entered the
wrong swept channel to the beach. The delay of 10 minutes was to allow the LCTs
to catch up and assume their proper place in the order of assault. However, the
delay and the higher tide than usual meant that the landing craft would be landing
amongst the very obstacles the Overlord planners had tried to avoid by landing at
low tide when the obstacles would be fully exposed. Two concrete busting LCTs,
each carrying two Sherman Ves manned by soldiers of each regiment, were also
part of the initial assault wave (one for each tank regiment) and were tasked with
engaging specific bunkers on the way in.
Fort Garry Horse
The DD tanks of the Fort Garry Horse were to be transported by the N LCT
squadron of the lIth LCT Flotilla and land with the AVR Es as part of the J-2 naval
