224
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
19-20 July
The Germans launched minor probes and reconnaissance patrols during the morn-
ing, which delayed British preparations for resuming the attack. At 0700 hours, the
panzergrenadiers in Four succeeded in reoccupying Le Poirier. The 2nd Northants
Yeomanry performed a reconnaissance at first light towards the orchards south of
Cormelles but came under fire from tanks and anti-tank guns on the ridge.
After a restless night, the grd RTR moved out early in the morning and slowly
advanced up the ridge towards Bras and Hubert Folie again. Another firestorm
from German artillery and anti-tank guns descended on them and several tanks
were quickly knocked out."" It was clear the Germans were still present in force and
where possible had improved their defences overnight. Realising that a more co-
ordinated attack was required, the 3rd RTR were forced to retire back behind the
Caen-Paris railway to reorganise. Other reconnaissance patrois reported German
infantry reinforcing Four?°
As if shell-shocked from the previous day's operation, the British could only
manage a slow start next morning. General O' Connor scheduled a command
conference for 1200 hours for the divisional commanders where they presented
their operational plans for what was left of the day. This time the plans had been
formulated by the commanders themselves rather than having been imposed on
them by Dempsey and O'Connor.
The Is9th Brigade had finally been reunited
with the rest of the lith Armoured Division overnight and was available to work
with the regiments. Tanks, infantry, motorised infantry and artillery would be
used in several scaled-down minited attacks to try and capture we wages ta
had been the previous day's objectives. Given the tallure on the first day to break
through, Dempsey had apparently lost interest in the battle?"
The Germans were not idle during thin unexpected reprieve, regrouping and
reorganising their defences as the remainder of their reserves came up into line;
the 12th so Panzer Division was Puner auboth sides of Caen-vin dau
New defence lines were created further to the rear and the intantry of the 1st so
ranzergrenadier Regiments relleved the 192nd anzergrenader Regent of the
2Ist Panzer Division.
The 2nd Northants Yeomanry were ordered to attack at 1600 hours and take Bras
With a company of the 8th Rifle Brigade, and when that was done, the 3rd RTR
were to assault Hubert Folie with fire support to be provided by the znd Northants
Yeomanry, General Roberts specifically warned the znd Northants Yeomanry not
to stray too far west towards Ifs as strong German anti-tank forces had been located
there the previous day.
Despite the warning, the 2nd Northants Yeomanry strayed westwards and a bar-
rage of well-aimed fire from Ifs stopped the attack cold; within 20 minutes it was
obvious the attack could not succeed. Five tanks were lost very quickly and the
attack came to a halt. The Germans had seen the build-up of British armour and
had decided to withdraw from Bras for the attack, leaving only two Stug III assault
An early Sherman DD training tank - note the wooden gun barrel. The three rails that support the
screen can be seen, as well as some of the supporting struts at the front. The tank commander's
perch can be seen on the rear of the turret. (WM MH 3660)
D-Day Omaha sector, Easy Red beach. Two wading tanks of the 741st Tank Battalion with infantry
Sheltering behind them have arrived before two DD tanks, which are in the process of lowering
their screens. Note small exhaust stack on DD tanks. (Magnum Photos)
