134
BRIGADE.
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
CANADIAN DIV
Secqueville-en-Bessin
Bray
RÉGT
Putor-en-
Bretteville-
l'Orgueilleuse
Le Hamel
BF
GRENADIER
2ND BN 26TH S.S,
Le Mesnil-
Patry
ON WOR
COF C.
REGIMENT
PANZER
a Villene
Norrey en...*
•*Bessin
1ST BN
GRENADIE
Carpiquet
Fontenay-le-
Pesnel
LE MESNIL - PATRY
AND THE
MUE VALLEY
1L JUNE 1944
Le Mesnil Patry - the advance of the 1st Hussars on 11 June 1944, adapted from the Victory
Campaign. (By kind permission of C.P. Stacey DHH)
trom unseen guns, seemingly shooting from the direction of Cristot. Brigade
HQ had earlier received a report that the 8th Armoured Brigade was in Cristot and
this information was passed to the Hussars along with the order not to open nre
Lieutenant-Colonel White instructed the two squadrons to fly their recognition
flags, and Major Marks, the commander of C Squadron, even got out his tank
whilst under fire to check that all his tanks were flying the correct flag. The vol-
ume of armour-piercing shell only increased, however, and permission was finally
given for the two squadrons to return fire.
The line south of Cristot was
defended by the panzergrenadiers of the
26th Regiment with their anti-tank
guns and three Mark IV tanks of the
8th Company. The Sherman tanks of B Squadron ran straight into the waiting
anti-tank guns just as the Mark IVs moved up to the fighting. Untersturmführer
Jeran was in an 8th Company tank:
As we rolled forward, and during an observation stop, I recognised from the agitated
gestures of some grenadiers who were pointing in the direction of the enemy with
their spade that acute danger was facing us. 'Ready for action." On this order, the
hatches of the three tanks closed as if by themselves. The gun barrels were wound
135
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
on tofiring elevation. Anti-tank shells were loaded on the move. A hedge was still
outin our view of the enemy on the left. When the hedge suddenly disappeared
and our point tank was in the midst of our own infantry, several Shermans were spot-
troliga a dangerous distance towards us through the orchard of a farm. We had
cine right in front of their barrels and were showing them our vulnerable flanks.
Eremy tanks from the left - 9 o'clock - 200 - open fire." This was all the commander
at the point tank could do, he was also the commander of the 8th company. But
octing is was required. The months-long battle drills and battle experience of the
wEis now proved themselves. The driver jerked the tank to the left, bringing it into
a ring potion. Even before the fighting compartment ventilation fan, crucial for
nerval of the crew, go to full speed, the closest enemy tank had been hit. Within
amnute or so, four or five Shermans were burning. Only the last one, which had
worked is way to within 100 yard on the far left, brought sweat to the commander's
acon. It had only just been spotted and was already swinging its gun towards us.
TEnemy tank - hard left - 10 o'clock - 100.' Barrel was now turning towards barrel,
mual against muzzle. Through the gun sights they were close enough to touch. For
arisa, the gunners may have lined up the cross hairs of their gun sights on each
other. Then came a blow, a flash of fire from the breech of the gun, the cartridge
dropped into the sack and the enemy tank exploded."
Both B and C squadrons suffered heavy losses and other German tanks Were com-
ing in on both flanks. While the 8th Company attacked from the east, the other
available Mark IV tanks of the and battalion skirted Le Mesnil Patry to me west
and attacked C Squadron before it could go to the aid of B Squadron. C Squadron
had managed to advance as far as the command post of the 7th Compally or the
26th Panzergrenadier Regiment, which was defended by some and it dau
wank guns. As both squadrons were in danger of being destroyed, the order was
given for the regiment to withdraw to the start line. Ine surviving - squadron
tanks began to retire, but there was no reply trom b squadron, which dau either
ven completely destroyed by then or was unable to disengage. The three Mark IVs
pursued the retreating Shermans but were in turn knocked out by anti-talk guns
south of Bretteville.
The Hussars' Shermans picked up what intantry they could trom the battlefiela
between the two villages and withdrew back through money.
which was now
being heavily shelled by German infantry and mortars. Lieutenant-colone waite s
tank in the village was destroyed by a direct hit. Rubble from the destroyed church
steeple then blocked the streets, so an alternative route through the village had to
be found. A tank knocked down a wall to make a new exit, only to fall into the
cellar of a house. By 1746 hours, the surviving tanks had formed up near the rail-
way line, along with the Fort Garry Horse Regiment in expectation of a German
counterattack, but none came.
Throughout the rest of the afternoon and evening, stragglers made their way
back through German lines to the Canadian position but the regent nad suttered
