426
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
weakened. For example, parts of znd SS Panzer Division were continually de-
tached to support other divisions so that in the entire Normandy campaign, the
division did not once fight as a single entity. Panzer Lehr, when it initially moved
to the American sector near St Lô, was forced to leave a tank and artillery battalion
behind to support the infantry division that had relieved it with the result that the
division was not complete when it launched its attack on I July at St Jean. The
division escort company of the hard-pressed 12th SS Panzer Division was even sent
to reinforce Panzer Lehr for the period of 16-20 June.'
What of the Rommel versus Rundstedt invasion strategy? The course of the
Normandy campaign closely followed the intended strategy of von Rundstedt and
others in that the Allies were allowed to land and establish a beachhead. However,
because of the Allied air superiority, their immense resources and Montgomery's
"keep hitting' strategy, the Germans were never able to mount a decisive coun
terattack. Therefore von Rundstedt's strategy was proven wrong but the question
remains as to whether Rommel's strategy of having the panzer divisions near the
coast would have worked either. The location of the billets and assembly areas of
any panzer divisions would have been well known to the Allies prior to D-Day and
would have been subjected to heavy naval and air bombardments. The survivors
of such attacks would have been forced to make an advance towards the beaches
late in the evening or at night, as any observed concentration of tanks during the
day would have again been subjected to naval gunfire. Even this would be no
guarantee of success, but Rommel's strategy and appreciation of Allied capabilities
was the more correct of the two strategies.
As history has shown, once Eisenhower made the decision to go ahead with
-Day, given the overwhelming superiority of the Allied war machine, aerial
dominance, the success of Operation Fortitude and the ineptitude of the German
command, there was only one possible outcome for the Allies: victory. The German
command structure rather sidelined Rommel who was a firm believer that the
Normandy landings were a feint for further landings in the Pas de Calais. Rommel
had been a strong advocate of Calais as the likely location of any landings and
he continued to tour Fifteenth Army defences right up until being wounded on
17 July. Within four days of D-Day, Rommel was pessimistic about the outcome of
the fighting in Normandy!? Perhaps disappointed at not being made commander-
in-chief after von Rundstedt or overwhelmed by the forces apparently arrayed
against him as projected by Operation Fortitude, Rommel did not play a major
part in the Normandy campaign, declaring that because of Hitler's interference
a sergeant major could have carried out his role? Rommel's strong opinions re-
garding Calais certainly helped perpetuate the Allied deception and prevent the
early movement of troops to Normandy. No doubt the machinations of the plot
against Hitler distracted him further.
The Allies succeeded despite their own shortcomings in infantry/tank doctrine,
the existence of the tank devlopment gap and stresses in command at a senior level.
Summary
427
Montgomery's bold plan of armoured thrusts moving rapidly inland to stake
out large tracts of Normandy failed in the first few days of landing in the face of
German opposition. The two armies of 2ist Army Group were unable to deepen
and broaden the initial lodgement as planned with the result that the intended pivot
by the armies was delayed and there was a fear of a stalemate developing. With the
failure to capture Caen, this movement was not possible until after the relative
success of Operation Cobra in July. The US Third Army's original mission was
to capture the Brittany ports further west and a line would be held by the Allies
while this was achieved. Patton was then tasked with defending the supply corridor
through Avranches and did not commence a general eastward movement until
4 August. Only when Hitler committed the bulk of the remaining panzer forces
to a desperate counterattack westwards did Bradley, not Montgomery, recognise
the strategic opportunity for encirclement that had arisen and the German Seventh
Army was eventually destroyed in the Falaise Crap.
Montgomery was intent on
carrying out his Overlord plan and did not see this opportunity. Had Hitler not
committed the panzer forces at Mortain, the Allies would have faced consider-
ably more opposition in their advance to Germany. Nevertheless, the Allies and
Montgomery had in less than 9o days advanced to the River Seine, liberated Paris
and destroyed two German armies, achieving far more than was ever envisaged in
Operation Overlord.
On 1 September, Eisenhower assumed control of all the Allied land forces in
Franceas previously decided owing to the greater contribution being made by the
United States, and by then Bradley and his staff were thoroughly disenchanted with
Montgomery's leadership. Montgomery was very disappointed and felt that he had
carried out his mission in Normandy well enough to deserve to remain commander.
Victory in Normandy came to the Allies in the end through their dominance
of the air and their superiority in firepower, numbers, logistics and code breaking
skills. For the first six weeks of the campaign until Operation Cobra, the Allied
battle plans were unsuccessful until the Allied overall superiority had severely
weakened the Germans. Final success was in no small part due to the bravery and
sacrifice of the men of all arms, including the tank crews in their thinly armoured
Shermans and Cromwells that continually went out to do battle every day with
more powerful enemy tanks and anti-tank guns. The Shermans and Cromwells
were not the match of German tanks but they got the job done and the Allies won
the campaign in Normandy, despite the many casualties amongst the tank crews.
General Bradley commented after the war:
The Sherman with its powerful engine could always be counted on to run without
a breakdown. This advantage, together with our US superiority in numbers, enabled
us to surround the enemy in battle and knock out his tanks from the flanks. But this
willingness to expend Shermans offered little comfort to the crews who were forced
to expend themselves.$4
