332
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
outspoken towards Adolf Hitler." Dietrich was only too conscious that his front
was close to collapse and would have great difficulty resisting another attack if the
Ist SS Panzer Korps was transferred elsewhere.
Final Plans
Simonds wanted a week of training for the operation but got only one night on
5/6 August for the armoured columns to form up and practise manoeuvering.
Further preparations on 6 August were interrupted by church services for all units,
which were well attended.
A German ambulance and a deserter from 8oth Division were captured on the
night of 5/6 August, and Simonds learnt that the ist SS Panzer Division had been
withdrawn. However, British Intelligence could not answer the question as to its
new location.
The plan for Operation Totalize was for two divisions to break into the German.
lines and create the gaps for the armoured divisions to subsequently exploit. The
2nd Division would attack west of the Koute Nationale 158 Caen-Falaise road, with
the armour of the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade arranged in four columns. The
attached sist (H) Division would attack east of the road with the 33rd Armoured
Brigade tanks in two columns.
Each column was four tanks wide and more than fifty vehicles long, the width
of the column being determined by the size of the lane, which could be deared by
four Flail tanks operating side by side. There was less than oft between the vehicles
in each row and zoft separating each row. The actual composition of each column
varled from unit to unit, but generally the columns were led by a navigator in
a Stuart tank followed by two troops of Sherman tanks, which in turn were in front
st the fial tanks, I ne remainder OI the armoured regiment then came behind the
Flails, tollowed by the "defrocked' Priest troop-carrying vehicles, AVR Es and the
anti-tank guns of the infantry battalions.
Having on y had one night to practice driving in such a column, it was a dificult
task for tank drivers to keep formation behind the tank in front whilst the column
twisted and turned to avoid any obstacles on the intended route. The movement
of so many tracked vehicles threw up huge clouds of dust, which reduced visibility
to a few feet on occasions, and in order to maintain the integrity of the columns,
a concession was made to allow the tanks to switch on one red tail-light for the
vehicle behind to follow.
The columns formed an armoured snake, a sort of twentieth-century throw-
back to the ancient Roman testudos. Just like in Operation Goodwood, the tanks
themselves would be blasting the gap in the German lines. Instead of the armoured
cavalry charge of Operation Goodwood, Simonds had devised an armoured steam-
roller. The armoured columns were instructed to bypass all centres of resistance
and not stop until they reached their phase one objectives.
Operation Totalize
333
Once the objectives of phase one were achieved - that a line from May sur
Orne to Fontenay to La Hogue had been secured - the two armoured divisions
were to be launched side by side, with the direction of their attacks parallel to the
Route Nationale 158 towards Falaise. In his appreciation dated I August, Simonds
believed he was immediately facing two SS panzer divisions, with a third, the
i2th SS, in reserve. The initial plan was for an operation in three phases:
• Phase one - two infantry divisions, each supported by an armoured brigade, to
break into German lines and capture the high ground at Point 122.
• Phase two - one armoured division and another different infantry division to
break into and open gaps in the second line of defences.
The high ground west
of Quesnay Wood was to be captured by the armoured division.
• Phase three - a second armoured division was to advance to Falaise.
Simonds' appreciation recognised two German defensive lines: a forward line that
ran from May sur Orne to Tilly to La Hogue and a rear second line that ran from
Hautmesnil to St Sylvain; both were to be targeted by the heavy bombers. Simonds
fully expected the initial night advance to provoke the usual German counterattack
once daylight came on 8 August, and the Canadian units were warned to prepare
defensive positions accordingly.
As 7 August approached, intelligence reports of the movements away from Caen
by the German panzer divisions must have encouraged Simonds and his planners
greatly. At 1000 hours on 6 August, at a final briefing conference, a change was
made to the plan on the basis of intelligence that not only had the 2nd SS Panzer
Korps moved to Flers but the Ist SS Panzer Division had been relieved by the
89th Division and had moved back to the rear, either around Potigny or as far
afield as Vassy.ª Phase one was expected to be easier, but the phase two attack was
still likely to mect strong resistance from the 12th SS Panzer Division, which was
in reserve somewhere around Bretteville sur Laize and would provide the main
opposition as it had done for the last six weeks. Given this apparent reduction in
the numbers of defenders, Simonds changed his plans and decided to launch the
two armoured divisions simultaneously, side by side down the road to Falaise, thus
reducing the operation to two phases.*4
On the evening of 6 August, Ultra decrypts disclosed that the Ist SS Panzer
Division was part of the forces assembling for the Luttich counterattack, and as
the Allies also knew that the I2th SS Panzer Division (or at least parts of it) was
in action at Grimbosq on the River Orne and around Vire, there appeared to be
considerably fewer panzer formations opposing them, if any at all. This was good
news for the Canadian First Army, but Simonds certainly did not believe that the
Germans would leave the road to Falaise virtually denuded of German tanks after
having defended Caen so vigorously since D-Day. However, this was precisely
what von Kluge had been instructed to do, with the 12th SS Panzer Division
allocated to Operation Luttich and about to begin its move westwards to Vire.
