156
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Dollman was further encouraged by the progress of the two divisions of the 2nd
SS Panzer Korps assembling as a reserve and the arrival of the first panzergrenadier
regiment from the ist SS Panzer Division on its way from Belgium. However,
other news later in the day was not so uplifting. Hitler had ordered a court martial
into the rapid capture of Cherbourg by the Americans and the report later in
the evening that the British had secured a bridgehead over the River Odon was
particularly unwelcome.
28 June
In response to the British capture of the bridge at Tourmauville, at o81o hours,
General Dollman ordered the znd SS Panzer Korps to attack immediately from
the south-west and eliminate the breach south of Cheux. At the same time, the
newly arrived panzergrenadier regiment from the ist SS Panzer Division would
attack from Verson in the east to cut off the British bridgehead, which would in
turn be invested by the remaining 12th SS troops and tanks to prevent any further
enlargement. However, the 2nd SS Panzer Korps reported that it had still not fully
assembled and could not attack for at least 24 hours. For Dollman this was the final
straw. Already under considerable pressure, having commanded the Seventh Army
since D-Day against the Allies who were now threatening to break through and
in receipt of Hitler's telegram regarding the Cherbourg inquiry, Dollman wrote
a reply to Hitler and then committed suicide at about 1000 hours." It was not until
1300 hours that day that the 2nd SS Panzer Korps stated that it would be ready to
attack early on the 29 June.
The Scottish Corridor
The panzergrenadier regiment of the Ist SS Panzer Division, five remaining
4th Company tanks from zist Panzer Division and some ligers from loist SS
Schwere Tank Battalion advanced westwards along the line of the railway to
Mouen, which was captured by early afternoon, knocking out three Stuart tanks
from the 3rd CLY. The loth Highland infantry plus the grd CLY were ordered
to clear the area and extend the corridor eastwards. Just after 1900 hours, their
attack began and three Shermans were destroyed; the attack was unsuccessful in
dislodging the Germans but did prevent them from advancing further westwards.
The Shermans of the 3rd CLY took their toll on the German tanks:
Round about 1700 hours the Mk IV tanks of our company found themselves in
a triangular field bounded by the railway line running between Mouen and Cheux.
It was a dangerous position, and when the enemy attacked, we found ourselves en-
gaged in a bitter battle with enemy tanks and anti-tank guns. Tank 413 had a track
broken by a shell, but the crew repaired it covered by their 'little brothers' of the SS
157
Operation Epsom
punzergrenadiers. Then the commander of tank 421, standing up in the turret, had his
head blown off by shell; the crew were so horrified that the driver reversed abruptly
and broke part of the track mechanism. Both these two crippled tanks retired, moving
very slowly. Tank 422 was the next to be damaged; its turret jammed by a hit, it
resed into a sunken road to carry out its repairs. Tank 425 first had it engine put out
otation, then its gun; immobile, it lay in the middle of a close quarter fight between
theS panzergrenadiers and the enemy infantry. All its commander could do to help
ourmen was to chuck hand grenades out of the turret. It was hit again and caught fire.
hinaly, Tank 412 the leader's machine, went up in flames. We had lost two tanks and
had three seriously damaged. 28
la Gravil, after the failure of the previous day, a determined effort was made by
the infantry of the gth Cameronians and A Squadron of the 9th RTR to take and
od the village. The first attack was disrupted by German artillery and it was not
whil just after midday that the tanks and infantry began to enter Grainville. No
soner had they done so than the Germans entered the opposite side of the town and
a fierce bale ensued for the next few hours. The Panther tanks of the 2nd Panzer
Division, properly co-ordinated this time with Kampfgruppe Weidinger, made
the German attack. Churchill and Panther tanks stalked each other through the
orchards near the railway line north of Grainville, A Squadron losing another two
Churchill anks." Jim Hutton, a tank driver in No. 1 Troop, described the scene:
Anyway, in the action at Cheux, my troop was engaged in taking on two German
armoured vehicles, I believe one was a Panther and other was a Mark IV. We were told
wa they had been knocked out, that smoke was coming not the Mark i and we
went up to this hedgerow, and as you know the ariver on a leagerow is just looking
at the hedge and turret is in a hull down position and just the turret poking over the
top. Tony Lyall nipped off in between the tracks and the hedge and he was doing his
usiness. And while this was going on, this German tank gunner cumbed back into
what we thought was the knocked out Panther and opened up. He fired a shot and it
hit the top of the turret next to Trooper Butterfield who was sitting on the top and
it splashed him with fragments and I remember his face getting smothered in blood.
ut it just nicked a little vein on his forem i asneac course, the blood spurted out
because it was a red hot fragment that hit ru asnf i next thing we got one smack in
e turret which it penetrated the triangle dead cenue on the front of me butter did
asnf it intrated the 2 inch phosphorus grenades dad set tea on. At Manow, our
gunner, was sprayed with all the phosphorus. He came out screaming his head off
and bailed out and Jimmy Bennell took the full force of the shot through his stomach
and that killed him instantly. I was knocked unconscious with the impact and when
I came around the pannier door was open and my co-driver was gone and i happened
to shake myself and get me head together and doing so I got a perforated eardrum
and me ear was terrible, terrible pain I got from me left ear. And I got out and we
