11
Operation Totalize
The 2nd Canadian Corps, which had been fighting in Normandy since D-Day,
regrouped after the heavy casualties of Operation
Spring; in the frontline
we 4to canadian Armoured Division had taken the places ot the Guaras ame
7th Armoured divisions, which had moved to Caumont.
The newly activated
Canadian First Army was ordered by Montgomery at the end of July to try and
pin down as many German units as possible to assist Operation Bluecoat whist
also preparing plans for a future offensive. The deployment of the Canadian First
Army had been delayed because of congestion in the limited British beachhead.
Despite the efforts of the Canadians, the 2nd SS Panzer Korps and the 2ist Panzer
Division moved westwards away from Caen to Caumont in response to Uperation
Bluecoat. As the German forces in the Caen sector were now significantly weak
ened, Montgomery wanted to mount a ertakfattack there as soon as possible.
The most
aperienced British troops were already involved in Operation
Bluecoat, and any new operation in the Caen area would have to be undertaken
Dy the unblooded Canadian first Army with the attached Ist Polish Armour
vision mong melys directive issued on 4 August instructed the Canadians w
launch an alack to breakthrough in the direction of Falaise in order to cut on
hinder the withdrawal of German forces around Caen, with this operation to start
10 later than & August, ideally sooner. Much to the irritation of the commander ol
the Canadian First Army, General Crerar, Montgomery sent his own staft officer.
told dese army croup to assist with the planning.? Crerar, in turn, then left mos
of the planting to General Simonds of the 201 Canadian Corps. Simonds had
already been working on plans for such an o ration since the end of July but,
at 2300 hours on 4 August, Simonds was aske if the operation could be brought
forward 24 hours in view of the developments in other parts of Normandy and the
ranster of the and So Panzer Korps away from Caen. Simonds agreed, knowing
that this would inevitably reduce the time for planning, the drawing up of orders
and preparations for the attack. D-Day for Operation Totalize was now 7 August
1944, with H-hour at 2330 hours.
Operation Totalize
329
In a British intelligence summary dated 6 August the Germans are generally
described as falling back in disarray, and in a later directive Montgomery (M5I7)
stated that the Allied units must pursue the Germans with vigour so as to not allow
them to establish new defensive positions?
On the night of 6/7 August, XII Corps crossed the River Orne near Thury
Harcourt with the tanks of the 34th Tank Brigade in support of the s9th Division
in a diversionary operation. During the initial fighting, the Germans found the
plans of the British attack in a knocked out armoured car and decided that the
attack by XII Corps was the main effort. Therefore Kampfgruppe Krause from the
I2th SS Panzer Division was dispatched to Grimbosq to support the 27 Ist Division
along with the and Battalion of the panzer regiment, which moved into the vI-
cinity of Thury Harcourt at Acqueville. Kampfgruppe Krause was composed of
the following:
• 3rd Company Panthers - ten tanks
• 2nd Company Panthers - three tanks
• 8th Company Panzer IVs - five tanks
• 2nd Company from Ioist SS Schwere Tank Battalion of ten Tiger tanks
• Ist and 3rd battalions of 26th Panzergrenadier Regiment (commanded by Krause)
The kampfgruppe was quickly in action, as recorded by the war diary of the
2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, which reported on 7 August of attacks on the
Soth Division defending the bridgehead at 1900 hours by a German infantry bat-
talion and twenty tanks.+
For the main attack planned by Simonds, Operation Totalize, the Canadian First
Army was composed of the Canadian znd and 3rd divisions, the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division, two armoured brigades (2nd Canadian and the 33rd Armoured
Brigades), the Ist Polish Armoured Division and the British sist (H) Division.
Simonds' plan, after the by now standard heavy bomber raid as a prelude to any
Allied breakthrough operation, was for a series of armoured columns to break
through the German line at night. As a second line of German defences had been
identified, a second bombing operation would signal the start of the subsequent
exploitation phase by the ist Polish and 4th Canadian Armoured divisions towards
Falaise. Simonds was acutely aware of the problems facing the operation. The
countryside south of Caen was very open, with long uninterrupted fields of fire
that suited the high-velocity anti-tank guns of the Germans, who were occupying
positions they had been in for many weeks. As an ex-artillery officer, Simonds
had no experience of handling an armoured division, but the availability of heavy
bomber support reinforced his pre-war belief that the use of aircraft avoided the
need to secretly concentrate the artillery before an attack' Simonds was also
conscious of the German tactics of mounting immediate counterattacks and had
written a znd Canadian Corps policy that such attacks were to be expected and
provisions needed to be made to meet them.®
