46
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
when they landed just after H-hour, some finding themselves alone on the beaches
because of the chaotic LCT landings. Only six of the sixteen teams were able to set
off their demolition charges to clear small gaps in the rows of obstacles. The assault
timetable was in tatters - some landing craft were unable to approach the beach as
the obstacles were still intact and many landing craft that had been damaged (or
sunk) were unable to return to the troopships offshore for another load.
One by one, the A Company tanks were either knocked out or immobilised,
either by mines or by direct hits from anti-tank guns or artillery. A total of five
tanks were disabled when they threw tracks in the shingle of the beach?" Only one
A Company tank survived the day: the tank of Lieutenant Barcelona, which lost
a track and was immobilised for several hours. The assault on the E-I St Laurent
exit ultimately proved to be more profitable than the attacks on the E-3 Colleville
exit. The few A Company tanks that were able to engage the bunkers WNos and
os continued to do so, helped by tanks from A and C companies of the 743rd Tank
Battalion. The E-i exit was finally opened to infantry only from 1300 hours.
Once the infantry began to penetrate inland off the beach the amount of direct
fire was dramatically reduced, though long-range fire from the 352nd Division
artillery batteries inland continued to hit the beach. Between 1200 and 1500 hours,
the battalion's tanks were not engaged in combat. By 1530 hours four reserve tanks
had arrived on the beach and were quickly directed to the assembly area. These
included two HQ tanks and a tank from C Squadron that had been left out of the
original landing. One reserve HQ tank got mixed up with the arriving tanks of
the 745th Tank Battalion and exited the beach with them, not returning to the
unit for another three days. Two armoured recovery vehicles also arrived, which
began to salvage abandoned tanks and help repair those that had lost tracks. Late
in the afternoon, the battalion's five remaining tanks left the beach by the E-1 exit
and went into harbour east of St Laurent sur Mer. Here the operational tanks were
allowed no respite and at 2000 hours, one tank was sent to assist the infantry with
a mopping-up operation; at 2015 hours, the remaining three tanks under the com-
mand of Lieutenant Barcelona were dispatched at the request of the 29th Division
to deal with machine gun nests and snipers around St Laurent sur Mer. All four
tanks came back at 2300 hours.
At 231S hours, the 74Ist Tank Battalion strength was given as three tanks opera-
tional, two fit in 24 hours and forty-eight lost." The battalion's entire first wave
had been lost except for Lieutenant Barcelona's tank. The reserve tanks provided a
nucleus for the battalion to reform around for the coming campaign and it would
not see further combat for another two weeks.
The Reasons Behind the Decision to Launch
The likelihood of rough seas on D-Day had been discussed during training and
at the briefing before sailing by the LCT commanders and the officers of the tank
battalion. The decision to launch the DD tanks had been delegated to the local
commanders of the assault force on the basis that the sea conditions might vary
D-Day Tanks
from beach to beach and that the sea conditions being experienced by the assault
commander's headquarters vessel may not necessarily be the same as those closer to
the shore. A procedure was agreed by which the senior LCT naval officer and sen-
ior battalion army officer would confer and agree before launching the DD tanks.82
Unfortunately, this procedure was not followed with the 74Ist Tank Battalion
tanks, as Captain Thornton, the senior battalion officer, made the unilateral deci-
sion to launch without consulting with the flotilla officer, Lieutenant J. Barry. A
later US Navy report by the lIth Amphibious Force commander, Admiral Hall,
was critical of Lieutenant Barry who 'tacitly acquiesced in the decision by his
failure to take action to change the order directing the launching. The report
went further and criticised the decision by Thornton as being unsound given the
widespread knowledge of the limitations of DD tanks in rough seas. Thornton, for
his part, was anxious that the tanks get ashore and support the infantry:
Captain Thornton succeeded in contacting Captain Young by radio and the two
commanders discussed the advisability of launching the DD tanks, the sea being
rough, much rougher than the tanks had ever operated in during their preparatory
training. Both commanders agreed that the advantage to be gained by launching the
tanks justified the risk of launching the tanks in the heavy sea.®4
Once the tanks were launched, large waves pounded against the flimsy canvas
screen and they began to ship water. The top rail of the screens buckled under the
force of the waves, which also broke some of the struts supporting the screens; this
allowed water to pour into the tanks, which then sank within seconds, sometimes
dragging crew members down with them. The failure of the top rail in the rough
conditions is evidenced by the account of Corporal Hopper above and by an op-
erational report of the 79th Armoured Division that stated, It was found necessary
for the crew to support the top rail with their shoulders on the way in. Much water
was shipped and the top rail bent ominously on the impact of the sea.'"s
These were the same top rails that the British had urgently reinforced in the days
before the invasion. Even if the screens did not collapse, water got into some tank
motors and they duly stopped, leaving the tank unable to manoeuvre and liable to
being swamped. Some tanks did not sink immediately but struggled toward the
shore, making for the agreed landmark of the church spire of Colleville. However,
the strong cross-current pushed the tanks more and more off course eastwards and
they were forced to steer a course which meant that their unstable craft became
more and more side-on to the heavy seas, which had an even greater effect on the
top rail of the canvas screen. After the war, many of the tanks that sank were found
on the seabed still lined up in the direction of the church spire at Colleville?
The Sherman Mk II DD tanks used by US forces were supposed to have at least
30in of free board at the stern. Many of the DD tanks were overloaded with extra
ammunition and had less freeboard than they had ever operated or trained with
before, some as little as gin. On D-Day the waves were up to oft high off Omaha
