318
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
GERMAN COUNTERATTACK
AT MORTAIN
7 Auguat 1944
operation Lutter limits or German advance, adapted from Breakout and Pursuit. (By kind permis
sion of M. Blumenson, USCMH)
succeed and that he had insufficient forces to both go on the attack and preven
the front being held by the newly arrivee and inexperienced 84th Division from
collapsing. The division was expected to attack westwards while being under
aldek from the north; the division's artillery had to fire in two directions that day.
After the relief of von Schwerin, the 1l6th Panzer Division finally attacked dur-
ing the night and reached the railway crossing within soom of Cherence but was
forced back by an American counterattack. Tin failute of the 116th Panzer Division
to advance in paralel with the and Panzer Division exposed the spearheads of the
the 3rd Armored Division.
danet be so teets to the 4th Division alla Cab oI
Mille, deanWale, was becoming increasingly concerned about the prostess of
the attack, given its strategic importance, and ordered that afternoon:
I command the attack be prosecuted relentlessly and daringly to the sea. Regardless
of the risk, the 2nd SS Panzer and either the 12th SS or 2ist Panzer Divisions must
be withdrawn from the Fifth Panzer Army line and committed in the Avranches
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
319
sector to bring about the collapse of the Normandy front by a thrust into the deep
flank and rear of the enemy facing Seventh Army. Greatest daring, determination and
imagination must give wings to all echelons of command. Each and every man must
believe in victory. Cleaning up the rear areas and in Brittany can wait until later."
By 1930 hours, Hausser was already discussing options with von Kluge for with-
drawing; both men believed that the attack had failed. However, despite the ad-
vances of the Americans in the south and the attack of 2nd Panzer Division being
halted, OK W ordered von Kluge to continue the attack. The 9th Panzer Division
was to attack towards St Hilaire with available forces and it was decided to com-
mit the loth and 2nd SS Panzer divisions next day under a new korps command,
IVIII Panzer Korps.26
The German attack, often through narrow sunken lanes, had to contend with
restricted room to manoeuvre, fog and American resistance on the ground and in
the air, all of which had served to limit their progress on the first day. A spearhead
from the 2nd SS Panzer Division attacking on the southern route towards St Hilaire
made the most progress, reaching Milly, 4 miles from St Hilaire.
8 August
Pressure from the US units forced the znd Panzer Division to pull back its most
advanced units that had not already done so from Le Mesnil Adelée on the night
of 7 August. The arrival of US 2nd Armored Division at Barenton now threatened
the rear of the German attack.
During the day, the US 3rd Armored Division continued its blocking action of
the German attack and was able to make up some ground. Task Force 1 of CCB
advanced to the northwest of Le Mesnil Tove to make contact with the 8th Infantry
Regiment. The half-track of the forward observer was knocked out and, without
artillery support, the advance bogged down when a force of seventeen Panther
tanks east of Le Mesnil Tove was encountered. Thirty minutes later, a squadron of
P-47s arrived and broke up the German tank formation. That night, the task force
harboured on the high ground north-west of Le Mesnil Tove after linking up with
the intended infantry at 1912 hours and Le Mesnil Tove had been recaptured. The
CCB knocked out three Panthers, two Stug IIIs and a Mark IV.27
The Ist SS Panzer Division again made no progress towards Juvigny because
of heavy artillery, fighter-bomber attacks and the strong American resistance.
D Company of the 2nd Battalion of the 33rd Armored Regiment managed to
construct a roadblock between Le Mesnil Tove and Grand Dove late that evening
to further contain any German advance28 The 2nd Panzer Division was pushed
back to a line from east of Le Mesnil Tove to Hill 220 near St Barthélemy.
South of Mortain, the US znd Armored Division began to put pressure on the
Germans by attacking towards Ger. The 2nd and 3rd battalions of the 67th Armored
