314
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The left attack of the 2nd Panzer Division and the attached Ist SS Tank Battalion
did not start in earnest until osoo hours owing to the late arrival of the Panther bat-
talion. Two Panthers, with some panzergrenadiers, had moved off at the originaly
designated starting time and approached St Barthélemy from the north-east, which
was defended by the 117th Infantry Regiment. After some initial skirmishes with
sentries and patrols, at about o200 hours the Panthers attacked a roadblock cons-
ing of a $7mm anti-tank gun and a platoon of infantry, knocking out one anti-tank
gun but alerting the Americans to the attack in progress. These tanks then waited
for the rest of the division and the Ist SS unit to catch up. This delay allowed other
anti-tank guns, including four 90mm guns, to be quickly deployed in and around
St Barthélemy. When the Germans resumed their advance in force at about osco
hours, their artillery shelled St Barthélemy heavily. One American anti-tank gun
knocked out the leading Panther, which blocked the road for an hour. Dense tog
attackers and defenders from each other. A second Panther was destroyed by the
same anti-tank gun and the attack again halted to wait for more infantry to come
up. Meanwhile, other German tanks began to attack St Barthélemy from difter.
ent directions and infiltrate past the anti-tank guns positions. American solders
vere able to stalk Panther tanks in the fog and knock out several with bazooka
rockets. Now behind schedule, the Panthers and Mark IVs advanced straight inio
St Barthelemy, sing deter tank to a 9omm anti-tank gui a ta t
However, one by one the anti-tank guns were put out of action by the Panthers
and panzergrenadiers, which then roended up the crews and any soldiers they
could find. Instead of then heading straight for juvigny, the and Panzer Division
column halted for go minutes to reort nise and allow the advance to be taken
over by the Panthers of the ist SS Battalion as arranged. At about noon the tanks
started forward again, only to be fired at by a single anti-tank gun, which prompty
knocked out the leading tank and daliged a second, before being soyed by
other Panthers. By this time, the morning fog had burnt off to a brig stay day
and the planes of all nationalities took to the skies. Forewarned Of the Luftwafte
plans, British and American lighters intercepte the German planes near thett bases
or en route to the Mortain area so that not a single Luftwatte plane reached the
operational area.'3
The only planes in thavaties over Mortain were Alhed, and
the fine weather permitted them to go to work on the German columns. Werner
Josupelt, a panzergrenadier, wrote later:
Our Panzers stood on an asphalt road. We were not moving forward. We midity
sat on the Panzers.
Luckily there was thick fog. I thought "They must think we're stil
in Russia, where you can get away with big assemblies of Panzers like this." But today,
German planes were supposed to be keeping the air space above the attack sector clear.
We finally got off the Panzers which rolled into the fields and camouflaged them-
selves. The fog lifted. There weren't any German planes, there were only Allied
315
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
planes. We all cursed Hermann's Luftwaffe. If he wasn't going to fly today, when was
he going to fly?
The fighter bombers circled our tanks several times. Then one broke out of the
circle, sought its target and fired. As the first rejoined the formation of 20 planes,
a second pulled out and attacked. And so they continued until they had all attacked.
Then they left the terrible scene. A new swarm appeared in their place and fired all
their rockets. They had it well organised!
Black clouds of smoke from burning oil climbed into the sky everywhere we
looked. They marked the dead Panzers. There were dozens of clouds of smoke from
our area alone. Finally the Typhoons couldn't find any more Panzers so they dived
down on us and chased us mercilessly. Their rockets fell with a terrible howl. One hit
right next to a comrade of mine but he did not get hurt. These rockets burst into just
a few big pieces of shrapnel, and a man had a chance of not being struck."
Later that month the British Operational Research unit examined the Mortain
battlefield:
Conditions on the afternoon of the 7th August were ideal from a pilot's point of view
as no opposition was encountered from enemy aircraft and nor, till late in the day was
there any appreciable flak reaction. Under cover of mist and low cloud, the Germans
seem to have neglected all normal precautions and, when the weather cleared, they
were sighted in large numbers head to tail in narrow road and lanes. The pilots re-
ported that they were able to go in very close to attack, rockets being fired at 1000
yards range and cannon and machine guns from even closer. "
It was only 3 miles from St Barthélemy to Juvigny, but the attack by the Ist SS
Panthers was stopped halfway by the aerial storm unleashed by the rocket-firing
Typhoons of the and Tactical Airforce, which arrived from noon onwards. 6
That day, Typhoons from ten squadrons of the RAF znd Tactical Air Force
flew 294 sorties and US planes made a further 200 raids." Over the three days
from 7-10 August, pilots claimed 153 enemy tanks destroyed, forty-three probables
and fifty-six damaged: a total of 252 tanks. As this was more than the number of
German tanks involved, clearly some of these claims were
incorrect.
After the
battle, the wrecks on the ground in the area were examined and out of thirty-three
Panther tanks and ten Mark IVs found knocked out, only six Panthers and three
Mark IVs were found to have been destroyed by rockets and soo-pounder bombs.
A total of 125 German vehicles (tanks,
armoured cars,
half-tracks,
car, lorries)
were found on the battlefield, of which only thirty-three were confirmed as being
hit by aircraft. Although the Germans may have taken many damaged vehicles
with them when they withdrew, it appears that the effects of the aerial support
were more psychological than physical and the mere appearance of the planes over
the battlefield was enough to halt the advance and force the vehicles off the road
into whatever cover they could find. One of the determinants of the success of
