188
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Advancing towards La Caplainerie (north of Le Dézert), the battle group of
the and battalion goist Panzergrenadiers, supported by eleven Panther tanks, was
stopped by two Mio tank destroyers. The CCA tanks were located in orchards on
either side of the road, waiting to take part in a 47th Infantry Regiment mission
while the two Mios were holding positions on the road about 2ooyds from the
American tanks. When the Panther tanks appeared, F Company opened fire but,
inexplicably, used HE rounds, which at a range of 4ooyds had no effect on the
Panthers. The leading Panther broke through to duel with an Mro at a range of
Izoyas. The Panther was damaged by the first shot from the Mio, but it returned
fire, hitting the Mio and wounding or killing three members of the crew. The
other Mio then opened fire, finishing the Panther off with two shots. Another
Panther tank was spotted and the same Mio fired ten rounds into the suspension
system of the second Panther, which sideslipped helplessly into a bank on the side of
the road and was immobilised, caught in a tangle of matted hedgerow and churned
mud. The Panther crews bailed out and were later captured after taking refuge in
a nearby farmhouse.? A second column of tanks was destroyed on another tree-
lined road north of Le Dézert when the first and last tanks were knocked out,
trapping the remainder, which were then shot up one by one. The long, overhang-
ing barrel of the Panther tanks apparently prevented the tanks from turning their
turrets to fire back at the Americans. Bayerlein himself described the Panther tank
as not being suitable for use in the bocage, unlike the Mark IV tanks. 24
The destruction of the German armour entinued and P-47s Joined in trom the
air, diving on the assault guns around Le Dézert. By 1600 hours, the Panzer Lehr
attack had been blunted. All the Panther tanks used in this attack were lost, as well
as nine Stug Ills? The 899th Tank Destroyer battalion alone had destroyed eleven
Panthers and a Mark IV tank. These wrecked Panther tanks would subsequently be
examined by the Americans and used in armour penetration tests.
On the American left flank,
the German columns of tanks and a battalion
from the goznd Panzergrenadier Regiment had been able to infiltrate behind the
IIoth Infantry Regiment lines east of highway and reached Cavigny. CCB was
preparing to attack Les Hauts Vents once more when it was ordered to send Task
Force Y to the aid of the infantry; two companies of tanks from the Ist Battalion
were dispatched towards Cavigny. In response to this, the 2nd Battalion of the
902nd Panzergrenadier Regiment was forced to break off its attack northwards and
help defend Cavigny. Task Force Y lost another six tanks to German self-propelled
guns apparently firing from across the river at St Gilles, but the Germans were un-
able to penetrate the American lines in any great strength and their attack faltered.
Later that afternoon the Germans withdrew from Cavigny.
A second German column advanced in the early morning into the positions of
the 3rd Battalion of the 120th Infantry Regiment at Le Rocher. Unchallenged by
sentries,
tanks and armoured cars supported by panzergrenadiers on foot reached
the battalion command post before the
Americans realised what was happening
189
Battle of the Hedgerows
and opened fire? In the ensuing firefight in the dark, the Germans lost a further
five Mark IVs tanks and four armoured cars and the attack was beaten off.?7
Combined with artillery and air support, these actions were enough to defeat
the advance by the two battle groups of the 902nd Panzergrenadier Regiment. The
Panzer Lehr Division was forced to go on the defensive for the rest of the campaign.
CCB resumed the attack on Les Hauts Vents with the attack still being led in
person by Colonel Roysden. As Panzer Lehr had attacked north-eastwards during
the day, CCB had also advanced in the opposite direction in an effort to capture
Les Hauts Vents again. When CCB pushed forward, the battle groups of the Panzer
Lehr Division had swept past it on either side.
Les Hauts Vents and the strategic Hill or were finally recaptured by the com-
bined efforts of Task Forces Z and X at 1736 hours and defensive positions were set
up. The 2nd battalion (Task Force X) lost three tanks but knocked out a Mark IV
Just north of Pont Hébert.28 CCB held Les Hauts Vents from 12 to 16 July waiting
for the arrival of the remainder of the goth Division. The 33rd Armored Regiment
had thirty-one tanks destroyed or damaged, mainly by Panzerfäuste, and all of
these were M4s except for one Ms light tank.
In defeating the attack of the Panzer Lehr kampfgruppe around Le Dezert,
CCA (32nd Armored Regiment) had tank Casualties of three Ma medium tanks
knocked out (one to Panzerfäuste) and two damaged but repaired plus two tanks
unfit, with mechanical problems." During the whole action, the 32nd Armored
Regiment lost a total of twelve tanks destroyed, including two Ms light tanks,
While twenty-seven tanks were repaired." Twenty-four new tanks were issued by
Ordnance to the division in this period. The 3rd Armored Division maintenance
battalion repaired other tanks with routine mechanical problems, making a total
of fifty-two tanks lost or damaged during the course of this battle. On 16 July,
Colonel Boudinot, commander of the 32nd Armoured Regiment, assumed com-
mand of CCB to replace Brigadier Bohn.
The znd SS Panzer Division during this battle up to 23 July lost thirteen Mark IVs
and thirty-one Panthers destroyed or damaged plus fourteen Stug Ills destroyed or
damaged. In the same period, Panzer Lehr lost twenty-one Mark IV and sixteen
Panther tanks, with an estimated ten Stug IIIs also lost."
The similar tank losses of the Americans and Germans demonstrated the dif-
ficulties of advancing in the hedgerows that gave the tactical advantage to the
defenders. The initial American advances were strongly resisted by fewer German
troops, but the counterattack by the Panzer Lehr Division was no more successful,
destroyers and M4 tanks at close range in ambush positions.
The better firepower
and armour-penetrating abilities of the German Mark IV and Panther tanks com-
pared with the M4 Sherman were to some extent negated by the close ranges (less
than 400yds) that most tank combat took place where the Sherman 75mm gun
could penetrate the side and rear armour of the German tanks. This was provided
the M4s could outflank the German tanks, which was very difficult to do quickly
