418
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
instead of being used as a force to exploit gaps in the German lines, were used as
blunt instruments to make the gaps in conjunction with the support from heavy
Air Force bombers.
The 7th Armoured Division had struggled in the bocage during the advance to
Villers Bocage and only made slow progress against small numbers of tanks and
anti-tank guns supported by a few infantry. The division's own infantry brigade
was unavailable and the tanks had to work with infantry they had never trained
with before, which resulted in a predictably slow advance. Having been created as
a weapon of exploitation, the 7th Armoured Division was forced by the bocage to
act as an infantry tank brigade.
Once Villers Bocage was reached, the leading regiment pushed on without a re-
connaissance,
even though enemy units were around. At the objective, the regi-
ment stopped in a column as if it was on a peace-time training exercise, allowing
a few German Tiger tanks to fully exploit the opportunity and the desert veterans
of Britain's most experienced armoured division were forced into an ignominious
retreat halfway back to Bayeux.
The next action of the 7th Armoured Division was during the breakout attempt
of Operation Goodwood. However, the 7th Armoured Division was missing
in action for virtually the whole day and did not enter the fighting until about
1700 hours.
The 7th Armoured Division's unfortunate experiences in Normandy continued
in Operation Bluecoat.
The
division
was held in reserve ready for exploitation
by XXX Corps southwards to Vire or Le Bény Bocage as the opportunity arose.
With the rapid advance of the lith Armoured Division, the division was again
committed to the attack in a battering role, not one of exploitation. Progress was
slow against German mines and anti-tank guns in the bocage and the division was
unable to capture Aunay on schedule. The XXX Corps plans were changed on
§ August with the division being redirected towards Thury Harcourt.
With a new commander, General Verney, a period or rest and reorganisation
followed while 100 new personnel were absorbed. A slow advance to Seine began.
on 17 August in an operation which lasted ten days. Free of the bocage, the division
advanced in series of more familiar textbook operations and with the changes in
personnel, the morale of the division gradually improved. Buoyed by the enthu-
siastic reception from the French population liberated in Livarot and Lisieux, the
spirit and confidence of the men improved further. For the Desert Rats further
challenges lay ahead in northern France, Holland and Germany. General Verney
could not find solutions to all the division's problems and he himself was replaced
in November 1944.
However, by this time Montgomery's plan to reinforce the unexperienced units
of the British Second Army with combat seasoned troops he had previously com-
manded had badly misfired. Doubts were being openly expressed within zIst Army
Group about the performance of the 7th Armoured, soth and sist Divisions. There
were high numbers of desertion and subsequent court-martials in the soch Division
Summary
419
and the commander of the SIst Division was replaced with the division regarded as
unft for battle. + The 7th Armoured Division were not alone in believing they had
done their share of fighting.
The Ilth Armoured Division began the Normandy campaign as an inexperi-
enced green division, although its 29th Armoured Brigade had been leavened with
the experienced 3rd RTR, which had seen action in North Africa and Italy. Its
combat debut during Operation Epsom was characterised by the splitting up of
the divisional troops by the VIII Corps commander, General O'Connor, and their
subsequent independent actions, which was disappointing for General Roberts as
the division had trained extensively before D-Day in infantry/tank co-operation.
O'Connor and Dempsey repeated this separation of the infantry and tanks in
Operation Goodwood. Because of the limited room for deployment at the start
of the attack, instead of the advance being made by two divisions side by side,
the Guards Armoured Division could not come up alongside the lith Armoured
Division, which advanced alone into the intact German gun lines.
It was in Operation Bluecoat that the lith Armoured Division really came into
its own. This time General Roberts was able to plan his own battle and the division
was at last able to operate as one unit. The armoured regiments and infantry battal-
ions of the isgth Brigade formed two battle groups, which rapidly penetrated deep
behind German lines to Chenedolle and Burcy. The division also demonstrated
Rexibility and aggression in advancing at night with the capture of St Martin des
Besaces. Roberts was then able to boldly exploit the situation further through
the rapid reinforcement of the Household Cavalry patrol, which had penetrated
the Forêt l'Evêque and seized the bridge over the River Soulevre. But Roberts's
«Egression was not matched by O'Connor and the division's advance was halted.
The Guards Armoured Division, designated to safeguard the left flank, had again
not kept pace with the progress of the lith Armoured Division and had left its
flanks exposed.
During the furious counterattacks by the znd SS Panzer Korps to eliminate the
lith Armoured Division battle groups, which were already behind the new front-
line the Germans were trying to establish, the battle groups were able to defeat the
German attacks with the considerable assistance of divisional and corps artillery
Plus air support. The lith Armoured Division showed that it could operate with
infantry successtully, like the untantry tank brigades The appointment of Roberts
in December 1943 as an experienced commander of a green division proved to be
a particularly good decision.
The Guards Armoured Division made its combat debut in Operation Goodwood
in the role of a battering ram. The division experienced its first casualties around
Cagny, faltered, and on seeing the burning lith Armoured Division tanks on the
rising slopes the other side of the railway line, advanced no further. By the Guards
not eliminating German flanking fire from villages like Frenouville, Le Poirier and
Four, the fith Armoured Division was left exposed. The division hastily reorgan-
ised during Operation bluecoat to achieve a better combined arms structure when
