234
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
isolated. But this is exactly what did happen as the Guards and the 7th Armourea
divisions displayed a reluctance to get forward and into battle. The Guards initial
enthusiasm for their first action was tempered by the casualties suffered by the
znd Grenadier Guards and then blunted by the sight of the burning and Fife and
Fortar tanks the other side of the railway. Blaming a lack of infantry to tackle the
hidden anti-tank guns, the Guards made little progress towards their objective of
Vimont and did not venture across the railway line to put pressure on the Germans
in Frénouville who were taking their toll of the znd Fife and Forfar and 23ra
Hussar tanks around Four and Soliers. The ist Coldstream Guards, despite being
in the vanguard of the division's advance, did not lose a single tank to enemy fire.
The Guards Armoured Division on its formation, like all Guards units, had to be
commanded by a Guards officer. As there were no Guards officers who had served
in tanks before as this was the first Guards unit to be equipped with tanks, the
Guards Division was extremely lacking in tank battle experience. General Adair
later commented:
Goodwood was a badly designed battle from the Corps point of view. Our advance
rather resembled a cavalry charge with its momentum lost once lIth and Guards
division became deeply involved at Cagny. Our tanks were picked off by well-sighted
German anti-tank guns."
The historian Liddell Hart, after talking post war with General Hobart (then in the
Tith Armoured Division), concluded that 7th Armoured Division, commanded by
General Erskine, had also showed 'pervading caution' during the advance, result-
ing from the division's disillusioning experience in the early stages of the invasion'??
After meeting with officers from the Guards Division and 23rd Hussars, at II4S
bours Brigadier Hinde sent an extraordinary imprecise signal to 7th Armoured
Division headquarters saying that the situation was obscure and that the enemy
was somewhere in front between the lith Armoured Division and the Guards
Division. Later in the afternoon Digadier Hinde met with Generd mus demo
tactical HQ north of Le Mesnil Frémentel, and Roberts was disappointed by what
Hinde had to say: 'There are too many bloody tanks here already; in not going
to bring my tanks down yet.»* Before the surprised Roberts could reply that the
tanks in view had actually been knocked out, Hinde took off for somewhere else.
At O'Connors afternoon meeting, Roberts explained the situation to benea
Erskine and the need for the support of the 7th Armoured Division to neutralise
the defended villages; O'Connor ordered Elkine to provide this support and
attack towards La Hogue. But the 7th Armoured Division regiments were still
strung out all along the corridor of advance after the delay in crossing the bridges
over the River Orne. Erskine believedigne whole operation was a gross abuse of
armour and seemed determined to keep his tanks out of it as long as possible,
a belief that was reinforced by Hinde's reports.? When O'Connor demanded that
the 7th Armoured Division advance, Erskine then maintained that there was no
Operation Goodwood
235
room between the two divisions ahead. The sth RTR did not cross the Caen-Paris
railway until about 1800 hours and was too late to influence the battle. It is clear that
both Eskine and Hinde were not keen on participating in Operation Goodwood,
which they both regarded as being poorly planned and were determined to avoid
another catastrophe befalling the division similar to that of Villers Bocage.
This reluctance to get forward combined with the poor planning that caused
such massive traffic jams at the start allowed the Germans to repeatedly attack the
exposed left flank of the lIth Armoured Division from where the 7th Armoured
Division was supposed to be positioned. The narrow frontage of the British attack
allowed the arriving German reserves to be quickly marshalled to parry the lone
spearhead of the IIth Armoured Division.
The morning advance of the lIth Armoured Division was halted primarily by
the improvised assault guns and anti-tank guns of the 2ist Panzer Division that
survived the terrific aerial bombardment. The much-vaunted Tiger tanks played
lite or no part in stopping the attack and the two sorties made by the so3rd Heavy
Battalion, although suffering from the aerial bombardment, can only be described
as half-hearted. At one point a company of King Tigers,
the largest and most
powerful tanks then in existence, threatened to cut the British axis of advance but
they were deterred by a few determined Shermans of the Coldstream Guards.
Montgomery had said in January 1944 that he would not use an armoured corps
again, yet at Goodwood employed three armoured divisions at the same time in
VIII Corps.
A Victory or a Defeat?
In order to determine whether Operation Goodwood resuited in a victory oe
a defeat for the Allies, its stated objectives must be compared with actual outcomes.
It is clear from the early brietings that Montgomery was planning a breakthrough
and communicated so to SHAEF and the CIGS Brooke. However, this was subse-
quently revised and downplayed by Montgomery and lesser territorial objectives of
enlarging the bridgehead over the River Orne were set. However, most regimental
commanders believed that they were participating in a battle for a breakthrough;
Dempsey, as confirmed by the movement of his HQ before the battle to that of
VIll Corps plus his post-war interview with Liddell Hart, certainly believed this.
Thus, if a battle for territory only took place, the Allies were successful in achieving
an enlarged bridgehead with the added bonus of the
destruction of eighty-three
irreplaceable German tanks. Despite losing 217 Shermans, which could be replaced
from the reserves, then Operation Goodwood was successful.
If, on the other hand, the objective of the battle was a breakthrough to Falaise
then as the German lines held and inflicted 275 tank casualties on the Allies, the
outcome was unsuccessful and can be regarded as a German victory. However, the
