138
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Squadron Leader's tank was hit some thirty yards on our left, and he and his
crew bailed out. This left our own commander, Captain Abel, in charge of things
and in control of the remaining tanks. He gave the order to leave the orchards and
to get into the open country to our left. I drove on to open ground in a wide arc,
and began to think luck was with us. Suddenly the tank received a heavy blow as
if a huge hammer was using it as an anvil. We stopped almost dead and the driving
compartment filled with big sparks and flakes of burning paint and metal, some of
which showered over us. When I flicked the catch which allowed the hatch cover to
rise, nothing happened. I had always been careful to keep the catch well-oiled, to
ensure that the hatch would open. Now, it was obvious the hatch was damaged. This
meant that I would have to leave by the hatch of my co-driver - but I saw that he was
still in his seat. So I scrambled over the large gear box casing between our seats, and
told him to get moving. One member of the crew - our gunner - was already on the
ground on our side; the commander and the radio operator were crouched against the
Sherman on the other side.
At this time, all hell let loose from the enemy positions, with machine-gun and
mortar fire. They were about two hundred yards away. One mortar bomb landed
close to the two chaps on the other side of the tank. We were completely exposed,
with no cover, and were being sprayed with earth as bullets from a Spandau raked
the ground all around us. We were huddled together; I felt Jack, the co-driver, jerk
violently as he was hit in the legs by several bullets. We could not stay where we were
and decided to shelter under the tank by crawling in from the rear. We managed to
drag Jack with us. I got a great shock when I looked through the gap in the bogey
wheels and saw that Captain Abel was dead and Bob (the loader/wireless operator)
to join us underneath the Sherman. All the while, bullets were peppers the side oi
the tank: I pressed myself into the cool grass and tried to think. Suddenly there was
an almighty crash, as another shell from the enemy 88mm found its mark. It actually
lifted the tank off the ground. As we lay there, we could hear the ominous hissing and
whacking noises as the tank began to 'brew-up'. We realised that we had a choice:
the fuel from our tank, or the fire from the enemy. A sniper began to aim his shots
between the bogey wheels systematically going along the length of the tank. I told
the lads to move back, and as I moved, a bullet hit the ground where my head had
been a moment before. We came out from under the tank, and again, all hell let loose,
so we crawled to the side of the tank which seemed to offer most cover. Stray bullets
were still ricocheting off the side of the tank though there was nowhere to go. Bob
was bleeding badly from his neck and arm and Jack was in great pain from his leg.
The rest of the Squadron had now withdrawn under cover of a smoke screen, but
the smoke between them and the Germans left us on the enemy side. I noticed that,
on our left, was a line of trees and shrubby undergrowth. To reach this cover meant
crossing open ground. We discussed it and after realising that there was little chance
of survival where we were, decided to make a break for it.34
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
139
Jacke Weir was taken prisoner along with the other wounded crew members who
vete apparently shot in cold blood. In another savage episode, a Dragoons troop
reader, ieutenant Moore, who had also been captured, was killed when he was
te to the branch of a tree and left out in the open when British artillery fired at
the German positions.
Seven B Squadron tanks had been lost in a matter of minutes. On the northern
sue of the sunken lane, out of sight of the anti-tank gun and the Panther tank,
Squadron and the infantry reached the outskirts of Cristot but were beaten back
oy neary fire from the village. The turret of one C Squadron tank was hit several
times by an anti-tank gun in Cristot and the crew abandoned the tank? The attack
bad now run out of momentum, and as the Germans had obviously reinforced the
tra since the morning reconnaissance, the attack was called off. A smoke screen
was put down and two tanks from C Squadron covered the withdrawal, picking
i what wounded infantry they could. The Green Howards lost twenty-eight
ne killed and the Dragoons thirteen troopers. The folly of separating tanks and
manty was amply demonstrated in this attack against a well-concealed enemy:
the Dragoons lost eight tanks and the infantry suffered heavy casualties when their
armoured support was knocked out.
Montgomery's Operation Perch to encircle Caen had been a complete failure.
The operation demonstrated that hastily or poorly planned attacks against deter~
mined resistance in the bocage countryside were doomed to fall. I he imperious
advance of the ith Armoured Division through Villers Bocage without adequate
connaissance had led to disaster for the western pincer, the Canadians had sul-
ered heavy casualties in a rushed and unrecateup aye ottack on Le Mesnil ratry just
support the attack of the goth Division, which was attempung to pin the fanzer
Lehr Division whilst the 7th Armoured Division advanced behind it. Ine diack
by the sist (Highland) torming the eastern pincer had been supp a previe
with heavy casualties. All three of the Montgomery's veteran divisions had tailed
to take their Operation Perch objectives. In a letter sent on 14 June, Montgomery
had already given his version of events to the CIGS Alan Brooke:
When and Panzer suddenly anneared in the Villers bocage-Caumont died, so
the hole through which I had broken' and I had to think again' and "be careful not
to get off balance ... So long as Rommel uses his strategic reserves to plug holes that
is good' but I had not got sufficient strength to be offensive on both flanks of Second
Army? He (Montgomery) had therefore decided to be defensive in the Caen sector
on the front of 1 Corps but aggressively so' and to use all the offensive power of XXX
corps on the right of the enemy. I shall hold strongly and fight offensively in the
general area Caumont-Villers Bocage, i.e., at the junction of the two Armies?6
for Montgomery to have claimed a "breakthrough' when the frontline had not
Yet even formed was bizarre, and then to blame the failure of Operation Perch
on the arrival of a few advanced elements of the 2nd Panzer Division was simply
