424
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
By the end of August, the 3rd Armored Division had overcome its baptism of
fire and became a formation that befitted its nickname of 'Spearhead'. It had suc-
cessfully fought through the hedgerows by adopting combined arms tactics learnt
the hard way. Free of the hedgerows after Operation Cobra, both the 2nd and
3rd Armored Divisions rapidly advanced great distances, ably assisted by the cab
rank of fighter-bombers overhead.
German Strategy
The Germans in Normandy knew how their panzer forces should be used but were
unable to employ them. This was for two reasons: firstly, the lack of mobility of their
infantry divisions and secondly Montgomery's most successful strategy of keeping
the Germans off-balance by repeated blows in different places. This 'keep hitting
strategy allowed the Allies to nearly always retain the initiative in Normandy and
forced the Germans to continually commit any available reserves. The panzer divi-
sions were the only forces capable of rapid movement to meet such blows and this
inevitably resulted in them becoming caught up in the fighting, unable to disengage
to move back into reserve or assemble for their own attack. In the entire campaign,
the Germans did not mount a single offensive that ever threatened the beaches
and after June, they were continually on the defensive until Mortain. However,
the panzer division's reputation was such that the threat of an attack by them was
enough for Montgomery to halt any British offensive in progress.
The German strategy in the first half of the campaign was considerably infu-
enced by Operation Fortitude, which succeeded beyond the wildest dreams of the
British. Nine German infantry divisions remained along the coast at Calais during
the entire campaign, although these were largely static coastal defence divisions.
The Ist SS Panzer Division remained in Belgium in anticipation of a landing near
Calais until mid-July by which time the Allied build-up had all but assured success
in Normandy.
The German forces in Normandy had a complicated command structure that
was almost designed to fail. The three panzer divisions ordered to throw the Allies
back into the sea received orders from five different formations in the first few
days after D-Day, to which a sixth was added with the creation of Panzer Gruppe
West. The first attempts at counterattacks by the panzer divisions commanded by
Dietrich and the Ist SS Panzer Korps were poorly coordinated and hastily con-
ducted. With the destruction of the Panzer Gruppe West HQ on iI June, five days
had passed since D-Day during which time not a single coordinated mass panzer
counterattack was made, allowing the Allies to quickly build up their forces and
expand the beachhead.
The initiative then remained firmly with Montgomery. Although the Germans
prevented the capture of Caen and Carpiquet airfield, the strategy of constant
blows prevented the Germans from regrouping their forces and moving the panzer
Summary
425
divisions back out of the frontline to form a mobile reserve for a counterattack. The
Germans were hampered by a lack of aerial support from the Luftwaffe, particularly
reconnaissance information of Allied units and their concentrations. The subjuga-
tion and absence of the Luftwaffe allowed Allied fighter bombers, reconnaissance
fights and low-flying artillery spotter planes to roam at will over the Normandy
countryside during the day, reporting on the movements of all German units and
attacking them whenever they could be found in any concentration.
The Seventh Army then became preoccupied with the American attempt to
capture Cherbourg and cut the Cotentin peninsula while the British Second Army
continued to exert pressure all along the front from Caen to Tilly, ensuring that
the three panzer divisions were continuously involved in fighting, which served
to both keep them in the line and continue their attrition. Other panzer divisions
as reinforcements were on their way to Normandy, including the and, 2nd SS
and the two divisions of the znd SS Panzer Korps from Russia. According to von
Schweppenburg after the war, there had been an opportunity for an attack on
I3 June by the panzer divisions and the wheeled elements of the newly arrived
and Panzer Division towards Bayeux but this was not ordered by Seventh Army:0
Only the reconnaissance and wheeled elements of the division had arrived by this
time and immediately became embroiled in the fighting around Caumont and
Villers Bocage.
The gales and storms of 19-23 June perhaps represented the German's best oppor-
unity for a successful counterattack. The bad weather kept Allied aircraft grounded
and therefore naval and air support were not available. However, the three main
panzer divisions were still holding the frontline at that time. On 17 June, Hitler
met von Rundstedt and Rommel to discuss future operations. Rommel drew up
several scenarios for a counterattack but all of these depended on the arrival of
the 2nd SS Panzer Korps and a massed panzer attack would not be possible until
the end of the month. This was forestalled by Montgomery's Operation Epsom,
which completely disrupted the German plans and saw the newly arrived SS panzer
divisions roughly handled.
Paradoxically, the only massed panzer counterattack of the Normandy cam-
paign was Operation Luttich at Mortain and then only at the express orders of
Hitler himself, which is an indictment of the poor performance of the German
commanders in Normandy. Despite Operation Luttich being conceived in fantasy
by Hitler, the offensive was duly carried out by the army commanders. The fact
that none of them would voice their objections illustrates how moribund Army
Group B and von Kluge had become, although the numerous arrests and deaths of
many senior officers after the attempted assassination of Hitler on 20 July no doubt
helped bind them to his will.
Despite the importance of the panzer divisions to any future attack plans, the
German commands regularly detached parts of the panzer divisions so that they
rarely fought as a cohesive unit. Ad-hoc kampfgruppen were used to restore the
frontline and support other units but this process left the parent unit considerably
