214
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
of Le Prieure. At about 1100 hours a troop of four Shermans from the 2nd Grenadier
Guards appeared from Le Prieure, probing eastwards. In a short, sharp engagement
two Shermans were destroyed, forcing the remainder of the troop to retreat the
way it had come. When many of the armour-piercing rounds fired at the Shermans
missed their targets, the Tiger crews realised to their horror that their gunsights
had been knocked out of alignment by the blasts from the bombing. The Tigers
moved south towards Cagny to find a better defensive position when suddenly two
of them were knocked out by armour-piercing rounds fired from the direction of
Cagny, piercing the normally inpenetrable frontal armour of their tanks. This was
unprecedented and caused the nervous Germans to fear further casualties, so the
move was broken off as 'they could not pinpoint the source of fire and did not want
to suffer any further total losses? * With that, the remaining Tigers of von Rosens
3rd Company limped from the battlefield and took no further part in the action,
preferring to concentrate on salvaging what tanks they could from Manneville. By
1600 hours there was only one Tiger tank operational.
Whilst von Rosen's 3rd Company was sorting itself out, the ist Company under
Oberleutenant Oemler, equipped with King Tigers, was also doing the same and
by too hours eight tanks were ready for action. Proceeding north from the vicin-
ity of Manneville, the Tigers then turned westwards and began to approach the
British columns of tanks, wheeled vehicquoq carriers pours soutwards along
the corridor from the bridgehead over the River Orne. The Tigers approached the
neck of the corridor at its narrowest point, which was barely i mile across from
Lirose to Démouville. As it traversed a wheat field, Oemler's tank fell into a large
quoq rater and was immobilised while two other King ligers were engaged mon
their flank by a Sherman Ve of the ist Coldstream Guards, which knocked them
out. Displaying similar over-caution to von Rosen, Oemler blew up his own tank
and the remaining five tanks called off their weak attack. For the rest of the day, the
Ist Company along with the 2nd Company defended the area between Emieville
and Frénouville before the entire sO3rd Battalion was withdrawn when darkness
came." Another King Tiger would be lost in unusual circumstances in a confron-
tation with the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards. As a counterattacking te, te ligen
of the sord Battalion were very ineffective in this battle and certainly did not live
up to the reputation of their comrades on the Eastern front who reguary carried
out fire brigade actions to restore the frontlines. The salvaged Tigers, King Tigers
and Panzer IVHs formed ad hoc defensive positions for the rest of afternoon in
support of the remnants of ist Battalion 125th Panzergrenadier Regiment in a line
from Cagny to Emieville.
The Cagny Anti-tank Guns
One of the most celebrated stories of the Normandy campaign is that of the German
commander of the 12sth Panzergrenadier Regiment of the 2ist Panzer Division,
215
Operation Goodwood
Mir Hans von Luck, who arrived back from leave in Paris just after the British
mily arage had ceased. Von Luck commanded a kampfgruppe made up of his
un azergrenadier Regiment and other forces, including the 4th Company of
Nak VH, which lay directly in the proposed British line of advance. According
i on. uck, in an effort to find out what was happening he was driven, still in
is resunform, in a Mark IV tank to Cagny where he saw the tanks of the
id amoured Division streaming past the village to the west. On his way back to
tie command post von Luck noticed a battery of four Luftwaffe 88mm flak guns,
ter red piting skywards, in the centre of Cagny. According to von Luck,
te asked the Luftwaffe captain if he knew that there were British tanks already
opsing Cagny and ordered him to move his guns to an orchard north of the
nilge to engage them. According to von Luck, the reply from the captain and
then his response was as follows:
major, my concern is fighting enemy planes, tighting tanks is yourjob. I'm Lultwafte."
He was about to turn away. At that I went up to him, drew my pistol (which we had
lo cary for trips to Paris, levelled it at him and said, "Either you're a dead man or you
can earn yourself a medal?"42
The captain realised that von Luck was serious and decided to comply with the
order, quickly moving his guns into the orchard overlooking the lines of advancing
British tanks. Von Luck arrived at his command post just as the ballage ended, so
the time was about oges hours the leading elements of the 3ro But and 2nd
hite and Par reached the Caen-Vimont railway at 0950 hours and were across
"Is minutes later and this is when disaster struck e squadron or the zha rue and
Porfar as they were milling about waiting to cross the railway.
Some doubt has been expressed post-war as to the existence of the battery of
than-lite character and a tendency to enjoy telling the story or nis part in the
battle on post war lecture tours. Other historians have not been able to find any
photographic evidence of flak gun emplacements and so claim they did not exist 43
An 88mmm Flak 3o gun deployed in anti aircraft postion takes a six man crew
3.5 minutes to convert it to the traveling poston on two too dad oy to min-
Position. Therefore the 88mm flak battery would need only about is minutes to
relocate a short distance. It is most likely that it was these somms that caused so
many losses to the znd Fife and Forfar about 0930 hours.
The only other possible
unit is Becker's 4th Batterie in Le Mesnil Frémentel. However, if this company did
not move before 0930 hours, it would have been cut off when the leading tanks of
29ch Brigade crossed the railway. The 4th Batterie was able to relocate successfully
to just south of Four where it was in action for the rest of the day and so must have
moved well before 0930 hours.
