210
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The regiment advanced up the gentle slope through wheat fields towards Hubert
Folie and got to within sooyds of it when they were caught in a crossfire of armour-
piercing shells. The Germans had either been too surprised by the appearance of
the scouting Bren carrier to open fire or had been deliberately laying low. Fire
came from Hubert Folie and Bras, as well as from the direction of Bourguébus
back across the railway line. Tanks began brewing up and blackened figures threw
themselves out of hurriedly opened hatches of tanks that had been hit and from
which flames and smoke began to rise. Captain Lemon was now less confident:
We did not hit the crust of the enemy, the zist and 12th SS Panzer Divisions - it was
just as the leading tanks were level with Hubert-Folie when the fun began. I saw
Sherman after Sherman go up in flames and it got to such a pitch that I thought that
in another few minutes there would be nothing left of the Regiment!
The 3rd RTR had run into the anti-tank gun screen of the 88mm flak guns of
III Flak Korps and the anti-tank guns of the 192nd Panzergrenadier Regiment de-
fending Hubert Folie. A battery of 88mm anti-tank guns from 21st Panzer Division
may also have been present. The three squadrons lost nearly half their tanks in
minutes in the crossfire:
Bras is at the top of the slope beside a small wood. We started copping it there and
I fired back, hitting a couple of SP guns and a tank before the Sherman on my left
brewed up. The crew bailed out and came over to my tank carrying the gunner,
a Scots lad called Hume who used to play for the battalion football team. I thought
*My God, Hummer, you will never keep goal again? Both legs were hanging on.
by sinews. They got him on the back of the tank and I handed them morphine as
I had other things to do. Hummer must have been gripping something when the
shot entered the tank as one hand was taken off and the other burned black. I decided
to get him back and called up the MO. When I had reversed to the bottom of the
hill, Mac came up in a half track and took Hummer away but I heard that he died in
hospital. By the time I got back up the hill we were getting it really badly and my tank
was hit two or three times but not penetrated.3'
The advance faltered in the face of the fierce German fire and Shermans began to
move backwards as fast as they could go, zigzagging from side to side. The troop
commanders urged their tanks to find cover of which there was precious little
apart from small hedges. By 113o hours, the 3rd RTR reported that it was in a very
exposed position around Bras and Soliers. The regiment remained in this position
for nearly 4 hours, waiting for support from other regiments and artillery to arrive.
The znd Fife and Forfar, once it had disentangled itself from Cagny, crossed the
Caen-Vimont railway line and made for the villages of Soliers and Four but came
under fire from Frénouville and Le Poirier and found it difficult to disengage.
By is hours, the regiment had apparently reached the limit of its advance as
Operation Goodwood
211
tanks were reported to be 40oyds just east of Bourguébus. But this was an error.
In reaity, the tanks got no further south than south-east of Soliers. The flanking
fire from the direction of Frénouville became heavier and more accurate, pinning
down the left squadron.
The 29th Brigade HQ told the 2nd Fife and Forfar not
to worry about Frénouville as the Guards Division were going to deal with it.?2
Four unidentified tanks were spotted moving southwards from Frénouville at II52
hours by the 2nd Fife and Forfar, which were possibly Becker's sth Batterie moving
back from Le Prieure to its next position German infantry and anti-tank guns
were seen in the villages of Four and Soliers while tanks were observed arriving in
Bouguébus from noon onwards. B Squadron of the 2nd Fife and Forfar reached
the outskirts of Soliers and Four, and came under heavy fire from the defenders.
The accompanying motorised infantry occupied Four, but this was to be their
only success: the Fife and Forfar found it impossible to capture any other villages
or make any further progress in the face of the arriving German reserves. The
regument had moved into the German killing zone created between Soliers, La
Hogue and Bourguébus, all of which looked down on the advancing tanks from
higher ground. John Thorpe, 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry:
I see palls of smoke and tanks brewing up With flames belching forth from their
tures I see men climbing out on fire like torches, rolling on the ground to try and
douse the flames but we are in ripe corn and the straw takes fire.?*
The 2nd Fife and Forfar tanks began to be picked off one by one, and the regiment
sust more than twenty tanks in this area; at 1245 hours the regiment reported only
twenty tanks left.
The German reserves, in the form of the ist SS Panzer Division, did not reach
the field and attack until about noon so any tank casualties before this were due
o the anti-tank guns and tanks of the zist lanter Division and dad guns or te
III Flak Korps.
Guards Morning
the Guards Armoured Division planned to attack wa-up, war the zhe babados
Grenadier Guards on the right to attack Cagny and the Ist battalion Coldstream
Guards on the left to attack Vimont, Intending to pass to tue east of baguy. ene
objective of the division was to pass east of Cagny and press on to Vimont, which
had been described as the tailor's shop of the zist Panzers? The and Battalion
Irish Guards was in reserve. The tith Armoured Division crossed the River Orne
more quickly than anticipated and at 0800 hours a frantic
message was sent to
Sth Brigade HQ by dispatch rider to get the division moving, but the river was
not crossed until 0930 hours. Both the Guards and 7th Armoured divisions were
moving simultaneously after a VIII Corps staff officer, dismayed that the Guards
