364
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
• GGFG - thirty-seven Shermans and nine Vcs
• CGG - forty-one Shermans and seven Vcs
• BCR - forty-five Shermans and six Vcs
On 13 August, Crerar and Simonds addressed the commanding officers of the tank
regiments in the division and stressed the need for 'pushing the armour to the limits
of its endurance
and that 'any thought of the armour requiring infantry protection
for harbouring at night or not being able to move at night was to be dismissed
immediately?!? Simonds was a little more forthright in his own address and accused
them all of being rotten and 'yellow and henceforth you will command from your
tanks?" This instruction illustrated how little Simonds knew of the tactical handling
ot armour as it was impossible to command a tank in battle while co-ordinating
the actions of three squadrons and supporting arms. General Crerar did not want
a repeat of the slow, hesitant advances of Operation Totalize, while Simonds was
angry that his plan had not succeeded and clearly held the armoured regimens
responsible for the outcome of Totalize.
Meanwale, two American intantry divisionsso ad pushed nortawas as part
the soutnern pincer and were just south of Argentan on 13 August but nad halted so
as not to cross the inter-army boundary between the US and British forces, which
was Argentan itselt. Bradley had reached Argentan as ordered by Montgomery but
was unwilling to advance further north to close the gap.
Bradley accepted responsibility for this after the war and stated that his reasons
for ordering the halt were two-told: firstly, he did not want two Allied armies to
advance head on into each other, and secondly, he did not want the necks of the
Americans occupying the gap being broken by the German forces 'sluicing back?*
The first reason is specious, as with radios, liaison officers and agreed recognition
procedures there would have been little confusion, and the second not much more
logical, as there was no general German withdrawal underway at this time, nor did
it begin in earnest until 16 August.
shoes explanation for the halt, although contradictory, is that meetect
Imerican intelligence reports may have convinced Bradley that the bulk of the
verman torces had already fled the encirclement. An 18-mile gap still remaine
between the American and Canadian forces. General Patton, with his customary
dipiomacy, asked bradiey for permission to keep advancing and push the british
back into the sea for another Dunkirk. When Bradley politely refused, Patton kept
is army moving by directing two XV Corps' divisions eastwards towards the
River Seine as a part of a longer envelopment.
On the morning of 14 August, the armoured regiments of the two Canadian
armoured brigades began to form up in the area from Cauvicourt to St Sylvain into
Simonds desired formations. These movements were in full view of the German
defenders and were conducted as if they were on a parade ground. Each armoured
brigade, with two regiments up, occupied a box about Sooyds long by tzoyds wide.
Troops of Flail tanks and AVR Es carrying fascines were attached to each regiment.
Operation Tractable
365
Behind the armoured phalanxes came the infantry carriers, anti-tank guns, field
artillery, recovery vehicles and medical half-tracks of the infantry division.
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division was to advance across the River Laison at
Rouvres and Mazières and move on to Versainville and the high ridge north-east
of Falaise at Point 159.
The and Canadian Armoured Brigade was to advance to the river at Montboint
and then the high ground at Point 170 west of Olendon and then the ridge south-west
of Olendon at Point 175 (Orme des Gresles) and up to Point 184. The Sherbrooke
Fusiliers Regiment continued to be attached to the znd Canadian Division, which
was attacking directly down the Caen-Falaise road towards Soulangy.
It was another sunny day and the wheat fields of the terrain at the start lines had
been untouched by the war so far. The tanks gleamed and sparkled in the summer
sun and the armoured regiments were each drawn up in four rows of six tanks like
a Napoleonic cavalry unit. At I142 hours, the command was given for the advance
as forty-five medium Mitchell and twenty-eight Boston bombers began to bomb
targets on the defensive line to the north of the River Laison and in the valley itself
around Montboint, Assy and Mazières. The armoured phalanxes started forward
in unison, steadily picking up speed to 12 miles an hour. A barrage of smoke shells
began to tall in front of the advancing tanks to make a smoke Screen behind which
they advanced, the barrage lifting sooyds every minute:
ADVANCE NOW. Then all hell broke loose. The fog of war descended and the
confused din of the battle broke with a rumbling roar. The whole earth trembled with
the rattle of a thousand speeding vehicles and the shock of gun recoil and discharge.
The acrid air throbbed with the hum of engines and the explosion of all manner
of screaming missiles. An incomprehensible range of reverberating vibrations struck
upon the senses until only the sights of the gun and the red disc of the sun could be
seen through the quivering misty veil. For the first two minutes the original forma-
tion was maintained, but before the first half mile, a concertina movement developed
on account of minor bottlenecks caused by bomb craters, a sunken road, and other
irregularities of the terrain. Then all were running blindly forward with pedals to the
floor, in mixed groups of Grenadier, Foot Guard and Churchills."
The formation began to break up only a mile from the start line as visibility
was lost and tanks began to be knocked out by German mines, 2nd Company
Jagdpanzers and anti-tank guns firing at very close range. The leading tanks used
their main guns and machine guns to destroy those infantry outposts they could
see to shoot at. The smoke screen was not uniform and in some places quickly
dispersed, exposing the tanks to the waiting anti-tank guns north of the river
as they passed through the German lines. Other tank drivers could see nothing
apart from the pale outline of the sun through the clouds of dust and smoke, and
they steered towards this, causing many of the formations to veer eastwards. The
tanks encountered batteries of anti-tank guns and 105mm artillery, which were all
