2.
88
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
improvised explosive devices of today. The explosive charge is shaped around the
outside of a hollow metal container and when the projectile hits the target the
charge detonates and a stream of hot gases are directed by the metal onto a small
area of the surface of the armour, which is melted by the heat. The hot gases
then penetrate the armour, sending a molten stream of metal and gases into the
interior of the tank with devastating consequences. The British army had little
or no experience of the Panzerfaust until May 1944 in Italy, and the War Office
promptly issued a report on the 1o June recommending that protective infantry
had to accompany the tanks into battle, which was yet another change in tank
and infantry doctrine." The report came a little late for the units already fighting
in Normandy and the Panzerfaust would prove to be a formidable weapon in the
hedgerows of the bocage.
For anti-tank defence the British soldier had the PIAT, which was a weapon
firing a hollow charge rocket up to Ilsyds that could penetrate the armour of most
German tanks. The trigger mechanism used a spring, which was difficult to cock
while prone. The PIAT had no backblast and tended to be used at close range but
it was heavy and cumbersome, and not very accurate. The fuses were often faulty
and the charge would not go off even if it did hit the target. The PIATs were issued
one per platoon so they were not as widespread as the Panzerfaust in the ranks of
the infantry in Normandy.
The relative failure of the War Office and the British tank industry to produce
a tank that could compete on equal terms or best the German tanks became a po-
litical issue; questions were repeatedly asked in the House of Parliament by a small
group of politicians, much to the displeasure of Churchill, who had established
a national coalition government to unite the country politically whilst conducting
the war. However, by late 1943 the questions had neither ceased nor been properly
answered and eventually a Select Committee on National Expenditure, chaired
by John Wardlaw Milne, was set up to report on British tank production. On
II March 1944, this committee delivered a critical memorandum and Churchill
asked the War Office and the Ministry of Supply to draft a short response. MPs like
Richard Stokes continued to raise questions in parliament, not just about tanks but
also other items of equipment:
16th March 1944:
Mr. Stokes asked the Prime Minister whether, in view of the unsatisfactory reports
which he has received both as to the inadequacy of British tanks in the field and the
waste in production in this country, he will tell the House what action he proposes to
take in default of holding an inquiry.
The Prime Minister: I repudiate the allegations of the hon. Member. The next
time that the British Armies take the field, in country suitable for the use of armour,
they will be found to be equipped in a manner at least equal to the forces of any other
country in the world. 20
Fighting the Tank
89
3oth March 1944
Mr. McGovern: Will the Prime Minister be prepared to take charge of a Churchill
tank and allow the hon. Member for Ipswich (Mr. Stokes) to take charge of a Tiger
tank?
The Prime Minister: I think it might be one way of settling the difference.
In order to try and take some of the heat out of the issue, a secret debate was held
in the House of Commons on 24 March 1944. However, the report by the Select
Committee was not released by Churchill to MPs prior to the debate as it was
allegedly a secret report prepared for Cabinet and not the House. Questions on
the performance of British tanks were often answered evasively on the basis of
not wanting to give information to the enemy. Stokes continued to ask questions
about obsolete tanks and even requested that captured German tanks be brought
to Westminster for MPs to see for themselves. By June, a formal reply to the Select
Committee report had still not been made and the two 'short' draft responses were
so lengthy that summary versions were also in circulation.
To reduce the performance gap between German and Allied tanks, the British
developed the 17-pounder anti-tank gun (both in the Firefly and as a mobile anti-
tank gun) and improved APDS shot for the 6-pounder guns. The Americans, for
their part, although there was a heavier tank in development, had put their faith in
a Sherman M4 up-gunned with a 76mm gun.
A second step to close the gap was for some Churchill tank units to remove their
75mm guns and retro-fit them with 6-pounder guns to use the new APDS ammu-
nition developed in 1943. Montgomery wanted it to be official policy for one tank
in a troop of four to have a 6-pounder until a way was found for the 17-pounder
to be fitted to the Churchill tank." Consequently, three of the independent tank
brigades arrived in Normandy with a mix of 75mm and 6-pounder Churchills.
The basic problem was that the Allies were going to Normandy with a main
battle tank that was essentially unchanged since its introduction in 1942 while the
Germans had introduced the Tiger and the Panther and continued to improve the
venerable Mark IV. Montgomery was well aware of the situation, having written
in August 1943:
We are badly behind the Germans in this respect and I am anxious as to whether we
are thinking far enough ahead. History relates that in the struggle between the gun
and armour, the gun always comes out on top.
Lo overcome this serious defect it is necessary for our tanks to make the fullest
use of ground in order to being effective fire to bear on the enemy tanks. 1 his 1s
a definite handicap when we are the attacker. In pushing forward in a search for good
me positions, tanks often have to expose themselves and casualties happen rapidly.
