118
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
more Panthers were there but did not come into view and retired with the loss of the
one tank commander, picked off by the company commander's batman who could
not resist the temptation, even though the whole company had been told to lie low in
their weapons slits. So there you have an action where nine Shermans took on eleven
Panthers, knocked out seven and routed four without loss from a range as stated above
(Lt Henry of the Ist Hussars had a 17 pr). The crew commanders I can remember were
Sgt Graham and Sgt Chadioisky. My gunner was Tpr Bennett and loader Tpr Argue;
the boys of the other tanks claimed Bennett and Argue got off three rounds before
any of the others fired. Bennett's first shot from his tank knocked out a Panther at 850
yards, the second shot missed the tank aimed at and hit another, it exploded and blew
off the turret. 44
Trooper A. Chapman, the gunner in Lieutenant Henry's Firefly, established
a bridgehead record of sorts - when the six Panther tanks appeared, he held his
tire until all were visible and then fired five times, knocking out five Panthers with
five rounds. A sixth Panther became the victim of a tank commanded by sergea
Boyle. " Chapman's record was made possible by distracting HE fire, provided by
other tanks at the crucial moment, and the Germans did not detect the presence
of the C Squadron tanks until too late, not even managing to traverse then wi
to return the fire.
While there is a discrepancy in the accounts, it is possible that some Panther
tanks were hit more than once. In the 3rd Company, fifteen men were killed
and nearly all the other crew members were wounded or burnt. The few surv-
vors, including the wounded, bailed out of their destroyed lamas and ted back
towards the underpass as an artillery barrage began to pound the area. I he attack
by the panzergrenadiers preparing to assault Norrey with the Panthers had been
stopped cold, as had the other attacks over the previous 24 hours by the I2th Ss
Panzer Division.
The first Panzer Lehr Panthers did not arrive until 10 june. Kurt Meyer me
with von Schweppenburg after the faild i attacks on Norrey and Bretteville ano
explained the impossibility of capturingk he fortified villages from the Canadians
who were strongly supported from the air and by artillery. According to Meyel,
von schweppenburg looked at him quickly and said, My dear ferr eyel, the va
can now only be won by the politicians.16
Having assumed control of the three manzer divisions, Panze uppe wer
planned for a major counterattack by the Ist SS Panzer Korps during the night of
10/11 June so as to negate the effects of Allied observed artillery and naval guntire.
However, the location of von Schweppenburg's staff headquarters in a chateau at
La Caine was revealed to the British in an Ultra decrypt and the chateau was
attacked by Typhoons and Mitchell bombers, killing most of the Panzer Gruppe
West staff and rendering it incapable of functioning.+ The proposed attack had
to be cancelled and the Seventh Army made a transition to defence all along"
Normandy front in anticipation of the arrival of more reinforcements in the form
119
Bridgehead Battles
of the 2nd SS Panzer Korps from Russia. The control of the panzer divisions was
returned to the Ist SS Panzer Korps.
After only a week of fighting, the strengths of the three panzer divisions had been
severely reduced and no massed counterattack had been made against the Allied
beachheads. The activities of Allied aircraft had not only delayed their arrival at the
frontline but also caused shortages of fuel and ammunition by preying on the vehicles
of the rear echelons. The Germans were forced to commit the panzer divisions in
a piecemeal fashion as soon as they arrived to either meet a Canadian or British advance
or to mount a limited counterattack towards the landing beaches. Both the 12th SS
and the Panzer Lehr divisions were flung into battle hastily and the attacks were then
called off, wasting scarce resources such as men, tanks, fuel and ammunition. The
result was that the divisions were not committed fully assembled and, despite tempo-
rarily halting the Canadian advances, any counterattack was insufficient in strength
to break through to the coast. Once committed to the fighting, the panzer divisions,
especially the 2ist Panzer Division, found it very difficult to disengage as they were
blocking British breakthrough attempts and preventing the whole frontline from col-
lapsing. German infantry divisions did not have the mobility for rapid deployment and
their movement was further hampered by Allied aircraft. The German forces were
severely handicapped by the absence of the Luftwaffe due to the Allied air supremacy.
The Lufwaffe could not during the day provide cover for the troops on the ground,
interfere with the Allied build-up on the beaches, chase observation aircraft away or
even provide reconnaissance information on the troops being landed in Normandy:
Hanging over the German High Command was the threat of further landings in
the Pas de Calais, which prevented the transfer from that area of any infantry divi-
sions and initially the Ist SS Panzer Division. Had the Ist SS Panzer Division been
moved to Normandy early on then it could have heavily influenced the outcome
of the fighting there.
For the 1ath SS Panzer Division, it was a week of mixed fortune. Having beaten
of the attack at Buron, the division suffered from being committed piecemeal
and straight off the march without adequate reconnaissance. Other assaults, such
as the attacks on Bretteville at night and Norrey by unsupported tanks, leave the
impression of rather hasty and ineffective improvisation.
The attacks were pressed
with courage and determination but with no particular skill,48 The same can be
said for the operations of the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, such as at Buron
and Le Mesnil Patry where hastily mounted attacks and insufficient reconnaissance
resulted in heavy losses. It was the first time in action for both units, however,
and both were determined to be successful. After the battle at Le Mesnil Patry on
- June (see tollowing chapter), General Simonds of the 2nd Canadian Corps told
the Hussars that their action had thwarted a counterattack by a panzer division:
ade lie battle yesterday seemed futile, it actually put a panzer division on skids,
nereby saving /s from being cut-off and in the broader picture it nelped british
7th Armoured Division to advance on our right flank. 49
