1
D-Day Tanks
One of the bitter lessons that the British had learnt from the Dieppe raid in 1942
was that armoured support was essential for supporting the assaulting infantry. At
Dieppe, half of the Churchill tanks that landed on the beach either lost tracks in
the shingle or had difficulty crossing the sea wall to get off the beach and support
the troops inland. Of the twenty-nine Churchills landed, only fifteen tanks were
able to get onto the promenade before road blocks eventually halted their progress
inland and forced them to return to the beach. A total of eighteen tanks were
immobilised by gunfire that knocked their tracks off, and four more tanks got
stuck in the chert shingle on the beach.' The Germans could not believe the British
would abandon their latest tanks on the beach to be examined at their leisure and
presumed the Churchills were obsolete tanks that the British could afford to lose.
It was not an auspicious combat debut for the Churchill tanks, but their sacrifice
helped identify many of the challenges of an opposed landing. The Operation
Overlord planners moved to address some of these problems with the formation
of the 79th Armoured Division a year before D-Day under Major-General Percy
Hobart to develop and test the specialist armoured vehicles needed to overcome
the obstacles expected to be encountered in future landings in France. The
79th Armoured Division also provided training for men to operate this equipment;
the US Army had no equivalent.
A shortage of landing craft was influencing Allied planning (i.e. the delayea
timing of Operation Overlord for the invasion of north-west France and Operation
Anvil/Dragoon for the south of France landings) as there were not enough craft to
make simultaneous landings. Given the shortage, the British were concerned that
landing craft would be vulnerable on the run into the beach from shore defences.
One devastating hit on a landing craft from a gun could eliminate four or five tanks
in one stroke. This was despite the fact that at Dieppe no tank-carrying landing
craft were lost on the actual run-in to the beach, although many were damaged
and several sank after off-loading their tanks. The Royal Navy did, however, lose
more than thirty landing craft of all types in the operation. One solution was to
convert a number of landing craft to fire rockets for close support after the naval
D-Day Tanks
11
bombardment had ceased, but this only compounded the shortage of such craft.
Another solution was to provide the tanks with flotation equipment so they could
swim in under their own power, thus presenting smaller and more dispersed tar-
gets. On touchdown on the beach, the tanks would then be immediately available
to support the infantry.
Work on a floating tank had already begun using a design originally conceived
in 1941 by an American, Nicholas Straussler, and successfully used on Valentine
and Tetrarch tanks. As these tanks were outdated and the British were standardis-
ing their armoured units around the Sherman M4 as their main cruiser tank, the
design had to be altered to suit the Sherman. The realisation of the floating tank
concept became one of Major-General Hobart's projects.
A rubberised canvas screen fitted around the top of the tank hull was erected and
held taut by a combination of metal struts and inflatable pillars filled with bottled
compressed air. The canvas screen was raised by thirty-six pillars when compressed
air was pumped into them via a pneumatic system, and thirteen metal struts fixed
between the tank and the screen helped to keep it erect. The screen itself was
attached to a boat-shaped metal framework welded to the tank's upper hull. This
system could be inflated in Is minutes and could be quickly deflated when the tank
reached a depth of sft or less. The tank floated according to Archimedes' principle:
with its additional canvas screen, it displaced more water than it weighed. The
struts were fitted with a hydraulic quick-release mechanism to collapse the screen
and allow the 75mm main gun to come into action when the tank arrived on the
beach. If the screen was not properly lowered, the bow machine gun could not
be used. Once the screen was deflated and ejected, the tank had the full use of its
turret and could operate as a normal tank.?
A modified Sherman tank was known as a DD tank, so named for its double, or
'duplex drive' systems that by means of a pair of propeller screws at the rear could
propel the tank in water at a speed of up to 4½ knots as well as power it on land.
The Americans inevitably nicknamed the DD tanks 'Donald Ducks'.
The Sherman II (M4A1), as used by Americans at Omaha and Utah sector
beaches, had a freeboard of 3ft in front and 2.sft at the stern when unloaded. The
slightly larger (by s-sin) Sherman V (M4A4), as predominantly used by the British,
had a freeboard of 4ft at the bow and 3ft at stern.
To launch from their landing craft, a tank drove on its tracks down the lowered
modified ramp into the water and then engaged the Duplex Drive to operate the
propellers. This meant a dangerous delay of a few seconds in which large waves
could potentially push the tank back into the ramp or the landing craft could run
down the tank if a wave caused it to suddenly surge forward. Once launched, the
tanks could not get back on the landing craft.
When the screen was erected, the
driver's vision hatch was blocked by it, so steering was by means of a periscope
and a gyroscope, following the commander's instructions. The driver steered the
tank by means of a rod linkage that swivelled the propellers at the rear of the tank.
The tank commander, as his view out of the turret was also blocked by the screen,
