60
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
its 88mm casemated gun at the corner of the sea wall and sighted to fire along
the beach.
Three tanks from C Squadron were drowned coming ashore on the beaches
when they fell into shell craters. 27 The advance of sth East Yorks was held up at
La Rivière by heavy fire from fortified houses and the 88mm gun; the infantry
were forced to shelter behind the sea wall, unable to advance. Two Churchill
AVRE tanks were destroyed by this bunker before a Flail tank of the Westminster
Dragoons engaged it.
Lieutenant B. Hoban, a troop leader of the Ist Troop Westminster Dragoons,
wrote in his post-war recollections:
... The familiar juddering thud as the LCT ran aground at La Rivière, the familiar
rattle of the chains as the ramp was lowered. From then on things seemed to happen
fast. We were soon down into the water, appreciating the fact that our waterproofing
seemed to have been efficient. Two AVR Es from our LCT charged ahead up the beach
until in quick succession they simply exploded. Everything stopped all of a sudden;
then got going again in response to the Canadian tones on the wireless of Major Tim
Thompstone, RE, our breaching squadron commander, saying 'Get up the bloody
beach, all of you'. Luckily Captain Roger Bell on my left, spotted where the fire was
coming from, an 88mm in a huge concrete pillbox, and managed to engage, firing
through the slot in the pillbox. After his fifth round the gun fell silent. 128
Once the troublesome casemated 88mm gun was silenced, a Churchill tank led
the C Squadron tanks into La Rivière to begin the work of assisting the infantry
to clear it.
Meanwhile, other C Squadron tanks were conducting mopping-up operations
and advancing inland with little German interference. There was little opposition
apart from snipers, who killed one tank commander and wounded two others.
A Squadron
The landing craft carrying A Squadron started beaching at H+6o minutes. Two
tanks from A Squadron were lost when they too fell into deep shell holes while
wading ashore, making seven lost on the beaches for the regiment altogether.!a9
Two of these were recovered next day, as the 8th Armoured Brigade war diary
reports that the Royal Dragoons had five tanks written off in the actual landings
on D-Day.130
The Royal Dragoons and the infantry now had a clear exit off the beach and the
troops surged inland as behind them waves of reinforcements began to land on the
A Squadron advanced towards the 69th Brigade's objective, St Leger. There
was only sporadic resistance from demoralised German conscripts, who promptly
surrendered when the tanks appeared. Crépon was quickly captured and the
tanks pushed on southwards to Creully. On the bridge over the river just north of
D-Day Tanks
61
Creully a German self-propelled gun opened fire, forcing the leading tank to find
cover under a hastily laid smoke screen. The armour-piercing shell tore off the
Sherman's spare bogey, 8ft of the wireless aerial and gouged out a piece of armour
from the glacis near the driver's head. As the squadron's tanks swung right to go
around this blocking force, a message was received from the infantry that the
enemy tank had retired so the tanks returned to the main road and quickly passed
on through Creully. Suddenly four tanks were destroyed in quick succession by
another self-propelled gun and the advance came to a halt. Lieutenant Hoban was
also accompanying the advance:
We saw three tanks of the 4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards hit and starting to burn
some 800 yards ahead. We quickly got our tanks behind cover in fire positions. Brian
Pear and I were conferring in the open when a 4th/7th subaltern came running up to
ask if we had any Fireflies (Sherman tanks with 17-pounder guns) with us; apparently
they were fed up of seeing their 75mm AP shot bouncing off the German tank that
was causing them so much trouble and damage. Here was early first hand evidence, if
we needed it, of how vulnerable our tanks were to German armour. "3t
The assault gun and an anti-tank gun were quickly knocked out by other tanks,
and an Orders Group was called by the A Squadron commander just south of
Creully as the tanks approached the high ground. Unfortunately, the Royal
Dragoons were then mistaken for German tanks by a spotter plane for HMS Orion,
and the leading tanks came under terrific naval shellfire at 1940 hours, killing a
troop leader and badly wounding another. HMS Orion had received an order at
1847 hours to engage an assembly of tanks that it could not initialy comply with as
its spotter plane was in the process of being relieved. This changeover may have
contributed to the friendly-fire episode, as HMS Orion was ready to engage the
first target reported by the newly arriving spotter plane. Ten of the regiment were
killed and sixteen wounded with numerous casualties amongst infantry. At 2012
hours HMS Orion was ordered to cease fire and reported 'three tanks destroyed
with the remainder scattered'.
Following this setback, the limits of the advance for the day had been reached.
lo add insult to injury, A squadron were then strated twice by a USAAt 1-47
Thunderbolt that did not see the yellow recognition panels on the tank rear decks
before orange smoke grenades could be let off.'"3
The 4/7th Dragoon Guards had advanced inland 6 miles and although they had
not reached their D-Day objectives, they had achieved a most sate
to the invasion' 134 The regiment had lost nineteen tanks from all causes, including
at least three knocked out or damag ppe ofhell fire from HMS Orion - A squadron
had lost seven, B Squadron nine and C Squadron three." weive oficers and mea
were killed and eighteen men wounded.
