324
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
artillery? The 2nd Armored Division, advancing from Barenton, destroyed only
five German tanks of the few operational left in the loth SS Panzer Division.
The Germans lost 120 tanks and assault guns, well over two-thirds of the as-
sembled armoured force. The panzer divisions had now been worn down to the
point where they had little offensive capability and would never again pose a threat
in Normandy.
The 33rd Armored Regiment
processed forty-one replacement vehicles and
more than sixty work orders during the short five-day action?" Twenty-six CCB
M4 and four Ms tanks were destroyed. The 2nd Armored Division had twenty-
seven M4s and five Mss knocked out in the period 1-15 August.?9 American losses
totalled sixty-six M4 tanks.
Aftermath
Hitler believed that von Kluge had shown poor judgement in the conduct of the
attack on 7 August in not waiting until his forces were fully assembled or for
favourable weather that would have grounded the Allied fighter-bombers, which
had both delayed the assembly and wrought havoc during the attack. In many
ways these criticisms were unjustified. American advances changed the strategic
situation daily, and whilst von Kluge could do nothing about the weather, both
von Kluge and von Gersdorff believed that if the attack was going to be made then
it had to be made as soon as possible in view of Allied advances further south. But
the attack was certainly not well co-ordinated, with some units of the znd Panzer
Division attacking before the designated start time and the attached units of the
ast so fanzer Division not arriving until osoo hours when it was already getting
light. The ri6th Panzer Division did not attack at all until the evening of 7 Augus
atter von Schwerin had been relieved of his command. These mistakes meant that
he Germall dimoured punch was not as strong as it might have been and the
mericans were aierted to the impending attack, although Ultra intelligence nac
already given a warning. Instead of the planned six armoured columns, the failure
of the 116th Panzer Division and the left column of the and Panzer Division tO
start the attack meant that only three armoured thrusts began at midnight. Ihe
commander of the attack, von Funck, did nohe onduct a proper leconnaissance
before the attack, which would have revealed not only the US units along the
intended axis of the attack but also any gaps between them, which could have
been exploited. The decision to make the main point of effort towards Avranches
in the north via Juvigny rather than southwards towards St Hilaire was crucial as
it meant that the znd Panzer Divisorn would be advancing close to the existing
frontline with the US 4th and oth divisions nearby." As the 116th Panzer Division
had not advanced to protect the flank of the 2nd Panzer Division, it was quickly
engaged by three infantry divisions and CCB of the 3rd Armored Division plus
heir attached tank battalions. The southern route via St Hilaire, the most direc
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
325
and less defended route, had been originally allocated to the 2nd SS Panzer Korps,
which was caught up in Operation Bluecoat and unable to take part. With the
unavailability of the znd SS Panzer Korps, no thought seems to have been given to
changing the direction of the schwerepunkt.
During the actual attack, the attack of the 2nd Panzer Division lacked aggres-
sion and coordination. The advance around St Barthélemy was hesitant and lacked
determination to either breakthrough or bypass the American resistance. Belle
Fontaine, on the road to Juvigny, was taken early on by the left or southern column,
but the Germans did not attempt to bypass St Barthélemy or use the fog to infiltrate
past anti-tank guns positions. The right column of Kampfgruppe Schake stopped
at Le Mesnil Adelée in the belief that it was not being supported and missed an
opportunity to capture Juvigny from the undefended north.
Both the znd and Ist SS Panzer divisions were understandably reluctant to keep
attacking when the fog cleared and the Allied fighter-bombers appeared overhead,
with the Luftwaffe conspicuous by its absence. Although their attacks were daunt-
ing to units on the ground under fire, the Typhoons destroyed far fewer armoured
vehicles than both combatants believed. However, they did cause the leading tanks
to seek cover off-road rather than continuing the attack. If von Kluge and the com-
mander of the rIoth Panzer Division were not optimistic about the operation then
their troops can hardly have been motivated either, and it may be that the failure
of the Luftwaffe to appear and the stronger-than-expected American resistance
offered an excuse for the vanguard to halt.
A thorough reconnaissance of the battlefield before the attack combined with
better intelligence on the American units would have also revealed the sizeable
armoured forces that were actually confronting the Germans, who believed they
were attacking only part of the ard Armored Division and an infantry division.
The 3rd Armored Division was a 'heavy' division with two armoured regiments,
so even though it had been split into two combat commands, each command was
almost the equivalent of a standard armoured division. However, each US infantry
division also had attached to it an independent tank battalion of sixty M4 tanks,
and as there were five infantry divisions involved in the battle, this was an extra
300 American tanks. The 743rd Tank Battalion attached to the 30th Division saw
a lot of action during this battle, with its companies and platoons of tanks support-
ing individual battalions of infantry as required. Other tank battalions involved
included the 7oth, 737th and 746th Tank battalions, and there were also a number
of Tank Destroyer battalions present, both towed and mobile, including the 7o2nd,
629th, 899th and 823rd battalions.
From the 743rd Tank Battalion, B Company was sent on 6 August to Barenton
with a battalion of the 120th Regiment while the other companies helped de-
fend the area around Le Mesnil Tove and Le Mesnil Adelée with CCB of the
3rd Armored and the 119th Regiment. Eight M4s were destroyed in this action.
The 823rd Tank Destroyer Battalion, with its towed 90mm guns, was deployed
in the St Barthélemy and Abbaye Blanche roadblocks and was instrumental in
