310
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Luttich to proceed. While Hitler regarded the planned attack as a masterstroke, von
Kluge was unenthusiastic: to assemble the required panzer divisions meant weaken-
ing further the forces around Caen and the intentions of Patton's Third Army to the
south were still not clear. At best, von Kluge believed that the attack would restore
the frontline at Avranches and force the Allies back on the defensive?
The znd Panzer and 2nd SS Panzer divisions were withdrawn from the frontline,
their place being taken by the arriving 363rd Division. The 116th Panzer Disson
continued to be hard pressed and had to abandon Brecy while struggling to defend
St Pois.
The 275th Division was also being strongly attacked at this time by the Americans
and was forced to give ground in the face of heavy artillery bombardments ano.
aerial support. Two assault guns sent to reinforce it were knocked out by Alled
fighter-bombers. Juvigny and St Barthélemy north of Mortain were lost, and the
reconnaissance battalions of the and Panzer and Lehr divisions were committed to
supporting the 27Sth Division around Mortain. The armoured columns of Patrons
Third Us Army were on the move and an anti-tans sue screed with the sele
propelled guns of the 34lst Assault gun Brigade could not prevent the capture
The oth Panzer Division, also part of the coming attack, was coming up from
the south of France and had reached Alençon.
From 4-6 August, the Seventh
da mole cause e pene situation de vie dae deet sette
SS Panzer Korps and Kampfgruppe Olboeter from the 12th SS Panzer
Division, but the two divisions could not immediately leave the vie sector anto
were a vital part of German plans. The American advance south from rontaubault
ad not been as rapid as teared and was expected to swing westwalas loWdits
brittamy do per the invasion prans capture 1D-Day." As Vire WaS SuA tAL CULAON
hands, the Ist SS Panzer Division had been able to begin its move from Caen to the
assembly area around Tinchebray, being due there on 6 August.
nticipated for another three or four days at the earliest, and given that e sudeg
situation by then was impossible to predict with the assembling forte meding
at risk of being detected and bombed trom the air, von Kluge decidea to dial
mediately on 6 August with the immediately available forces. Given the enormou
a superere due, diFor apport was requested mon due Font
he Luttwatte. The German panzer divisions, incorporated into the alvide
Korps led by General von Funck, would attack as follows:
• lloth Panzer Division on the right flank north of La See River (thirty Mark IVs
and thirty-two Panthers operational on 30 July*)
• 2nd Panzer Division (reintorced) in the sector La see and St fu there a
tanks and fifteen Jagdpanzer IVs)
caso tanter Di cone due di morte wenty to twentyrte tuo
• oth Panzer Division and 708th Division to follow when they arrived.
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
311
• Ist SS Panzer Division (fifty-seven Mark IVs and forty-six Panthers operational
on 5 August)
* All operational figures from Zetterling
The main point of effort, or schwerepunkt, was to be with the and Panzer Division,
which was to be reinforced by one panzer battalion from each of the ist SS and
the Iloth Panzer divisions with the objective of taking Avranches via Juvigny, 21
miles away. The additional thirty Panthers from the rioth and thirty from the
Ist SS Panzer divisions gave the and Panzer Division a strike force of 135 tanks
in the main thrust. Colonel von Kluge, von Kluge's son, reported that the attack
would be made with 145 tanks. Owing to its late assembly, the entire Ist SS Panzer
Division was to take over from St Barthélemy onwards for the drive to Avranches.
Each panzer division would attack in two columns, with the rioth Panzer Division
to advance north of the River See and protect the right flank of the znd Panzer
Division from the advancing Americans.
The Americans continued to make attacks all along the frontline in the first
week of August, which particularly caused problems for the rioth Panzer Division
as the 84th Division had not yet fully arrived; each time units of the division tried
to disengage they were required to mount a counterattack to seal off the frontline
again. Mortain was captured on 3 August by the US ist Division. On s August
Patton's Third Army swung eastwards to threaten Mayenne,
which was a great
concern to the Seventh Army and required the formation of a blocking force com-
posed of the 708th Division, an engineer battalion from the sth Parachute Division
and the reconnaissance battalion of the 9th Panzer Division. A small kampfgruppe
from Panzer Lehr was also ordered to join this force. Laval was lost on 6 August and
again the Germans were surprised at the speed of the advance of the Americans.
Still on the march, the gth Panzer Division was not available for the attack and
the rl6th Panzer Division was still heavily engaged against the US 9th Division,
which was attacking towards Sourdeval. The battalion of tanks from the Ist SS
Panzer Division had still not arrived by the designated start time of 2200 hours,
so the start was postponed until midnight, losing two valuable hours of darkness
for the attack. A kampfgruppe from the 17th SS Panzer Division also joined the
been assembled
Reinforcements would be provided by the gth and loth SS Panzer divisions and
the new Panther battalion of the 9th Panzer Division. On 6 August, Hitler sud-
denly got involved in the planning of the operation and committed the lith Panzer
Division, which was moving up from the south of France.' Hitler also wanted the
attack to be led by General Eberbach and for von Kluge to wait for all the panzer
divisions to be assembled; von Kluge insisted that the attack go ahead at once in
view of the rapidly changing tactical situation. From an attack to restore the front-
line as planned by von Kluge, Hitler saw this attack as determining the outcome of
