14
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
tanks, under the supervision of the contractor, Metro Cammell. This fault affected
only the kits made in England installed on M4A4 tanks and was apparently not
present in US-made kits, although these were made from British plans with the
same specification. A British interim report in May stated that a steel tube with
a higher tensile strength was now being used in production." The repairs were to be
trialled by B wing of the 79th Armoured Division in rough weather before D-Day
but these trials had to be cancelled - owing to bad weather! There is no evidence
that the Americans were informed of the potential problems before D-Day.
The training branch of the RAC believed the DD tanks could be classed as un-
derwater craft and therefore the tank crews should be entitled to the same Special
Duty Pay as submarine crews, but this was rejected by the War Office.
Hobart's team developed a range of special-purpose vehicles for use in beach
operations, the floating tank being only one of them. A Churchill tank fitted with
a short-range mortar that fired a large explosive charge, known as a Petard, for
destroying bunkers was developed. The Petard-firing tank was then used to build
other special-purpose vehicles to cross obstacles, including a tank to carry a small
box girder bridge that could be laid across trenches and a tank to carry a bundle
of planks (fascine) that could be dropped into ditches and trenches to enable other
vehicles to traverse them. Another version (Bobbin) carried a canvas carpet for
placing over soft ground to prevent vehicles from getting bogged. As these tanks
were issued to army engineers, they were called Armoured Vehicles for Royal
Engineers, or AVREs. Once the AVRE tank had completed its task, it was then
able to operate as a normal Petard-firing tank. Another useful vehicle developed by
Hobart's team was the Flail, also known as a Sherman Crab, which was a Sherman
fitted with chains on a rotating drum at the front of the tank to beat the ground
ahead of the tank and explode any mines in its path.
The Overlord Plan
The Allies had two years in which to plan their return to Europe, and in that time
extensive information about the German defences was gained by aerial reconnais-
sance and reports from the French Resistance. General Morgan's original COSSAC
plan called for a simultaneous assault by three divisions in the Normandy area
(Caen and Bayeux) and for a parachute division to capture Caen at the same time.
The port of Cherbourg was an early objective, as were the coastal ports of Brittany
to the west. The need to secure a firm lodgement and build-up of forces ashore
betore attacking southwards and eastwards to the River Seine was recognised?
Normandy was selected rather than the nearer Pas de Calais as it was considered
to be less heavily defended by coastal fortifications and was the most distant from
Luftwaffe bases. The advantages of Normandy, which was still within the range of
Allied fighter planes based in southern England, outweighed the disadvantages of
a longer sea journey for the invasion forces and the lack of a deep-water port.ยบ On
D-Day Tanks
15
reviewing the plan early in 1944, General Montgomery ordered it to be expanded
to use five divisions and three airborne divisions in the assault but the fundamentals
of the plan were largely unchanged.
The sectors that were originally selected by the Allied planners, after very
detailed reconnaissance and assessments that included the taking of actual beach
sand samples, were known as (from east to west): Juno, Gold and Omaha. An ad-
ditional sector, Sword, was added to the Second British Army front on the extreme
eastern flank, and the Utah sector was added to the First United States Army's
proposed front farther to the west. However, a lack of available landing craft (as the
Americans were determined to mount Operation Anvil) meant that the additional
landings could only be mounted on a single brigade or combat team front, unlike
the Juno, Gold and Omaha sectors, which would deploy two brigades or combat
teams in a two-up assault formation.
SHAEF's orders were for the 2Ist Army Group to secure a lodgement on the con-
tinent from which further offensive operations could be developed. Montgomery
intended that armoured thrusts by battle groups be made inland the same day if
conditions were favourable. The British Second Army was to seize high ground
and other strategic objectives further inland before the German defences could
regroup and reinforcements arrived. The 8th Armoured Brigade was given the
task of capturing Villers Bocage while the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade was
to advance as far as Evrecy, south-west of Caen. The 27th Armoured Brigade was
to support the 3rd Division in capturing Caen, a vital D-Day objective. These
armoured thrusts were explained by Montgomery to Churchill, the King and
senior officers of the Allied forces at an invasion briefing given at St Paul's School
in London on IS May and were a key element of Operation Overlord. General
Bradley of First United States Army (FUSA) remembered Montgomery making
comments about tanks even reaching Falaise on D-Day 'to knock about a bit down
there'?" Having landed with the two Allied armies of 2Ist Army Group aligned
east to west, and with the Americans on the right of the line, the armies would
then wheel or pivot to realign in a north-east to south-west direction while the
deep-water ports of Brittany to the west were captured. They would then advance
on a broad front towards Paris and Germany.
The German defences forming Hitler's Atlantic Wall to repel the expected
Allied invasion were of two types. Strongpoints and bunkers (Wiederstandnester)
containing heavy guns were constructed on the shore to engage any landings on
the beaches, while obstacles were erected offshore to prevent boats or landing craft
from actually getting to the beach. A variety of concrete bunkers and emplace-
ments were constructed, their size and shape depending on their location and on
the availability of guns and materials. Many bunkers had concrete walls up to loft
thick and were constructed so that the guns inside could fire along the beach rather
than out to sea. This enabled a thick concrete wall to be built seawards to offer
protection from naval gunfire. It also meant that they could only be knocked out
by guns or tanks that had landed on the beaches. The Atlantic Wall was designed
