166
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the attached anti-tank guns and defensive artillery barrages called down on any
concentration of German forces won the day. The German counterattack to clear
out the breach at Cheux had failed. Shortages of ammunition and a complete lack
of aerial reconnaissance or protection all contributed to the German failure as well
as the stout, concentrated defences of the British infantry brigades.
The situation report of the oth SS Panzer Division on 29 June referred to the
high intensity of Allied artillery being like the drumfire of the First World War
that caused all attacks to be nipped in the bud. The division's tank losses were six
Panthers, sixteen Mark IVs and ten Stugs but claimed forty-nine British tanks
knocked out by the Stugs of the 7th and 8th companies and thirteen tanks destroyed
by the ist Panther Battalion and the Sth and 6th Mark IV companies. 40
On the morning of 1 July, having returned to Normandy, von Rundstedt re-
ceived a report from von Schweppenburg as to the progress of the offensive; the
report stated that the planned major counterattack could no longer take place as the
panzer divisions had been weakened too much and it advocated a withdrawal out
of range of naval gunfire with an evacuation of the Caen salient to establish a new
frontline. It was proposed that this be done with the newly arriving infantry divi-
sions in order to enable the panzer divisions to be moved into reserve to prepare
for the major offensive. Von Rundstedt once again requested freedom of action
in a letter to OK W and forwarded a copy of the report from von Schweppenburg
plus endorsements from Hausser and Rommel, all of whom were apparently in
agreement with one another. Von Schweppenburg and Rommel did argue over the
use of the newly arriving infantry divisions, which Rommel reportedly refused to
throw into the frontline, saying that the infantry cannot do this anymore and is
not prepared to do it'" Rommel's refusal to pull out the 12th SS and 2ist Panzer
divisions from the frontline and use them as a mobile reserve in the Ist SS Panzer
Korps was apparently because this would have meant abandoning Caen, which was
against Hitler's direct orders.
was a massed panzer
Given that Rommel's single concern since D-Day
counterattack to the Allied beaches and the only way of
assembling enough panzer units to do this was by pulling them out of the frontline,
this was an odd statement for Rommel to make, if indeed he did say it and it has
not been taken out of context. Von Schweppenburg, perhaps in a further attempt to
discredit Rommel, also hinted that Rommel may have been acting with political
motives in view of the later plot to kill Hitler. There was no love lost between
Rommel and von Schweppenburg, and Rommel cannot answer this charge, which
was made during post-war interrogations.
The request and report from von Rundstedt must have come as a shock to Hitler,
who had personally issued specific directives to his two senior commanders fight-
ing the Allied invasion less than 48 hours previously at Berchtesgaden. At 1740
hours, the reply from OKW was received and it again ordered that the present
positions were to be held. By then von Rundstedt was quite pessimistic about the
military situation in Normandy and told General Keital as much in a telephone
conversation that evening:
167
Operation Epsom
What shall we do?' asked Keital.
What shall we do? Make peace, you idiots, said von Rundstedt.
'What else can
you do? 48
The next day, von Rundstedt was given a letter of dismissal along with the Oak
Leaves to his Knight's Cross medal. Field Marshal von Kluge was appointed the
supreme commander OB West and arrived on 3 July to take up his new command,
much to the dismay of Rommel, who was hoping to be given that promotion.
Von Schweppenburg was also dismissed the same day and was replaced as the
commander of Panzer Gruppe West by General Eberbach.
Panzer Gruppe West was subordinated to Army Group B, not Seventh Army on
28 June, and it was therefore under Rommel's direct control, but Rommel apparently
refused to move the panzer divisions. Von Schweppenburg later maintained that
a co-ordinated attack could have begun on 29 June as the 2nd and 2nd SS Panzer
divisions were idle. " However, in the absence of both Rommel and von Rundstedt,
who were in Germany that day, General Hausser, not having any contrary instruc-
tons, believed the relieving counterattack by the znd SS Panzer Korps was more
appropriate and necessary in the circumstances. Hitler himself had stipulated that the
suation around the River Orne had to be cleared up before the major counterattack
o the coast. The Seventh Army daily summary on 29 june stated that the arrival
of the divisions of and SS PZK, barely in time, made possible the prevention of
the enlargement of the breakthrough on all sides. Furtaer, the breaking was
compressed against an enemy who was superior on the ground and in the air. 3o
Thus the gth and loth SS Panzer divisions were thrown into the Normandy
maestrom as soon as they arrived and carried out a failed counterattack, which se-
verely weakened their combat effectiveness for future operations in the campaign.
Tank Casualties
In their first battles, the British armoured units suffered significant casualties. Using
information from the war diaries of the units involved and the daily zist Army
Group summaries, the total tanks lost can be determined.
Sherman
Stuart
31st T Bde
2nd NY
29th A Bde
44RTR
3CLY
Sherman Vc
Churchill
35
Cromwell
14
21
49
10
64
10
35
27
14
