162
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the River Odon at Gavrus remained in British hands. One Mark IVH tank was
knocked out by infantry using PIATs in Gavrus.
At about 1640 hours, panzergrenadiers supported by tanks began to attack along
the Gavrus-Tourmauville road and penetrated into the woods north and east of
Gavrus. A battery of 17-pounder self-propelled anti-tank guns (Achilles) retreated,
exposing the positions of the 44th RTR. Three C Squadron tanks were hit from
these woods, two tanks bursting into flames. Such was the German pressure that
the tanks of B and C squadrons had to withdraw and form a last line of defence in
some woods to block any further progress of the Germans towards the vital bridge
at Tourmauville. A Squadron were on the extreme left of this line, still in the open
ground between Hills 112 and 113, and began to come under fire as the regiment
received instructions to retire over the River Odon. Two troops of B Squadron
reinforced A Squadron, which covered the withdrawal across the river. As late as
2020 hours, an A Squadron tank was knocked out by a direct hit on the turret.
Having by now run out of smoke to cover their withdrawal, A Squadron and
RHQ finally crossed the river at 2300 hours and harboured back at Cheux. The
44th RTR lost a total of thirteen tanks including two Sherman Ves (Fireflies) and
two Stuarts in this action? The German attack remained stalled at Gavrus and the
objectives of Hill 112 and Esquay were not achieved. The roth SS Panzer Division
claimed twenty-eight tanks destroyed for the loss of only two of their own?"
North of the River Odon, the attack by the gth SS Panzer Division, reinforced
again with Kampfgruppe Weidinger and tanks from the 2nd Panzer Division, finally
got underway at 1400 hours in a concentrated thrust to take Cheux and Mouen, and
cut off the British bridgehead. The British had an infantry brigade at the crossroads
at Le Valtru plus other brigades defending Grainville, Mondrainville and Mouen.
Though having served on the Russian Front, the division had not been subjected to
an Allied bombardment before and the experience proved to be both shattering and
overwhelming. The German assembly areas for the attack were subjected to naval
gunfire, fighter-bomber attack and intense artillery fire and the start of the attack
had to be delayed. In particular, the assembly area for the tank regiments at Noyers
and the woods at Bas de Forges were targeted by devastating naval guntire and
fighter-bomber attacks. Some authors have claimed that these tanks were bombed
by too Lancasters, but this is not mentioned in the VIII Corps war diary or the of-
ficial British history?" RAF Bomber Command made no raids in this area that day?"
The preparations of the oth SS Panzergrenadiers were so disrupted that they
were not ready to attack after their own artillery barrage had begun. About I400
hours, the panzergrenadier regiments finally began their assaults on Le Valtru
and Grainville. The oth RTR had remained in position around the Le Valtru
crossroads and the machine guns of the Churchills tanks inflicted heavy casualties
on the German infantry. Four Mark IVs broke into the Scottish infantry positions
at Le Valtru but were knocked out by PIAT weapons. Well supported by artil-
lery, the crossroads were held. Five hundred yards further to the north, Grainville,
similarly, was being attacked. During the morning, the 7th RTR plus infantry of
163
Operation Epsom
the 4th Brigade had pushed south from its harbour near Cheux towards Grainville
to the same part of the railway line at Grainville as the previous day. The tank regi-
ment was well positioned to receive the full force of the 9th SS Panzer Division's
atack and the Churchill tanks played a major part in blunting the advance but lost
eve of their number doing so." Both infantry battalions held their positions,
desite some forward positions being overrun.
Late in the day when the German attack had been turned back, the Cromwell
lanks of the and Northants Yeomanry were ordered to make a sweep from Cheux
lo Grainville. The objectives of this order were to ensure that the Germans had
reited and to link up with the infantry again to boost morale. The advance did
not get going before dark and as progress cross-country was difficult in the failing
ligh, the tanks proceeded in columns through the gaps in the hedgerows and
emankments. One tank of C Squadron was destroyed by an unseen anti-tank
gun and then the squadron nearly ran into four Mark IVs. One German tank was
knocked out and the other three disappeared into the gloom, so there were no
more losses to C Squadron, which went on to meet up with the grateful infantry.
I Squadron got separated into two groups in the daraness ane due group oi seven
Lanks missed their rendezvous and ventured too far west, straight into the German
postions. A firefight broke out in the dark, lit only by the flames from burning
anks, for either side to shoot meant that a suns macte das woute dered des
postion. However, one by one, the Cromwells were knocked out, and after twice
having had requests to withdraw retused, all contace was lost with the tanks at
about o10o hours, * The burnt out hulks of the tanks were found next morning.
The 3rd RTR harboured at the northern base of Hill 112 and at 0430 hours reoc-
cupied their former positions on the hilltop and remained there in observation all
ay. From 1o10 hours, typhoons appeared all attacked the verman tanks die gun
positions periodically throughout the day. On aktast on the est was interrupteauy
savo of Nebelwerfer Moaning Minme rockets, wach sied tout des datesy
enough to be caught outside their tanks.
At 1000 hours, General O'Connor again ordered the lith Armoured Division to
remain in its present positions. Allied fighter-bombers claimed to have destroyed
nearly 200 German vehicles moving up to the frontline and these were clearly the
supply echelons for the panzer divisions; a major attack was therefore believed to
be imminent. British artillery continued to pound the area around Hil II2 while
the Germans had only enough ammunition for their artillery to fire an estimated
10 per cent of the total rounds expended by the British.4
The grd RTR attempted to improve their positions and eliminate some of the
German gun positions from which tanks and anti-tank guns were tiring at them.
A Squadron was ordered to attack Esquay, but as soon as they moved they were
engaged from what seemed like three directions. The tank of a troop corporal was
hit and then Major Close, the A Squadron commander, urged the troop further
forward. Sergeant Reay's tank was hit and it burst into flames; the sergeant and his
gunner jumped out with their clothes alight, only to land on a wire fence. Sergeant
