22
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
shore at a specific target. These two tanks were on charge to the I Corps Delivery
Squadron but were crewed by the regiment. On landing, the tanks would revert
one each to A and B squadrons. CB 2337 was seen to be listing to starboard as it
approached the beach after having shipped a lot of water in a difficult Channel
crossing. The two tanks did not fire at all on the run-in and landed at Htis
minutes, the tanks moving off to find their squadrons. The tank of Sergeant Ellis
located A Squadron, and the tank of Lieutenant Knowles, after remaining on the
beach for a while, linked up with B Squadron.
C Squadron
The C Squadron wading Sherman tanks landed directly from their landing
craft at H+45 minutes opposite the silenced La Brèche position to find the beach
crowded with landing craft but relatively calm, apart from intermittent sniper
fire. German artillery shells and mortars were still regularly hitting the beach and
there were many burning landing craft, swamped vehicles and disabled tanks along
the shoreline. The waves were full of debris and the occasional body. On the
narrowing beach was a multitude of armoured vehicles waiting to move inland.
C Squadron was to support the intermediate reserve battalion of the 8th Brigade,
the Ist Suffolks Battalion, firstly to eliminate the Morris bunker and then Hillman.
Morris was surrounded by barbed wire and mines, but in a two-pronged attack,
the three tanks of 4th Troop plus an attached tank approached the strongpoint
from two directions. Two tanks working with the infantry slowly made their way
through the village of Colleville whilst two other tanks worked themselves into
Position at the rear of the bunker. Before the attack could begin, the defenders
abandoned the position without a shot being fired." Forty prisoners were taken
under a white flag. 24
The Hillman position ssoyds farther south was still defended, and the ist Suffolks
had great difficulty in approaching it owing to the surrounding minefields which
were covered by machine guns. The position was the headquarters of the 736th
Regiment and had extensive underground bunkers, including two concrete gun
emplacements covered with steel domes impervious to all British naval and tank
fire. The defenders were able to move between weapon pits and bunkers by means
of tunnels and trenches, and the enemy positions had to be eliminated one by
one. The defences inflicted nearly Iso casualties on the soldiers of the ist Norfolks
Battalion when they tried to bypass Hillman in the afternoon on their way in-
land.' As the 4th Troop Sherman tanks moved cross-country to engage the bunker
from the rear, a hidden anti-tank gun from Hillman destroyed two tanks in quick
succession? Two other tanks of C Squadron were knocked out by anti-tank guns
from Hillman. 27
At 1930 hours the tanks of C Squadron were ordered to leave Hillman and form
a defensive screen behind a ridge to the south against a counterattack by German
tanks. The Staffordshire Yeomanry's A Squadron was detailed to cover Hillman in
the place of C Squadron.
D-Day Tanks
23
Meanwhile, the tanks of the rest of the squadron finally broke into the Hillman
position and wreaked havoc on the installation, driving over trenches and under-
ground bunkers to make them collapse while tank commanders threw grenades
into every weapon pit they could find. The squadron leader's tank fell into what
turned out to be the officer's latrine, and his tank was damaged, losing a track.
Hillman was finally reported captured at 2100 hours, but this strongpoint had
greatly delayed the 3rd Division's plans and timetable for the day.
The DD tanks of the regiment that had made it to the beach had eliminated
three or four 75mm guns, four or five somm and numerous 20mm cannon posi-
tions.28 However, the brigadier of the 27th Armoured Brigade, G.E. Prior-Palmer,
who had been watching the attack from LCH 185, was reported to have been
disappointed with the performance of the regiment.2
A Squadron had lost fourteen tanks and had six tanks left at the end of the day
when the Sherman Vc from CB 2337 (Sergeant Ellis) rejoined them. B Squadron
had lost ten tanks destroyed or damaged. C Squadron had lost six tanks, four being
knocked out and two damaged. Therefore the Royal Hussars lost thirty-one tanks
out of a total of sixty-three, the regiment's normal complement of sixty-one being
bolstered by the two additional DD Shermans in A and B squadrons. This was a fifty
per cent casualty rate - but not unexpected as the regiment was in the vanguard.
The 266th Field Delivery Squadron servicing the 27th Armoured Brigade was due
to land next day with thirty-one tanks, of which seventeen were designated for
the regiment. Although the regiment's casualties were initially feared to be high
because of a large number of men missing from the drowned or swamped DD
tanks, fortunately this was proven wrong. When everybody could be accounted
for some days later, the regiment's casualties were relatively light: one officer and
fifteen other ranks (ORs) killed and one officer and eighteen ORs wounded.3o
The Staffordshire Yeomanry
As the tide came in more quickly than anticipated, many beach obstacles could
not be cleared; the dry beach area was soon only a narrow strip isyds wide at high
tide. This caused considerable congestion on Queen White beach, to which the
seven stranded or swamped tanks of the Hussars added. When the landing craft
of the Staffordshire Yeomanry, the second tank regiment of the 27th Armoured
Brigade, due at H+195 minutes, landed at 1030 hours slightly ahead of schedule,
their tanks disembarked to join the melee at the water's edge. The intention was
for the newly arrived 185th Brigade to push on rapidly inland and capture Caen,
with the infantry of the znd King's Shropshire Light Infantry (KSLI) Battalion to
be carried on the Staffs Yeomanry tanks towards Caen.
By this time, the fighting had moved inland and there was only sporadic shelling
and sniping of the narrow beach, which was fortunate as the beach was jammed
with vehicles of every description, there being no apparent traffic control or beach
organisation. The tanks remained lined up on the beach for more than an hour
before they were able to use one of the exits and begin to move to the assembly
