338
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
An early morning ground mist also persisted, but this allowed the tanks to deploy
trom their columns without enemy interference. The mist would have caused some
difticulties for any further advance until it burned off, though none was planned.
The 4th Canadian and Polish Armoured divisions were to move up to their start
lines in this period, ready to attack once the phase two bombing finished.
Pockets of German resistance that had been bypassed during the night began
to mount localised counterattacks with small groups of infantry accompanied by
one or two tanks or self-propelled guns. In particular, the villages of Caillout,
Tilly and Gaumesnil remained in German hands. These actions prevented any sup-
plies or ambulances getting through to the Canadian positions. Caillouet was nor
captured until midday after the mist cleared, and operations continued throughout
the day to mop up these pockets of resistance and clear the lines of communication.
Blue on Blue
For the phase two bombing, the Flying Fortresses were instructed to bomb in
a direction parallel to the front to avoid a repeat of the friendly-fire bombings of
Operation Cobra. This required them to approach the target from the direction
ot Vire, which exposed the planes to a lengthy period of anti-aircraft fire. The
first wave bombed without problems but a lot of smoke and dust was created.
Inexplicably, a formation of twelve planes veered off the flight path and headed for
Caen, where they dropped their bombs on the suburb of Cormelles and the road
to Falaise. Many vehicles and guns were hit as well as supply units. Troops were
caught in the open as they were on the move and had no time to dig slit trenches.
Casualties troll this incident caused great disruption amongst the troops moving
up, especially the supporting artillery for phase two. Cormelles was some 6 miles
from the intended line of targets. The units bombed were aghast and shocked;
unanswered questions ranged from wondering how the Germans had managed to
capture some Flying Fortresses to asking why the Americans were bombing them.
The war diary of znd Canadian Armoured Brigade commented, 'At approximately
1300B hours, main Brigade HQ at Cormelles along with various gun areas in the
immediate vicinity were bombed by American precision bombing. Casualties were
heavy in both men and equipment.?s
Remarkably, a second formation of twelve planes followed the lead of the previ-
ous group and dropped their bombs in the same vicinity. A total of sixty-five men
were killed and 2so wounded, including the commander of the 3rd Division. The
USAAF would later claim that the lead plane was hit by anti-aircraft fire and was
forced to abort its mission before jettisoning its bomb load over Caen. 26
For the Germans, the halt by the Canadian advance was little short of a miracle
and allowed them time to gather together all available forces, deploying them to
meet the Canadian attack. Meyer likened the halt to a cavalry charge where the
riders had stopped to feed their horses. Reinforcements, in the form of the 85th
Operation Totalize
339
Division, were due to arrive from 10 August, but the 12th SS Panzer Division
would have to meet the brunt of the attack in the meantime. The only troops
immechately available were subordinated to Kampfgruppe Waldmuller of the
25th Panzergrenadier Regiment along with the seventeen Mark IVs from the
znd Battalion, the corps and division escort companies plus a company of ten
self propelle anti-tank guns (Jagdpanzer IVs). To this kampfgruppe was added the
3rd Company of Tiger tanks from the roist SS Schwere Tank Battalion, now com-
manded by Michael Wittmann. Therefore Kampfgruppe Waldmuller contained
the following tanks:
• Seventeen Mark IVs - five from sth Company and twelve from the 7th Company
• Ten Jagdpanzers IV
• Ten Tigers
formation.?7
The Germans saw the hundreds of massed Canadian and British tanks that
had broken through but had halted in front of them and realised that they could
not defeat them with the forty-two tanks of the kampfgruppe. Their only hope
was to disrupt the timetable of the advance so as to give them time to establish
new defensive positions and reform the frontline.
The mission of Kampfgruppe
an aut was to form a blocking position on the low flage south of st aignan de
Cramesnil to St Sylvain. The terrain was quite open and the Germans hoped that
the long-range superiority of the liger tanks would keep the Alled tanks at bay.
Death of Wittmann
The German counterattack was schedulean aul do tours a corded
With the arrival of the first wave of Flying Fortresses. Led by the eight Tigers, the
verman tanks drove quickly towards st Aignan de Cramesni from enteaux
astride the Caen to Falaise road. The Mark IVs and Jagdpanzers were echeloned
to the right rear, accompanied by the panzergrenadiers of the 2sth Regiment.
Unseen by the Germans, two armoured regiments had advanced from their earlier
positions at Point 122 towards Cintheaux. On one side of the Caen-Falaise road,
A Squadron of the Sherbrooke Fusiliers had occupied the Gaumesnil chateau
grounds and taken up firing positions behind a wall overlooking the open ground
to the east. Meanwhile, in the east, A Squadron of the ist Northants Yeomanry
had worked their way through an orchard and the woodland south of St Aignan,
Which was occupied by the rest of the regiment and the 144th Regiment RAC.
The A Squadron tanks were lined up behind a hedge and had an excellent view
