254
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
commands of CCA 2nd Armored Division and the 3rd Armored Division were
forced to use the same road to Marigny in a continuous armoured column, which
contributed to the already considerable traffic congestion in the area.
Just outside St Gilles,
a strong roadblock of four Mark IV tanks along with
anti-tank guns was quickly overcome by M4 tanks with air support and by mid-
afternoon CCA entered St Gilles. The advance continued relatively unhindered
down the road towards Canisy. This road marked the boundary between Panzer
Lehr and the 352nd Division (as well as being a corps boundary) and as the road was
the responsibility of Panzer Lehr, which was no longer operational, the advance was
largely unopposed. After smashing another roadblock outside Canisy, the columns
passed through the village at i510 hours and then diverged, one half proceeding in
the evening to St Samson de Bonfosse and the other to Le Mesnil Herman. That
day, CCA only lost three M4 tanks, a half-track, a truck and a jeep?»
St Samson de Bonfosse was entered about midnight and Le Mesnil Herman
(8 miles from the line of departure) was secured next morning at 0800 hours after
a brief halt to refuel and rearm. Three tanks were lost to German infantry wielding
Panzerfäuste on entering Le Mesnil Herman.
Next day, two reconnaissances in force were made, one in the direction of
Villebaudon by the 3rd Battalion and the other towards Tessy-sur-Vire by the
Ist Battalion. All forces harboured at the end of the day back near Le Mesnil
Herman. On 28 July CCA was reorganised into three columns and the 2nd Battalion
attacked towards Beaucoudray (with the objective of Percy) as part of the middle
The 2nd Battalion lost one tank in a minefield near Moyen and in the
town itself, a tank battle developed between the battalion's M4s and ten Panthers
with four assault guns.
The battalion knocked out two of the Panthers and two
assault guns for the loss of three medium tanks but was unable to capture the town.
A wide flanking movement to take the town from behind was unsuccessful and
another tank was
destroyed by a Panther. The left-hand (eastern) column of the
Ist Battalion met strong opposition from tanks and 88mm flak guns when advanc-
ing to Le Mesnil Opac and destroyed four anti-tank guns and five Mark IVs for the
loss of only one M4 tank.
As the task force was under heavy mortar and artillery
fire, it was unable to make any headway and withdrew.
The right-hand column
(3rd Battalion) reached Villebaudon on 28 July and
advanced towards Percy where there was heavy fighting for the next two days
and the column was periodically cut off. CCA was battling with the remnants o
Panzer Lehr and the 2nd Panzer Division, which had arrived that morning aiter
having been sent by von Kluge to Tessy-sur-Vire in response to Operation Cobra.
The and Panzer Division blocked the Villebaudon to Tessy road at Hill 133 near
Le Mesnil Opac and succeeded in capturing the La Denisiere crossroads further
west, cutting the Ist battalion column? Also defending in the area were other
battlegroups from the 2nd and i7th SS Panzer divisions. The rioth Panzer Division
would also join the znd Panzer Division next day to support the Seventh Army
around Tessy and Vire.
255
Operation Cobra
At 1530 hours on 29 July, on the same day the reconnaissance battalion of the
lióth Panzer Division arrived in the area, the CCA 3rd Battalion finally reached
Percy. The bulk of the division was due in two more days. The ist Battalion
column could only manage an advance of 1 mile that day from Le Mesnil Opac
before harbouring back at le Mesnil Herman. CCA was now confronted by the
vestiges of four panzer divisions, which continued to put up strong resistance. The
unique heavy' structure of the and and 3rd Armored divisions, with two tank
regiments in each division, paid dividends here as CCA contained an entire regi-
ment of tanks, which enabled it to sustain losses and maintain the offensive against
the considerably weakened German divisions. The 2nd Panzer Division largely had
only its Panther battalion as it was forced to leave two companies of the Mark IV
battalion to reinforce the 326th Division around Caumont until 27 July and had no
more than twenty Panther tanks operational.37
The and Battalion of the 66th Armored Regiment continued the advance
cowards Tessy on 30 July from Villebaudon and, against determined resistance,
only managed to capture the crossroads south of the town by the evening before
withdraving to a harbour area, leaving the town in the hands of the infantry.
After heavy fighting, Percy was finally captured on the evening of 30 July by the
3rd Battalion.
The next day the ist Battalion was ordered to secure the left flank and high
ground around Dumont. The advance reached a ravine where there were German
(anks on the far side and a spirited firefight across the ravine ensued in which
four German tanks were claimed as destroyed. The battalion was unable to force
a crossing amidst the heavy artillery and tank fire being received.
On I August, the 3rd Battalion task force attacked towards Tessy s miles away.
In the misty conditions, a German transport colma was encountered on me toda
which was shot up and destroyed. Resistance increased around
Tessy and two
Mus were lost on the outskirts of the town when they ran onto mines covered by
anti-tank guns; on bailing out, the tank crews were captured. In other skirmishes,
two German Panthers cut the battalion convoy and before being driven off, four
tanks were lost while the rest of the column kept moving eastwards under cover
of a smoke barrage. Two more Mys were knocked out by Panthers west of La
Poemeliere. The attack resumed at 1430 hours, with H and & companies either side
of the road to Tessy-sur -Vire, and four more tanks from G Company were knocked
out. By the time the high ground north-west of Tessy-sur-Vire was reached at
about 1800 hours, the battalion had lost fifteen M4 tanks and a light tank. Tessy-
sur-Vire was finally captured and cleared that evening.
CCB 2nd Armored Division
CCB was committed only at 1100 hours on 27 July in its originally planned role of
setting up blocking positions between Lengronne and Notre Dame de Cenilly by
