OPERATION "TRACTABLE"
14-16 AUGUST 1944
519T (H) DIV
CON
ARMO DN
POLISH
ABSORO
Operation Tractable: the limits of Canadian and Polish advances, 16 August 1944, adapted from
the Victory Campaign
Operation Tractable
371
interfere with the more important objective of driving south-east to capture Trun
and link up with General Patton's forces coming up from the south.
At Clair Tizon, the 2nd Division and the Sherbrooke Fusiliers attacked, opposed
by the few Tigers of the 2nd Company of the 10znd Schwere SS Battalion and the
fifteen operational Panthers of the amalgamated 2nd and 3rd companies. The
Germans were overwhelmed and began to fall back under the weight of Canadian
arillery, tanks and infantry. At 1400 hours, the Panther company was ordered to
withdraw to Olendon but waited for the bombing to finish.
The three remain-
ing operational tanks arrived at Olendon at
1900
hours. The other tanks were
destroyed by artillery or encircled by Canadian infantry and knocked out. 1wo
tanks that were bogged had to be blown up.
The Tiger company, after losing two Tigers,
was forced to retreat towards
Soulangy. At 1800 hours the Tigers took part in the tighting on Hill 184 Just oft
the Caen-Falaise road where they 'found our own infantry running from the
frontline, in battalion strength, chased by twelve Sherman tanks. At last daylight,
we quickly set three of them on fire whereupon the infantry began to dig in on
the hill,33
15 August
Atter spending an anxious night aumuoy harbours in forward posts, deat
morning the 4th Brigade regiments made plans for the continuation ot the opera-
ton although 'no guidance was received from above from the acting brigadier,
Lieutenant-Colonel Scott34 An immediate problem for the regiments was that their
supporting echelons had not arrived overnight. The Grenadier Guards A echelon
was the first to come up in the morning at the fuel die dated Was shared
amongst the regiments. The three regiments attempted to reach Point 159 near
Versainville above Falaise but the village of Epancy provided to be an obstacle
all day.
The four remaining Jagdpanzers of the 2nd Company were positioned in thi
orchards south of Epancy whils the ist Company had been sent north-east to Hill
120 near Jort to cover the Jort-Falaise highway. A decision by the Luftwaffe to
withdraw the remaining batteries of III Flak Korps to behind Falaise was not well
received by the soldiers in the frontline.?" There were two companies (sixteen guns)
of the 88mm Flak guns of the 12th SS Panzer Division defending the area around
Point 159 and the third company was defending the line near Jort.
Epancy was defended by the grenadiers of the 3rd Company of 1,054th Regiment
of the 85th Division, reinforced with a medium artillery battery and a few tanks
of the 12th SS3 The German armour had withdrawn during the night to the de-
fensive positions previously reconnoitred by Wunsche. Kampfgruppe Kraus moved
to defend Soulangy with two Tigers on the night of 14/15 August. Forming a thin
defensive screen from Soulangy to Point 159 were the three Panther tanks, a dozen
