116
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Panzer Gruppe West assumed command of the panzer divisions on the evening
of 8 June and von Schweppenburg visited the command posts of each division."
Either von Schweppenburg was not told of the proposed attack next day by Panzer
Lehr or it was permitted to go ahead as its tank battalions were finally due to arrive
overnight. Panzer Lehr duly attacked towards Bayeux on 9 June but was still missing
its Panther battalion. The plan of attack was to employ the goist Panzergrenadie
Regiment, reinforced by an anti-tank battalion on the right flank and the Mark IV
Battalion plus the ist Battalion of the g02nd Panzergrenadier Regiment on the
left flank. The reconnaissance battalion was to secure the left flank from Ellon to
Trungy. However, at the last minute, the goist Panzergrenadier Regiment had to
be diverted to defend Tilly and so less than half the division started the counterat-
tack, which got as far as Ellon when it was ordered to halt by the Ist SS Panzer
Korps. The division was redirected eastwards to go on the defensive against the
British soth Division driving on Tilly and Point 103. On the way back to Tilly,
the tanks of the division were forced to travel along a narrow stretch of open
ground between two woods and here the division was again hit by fire from naval
guns, artillery and anti-tank guns as the British advance had reached the northern
outskirts of Tilly. Von Schweppenburg at Panzer Gruppe West was apparently nos
informed by Rommel either of this decision to switch to the defensive.
12th SS Norrey, 9 June
The Forward Delivery Squadron for the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade
C Squadron, Elgin Regiment) landed in Normandy at 0500 nours on a june and
immediately moved inland to link upsH aspe brigade. The sudaron wasse
posed to have thirty-one Sherman tanks for the three regiments but was forced to
cannabalise two tanks before departing England just to ensure that the remain
ing twenty-nine were operational.42 On learning of the brigades -Lay losses,
eight tanks under the command of Major C. Tweedale were sent ahead to the
ist Hussars, arriving at C Squadron later that day. Although the reintorcement
OH ISlame from three different regiments, under the reinforcement system of the
2nd ARG the reinforcements were to be taken on strength by whichever regiment
needed them. In this instance, seven of the tanks were crewed by men from the
Fort Garry Horse and even though these crews were originally part Ot, and had
trained with, the Garrys, on 8 June they became Hussars. On 9 June, the now
overstrength C Squadron (six troops instead of five) was ordered to support a
attack on Bretteville l'Orgueilleuse and Norrey by the Regina Regiment. Ale
seeing the infantry into bretteville, the tanks proceeded further soutd lost.
Norrey with their machine guns.
That afternoon, the twelve Panthers of the 3rd Company that had not been
involved in the previous night's action at Bretteville L'Orgueilleuse were ordered
to attack towards Norrey. After using i underpass to cross the railway lie soun
Bridgehead Battles
117
of the village, the company commander ordered the tanks to swing left so as to
present the thick frontal armour of the Panthers toward Norrey. The five tanks of
the third section hugging the railway embankment were forced to speed past the
second section in order to keep a straight line of tanks facing Norrey. The four
tanks of the first section had by this point slowed to form a reserve. Unfortunately
for the 3rd Company tanks, this turn, though protecting them from the 6-pound-
ers in Norrey, exposed their flanks to the advancing C Squadron Shermans, which
spotted them first. The Shermans deployed in a line and opened fire at less than
I,000m range. A Firefly commanded by Lieutenant Henry hit the tank nearest the
rail-line first. Adolf Morawetz was commanding a Panther tank:
At that moment after a muffled bang and a swaying as if the track had been ripped off,
the vehicle came to a stop.
It was quiet inside the tank. I thought we had driven onto a mine. When I looked
to the left to check the situation, I happened to see the turret torn off the panzer
driving on the left flank. At the same moment after another minor explosion my
vehicle began to burn. The machine gun ammunition caught on fire and there was
a crackling like dry wood burning. Since we were to push into Norrey, I had closed
the hatch moments before. I tried, without success to open the turret hatch. I could
only lift it with the spindle but could not swing it out. Paul Veith, the gunner sitting
in front of me had apparently been seriously injured by fragments from the hit. Veith
did not move. I tried for a long time with all my strength to swing out the hatch.
I was only successful when I tried different height settings on the lift crank. It had
probably been damaged by the hit. I jumped out, fell on the rear and was unconscious
for a short time. Then I saw flames coming out of the open hatch as if from a biow
torch. I got up and tried to jump off the tank. However I could not keep my balance
and landed head first on the ground. I do not know how long I lay there. Then I got
to my feet and saw to my left along the same line as my tank, other burning panzers. +
Veith did not get out of the Panther, and seven others were quickly dispatched in
the next 4 minutes. Major Tweedale recorded the incident:
We were busily "brassing up" Norrey en Bessin, and an ammo train at the station
(cross fite with co-ax etc in a good hull down position), when I noticed a hell of
a big tank with a long gun pass our front about goo yards away and going at a good
speed. We called up and told the right troops about it. When lo and behold, six
"Panthers" came up to the crest in orderly fashion and slowly, about 8so-roso yds
range. We let them have it and knocked out the six without them firing a shot at us
or traversing their guns in our direction. We thought there were only five but found
we had knocked out six on later inspection. The right troops got the lead tank, which
no doubt a lot of the Regiment saw on the road between Bretteville and Norrey; our
daily tanks accounted for three. We later found a company of Regina Kines had
been isolated out there and over-run; these men were saved by our action. Also tour
