36
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
turret keeping one half open so as to have an occasional look for mines and obstacles at
the water's edge. When I judged it safe to deflate we did so and then we immediately
opened fire on the pill box which was on our immediate front with 75mm HE. After
ยง rounds I advanced another 5o yards and fired s more rounds of AP, we were then
about 150 yards from target. As there was no other answering fire except small arms I
looked back to see if the way was clear for the AVRE. Then I engaged machine gun
nests dotting the beach which were playing merry hell along the water line."
Of the DD Shermans that arrived on Nan Green, two tanks were subsequently
swamped in the surf. Duels broke out between the tanks on the beaches and the
88mm and 75mm anti-tank guns in the bunkers, which the tanks won, not losing
a single tank in the firefight. The assault infantry and AVREs arrived Is min-
utes later, and the AVREs set about making exits off the beach. The tanks began
to engage the pill boxes along the promenade in co-ordinated attacks with the
infantry. The appearance of the tanks was apparently a complete surprise to the
defenders and contributed to their decision to surrender, according to one report
in the Hussars war diary." Half an hour later, at about 090o hours, the first tanks of
B Squadron were able to leave the beach and assisted the infantry with the clearing
of Courseulles. By 1400 hours, B Squadron only had nine tanks fit; the tank of
Lieutenant Seaman had struck a mine assisting the Regina Rifles into Reviers.
Later that afternoon, whilst advancing inland on a reconnaissance patrol of the
high ground behind Pierrepoint, five of the squadron's tanks were destroyed in
matter of minutes when distracted by a dummy anti-tank gun. By the end of the
day, according to the regimental war diary, B Squadron had four tanks fit. Sergeant
Gariepy provided a detailed account of the action:
We moved along road past ADEN (codename for Reviers) when high ground reached
we deployed - first troop on left, second troop right then HQF covering rear from
hull down position on high ground. Small calibre mortar fire was observed in wood
behind ADEN. Keeping our formation, we advanced on wood firing HE at the edge.
When in valley about iso yards in front of wood, heavy mortar fire was ranging
close to second troop. Second troop leader had no wireless so I called Sun Ray and
explained situation and he advised me to withdraw, so I laid down smoke screen to
cover our withdrawal. The troop leader realised what was happening and tuned back
in two-up formation; troop leader and corporal in front and I in the rear, about ten
yard in rear covering with smoke. When top of crest was reached, I saw my troop
leader's tank burst into flame. I halted, told my driver to reverse full speed and my
gunner to traverse 160 degrees right. When this was almost completed I saw my
corporal's tank blown up in turn. I then halted my driver and gave a fire order to bear
on the anti-tank gun which was in between the burning tanks approximately 6o yards
away. After two rapid round of HE I hit target. I then reported back to Sun Ray who
told me to proceed to ADEN. The rest of the squadron followed, the encounter cost
us ยง tanks - the anti-tank gun was an 88mm."9
D-Day Tanks
37
Another account of the same action was given by the troop leader, Lieutenant
Mcleod, who provided a vivid description of what it was like when a tank was hit:
I was leading the squadron which at that time consisted of the two tanks in SHQ,
another troop of three tanks and my troop; we moved to the right or west of the
town and swung through the fields towards the high ground south of Reviers. I saw
a haystack directly in front at which I fired two rounds of HE. The next thing there
was a great jolt in the tank and the turret swung about. The driver reported over
the intercom that his periscope had been shot away and the gunner reported that his
traverse gears would not work. I immediately gave the order for the driver to swing
left and speed up.
A moment late a shell came across the tops of the turret hitting the cupola lids. My
face seemed cut and my earphones and tin hat had been knocked off. I then crouched
down to give the driver orders to keep going helped by the co-driver who could still
see through his periscope. The operator then said the tank was on fire so he pulled
the fire extinguisher knobs and used the extinguisher in the turret on the rear hull
around the oil canister. The motor quit so I gave the order to bail out. The gunner,
operator and myself got out of the turret onto the ground to find the turret was in
such a position that the main gun would not allow the driver's or co-driver's hatch to
be opened. The screen on the outside was burning by now but I managed to get in the
turret and somehow swing it enough for the driver and co-driver to escape through
a hole in the basket. The co-driver could not get his hatch off due to Bostik glue. We
all laid still in front of the tank in the tall wheat to collect our bearings. o
Lieutenant Mcleod was hit in the eye by a piece of shrapnel from the 88mm AP
shell that hit the turret hatches and was evacuated back to England.
During the landings, the concrete buster LCT(A) CB 2401 had carried out the
destruction of a specific bunker near Courseulles as planned on the run into the
beach, each tank using only thirty rounds of ammunition to do so. The ammuni-
tion for the Firefly was carried separately in the LCT(A) so that the tanks could
land with a full load of ammunition. The two Fireflies (commanded by Lieutenant
Irving) joined up with B Squadron but whilst proceeding inland, Lieutenant Irving
was wounded when his tank was hit and disabled by a somm anti-tank gun.
C Squadron
C Squadron plus the tanks of RHQ, a total of seventeen Shermans V and five
Sherman Vc (including RHQ), were scheduled to land at H-hour+45 minutes.
The landing craft arrived at 0820 hours on Mike beach to find that, apart from
occasional sniping and machine-gun fire, it was secure but a traffic jam was rapidly
developing on the beach. By 0900 hours, there were still no exits. The AVR Es had
been labouring to clear a gap through some flooded ground beyond the sand dunes
to a lateral road, and one AVRE carrying a fascine had become almost submerged.
The fascine was removed by its crew, which then enabled a bridge-layer AVRE to
