The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
them up for an attack. In addition to these fundamental difficulties, the problem of
the convoluted chain of command, which affected the operations of the 2ist Panzer
Division so much on D-Day, would continue to plague German operations for the
next four weeks.
However, the first week of the campaign was the most vital in terms of the need
for a successful German counterattack against the Allied beachheads, which were
at their most vulnerable. Seventh Army believed that no matter which strategy was
followed, Rommel or von Schweppenburg's, a decisive counterattack had to be
made within three to four days of the landings?5
Having finally been given their mobilisation orders, Panzer Lehr and the 12th SS
Panzer Divisions commenced their approach marches to Caen but were set upon
by Allied fighter-bombers and their progress to the frontline severely delayed. At
1507 hours on 6 June, all three panzer divisions were subordinated to the is SS
Panzer Korps, which was commanded by Sepp Dietrich who had risen through the
ranks of the SS from being Hitler's bodyguard in the early 1930s. Although having
seen action in Poland and Russia, Dietrich was more of a leader of men in battle
rather than a tactician and was not regarded as an intellectual by von Rundsted!"
In recognition of this weakness, Panzer Gruppe West, under von Schweppenburg,
was given control of the panzer divisions on 7 June to co-ordinate their actions.
However, von Schweppenburg did not arrive until the evening of & June and until
then the counterattacks were Dietrich's responsibility, supported by Rommel. The
three panzer divisions were now subject to the control and orders of six higher
commands: the Ist SS Panzer Korps, Seventh Army, Panzer Gruppe West, Army
Group B (Rommel), von Rundstedt (C-in-C West) and the OKW in Germany,
this did not make for clear lines of command and control.
The 12th SS Panzer Division only had one of its panzer battalions and one
panzergrenadier regiment for the attack on 7 June as the division's movement to the
frontline had been deayed by Allied arcraft and preparations for the counteraras
at 16oo hours were interrupted by the Canadian advance to Buron. Whilst the
I2th SS Panzer Division was entering the battle, the Panzer Lehr Division was only
at Thury harcourt, having been delayal. at a bridge over the River Urne that had
been damaged by British aircraft.
Another problem faced by the Germans was the disruption of their communica
tions networks, again by Allied aircraft. Towns at regional hubs in Normandy such
as Argentan, Caen, St Lô and Caumont had all been heavily bombea, damaging
the telephone connections between units. Wireless communication was otten dif
ficult as the radio cars of frontline units were harassed by Allied fighter-bombas
and identified headquarters were shelled by naval guns and artillery. Panzer Lehr
had difficulty even locating the ist SS Pizer Korps headquarters on 7 June atter
the death of a liaison officer carrying codes to the division. When Dayeren mal
met up with Dietrich, plans were issued by the ist SS Panzer Korps for a renewer
attack next day by the 2ist and 12th SS Panzer Divisions aimed at the coast a
Courseulles via Bretteville. Panzer Lehr was to follow up as soon as it arrived.
115
Bridgehead Battles
Some forward elements of the Panzer Lehr arrived at their assembly area near
Bronay at dawn on 8 June to find units of the i2th SS already there so they were
forced to withdraw. The northernmost part of the assembly area was also held by
the Canadians, further adding to the early morning confusion. This situation was
the result of poor staff work by the ist SS Panzer Korps, a rapidly changing situa-
tion on the ground and the failure of communications.
It is possible that the two
panzergrenadier regiments of the 12th SS were supposed to shift their positions to
the right before the attack to close a gap between them and the 2Ist Panzer Division
but did not receive their orders, although no evidence has been found of this."
The newly arrived 26th Panzergrenadier Regiment began its attack in the early
hours of 8 June without any armoured support from the Panther tank battalion,
which had again been delayed by Allied aircraft. Putot was captured briefly from
the Canadians, who were overrun, but the situation was restored by the Canadian
Scottish Regiment, assisted by artillery and the tanks of the ist Hussars. Bronay
was occupied by the 2nd Battalion of 902nd Panzergrenadiers of Panzer Lehr, who
were subjected to naval gunfire:
Here we encountered the most terrible image of war.
The enemy had virtually cut
to pieces units of Panzer Lehr Division with heavy weapons.
Armoured personnel
carters and equipment had been ripped apart and next to them on the ground, even
hanging from trees, were body parts of dead comrades. A terrible silence covered all. 38
As Panzer Lehr fought for its jumping off positions for the attack and waited for its
tank battalions to arrive, Rommel drove to Bayerlein's command post and ordered
the attack to stop and for the division to shift its position in preparation for an
attack next day on Bayeux. The Seventh Army had ordered the Ist SS Panzer
Korps to carry out this attack, much to the incredulity of its Chief of Staff, who
complained after the war that the Seventh Army expected an attack to be made by
panzer divisions without understanding that they were already engaged holding
together the frontline in support of the badly mauled infantry divisions.?"
To emphasise the apparent remoteness of Seventh Army and the communication
problems, General Dollman had to go to the command post of Ist SS Panzer Korp
on s june to inform himself first-hand about the situation as, according to the
Seventh Army War diary for 8 June, no counterattacks had apparently taken place.40
That evening, the first two companies of the Panther tank battalion of the
12th SS Panzer Division finally arrived on the battlefield and an attack was made
on Bretteville L'Orgueilleuse after dark by the tanks and a company of motorcycle
Intry mounted on them. The Panthers ran into a 6-pounder anti-tank gun
screen and many tanks were knocked out and caught fire. The mounted infantry
mmediately went to ground and the Panthers rashly carried on the attack directly
into Bretteville without their support. Ine intantry and anti-tank guns of the
Regina Rifles were able to knock out five Panther tanks, including several at close
ange that had penetrated into Bretteville as 30r as the battalion command post.
