136
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
heavy casualties that day. Only the surviving tanks of C Squadron and a few crew
members of B Squadron who had bailed out when their tanks were hit made it back
to the railway line or Norrey.
In what came to be known as the Black Day of the Hussars, there were only two
of B Squadron's twenty-one tanks left and these had broken down before entering
the battle * Only one B Squadron officer survived and he was taken prisoner; eight
officers and forty-seven men were killed, six were posted as missing and a further
twenty were wounded? It was an even darker day for the infantry,
however:
D Company of the Queen's Own Rifles had ninety-eight casualties out of nearly 120
men, fifty-five of whom were killed. The regiment itself lost a total of twenty-five
Shermans and three Fireflies, not the thirty-seven tanks claimed by some historians;
thirty-seven was the total stated as lost by the whole brigade for that day26
The Hussars claimed that they knocked out fourteen German tanks, includ-
ing Panthers and a number of anti-tank guns.? Trooper Chapman, in his Firefly,
claimed three more German tanks. However, no Panther tanks took part in this
action, as the attack was met by the Mark IVs of the znd battalion of the 12th SS
Panzer Regiment, which recorded only three Panzer IVs as being lost that day.?3
Both the war diaries of the znd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the ist Hussars
state that the action had resulted in a major German attack being defeated, but this
was incorrect. The Germans had already postponed any planned major counterat-
tack until more panzer divisions had arrived, so the losses inflicted on the Hussars
were simply from the Germans reacting to their advance. The parallel attack on the
right by the British 69th Brigade had been delayed, so the entire Mark IV battalion
was able to be concentrated to resist the Canadians. The verdict of the Canadian
historian on the operation was succinct, describing the operation as a complete and
costly failure' in the Canadian official history. 29
Next day, the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade sent a plaintive message to the
RAC at the Second British Army HQ requesting that friendly AFV recognition
procedures be standardised. An RAC liaison officer also reported that the brigade
was being outgunned and that more Sherman Ves were needed. Communication
problems were ascribed to the failure of the radios in DD tanks due to saltwater
contamination from the D-Day landings? On the night of 16/17 June, Le Mesnil
Patry was finally occupied without any opposition since the Germans had with-
drawn in response to progress by the soth Division on the right.
Cristot
On it June, the soth Division was ordered by XXX Corps to continue its advance
and clear St Pierre, Cristot and the nearby woodlands. It was intended that this
would reduce the pressure on the 7th Armoured Division's drive southwards as well
as protecting its left flank. The 69th Brigade, positioned east of the River Seulles,
had been fighting for the strategic hill of Point 103 near St Pierre for the previous
137
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
to days. On I June it was tasked with enlarging the salient it occupied, which
an though Audrieu and St Pierre, and given the specific objectives of capturing
Cist and Point 102, on which a considerable number of troublesome German
motars were thought to be located.
Prior to this attack the CO of the 4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards' B Squadron
bad coducted a reconnaissance in his tank of the approaches to the village of
Citor and Point 102 and had seen a considerable number of infantry but there
nas no strong reaction. Enemy fire was received from hidden snipers and machine
guners, who seemed to be in every hedge, but the tanks were impervious to
this and had no casualties. This reconnaissance may have disrupted a German
zack in the process of forming up, but it also alerted the Germans to possible
British intentions?"
The attack would be in the afternoon by the 6th Green Howards battalion,
ported by the tanks of the 4th/7th Royal Dragoons plus two batteries of self-
popele artillery. It would be the first combined tank/infantry operation by the
Royal Dragoons and it was organised as per previous training and then current
doctrine, with the tanks in the leading wave with the many due more bane t
successive waves behind.2
At Içoo hours, the 6th Green Howards passed through the ist worsets in the
troutine and began the advance eastwards, either side of the track from Point tus
to Cristot and Point to2. Ihe guns of the moble artery free on known idgers
and one hedge immediately ahead of the advance in order to try and eliminate any
hidden German positions?3
For the attack, the intantry went in two companies up with b squadron tanks
apporting on the right and C Squadron on the left. B Squadron was somewhat
inderstrength with only nine tanks avalable for the allack. Having crossed the
start line, the infantry soon met opposition at about 1700 hours from machine guns
and smpers. In the close bocage countryside, with its small fields and long, thick
hedges, the tanks of the Dragoons quickty got separated from the many who
agged behind. It was impossible to see the enemy positions until they opened fire,
and the infantry began to suffer heavy casualties.
ust beto: he advance along the track reached the cristol-ves aus vers
road, two B Squadron Shermans were knockede ut by a hidden anti-tank gun
south-west of Cristot. The vanguard crossed this road but heavy machine-gun fire
from the top of a sunken lane straight ahead temporarily stopped the advance. the
infantry deployed one company either side of the lane with one company to charge
straight up it. B Squadron moved into a small orchard on the right to bypass the
lane and began to receive anti-tank fire trom a dug-in ranther tank and the same
anti-tank gun, losing two more tanks. The remaining B Squadron tanks pushed on
and traversed a hedge into another small field immediately south of Cristot. Still in
view of the Panther tank, the remaining tanks of b squadron were hit, includis
the tank of the B Squadron's second in command. Lance Corporal Jackie Weir was
the driver:
