108
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
La Mare at dusk when they were forced to harbour without having reached their
D-Day objectives.
At dawn on 7 June, the regiment resumed the advance southwards towards
Villons les Buissons with the soldiers of the North Nova Scotia (NNS) Highlanders
from the gth Canadian Infantry Brigade mounted on its tanks. The order of ad-
vance was:
• Recce troop
• C Company NNS in their carriers
• A Company NNS on A Squadron tanks - right
• B Company NNS on B Squadron tanks - left
• D Company on C Squadron tanks
A Squadron was on the right flank and B Squadron on the left; C Squadron was
in the centre on the axis of advance. A troop of Stuart tanks advanced into Buron
about 1000 hours and held it for an hour and a half amidst heavy mortar fire
and sporadic infantry attacks while waiting for the vanguard of the regiment to
arrive. Initial opposition to the advance came from a single anti-tank gun outside
Buron, but the infantry quickly dealt with this; dismounting from the tanks, they
charged the gun position and destroyed it with hand grenades. A small number of
German infantry were similarly eliminated by the accompanying infantry and the
tanks. The German defenders were a part of a panzergrenadier battalion from the
2ist Panzer Division and stragglers from the 7t6th Division. Nearing Buron, the
two squadrons by-passed the village, with the recce troop protecting the left (as)
Hank. Buron itself was entered and secured at about IIs0 hours.* I he carriers of
C Company of the North Nova Scotia Highlanders went on to Authie withou
armoured support until a number of machine guns opened tire and supped the
advance; heavy mortar and artillery fire was then directed at the Highlanders.
As it advanced past Villons les Buissons, B Squadron opened tire on some
half-tracks and supply vehicles in the orchards to the east. After the many dad
dismounted in Buron, the tanks moved to the right of Galmanche to conduct
a squadron shoot on some enemy tanks, half racks and troops that appeared to
be forming up for an attack. The squadron was then hit by heavy and dude
retalian ry artillery fire and a mortar barrage which forced it to retire to the nigh
ground sooyds further north, leaving behind for knocked-out or damaged tanks.
Meanwhile, the infantry carried by A Squadron tanks dismounted south of Buron
and began digging-in near Gruchy whele the tanks proceeded on to Authie and
Franqueville. Two tank troops went forward of support C Squadron, already try
ing to counteract the machine-gun fire holding up the advance of the intantry
Another troop was sent to help B Squadron who at 1410 hours had reported
German tanks coming in on the left flank.
The bulk of the 12th SS Panzer Division, which had arrived overnight, and the
2Ist Panzer Division were ordered by the ist SS Panzer Korps to launch an attack
Bridgehead Battles
109
БіЛОЙ
THE CANARAN FRONT
GRENADIER
L LEVEL NOT SH
Buron - the Canadian advance inland of the Sherbrooke Fusiliers and the gth Canadian Infantry
Brigade on 7 June 1944, adapted from the Victory Campaign
at 1600 hours with the aim of breaking through to the coast at Lion sur Mer.
The commanders of the 12th SS Panzer Division and Ist SS Panzer Korps met
with Feuchtinger at his command post at St Pierre sur Dives at 2000 hours. Kurt
Meyer, the commander of the 25th Panzer am ier Regiment, boasted, 'Little
fish! We will throw them back into the sea in the morning!"' Only the Mark
IV battalion of the 12th SS Panzer Regiment had arrived in time to take part
in what would be the division's first action. The battalion had ninety-one Mark
IVHs fit on 1 June, but some tanks were left at Elbeuf and did not arrive until
the next day. Sturmbannführer Prinz, commander of the battalion, reported to
Meyer that approximately fifty tanks had arrived. The tanks and panzergrenadiers
were deployed in a v-shaped formation from Franqueville to St Contest for their
coming attack and as Meyer watched the Canadian tanks from the tower of the
abbey at Ardennes, they advanced further towards the German positions, which
had become, by accident, a trap for the Canadians. Meyer ordered the waiting
tanks and anti-tank guns to hold their fire.
A Squadron, having pushed on through to Franqueville where they could see
neir main objective, the airfield at Carpiquet, reported enemy tanks in a valley in
ront of them. At about 1400 hours, a zug of four Mark IVHs from the sth Company
nette shermans of A squadron along the road from authie to rianyuevile, da
