266
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
divisions, particularly Marigny, were too far away and the divisions were too weak
to realistically attain them. 2
The 2nd Armored Division was more heavily engaged in tank-to-tank combat
when CCA pushed towards Tessy-sur-Vire where it fought with tanks of the 2nd and
Iloth Panzer Divisions. The division had forty-five M4s and two Mss replaced
during July and as the division was in reserve until Operation Cobra, this total
was lost during the breakout.® The 3rd Battalion of the 66th Armored Regiment
(CCA) alone had thirty-five tanks damaged or destroyed during Operation
Cobra for the destruction of only four German tanks.'4 The 2nd Battalion of the
66th Armored Regiment also had fourteen tanks knocked out or damaged and
received a Presidential Unit Citation for its efforts.
There were six independent tank battalions attached to the infantry divisions of
the three corps of the FUSA engaged in Operation Cobra and a total of forty-nine
tanks were lost by these battalions. A total of at least 109 American medium tanks
were knocked out in Operation Cobra, the majority of which were destroyed and
had to be replaced.
German armour losses during Operation Cobra are difficult to estimate.
The
znd SS Panzer Division on 23 July had seventy-eight tanks and twenty-five as-
sault guns operational but by the time of Operation Luttich on 7 August only
had twenty-five tanks and perhaps fifteen assault guns operational." Therefore an
estimated fifty-three tanks and ten assault guns were lost in Operation Cobra by
this SS division.
Panzer Lehr was occupying the frontline directly under the aerial bombardment
and there were 347 panzergrenadiers killed in July with another I,480 missing
following the bombings of 24 and 25 July. Reports vary as to the number of tanks
lost. Certainly some Panther tanks were lost in the bombing, either buried or
overturned, as photographs exist of these tanks. One report states that forty tanks
in the frontline were destroyed by the American bombs but another says that the
Mark IV battalion was withdrawn to form a mobile reserve and very few Panther
tanks were actually knocked out.®? The division records show the same number
of Mark IVs operational (fifteen) on I August as on 23 July while the number of
operational Panthers has decreased from sixteen to twelve in the same period, so
t would appear that only four Panther tanks were lost during peration cobra.
Une war correspondent counted nineteen tanks knocked out or abandoned alone
2 miles of the road to St Gilles but did not identify the type or unit."" With the
capture of the division's repair facility at Cerisy de Salle, the entire tank strength of
the division was reduced to only thirty-three tanks and assault guns by I August,
less than two full-strength companies. Panzer Lehr would never fight again as
a division and the survivors formed a battle group, which was attached to other
units over the next few weeks.
Therefore the Germans lost an estimated seventy tanks and assault guns in
Operation Cobra, the bulk of these being from the 2nd SS Panzer Division. The
eight infantry divisions in LXXXIV Corps also had companies of self-propelled
Operation Cobra
267
anti-tank guns (Marders) and Stug III assault guns as part of their organic anti-
tank units and those that were still operational attempted to break out through
the American lines with their infantry. Most of these armoured vehicles were
destroyed in the Roncey pocket and in the clashes with CCB of the 2nd Armored
Division during 29-30 July.
Operation Cobra utilised the strengths of FUSA and developed into an out-
standing success. The initial attack of three infantry divisions well supported by an
abundance of artillery and heavy air support concentrated on a narrow front did
not go well and it was left to the Ist Division and the combat commands of the
znd and grd Armored divisions to force their way through the German lines the
next day. After some initial difficulties around Marigny for the Ist Division, the
two armoured divisions were then able to move through the gap and make rapid
advances against the defeated and disorganised Germans in a textbook armoured
attack. Unfortunately the failure of the 3rd Armored Division to form a secure
cordon quickly enough allowed many Germans and their equipment to evade the
trap being set before the 2nd Armored Division finally established a line further
south on 29 July. With the apparent early success of the operation, Montgomery
issued a directive on 27 July stating that:
.. the main blow of the whole Allied plan has now been struck on the western
fank; that blow is the foundation of all our operations, and it has been well and
truly struck. 9
A day later, in a cable to Brooke, Montgomery was even more confident in the
outcome: "It begins to look as if policy we have been working on for so many weeks
Is now going to pay a dividend. However, the same day, in a second telegram to
Brooke, Montgomery stressed the importance of the pending Operation Bluecoat
in which all caution would be thrown to
the winds' in another British breakout
attempt.
Notes
I Danchev, A. and Todman, D., eds, War Diaries Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke (London,
Weidenfeld and Nicolson), p.$66
2 D'Este, C., Decision in Normandy (London, Penguin, 2000), p.303
3 CAB 44/248, letter Eisenhower to Montgomery, 7 July 1944, TNA.
4 Letter Dempsey to Liddell Hart re Operation Goodwood, 28 March
1952,
LHCMA
LH1/230/22
s CAB 44/248, letter Montgomery to Brooke, 1o July 1944
6 CAB 44/248, signal Montgomery to Eisenhower, 13 July 1944
7 CAB 44/248, signal Montgomery to Brooke, 14 July 1944
8 Blumenson, M., Breakout and Pursuit (Washington, US Army CMH, 1961), p.177
9 Blumenson, ibid, p.207
