394
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
forward on foot and I show him the Shermans still standing on Point 262 and firing
into the pocket. The young commander issues orders and within a minute three
enemy tanks have been knocked out. He continues firing until he has knocked out
tive Shermans and inflicted damage upon several others.?8
The other Sherman tanks withdrew from sight and the shelling on troops mak-
ing their escape below was eased. Two tanks from the 3rd Squadron (2nd Tank
Regiment) were knocked out by Mark IV tanks supporting the 3rd Battalion Der
Führer.? During the fighting in the morning, a convoy of trucks carrying supplies
for the Polish was wrecked by German artillery as it approached Coudehard from
the north.
Despite the German pressure from the north, at 1000 hours the Poles attacked
across the valley as ordered the previous day with two squadrons of the ist Tank
Regiment and two companies of infantry to take Mont Ormel on the southern
Hill 262.
The progress was slow through the wreckage littering the Chamboss-
Vimoutiers road and the fierce German defence. With the losses to the 3rd Squadron
(ist Tank Regiment) seriously weakening the defenders to the north, the decision
was made to abandon the attack southwards and recall the battle group as all forces
were needed to defeat the German attacks from the north.
While German troops continued their attack on Coudehard, others fled east-
wards as fast as they could, under a continuous bombardment from Canadian and
Polish artillery. The roads were choked with destroyed vehicles, wrecked guns and
the bodies of men and horses. The lack of mobility of German infantry divisions
was now coming back to haunt the Germans: what was left of the panzer divisions
had been able to move out of pocket during the night, leaving the walking infantry.
The 2nd SS Das Reich panzergrenadiers were able to create a thin semi-circular
line north of Coudehard to contain any offensive actions from the Polish that
could interfere with the withdrawal. The simultaneous attack by a few tanks of the
oth So Panzer waisor on the right flank down the Champedus to run road with
the objective of Louvieres only reached the high ground at St Gervais where it
was stopped by the tanks of the British Columbia Regiment. The panzergrenadier
regiments were too weak to make a decisive attack and could only fight defensively
to keep the northern shoulder of the corridor open.
Attempts were made to drop supplies by parachute to the Polish during the day,
but these supplies fell behind German lines. Infuriated by the Polish resistance,
Hausser ordered the Coudehard position be eliminated and from noon onwards the
entile position was subjected to concentrated artillery and mortar fire. A second
attack from the north-east by a battalion of infantry supported by some Mark IV
tanks was beaten off in the afternoon. At 1700 hours, the perimeter defences to
the north were broken by three Mark IVs that penetrated the Polish lines and
were able to set free a number of German prisoners before being knocked out by
a counterattack from tanks of the Ist Tank Regiment. Another Sherman tank was
lost, but 800 more prisoners were taken. The Germans continued their attacks until
395
Falaise Gap
about 1900 hours when they withdrew to resume their retreat under the cover of
diness. The Poles, exhausted and virtually out of food, fuel, medical supplies and
muntion, were desperately awaiting the arrival of the Canadians.
The harbour of the roth Mounted Rifles on Hill 113, north of Chambois,
ad been attacked during the night by a large German reconnaissance force. At
dawn, infantry supported by fifteen Panthers and four Mark IVs mounted a strong
German atack. The brunt of the fighting fell on the grd Squadron, which was
be to hold its ground with the support of the rest of the regiment. The German
itantry pushed so close to the Polish position that when their armour was knocked
our and the Polish tanks' machine guns began to take a heavy toll, many of the
Germans surrendered rather than risk death by continuing to seek a way out of the
trap. Entire companies gave themselves up,erncluding commanders of units of the
UXXXIV Korps and a panzergrenadier battalion from the znd Panzer Division.
to the Polish, the ammunition shortage was becoming a major problem, as were
the numbers of wounded and prisoners. When, in the afternoon, the loth Mounted
Rites made contact with the 38sth Infantry battalion from the US goth Division
at Chambois, the Americans were able to assist with the wounded and took re-
ponsibility for the prisoners of war. The regiment then decided to move closer to
a relative safety of the American positions on the id stern outskirts of Chambois.
I savage day of combat, the toth Mounted Rifles had four men killed and four
wounded and lost two Cromwell tanks, but they destroyed four Panthers and four
Mark Is as well as several armoured can and took more than 1,200 prisoners, 1º
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division's plans for an advance to Vimoutiers were
cancelled at o637 hours that morning on the orders of Kitching. Intelligence had
been received overnight that a massive German breakout was to be attempted
that day, spearheaded by an armoured column. The division was to be used to
dock the German forces escaping through the nig" ground to the north-east of
Chambois. However, these new orders were not received by the Foot Guards,
Which set off at o530 hours from Point 258 towards Vimoutiers with A Squadron
and two companies of motorised infantry as previously ordered, getting as far as
Camembert with little opposition. The rest of the regiment had moved up to join
them before the operation was cancelled and the regiment had to hastily turn
around and return to its previous position, Point 258, which was directly in the
path of the retreating Germans.
During the night, many Germans had worked their way past the South Alberta
tanks, which were unable to stem the human tide or do much more than specula-
tive shooting in the darkness. Waves of men led by the 3rd Parachute Division
broke on the positions of the South Albertas. As there were only a few infantry
With C Squadron to interfere with the German retreat, the bulk of the remaining
Germans tried to bypass the Canadians, aided by the morning drizzle from low
clouds, which had also grounded most aircraft. There was no organised attack, just
a mass of moving men, which despite heavy losses, began to overwhelm the posi-
tions in St Lambert and at RHQ on Hill 117. A Tiger tank entered the main street
