272
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Montgomery's directive Msis of 27 July is vague regarding Vire and states only
that a strong force should be held ready for a rapid exploitation towards Vire?
The operational orders of VIII Corps for Operation Bluecoat say nothing about
Vire. The primary intention of Operation Bluecoat, as stated in the VIII Corps
orders, was for XXX Corps to assist FUSA in its breakout attempt by capturing
and denying the use of the high ground at Mont Pinçon to the Germans to use as
an anchor or hinge for their Seventh Army!º The VIII Corps objective furthest
south given was that of Petit Aunay, which was just north of the River Soulevre
and nowhere near Vire.
An attack by six British divisions was planned into the worst bocage countryside
in Normandy. To the usual small fields, high hedgerows and sunken lanes of the
bocage were added heavily wooded areas and many steep hills, ridges and valleys.
So bad was the terrain that the German 326th Division, defending part of that
sector, had no tank support apart from two companies of Mark IV tanks left behind
by the znd Panzer Division and its own anti-tank company, comprising fourteen
Marders and ten Stug III self-propelled guns as the Germans thought the country
to be unsuitable for tanks.
In order tor FUSA to concentrate its forces for Operation Cobra, the Second
British Army had extended its responsibilities on 23 July to include part of the
line previously held by the sth US Infantry Division so the Isth (H) Division
was moved into the line next to the Americans." This allowed the inexperienced
US sth Division to attack on a smaller, single regiment front, which they had
been doing since 26 July but had only managed to advance 3 miles in the difficult
countryside before Operation Bluecoat.
The short space of time available to mount Operation Bluecoat meant that when
the first operational orders were issued by VIII Corps on 29 July to the two divi-
sions leading the attack, the lith Armoured and the isth (H) Divisions, the times
for the start of the attack could not be given as the details of the air support had not
yet been determined. Once again, as in the previous breakout attacks of Operations
Goodwood and Cobra, extensive air support had been organised to assist with the
breakthrough of the German lines. When finally confirmed, the air support plan
was for 700 R AF heavy bombers to bomb targets in front of XXX Corps between
o8ss and 09ss hours and 900 USAAF bombers to support VIII Corps at the same
time. Cloudy weather on the first day of Operation Bluecoat then interfered with
the air support programme.
Only 480 RAF bombers were able to locate their
targets, and all fighter-bomber squadrons were grounded. The USAAF success-
fully carried out its mission in support of XXX Corps.ª Learning from Operation
Goodwood, a further bombing raid had been organised for the afternoon to assist
with the advance through the German defences that were organised in depth as
was their usual practice. If Operation Bluecoat was not ever intended as a breakout
operation, the need for this second air raid is not clear. A second air raid had been
requested by VIII Corps planners for Operation Goodwood and had been refused.
The war diaries of the 4th Grenadier Guards and the 3rd Scots Guards Armoured
Operation Bluecoat
273
regiments state that Operation Bluecoat was intended both as a breakthrough and
breakout battle. Nevertheless, Montgomery was again hedging his bets with his
orders for VIII Corps, which were only to be prepared to exploit southwards whilst
at the same time conveying to the CIGS and Eisenhower what they wanted to hear.
Operation Bluecoat involved four corps of the Second British Army, principally the
British VIII and XXX Corps, which were to be supported by simultaneous attacks
by units of XII Corps and the znd Canadian Corps further east. The main advance
was to be made by XXX Corps whose final orders were to capture the area of high
ground at Point 361 west of Jurques using the soth and 43rd Divisions, supported by
the 8th Armoured Brigade with the 7th Armoured Division in reserve. When this
was completed, the 7th Armoured Division was to be prepared to pass through and
either capture Le Bény Bocage, Vire or dominate the Mont Pinçon feature.
VIl Corps was to advance on a two-division front with the isth (H) Division
on the left and lith Armoured Division on the right; its mission was to protect the
right flank of XXX Corps, capture the high ground east of St Martin des Besaces
(Point 309) and advance as far as Petit Aunay. The main effort was to come from
the Scottish Division as the lith Armoured Division, after being mauled during
Goodwood, was only involved as there was no other infantry division available.!s
The Guards Armoured Division was in reserve.
Following the difficulties of fighting in the bocage experienced over the previ-
ous eight weeks by the Allies, the British armoured formations reorganised to
try and find the best structure for infantry tank cooperation. In VIII Corps, the
ISth (H) Division was reunited with the 6th Guards Tank Brigade with which
it had trained before the invasion.
Two troops of three Churchill tanks, with
a seventh Churchill with 95mm howitzer from the 4th Grenadier Guards, were
allocated to each company of the 227th brigade."*
The Guards Armoured Division in VIII Corps also reorganised at the specific
instruction of General O' Connor. An infantry battalion and an armoured bat-
talion were grouped together. The two Grenadier Guards battalions were at last
put together, but for some reason the Coldstream and Irish Guards units remained
separated so that the ist Armoured Coldstream worked with the 3rd Irish Guards
and and Irish Guards worked with the infantry of the sth Coldstream. This reor-
Ganisation was done in great haste, within 90 minutes, on the basis of which bat-
talions were camped next to each other in adjacent fields." The motorised battalion
of the Grenadier Guards was thus lost to the other armoured regiments, restricting
their mobility and flexibility. 16
The lith Armoured Division reorganised into two battle groups. The division's
ISoth Brigade would work with the 2nd Fife and Forfar Regiment, whilst the rest
of the 29th Brigade would be supported by an extra infantry battalion brought
into VIII Corps, the 3rd Monmouth. Although not of equal size, General Roberts
hoped that the two battle groups would give a more flexible and integrated organi-
sation that would produce results in the bocage. Both battle groups were supported
by divisional and corps artillery plus AVR Es from the 79th Armoured Division.
