202
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
artillery being amassed around the wrecked gliders of the 6th Airborne Division
that had captured the vital Ranville bridge over the River Orne on D-Day. Dietrich
mocked his captors after the war by claiming that he could hear the British tanks
moving up by putting his ear to the ground in Red Indian fashion.
In the frontline, at the expected place of attack, was the Ith Luftwaffe Field
Division and elements of the 2Ist Panzer Division. The 2ist Panzer Division, hav-
ing been in continuous combat since D-Day, was sorely in need of a rest and refit.
The bulk of the division had been placed in reserve behind the Luftwaffe division,
which had also been badly mauled in the fighting for Caen and was in reality
nothing more than a screen for the German positions. However, Feuchtinger had
not been idle and had prepared many defensive positions and firing pits for his
tanks and assault guns. These defences were inspected regularly by Rommel and
General Eberbach, the new commander of Panzer Gruppe West. The countryside
south of the River Orne along the intended line of attack was a chess board of
small, open wheat fields studded with small stonewalled villages every mile or
so. By occupying and defending these villages, the Germans were able to create
carefully planned arcs of fire and killing zones for their high velocity anti-tank
weapons. The open Normandy countryside, which the British so coveted for their
airfields and which was good tank country, was even more perfect for defence,
with its long, uninterrupted views and lines of fire. The British would also have to
negotiate two raised railway lines that crossed the battlefield and would generally
19 attacking uphill, allowing the Germans to have a good view of the battle as it
unfolded below them.
The Germans had several panzer divisions available for defence. The complete
Ist SS Panzer Korps had recently been moved into the area. The Ist SS Liebstandarte
Adolf Hitler was in reserve south of the bourguebus klag aund bully and
Bretteville sur Laize whilst the 12th SS Panzer Division was also resting in reserve
around Potigny and Garcelles. The ist SS Panzer Korps also had a heavy tank
battalion (rorst Schwere SS) attached of approximately twenty-five Tigers, with
sixteen tanks operational on 16 July. " The 2ist Panzer Division had only fifty Mark
IVHs operational plus a battalion of fifty self-propelled guns converted by its com-
mander, Major Becker, from captured French tanks. Thirty powerful 75mm Pak
40 anti-tank guns had been mounted on the chassis of Hotchkiss tanks and another
twenty converted to fit 10smm howitzers. Firing pits, offering good camouflage
and a low profile, had been prepared for each vehicle to move into and out of as
the tactical situation required. Major Becker had organised these hybrid assault
guns into five batteries, each of six anti-tank vehicles and four self-propelled artil-
lery guns and deployed them in the various fortified villages along the anticipated
British line of advance. The sord Heavy Tank Battalion, equipped with Tiger
tanks, had taken the place of the second tank battalion of the 2ist Panzer Division.
Twelve of these Tiger tanks were the new Tiger Ils or King Tigers, at the time the
heaviest and most powerful tank of the war.
203
Operation Goodwood
German operational tanks and SP guns 17 July (per Zetterling)
PZIVH
59
50
Panther
Stug Ill
Tiger I
Tiger II
46
35
SP A/t Guns
Ist SS LAM
21st Panzer
503rd tank bn
101st SS tank bn
Total
30
109
46
35
27
16
43
12
12
3°
The tch Luftwaffe Division had two Stug IIIs and the 346th Division had eight
Sug Ill as part of their mobile anti-tank sections. On the eve of the battle, the
Germans could therefore muster fifty-five Tigers, forty-six Panthers, 109 Mark
Hs and seventy-five assault guns for a total of 285 armoured vehicles in the
frontline. In reserve, the 12th SS Panzer Division had twenty-one Panzer IVHs
and eighteen Panthers operational on 16 July, giving the Germans a total of 324
tanks and self-propelled guns, including the reserves. It was accurately estimated
by the British that the German armour in the frontline numbered 250 tanks."
The Germans also had a large number of anti-tank guns and dual-purpose 88mm
Pak guns in the area. Three batteries of six 88mm anti-tank guns of the 2ist Panzer
Division were located on the Bourguebust lage as were up to seventy-eight
dual-purpose 88mm nak guns of the lll Flak Korps, win had been deployed in
a crescent from Bourguébus to Cagny to provide air defence for Caen.
The two panzergrenadier regiments of the 2ist Panzer Division also had an
anti-tank capability. The heavy suppy t company of each battalion (there were
two battalions to a regiment) had three 75mm Pak 40 anti-tank guns and two of
these had been mounted on Somua half-tracks (another of Major Decker's hybrid
vehicles) making a total of twelve 75mm anti-tank guns.
These were
dispersed
E, the villages defended by the panzergrenadiers, such as Le Mesnil Frementes
Grentheville and Le Prieure. Each regiment t2 also had a battery or three somm
anti-tanks.
Therefore the Germans possessed a powerful anti-tank defence force. Kommel
and Eberbach had created four formidable defensive belts plus had strong reserves
in the tanks of the Ist SS Panzer Korpsquaig German Positions were the strongest
yet built in Normandy, but the British trusted that the fragmentation bombs of the
USAAF along the proposed corridor of advance and the artillery barrage directly
on the villages beforehand would neutralise these positions."
On the evening of 17 July 1944, the VIII Corps had more than 750 tanks opera-
tional for the coming day's battle and a further 460 tanks to support the infantry
divisions conducting the fank attacks. I his totde excludes the start talks, waich
were virtually no longer fit for use on the battlefield, and the self-propelled Mros
of divisional anti-tank regiments.
