148
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
7th RTR
A and B squadrons left their start lines at 0730 hours following the artillery
barrage to advance on Cheux 2 miles away with the infantry of 46th Brigade
they were supporting. For the operation, VIII Corps had under its command
$32 25-pounder field guns, 112 medium guns and 48 heavy artillery guns. This
firepower was supplemented by three Royal Navy cruisers and the monitor
HMS Roberts with its I6in guns. A programme of support from R AF medium and
heavy bombers was also organised but this had to be cancelled on the morning
of 26 June because of bad weather over England. Local tactical air support would
be provided by the fifteen squadrons of the 83rd Group operating from forward
airfields in Normandy."
Each squadron supported a Scottish battalion with two troops of tanks to each
company of infantry. In another interpretation of the 2Ist Army Group infantry/
tank policy, one troop advanced alongside the infantry while the second supported
from the rear! Within 0 minutes, nine tanks from the regiment had been dam-
aged in a German minefield just south of Le Mesnil Patry and the subsequent
confusion caused the tanks to fall behind the advancing infantry. The artillery
barrage had done its work and only limited opposition was encountered, particu-
Jarly as the tanks of the 12th SS had been drawn off towards Rauray by the attack
of XXX Corps. Cheux was reached about 1030 hours and on pushing further
south, the advance then ran into determined resistance. South of Cheux, the
bocage countryside, with its sunken lanes, high heages and small ben, began
to cause problems. The infantry on foot could only see to the next hedge and
tank commanders, from their elevated positions in the turret, could only see to
the next hedge beyond; numerous well-positioned German anti-tank guns and
camouflaged tanks held up the advance of the tanks, which were harried by the
panzergrenadiers and engineers of the I2th SS Division, armed with Panzerfausts
and magnetic mines. Co-operation with the infantry was difficult as the tank radio
sets were not working and the close countryside meant that tanks could only move
using the open fields or roads whilst the infantry negotiated the hedges and woods
so the two arms were quickly separated.
The regiment finally harboured near Cheux, fortunately not losing any more
tanks. There were a considerable number of casualties amongst the tank com-
manders who were victims of sniper fire; seven officers and twenty-six other men
were killed or wounded.'3
9th RTR
Advancing on the left flank with the 44th Brigade, the tanks of the 9th RTR
joined the infantry in following the artillery barrage at H-hour. A and B squad-
rons each supported a battalion of infantry with tanks following the infantry.
The objective of A and B squadrons was to reach the Caen-Fontenay road and
St Manvieu, where C Squadron would push on through to Colleville just north
149
Operation Epsom
dith River Odon. However, before even reaching the start line, two tanks fell
to sell. cater oft deep from one of the warships providing naval fire support.
The advance was initially without major incident, although a tank commander
was illed by a German mortar and three tanks were damaged; two tanks ran
or mines and a third temporarily immobilised when an anti-tank gun hit
a front idler."
' Manvieu was the location of the battalion headquarters of the ist battalion
sh S Panzergrenadier Regiment of the 12th SS Panzer Division, and it took
all 2000 hours to secure the Village after fierce hand-to-hand combat and the
die ame-throwing Crocodiles. A German counterattack by panzergrenadiers
an ev tanks of a newly arrived company from the 21st Panzer Division was
decimated by British artillery.
after the delay caused by the tenacious resistance in St Manvieu, the attack by
The 27 Brigade and gth RTR's C Squadron to push through the gap created by
me two other brigades began at gis hours withho au pu premataly duney bom-
ordine. The 227th Brigade was composed of the 1oth battalion Highland Light
minty, ad atalion Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders and the znd battalion
Cordon Highlanders. The actual attack was to be made by the toth Highlanders
and the nd Gordons, supported by the oth RTR, with the znd Argylls in reserve.
(Squadron advanced cautiously through the rubble-strewn streets of Cheux but
when the tanks moved through the wheat fieths towards Colleville and went over
a lage, they were hit by anti-tank gunfire and tire front canners. Visibilly was
or in the rain and gloom, making it aimul to see the butta posters. the
squadron was then divided into two with half to engage the tanks shooting at them
nd the other half to support the infantry into Colleville. A tale commander,
Sergeant Hall, reported afterwards:
We were to advance through the village of cheux did up on to the nage where wate
would be little opposition. Then we were to move on to the next ridge and try to
secure a crossing of the River Odon. It started to rain and as we were approaching
the ridge on the right fank, we saw some tanks had been hit and set on fire. I saw
Bien tracer coming towards us, one to the left and one to the right. The third was
a direct hit on the turret. We fired back along the ridge at what was either a Tiger or
a Panther, and reversed to be able to come up again in a different position.
did and ended up three-quarters on to him. We came under fire straight away and
received several more hits, mostly on the hull. Because we were at an angle to the
enemy none of the shots penetrated the armour, but when we tried to reverse prior to
coming up on to the ridge again, my driver, Bill Cruickshanks, told me he had lost his
hydraulics. As we were still under fire it was only a matter of time before we would
lose the crew as well as poor old 'Ilkley? I gave the order to get out, and we all met
up in a large shell-hole nearby. We came under mortar and sniper fire, but due to the
very wet cornfield no one was hit, although many mortars landed very close.
We all
