/0.
50
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Another tank was hit and the surviving crew members bailed out to find shelter
inside the remaining tanks where possible. One B Company man was taken in
by an A Company tank and remained with them for the next two weeks.' Eight
tanks of B Company and some C Company tanks engaged the bunkers of WN71
and WN72 at the D-i exit. As radio communications were difficult, during the
morning the battalion's commander, Colonel Upham, directed the action on the
beaches on foot. The large white numbers visible on the tanks' turrets stood out
through the smoke and dust of the battle and enabled Colonel Upham to order
individual tanks into position. As the tide came in, the tanks were forced to move
to parts of the beach not yet covered by water. Two tanks became snagged on
hedgehogs and had to be abandoned as the water level rose inside and flooded
them. B Company supported the assault on the Vierville D-i draw throughout the
day and gradually fought their way inland along the elevated gravel causeway of
the draw towards Vierville."6
Such was the ferocity of the battle between the tanks and the bunkers directly in
front of them that they were too busy to engage and knock out the anti-tank guns
to the west near the end of the beach at Pointe de la Percee, which could fire along
the beach. The tanks did, however, make the landings of later assault waves easter
as they attracted the enemy fire more than the landing craft."7
The destroyer USS Carmick came close to shore and helped some tanks that
had managed to get on the promenade road and were trying to fight their way
westwards towards the Vierville draw D-I. The ship's officers watched where the
gunfire from the tanks was landing on the bluff and then used those as aiming
points for the guns of the destroyer.?" Two other destroyers, the USS M.Cook and
USS Doyle, also shelled the defences of the D-i and DD-3 exits throughout the day,
though shore-to-ship liaison was difficult. At noon for an hour, the battleship
USS Texas shelled the D-1 exit with its 14in guns and thirty Germans promptly
surrendered. At about midday the tide was at its highest and all of the battalion
tanks were forced to congregate in the only available dry space on Dog Red beach.
explosives were then used successtully at 1400 hours by engineers to blow up te
anti-tank concrete wall; exit D-i was finally open to infantry but not yet passable
for tanks. The After Action Reports of both B and C companies lament the lack of
air support during the day.
Using the D-1 exit, B Company finally left the beach about 2130 hours and
aboured at vierve navis lost seven tanks during the day, me bong sui
peratonal." Three Officers and six men were kify d, and one officer was wounded.
C Company Action
The landing craft carrying C Company to Dog White beached directly at 0624 hours
in equal numbers on Dog White and Easy Green near the E-I St Laurent draw as
she landing craft were carried by wind and tide eastwards. This was defended by
W N04 and wilos with a 75mm howitzer and various somm and 370mm suns.
C Company lanes langed over a number of beaches during the day, and several
D-Day Tanks
51
A and C Company tanks assisted the remaining 74Ist Battalion tanks on Easy Red
support the infantry attacking the pill boxes at the bottom of the E-I St Laurent
draw. The C Company tanks were particularly welcome there as there were only
four DD tanks supporting fewer than 100 men left of the original assault wave. Tor
The C Company report for 6 June claims that no tanks were lost by enemy
action 2 However, a couple of tanks were destroyed. The tank driven by J. Parsons
ran over a mine, lost both tracks and was subsequently flooded. Sergeant Preston's
tank was hit by a mortar bomb, which killed two crew members, and was disabled
while pulling another tank out of a ditch. The life raft of one tank on the beach
was set on fire by a mortar shell and the tank was lost in the subsequent fire. 1o3
Therefore at least two C Company tanks were knocked out. Other C Company
tanks on Dog White joined B Company tanks in attacking the D-i Vierville exit.
The rising tide restricted the beach area and the tanks moved to Dog Red beach
about midday to avoid being swamped by the rising tide. Movement on the beach
was restricted by the high tide, wreckage and the bodies of those killed in action.
C Company finally got off the beach at 2230 hours with thirteen operational
tanks, two having been knocked out and one damaged. Casualties to tank crews
were light: five men and one officer were wounded.
A Company
A Company landed a few minutes after o630 hours on Easy Green and Dog Red
beaches near the Les Moulins draw. This was defended by WN66, 67 and 68 with
various 37mm and somm guns, including two 37mm guns mounted in tank turrets
on top of the concrete fortifications, which were also protected by an anti-tank
ditch and concrete wall. A Company was supposed to land across all the rioth Re
beaches to provide fire support and tank dozers for the infantry assault teams. The
modified LCT(A)s were equally unseaworthy and A Company had losses before
it even landed in Normandy. LCT(A) 2229 sank on the sea passage and two other
LCT(A)s would not arrive until the afternoon.
Of the five landing craft (ten tanks and five dozers) that arrived, most beached
on Dog Red opposite the D-3 draw. A tank and dozer were lost when Lieutenant
Sturbitz, aboard LCT(A) 2307, refused to disembark, claiming that the water was
too deep for his wading tank and the bulldozer behind. This was despite the fact
that the first tank had driven off successfully. Whilst debating the depth of water,
a shell nearly blew the landing craft's ramp off, wounding several crew members.
The LCT promptly retracted off the beach with the tanks still aboard but later sank
from the damage caused by the direct hit on the bow. Two tanks and a dozer
trom another landing craft were also immediately lost when they disembarked
ue you into water that was too deep.os Theretore on arrival, A company was
further reduced in numbers within mint's to just seven Mys and three dozers.
Staff Sergeant Jenkins dismounted to lead a platoon of tanks and dozers through
the beach obstacles after the blade of the leading dozer set off a mine on a pole with
unknown consequences for the infantrue unping to find whatever cover they
