232
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Killed
Officers
13
Wounded
Officers
28
Other ranks
84
23
Other ranks
176
11th AD
Guards AD
7th AD
Total
20
116
40
39
268
As RAC fatalities only totalled 136, this is another indication that fewer tanks
were lost than officially reported. As the number of tanks knocked out was 217,
the casualty numbers are still fewer than the expected average as per the study by
Coox and Naiswald, which found every time a tank was knocked out, an average
of one man was killed and another wounded.8 This can be explained by the fact
that Sherman crews, after six
weeks of fighting, had more experience at bailing
out from tanks hit by enemy armour-piercing rounds; some dew member add
already bailed out of two or three tanks by the time of Operation Goodwood. The
numbers of men wounded are more in line with the expected average if 27s tanks
were lost or damaged, bearing in mind that on the night of i8 July, the 2nd File
and Fortar lost three officers and tour ORs killed plus forty-tree men wounded
in the German air attack.
Failure of the Plan
The build-up of Allied armour before the attack was plainly seen by the eras
trom observation posts in chimneys at Colombelles and from the high ground to
the east of Caen, which undoubtedly led to Dietrich's post-War comment abou
Red Indians.
The additional bridges required for Operation Goodwood were not all com-
pleted until 0200 hours on the second day of the attack, although one ding was
completed by 174s hours on the first day. However, this was too late: the crossing
had acted as choke points and hindered the armoured advance from the start.
By dawn on 18 July, seventeen channels had been cleared through British mine-
fields, so mines did not restrict vehicle movement as much as the bridges had done.
Despite the fears of the planners, very few German mines were encountered along
the centre line of the advance with the exception of the southern suburbs of Caen
where several Canadian tanks were damaged. In fact, shipments of German mines
to the Normandy front had been delayed in Paris by the Allied bombing of the
railway system.
The axis of the VIII Corps advance was far too narrow: the initial frontage that
was allowed for the advance of three armoured divisions was that normally used for
a single armoured brigade. This narrow frontage for the attack prevented the ar-
moured regiments from spreading out as well as not allowing any other supporting
Operation Goodwood
233
arms to move up with them. This made the armoured regiments dependent on
their own motorised infantry brigades to capture villages and flush out anti-tank
guns. As there was only one motorised battalion per brigade,
this allowed only
one motorised company for each regiment. O'Connor had ordered Roberts to use
the isth Brigade to clear the villages of Cuverville and Démouville so these men
ivere unavailable to Roberts for the rest of the day. Therefore on 18 July the lack of
avalability of infantry hampered the British as there were not enough motorised
infantry to accompany the tanks into battle and seize the fortified villages on the
route of the advance.
The narrow frontage of advance further played into the hands of the German
defenders as accurate anti-tank gunfire could be directed from the orchards and
villages of Cagny, Emieville and Cuillerville on the left flank across the corridor
of advance. The advance southwards exposed the thinner side of armour of the
Shermans to this enfilade fire, which slowed the advancing tanks as they took
casualties. The 7th Armoured Division took from 1045 hours to 1900 hours for
the sth RTR, the leading regiment, to take up a position on the left of the tith
Armoured Division. It should be noted that the general advance resembled not
so much a cavalry charge but a gentle trot: the leading regiments
of the lIth
Armoured Division took more than 2 hours to get across the main Caen-Vimont
railway, which was more than double the time allowed by VIII Corps planners."
Once out of range of the heavy corps artillery AGRA (Army
Group Royal
Artillery) regiments to the west of the River Ome that could not be moved up
to follow the advance, the armoured divisions were dependent on their own self-
propelle field artillery just as they moved forward into terrain largely untouched by
the morning's bombing south of the Caen-Paris railway. The British tanks had to
undertake the final exposed 4,0ooyds of their advance with no support from heavy
artillery or the air when it was most needity aye vehicle carrying the forward
Air Controller for the tith Armoured Division was knocked out early in battle
(although his place was taken by a junior officer) so tactical air support was perhaps
not as effective as it could have been. The heavy aerial bombing by the first and sec-
ond waves was effective on the flanks and along the path of the armoured divisions;
he third wave with its 100-pounder and z0-pounder magendue bombs on te
designated areas of Hubert Folie and Bourguébus was not so successful, the target
areas being obscured by smoke and dust and the fall of bombs widely scattered.?
Some planes did not bomb at all because of the poor visibility. It was in these areas
that the German anti-tank guns and flak guns baited the vill corps attack.
Much heavy artillery was still west of the River Orne on 19-20 July and so
could not support any further operations. On 20 July, the heavy rain grounded the
tactical ground support aircraft altogether, so Operation Goodwood was finally
called off, though in reality the outcome had been decided on the first day.
O'Connor met specifically with Adair and Erskine to emphasise the importance
of the 7th and Guards Armoured Divisions taking up positions alongside the lith
Armoured Division as soon as possible so as not to leave the lith Armoured Division
