208
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Lines of defensive anti-tank guns had been smashed by the bombardment and
any emplacements showing signs of life were quickly shot up by the tanks. The
single-track railway was not thought to be an obstacle by the intelligence oficers
of VIII Corps, but this proved to be a mistake. Built on a raised embankment up
to oft high, the railway line was just navigable to the tanks but not to the wheeled
vehicles following behind, which had to find alternative crossing points such as
the level crossing at Lirose. This caused much confusion and a further delay until!
engineers blew several gaps in the embankment. Two tanks of the 3rd RTR lost
their tracks crossing the railway lines. 26
Once across the railway, the available frontage widened and the and Fife and
Forfar came up on the left of the 3rd RTR who were to go to the right of the
farm Le Mesnil Frémentel and the 2nd Fife and Forfar to the left of it. A dense
hedge, reminiscent of those of the bocage, then barred the way of the grd RTR. It
could only be crossed by a tank where the earth banks were lowest and the foliage
sparsest. A gap was forced by one tank and enlarged by successive tanks passing
through, making it passable for the wheeled vehicles following behind.
The artillery barrage stopped at o9os hours and from then on the tank regiments
were dependent on their own mobile field artillery provided by eight self-propelled
Sextons with 2s-pounders attached to each regiment.
A second hedge just north of Le Mesnil Frémentel was reached at about 0900
hours and searching for a gap caused a further delay. Once through this heage,
the tanks of the 3rd RTR were in plain sight of the defended farmhouse and anti-
tank gunfire began to strike the advancing tanks. The position was defended by
panzergrenadiers of the i2sth Regiment and Becker's 4th Batterie. Concerned by
the fire coming from Le Mesnil Frémentel, Major Close of the rd RTR radioed
that he wanted to stop and shell the buildings but was told to keep going by the
29th Brigade HQ:
This wasn't the usual way to deal with defended villages and I felt most uncomfort-
able. We were crossing what was virtually a plain at this time and armour-piercing
shot was coming from Cagny and Le Prieure. As the shot hurtled over the corn, you
could see it rippling, leaving a wake like a torpedo. The paths were so clear that we
were able to take evasive action.27
Major Close ordered his tanks to fire into Le Mesnil Frémentel while on the move.
Attempting to bypass the position exposed the thinner armoured, more vulnerable
sides of the Shermans to Major Becker's 4t|R Batterie of assault guns within the farm.
The ard RTR experienced its first casualties, three Shermans being lost in quick
succession. An infantry attack by the HQ company of 8th Rifle Brigade and half
of its E (support) Company was organised by 29th Brigade HQ but it did not begin
until 1030 hours, taking an hour to clear the farm house and surrounding area.
The znd Fife and Forfar, going east of Le Mesnil Frémentel, took its first serious
casualties when it reached the second railway line embankment, the Caen-Vimont
209
Operation Goodwood
railvay. The leading two waves crossed the embankment successfully but
C Squadron, in the third wave, was devastated by fire believed to have come from
the direction of Cagny to their rear whilst waiting to cross. Trooper John Brown
ina Sherman Vc of the 2nd Fife and Forfar recorded:
It was not long after the earlier euphoria that we realised what was in store for us -
thirteen tanks, one of our squadrons knocked out, some burning and what remained
of their crews either walking or crawling back from the front. Our tanks reached the
Caen-Vimont railway the second main obstacle] close beside a level crossing in the
Cagny area. From our position we knocked out two, probably three German tanks,
but it was difficult to recognise this in the carnage.?8
Thirteen tanks were lost in quick succession at about 0930 hours. Was this Becker's
4in Batterie still in Le Mesnil Frémentel or 88mm fire from Cagny? The 2nd
File and Forfar history is convinced that it was fire from Cagny. A veteran of the
std RTR believed it was the combination of the self-propelled assault guns in Le
Mesnil Frementel and the anti-talk guns li ge say diat da the damage to and fie
and Forfar; smoke and dust from the artillery barrage plus that churned up by the
advancing tanks made it difficult to locate the source of the enemy fire?"
The Charge Continues
As the leading tanks of the grd RTR approached Grentheville, having crossed the
Caen-Vimont rallway, armour-piercing fee increased trom the direction of the
wage and its orchards. Major Close reported seeir; anti-tank guns amongst the
trees being erned by their crews to engage his squadron. Five Shermans were hit,
their crews baling out. Another of Becker's assault gun batteries, the 3rd Batterie,
occupied Grentheville. Again Major Close had to push on, leaving the enemy posi-
tion to others to deal with. Ordered to get his squadron to the west of the Chemin
de Fer Minter rallway line that ran north-south over the eden-tars ralways and
roads, Close led his squadron into the relatively peaceful countryside west of the
embankment using a culvert under the railway. The tank commanders could now
see the industrial suburbs of Caen (Cormelles) and the
villages of Hubert Folie
and Bras higher up the ridge to the south. Sheltered by the railway embankment
from the fire from Grentheville, the 3ra kik beneved wey were throug the
German lines. The rest of the regiment came under the embankment either at the
ame point or further south and the remaining tanks formed up in line abreast for
the advance up the slope. It was then about 110o hours.
An artillery barrage from
the accompanying Sextons was put down on rubert role and a bren sun carter
quickly drove up to the village under cover of the barrage to determine if it was
held by the Germans. Drawing no fire, the carrier careered the length of the village
before hastily retulling to report that Hubere rone appeared to be decapree.
