25
D-Day Tanks
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
point to meet up with the waiting infantry. There were traffic jams even on the
roads inland from the beach, and a different assembly point near Hermanville
was chosen to try and avoid the congestion. In the meantime, the commander of
2nd KSLI, having waited for more than an hour until 1230, ordered his men to set
off on foot for their objectives.?1
C Squadron of the Staffs Yeomanry were then sent by 185th Brigade commander
to capture and hold Point 6i on the Periers Ridge, which was considered vital high
ground as it overlooked Queen beach; the tanks achieved this without opposition
by 142s hours and remained there in defensive positions. A Squadron was ordered
to assist with the capture of the Hillman strongpoint, which was still holding out
and had been firing on the units advancing inland towards Caen, causing consider-
able casualties.
This left only B Squadron and the RHQ (Regimental Headquarters) tanks to
continue the advance inland. The armoured thrust inland to Caen as envisaged by
Montgomery before D-Day was now being conducted by a few hundred infantry-
men on foot, without most of their supporting tanks, which had been diverted to
secure minor objectives such as Point 61 and Hillman. A well-hidden 88mm anti-
tank gun ambushed the advancing tanks of B Squadron, and five tanks (including
two Shermans from the reserve engineer squadron carrying fascines for the anti-
tank ditches located by aerial reconnaissance before the invasion) and the medical
officer's half-track were knocked out in quick succession before the gun could be
located and destroyed by the remaining tanks? The survivors of B Squadron then
took over from C Squadron on Point ot to guard the right flank of the advance, and
C Squadron tanks were ordered to take over the advance towards Caen. However,
they too struck trouble in the form of a battery of captured Russian 122mm guns
in the woods around Periers sur le Dan and were held up.
The 2nd KSLI reached Biéville-Beuville and requested armoured support, so a
troop of tanks from C Squadron was sent to help. In turn, C Squadron requested
assistance to eliminate the battery of guns holding them up in the woods, and a
company of infantry was ordered forward. C Squadron, with some recce tanks
in front as a screen, then resumed their advance and reached the anti-tank ditch
south-west of Biéville-Beuville, which two troops of tanks succeeded in crossing.
At this time, about i6oo hours, the recce troop reported enemy tanks moving
northwards from Caen. The 2nd KSLI, about to attack Biéville-Beuville, also re-
ported at 1óis hours that tanks were approaching. The Staffs Yeomanry commander
immediately requested the release of A Squadron from its support role in the attempts
to capture Hillman, and the regiment deployed to await the attack. The enemy tanks
spotted were the Mark IVs of the 22nd Panzer Regiment of the 21st Panzer Division,
which, after a frustrating day rushing first east of the River Orne and then back
westwards across the only available bridges in Caen while under attack from the air,
were about to mount the first serious German counterattack of the day.
The 2Ist Panzer Division on D-Day was organised into three battle groups,
or kampfgruppen. The first, Kampfgruppe Oppeln, consisted of the 22nd Panzer
SWORD SECTOR
QUEEN BEACH D-DAY
Advance Inland
ROGEK BEACH
Direction of German affack
scale 1:2500
Sword sector, Queen beach and the armoured advance inland to Caen, D-Day
Regiment and the 12sth Panzergrenadier Regiment with supporting units. The
panzer regiment normally had eight companies of Mark IV tanks but was missing
a company as this had had been sent to assist a company of the 12sth Panzergrenadier
Regiment attack on the British paratroopers east of the River Orne as a part of the
