110
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
in the brief firefight that ensued, three German tanks were destroyed. The element
of surprise having been lost, Meyer ordered the sth and 6th Panzer Companies
and the 3rd Panzergrenadier Battalion into the attack, which caught the Canadians
in the left flank. The German tanks opened fire and several Shermans were hit.
One troop from A Squadron lost two tanks in quick succession and the remain-
ing Firefly tank took up position in an orchard just south of Authie. C Squadron
then moved left to try and outflank the attacking German tanks after dropping
off in Authie the soldiers they were carrying. A fierce tank battle erupted with
A Squadron being initially caught in a pincer movement by the two panzer com-
panies until B and C squadrons could get into action. The two forward companies
of NNS Highlanders in Authie were cut off by the German attack and began to
receive so many casualties from a ferocious artillery and mortar barrage that no
further advance was possible from Authie and a withdrawal was planned. Before
it could commence,
however,
German tanks and panzergrenadiers arrived." C
Company in Authie requested artillery support but were informed that the artil-
lery was moving forward to cover the advance and was temporarily unavailabie.
Due to communication probiems, naval support guntre was not avaldore either.
The Highlanders had a section of 6-pounder anti-tank guns with them and these
took a toll on the advancing German tanks.
As C Squadron took over the advance from B Squadron on the left Hank, an
anti-tank gun screen ahead of them was spotted and the Shermans began to engage
the individual guns. Sergeant Reid of C Squadron reported afterwards:
Mr MacLean quickly dispersed us and instructed us as to the guns we were to take
out. I believe the gun crew on my particular target had deserted their gun, however,
we took no chances and quickly dispatched same. The B Squadron troop, commanded
as l later found out by Lt Steeves and the reminder of the tanks were taking out their
guns when suddenly, out of the blue we got it. I felt a jolt in my tank, looked back
and found my blanket box shot through. The next shot unseated my loader/operator,
Trooper Galley, and then I saw what was hitting us. There were 18 hornets lined up
in hull down positions about 2500 yards away and they had us cold; their third round
went through my engine and quickly after that they struck Lt MacLean's and Li
Steeves' almost simultaneously. 19
All available Shermans from B and C squadrons were ordered forward to meet
the German tanks and assist the NNS. After regrouping, B Squadron had ten
operational tanks left and at about 1400 hours the squadron moved off towards
Luthie with a troop of lOur tanks covering the left Hank, only to run to the sale
hull-down German tanks. Lieutenant Davies of B Squadron reported atterwards:
I found myself all alone with about seven or eight enemy tanks at 1000 yards on my
left. I halted, stopped two of them with the 17 pounder, advanced, halted and fired
again, scoring another hit, then all Hell seemed to break loose. There were tanas
111
Bridgehead Battles
coming up at full speed to my rear (our own), tanks to my left firing at us, A/T
blazing away from our left and rear, and tracer and 75mm gun flashes all over the
place. I moved forward again, apparently to a hull down position which turned out to
be a bottle neck as it was practically a tank trap in an orchard, huge logs barred our
way. Tanks were hit and burning all around us by then and it was impossible to keep
track of who was who, one was hit directly in front of me, one right beside me, 88mm
tracer was cutting down trees all over the place so I decided to withdraw what was left
of no. 2 and no. 3 troops. Number 1 troop had meanwhile stood to and covered our
fank but had left themselves open by doing so and Lt Steeves' tank went up in flames
a couple of hundred yards away. 20
The advance of the No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 Troops from C Squadron to the left
of Authie was stopped in its tracks. Sergeant Thompson in No. 4 Troop described
the situation:
We started for the woods and the next time I looked around, I seen five of our tanks
on fire, two from no. 3 troop, one from B Squadron and two recce tanks. While we
were trying to take cover a tank came from behind the hedge running wild with no
one showing out of it and was making straight for my tank, we pulled hard right and
ran up on a stump and near upset the tank and was held there solid. We all got out
of the tank where several more tanks were and this tank from B Squadron pulled up
and stopped. When they got out I asked them what was wrong, they told me their
commander had been badly hurt, they put him out on the ground then went on but
none of them would take over as commander. We then all sat around there when one
tank started back for Buron and just as he passed the hedge he was hit and the tank
caught on fire, I do not know who it was. We then all sat around under the tank as the
enemy were shelling us. After it stopped, Sgt Cathcart hauled my tank off the stump
and we started back. There were several wounded and they started back, before that
some were badly burned, one officer Mr Kraus had a broken leg and his gunner had
been killed but did not get out of the tank.2
As the casualties amongst the tanks and crew members increased, the surviving
troop leaders of the different squadrons gathered together their surviving tanks
and made a rapid retreat back past buron to where D company of the NNS had
prepared hastily dug trenches bialtesen Buron and Les Buissons.
The heavy German artillery fire appeared to be coming from the direction of St
Contest to the east, so the CO of the Sherbrooke Fusiliers then ordered C Squadron
10 assist b Squadron on the left flank in order to reduce or eliminate it. As the
L Squadron troops were already committed, only the three tanks of squadron
were avalable, reinforced by a tank that nad just come up from the beach.
The troop moved to near St Contest and engaged the advancing German tanks,
knocking oll two from the 7th Panzer Company supporting a battalion of panzer-
schaders and causing a third to retreat. I he panzergrenader battalion commander
