330
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
demoralised after the many casualties suffered in Operation Spring. Simonas care-
fully considered all aspects of these problems and came up with a series of potential
solutions, which would work with varying degrees of success.
To limit the formidable firepower of German guns (of which the burnt-our
Sherman tanks littering the slopes of the Verriers and Bourgébus ridges provided
gruesome examples), Simonds' final plan proposed an armoured attack at night
despite no Allied tank units having had training or experience of such operations.
Dritish doctrine of the time Was top 1o rmoured regiments to retire to a sate
harbour at night behind the frontlines, where the tanks could be protected by the
infantry; therefore this was an entirely untried tactic. Tanks also did not fight at
night as a certain amount of light was needed to illuminate the optics of the gun
sights (the so-called periscope light) and therefore the tanks would be unable
to return enemy fire accurately. Lastly, to overcome the navigational probems
of driving cross-country at night, Simonds hoped that innovative methods of
maintaining direction such as searchlights, coloured artillery marker shells, radio
lection signal beams and botors an guns tring coloured tracer on ixed w
would adequately mark the direction of travel in the dark.
To break into the verman lines, the armour would be organised into six coi
o to called by coops of call tanks to detonate any mines in the paul of tie
Armoured troop carriers were faut thated by removing the guns from
Priest Iosmm selt-propelled guns and welding armour over the gap in the tront.
Each 'detrocked Priest (later dubbed a Kangaroo) could carry a section of men,
and these vehicles would enable the intantry to accompany the tanks into battle to
deal with any anti-tank guns encountered. Armoured personnel carriers had been
discussed truitlessly by the British since the Fit - World War, so this was their first
use by the Allies. In contrast, the Germans had been using armoured half-tracks
(SK fz 250/250) for their panzergrenadiers since the outbreak of war.
1he operation would be preceded by massive heavy bomber support, but this
time be arming trom uperation Goodwood (as did Operation Bluecoat), a later sec
ond bomber raid was planned to eliminate tibe artillery and anti-tank gun screens
the second line of derences. A considerable pause betore the commencement
of phase two after the second bombing would allow some artillery to move up
to support phase two as the phase one advance would move beyond their range,
which also had been a major shortcoming of Operation Goodwood. The second
aerial bombardment would compensate for the reduced amount of artillery being
available for the start of phase two.
Finally, dear enort to boost morale, di an officers meeting conducted a simonds
HQ in Cairon on 30 July, Simonds tried to motivate his officers by relating the
xploits of a recent British Victoria Cross winner of the Westminster Regiment in
Operation Totalize
331
its first action in Italy. The officers were told to discuss this and its implications with
the men of their commands? Simonds had not been impressed with the Canadian
forces (particularly the infantry) in Operation Spring, and he was determined to
keep close control of the coming operation.®
While planning was going on, Montgomery ordered limited actions by the
Canadians in support of Operation Bluecoat, which proved to be unsuccessful and
costly in terms of men and tanks. The Canadians effectively signalled the Germans
with these probes and limited attacks that they intended attacking again in the
same direction from Caen towards Falaise, which was as Montgomery intended as
per his Ms16 directive to encourage the Germans to keep their forces around Caen.
German Defenders
From 3 August, while the Canadians were planning Operation Totalize and mak-
ing their small-scale attacks, the German forces around Caen changed in response
to Operation Bluecoat, the arrival of infantry divisions as reinforcements and the
planned counterattack at Mortain, Operation Luttich. The 2tst, 9th SS and roth SS
Panzer divisions were sent to Caumont. On the night of 3/4 August, the 12th SS
Panzer Division went into reserve, its sector of the frontline being taken over by
the 272nd Division.
Finally, the Ist SS Panzer Division was pulled out of the frontline into reserve
from s August as the 89th Division arrived from Norway to take over. The
S9th Division, with a single anti-tank gun company, was to occupy a sector previ-
ously held by two panzer divisions? The 89th Division was at full strength but
had been formed from under i8s, over 40s and East Europeans, and was untried in
battle ° A company of thirteen Sturmpanzers from the 217th Battalion was placed
under its command for extra artillery support. As a part of the change in disposi-
tions and the impending Operation Luttich, Panzer Gruppe West, under General
Eberbach, was redesignated the Fifth Panzer Army on 5 August.
Both divisions of the Ist SS Panzer Korps, i.e. the Ist SS and i2th SS, were
earmarked for Operation Luttich, and orders were in the process of being raised for
their redeployment with Seventh Army.
The Germans actually hoped that during the first week of August the Allies
would mount another Goodwood-type cavalry charge that would allow the com-
bined strengths of the ist SS and 12th SS Panzer divisions to wreak heavy losses
trom prepared defensive positions. The tank regiments from both divisions were
amalgamated into one Kampfgruppe, commanded by Wunsche, to provide a pow-
erful counterattack in the event of such an attack. Kurt Meyer had been stationed
in this part of France in 1942 when the Ist SS Panzer Division was refitting, so the
Germans knew the terrain very well.
The planned movement of panzer divisions westwards for Operation Luttich
was strongly resisted, especially by Dietrich, who, somewhat surprisingly, was very
