Operation Epsom
By mid-June both Hitler and General Montgomery were concerned, though for
different reasons, by events following the D-Day landings. The Allies had linked
up the beachheads of their five landing sites and had begun slowly to expand
their occupied zone south and westwards. In the Cotentin peninsula, Carentan
had fallen and the Americans were now pushing towards their goal of the port
of Cherbourg: All German counterattacks had failed and the Allies had complete
command of the skies during the day, which allowed their fighter-bombers to
roam the battlefield at will, attacking any build-up of German forces. Observer
planes for the artillery and navy operated unhindered. Heavy Allied bombers
continued to conduct bombing missions on the German communication centres
at the road and rail junctions of the transport networks that serviced Normandy.
But Hitler did not have just France to worry about: Germany was now fight-
ing a war on three fronts, which went against all German military training and
doctrine. The Allies had captured Rome and were surging northwards towards
the next defensive line hurriedly being prepared, the Gustav Line. On the Eastern
Front, the forces of Russia continued to sap the human and material resources of
the German Army. Hitler believed that the war would be decided in France; if the
Allied invasion could be thrown back across the Channel then the capacity and
will of Britain and America to mount any further offensives would be severely
reduced for some time, which could even lead to them suing for peace, allowing
Germany to concentrate on the battle in Russia.
Despite Hitler and OKW ordering counterattacks to throw the Allied troops
back into the sea on 6, 7 and 9 June, the Allies were unmoved and growing stronger
every day as the build-up continued unchecked. The Kriegsmarine, which could
not match the strength of the combined US and British fleets after the destruction
of most of the U-boats sent to attack the invasion fleet, had resorted to extensive
minelaying and even the use of human torpedos. Similarly, the Luftwaffe was
reduced to mounting night attacks with medium bombers such as the JU88s, which
caused only pinpricks to the Allies. For two years, the Luftwaffe had been building
up its fighter strength to defend German towns, cities and industry from the Allied
143
Operation Epsom
megir bomber offensive and the development of jet fighter aircraft and rockets
a be given priority over a replacement for the obsolete HEIll twin-engine
not herefore the Germans lacked a heavy strategic bomber with which to
at he th beachhead and disrupt the build-up of men and material. During
c a handful of ME 109s or FW 190s fighters could make low-level at-
aso. dividual targets with small bombs or 20mm cannon. Overshadowing all
disast reat of a further landing near Calais by General Patton's phantom
a go, which, according to all German intelligence reports, was still poised
i agand for a further landing. The weekly report of Army Group B on 2 July
it big information supplied by the German Abwehr, stated that there were
liters- our age formations standing by in Britain, fifty-four of which
wu be ratred to France? The only bright spot for Hitler was the successful
at eV - missile campaign against Britain, which he hoped would bring
brinto is nes. Ironically, the Abwehr office also warned that these weapons,
rich were being launched from the Pas de Calais, might actually encourage
ane Allied landing in that area.
On 17 June 1944, Hitler held a command conference at a bunker prepared
de am at Soissons in france in 194a for the invasion of england, Romer and
in Rundstedt attended, along with their chiefs of staff and Generaloberst Jodi
tom OK W. First Rommel and then von Rundstedt gave pessimistic overviews
i he military situation. Von Rundstedt requested and was granted permission
from Hitler for the forces resisting the Americans in the Cotentin peninsula to
midtav slowly into Cherbourg, which would then be turned into a
kommel outlined his intentions for a major counteralack by sia panzer divisions
to pite American and British armies and reach the coast before wheeling either
left or right to roll up one or the other Allied armies. Four of the panzer division.
in france (st and 2nd SS, 2nd and Lehr Panzer divisions) were to be supplemented
by che gth and toth SS Panzer divisions of the 2nd SS Panzer Korps, recalled from
the Eastern Front on 12 June. Hitler ordered detailed plans to be made, and these
were drawn up over the next 48 hours by Rommel and his sad, not eared
two scenarios for what was deemed the final counterattack but cautioned that the
ans would fail if the probiem of Allied naval gunfire coul nor ve camared.
On 20 June, the OKW ordered that the offensive begin as soon as possible after
tro conditions had been met. The first condition was that panzer divisions in the
line had to be relieved by newly arriving infantry divisions,
the
16th Luftwaffe
Field Division and the 276th and 277th divisions. The second condition was more
onerous and stipulated that the enemy east of the River Orne was to be destroyed
before the main counterattack began? Several attacks by
2Ist
Panzer
since D-Day to try and achieve this had been unsuccessful. Army Group B began
to prepare movement orders for the relevant formations and with the continued
bombing of the road and rail networks dramatically slowing the movement of units
to the Normandy front, it was anticipated that the attack could not begin until the
first week of July.
