382
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Dives. That evening, Jort itself was cleared and the tanks of the ist Tank Regiment
arrived to relieve the ioth Mounted Rifles, which harboured back across the river
in Jort. That night, sappers improved the ford by laying steel mesh and prepared to
build a Bailey bridge over the river.
During the night, the remnants of the German defenders established a new line
from Courcy to Louvagny and were reinforced by 300 men from an artillery regi-
ment but contact was lost with the 12th SS Panzer Division. A kampfgruppe from
2Ist Panzer Division arrived from Estry to help fight the breakthrough in this area.
Next day, 16 August, the Polish advanced in two battle groups, each led by a tank
regiment, southwards along the eastern bank of the River Dives to L'Homme
Couleboeuf and Barou to the east. The remaining Panthers that had been attached
to the I02nd SS battalion were moved across at 1800 hours to defend Jort.®
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division spent the day reorganising, replacing
tanks and crews and planning the next phase of the advance, codenamed Operation
Smash, despite the orders from Montgomery and Simonds to move to Trun as
soon as possible. Welders at the armoured regiments worked frantically at fixing
track links and armour plating to their replacement vehicles for extra protection.
Meanwhile, the 2nd Division fought its way into Falaise against strong German
resistance and the town was finally secured about midnight after having been
largely reduced to sandstone rubble by the fighting. The acting 4th Brigade com-
mander, Lieutenant-Colonel Halpenny, held his own Orders Group at 2315 hours
that evening, again not leaving much time for any preparations for an advance next
day by the time the regiment commanders had briefed their squadron leaders.
17 August
The Polish units advanced steadily for most of the day cross-country, eschewing
the road network and meeting little opposition. The toth Mounted Rifles moved
in advance of the other battle groups towards Trun, Hill 159 and Hill 259. The
3rd Squadron captured Hill 159, finding an abandoned fuel dump and a battery
of artillery before trying to take Hill 259 above Hordesseau. The regiment recon-
noitred towards Trun and saw many German columns moving eastwards along the
Falaise-Trun road, which they engaged and called down artillery fire on. A patrol
further to the east was fired at by two anti-tank guns, which were eventually
destroyed, losing one Stuart tank being lost and another damaged.
The left-flank battle group of the 2nd Tank Regiment and the 8th Rifle Battalion
advanced via Norry en Auge to Hill 259 above Hordesseau. On the right flank
the 24th Lancers and roth Dragoons battle group advanced to Hill 159 west of
Moutiers en Auge.
At the same time, the South Albertas Regiment with a company of infan-
try had moved ahead of the main advance by the division to the outskirts of
Damblainville before dawn. The recce troops reported the village clear, and A and
Falaise Gap
383
C squadrons moved in, capturing the stone bridge over the River Ante; one tank
was knocked out.
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division's main advance began at 0900 hours
on 17 August, with B Squadron of the British Columbia Regiment leading from
Epancy towards Damblainville with a company of the Lake supenor Regiment.
Verman tanks were reported at 1037 hours by the South Albertas. On the ridge
overlooking the River Ante just south of Damblainville, a Tiger tank knocked out
one of B Squadron's Shermans that were shelling Angloischeville ° Three Tiger
tanks and several jagdpanzers were in position to block any auvance south. reavy
ariller and mortar fire then hit the Canadian columns moving into Damblainville
and the decision was taken by Simonds to shift the axis of the advance 2 miles
turther east to the crossing over the River Dives at Morteaux-Coulboeuf, which
had been seized by a patrol earlier in the day after the ist Armoured Polish Division
ad passed through. The Polish advance had opened the way for the canadian
4ih Armoured Division to advance to Trun. The British Columbia Regiment was
et in position to pin down the German troops south of Damblainville whilst
the Foot Guards took over the advance at 1600 hours, followed by the Grenadier
Guards. Morteaux-Couliboeuf and the river were reached without incident but
while proceeding south, the CO's tank was hit by an anti-tank gun and burst into
ames. the legment then harboured 1,oooyds nortreas of Cloy, a devance
of just 3 miles from the river crossing. Shortly before dark another tank, this time
2 Sherman Vc, was hit by three 75mm armour-piercing shells, probably from one
of the Panther tanks that had redeployed the previous day.
In the meantime, the British Columbia Kegiment, less B Squadron, was ordered
to advance through the Grenadier Guards to Fill To Just not of lun but cuy
got as far south as the foot Guards, harbouring at Moutiers en Auge through
which the Polish had passed earlier in the day. The Grenadier Guards were last in
line but advanced the furthest south to Louvieres en Auge just over a mile from
run and without loss, shooting up some sort vehicles of the ist so falcer Divisor
on the way and taking a few prisoners. l was omy 1z miles from daise to tea,
but the advance was slow and hesitant, as evidenced by the 4th armoured Dr saes
radio signals log.
At 1445 hours, Montgomery issued new orders to Crear that it was essential that
the gap between the Canadian First Army and US Third Army be closed as soon as
possible. At 1750 hours, Simonds arrived fresh from a meeting with Montgomery
and with new orders to take Chambois that same night. In view of the numbers of
German forces assembling around the developing bottleneck, Montgomery realised
that an encirclement needed to be completed further to the east at Chambois rather
than Trun, which was now to be captured by the Canadians and not the Polish.
The 2nd Canadian Corps was also to create blocking positions at the heights above
Chambois at Mont Ormel.
General Maczek in turn issued his new orders at 1900 hours for the Ist Polish
Armoured Division but it was not until o200 hours that the division, divided into
