20
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the explosive charges which the AVRE was carrying for the purpose of destroying
concrete replacements.
I immediately got my gunner to engage a bunker from which I thought that the
shot had been fired. His first round hit the target and the gun became silent. We then
continued to fire at suspected defensive positions until we could neither see nor hear
any firing from the defences.
The Assault Engineers crossed the beach and started to carry out their task of
creating exits' from the beach. The Assault Companies of the South Lancashires came
ashore, crossed the beach with very few, if any, casualties and passed inland.'8
A total of sixteen A Squadron tanks reached the beach about the same time as the
AVR Es of the assault squadron but too far away to offer effective support to them
as they began clearing their lanes." The rough seas and strong wind caused the tide
to come in more rapidly than expected, and waves breaking over the rear of some
of the tanks on the beach caused their motors to stall. Several tanks were hit and
disabled by armour-piercing shells fired from the bunkers and were subsequently
swamped by the incoming tide, as were those that lost engine power. Another was
blown up when it was jockeying for position amongst obstacles at the water's edge
and set off a mine; a total of eleven tanks were eventually swamped and lost. 30
Anti-tank
guns from the La Brèche strongpoint fired along the length of
both landing beaches, as did machine guns that took a large toll of the infantry.
La Brèche was an initial objective of the men of the 2nd East Yorkshire Battalion,
but two companies of the ist South Lancashires landed in the wrong place, close to
the strongpoint, and had no option other than to join in the attack. After an intense
firefight the La Brèche strongpoint was taken, and all serious resistance, apart from
an occasional sniper's bullet, had ceased 20 minutes after landing.
Many A Squadron tanks were knocked out and only five eventually left the
beach to support the south Lancs in capturing Hermanville inland. Fortunately,
in view of the number of tanks lost, not much more opposition was encountered
during this part of the operation. The squadron survivors then went west towards
Lion sur Mer with the infantry and No. 4I Commando to clear the town and the
Trout fortification. Trout was found to be abandoned and Lion sur Mer quickly
captured, but increasing German resistance centred on the Vaux chateau in the
area meant that Lion sur Mer would be the limit of the westward advance from
Sword on D-Day. The 3rd Division was therefore unable to link up with Canadian
3rd Division on Juno beach, and that evening a gap of 3 miles existed between the
Juno and Sword sectors.
B Squadron
B Squadron orders were to support the znd East Yorkshire infantry in overcoming
the La Brèche 'Cod' strongpoint before advancing inland to capture the fortified
Sole and Daimler battery positions. The B Squadron tanks had a more successful
swim into their designated beach, Queen Red. However, one DD tank could not
D-Day Tanks
21
be launched when the ramp of its landing craft was damaged by gunfire after the
other four tanks had launched, so was taken back to England. LCT 467, which
carried the five DD tanks of the B Squadron commander, Major Rugge-Price,
and the 4th Troop, the first DD tank damaged its screen before launching after a
near miss on the LCT. This caused the tanks aboard to lurch into each other and so
prevented the other tanks from launching. Major Rugge-Price demanded that the
damaged tank be jettisoned, but he was overruled by the commander of the landing
craft who had received instructions from LCH 185, a headquarters landing craft,
to take the landing craft all the way into the shore at H+45 minutes with another
assault wave. Subsequently this landing craft arrived 45 minutes late.? This action
was initially praised by the S-3 naval commander, but the fact that the beach assault
was deprived of five tanks at a vital stage was later criticised by Admiral Talbot.
The slow progress of the B Squadron DD tanks meant that they arrived about
§ minutes behind the LCTs carrying the AVR Es and the LCAs carrying the assault
infantry. The German defences were alert and immediately opened fire on the
disembarking 2nd East Yorks infantry, which took heavy casualties; their only
support for a few minutes was the AVRE tanks. When the fourteen DD tanks
arrived and added their firepower, the defences were subdued by Htzo minutes
with the assistance of No. 4 Commando. One B Squadron tank was knocked out
by shellfire on the beach and two others became bogged in soft sand, all three
being subsequently swamped by the incoming tide. A total of five tanks were lost
on the beaches, and as one tank was unable to disembark, only thirteen tanks were
able to proceed inland to support the infantry.
Tired of waiting for the assault gapping teams to do their work, a new beach
exit was cleared across the sand dunes by Captain Neave (second in command
B Squadron), who requisitioned a bulldozer to clear a path through the obstacles
and dunes. Five other B Squadron tanks, including the ist Troop, moved off the
beach but turned eastwards by mistake towards Ouistreham and went on to as-
sist the commandos of Lord Lovat's 4th Special Services Brigade in relieving the
óth Airborne paratroops holding the bridges at Bénouville. This was not as per the
squadron's immediate orders, which were to support the infantry in taking Sole
and Daimler, but the action was successful, apart from two tanks being lost to anti-
tank gunfire south of Bénouville later on in the afternoon. The eight surviving
tanks eventually left the beach and helped clear Ouistreham, followed by Sole and
Daimler. Two B Squadron tanks appeared at an opportune moment to help knock
out two somm anti-tank guns at the Casino bunker at Riva Bella that were hold-
ing up the liberation of Ouistreham by No. 4 Commando unit. Another two tanks
were damaged in these operations. The Daimler fortification near Ouistreham
resisted until 1900 hours.
A special so-called 'concrete busting' landing craft was included in the wave of
LCTs carrying the AVREs. This was CB 2337, an LCT(A) Mk V, a landing craft
that had been modified to carry two Sherman Vc (known post war as Fireflies) on
a raised deck in the hold so that the two tanks could fire on the approach to the
