104
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
send initial movement orders to the 12th SS Panzer and the Panzer Lehr Divisions
at 0400 hours. At the same time, von Rundstedt requested permission from OKW
to deploy these strategic reserves and was told in no uncertain terms, in view of
Hitler's edict, to cancel his orders. This von Rundstedt duly did, and it is ironic
that in view of the dispute between Rommel and von Schweppenburg over the
deployment of the reserve, von Rundstedt's first reaction on 6 June was to call for
the mobilisation of the panzer divisions before any Allied troops had even landed.
Hitler's adjutant,
General Schmundt, and the OKW Chief of Operations,
General Jodl, were reluctant to wake Hitler with any news that might turn our
to be false, and as he was in a drug-induced sleep, it was considered dangerous
to wake him. Jodl finally convinced Schmundt to awaken Hitler, who appeared,
according to different reports, between 0800 and 1000 hours in the Great Hall of
the Berghof. The late rise was inconsequential as Hitler was in no hurry to commi
the panzer divisions and was apparently optimistic at the news of the landings, As
long as they were in Britain we couldn't get at try m. Now we have them when
can destroy them,' he reportedly told Keitel
On reviewing the situation on 6 Jun a there was still great uncertainty amongst
the OKW as to whether the Normandy landings were a feint or the real invason.
Jodi believed the landings were a diversion for the real landings to come in we ras
de Calais and even von Rundstedt was convinced the Normandy landings W
a feint. OKW had predicted that the invasion would start with a diversionary raid
so as to draw away any strategic reserves in the wrong direction. For the last few
months, the Germans had also received many reports and pieces of intelligen
to the effect that the Allied landings would come in the Pas de Calais. What
the Germans tailed to realise was that mucs of what they were receiving was
part of a massive Allied deception operation with the objective of convining
Germans that the real landings would not be in Normandy.
Under the umbrella of Operation Bodyguard, dozens of pieces of false intorma-
on and diversionary lacues had been deployed by the Allies in separate dis
fortitudey south) had the objective of confirming German thing about me
to keep the Germans guessing as to where the rels landings would come. Operato
Pas de Calais; in conjunction with this, there were a host of minor operations ta
further confuse the Germans, such as Fortitude N Worth), which proposed a landing
in Norway followed by a landing in Calais.
In another Allied ploy, an entire fictitious army, the First United States Army
Group, had been created under General Patton in the south-east of England to
supposedly invade France across the Straits of Dover at Calais. Dummy tanks and
landing craft had been set up in Kent and a high level of bogus wireless traffic was
constantly transmitted for the benefit of German listening stations. Any moveme
of troops to the south coast that was observed by German spies in England was
interpreted as being part of the build-up of this army. The fictitious army oppose
Calais allowed the Allied troops to assemble unnoticed in the south of England for
peration Overlord. Due to the faulty intelligence of the Abwehr, which ported
Bridgehead Battles
105
many more divisions than actually existed, the Germans also had a completely in-
accurate estimate of the number of army divisions in England. British Intelligence
had also completely compromised every German agent being used by the Abwehr
in England, to the extent that these agents were being given false information by
the British to send back.
In tandem with the failure of intelligence, the Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine had
completely failed to detect the assembly of the invasion fleet in southern England
or its passage to France. Before the invasion, the RAF had successfully chased away
any Luftwaffe reconnaissance planes from the south coast whilst allowing them
passage over south-east England and Patton's 'army'.
On the morning of 6 June, the RAF and Royal Navy had also carried out a num-
ber of diversionary operations to further confuse the Germans. Over Normandy,
dummies with firecrackers had been dropped by parachute to simulate a small arms
firefight and these had subsequently been found by the Germans. The Royal Navy
had made attacks on beaches in the Pas de Calais area; six launches made a diver-
sion near Boulogne and eight more near Le Havre. The parachute drops of the
American 82nd and loIst Airborne Divisions during the early morning of 6 June
had been so scattered by high winds that, although this made their subsequent
operations difficult, the dispersal also contributed to the confusion of the Germans.
In Operations Glimmer and Taxable, RAF planes had dropped metal strips
(window) to simulate an invasion fleet sailing for the coast of Calais. In the ex-
tensive bombing raids in the weeks before D-Day, the RAF had mounted two
bombing raids in the Pas de Calais for each one in Normandy so as not to alert the
Germans to any special interest in Normandy. Therefore it is not surprising the
Germans were not in a hurry to commit themselves to a counterattack without
a clearer picture of the landings.
While it was still dark, confusion reigned. In the early morning, reports of
a massive invasion fleet and a heavy naval and aerial bombardment began to be
received. With daylight, more accurate reports were made by the beleaguered
coastal divisions to Seventh Army. These units were under no illusions as to the
size and scope of the invasion forces that had landed and were now bombarding
them. Reconnaissance units from 2ist Panzer Division had patrolled south and
west of Caen and found nothing. The 12th SS Panzer Division was ordered to send
car reached Magny just inland from Arromanches and observed the landings on
Gold beach and the naval activity offshore.
With this report, others from Army Group B and even bbC news broadcasts,
by 1000 hours the OKW had started to come around to the view that the landing
were real, or at least in considerable force. But such was the volume of contradictory
evidence and dissension among the OK W generals that Hitler deferred a decision
the visit of the Hungarian prime minister. The deciding factor for the Germans
