90
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Churchill was also well aware of the tank gap and the disadvantages faced by the
Allied tanks, having written in a minute to the Defence Committee (Supply) in
April 1943:
We shall, I am sure, be exposed to criticism if we are found with a great mass of thin
skinned tanks of medium size, none of which can stand up to the German guns of
1943, still less than those of 1944.23
General Bradley was also conscious of the tank gap, writing after the war of the
North African campaign that US tanks were no match for more heavily armoured
and better-gunned German panzers. 'Too often the American tankers complained
it cost them a tank or two, with crews, to get the German tanks. Thus we could
defeat the enemy's Panzers but only by expending more tanks than we cared
Before the British Vill Corps arrived in Norrandy, connor had his sai
prepare a report on the numbers and types of German tanks the corps could expect
to encounter. By D-Day, the Germans would have 413 Panthers and 70 Tigers
opposing the Second Army, which would have landed 187 Ves in a similar period,
increasing to a maximum of 259 by D+is. Further German reinforcements would
bring a total of s6o more Panthers and 140 Tigers, making 973 Panthers and 210
Tigers in opposition."
This report seemed to have falsely assumed Mark IVs had all been replaced
by Panthers and overestimated the number of Panthers available to the Germans,
which was a theoretical total of oss in the panzer divisions eventually deployed in
Normandy. Another implicit assumption in the report is the superiority of the
Panther and liger to the standard sherman, clearly, senior Dauso cunder
were concerned about the threat posed by German tanks and the weaknesses of
British armour.
Most tank crews on arrival in Normandy immediately set about fixing i well.
ing track links from destroyed German tanks to the front of their tanks for extra.
protection. Some commanders, particularly General Patton, frowned upon this
duse it added extra weight and therd ore hindered mobility but the brust and
Canadians continued the practice throughout the campaign.
The tank gap - the differences in firepower, armour and mobility between
GI man and Allied tanks - meant that in any encounter with German tanks,
the Allied main battle tank was likely to come off second best unless it could g
within sooyas range of outflank the enot ny and hit it in the side. Alowing d
the Sherman was at a significant disadvange to the German tanks, the lumber
of tank casualties in Normandy would also be determined by how the tanks were
actually deployed in battle by all the senior officers and commanders al an dy
corps and divisional level.
Fighting the Tank
91
Living in the Tank
The crew of a tank ate, slept and fought in a compartment the same size as a large
modern four-wheel drive passenger car. Four or five men living together in such
a small space and sharing the experiences and dangers of going into battle in an
armoured box containing large quantities of explosive ammunition and fuel meant
that crews quickly became tight-knit teams. In action, the fate of the tank often
depended on each crewman doing his job and doing it well. The tank commander
sat on a folding seat at the right rear of the turret, directly under the large hatch with
its two semi-circular flaps; map reading was particularly difficult in the confined
space, especially when being jolted around if the tank was travelling cross-country.
When the hatch was closed, the commander had to use a periscope, which severely
curtailed his field of view. Most German tanks possessed a vision cupola, which
with glass blocks all around the outside permitted a better view of the battlefield
In the immediate vicinity of the tank. Therefore most Sherman commanders kept
the hatch open during combat, taking frequent quick looks out of the hatch, which
even some of the experienced German tank commanders did. Having the hatch
open made all tank commanders more vulnerable to mortar and artillery fire, as
well as snipers, and there was a high casualty rate amongst Allied tank commanders
in Normandy. Officers made up 12 per cent of tank casualties, despite being only
8 per cent of the total complement of a regiment. 27
The tank commander had the best view of the nearby terrain and was usually
the first to identify potential targets or threats to the tank. He gave orders over
the intercom to the driver who manoeuvred and positioned the tank as quickly as
possible. When not driving the tank, the driver was responsible for maintenance.
The gunner needed to be well trained and a proficient marksman, especially when
engaging moving targets such an enemy tanks. Very often the tank that got off the
first shot survived to fight another day and battles were decided by the split-second
gunnery and movement of the tanks. The gunner controlled the traverse of the
turret by an electric motor and the elevation of the main gun by a handwheel.
The loader/operator was required to keep a constant supply of shells up to the
main gun in accordance with the commander's instructions for a particular type
ot shell depending on the target, either High Explosive (HE), armour-piercing
5 aut 47 When not loading the gun, the loader/operator was responsible for
communications over the No. i9 wireless set. This man was the tank's only contact
and the location of supplies. As the wireless and intercom were not supposed to be
operated at the same time, when the tank commander or operator was using the
wireless the crew had to perform their duties using their own initiative.
The co-driver operated the bow machine gun to keep any enemy inranury at
a sate distance as well as sharing the driving. The co-driver also assisted with main-
tenance and was usually the odd-job man for the tank as required. In a Sherman,
the tank drivers each had a hatch over their heads. The turret itself had a basket
