164
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Reay rolled around on the ground to extinguish the flames, but he was badly
burnt. A half-track from the supporting infantry of the 8th Rifle Brigade picked
him up, but on the way to the Regimental Aid Post the half-track was struck and
penetrated by an armoured piercing shell that hit both his arms. Shipped back to
England swathed in bandages, Reay was taken on 4 July to a specialist burns and
plastic surgery unit at a hospital in Basingstoke. There he remained, in great pain
and unable to see, for two days. A further operation was needed for an aneurism in
his left arm as result of injuries caused by the armour-piercing shell:
My face had begun to heal up and all the burnt skin had peeled off. I was walking
down the corridor one morning, having had all the dressings removed, when I caught
sight of my reflection in a glass door. At first I thought there was someone standing
behind me. There was this image, not a hair on his head, eyes all distorted, bottom lip
hanging down over his chin, upper lip shrunk right up under his nose, or where his
nose should have been, both cheeks in a hell of a mess and both ears missing. I made
my way back to the ward and laid on my bed and cried my eyes out. For two days
I didn't eat or talk to anyone ... not even my best friends. I didn't sleep for two days
and nights trying to think things out. Then I came to a decision. I would make the
best of a bad job. At least I was alive. There were lads in Normandy who would never
make it out of their tanks.42
As if the burns were not enough, Sergeant Reay's lower left arm had to be am-
putated and his right hand was crippled. The previous day, on the approach to
Hill II2, Reay's tank had broken down. Contravening an unwised fue wid
a sergeant stayed with his tank, Major Close had ordered him to take over the troop
corporal's tank. Previously in England before embarking for the invasion, Sergeant
Reay had declared that he had lost his nerve and wanted to leave the army. The
response from the commanding officer, Colonel Silvertop, was that Reay had to
"carry on like the rest of us' .43
In the afternoon, a company of men from the 8th Rifle Brigade supported by
other tanks of the grd RTR did manage to capture the devastated small wood on
the southern side of Hill 112 to slightly lessen the amount of accurate German fire
being directed at the regiment.
During the day, Montgomery and O'Connor had been receiving a steady flow
of Ultra decrypts of German signal traffic which all indicated a build-up of panzer
divisions. Information had also been obtained from prisoners and a set of plans and
maps for the German counterattack found on a dead SS officer. The bridgehead
over the River Odon was badly exposed and the single supply-line through Cheux
and Colleville serving it congested, if not choked, with traffic, as well as being
under attack from both flanks. *
The attack by the 9th SS Panzer Division was
regarded by the intelligence officers of the 2ist Army Group and Montgomery as
being merely the opening of a major offensive that would eventually utilise all of
the German panzer divisions.
165
Operation Epsom
Late in the evening, VIII Corps ordered General Roberts at 2200 hours to pull
back the tanks from south of the River Odon. Roberts was apparently disap-
pointed, but this disappointment was not shared by the men of the 3rd RTR in
their exposed tanks on top of Hill 112 and few regretted leaving the hill.4 The
frd TR had lost twelve tanks, five from A Squadron. The 29th Brigade in turn
received its orders at 22s0 hours to move back across the river and one by one the
tank regiments moved, in the dark, back across the river in good order.
At Berchtesgaden, Rommel and von Rundstedt's meeting with Hitler began at
1800 hours. The military situation in Normandy was discussed and Hitler directed
that the present frontlines be held; the major counterattack was to begin as soon
as possible. Rommel tried to bring up the subject of a political solution but was
rebuked by Hitler and told to focus only on the military situation. Rommel made
one more attempt to raise the matter, looking to Goebbels and Himmler for sup-
port, but none was forthcoming, and Hitler angrily dismissed Rommel from the
conierence. Orders affirming Hitler's directives were issued by the OKW later
that evening.
30 June
The gth SS Panzer Division tried a night attack during the darkness of 29/30 June
in order to lessen the effects of the naval and artillery fire, but by dawn this attack
had petered out. The renewed attacks by 9th and loth SS divisions were hampered
agan by a lack of co-ordination between the tanks and the panzergrenadiers in the
darkness and by devastating British artillery fire.
Early in the morning, Montgomery ordered the end to Operation Epsom as
he considered that it had reached its maximum oftensive usefulness.
General
Connor deployed Vill Corps in expectaden of a major enhan onensive and
the area around Cheux bristled with intantry, tanks and artillery pleces.ts The
topographically insignificant but tactically vital Hills 113 and 112 were recaptured'
y the loth SS atter an artillery bombaramen, but the britist dad already wich-
drawn during the night. Any advance further northwards by the Germans over the
River Odon proved to be impossible.
Rommel and von Rundstedt did not arrive back at their command post until late
on 30 June. Hitler, by summoning the twa' licers to Germany for a mecting, had
deprived the German forces fighting the battle of their two most senor command-
ers at the critical point of Operation Epsom.
1 July
The gth SS Panzer Division renewed the assault into the gap between Rauray and
de Haut du Bosq. Again, the forward British infantry positions were overrun but
