160
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
by Mark IVs from the southern slopes could not dislodge the British either, for as
soon as they advanced they were met with withering fire from the Shermans. Some
German tanks occupied prepared defensive positions in a small wood on the south-
ern slope of Hill i12 where they defied all attempts to knock them out with rocket-
firing Typhoons, artillery and self-propelled anti-tank guns. For a tank of either side
to move from what little cover there was meant that it would almost certainly be
knocked out. The German tanks in the wood changed positions regularly to avoid
being hit by the British tanks. Artillery from both sides bombarded the hilltop and
infantry tried to find what cover they could in a small wood as the landscape was
swept by mortar fire and rocket fire. The Germans engaged targets on the hilltop
from Esquay, the Chateau du Fontaine to the north-east and from the south-east.
Firing went on until 2230 hours, when it was too dark to shoot any more and
the 3rd RTR tanks moved back to harbour at base of the hill just east of Baron.
The death of General Dollman had far-reaching consequences for the Germans.
Half an hour after the news, Hitler called a strategic conference for next day, which
included Rommel and von Rundstedt who were compelled to leave Normandy
that afternoon to drive to Germany. While they were en route, Hitler made
a number of changes in the command of Seventh Army. The commander of the
2nd S$ Panzer Korps, General Paul Hausser, was made the temporary commander
of the Seventh Army until the return of von Rundstedt. Hausser and his staff were
still planning the next day's attack and changing the corps commander the day
before a major attack did nothing but unsettle the corps units. At 1700 hours that
afternoon, the four corps, including all the panzer divisions then fighting or about
to arrive in Normandy, were again put under control of von Schweppenburg's
Panzer Gruppe West, which had largely been inactive since its headquarters was
destroyed by British planes on to June. Panzer Gruppe West was to plan and imple-
ment the long-awaited attack to the Normandy beaches as soon as possible and
had been given responsibility for the eastern half of the Normandy front with the
Seventh Army to manage the operations against the Americans. However, before
this could happen the situation around Cheux and Hill 112 had to be resolved
as the 12th SS could not continue to hold the line on its own.
Therefore the
planned attack by the and SS Panzer Korps to relieve the situation was allowed to
continue, even after this was queried by von Schweppenburg. After the war, von
Schweppenburg complained bitterly about what he saw as the misuse of the 2nd SS
Panzer Korps in terms of the direction of its attack, which he thought should have
been more northwards into the rear-right flank of the British forces rather than in
the north-easterly direction to cut off the River Odon bridgehead.32
29 June
The weather, which had started to improve the day before, was fine on 29 June and
this allowed the Allied fighter-bombers and observer aircraft to take to the skies
Operation Epsom
161
once more. The attack by 2nd SS Panzer Korps was planned to start at 06oo hours;
the gth SS Hohenstaufen was to attack north of the River Odon and the bulk of
the toth SS Frundsberg to attack south of the river towards Hill 113 and Gavrus.
The toth SS Frundsberg was a comparatively weak panzer division as it only had
one tank battalion in its panzer regiment.
On the British side, the 44th RTR were ordered to occupy Hill in and put pres-
sure on Esquay, whilst the 3rd RTR were to remain on Hill 112. The 44th RTR did
not advance until og1o hours, C Squadron moving cautiously to just north of Hill
13. First contact was at 103o hours when two Stuarts were knocked out by guns
trom the woods just east of Bougy?" C Squadron immediately put down covering
tire whilst A Squadron moved towards Esquay and shot up any vehicle moving in
the vicinity. B Squadron gave support fire to the 3rd RTR, which was moving up
onto Hill 12 and claimed to have destroyed a Mark IV and some anti-tank guns
engaging the 3rd RTR tanks. At about 1230 hours, reports of German armour saw
the regiment redeploy to meet the coming attack. C Squadron, on top of Hill 113,
dashed with an advancing company of Stug IIIs. These self-propelled guns were not
supposed to be used in an attack in the open as their role was normally to provide
anti-tank defence from concealed positions because of their thinly armoured sides
and low silhouette. However, as this firefight took place in open terrain, the Stugs
were able to spot the advancing Shermans and halted to engage them from long
range with their powerful 75mm guns. Three Shermans of No. 2 Troop were hit
and began to catch fire. The No. 3 Troop with the troop of Sherman Fireflies
returned fire and scored hits on the Stugs, but more Shermans were struck by the
accurate 75mm fire. The turret of the Firefly commanded by Lieutenant Colbeck-
Welch took a direct hit and he ordered the crew to bail out. The lieutenant tried to
reverse the tank out of action, but the tank was hit again and knocked out, killing
the officer. Finally, B Squadron put down smoke and the remnants of C Squadron
withdrew.* The 23rd Hussars, having been relieved from the top of Hill 112 by the
3td RTR and withdrawn to Tourmauville, reinforced the 44th RTR during the
afternoon. The 23rd Hussars covered the positions of the 44th RTR while they
subsequently withdrew, losing one tank, which was later recovered.
C Squadron's battle was not over, however. Later the tanks of two other com-
panies of the roth SS Panzer Division arrived and their Mark IVs joined the Stugs
in attacking the 44th RTR, which was now supported by Mios of the 75th Anti-
tank Regiment. The intention of the roth SS Panzer Division was to advance to
Hill 112 via Esquay and Hill 113 to destroy the British forces south of the River
Odon and recapture the bridges. The right wing of the division's advance could
be seen from Hill 12 and spotter aircraft above and so concentrated artillery bar-
rages were brought down very quickly on the panzergrenadiers, disorganising the
attack. Their progress was hesitant in the face of this heavy artillery fire and the
defence of the and Argylls around Gavrus. Some tanks penetrated into Gavrus,
which became the contested ground between the two forces, but the bridges over
