362
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
On the Second Army front, there has been very heavy fighting on the fronts of all
three Corps and each one has made definite advances. On the front of the Canadian
Army, no (repeat no) progress has been made today?
General Crerar and Simonds were only too aware that there had been little pro-
gress, as Operation Totalize had come to a halt in front of the hastily regroupe
tanks and anti-tank guns of the 12th SS Panzer Division. General Crerar issued
orders on I3 August to attack and seize the road net north, east and south of Falase
but not the town itself, as this would be taken by the British XII Corps. Once this
was done, the army was to drive south-east to Trun to form the northern pincer
while the Americans advancing from the south would form the other pincer to
encircle the Germans. Simonds immediately set about planning the next operation
to achieve the breakthrough that had been much sought after by the Second Britisn
Army since D-Day. Again, he would have the znd Canadian Corps and the British
I Corps at his disposal.
As the Caen-Falaise road was strongly defended by the Germans in the villages
and high ground along its length, Simonds wanted to make more use of the open
ground to the east of the Route Nationale. The plan was to attack with the th
Canadian Armoured Division on the right flank and the 3rd Division on the let.
The attack would again be led by the armoured formations with the znd Canadian
Armoured Brigade under command of the 3rd Division. The Ist Polish Armoured
Division had been relegated to the role of corps reserve as Simonds was so dis-
pleased by their pertormance that he had considered having the division disbanded."
Simonds looked at what had worked in Operation Totalize, chiefly the advance
1 the armoured columns at night that had broken into the German lines and
aPplied similar thinking to what became known as Operation Tractable (originally
Operation Tallulah). This time the operation would start in daylight to avoid the
avigational probiems of the night advance and the advance would be conducted
behind a huge smoke screen to reduce the effectiveness of the waiting German
anti-tank guns. To offset the strong likelihood that anti-tank gunfire would quickly
cause the columns to break up, the armour would be grouped in solid phalanxes.
The tanks would therefore charge on in a (oug dass, regardless of the unfortunate
victims lost on the outside of the formations to anti-tank guns, relying on sheer
weight of hunters to silash through the German lines along the Kiver Laison and
reach their objectives. This plan was a throwback to the heavy cavalry Charges of
the Napoleonic era or the advances of the Roman legions in ranks. Once again,
heavy bomber support would be provided in two waves to protect the flanks from
counterattack and bomb the defensive positions around Quesnay Wood on which
Operation Totalize had foundered.
363
Operation Tractable
German Defenders
Following Operation Totalize, the exhausted Germans constructed new anti-tank
gun screens and deployed their armour where it could be most effective in the
terrain. This task was aided once again by the capture of a complete set of plans for
Operation Tractable on 13 August when an armoured car on reconnaissance was
knocked out after losing its way and driving into the German lines. Armed with
these plans, the Germans scouted for good defensive positions along the route of
the intended Canadian advance to Falaise?
The newly arrived 8sth Division was holding the right flank of the Ist SS Panzer
Corps around Jort whilst the 12th SS Panzer Division was in reserve behind the
remnants of the 89th Division on the Caen-Falaise road with the 27Ist Division
further west. As the German armour had withdrawn from around Thury Harcourt
during Operation Totalize, this had allowed the Canadian 2nd Division to advance
into the vacated areas supported by the Sherbrooke Fusiliers Regiment.
This force
managed to establish a bridgehead over the River Laize at Clair Tizon on i3 August.
Overnight, the Germans moved Kampfgruppe Krause (this time composed of the
3rd Battalion 26th Panzergrenadier Regiment and the division escort company) to
eliminate this bridgehead, which they were able to achieve next morning.
The 12th SS Panzer Division had suffered heavy losses in the defensive fight-
ing of the last eight weeks. On It August, it had only seven Panthers, seventeen
"aus send tive jagapanzers operational, a little more than a busa squadron.
Three days later the number of operational Panthers had increased to titteen.® The
panzergrenadier regiments and the divisional artillery had been reduced to half
strength. The two battalions of Tiger tanks remained in the area, deployed in twos
or threes. The roist SS Battalion had eleven Tigers operational on It August, and
the roznd Battalion had thirteen tanks operational on I3 August.
'Advance Now'
The armoured regiments used the few days after Operation Totalize to receive
replacement tanks and crews and repair minor damage.
The
Field Delivery
Squadron delivered in two days thirty-seven Shermans and two Ve tanks to the
British Columbia Regiment, two Mss to the South Albertas and nine Shermans
and a Stuart to the Grenadier Guards. These replacements completely depleted
the delivery squadron and were still not enough to bring the regiments up to full
strength again. The 4th Canadian Armoured Division workshop also managed to
repair twelve tanks and these would be the only replacements available during the
coming operation. To
The total strength of 4th Canadian Armoured Division on 13 August was 259
A vehicles." This gave the division a strength of about 75 per cent. The estimated
tank states of the regiments were as follows:
