258
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
so as to link up with troops supposedly assembling for a counterattack near Vire.
Von Choltitz protested, as this would mean the western end of the German line
would lose contact with the coast and allow American forces to surge around the
German left flank unopposed, but Hausser insisted on his orders being carried
out. Von Kluge was furious when he found out about this order and immediately
countermanded it but Hausser was unable to contact von Choltitz. By the time
a messenger conveyed the order to von Choltitz, he had lost touch with many units
and it was too late as the German forces trapped were already making preparations
for their own breakout attempts. The planned attack to the south-east, as ordered
by Hausser, would take them straight into the 2nd Armoured Division's CCB
blocking positions.
Aware that the Germans would attack in an effort to breakthrough their positions,
CCB recalled some of its more distant units from Cerences, creating a I0-mile gap
between Lengronne and the coast that would have considerably helped any break-
out attempts made by the Germans due south. Still north of the CCB positions
were the and SS Panzer Division, parts of the 17th SS Panzer Division, the óth
Parachute Division and the 243rd and gist divisions. This force was concentrated
around the Roncey and Montpinchon area.
29 July: the Roncey Pocket - 2nd Armored Division
During the night, the advance elements of the 4th Division began to arrive in
Notre Dame de Cenilly to relieve the CCB right column. Both the ist and and
battalions of the 67th Armored Regiment were heavily engaged to the west of
St Martin de Cenilly while a company of armoured infantry blocked the road
further to the south-west. A company of men from the 4th Division and four tank
destroyers formed a roadblock in the early hours of the morning at the La Panetiete
crossroads between St Martin de Cenilly and Notre Dame de Cenilly.
Just before dawn, at 0400 hours on 29 July, a column of thirty German vehicles
coming from the direction of Roncey, including fifteen tanks, tried to break
through the roadblock; they overran the company of infantry and reached the
positions of the 78th Armored Field Artillery Battalion. The self-propelled rosmm
field guns were forced to fire over open sights at the attackers. With the aid of an
additional four guns from the 702nd Tank Destroyer Battalion and artillery fire,
the attack was held off for 3o minutes until reinforcements from the armoured in-
fantry arrived to defeat the attack altogether. Seven Mark IV tanks were destroyed
and 125 Germans killed. +2
As the right column was heavily engaged with this early morning breakout
attempt, the left column of CCB moved off to reinforce the previously established
blocking positions but progress was slow as the area between St Martin de Cenilly
and Hambye was being used by Germans retreating southwards. Enough of the
4th Division had arrived at Notre Dame de Cenilly by 1200 hours to relieve the
Operation Cobra
259
forces of the right column and these then advanced rapidly to Lengronne and
St Denis le Gast. The 2nd Armored Division Combat Command Reserve later
Planes from the IX Tactical Air Command spotted and attacked a concentration
of German vehicles in the area around Roncey. Two large columns of vehicles on
separate roads that converged at Roncey had created a massive traffic jam: vehicles
were stationary and bumper-to-bumper. It was a fighter-bomber's paradise, and
the Thunderbolts and Mustangs set about their task with a savage enthusiasm. For
ó hours squadrons rotated over Roncey and attacked whatever vehicles were still
intact while CCB tanks and artillery directed a barrage of HE fire into the vil-
lage. More than 100 armoured vehicles and 250 soft vehicles were found wrecked,
damaged or abandoned in the Roncey pocket a few weeks later. That night the
surviving soldiers would attempt a final breakthrough of the CCB line and formed
independent groups supported by a few tanks to press against the CCB cordon,
desperate to find a way through back to their own lines.
30 July
At 0300 hours, elements of the and and I7th SS Panzer Divisions (600 men and
ninety armoured vehicles, including twenty tanks) attacked the and Armored
Division Combat Command Reserve around St Denis. The headquarters of both
the 4Ist Infantry Regiment and the 3rd Battalion of the 67th Armored Regiment
Were overrun; a Panther tank put its gun muzzle through the hedge and shot up
the tank battalion command post in the field where it was harboured. A German
column, headed by an 88mm self-propelled gun, entered St Denis le Gast itself, the
infantry using Panzerfäuste and throwing grenades. An Ms light tank, commanded
by Sergeant Douglas Tanner of A Company of the 67th Armored Regiment, en-
gaged the German column head-on in order to allow his fellow soldiers time to fall
back and get out of the way of the Germans. Tanner's tank exchanged shots with
the self-propelled gun and was hit twice,
bursting into flames. The driver of the
Ms pulled Tanner out of the turret and laid him on the side of the road, but Tanner
was mortally wounded. For his bravery, Tanner was awarded the Silver Star and
the Croix de Guerre with bronze star. 43 Such was the force of the German assault
that the American line was broken and St Denis had to be temporarily yielded to
the Germans.
In the midst of the confusion and intense enemy fire in the darkness, the re-
maining roadblocks were strengthened and all available headquarters personnel
Joined the fight. 4 The German soldiers were more intent on breaking through
the American outposts than stopping to engage in any firefight, which meant any
contact was brief but savage.
The capture of St Denis allowed the surviving Germans to continue their flight
southwards for a short period before a CCB counterattack retook the village at
