The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
32
but as there were no infantry with them to hold the town, RHQ and repaired X
tank casualties rushed up in support until the Queen's Own Rifles finally arrived
to relieve them. The next day the Fort Garry Horse reported eleven tanks being
lost (two damaged) with forty-four Shermans and seven Fireflies fit. 49
Having largely achieved their D-Day objectives, the tanks of the Fort Garry
Horse were pulled back as the divisional reserve. The regiment was ordered back to
harbour in Bény sur Mer at 2000 hours, but the tanks stayed with their infantry well
into the night. It was not until oroo hours the following morning that B Squadron
made it back to Bény sur Mer while C Squadron stayed with the North Shores in
Tailleville until the following afternoon. The Queen's Own Rifles' history pays
tribute to the Fort Garry Horse:
The tanks ranged far and wide and did valuable work in locating and destroying
pockets of the enemy. It was a tank-infantry fight against scattered nests of enemy
resistance and never did the cooperation work more smoothly.S°
The delay at Bernières meant that ultimately Carpiquet, one of the D-Day objec-
tives of the Canadian 3rd Division, could not be taken that day and the gth Brigade
and its supporting tank regiment, the Sherbrooke Fusiliers (27th Canadian
Armoured Regiment), had to harbour for the night short of their objective. The
Fort Garry Horse lost thirteen men killed (one officer and twelve ORs) and twelve
men wounded (two officers and ten ORs) on D-Day.
1st Hussars
The DD-equipped A and B squadrons of the Ist Hussars were to land either side of
the mouth of the River Seulles at Courseulles at H-s minutes in support of the 7th
Brigade. A Squadron was to support the Royal Winnipeg Rifles Regiment into
the western part of Courseulles and B Squadron was to support the Regina Rifles
Regiment in clearing eastern Courseulles and then move inland to the bridges
over the River Mue at Reviers and further south to Fontaine Henry. The landing
craft of K LCT squadron of the 4th LCT Flotilla would transport the DD tanks to
their launching positions as part of the J3.III assault wave composed of DD tanks
and AVR Es.
The main German strongpoint at Courseulles, WN29, was equipped with an
88m gun and two 75mm guns sighted to fire along the beach from Courseulles to
St Aubin.
A Squadron
As arranged at a briefing on 4 June for the tank troop commanders and the DSOAG,
a signal was sent from control landing craft at 0530 hours when the LCTs were still
8 miles from the French coast, querying the advisability of launching DD tanks. The
firm reply was that the sea was too rough and to check again at 7,00oyds offshore.
At this distance, at 0640 hours, the LCT HQ ship sent a signal that it was too rough
D-Day Tanks
33
JUNO SECTOR D-DaY
7th Canadian Infantry Brigade
First Hussars
Courseulles-sur-Mer
Mines wa
Chateau Vaux
Blad
NAN
GREEN
UND TINI
MIKE
VINI SUIT WININ VIVN
TIVI •
RED
MIKE
GREEN
D Coy
ILOINA KILLED
ROYAL WINNIPEG RIFLES
CANADIAN SCOTTISH
i go ago go go.
Juno sector, Mike beach. The landings of the 1st Hussars and the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade,
adapted from Maple Leaf Route: Caen. (By kind permission of T. Copp)
to launch and to proceed directly to the Mike beaches.
The tank crews began to
discard excess equipment such as tiller bars, compasses and escape apparatus.
As the LCTs were now ahead of schedule as they had not stopped to launch,
the flotilla turned in a large circle to mark time. However, when the flotilla was
lined up for the beach again at o72s hours, the bells rang for down doors' and
the DD tanks were ordered to launch. The senior squadron leader had decided
to launch to ensure that the tanks arrived as scheduled to support the assaulting
infantry. By this time, German mortars and shells were beginning to range in on
the landing craft. After launching one tank, the chains holding the door ramp of
the port landing craft were shot away and the other tanks could not launch, so the
LCT carried them to the beach, only to hit a mine immediately after the second
tank launched. The next tank tried to get off as the LCT started to list to port, but
it was immediately swamped on launching and blocked the exit of the remaining
two tanks, which were then unable to disembark. Only when the tide went out
later in the afternoon could the two tanks get off the beached LCT. Another LCT
