316
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the German operation was support from the Luftwaffe, and thanks to Ultra, this
support did not appear. The advance was taken over by the Mark IV battalion o
the 2nd Panzer Division, but the two leading tanks were knocked out by a bazooka
team and blocked the road to Juvigny, effectively ending the German advance,
which was not to resume until dusk.
At Mortain, the 2nd SS Das Reich Division attacked both sides of the town
and captured it after a short fight. However, men of the 2nd battalion of the
I20th Regiment held their position on Hill 317 to the east of Mortain. This hil
overlooked the surrounding countryside through which the German forces were
advancing, and the battalion were able to call heavy and accurate artillery fire
down on the roads choked with Das Reich vehicles. Simultaneously, Das Reich
assault guns broke through the screen of 4th Cavalry squadron attached to the
Ist Division further south near Barenton.
The tanks of the 3rd Armored Division's CCB were undergoing maintenance
and rest on the afternoon of 6 August. When General Boudinot got word of a poy-
sible German attack at Olls hours on 7 August, many of the tanks were missing
tracks, guns and engines, and work to reassemble them could not begin until it.
was light. Therefore CCB could not move before noon." At 0744 hours CB was
attached to the 3oth Division and at rors hours received orders to retake Le Men!
Adelée and Le Mesnil Tove.
At too hours the reconnaissance company of the 33rd Armored Regimen:
moved out to reconnoitre the roads towards Mortain.
Task Force I, including
Ist Battalion 33rd Armored Regiment, was ordered to stop the German attack
and clear the area around Le Mesnil Adelée and Le Mesnil Tove. Task Force 3 was
dispatched to seize the road junction at St Barthélemy. 2°
The tanks of the ist Battalion reached halfway between Le Mesnil Adelée and
Le Mesnil Tove when they were stopped by artillery fire from the north and west.
Three or tour tanks were knocked out and Le Mesnil Adelee Was leported to
be swarming With German troops. Two platoons from F Company attacked Le
Mesnil Adelée from the south and one platoon from the north after an artillery
bombardment. I he attack from two directions surprised the Germans, and severe
Panthers were destroyed by the M4s coming from the north. The two southern
platoons attacked in a frontal assault but lost six Mas damaged or destroyed."
The armoured spearhead of Kampfgruppe Schake had stopped, believing that it
was getting too far ahead in the advance and was not being supported by other
units. Now the kampfgruppe was being fired at by the combined artillery of three
American divisions and had enemy forces on three sides.? Once the morning fog
cleared, the conditions were perfect for artillery observation and the Americans
used their artillery effectively. Under considerable pressure from the American
tanks, artillery and armoured infantry, the kampfgruppe withdrew from Le Mesnil
Adelée from about 1800 hours, leaving behind six Panthers and two assault guns
that were knocked out.23
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
317
In the south, the Americans counterattacked towards Barenton, and the weak-
ened German 27 5th Division was unable to prevent the village from being captured.
The reconnaissance battalion of the gth Panzer Division was ordered to attack the
fank of the advancing Americans but could not disengage from the American tank
forces attacking Domfront.
The US and Armored Division had begun its move to link up with the
Ist Division just after midnight, and the 82nd Reconnaissance Battalion that was
leading came under machine-gun fire and mortar fire as it approached Cherence.
Contact was made with infantry from the gth Division and it was clear that a major
German attack was in progress. The 3rd Battalion of the 67th Armored Regiment
reached Le Mesnil Gilbert at 0945 hours, and the tanks and divisional artillery
engaged any targets they could see across the river in the fog at Le Mesnil Adelée
for the rest of the morning. The commander of CCB offered support to the be-
leaguered 3oth Division but was ordered by General Huebner to keep moving
to link up with the Ist Division for the advance to Mayenne. The division (less
CCA which was fighting round Vire) was then transferred to VII Corps at II00
hours and was ordered to move to Barenton with the mission of attacking back to
the north towards Ger. The reports of heavy fighting coming in all morning had
confirmed Bradley's prior knowledge of the German attack and these orders meant
a movement of 5o miles around the German advance to place a strong armoured
force on the southern flank of the Germans. When infantry of the 4th Division
arrived, the 2nd Armored Division commenced its move westwards, again being
led by the 82nd Reconnaissance Battalion, which felt its way around the German
spearheads. The division crossed the River See and moved through St Hilaire to
Barenton; here it made contact with Task Force X of the 3rd Armored Division
and the 3rd Battalion of the 120th Regiment attached to it. Also a part of the
2nd Armored Division at that time was the 702nd Tank Battalion less Company
A, which was with CCA. The hilly countryside around Barenton was not suited
to armour and the control of the high ground was essential for future operations as
the road to Ger lay between two steep hills.
The 35th Division in the south, a part of the Third US Army, was ordered to
attack from St Hilaire towards Barenton and was also attached to the znd Armored
Division. Thus in a short space of time, five infantry and nearly two armoured
divisions plus their attached independent tank battalions were in a position to block
the German advance and attack its southern flank.
To the north, the Ist SS Panzer Division could make no progress in the teeth
of the heavy artillery fire and fighter-bomber attacks, so its vehicles had pulled
off the roads into the fields and camouflaged themselves as best they could. The
2nd SS Panzer Division could not take Hill 317 east of Mortain and was under attack
around Romagny.
At 1600 hours on 7 August, the commander of the 116th Panzer Division, von
Schwerin, was relieved, having not made much progress in supporting the attack
of the 2nd Panzer Division. Von Schwerin had believed the attack could never
