392
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Foot Guards were ordered to move to the high ground at Point 258 just
north of Ecorches and two patrols were sent out to deal with a German convoy in
the area, only to find that Polish troops were already attacking the Germans. The
regiment lost two Stuarts to anti-tank guns during the day and claimed to have
been attacked by Tiger tanks and infantry. The Grenadier Guard tanks stayed at
Point 259 near Hordesseau and as this position was a Polish responsibility, spent
the day in reserve, performing necessary maintenance on their operational tanks."
Booth's replacement, Brigadier Moncel, had arrived the previous evening to
take command of the 4th Brigade. The brigade's war diary for 19 August reported
some uncertainty about the position of the Ist Polish Armoured Division, which is
curious as the Polish had occupied Coudehard that morning as ordered. That even-
ing at 2130 hours, Moncel held his first Orders Group and immediately cancelled
the stand-down; an advance to Vimoutiers was planned in detail, with Moncel
declaring that he wanted progress
reports by radio from the regiments every
30 minutes. The Foot Guards and one company of motorised infantry were to move
to Vimoutiers after first establishing a firm base on Point 261 at Les Champeaux. At
the very time when the last elements of the German Seventh Army were planning
their breakout, the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade was preparing to move away
from the blocking positions held at Chambois and St Lambert. Only the South
Albertas (the reconnaissance regiment) stood between the desperate Germans and
their passage out of the encirclement.
Between von Kluge officially ordering the withdrawal on 16 August and
19 August, five panzer divisions and two infantry divisions plus hordes of rear ech-
elon personnel and non-combatants had left the pocket. Whereas the withdrawal
had started in an orderly fashion, the constant Allied artillery and aerial attacks had
delayed the progress of many units and panic had begun to set in. That day, Hausser
and Model realised that the coming night was their only chance to get the rest
of the Seventh Army out of the encirclement and a last-ditch breakout operation
was planned.
20 August
All the Allied units on the frontline spent another restless night: German vehicles
could be heard moving along the valley roads below and there were large groups
of German infantry moving cross-country that could stumble into the Canadian
positions at any time. The remaining German units in the pocket planned their
final breakoutbreakout, which would be assisted by attacks from outside the pocket
on the shoulders of the gap to try and keep escape routes open.
There were still seven infantry divisions, one parachute division, the remnants
of six panzer divisions plus countless stragglers and rear echelon staff in the Falaise
pocket, an estimated maximum of 70,000 men and 150 tanks. The attack from
outside the pocket would employ the divisions of the 2nd SS Panzer Korps; the
393
Falaise Gap
ot SS Panzer Division would attack on the right and the 2nd SS Das Reich on
the left. Some of the Germans trapped were veterans, which only moved at night
and were content to lie up during the day and let the Canadians target other units
on the move. The 2,000 survivors of the 3rd Parachute Division would lead the
way via Coudehard whilst the 353rd Division would attack the southern Hill 262
to Kep the road between the two hills open. The panzer divisions would follow
beind with the remaining infantry further back. The artillery had fired off all its
maning ammunition the previous day and destroyed its guns. The fleeing tanks
and armoured vehicles needed bridges over the River Dives capable of carrying
their weight and these were located at Trun, Chambois and St Lambert. With the
it owns firmly in Canadian hands, St Lambert provided the only escape
route. At Moissy, just to the east of St Lambert, was a ford that the infantry on foot
could use.
Early in the morning, the 3rd Squadron of the Ist Tank Regiment with a com-
pany of infantry had occupied the wooded hills to the north-west of Coudehard
near ill 39 to keep open the line along which any relief was expected to come.
This line was directly in the path of the attacking 2nd SS Panzer Korps and the in-
tended route of the German breakout. The squadron reached the woods at Hill 239
and could see lines of German troops marching towards them from the west and
ote tanks and troops advancing from the north-east. The targets below to the
iest were engaged for more than i hour, which broke up some of the columns,
catering the infantry and setting fire to four self-propelled guns.2
From the 2nd SS Panzer Division, the 3rd Battalion of the Der Führer Regiment
with infantry in half-tracks supported by two Mark IVs and a Panther tank, at-
lacked at os45 hours either side of the minor road Champosoult to Vigan. One
company advanced towards St Leger while a second attacked Boisjois. The Polish
commander recognised the importance of the Hill 239 feature and ordered the
and Squadron of the 2nd Tank Regiment, which was responsible for the defences to
the north, to support the 3rd Squadron of the ist Tank Regiment there. However,
the and Squadron was heavily engaged and could not carry out the orders. The
Germans also recognised the importance of Hill 239: whoever occupied it etec-
uvely controlled Coudehard. The German advance reached the high ground at St
Leger and ten Shermans from the 3rd Squadron were spotted on a ledge, lined up
side on and firing HE westwards into the valley below:?7
Our own panzers are still in Champosoult near 3rd Battalion HQ. I jogged back about
2 kilometres to TAC HQ outside which stands a panther which has just been repaired.
I order the platoon commander to bring his vehicle forward where it is urgently
needed. This he refuses to do as he is awaiting orders from the Panzer regiment.
I insist that he comply with my order but he still refuses and at last I draw my pistol
and tell him that I am the one issuing orders here. He agrees. I clamber on the back
of the turret and guide him to the point I had left earlier from which we can observe
heavy shell fire falling upon nos. 9 and II companies. The Obersturmfuhrer and I go
