150
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
walked back through Cheux and reported to the B echelon vehicles. I have a blank as
to what followed. I remember sleeping that night in a tent, and later we were kitted
out and given a new tank. IS
The 9th RTR lost a total of nine tanks on this day, five being totally burnt out,
four more being severely damaged and three tanks repairable within 24 hours.
Eight tanks were lost from C Squadron alone.
As darkness fell, some infantry of the 2nd Gordons entered Colleville but not
in sufficient strength to hold it, so the surviving tanks moved back to Cheux car-
rying those soldiers they could find in the gathering gloom. The tanks of B and
C squadrons finally harboured near St Manvieu that night after their first day
in battle.
German Reactions
Believing the previous day's advance on Rauray by XXX Corps to be the point of
main effort of the British attack, the 12th SS Panzer Division had been ordered to
counterattack. A reinforced battlegroup, Kampfgruppe Wunsche, was assembled
to attack towards Juvigny, this time with both of the division's tank battalions
supported by artillery and one
of panzergrenadiers. The Mark IV
ank companies of the 2nd battalion moved from their positors done cheus
overnight to be in position for the dawn attack on 26 June. No sooner had the
kampfgruppe's attack got underway at osoo hours than it clashed with the tanks of
the 8th Armoured Brigade attacking from Tessel Wood. Later, with the opening
of the bombardment at 0730 hours around Cheux, the ist SS Panzer Korps realised
that the main attack was taking place there and not Rauray so the 2nd battalion
was ordered to return to their previous positions around Cheux. The sth and 7th
companies were able to disengage and move eastwards to Le Haut du Bosq, where
they were able to interfere with the British advance that afternoon and were later
reinforced by the 8th Company.
11th Armoured Division
It was clear to General O'Connor of VIII Corps that the attack was going much
more slowly than planned and at about noon he decided to order the reconnais-
sance regiment of the lith Armoured Division, the 2nd Northants Yeomanry in
their Cromwell tanks, to dash forward from Cheux and seize the bridges over the
River Odon. At this time, the Northants Yeomanry only had two squadrons of
tanks ashore in Normandy and only one was to be used in the attack. A Squadron
struggled through the rubble-strewn streets of Cheux and then moved southwards,
under sniper fire and the occasional Panzerfaust attack from panzergrenadiers. The
Germans had recovered from the artillery bombardment and progress was slow
against the camouflaged German positions while bypassing them was even more
time consuming. One troop of the squadron got as far as the railway at Grainville
151
Operation Epsom
cer stu ome 20mm lak guns. The remainder of the squadron reported
te could se the intact bridges but were unable to make any further progress
xed thaT to tanks were lost to Panzerfausts and the regiment was ordered
ite at 630 hours.'
ang on the information received, O'Connor then ordered the tanks of
- in indeforward to assist the action of C Squadron 7th RTR and the
- it is sizing the bridges. However, it was getting dark, was raining
cry a tack of the 227th Brigade had already faltered, the infantry and
citato t tak rigade were retiring to Cheux to rest and replenish
ti and ammunition.
let was now crammed with tanks and infantry through which the tanks of
sited of had to pass. C Squadron decided to move round west of the town
kit couch, bug narrow, sunken roads was difficult for both squadrons.
its in at the earlier British advance, many German panzergrenadiers had
aped eir positions, which were difficult to locate in the close countryside
i cut ofer determined resistance. No sooner had one position been
cated ad diminated, another one sprang to life, taking a toll on nearby in-
ay a aks fore it too could be destroyed. Armed with Panzerfausts, they
ct racing tanks of the and Fife and Forfar while anti-tank guns
Sed he when the tanks moved into more open countryside. The tanks and
o Highland Light Infantry got as far as Le Haut du Bosq but were unable to
you the village. A Squadron lost two tanks and C Squadron seven tanks; other
as ve damaged in the series of ambushes.!' As it grew darker, it became clear
kat to push on was dangerous and the regiment was a lally recalcu. One tank
commander said that he had only managed to tind his way to the narbour by the
Sit the flaming wrecks of tanks scattered about." At the apparent withdrawal
of the British forces, the exhausted engineers and panzergrenadiers were elated that
their lines had held.
During the afternoon, the tanks of the z3rd Hussars had worked their way
oh around and through Cheux for B and C squadrons to support the attack on
collevil. Just as the Churchills of the gth RTR were knocked out as soon as they
appeared over a ridge, so were the tanks of the Hussars. These were the regiment's
tust casualties:
Those who witnessed it will always remember the shock of seeing for the first time
one of the regiment's tanks go up in flames. One moment an impregnable monster,
with perhaps a crew containing some of one's best friends, forging irresistibly towards
the enemy; the next a crack of terrific impact, a sheet of flame - and then, where there
had been a tank, nothing but a helpless roaring inferno."
C Squadron lost three tanks and had another one damaged at about 1900 hours
before the regiment moved back into harbour? The area was defended by the
