18
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Normandy coast, including Cherbourg and Ouistreham, had been heavily fortified
to repel any direct landing attempts like Dieppe.
The German 716th Division consisted of two infantry regiments (three bat-
talions each) reinforced by two battalions of Ostruppen, formed from men recruited
in the countries occupied in the Eastern front campaign. This single division was
expected to defend the Atlantic Wall that protected the Sword, Juno and Gold
sectors - 20 miles of Normandy coastline. The 716th Division was a part of the
LXXXIV Corps commanded by General Markes, who also had at his disposal the
reformed 2Ist Panzer Division, commanded by Generalmajor Feuchtinger. The
2Ist Panzer Division had been destroyed in Tunisia in May 1943 at the culmination
of the North African campaign and had been reformed with a mix of officers who
had managed to escape from Africa and new recruits, many of whom had been
rejected by other units. The 2ist Panzer Division was not yet rated for service
rained pier in it opted vel of operation
artillery targets. 6
The Merville and Le Havre German coastal batteries presented a significant
threat to the ships of the landing force as well as the beach itself. During the
early hours of 6 June, the paratroopers of the 6th Airborne Division landed and
neutralised the former whilst HMS Warspite engaged the Le Havre battery in a
duel after H-hour, eventually silencing the battery's guns; however, during the
afternoon a single gun continued to fire sporadically at the invasion fleet, though
its fire would have been more effective if directed at the landing beach.
The 13th/18th Royal Hussars
Following the 24-hour postponement because of bad weather, the Sword invasion
convoy S-3 with the LCT Mk IIIs carrying the DD tanks of the 13th/18th Royal
Hussars sailed progressively from osoo hours on s June from Spithead. By 0520
hours on D-Day, the LCTs had reached the lowering position for the infantry
landing craft in miles off shore. A green light shone by the midget submarine X23,
which had surfaced after fixing its position and remaining submerged for the previ-
ous 24 hours, indicated the course to be taken and the DD tank launching point!?
Because of the rough seas, the decision was made to not launch at the planned
7,00oyds out from the shore but for the eight landing craft to move to within
5,000yds of the beach, and this caused a delay. Eventually, the signal to launch was
given by raised yellow flags, and one by one the DD tanks moved ponderously
down the lowered ramps of the landing craft and dropped into the sea. Once their
propellers were engaged, they began to slowly move towards the distant shore at
a rate of iooyds a minute.
A Squadron
The objectives of A Squadron of the Hussars were to support the specialised AVRE
tanks and gapping teams breach the defences on Queen White beach by suppressing
D-Day Tanks
19
and knocking out the fortifications before supporting the ist South Lancashire
infantry battalion in capturing Hermanville. The tanks were to come ashore at
H-7½ minutes, before the gapping teams and assault infantry arrived.
Immediately on launching, the DD tanks experienced difficulties. Large waves
and a strong lateral current reduced the speed of the tanks to 3 knots, and they were
forced to steer at an angle of 40 degrees to their intended course just to keep head-
ing for the beach. One DD tank was swamped and sank after its propellers did not
engage after launching. A second tank, that of the squadron's second in command,
Captain Denny, was sunk by its own landing craft when it failed to get clear of the
ramp after launching and a wave caused the LCT's ramp to collide with the tank's
screen which collapsed; the tank quickly sank and only Captain Denny survived.
The landing craft carrying the AVREs of the gapping teams were following right
behind those of the Hussars, which were now behind schedule because of the
rough conditions and the decision to launch closer to the shore. The result was
that the AVRE LCTs were ordered to pass through the columns of swimming DD
tanks, unfortunately ramming one tank, which subsequently sank, in the process.
At 1,oooyds from the shore, the DD tanks changed formation from four columns
of tanks to line abreast in order to arrive at the landing beaches simultaneously. To
complicate matters, the AVRE LCTs in front then slowed again as 'short' rockets
from the shore bombardment support landing craft fell and exploded all around
them and the DD tanks. No tanks were reported hit, but one B Squadron troop
commander was killed by a piece of shrapnel from the rockets.
The DD tanks then caught up with the AVRE LCTs with the final result that
the DD tanks and the AVRE vehicles arrived at the beach almost at the same time.
Another tank was rammed by an LCT shortly before touching down, and although
the tank made it to the shore, it immediately began to ship water and soon had
to be abandoned. After dropping their canvas screens to bring their main 75mm
guns into action, the tanks began to engage the identified emplacements from
their hull-down half-submerged positions at the water's edge. Major Wormald,
A Squadron's commander, described the landing on the beach:
Naval and Air Bombardment was tremendous and occasional glimpses of the shore
were possible, due to the offshore wind which carried the smoke of the bombardment
towards us. The tanks were performing well beyond what we thought to be practica-
ble for the apparatus. Four columns each of five tanks (less Cpl Sweetapples) followed
the lead of a Landing Craft Personnel (Navigational) the task of which was to lead us
to the correct point of 'TOUCH DOWN' on the beach. Our tanks touched down
at 07.23. Sixteen tanks got their tracks on the sea bed, moved into water sufficiently
shallow to allow them to deflate their screens and to engage the beach defences.
I still remember very clearly the 'brewing-up' of the leading AVRE Churchill
tank as it drove down the ramp of an LCT which was beached a few yards to my left
front. The turret and the contents thereof spun into the air after a violent explosion,
presumably caused by a penetrating direct hit by an anti-tank shell which detonated
