206
states:
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Command dropped more than 5,000 tons. The 8th USAAF after action report
644 B-24s are dispatched, in conjunction with Ninth Air Force and RAF Bomber
Command, to bomb enemy equipment and troop concentrations in support of the as-
sault by the British Second Army in the Caen area; 249 hit Solier, 146 hit Frénouville,
I39 hit Troarn, 23 hit Hubert la Folie and 12 hit the Mezidon marshalling yard; I
B-24 is lost, 2 are damaged beyond repair and 182 are damaged. 90 RAF Spitfires Ay
uneventful support for the B-245.
The aircraft bombed from only a medium height, 5,000-9,00oft, but the combina-
tion of the bombing, artillery and naval gunfire quickly subdued many of the
defending flak batteries and only six aircraft (five Halifaxes and one Lancaster)
were shot down. Allied air superiority over the battlefield by day was complete,
and no German fighters appeared to hinder the bombing mission.
The bombs fell
on the German positions, not randomly but in a huge wall of explosions, thunder-
ous detonations and fountains of earth that advanced towards them. As they were
engulfed in the inferno, men simply disappeared, torn apart in the maelstrom of
high explosives. Heavy Tiger tanks were overturned by the blasts and men cowered
in their foxholes or under tanks wondering if they would be next:
As far as my company were concerned, two Tigers were completely neutralised,
two others were so badly damaged that they could not be employed. All the tanks
were completely covered with earth and the gun sights had been thrown completely
out of alignment by the shock effeyeid au do men of the company were dead, two
further had committed suicide during the bombardments; another had to be sent to
a mental hospital for observation. The psychological shock of these terrible exchanges
remained with us for a long time.22
The casualties amongst the infantry were far worse. The toth Luftwaffe Field
Division virtually ceased to exist, shallow infantry foxholes offering no protec-
tion to its infantry against the soo-pounder bombs of the RAF. General Eberbach
reported the bombing as follows:
The hail of enemy artillery shells and bombs had simply swept away not only the
remaining half of the 16 LW Feld Div, but also the elements of 21 Pz Div which
had been assigned to the second position in the rear. The local reserves had been
annihilated or shattered, the guns smashed before they had even fired a shot.
In addition, the telephone communication lines had been cut. The radio stations
of the intermediate command staff, in so far as they had not been damaged, had been
put out of commission by dust and concussion. The observation posts, in so far as they
were not situated in the sector under attack, saw for hours nothing but a screen of
smoke, dirt and fames. Thus the batteries which were left intact did not know where
207
Operation Goodwood
to fire. And if they fired all the same, then enemy fighter bombers immediately dived
onto them and silenced them with machine gun fire and bombs. *3
Such was the chaos and the destruction in the German positions that when the
Bitish tank regiments moved into their crowded final assembly positions east of
the River Orne before the attack, not a single German artillery shell landed on this
tempting target; the aerial bombardment had effectively neutralised the German
ailer positions and those of any forward observers in the frontline.
AtH-hour, 074s hours, the artillery barrage began, a second creeping curtain of
cash that marched towards the German lines before enveloping them in another
infero of smoke, dust and explosions. Unfortunately for the waiting British tank-
ts, some rounds fell short and landed amongst the 3rd RTR tanks, killing several
oices and men. By the time the subsequent confusion was sorted out, the barrage
had moved on and the leading tanks of the 3rd RTR were already behind the
barage and having difficulty in keeping up. The other two regiments followed in
coumn with the 2nd Fife and Forfar leading the 23rd Hussars, each accompanied
by their motorised infantry companies and artillery observers.
Once through the channels in the minefields, the 3rd RTR shook out into attack
formation two-up, te. two squadrons abreal, each squadron advanced in a yudre
formation with a troop at each corner and squadron HQ in the centre; the tank
trops themselves advanced in a V-formation with the Sherman Firefly tucked
in behind the three tanks in front and the mai uat tanks doome soyas apart. "4
The tanks went as fast as they could but visibility was poor due to the clouds of
dust and fumes from the bombardment and tank drivers had difficulty in avoiding
shell craters, even thouga only tragmentation bombs nad been usea. A speed or
only abouts miles an hour was possible and tanks reached their first objective, the
Caen-Troarn single-track railway line, at approximately 0830 hours.
i German opposition to this point was very light. Dazed soldiers who ap-
peared out of the gloom in front of the tanks with their hands up were waved to
the rear by commanders as the tanks could not stop to pies them up. the elects ot
the bombing were felt for about 2 hours by the Germans underneath it and for the
i § miles of the charge. Caplum Lemon of the leuce troop of 3rd kik:
I rather enjoyed the first few minutes as I think most of us did. There was very little
opposition and one had a wonderful feeling of superiority as many Germans, shaken
by the preliminary bombing and shelling, gave the seives up, As time passed thoug,
they became more aggressive, having overcad day elect de te sueds dad bottes
I and the tanks around me had some excellent MG shooting at targets that kept
appearing in the hedgerows and the villages of Cuverville and Démouville ... There
Were a couple of embankments to cross which proved to be awkward obstacles, but
an AVRE with a 'dustbin' did an excellent job of blowing gaps, making the crossing
easier. The objective was Falaise and it seemed at the rate we were going we would
reach there comfortably ... 2s
