368
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
miles to near Olendon. But valuable hours had been lost and again the momentum
of the charge had been halted because of an elementary planning mistake.
The partially rebuilt British Columbia Regiment lost fifteen Shermans that day.
One tank crossing the river toppled off a fascine at Rouvres and other tanks were
lost while climbing the southern slope of the River Laison valley towards the
waiting anti-tank guns.
After 2 miles of the advance to the river, the Foot Guards encountered a small
wood that turned out to be a German strongpoint protected by mines and contain-
ing anti-tank guns and Mark IV tanks. The regiment divided to go around either
side of the wood; No. 1 Squadron and R HQ went one way and the remainder of the
regiment the other. Accurate armour-piercing fire hit some of their tanks in their
thinner sides and six tanks were knocked out or damaged, including that of Colone!
Scott, which hit a mine. No. I Squadron and RHQ arrived at Rouvres to join the
tanks of the Grenadier Guards milling about looking for a crossing. A crossing was
found south of Rouvres,
which No. 1 Squadron and RHQ used before waiting
for the reminder of the regiment to arrive. Attempting to use a crossing that had
been constructed by the engineers with fascines, No. 3 Squadron lost seven tanks,
including one that overturned on the fascines and blocked the crossing. Before they
reached the river, two tanks of No. 2 Squadron became bogged in a sunken lane
and were destroyed by a pair of Mark IV5.28 The Foot Guards eventually crossed
the river at Mazières and regrouped before fighting their way to high ground near
Olendon, advancing to a point just west of Sassy.
In the znd Canadian Armoured Brigade, C Squadron of the Fort Garry Horse
found a crossing place over the River Laison 1,00oyds west of Rouvres at about
14iS hours and attempted to improve it with logs and a bridgelaying AVRE. RHQ
eventually found another bridge and by the time the other squadrons were noti-
fied and had crossed, it was 1630 hours. Several C Squadron tanks got bogged in
this process.
The Ist Hussars got one squadron across by means of the bridge in
Kouvies itself by 1412 hours. The tanks of the other two Hussars' squadrons had
bogged or had strayed eastwards along the riverbanks until they met the units of
the 4th Canadian Armoured Division. The subsequent delay whilst the regiments
regrouped into forces large enough to continue the advance lasted another 3 hours
and it was 1730 hours before the advance resumed.
However, more and more anti-tank guns of every calibre were encountered,
often in lines behind hedges, and the advance was slow. Ignoring pockets of infan-
try the tanks pushed on, their route marked by flaming Shermans. The Fort Garrys
got to Point 184 at Orme des Gresles just before dark with some of the infantry,
whose advance had been similarly disrupted by the lack of crossing points.
infantry continued to arrive in dribs and drabs during the night.
The
The second bombing raid came in at 1400 hours and 3,723 tons of bombs were
dropped by 417 Lancasters, 352 Halifaxes and forty-two Mosquitoes of RAF
Bomber Command. They were used on six targets around Potigny, including
Quesnay Wood and Fontaine le Pin. Unbelievably, again there were misdirected
Operation Tractable
369
or short bombs on Canadian troops. The bombs fell in the areas of St Aignan
de Cramesnil and Hautmesnil, and hit the rear echelons of the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division, disrupting the artillery, fuel supplies and brigade communica-
tions. Unlike the previous two incidents, which had been caused by planes of the
USAAE, this time the planes were from RAF Bomber Command and forty-four of
the seventy-seven planes that bombed short belonged to a Canadian bomber group,
No. 6 (RCAF) Bomber Group.3°
many casualties. Two aircraft were shot down, one of them possibly by Canadian
anti-aircraft gunners, unable to believe the aircraft were not manned by Germans.
In another administrative error, Bomber Command, perhaps used to night-time
operations, used yellow smoke for target markers, which was the same colour as the
yellow smoke used for identification by the Allied. It is likely that as the ground
troops let off the smoke, this only attracted more bombers to target them.
Brigadier Booth was following the advance with his tactical HQ and protective
troop. At about i50o hours, fire from a German tank hit Booth's tank, killing
another officer and mortally wounding Booth.
The route taken by Booth had
brought the troop too close to Quesnay Wood. Lieutenant-Colonel Scott of the
root Guards was ordered to take over the brigade, despite have carner mor
ken his ankle when his tank ran over a mine. Other tactical HQ vehicles were
destroyed and all radio contact between the brigade and the resents was lost.
communications for the next tew days remained either poor or torten as
replacement command vehicles were sought.
After a rapid advance that saw the tanks break through the German lines and
reach the river within 30 minutes, it then took another 4 or $ hours for the river to
be crossed and the regiments to regroup before the advance continued. When they
eventually harboured for the evening, the harbour furthest south was 2 miles from
the River Laison. The regiments of the 4th Canadian Armoured Brigade were in
the vicinity of Olendon and the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade was on Hill 160
to the east of Soulangy.
that day.
During the afternoon of 14 August, General Montgomery modified his original
orders to General Crerar and gave the Canadian First Army the additional task
of capturing Falaise itself, rather than the Second British Army.
This was the
fifth time that Montgomery had changed the responsibility for Falaise since the
campaign began; no
doubt Montgomery would see this as being 'fexible' and
'balanced'. Falaise was to be taken as soon as possible, but its capture was not to
