420
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
it found itself in the bocage. Strangely, the division did not allow the same infantry
and armoured regiments to work together, apart from the Irish Guards. Although
directly in the path of the later German counterattack, the Guards initially made
only slow progress and were halted for long periods such as at Le Tourneur and
Corteil. A divisional history blamed the bocage countryside and the Germans
for not forming proper defensive lines and for fighting in ad-hoc battle groups.*
Progress was firstly slowed by the zist Panzer Division and then halted altogether
by the counterattack of the 9th SS Panzer Division.
Though perhaps more favoured by the fortunes of war, the lith Armoured
Division was better trained in infantry/tank co-operation, had an experienced
commander and was ready to exploit any advantages on the battlefield. Arguably,
the assignment of an inexperienced divisional commander to the new Guards
Armoured Division was not such a sound decision by Home Forces in 1942 and
Montgomery did try to have General Adair removed in February 1944, without
success. 42 The Guards would be given one more opportunity in north-west Europe
to lead an attack during Operation Market Garden in September 1944. Debate
continues to this day as to the division's performance in this operation, although
once again British planning was rife with basic errors.
The Canadian 4th Armoured Division also went through a process of devel-
opment in
response to its first battle experiences but its commander, General
Kitching,
was replaced.
Simonds, to his credit, tried new armoured tactics and
virtually threw away the training manual in order to find solutions to the superor
firepower of the German tanks and anti-tank guns. His plan worked well and gaps
were created in the German lines for subsequent exploitation. Simonds's own plan-
ning then derailed the operation: the exploitation attack by the armoured divisions
could not get underway until after the second bombing as a German counterat-
tack was regarded as inevitable by Simonds. The subsequent delay afforded the
Germans nearly 8 hours to reorganise their forces and construct a new frontline.
The 4th Canadian Armoured Division's regiments subsequently attacked straight
into this new line, which buckled but again held.
A few days later, the same tactic was tried again, this time in daylight with the
Canadian tanks lined
in armoured phalanxes in parade ground fashion. The
initial advance went well until it reached the River Laison, which was supposedly
easily crossed. The opposite proved true and chaos ensued with valuable time being
lost; those tanks that got across continued their advance but by then were separated
from their infantry.
With tank casualties mounting and the loss of daylight, the
attack that did not start until noon was stopped. I his allowed the termidas to gan
regroup and progress next day was negligible.
Both of these operations are notable for the planning tuncuon being taken over
entirely by Simonds and his corps staff; Kitching was completery bypassed so canno
be held solely responsible for the outcome of Operations lotalize and tractable. The
operation to close the Falaise Gap saw the division curiousty unengaged, except for
the South Alberta Regiment. The division was certainly handicapped by the death
Summary
421
of Brigadier Booth who was killed on 14 August, his place being taken at different
times by two commanders of the divisional regiments. Lieutenant-Colonel Scott of
the Foot Guards took over first, followed by Lieutenant-Colonel Halpenny of the
Grenadier Guards, so at a critical stage of the campaign an inexperienced armoured
brigade was twice led by temporary commanders with acting commanders in all
three armoured regiments. Kitching struggled to retain control in the circum-
ching struggled
stances just when it was most needed. Simonds was also at fault for not arranging
the requested replacement for Booth more quickly, despite the officer being in the
area. Nevertheless, the strain finally got to Kitching: his refusal to send troops to
the aid of the ist Polish Armoured Division alone warranted his dismissal.
American Performance
The initial operations of the Americans in the capture of Cherbourg saw the in-
dependent tank battalions operate successfully with their infantry divisions against
very sparse German armoured resistance. However, in June, including D-Day
losses, FUSA reported 209 M4 and thirty-five Ms tanks lost despite FUSA having
been opposed by only one and a half panzer divisions. 43
The US tank battalions generally remained assigned to the same infantry divi-
sion during the Normandy campaign and this allowed good working relationships
to be developed. An exception is the 747th Tank Battalion, which complained of
friendly fire and a lack of artillery support from the 29th Division; the battalion
was even forbidden on occasions to use their own 105mm assault guns for support. 44
As in the British sector, the main problem faced by the armoured force of FUSA
was the effectiveness of German tanks and anti-tank guns. The Americans found
out the hard way what the British had already known: the armour of the Sherman
was little protection against the high velocity German tank and anti-tank guns.
There was also a growing realisation that a better tank gun similar to the British
I7-pounder was needed by the Americans to combat the German armour. In late
June, some testing was done by firing all available Allied anti-tank guns against
some Panther tank hulks. The poor results provoked an angry response from
Eisenhower:
You mean our 76 won't knock these Panthers out? Why, I thought it was going to
be the wonder gun of the war. Why is it that I am the last to hear about this stuff?
Ordnance told me this would take care of anything the Germans had. Now I find out
you can't knock out a damn thing with it. 4s
On 2 July, Eisenhower wrote a memo to his Chief of Staff, Lieutenant-General
Bedell-Smith, demanding that the special ammunition similar to the British
6-pounder SABOT be developed for the newly arrived MAi with the 76mm
gun as tests had shown that existing guns could not penetrate the frontal armour
