216
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
As part of the III Flak Korps, German heavy anti-aircraft guns were located in
the outlying villages of Caen as protection against the high-flying medium and
heavy Allied bombers that had been bombing Caen. Photographic evidence of the
Luftwaffe batteries in the area exists.4 Given the general hostility of the German
army towards the Luftwaffe because of its continued absence from the Normandy
battlefield, it is unlikely that the German army would credit the Luftwaffe for
anything unnecessarily. The timeline from von Luck's confrontation with the
Luftwaffe battery commander just after 0900 hours fits with the subsequent losses
of the 2nd Fife and Forfar C Squadron at 0930 hours as it took this time to relocate
the 88mm guns to new positions to enfilade the advancing British tanks. The loss
of the two Tigers moving southwards after engaging the Shermans from the 2nd
Grenadier Guards by clean penetrations of the Tiger's frontal armour suggests the
actions of an inexperienced Luftwaffe crew faced with large, unidentified tanks
coming straight for them.
With the later German decision to abandon Cagny, the 88mm flak guns were
destroyed on von Luck's orders so only wreckage could be found after the bat-
tie. The Guards Division King's Infantry occupied Cagny late in the afternoon
and found three 88mm anti-tank guns.4 An alternative explanation has been pur
forward that the self-propelled guns of Becker's sth Batterie may have stopped to
defend Cagny during their withdrawal from Le Prieure to Frénouville 47 At s00m
the 75mm Pak
40 was capable of penetrating 120mm of armour, so at 6som it
could have just penetrated the Tigers' frontal armour of 10omm. However, these
penetrations would not have been as clean as those from 88mm armour-piercing
shells. Von Luck correctly attributed credit where it was due and his only sin is
the assumption of a mantle previously worn by Rommel who stopped the British
tank attack at Arras in 1940 by ordering the 88mm nak guns to engage gonna
targets of the British tank force. Usually located well behind the frontlines, 88mm
anti-aircraft crews did not expect to become embroiled in fighting as per III Flak
Korps policy, and their direct involvement occasionally took some persuasion.
An officer of the
znd Fife and Forfar wrote in his memoirs of his surprise at
seeing a German officer in dress uniform surveying the battlefield from Cagny and
accordingly fired a couple of 75mm HE shells at him, which missed.48
11th Armoured Division Afternoon
At i2rohours, the infantry attacks by the 159th Brigade on Cuverville and Démouville
were still in progress, supported by tanks of the znd Northants Yeomanry, which,
despite being the reconnaissance regiment of the lith Armoured Division, had
been detailed to support the attack on Cuverville in front of the British bridgehead.
Roberts thought that if support was lent to his infantry then their task would be
completed more quickly and they would then be able to assist the tank regiments.
After a bad start losing four tanks on British mines, Cuverville was captured and
217
Operation Goodwood
i ten ation at Démouville, the 2nd Northants Yeomanry destroyed two
agam guns that were part of Becker's ist Batterie. The 23rd Hussars were also
moved in this battle around Démouville until ordered to advance to Grentheville
2120 hours. By then the 23rd Hussars had got more than a mile behind the
eating regiments and were unable to offer any immediate support to the regiments
in front.
The Panther battalion of the Ist SS Panzer Division began to arrive in the early
cino and made repeated raids on the znd Fife and Forfar tanks, the first seri-
cos at taking place at about 1300 hours. The counterattack was made straight
di ta march by the tanks as they arrived in Bourguébus, Soliers and Frénouville
eir heir position in reserve. Tactical air strikes were called in by the British on
titan moving up towards Bourguébus, but despite causing some damage they
could not slow the stream of arriving German armour.
The Panthers charged straight down the hill towards the British tanks and
a conted ank melee developed in which the long-range superiority of the over-
comited Panther tanks was largely negated as tank fought tank at close range.
The commander of the ist SS, Theodore Wisch, tried to recall the Panthers in
« nage at 12s0 hours as evidenced by a message intercepted by the Canadians.
The reply was also intercepted, to the effect that the Panthers were too heavily
trigged to withdraw. The ist SS Panzer Division had not learnt from the close
range tank battles of Kursk a year earlier.
When the Ist SS Panthers finally managed to withdraw, ten were left behind
a smoking wrecks. From then on, the Panthers made more judicious raids on the
angel mobile Shermans below them while other Panthers worked themselves
to god positions to fire on the British tanks from long range. The Tiger tanks
from the IOIst Schwere SS Battalion arrived later in the afternoon and daded to the
ous firepower of the Germans, bringing destruction to the helpless Shermans
in the cauldron below them. In the 2nd fite and fortars, captain mutcarison ot
I Squadron took up a flank guard position facing south-east from just north-east
ot Four and in this role destroyed two Panthers.
A VIll Corps command conference was held at 1300 hours between O'Connor
and the commanders of lith and 7th Armoured
divisions and at
I350 hours it
was decided to conunue the attack towards bourgeous walte to diatons.
Roberts was at pains to point out the need to eliminate the wage sumerones
using artillery and infantry as the tanks could not capture and hold them on their
own and in the meantime were receiving many tank casualties from the anti-
tank guns there. The 23rd Hussars were to move to the left of the grd RTR to
attack towards Soliers and Bourguébus, east of the Chemin de fer Minier railway.
The grd RTR was effectively isolated from the rest of the division as they were
positioned west of the embankment of the Chemin de Fer Minier towards Caen.
Since 12ss hours, the 23rd Hussars had cautiously moved up to support the
and Fife and Forfar, and after crossing the Caen-Vimont railway, they could see the
battlefield ahead littered with burning tanks. B Squadron advanced straight into
