98
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Casualties
When an armour-piercing round struck a tank, there was often a resounding clang
and a shower of sparks at the point of impact. If it had sufficient kinetic energy
to penetrate the armour, the shot would punch a hole in the tank and enter the
interior, causing tremendous damage to any flesh and bone in its path. As the shot
entered the tank the armour on the inside around the penetration would spall and
break off, showering the inside of the fighting compartment with red hot pieces
of metal. These pieces would then ricochet around the tank, hitting ammuni-
tion, fuel tanks, electrical cables and crew members. Even if it did not penetrate,
a projectile often still caused spalling on the inside from the impact. German 88mm
armour-piercing shot and some 75mm rounds had a small burster charge inside the
projectile itself that exploded inside the tank after penetration, causing even more
lethal fragments to fly through the tank. Allied armour-piercing shot did not have
this burster charge (shot was solid) which may have contributed to the tendency for
the Sherman tank to catch fire when hit, though this hypothesis does not seem to
have ever been tested. A penetration also generates great heat and a pressure wave,
which affects the lungs and other organs of the crew.33
The Panzerfaust, firing its hollow shaped charges, was a weapon the Allies had
not encountered before and the German infantry used them very effectively in the
thick hedgerows of the bocage where it was easy to approach a tank unseen. When
a tank was hit by a Panzerfaust, the crew were engulfed by a fireball that caused an
enormous rise in the interior temperature with a pressure wave pulse that damaged
the crew's body organs and hearing. The mixture of hot explosive gases used up all
the oxygen in the tank and breathing became very difficult.
With so many metal fragments and hot isses flying around the inside of a tank
full of ammunition and combustible fuel, a fire often started, which led to a cata-
strophic explosion. The ammunition would explode, creating bursts of hot gases
adorses that shot out of the turret, forming the characteristic black smoke nig
that so often marked the loss of another tank in Normandy. A habit of Allied tank
crew early in the Normandy Campaign of carrying extra ammunition outside Ol
the normal stowage bins may well has anontributed to the tendency of Sherma
tanks to burn or explode when hit. When this practice was discontinued and stow-
age bins surrounded by a water jacket were introduced in later Shermans, then the
tendio cy to burn was reduced. The effects on the crew of the various agents ilom
an armour-piercing shell included:
• Blast - whole body, ears and lungs
• Spall fragments - penetrations of the body
• Flame - skin and lungs
• Hot gases - lungs
• Light - eyes34
99
Fighting the Tank
The Sherman tank carried a first aid box on the outside of the tank that contained
bandages, dressings for burns and morphine, which was administered by crude sy-
ringes resembling a small toothpaste tube with a needle in it. Ampoules containing
chloroform that had to crushed between the teeth were also included. A medical
half-track accompanied the support echelons in battle to facilitate the transport of
wounded men to the regimental aid post. The removal of the bodies of men out
of knocked-out tanks was a particularly gruesome task that the medical team had
to pertorm.
Any tanks being backloaded to workshops in the rear or even England had to be
checked for any remaining limbs or organs after some tanks reached England with
body parts inside, to the horror of the female drivers? To remove body matter,
the insides of the tanks were cleaned with disinfectant,
detergent and water; in
extreme cases the interior was sprayed with a creosote-based solution, which could
then be scraped off when hard.
Not all hits by armour-piercing shells penetrated the hull or turret and knocked
the tank out. Minor battle damage, such as a broken track or suspension, was
categorised as an X casualty (repairable within 24 hours) and could often be fixed
by squadron fitters that accompanied the A echelon provided the tank could retire
under its own power. More serious damage often required a tow by another tank or
the squadron's armoured recovery vehicle after the fighting had ended or at night.
Such tanks were repaired by the regiment's Light Aid Detachment, which could
perform some heavy work including welding. Serious damage was a tank needing
24 hours or more to repair, which was categorised as a Y casualty. If the LAD could
not repair the tank, it was transported to the brigade or second line workshops
workshops in the rear areas, which were also staffed by REME men. The LAD
and brigade workshops only replaced assemblies and any vehicle with more severe
damage had to be dealt with by a third line workshop.
After a tank had been repaired it could either go straight back to its unit or to
the brigade's Forward Delivery Squadron. The delivery squadron was the channel
forwards for new or re-worked tanks and for replacement crews. If a tank was
knocked out and could not be repaired by first or second line workshops, it was
cassed as a Z casualty. At the end of August, the additional category Zw was
introduced for tank casualties that had been totally destroyed and burnt out.
repairable knocked-out tanks were collected at corps back loading points,
where they were either repaired by a third lidonsps workshop set up nearby or
shipped back to England for repairs. However, the process of shipping tanks back to
England took too long and by the end of August, three Advance Base Workshops
had been established in Normandy when there wits suitable buildings in Caen.
beyond the repair of field workshops and often beyond recovery. As a rough rule
The close lange lighting or the bocage means that many tank casuales were
of thumo, RevE Statistics showed that so per cent of knocked-out lane casual-
ties were repairable by divisional resources and
another 25 per cent had to be
