320
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Regiment supported the 4Ist Armored Infantry Regiment in attacks along the road
to Ger with the intention of cutting the road from Ger to Mortain that carriedall
the supplies for the panzer divisions. Tanks from I Company destroyed two 88mm
and two 37mm anti-tank guns in the village of Bousentier. One tank was lost by
the regiment on a patrol southwards to St Jean du Corail.
In the south, the relentless advance of Patton's Third US Army continued, and
at IS30 hours Le Mans fell, forcing the Seventh Army HQ to relocate. At 211$
hours von Kluge ordered the attack to halt altogether and preparations to begin
for its continuation in the next few days.? The Canadian Operation Totalize had
started around Caen, and von Kluge was now contending with threatened Allied
breakthroughs at Caen and Vire as well as the progress of Third US Army to
the south.
9 August
CCB of 3rd Armored Division continued its cautious move to recapture ground
from the 2nd Panzer Division. Task Force 1 was heavily shelled all afternoon and
finally withdrew back to Le Mesnil Adelée, having not made any progress.
the commander of Task Force 2, Colonel Cornog, was killed near Le Mesn
love by a tenan artillery shell that came through the door of a shack in which
an orders group was being held. The positions of the 2nd Battalion were under
constant mortar and artillery fire, and every vehicle movement brought up clouds
ot dust that attracted so much mortar erre that the infantry of ugth regiment
requested that the tanks stay back.
nd sk Force 3 carried out a much bolder operation, however. Having been unabie
to reach the road junction at St Barthélemy as ordered on 7 August due to the pres-
ence of German armour, the task force had gonds into reserve for the goth Division.
At noon on 9 August, Task Force 3 set off to complete its original mission by
makills an attack from south of St barthchemy with intantry of the znd Datalio
of the My gment waing on its tanks, The armoured column arrived at fill
285 to the west of Mortain and then conducted a reconnaissance, meeting troops at
the Abbaye Blanche roadblock north of Mortain that had been holding out against
Germans since the early hours of 7 August. As the tanks moved through Abbaye
Blanche, German artillery fire forced thad nfantry to dismount and take cover and
the tanks went on alone. A battalion of the Der Führer Panzergrenadier Regiment
er ta reintorced their positions with assault guns and anti-tank guns, and nine M4s
were lost in 3o minutes. The and Battalion infantry finally came up, but before
they could attack, their preparations were disrupted by another heavy artillery
ICh rage and the attack did not go ahead. Charles Corbin of the 39ist Field artillery
was attached to Task Force 3:
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
By 7 August, we were with Combat Command B again and the 3oth Infantry Division
to halt a counterattack near Le Mesnil Tove and Mortain. After reaching our objec-
tive on 9 August we were ordered to join Task Force 3, whose mission was to take the
high ground north of Mortain, to control the crossroads to Mortain. We hit heavy
resistance about 300 yards from our objective and the command made plans to go up
a hedgerow lane, out left into a field and go through the next hedgerow.
Lieutenant Patterson told our driver, John Manual, to follow the first tank when
it made a hole with its blade. We tried to do this twice as the tanks were hit by
anti-tank fire. Lieutenant Cooper of I Company pulled up beside us in his tank and
while waiting for another hole to be made, he jokingly said "Wouldn't it be nice to
get a million dollar wound and get the hell out of here?" His tank passed us by and
was also hit trying to break out of the hedgerow. I could feel the heat of the next shell
as we backed up. I saw two tankers get out of the tank and pull Lieutenant Cooper
out and carry him past us. He didn't seem to be seriously wounded. I waved to him.
The other tanks had coiled in the field and the German 88 that had been waiting for
us cut loose, also mortar, artillery and machine guns pounded our tanks and infantry.
The tank next to us went up in flames and a tanker was having trouble getting out.
Another tanker jumped on the tank and tried to help but was hit by a bullet. Then
a shell beheaded the tanker. At this point we bailed out of the halftrack. I was between
two infantrymen and a shell landed behind us and seriously wounded the two of them,
although I thought they were both dead. The rest of the 3oth Infantry retreated. All
or most of our tanks had been hit and what men could get out retreated back to the
next hedgerow. A piece of shrapnel hit our driver in the arm and I helped him back.
All of our men were accounted for except Lieutenant Patterson, who was kneeling
over the two infantrymen near our halftrack. I waved for him to come back but he
waved for me to come to him. He had administered first aid to them and was giving
them some morphine shots. We loaded and strapped one man on the left fender and
I held the other man on the right fender as he drove the halftrack to safety. We came
out on the losing end and with many dead and wounded and is of our 17 tanks
knocked out. A corporal left was the highest ranking man. It was one hell of a battle
witnessed by this 19 year old kid.3'
Task Force 3 was forced to go into a defensive harbour looyds from its objective
of the road junction.
Overnight, the loth SS Panzer Division arrived with orders to both relieve
the 275th Division and continue the advance towards Avranches, screening the
simultaneous attack by the 2nd SS Panzer Division. After the losses in Operation
Bluecoat, the division only had twelve tanks and assault guns operational. South of
Mortain, 3rd Battalion tanks from the 67th Armored Regiment continued pushing
along the high ground to the west of the road from Ger to Le Breuit. The terrain
around Hill 250 was too rugged for tanks, so infantry from the armoured regiment
conducted an attack, which captured the hill. German vehicles then visible from
the hilltop were shot up on a side road. In the afternoon, eight tanks from the roth
321
