390
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the numbers of German soldiers moving along the roads and countryside, which
prevented any supplies from getting through and wounded men from being evacu-
ated. The Polish loth Dragoons took Hill 137 to the west of Coudehard and then
reintorced Chambois itself against the increasingly desperate Germans looking for
a way out of the encirclement.
At first light, the South Albertas began moving to reoccupy St Lambert.
A Squadron held a line east of St Lambert while RHQ was established on Hill II,
where the regiment had harboured overnight. At oб3o hours C Squadron and the
infantry moved cautiously into St Lambert from the north and again a Sherman
was immediately knocked out by a German tank. A Mark IV was spotted and
a Sherman quickly hit it with an HE round followed by six armour-piercing
rounds that caused the tank to catch fire. A second Sherman was then destroyed
but the Argyll infantry surprised the crew of a Panther tank in the town centre and
after a short fight at close range, a grenade was dropped into the one of the tanks
hatches, which ended all movement; a PIAT was brought up to finish off the tank.
By mid-morning, the village was secure and the twelve remaining tanks deployed
to the west to face the expected German attacks.22
With the occupation of St Lambert, the Polish at Coudehard and a link-up
having been made with the Americans at Chambois, the Falaise Gap was closed
in accordance with Montgomery's orders and the German Seventh Army now
encircled. Whether there were sufficient forces to ensure the Gap remained closed
was another matter.
With the British Second Army advancing from Aunay sur Odon to the west of
the River Orne, acting as beaters to drive the remnants of the Seventh Army back
on its lines of communication through Argentan and Trun, the Germans retreated
in a north-easterly direction over the Falaise ridge to the south of Chambois and
Irun towards Vimoutiers. Thousands of soldiers could be seen emerging from the
forest covering the ridge, heading straight for St Lambert. Whilst the Canadians
held the towns and controlled the roads, the fleeing Germans were able to cross
the roads and flee cross-country. The hedgerows and woodlands permitted their
movement between the Canadian and Polish positions, which were like islands
in a human sea. Darkness also offered the Germans protection from observation
and subsequent attacks either from the air or by artillery. Word quickly spread
of the locations of gaps in the Allied line and that as they neared St Lambert and
Chambois, Allied air attacks were no longer taking place.
The South Albertas' A Squadron and a troop of Mios on Hill 117 with RHQ
fired at a German convoy moving on the far side of the river valley at long range
before another German armoured unit emerged from its camouflaged positions
only 2,000yds away. A furious firefight broke out before the German vehicles
disappeared from view. The countryside was full of German soldiers trying to
infiltrate past the Canadian positions and it was necessary to constantly machine
gun nearby hedges and the edges of woods to ensure that no Germans armed with
Panzerfäuste got too close to the tanks. St Lambert itself began to be overrun with
391
Falaise Gap
eman sodies trying to pass through while others preferred to surrender to the
Candians, the South Albertas took 2,000 prisoners that day alone and this became
agnica roblem of its own. Fortunately, the prisoners had no fight left in them
and cold loosely guarded by the tanks of RHQ on Hill 117. The AA Crusader
tak, it her 2omm cannon, were also used with devastating effect to try and
sem the human tide of field grey.
Despite the battle reaching a climax with the official closure of the Gap, the
ker tank regiments of the 4th Canadian Armoured Division had a curiously
pur day and saw little action, having been ordered to stand down for the next
ter day The regiments were ordered to occupy positions along the Trun to
outers road from Hordessau to Les Champeaux, which denied the road to the
vermans but lett a 2-mile gap between them and the Polish at Coudehard. I he
Brish Columbias moved to just north of the highway at Neauphe sur Dives, being
tora by anti-tank guns on the way but arriving without any tank casualties.
WOODS &
ORCHARDS
Mount Ormel -
WOODS &
ORCHARDS
(RHO
i Farm
B SQN
WOODS &
ORCHARDS,
C SQN HQ
River Dive:
St. Lambert
8 Forbe Brote
St. Lambert-
, sur-Dives
a de Quantité
WOODS &
ORCHARDS
073
•Moissy
Dives Bridge -
Aubry
Dive
The South Albertas in St Lambert, (Map by Molly Brass, from Donald E. Graves, South Albertas:
A Canadian Regiment at War)
