8
Operation Cobra
With the failure of Operation Epsom and FUSA's renewed offensive to gain much
territory in early July, there were fears of a stalemate developing in Normandy.
Churchill, at a meeting on 6 July with the CIGS Alan Brooke, had launched into
a tirade about Montgomery and his slow progress and Brooke was forced to defend
Montgomery! Churchill had also apparently met with Eisenhower to voice his
concerns and iterated that Eisenhower had only to ask for the dismissal of any
British officer and it would be approved.? Eisenhower, in turn, had written to
Montgomery on 7 July 1944:
It appears to me that we must use all possible energy in a determined effort to prevent
a stalemate or of facing the necessity of fighting a major detensive battle with the
slight depth we now have in the bridgehead.
We have not yet attempted a major full dress attack on the left flank supported by
everything we could bear?
When Montgomery met with Bradley and Dempsey on 10 July and asked both to
come up with plans for major operations, Bradley was a little despondent because
Of FUSA's failure to break through the German lines. In response, Montgomery
Was very conciliatory, if a little condescending, towards Bradley: 'Never mind.
Take all the time you need, Brad? And then later he said, If I were you, I think
I should concentrate my forces a little more.*
Bradley had been trying to advance the FUSA on a broad front through the
difficult bocage countryside and Montgod ry attempted to get bradiey to consider
a change of tactics. Montgomery later reported on this meeting to Brooke:
First Army is cracking ahead and I have been carefully into its various thrust lines
with Bradley. There is no doubt that the enemy is very severely stretched on my
western flank and he has very few reserves there with which to hold us; if we maintain
the pressure he will crack eventually?
Operation Cobra
241
Montgomery's orders to Bradley and Dempsey on 1o July (MsIo) required Dempsey
to plan for a major operation with three armoured divisions but contained no refer-
ence to a similar operation for FUSA. They state that FUSA's right wing should
continue to exert strong pressure southwards to Avranches while the whole army
was to eventually wheel southwards and eastwards, using its left flank as a pivot.
In the meantime, FUSA was to continue its efforts to seize Brittany, followed by
a wide sweep eastwards towards Alençon.
Following Montgomery's suggestion to concentrate his forces, on II July Bradley
devised a plan for another major offensive designed to achieve the much sought-
after breakthrough. This plan was developed in detail by the FUSA General Staff
and approved by Bradley on 13 July with a start date of 19 July. Operation Cobra
was to be a heavy daylight air bombardment of a small section of the German
frontline s miles west of St Lô followed by an attack by three infantry divisions
to breach the frontline. The British had used heavy bombers for the first time
on 7 July in support of a ground operation in the successful
attack to capture
Caen so the availability of air power was very much in the minds of Dempsey
and Bradley. Iwo armoured divisions would then charge though the breach and
drive to the west coast at Coutances, thereby cutting off the left wing of the entire
German Seventh Army in the Cotentin peninsula. The breakthrough would then
provide the opportunity for the deployment of Patton's Third Army to continue
the advance into Brittany. The main FUSA forces in the operation would be those
ot VI Corps while the other three corps would exert pressure all along their fronts
at the same time in support. On 13 July Montgomery afrmed his intentions in
a telegram to Eisenhower:
Am going to launch two very big attacks next week. Second Army begin at dawn
on to July and work up to the big operation on 18 July when VIII Corps with three
armoured divisions will be launched to the country east of the Orne. Note change
of date from 17 to 18 July. First Army launch a heavy attack with six divisions about
S miles west of St Lô on 19 July. The whole weight of airpower will be required for
Second Army on 18 July and First Army on 19 July.®
There is no mention here of Montgomery's avowed strategy of the British Second
Army holding the German forces around Caen while the Americans break out in
the west and clearly both armies were attempting to make a break through the
German lines and a subsequent breakout at the same time. Montgomery confirmed
this with his message to Brooke on 14 July in which he stated his intention to
have a real showdown' on the eastern flank and loose a corps of three armoured
divisions into the open country on the Caen-Falaise road?
The jumping-off point for Operation Cobra was to be the Perier-St Lô road,
which was not then even held by the Americans who were still attacking through
the hedgerows from the River Vire towards this road and St Lô. Once this line
