184
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
between vehicles occupies 12 miles of road, and there were now three reinforced
tank battalions for the 3rd Armored Division plus the rear echelon vehicles of the
30th Division all trying to use the same bridge. 16
The result was terrific traffic congestion around St Fromond. A conference was
held between the respective commanders and a route agreed for the tanks to ad-
vance along, a large part of which was still cross-country. Other infantry advancing
later south of St Jean de Daye complained that CCB tanks were cutting across their
front and they could not advance until the tanks moved off. In exasperation that
night, General Corlett attached CCB to the 3oth Division to ensure maximum
cooperation between the tanks and infantry. Corlett himself was unwell and inca-
pacitated for much of the time, so his aide, Major-General Walker, directed a lot
of the battlefield movements. To bolster the right flank of the attack, XIX Corps
now directed CCA of the 3rd Armored Division, with the attached ii3th Cavalry
squadron, to enter the battle from St Fromond and cross the battlefield westwards
to Goucherie to secure the right flank while the 3oth Division and CCB advanced.
This order predictably created yet more trattic congestion on the st rromond-te
Dézert road. CCB Task Force X finally halted to harbour at Le Bernadrie after an
advance of only 2,00oyds for the day and Task Force Y moved up to take over the
advance early next morning."
During the day, the tanks, engineers
and panzergrenadiers of Kampfgruppe
Wisliceny
arrived at Belle Lande
and
the engineers immediately established
a defensive position astride the main road from St Jean de Daye to Pont Hébert.
However, it was difficult to locate the individual units of Kampfgruppe Heintz,
making coordination impossible. Seventh Army also planned to reinforce the area
with a battalion of paratroops from the 3rd Parachute Regiment from reserves
and Mobile Brigade 30, a bicycle brigade then attached to the 352nd Division.
Rommel, at Army Group B headquarters, ordered the commitment of the Panzer
Lehr against XIX Corps after it had made a withdrawal from the British sector
at Tilly.
During the early morning of 9 July, reports of German armour on the move cre-
ated major concern at XIX Corps about a possible German counterattack. When
the American attack resumed that morning, progress was slow as CCB was still
muddled up with the ri9th Infantry Regiment. Task Force Y, now leading the
advance, only managed to advance dooyds during the morning and after crit-
cism from the commander of the goth Division, the CCB commander, General
Bohn, ordered the tanks to get on the road and use it to advance more quickly. In
response, a company of tanks from the ist Battalion carrying infantry, commanded
by Lieutenant-Colonel King, dashed down the road towards Les Hauts Vents.
At about 1500 hours, the expected German counterattack was launched either side
of the 2nd Battalion of the 120th Infantry Regiment, which was being supported
by the 743rd Tank Battalion. Two platoons of 743rd Battalion B Company tanks
were caught in a devastating ambush when they pursued two German Mark IV
tanks acting as decoys down a minor road towards a forked road junction. Several
185
Battle of the Hedgerows
dat Mak IVs, with sirens wailing, moved rapidly towards the 743rd tanks on the
guilt a from the junction and engaged them from the flank, knocking out the
titand at tanks so the Mys could not withdraw!® In a matter of minutes, nine
leans and a bulldozer tank were destroyed. Another three disabled tanks had to
kandoned by their crews when the supporting infantry withdrew (having seen
tramoured support destroyed), which meant that nearly all of the B Company
tas ve los in a single day!" All the XIX Corps divisional and Corps artillery
no concentrated on the highway and the attack of the advancing German forces
pond to a halt before withdrawing, leaving five wrecked Mark IV tanks behind.
The 1th Infantry Regiment had become increasingly nervous with the reports
* Geman tanks approaching. The ist battalion, east of the highway, began to
not tire from enemy tanks to the south at 1537 hours; then fire from friendly
dak destroyers; then trouble with friendly artillery fire falling short.
Then, at
1620 hours, the Ist Battalion reported ten tanks coming towards them; in the
next hait hour some elements of the battalion began to pull back along the road
ma movement that threatened to expose the positions of anu-lank sins and the
atched tank destroyers?" Almost at the same time, CB's Task Force Z (3rd
Battalion of the 33rd Armored Regiment) moving westwards had reached the
kos Hebert road at 1630 hours but mistakenly turned north instead of south. The
tanks of I Company approached the positions of the 117th Regiment, which, atter
checking with their HQ that there were supposed to be no triendly tanks in the
area, opened fire with its ant-tank guns. The leading company lanes learned
fire, but two tanks were knocked out before both parties realised their mistake.
One tank commander was killed. When it finally moved off in the right direction,
ask Force Z, using only minor roads, made good progress southwards. With
considerable artillery support pounding the enemy positions ahead of the advance,
we German detensive line was breached by the two task forces. task force
E lancing parallel with Task Force Y, reached Belle Lande and the high ground
of Les Hauts Vents, followed by the tankeof the Ist battalion in lask rorce y
shortly afterwards. CCB then requested permission to continue the advance, but
as the tanks were now well out in front of the goth vivision and further German
armoured counterattacks were expected, pelt nission was retused and the task forces
were ordered to harbour in detensive positions north of the objectives, seven tanks
from I Company failed to receive the orders to return to harbour and were left
on the high ground in front of the American positions. to add to their feelings of
solation and discomfort, these tanks were later strafed by P-47 aircraft. The news
that the CCB tanks were on their objectives was received wil stepucilly bout
the XIX Corps and 3oth Division headquarters.?*
CCB had made good ground that day and, having made little contact with any
sermans, successfully reached its objectives, only to be told by XIx corps to
withdraw and harbour. That evening, a a consequence of the confusion of the
previous 36 hours, which was certainly not all of his making, General Bohn was
relieved of command of CCB and replaced by Colonel D. Roysden.
