58
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
and to the west, in the sand dunes, was WN35 at Hable de Heurtot, which was
built around a series of pill boxes, machine gun posts and mortar pits.
The LCTs carrying the DD tanks finally sailed on the morning of s July after the
24-hour postponement. There was much seasickness because of the rough seas and
troops had been issued with Hyoscine tablets, which, if taken before the onset of
nausea, settled the stomach and produced a slight coma-like effect. Hardly anyone
had got much sleep the previous two nights with the postponement of the invasion
and the anticipation of the next day's landing. As the invasion had been postponed
24 hours, H-hour was now o72s hours, with the DD squadron tanks due in s min-
utes earlier; A Squadron was due an hour later at H+60 minutes.
The Royal Dragoons were part of the Gold assault force G-2 destined for King
beach and were transported on LCTs of the 12th Flotilla making up the G-4
assault wave.
The naval bombardment started at 0510 hours, engaging all identified German
strongpoints and gun batteries. The bin guns of HMS Orion effectively targeted
and destroyed the battery of four 120mm guns of WN35A directly in front of the
Royal Dragoons planned route of advance through Mont Fleury. "9
The sea conditions in the Gold sector were no better than those at Sword and
Juno. The G-2 naval commander decided at 0726 hours that the sea was still too
rough for DD tanks so the landing craft took them in all the way to the beach,
the tanks doing a short wade or swim to the shore before dropping their canvas
screens and going into action. Naval frogmen, tasked beforehand with clearing
lanes through the beach obstacles and divers, could be seen amongst the poles and
obstacles off the beach as the tanks swam in.
The decision not to launch meant that the LCTs of the DD tanks were mixed
up with the other waves of landing craft and the assault was delayed by nearly
10 minutes as a result. 120
B Squadron
Once the decision to land directly on the beaches had been made, the landing craft
had to turn to starboard away from the beach to allow the subsequent assault waves
through and they finally landed after the LCTs carrying the AVR Es of the gapping
teams in place of other LCT(A)s which had not arrived at all after an eventful pas-
sage across the Channel.!2 These LCT(A)s were carrying Centaur tanks equipped
with 95mm howitzers, which were supposed to support the infantry on the beach.
However, owing to the unseaworthiness of their modified craft, the first two tanks
did not arrive until 0900 hours and some never arrived at all. *22
The regiment's DD tanks landed at H+2 minutes, according to the Royal Navy
report. 23 Two landing craft were directed either side of the LCTs carrying the
AVR Es and the other four LCTs to King Green beach.
There was little opposition for the tanks, which provided covering fire as neces-
sary for the AVRE tanks as they cleared lanes in the beach defences. Coloured
D-Day Tanks
59
flares on the beach marked the cleared routes off the beach for the tanks and the
infantry, which landed approximately s minutes after the AVREs and DD tanks.
The AVRE tanks did most of the work in clearing the beaches and supporting
the infantry. At Hable de Heurtot, the AVRE Churchills used their Petard mortars
to knock out four pill boxes before two tanks got over the sea wall and charged
into the position, which was then secured by the closely following soldiers of the
6th Green Howards.
Tanks from a troop in B Squadron came ashore right in front of another bunker
on the right of their landing beach, which had been misidentified as a machine gun
post. Fortunately, the bunker had been built to fire along the beach rather than
out to sea and the tanks of 4th Troop stood off in the shallows of the rising tide
to fire at the bunker with 75mm HE rounds; a round was reported to have gone
through the embrasure resulting in six Germans coming out with their hands up
to surrender. In manoeuvring through the waves towards the bunker, one of the
tanks fell into an unseen shell crater and became firmly stuck, resisting all efforts of
the crew to get it out. The tank was subsequently swamped by the rising tide and
the crew remained on the beach in an unsuccessful attempt to recover the tank in
the afternoon.124
The Flail tanks began to beat exits off the beaches through the minefields but
two gaps were quickly blocked by damaged tanks. A third exit was then successfully
created by a single Flail tank commanded by Lieutenant Pear. This tank got onto
the lateral road running behind the beach and made for a previously agreed rallying
point, a house with a circular driveway. Just past the house, which came to be known
as Lavatory Pan Villa, Pear's tank was halted by a large bomb crater in the road. The
bridge-laying tank was brought up and this obstacle was quickly overcome.»)
The naval bombardment and the specialist tanks of the breaching teams nad
done their work and the landings of the Dragoon Guards were largely unopposed
and without casualties. However, a second B Squadron tank was swamped waiting
for an exit off the beach to be cleared.
Using the flailed exit, B Squadron tanks moved off the beach to the rallying
point and then inland past the destroyed battery at Mont Fleury.
The advance continued through Villiers le Sec without meeting much opposi-
tion but when they came to the river in front of higher ground, the leading tank
was knocked out by a Stug III self-propelled gun. The Stug III was in turn knocked
out and the tanks crossed the river at St Gabriel before they were engaged by
three more Stugs, which knocked out one more tank and hit two others without
damaging them. Atter taking up hull-down positions, the b squadron tanks then
destroyed all three Stugs in a brief firefight. The advance continued as far as
Brecey before the squadron harboured for the night.
C Squadron was to land near La Rivière on the left in support or the sth East
Iorks Battalion; the main defence on this beach was the wise eroti
