412
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
regiments in the frontline. This was because of a bottleneck in the servicing and
kitting of AFVs, which had an initial output of only ten tanks a day in June. With
the arrival of the First Canadian Army this rose to sixteen tanks a day, then twenty
tanks with extra REME assistance. With the attachment of the workshop from the
disbanded 27th Armoured Brigade, the daily output was able to rise to thirty tanks
by the end of August 2 LADs from the disbanded 148th RAC, I53rd RAC and
2nd Northants Yeomanry regiments were required to boost this further as output
still did not keep pace with losses in the frontline.
Tank Performance
Following the defeat at Villers Bocage, the first mutterings of discontent regarding
British tanks were heard in Normandy. Brigadier Hinde of the 22nd Armoured
Brigade wrote a critical report immediately after the action. To the weight of
this report was added a report by an XXX Corps General Staff Officer, Brigadier
Pyman, who wrote on 16 June:
The result is that while the 75mm shot has been failing to penetrate the front face of
the ligers and Panthers at ranges down to 30 yards, they can knock out Shermans and
Cromwells at ranges of up to 1500 yards with ease.?7
General Erskine seized on the comments made in the reports to excuse the turn of
events at Villers Bocage and added his own comments in his report to XXX Corps
1942 when the Crusader tank with a 2-pounder gun was outclassed by the Panzer
Mark IV. 28
The reports made by Pyman and Erskine were further elaborated on by another
report from an XXX Corps liaison officer which found its way to Montgomery and
somehow, the War Office in London. These were reports from some of Britain's
most experienced tank officers and were the opening shots in a debate about the
merits of Allied tanks that would come to haunt the north-west Europe campaign.
The 2ist Army Group Chief of Staff, Francis de Guingand, received copies of these
reports and wrote to Montgomery:
I feel that any further broadcasting of the sentiments expressed in Bowring's and
Pyman's letters needs to be jumped on. If we are not careful, there will be a danger of
the troops developing a Tiger and Panther complex - when every tank becomes one
of these types; compared to the old days when every gun was an 88mm.29
Montgomery's reaction was swift; the writing of further liaison reports was pro-
hibited and on 2s June he wrote a public letter, copied to James Grigg, Secretary of
State for War, claiming that there was no problem:
413
Summary
We have had no difficulty dealing with German armour, once we had grasped the
problem. In this connection British armour has played a notable part.
We have nothing to fear from the Panther or Tiger tanks; they are unreliable
mechanically, and the Panther is very vulnerable from the flank. Our 17-pounder
gun will go right through them. Provided our tactics are good, we can defeat them
without difficulty.?°
Grigg, for his part, was under pressure to respond to the critical Parliamentary
Select Committee report on British tank development and was alarmed at the
reports emanating from Normandy:
... He is nervous of two things
(i) Ill-informed criticism arising from first impressions
(1) Deliberate criticism almost amounting to defeatism as regards or armour; (in this
respect watch the Guards Armoured Divn which I think the S of S has spoken
to you.) 31
This letter was followed by a directive on 6 July from Montgomery (MS06) to the
War Office reiterating the above comments and his views on the future require-
ments of British tanks. This document, with its demands for more 17-pounder
equipped tanks, demonstrated that Montgomery was well aware of the situation
on the battlefield.
All was quiet for a few weeks until, following the failure of Operation Goodwood,
further criticism broke out, this time concerning the Sherman tank. According to
Grigg at the War Office, the MP Major William Anstruther-Gray, serving in the
Coldstream Guards in Normandy, was suspected of passing iniormation to an mr,
Richard Stokes, about the poor performance of British tanks.
Churchill, having delayed making a proper response to Parliamentary questions
for three months, was forced on 2i July to state that a full report would be made
to the House in the future. Visiting Montgomery in Normandy after Operation
Goodwood, Churchill requested a copy of the letter Montgomery had written
to Grigg on 25 June and then used sections of it in his speech to the House
of Commons on 2 August. Meanwhile, another question was asked by Stokes
in Parliament:
HC Deb 25 July 1944 vol 402 CS67 567
Mr. Stokes asked the Secretary of State for War whether he will assure this House
that our troops in Normandy are equipped with tanks at least the equal of both the
German Tiger and Panther in armour and armament.
