322
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
SS Panzer Division advanced down the road from Ger and five of them were let
burning by 3rd Battalion tanks and the 702nd Tank Destroyer Battalion.
The advance by the 2nd Armored Division was cautious and achieved only
§ miles in three days. The terrain was not suitable for tanks and Ultra intelligence
had revealed details of further German plans for resuming the attack, so the div-
sion was wary of advancing too quickly. The German Seventh Army tried to
regroup for the renewed attack by shortening the frontline where possible, and the
2nd and Iloth Panzer divisions were pullee out of the frontline into reserve.
Hitler repeated his
orders of 7 August and demanded that General Eberbach
be put in command of the renewed assault. Hausser wrote a situation report that
outlined the options for resuming the attack provided specific conditions were met
regarding reinforcements, air support, supplies and Alençon being secured. If these
conditions could not be met, Hausser requested that the attack should be cancelled.
Under pressure from the Canadians south of Caen, Hitler ordered anti-tank forces
to be transterred from the Calais sector to bolster the line south of Laen, and
ronibited all unnecessary attacks and unauthorised local withdrawals, even it they
overcame any advantages an Allied penetration might have achieved. Hiter aso
insisted that he alone would determine the timing of the next attack for Operation
Luttich." Von Gersdorff recorded the wording of Hitler's order:
A unique opportunity is offered OB West by means of a forceful thrust on Avranches
to decisively turn the tide of the entire situation in the west and to gain the inta-
tive. Therefore the attack is to be launched with all available forces after a thorough
preparation, taking advantage of the enemy situation which is in our favour... After
reaching Avranches, the main body of the force is to be turned off towards the north
so the ee sorces welch have broken through towards the south di
Fifth Panzer army.33
Hitler was now completely out of touch with the reality of the situation in
Normandy. Von Gersdorff wrote:
serged proportion, nor with the situation on the ground, in the air and in supply. It
the designated objectve was pure Utopla and was neither in keeping with the actual
especially failed to consider the situation on the southern flank. This represented the
apex of conduct by a Command ignorant of front-line conditions, taking upon itself
the right to judge the situation from East Prussia 34
Rausser and eberbach made plans for the attack, but both men knew that with
Hitler's express stipulation that the attack was not to be started until sufficient
forces were avallable, further advances by the Allon, would dictate the military situ-
ation and make the orders for the attack irrelevant. Von Kluge himself continued
the passive resistance to the Hitler's orders and wrote on to August, 'Owing to the
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
323
favourable weather conditions for the enemy and to the time required in bringing
up troops, it is not expected that the attack on Avranches can be launched before
August 20. 35
End Game
Next day, 1o August, the 2nd Armored Division continued in its attempts to cut
the Mortain to Ger road. At the same time, the 1oth SS Panzer Division attacked
towards Barenton but was compelled instead to block the advance of znd Armored
Division and could make no progress. CCB of the 3rd Armored Division remained
around Le Mesnil Tove whilst the fight for the road junction at St Barthélemy,
where Task Force 3 was still heavily engaged, continued.
The Third US Army started its advance northwards towards Alençon on
10 August, and the next day von Kluge was finally able to dismiss any thoughts
of a second German attack by convincing Hitler that the panzer divisions were
needed to attack the American forces advancing from the south. A German with-
drawal from the battlefield began: the Ist SS and and Panzer divisions were pulled
back to a line from Le Bruins to Hill 270, where they went on the defensive to
await the arrival of the oth Panzer Division, two more Nebelwerfer brigades and
the Panther battalion of the 9th Panzer Division. During the night of IT August
the Germans abandoned Mortain, and at noon the next day the American infantry
on Hill 317 at Mortain were relieved. The road junction at St Barthélemy was duly
occupied by American infantry early on the 12 August, leaving the CCB task force
to count its losses, which included fourteen Sherman tanks, two Stuart tanks and
three armoured cars.36
CCA from the US and Armored Division moved south past Sourdeval and Ger
and linked up with CCB on 14 August in an envelopment operation that trapped
a few elements of the Seventh Army, but by this time most of the panzer divisions
had withdrawn eastwards to avoid encirclement. Nevertheless, German losses were
once again significant.
Losses
The 2nd ORS (Operational Research Section) No. 4 report examination of battle-
field from St Barthélemy to Juvigny found thirty-three Panthers, ten Mark IVs and
three self-propelled guns - a total of forty-six tanks - all brewed up. However, the
Germans had time to recover salvageable or damaged tanks and actual losses were
considerably higher. The goth Division and its attached units (CCB 3rd Armored
Division, the 743rd Tank Battalion and 823rd Tank Destroyer Battalion) destroyed
sixty-nine tanks during the battle, many being hit by infantry bazooka teams or
