356
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
screen, just as they did in Operation Goodwood. However, the importance of the
part played by the III Flak Korps is often overstated as there was a constant conflic
between Luftwaffe and Heer as to how and where these guns should be employed,
as happened during Operation Goodwood. Meyer refers derisively to III Flak
Korps as not helping at all in the German defence during Operation Totalize??
Lieutenant Phelan of the Grenadier Guards, in his bold attack on 8 August, de-
stroyed several 88mm Flak guns that were pointing skywards. Even if the Luftwafe
sus were not being used in an anti-tank role during Operation Totalize, there
were still the twenty-four 88mm Flak guns of the 12th SS Division itself, which
were a formidable anti-tank force in and around Quesnay Wood.
Simonds failed to plan any action on the third defensive line north of Potigny,
despite knowing of it. This area was supposed to be bombed in phase two, with
tragmentation bombs to target artillery, anti-tank guns and personnel - air targets
10, Il and 12. The Intelligence summary of s August described this area as largely
being unoccupied but with some defences such as 'prepared infantry defences and
some bays suitable for the reception of artillery or tanks. At a final conference to
confirm the plans for the air support, Air chief Marshal Tedder said that the targets
10-12 were too large and spread out to be able to achieve the concentration of
bombs required to do any damage (i.e., the air force did not want to bomb open.
fields) and Leigh Mallory suggested these target areas could be handled by roving
tighter-bombers of and TAF and US oth AF? Simonds did not alter his plans: he
must have believed that with the aerial and artillery support at his disposal the two
armoured divisions would smash through the German lines and on to Falaise.
Having waned dours for te second bombing raid, the results were extremely
Laize to St Sylvain and Hautmesnil. Bretteville le Rabet and Quesnay Wood fur-
ther south were not included. Unfortunately, the phase two bombing was largely
ineffectual, failing to destroy the second line of German defences, hitting friendly
troops and contributing further to the traffic chaos in the rear of the Allied frontline.
Jerman lesslance continued all afternoon; bretteville sur Laize did not fall unti
the evening.
When the advance of Grenadier Guards finally got underway at about 1600
hours after the planning lapse of failing to plan for the capture of Gaumesnil, the
Germans by then had had ten precious hours to call back their kampfgruppen, plan
a counterattack and resurrect new defences along the Route Nationale. When the
advance began it was cautious and was hardly an armoured spearhead, being made
by one regiment with one squadron in front. Knowing that there were Tiger tanks
about, the Grenadier Guards may well have had Tiger phobia. The few tanks and
anti-tank guns of Kampfgrupper Waldmuller were able to successfully impede the
Operation Totalize
357
advance of two armoured divisions. The Grenadier Guards, from their positions
north of St Aignan before the second bombardment, managed an advance of only
2 miles the whole afternoon. The Polish, in contrast, displayed no caution but
attacked with their tanks concentrated in a traditional cavalry charge and learnt the
same lesson as all other Allied armoured formations about the superior firepower of
German tanks and the weaknesses of their own armour.
If the planning by Simonds and his staff was flawed, the planning by the
4th Canadian Armoured Brigade was lamentable in Operation Totalize. Brigadier
Booth did not hold his first meeting until t1oo hours on 7 August, the day before
the attack. Booth had already been to a meeting regarding Operation Totalize with
Simonds and other brigade commanders on 3 August. General Kitching had also
again briefed his two brigade commanders at 1800 hours on 6 August. A second
conference was held by Booth at 1800 hours on 7 August to finalise details and, in
the Grenadier Guards, Lieutenant-Colonel Halpenny did not issue his final orders
until 2200 hours for a start 2.5 hours later. This compressed time did not allow
much time for officers to familarise themselves with maps or for anyone to get
much rest. A period of more than 16 hours had been allowed to elapse before Booth
briefed his officers on 7 August regarding their first action.
The first day of battle for both armoured divisions was one of heavy tank losses
for the Polish and very little progress by the Canadians. Kitching and, in turn,
afternoon Kitching went forward to see Booth, only to find him completely
drunk in his command tank. Inexplicably, Booth remained in command after only
a tongue-lashing from Kitching?* The process of giving out orders that evening
for the coming day by Booth was predictably chaotic and not helped by Kitching
meeting very late with his brigade commanders at 2000 hours. Worthington went
to Booth's Orders Group at 213o hours whilst the infantry and tank command-
ers assembled their forces, having been given some warning of the plans. Booth's
meeting did not finish until otoo hours for an advance supposed to start at 0200
hours that morning. It was not until 2 hours later that the Worthington battle
group finally moved out. The regiment had little time to prepare or rest, let alone
tamiharise themselves with maps, and the outcome was predictably the almost
complete destruction of the regiment.
The morning of 9 August brought Booth another headache with the growing
suspicion that something had happened to Worthington Force or that they might,
at the very least, need reinforcement. At 1029 hours the Foot Guards, as the reserve
regiment, were summoned to 4th Armoured Brigade HQ and given orders to
advance to Point 195 to assist Worthington Force. Given that the Worthington's
orders were to hold Point 195 behind German lines until reinforcements arrived,
it is almost unbelievable that no unit was standing by to relieve Worthington. The
Foot Guards were going into its first action at 1330 hours with little more than 2.5
hours' notice but still found time for 'a hasty lunch?" The attack got underway an
