154
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
to reverse, having concealed ourselves in smoke. Having reversed about 100 yards
I halted and looked around for any survivors from "Inspire". I spotted Jimmy Deem
running toward some other tanks of the squadron amongst the orchards. Suddenly
several German machine guns opened up on him and he fell to the ground. We
engaged the machine guns with Besa and also fired a couple of HE shells into the
hedgerows concealing the German machine guns. All this happened in a matter of
minutes - which seemed like hours. I reported the incident to the Squadron Leader,
Major Bob Warren, and was instructed to return to the squadron. Having got back
and dismounted from Immune I heard a shout, and moving to the edge of the trees
I saw Jimmy Deem, limping badly, coming towards us. Several of us ran forward and
helped him back, and he was soon on his way to hospital.24
Therefore two Churchills were destroyed near Grainville but at the end of the day
the village remained in German hands. The 7th RTR, advancing through the
hedgerows south of Cheux, made little progress during the day either.
As well as the 8th Company, Mark IV tanks from the sth Company also defended
the Cheux/Le Haut du Bosq area, taking a toll of the slowly advancing Sherman
tanks while their own numbers dwindled until only three were left. Three more
znd Fife and Forfar Shermans were knocked out in the early afternoon. The bocage
countryside caused each unit's actions to degenerate into a series of independent,
individual engagements and any cohesion with nearby supporting units was rapidly
lost. However, as the British forces ground forward, they threatened to surround
the three remaining tanks of the 8th Company, which were running low on fuel
and ammunition and eventually had to pull back.
The 2nd Fife and Forfars spent the day defending against small German counter-
attacks from the right flank. Having not made much progress to the River Odon,
the regiment harboured just east of Le Haut du Bosq. On the left flank, German
reinforcements, which included the forst SS Schwere battalion of Tigers, were
slowly arriving from the east. The eighteen operational Tiger tanks distributed
themselves in twos and threes across the whole front from Rauray to Verson, where
they proved to be formidable rocks in the swirling battle south of Cheux. One of
the panzergrenadier regiments from the Ist SS Panzer Division was also on its way
to Verson and was due to arrive the next day.
Only one company of seventeen Panthers (not the promised battalion) from the
2nd Panzer Division arrived that day and mounted an attack towards Cheux. The
attack, unsupported by infantry and uncoordinated with the defenders, was poorly
implemented. After initially causing great consternation in Cheux, the attack was
beaten off by infantry using PIATs and the anti-tank guns of the loth Highland
infantry. The Churchills of the 3ist Tank brigade also helped repel the attack but
the Scotsmen would later lament the fact that Cheux was crowded with British
tanks, all of whom were oblivious to their appeals for help. Six Panthers were lost
in this wasted attack.
155
Operation Epsom
The infantry of the 2nd Argylls, supported by the tanks of the 23rd Hussars,
captured Colleville at about 0930 hours.
This cut the main Caen to
Bocage road, which was the main German artery for the supply and movement
of their forces behind the frontline. The Hussars pushed on further south towards
Mondrainville, losing two Stuart recce tanks, which were knocked out by a single
shot from a German tank, and another tank, which was hit near Mouen. The regi-
ments tanks entered the village and another two were hit by an unknown tank,
possibly a Tiger, and destroyed.
The advance of the 2nd Argylls and the 23rd Hussars had struck a weakly de-
fended part of the German line that was largely only defended by armoured cars
of the 12th SS Reconnaissance Battalion and a couple of Tiger tanks. The Hussars
wet out of touch with the Argylls, which was fortunate as there was little need for
infantry/tank co-operation and mutual support that afternoon.
the Scottish intantry pushed onto the Kiver Odon and captured we small
stone bridge at Tormauville at about 1700 hours. The news of the capture was
radied to the lith Armoured Division HQ, which immediately ordered the 23rd
Hussars to cross the river. Two Shermans were knocked out near Tourville while
doing so; later a solitary Panther in the east fired at traffic moving towards the
bridge. A troop of four tanks from A Squadron was sent out to deal with this tank,
but only one tank returned. After some confusion as to whether the stone bridge
could support the weight of their tanks, the first Hussar tanks crossed at 1900
hours.?' By 2200 hours, B and C squadrons of the fussars and all of the zna aroys
plus their 6-pounder anti-tank guns were across the river and had harboured at
Tourmauville. The lIth Armoured Division's infantry, the Is9th Drigade, moved
to the frontline to take over from the weary Argylls. As the britisa advance led by
the men of the Isth (H) Division had made only slow progress, another infantry
division was committed to the battle. Ine 43rd Wessex Division Was Ordere lo
move into the Cheux region to till the vacuum left by the Scots and firm up the
base of the Scottish salient.
The 3rd RTR were ordered to support the 23rd Hussars across the river but only
when they had been relieved by a regiment from the 4th Armoured Brigade and
so they did not move until the ard CLY arrived at 2130 hours. The regiment duly
harboured in Colleville for the night. According to the 29th brigade war dial,
a total of nineteen tanks were knocked out and three damaged that day. 3
veneral Dollman considered the morny; to have been a success delensively. n
dalegup from the and ss fanzer Division, aarp suff wearse, had now
arrived and was under command of the ist SS Panzer Korps. Originally scheduled
o attack on the 29 June, sampiguppe weldinger anu one company or dither
tanks would shore up the positions of the Lehr divisions and defend a line from
Mondrainville and Grainville to Rauray adi Tessel Wood on the western side of
the British salient the next day.
