2.
68
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
operational tanks left at the end of D-Day. Only three men were KIA but sixteen
were missing, believed lost at sea. 158
Late in the afternoon, a small force of one company of the newly landed
746th Tank Battalion, a platoon of 4th Cavalry reconnaissance tanks and ninety
soldiers, tried twice to break through to link up with the paratroopers at St Mere
Eglise from Exit 2. Both attacks were repelled, one tank being disabled the first
time and two tanks knocked out at the second attempt.!s' In total the 7oth lank
Battalion lost sixteen tanks, nine of these at sea and seven on land.
By that evening, Is hours after H-hour, the entire 4th Division was ashore -
some 20,000 men and 1,700 vehicles.16 The main differences between the Omaha
and Utah beaches were fewer bunkers and obstacles such as Teller mines on stakes
at Utah; this enabled Utah beach to be cleared quickly. The obstacles were nor
as dense as had appeared in reconnaissance photographs so the original plan of
clearing soyd gaps was abandoned in favour of bulldozers clearing the whole beach,
which they accomplished in an hour.or
The air force bombing had been very accurate and effective, unlike on Omaha.
The fortuitous landing on the wrong beaches had been opposed by only the small
strongpoint WNs, which had been virtually knocked out by the bombing; the
major fortifications at WN8, 9 and 10 played no part in repelling the landings. The
vermans had not heavily fortitied this bea aupeg ey were relying on the inundated
lands behind the coastline to deter any invaders.
the curances de led to the landings benor some eyes furter cast oi
where planned had a fortunate outcome and the Utah landings were very success-
ful. Their outcome was never in doubt, unlike on Omaha where the battle hung
in the balance for the first ยง hours. Given this, it is surprising that the uperdio
Overlord planners did not make the original landing beaches those where the troops
actually landed.
Effectiveness of the DD tanks
Following D-Day, reports were made by all the units involved in the beach
landings of the specialised tanks employed in the assault, including the assault
squadrons of AVREs and the tank regiments and battalions as well as the LCT
flotilla commanders.
The British and Canadians were generally postyve in their reports of the Do
tank's performance. The ist Hussars expressed enthusiasm for the DD tanks, de-
spite their heavy losses:
A very noticeable event was that very shortly after the tanks deflated back of the
underwater obstacles and commenced firing on the beach fortifications, the enemy
manning these casements surrendered. It has since been learned from some of these
prisoners that the presence of the tanks at this stage E the attack, came as a complete
surprise and were the main factor is beir decision to surrender instead of fighting t
D-Day Tanks
69
The commander of the Fort Garry Horse, even though his DD tanks were landed
directly on Juno beach, considered that it was very important to have these special
tanks and to launch them when and where they can best influence the situation, 163
The performance of the DD tanks in the British tank regiments was described in
the 79th Division's Operational Bulletins and final report:
DD tanks were launched on most beaches. They were generally successful; out of 130
launched over 80 touched down and fought on the shore. This was achieved in spite
of a sea so heavy that a number of purely naval craft foundered, the short steep sea,
reported force 4 to 6, and a strong cross current with the wind behind it gave a beam
sea of the most difficult kind; conditions were far from ideal for amphibious craft. 164
The Americans, given what they saw as the poor performance of the DD tanks at
Omaha and apparently unwilling to be critical of their own army officers' decisions,
were unanimous in their condemnation. In a post-war study, the three commanders
of the tank battalions in the first wave ashore were united in their opinion:
Colonel JC Wellborn, Lt-Col RN Skaggs and Lt-Colonel WD Duncan who com-
manded the 7oth, 74Ist and 743rd Tank Battalions respectively on D-Day stated that
in their opinion, the DD device was not satisfactory for the purpose intended and that
medium tanks can be landed more effectively from LCTs directly on to the beach
than by swimming in. Losses, in fact, were lower among the units which landed
directly on the beach. os
This view mirrored that of General Gerow before D-Day. He had protested about
having to use DD tanks for the Normandy invasion when tanks had been success-
fully landed directly ashore from LCTs in the Sicilian landings.
The US Navy conducted its own investigation into the performance of the DD
tanks and reached a similar conclusion: the DD tank had limited applications. The
commander of the Omaha LCT Flotilla, Lieutenant Rockwell, in his After Action
Report concluded that the DD tank was not an effective weapon in amphibious
warfare unless ideal sea conditions existed. Admiral J.L. Hall, the US Force O
commander, was equally negative in his report, saying, 'Because of the vulner-
ability of its flotation equipment and the general unseaworthiness of the entire
vehicle, the DD tank is not a practicable weapon for use in assault landings of open
beaches '166 The US reports concluded that amphibious tanks were required for
future use but that the DD tanks were found to be wanting in combat and that their
development should not be continued.
So how eftective were the DI tanks. As part of Operation Overlord, a total o1
290 DD tanks were to be launched in the first assault wave on five separate beaches.
The heavy seas caused by the high winds and currents made many local command-
Is change this plan in favour of the landing cralt taking the tanas ancey into me
taupee lerefore only 180 DD tanks were actually launched, otten considerably
