354
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
to get cracking' and 'get on' or the regiment would be taken out of the attack.
Booth was evidently under pressure from Kitching to reach the objective as soon
as possible. To add to the Grenadier Guards' problems, at 1007 hours twenty-four
German self-propelled 88mmm guns were reported on the southern slopes of Point
195. Rather than being vehicles, these guns were more than likely the 88mm Flak
guns of the 12th SS Panzer Division forming the last line of defence.
In response to the British advance, the Ist Jagdpanzer Company moved from
Mazières to Fontaine le Pin to the west of Point 195 while the operational Tigers
in the Quesnay Wood also engaged the Grenadier Guards from long range.
By lizo hours the regiment was in a cornfield just short of the crest of Point 195
in hull down positions, both No. I and No. 3 squadrons having lost two tanks on
the climb to the hilltop. The exposed position was receiving armour-piercing fire
from three directions, particularly Quesnay Wood, as well as mortar fire, and there
was little cover. Any advance by the tanks over the crest of the hill was met by a hail!
of armour-piercing shot, so the tanks remained stationary whilst an Orders Group
was held. Simonds had apparently threatened to 'pull-out the regiment if it did
not get moving."* A plan to advance to Point 206 was devised, but it was decided
that considerable artillery support was required if this was to be successful. At 115s
hours another volley of armour-piercing shells then came in from the left flank from
German Jagdpanzers and six Stug Ill assault guns that had worked closer to the
Grenadier Guards tanks by using the hedges for cover. Three German remote-
controlled robot tanks were directed at the stationary tanks without any success, as
the venicies were easy targets for the Shermans. By this time, eight tanks had been
hit and were burning. The CO reported that a further advance was now impossible
and then at 1228 hours that the regiment would be unable to hold its present position
Without assistance. The Foot Guards were ordered forward as support whilst the
Grenadier Guards were ordered to hold the position at all costs, being down to jus
itteen tanks. Ine situation was becoming desperate for the Canadians on Point 19)
a, along will a support, te twelve femaling tanks of the brush commu
Regiment were ordered forward. The main attack by the Germans was halted by
intense artillery fire, but the two Jagdpanzers of Hurdelbrink and Roy worked their
way around the right flank to engage the Canadian tanks in the rear. Between them.
another thirteen Shermans were destroyed. The Grenadier Guards requested to be
relieved at 1837 hours, but this was not possible. The two tank regiments and the in-
antry spent an uncomfortable night in their forward positions, virtually surrounded
by Germans.
Dults the dier ood, an attempt to clear Sues? y wood by two battalions of
infantry failed with heavy casualties. The infantry were told that the woods were
lightly defended and that the Germans were pulling back, not that the woods were
occupied by a formidable force of tanks and anti-tank guns.
The three operational Jagdpanzers of the 2nd Company arrived at Assy from
1500 hours and occupied positions north of Ouilly.
355
Operation Totalize
11 August
At o74s hours Simonds decided to call off Operation Totalize. Having been urged
to capture Falaise by Montgomery, Simonds was already planning his next opera-
tion. Operation Totalize petered out after achieving an advance of only 9 miles,
but in comparison to previous British and Canadian operations this was a consider-
able distance.
At 1400 hours the Grenadier Guards began to withdraw one troop at a time from
their exposed positions on Point 195. An earlier intense German artillery barrage
had knocked out four tanks, and as the tanks moved back towards the St Hilaire
tarm they came under accurate armour-piercing fire from the Jagdpanzers and lost
six more tanks.
Losses and Aftermath
in halting Operation Totalize the 12th SS Panzer Division, from 7-10 August,
lost twenty-two Mark IVs, twenty-six Panthers and six Jagpdpanzers, a total of
fifty-four tanks. Fifteen of these Panthers were lost elsewhere, nine at Grimbosa
and six at Vire. A total of six Tiger tanks were also destroyed, making sixty tanks
written off in the entire battle ' For its part, the Canadian First Army lost more
than 180 tanks in Operation Totalize.
Both the war diary and the regimental history for the Grenadier Guards state
that a total of twenty-one tanks Were lost and not recovered for rotalize anu tur
a single German tank was knocked out." This was later revised by the regiment,
and only twenty replacements were requested"? The Foot Guards lost at least
twenty-six tanks damaged or knocked out but did knock out one German tank,
for which the gunner was appropriately rewarded. *s
Total Sherman losses, including Fireflies, were reported as being eighty-one
for the 4th Canadian Armoured brigade and fifty-six for the ist Polish Division."
A total ofsixty-six tanks were lost by the Polish roth Brigade in its first engagement.?0
There is a cliché that no battle plan survives first contact with the enemy, and
Operation Totalize is an example of this. The attack started successfully as a set-
piece battle, but then having made the gaps for subsequent exploitation, Simonds
took the conservative approach and the advance was halted in preparation for
phase two. However, the achievement of phase two objectives by the armoured
divisions was then entirely dependent on the USAAF bombing being effective.
Unfortunately, not only was it ineffective but it caused Allied casualties and confu-
sion in the rear echelons as well. Moreover, the Germans were given precious
hours to regroup, bring up reserves and organise a limited counterattack, which
stopped the Canadian advance cold. While some parts of Simonds' planning were
innovative and daring, key aspects of the German defences were overlooked.
