48
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
beach, so the DD tanks stood little chance of reaching the shore once launched.
The tanks of both company commanders were amongst those that sank. The two
tanks that did make the beach did so by steering a course whereby the waves were
more behind the tanks so the risk of swamping was reduced. The fact that so many
tanks did launch is a testament to the courage and determination of the men of the
74Ist Tank Battalion.
In view of the number of tanks that sank, the battalion's losses were relatively
low: eleven men killed and twenty-six missing. Photographs of men on Omaha
beach being rescued from sunken landing craft are actually tank crews in their
RAF dinghies. The British report from the 79th Armoured Division concluded:
It may be that the foundering of some tanks was due to the failure of this rail. It was
recommended that, in addition to the top rail being of the proper specifications, an
extra strut from the turret front to the centre top rail should be attached in the future.?7
Clearly, there were problems with the design specification for the strength of the
top rail in the sea conditions experienced on D-Day. Many reports of the crews
mention the top rail giving way or the crews trying to brace it; one can only
imagine their panic as they fought to prevent the rail from collapsing and the tank
from sinking. The DD designer, Straussler, would no doubt have argued that the
tanks were deployed in conditions that were beyond their capacity, but the top rail
was a weakness in the design the British had attempted to address before D-Day.
This weakness apparently did not affect DD kits made in the USA. The M4A2 DD
tank used by the Americans was s.sin (14cm) shorter than the version used by the
British, therefore any weakness in the top rail would be slightly less critical. The
loss of so many American tanks was due to the decision to launch so far out in the
rough seas in tanks with an inherent weakness in the top rail. Unfortunately, there
is no evidence that the British informed the Americans of the potential problem
before D-Day and it is likely that had they done so then more men of the 74Ist Tank
Battalion would have survived.
743rd Tank Battalion
The 743rd Tank Battalion was to support the 116th RCT landing on the right flank
of the Omaha sector:" B and C companies of the battalion were equipped with DD
tanks and the intention was to land to minutes before the infantry and engage the
beach defences while remaining in the water for protection."
The commander of the LCT flotilla carrying the tanks, Lieutenant Dean
Rockwell, was experienced in the use (and limitations) of the DD tanks as he had
worked with the tank crews during their training. Well aware that the sea condi-
tions were much too rough to launch the DD tanks, Lieutenant Rockwell followed
the previously agreed procedure in the event of poor conditions for launching. In
his After Action Report, Rockwell says that at osos hours he contacted Captain
Elder of the 743rd Tank Battalion as the senior officer present and discussed the
D-Day Tanks
49
decision to launch or not; both agreed to take the DD tanks all the way in."ยบ In
later years, Rockwell changed his account slightly by saying that after launching
one or two tanks and having them become swamped by water and go down, I
communicated by low power tank radio with Capt Elder ..." Therefore, unless
Rockwell was referring to tanks of the 74Ist Tank Battalion, which would have
been difficult to see more than a mile away, one or two of the thirty-two tanks
were drowned, but this is not supported by official reports. All the LCTs except
LCT 590, which was badly damaged, were reused later that day.??
B Company
The landing craft designated to carry the tanks of B Company to their beach
on Dog Green were (Mk VI) LCTs, which landed near the D-i Vierville draw
slightly late at o63o hours. The Dog Green beach was the westernmost beach for
the Omaha landings and was defended by the strongpoints WN70, 71, 72 and 73,
which were equipped with various 75mm and 88mm howitzers and anti-tank guns
that could fire along the beach. As the landing craft neared the beach, towering
explosions of water and sand from the coastal artillery and mortars showed that the
formidable Omaha defences were very much intact.
As the tanks began to disembark from their LCTs, they immediately came under
anti-tank fire. The tank of the company commander, Captain Ehmke, drove down
the ramp of LCT s91 and stopped to fire its first round at a bunker. The response
was immediate: an armour-piercing shell crashed into the tank, filling the interior
with black smoke. Fighting the urge to bail out, the men got off two shots; in re-
turn, the tank was hit and penetrated by two more rounds, which killed three crew
members. Captain Ehmke jumped out of the tank and began to try and attract the
attention of other tanks to pick him up, but he was killed. Behind Ehmke's tank,
the landing craft had started to reverse off the beach before the other three tanks
had unloaded; as a result, when they did drive off the ramp the water was too deep
and they quickly sank.ยบ3
All around the tanks the soldiers of the tl6th RCT were struggling to find
shelter from the machine-gun fire amongst the hedgehogs and poles on the beach:
Some of the fellows, who were able to exit the boat without getting machine gunned,
were being dragged under by the wet combat jackets and heavy equipment. Their life
preservers were of no value. The water was over the head of the average man in my
coat. German snipers were also picking them off. The water was being splattered up
by bullets, as I ran through it. It was surreal. About 20 feet to my left front were two
of our Dual Drive Amphibious medium army tanks, with their rubber sides down.
Where are the other fourteen that were supposed be here?
Six agers were clinging to the one first to my left and seven were clutching to the
one closest to me. The distant tank had a dead soldier hanging from the turret. It had
at the enemy.'4
been knocked out. While the tank closest to me was actively firing its 75mm cannon
