278
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
attack. If the British infantry that withdrew had been in their previous positions,
the Jagdpanthers would not have been able to stalk the British tanks unnoticed
before opening fire.
The second bombing raid, which was the prelude to phase three, started
as scheduled at iss hours. The Coldstream Guards were ordered to advance
to Hill 309 at 1630 hours without any infantry as the designated infantry, the
Glasgow Highlanders, had not arrived and would now be carried by the tanks of
the Grenadier Guards behind them. The advance got underway is minutes late.
No. 3 Squadron encountered an anti-tank gun in La Morichesse and decided to
by-pass the village, but the RHQ rear link tank did not follow the detour and went
straight ahead into the village where it was immediately knocked out. Two other
tanks in La Ferrière au Doyen were also hit and immobilised by an anti-tank gun,
which was then silenced by an artillery barrage called down on its location. The
two squadrons of Coldstream Guards tanks got to Hill 309 at 1900 hours and the
infantry finally arrived at 2230 hours; the regiment harboured there for the night.
The Grenadier Guards received new orders that afternoon to proceed onto
Hill 309 with all squadrons, picking up the late Glasgow Highlanders en route
north of Hervieux, along the main road from Caumont to St Martin de Besaces.
A further tank was damaged on a mine around Sept Vents, and the advance vas
held up by another 88mm anti-tank gun covering the road south of fervieux at La
Morichesse. I ne intantry dismounted and proceeded to infidate mo the ving
supported by the tanks of No. 2 Squadron, which had one tank knocked out but in
turn destroyed the anti-tank gun. As it was now late evening, the reginent decided
to harbour a mile further north and found themselves in a traffic jam with other
vehicles coming down the road. The order to harbour was countermanded but as
it was too difficult to turn around, the regiment was diverted onto a wack Where it
eventually harboured at La Ferrière 23
11th Armoured Division
At 0700 hours, the lith Armoured Division's advance began in the two groups
previously described. The 2oth Brigade was the easternmost group (lefi) and the
159th Brigade was on the right; the divistechal orders were to protect the right lank
of XXX Corps.
ud he z3rd Hussars and Monmouth infantry were in the vanguard of the 29tl
Brigade group, and their route benefited from:le earlier actions of the dujacen
Isth (H) Division in clearing a path. Palang to the west of Sept venu, one talk
was knocked out by an artillery barrage and two tanks were lost in minefield. The
advance had to be halted whilst the Flails were brought forward to clear a passage.
The small fields and narrow lanes made it very difficult for the tanks to keep up
with the infantry although the tanks were under the command of the infantry
battalion. The advance was slow but med only isolated pockets of resistance and
mines, which had to be cleared before forward progress could be resumed. At La
Morichesse, the reserve group of the 3rd RTR and the 8th Rifle Brigade passed
Operation Bluecoat
279
through and took over the advance from the Hussars. After a firefight in the dark-
ness, St Jean des Essartiers was captured and the tanks then harboured.
The right-hand column of the 2nd Fife and Forfar tanks and Hereford infantry
struck more opposition and minefields. B Squadron lost seven tanks as soon as
it had crossed the start line and the Herefords spent most of the day clearing the
village of Cussy, less than 1,00oyds from start line. Guessing that the German
lines had been pierced and conscious of the tight timetable, the regiment was then
ordered by VIII Corps to advance as rapidly as possible. Lieutenant Steel Brownlie
of A Squadron relished the chance to advance at speed:
We were told to move and move fast. We called it 'baffing. No more creeping through
hedges and grinding about in first gear, but doing what we had been trained to do,
move. A Squadron went first, and I was leading troop. It was a case of motoring flat
out, 35mph on the straight, for the faster you went the harder you were to hit. There
were Germans all over the place, running and scampering. We fired wildly at them,
overtook them and left them far behind. There were targets at every turn of the road.
It was exhilarating.24
The other two tanks of Brownlie's troop were knocked out and Brownie's own
tank was damaged by a direct hit that jammed the turret. The squadron eventually
reached the high ground north-west of St Ouen des Besaces, which was where the
group harboured for the night. 25
The German Army Group B command was already preoccupied with dealing
with the threatened American breakout at Avranches when it received news of the
attack near Caumont. General Eberbach at Panzer Gruppe West did not want to
move any more armoured units away from Caen, so von Kluge decided to first send
a kampfgruppe of the zist Panzer Division to the aid of the 326th Division. Later in
the evening, the remainder of the division was added when it was realised that the
British had advanced as far as the 326th Division's rear artillery positions at St Jean
and La Ferrière. After having been in action since D-Day, the 2Ist Panzer Division
had been pulled out of the line on 27 July to rest and refit prior to the planned major
armoured counterattack. Three batteries of 88mm guns were also sent from the III
Flak Korps. The easternmost division of the Seventh Army, the 3rd Parachute
Division, which was the sole unit of the 2nd Parachute Corps, became increasingly
nervous about what appeared to be the collapse of its neighbouring division and
began to pull back from its own positions towards Vire.
31 July
XXX Corps
The 43rd Wessex Division made slightly better progress and captured Cahagnes,
advancing to a stream south of the village. The soth Division, after managing an
