66
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
assembling assault wave ran into a minefield. At os21 hours, a primary control
landing craft (PCC1261) for Uncle beach hit a mine and the secondary craft for
Uncle then fouled its propellers on a marker buoy so LCC 60 from Tare beach
turned back to guide the LCTs that had begun circling with the loss of their guid-
ing craft. 49 At this point, at 0s47 hours, LCT 593 detonated a mine off St Marcouf
Island and sank immediately with four tanks of A Company. The other LCTs
tried to pick up survivors but this put the landing timetable in danger of going
seriously astray. so Two officers on LCC 60 then made the decision to launch from
much closer to shore so as to make up for lost time. The commander of LCC 600
gathered together the LCTs with the aid of a bull horn and led them towards
the shore, unfortunately not the planned beach but one 1,00oyds further east ar
La Grande Dune. A strong tide and poor visibility, due to smoke on the beaches
obscuring landmarks, also played havoc with the infantry landing craft, which
landed nearly a kilometre east of their designated point. The infantry assault craft
had overtaken the tank LCTs while they were reorganising and were considerably
ahead of the tanks.
The DD tanks from the seven remaining LCTs were launched from about
I,sooyds oftshore and twenty-six tanks got to the beach without misnap. Une
A Company tank was drowned when the blast from the fire of a nearby rocket ship
damaged its canvas screen, causing it to collapse and the tank to sink. Another tank
developed steering problems and had to be eventually towed to shore. "
The southernmost beach for the planned landings was Uncle Red, which was
astride Exit 3 from the beach. The DD tanks and infantry actually landed with
their right flank on Exit 2 on a beach at La Grande Dune previously designated
as Victor beach. Rather than amending any orders for the successive waves, it was
decided to simply rename Victor beach as Uncle Red and Tare Green; the new
Tare Green was now directly opposite the La Madeleine fortification. By landing
suvale dado, vee dorand duel man deepesty degry creeds deben, deed daven
W N7 and Strongpoint No. 9 defences. La Madeleine had also been erectively
bombed by the air force.
However, the problems prior to launting meant that the DD tanks landed
20 minutes after the intantry. A Company landed on the renamed lare Green
beach in front of La Madeleine while B Company landed slightly further south on
Uncle Red Beach, opposite Exit 2. Once ashore, the DD tanks set about engaging
any bunkers that were still active and blowing a gap in the sea wall with 7smm
quate. Ao the be and wer law, the many nau baled mod ou wear
Dunes and par boxes that nau not been avanaonta be avoyou in ve havar
u oz dment without the support of the tanks. The tanks stayed on the beach for
we we see dong to verge want bear bootates were dead or wal wead o
constructed by the combat engineer battalions.
Once gaps were blown in the sea wall, A and led ompanies moved inland with
not support the infantry moving along that causeway but went westwards along
D-Day Tanks
67
Exit 2. Halfway along this causeway, it was discovered that the Germans had blown
up the causeway and covered the break with an anti-tank gun and mines. The first
tank hit a mine and the second tank was knocked off the causeway by the anti-tank
gun, which was in turn knocked out by the third tank. Is A Company then turned
north to link up with its infantry just west of Exit 3 and harboured for the night.
B and C companies harboured that night near Les Forges. One B Company tank
broke down on a narrow causeway across the flooded fields and had to be pushed
off the causeway by a bulldozer. '54 Nine 70th Battalion tanks were lost at sea, five
from A Company and four from C Company. Three tanks from A Company and
two tanks from B Company were disabled inland by anti-tank guns or mines. The
US Naval report was rather dismissive of the DD tanks, saying that their tardy
arrival was not seriously felt. 155
C Company
C Company was due at HIs minutes in the third wave of eight LCT(A)s, and each
LCT(A) carried two C Company wading tanks plus a bulldozer for clearing beach
obstacles. Four bulldozers came from the 7oth Tank Battalion and four from the
6i2th Engineer Battalion. 56 C Company was transported in similar landing craft
to those modified for use at Omaha. Two LCT(A)s capsized on the voyage from
England, LCT(A)s 2301 and 2402, with the loss of all four tanks and two dozers.
The remaining twelve wading M4 tanks and six tank dozers started landing on time
at His minutes; many C Company tanks arrived ahead of the still-swimming DD
tanks. One C Company tank fell in a shell hole on the beach and was swamped.
German 88mm shells and heavy machine-gun fire began to hit the beach. While
the infantry orientated themselves on the unfamiliar beach, the tanks at the water's
eage provided covering fire. Once ashore, the company commander, Captain
Ahearn, divided his tanks into two forces to look for a gap in the sea wall. One
group proceeded south towards Pouppeville and other north towards La Madeleine.
The first group found a small bunker that contained a Goliath remote controlled
tank, which fortunately was not operating as its control cable had been broken
in the naval bombardment. Holes were then blown by charges in the sea wall
and the battalion bulldozers cleared the debris from the explosions. The engineers
went through the gaps but then found themselves in a minefield, so the tanks of
C Company drove through to set off the anti-personnel mines. A bunker at Beau
Guillot controlling Exit 2 was engaged and neutralised and the tanks pushed on
to Exit I as well as moving out to the left flank. One of the two tanks of Ahearn's
group hit a mine and was immobilised whilst three of the four others on their way
to Pouppeville also hit land mines. Two tanks assisted the infantry in engaging
1oist Airborne troops, and the two forces linked up about itto hours. The two
tanks then went on to assist with the clearing up of hedgerows around an artillery
position cleared by the paratroopers. C Company lost two tallas moving lidha. sy
Four reserve tanks landed in the afternot oz he 70th lank Battalion had forty
