38
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
lay its bridge across the top of the sunken tank. Using this perilous exit, six tanks
of C Squadron were able to make an exit to the lateral road beyond until the bridge
was put out of action by an errant self-propelled artillery vehicle." The tank of the
commanding officer, Lieutenant Colonel Colwell, hit a mine while exiting. C
Squadron supported the ist Canadian Scottish infantry in a number of skirmishes
and then advanced inland to Banville, another tank being damaged by a mine.
The ist Hussars was the only regiment on D-Day to reach its objectives. A troop
from C Squadron under Lieutenant McCormick penetrated as far inland as
Bretteville l'Orgueilleuse and Sequeville Bessin and was in sight of the airfield at
Carpiquet. Little opposition was met, and the troop tried to contact regimental HQ
by radio to inform them of their progress but could not get through. Unsupported,
the troop was forced to return to the regiment.
At the end of the day, A Squadron only had nine tanks operational and B Squadron
had four so the two squadrons had to be temporarily amalgamated. 3 The regiment
reported only twenty-six Shermans and three Fireflies operational next day. Thus
the ist Hussars had thirty-three tanks destroyed or damaged on D-Day, including
one of the concrete-busting Fireflies. Most of the casualties were either irreparably
ruined by seawater on the beach or damaged in battle and were complete write-
ofts; the LAD (Light Aid Detachment) when it arrived ashore could only repair
several tanks that had run over mines. D-Day casualties in men for the ist Hussars
were heavier than for the Fort Garry Horse because of the greater tank losses - two
officers and nineteen men were killed plus a similar number wounded. +
Sherbrooke Fusiliers
The Sherbrooke Fusiliers, the reserve regiment with the oth Infantry Brigade,
landed on Nan White beach near Bernières at 1215 hours and, after many delays,
moved to the assembly point designated Elder' near Bény sur Mer, arriving at
dusk. The Sherbrooke Fusiliers had been using the four tanks per troop mode!
of squadron organisation since training in March 1944, but each squadron was
short a tank that was not detailed to arrive until D+8 days. The delays and tramc
congestion meant that the regiment had not been able to advance inland and seize
its objectives, which included Carpiquet airfield, so preparations were made for a
dawn advance next day.
Omaha Sector
The Omaha sector was located between Port en Bessin and the River Vire estuary,
and linked the Gold and Utah sectors.
The proposed landing beach was a crescent-
shaped shingle beach about 7,00oyds long with grass-covered hills behind the beach
and cliffs at either end. The beach was on average rooyds wide and rose up to a strip
of marshland up to zooyds wide at the base of the steep cliffs, or bluffs. In some places
the bluffs were nearly zooft high and extended from the top of the shingle beach.
D-Day Tanks
39
In the tidal zone there were three belts of underwater obstacles topped with
teller mines. The base of the cliffs and the marshland were also heavily mined.
The only exits from the beach for tracked and wheeled vehicles were five narrow
natural defiles or draws that cut through the bluffs and led up to the coastal plain.
These defiles were heavily mined and strongpoints had been constructed along
their length to block the routes away from the beach. There were a total of fourteen
strongpoints in the Omaha sector, which was the most heavily defended of all the
invasion beaches as well as being the most difficult terrain. All but three of these
strongpoints could fire along the length of the beaches proposed for the landings.
The bunkers had thick concrete walls to protect them from a naval bombardment
and could only be attacked by gunfire or tanks on the beaches. They were equipped
with a variety of captured French and Russian guns from 37mm to 75mm in size,
as well as German 75mm and 88mm anti-tank guns. At the base of the D-i draw
there were a number of villas along a paved promenade that ran parallel to the
beach between the D-1 Vierville and D-3 Les Moulins draws. Anti-tank ditches
had been dug in front of the E-3 Colleville and D-1 Vierville draws, and a sea wall
between 4ft and 8ft high, against which shingle had piled up, ran along the western
half of the beach and created yet another obstacle.
The Omaha sector was defended by the newly formed 352nd Division, which had
moved into the sector in April to support the 716th Division. The 352nd Division
had immediately set about improving the beach defences where there were suf-
ficient materials to do so. The division was formed from the shattered remnants of
Eastern front units, previously wounded men, seventeen- and eighteen-year-old
recruits and men from the Eastern occupied countries. Like many of the Allied
units, the 352nd Division had never been in action before. Observation posts in
the strongpoints were able to direct fire from four batteries of the division artillery
positioned inland to support the beach defences. These guns had pre-registered
potential targets on the beaches.
741st Tank Battalion
H-hour was the same as Utah, oo hours, and was preceded by heavy aerial
and naval bombardments. Omaha was farther west than the British sectors and
therefore high tides were earlier. So as not to unduly alert the Germans to the
imminent invasion, the American naval bombardment would begin at the same
time as the British bombardment, but because of the earlier high tides, it was only
of 40 minutes' duration compared with the 2 hours on British beaches.
The tanks of the 74Ist Tank Battalion sailed from England as part of Force
O-1 in Mk VI LCTs of the 12th US Flotilla, which were slightly smaller than
the British LCT Mk III and only carried four tanks. The landings were to be on
a two-brigade or regimental combat team front, as per Juno and Gold sectors. The
Tiốth Regimental Combat Team (RCT) from the 29th Division was to land on the
right and the 16th RCT from the ist Division land on the left.
