350
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
times. It was a tall order for the regiment, and although the Canadians' luck held
for Simonds' first night attack, their luck ran out for Worthington Force.
Worthington seems to have overruled his junior officers on a number of oc-
casions, perhaps refusing to admit he had made a mistake or convinced that his
navigation was correct. When Major Carson of B Squadron queried the line of
advance, he was told to recall his troops that had started out for Hill 195 and order
them to join the rest of the regiment on Hill III.
At 0748 hours the 4th Brigade HQ requested by radio the regiment's position
and it was given by Worthington at o7ss hours as Point 195. When Captain Lewis
took some half-tracks carrying wounded back to the Canadian lines mid-morning
he also carried a message from Worthington, again saying they were on point 195?°
Radio contact was unfortunately lost with Brigade from about 1000 hours on-
wards, but Worthington and other officers were still able to contact other Canadian
At 1100 hours Worthington requested more ammunition from his supply
echelon. The accompanying Forward Observation Officers (FOO) with the field
artillery regiments also had a good idea where they really were and were in contact
With their regiments, which were moving up to lend support. At about noon, one
battery fired three rounds of smoke, which was observed I, 8ooyds to the north, so
at least one field regiment knew the Worthington's location. The FOO with the
I9th Field Regiment was also apparently in contact with his regiment for most
of the day, until 1830 hours, and yet the FOO with the British medium artillery
regime on the hilltop claimed that he could not find a working wireless set? Ine
war diary of the Algonquin Regiment refers to a discussion mid-morning between
Worthington and the senior officer of the Algonquins present where the fact that
the battle group was in the wrong position was recognised, but the officers hoped
that the information given by Lewis would enable a relief force to be organised and
therefore they would hold on for as long as possible. In view of the earlier message
given by Worthington for Lewis to take back to the Canadian lines, Worthington
still seemed to be in state of denial. Meanwhile, the 4th Brigade HQ was now
searching for their lost regiment. A light plane was sent up and a patrol sent out
from the 12th Manitoba Dragoons to observe Point 195 but both reported no signs
of the battle group.
The heavy tank losses of ist Polish Armoured Division on 8 August meant that it
would not take part in any overnight operations while it regrouped and sorted itself
out. Their advance on 9 August did not start until 1100 hours, and one of the objec-
tives of the Ist Tank Regiment was the capture of Hill 140. The Poles encountered
the British Columbia Regiment about 1500 hours, and the Canadian liaison officer
with the division reported the presence of Canadian tanks; this should have alerted
the 4th Brigade that the British Columbia Regiment was on the wrong side of the
Caen-Falaise road. Similarly, the Typhoons did not report the regiment's location
although the planes repeatedly returned during the day.
When Worthington decided to let the remaining tanks and vehicles make a run
for it at about 1s0o hours, this was in effect a death sentence for the tank crews
351
Operation Totalize
and Algonquin left behind. Perhaps unwilling to surrender to the SS in view
of rumours of atrocities, or perhaps realising he had committed a grave error,
Worthington was determined to fight to the death. No help was on the way as no
one knew their correct location. No purpose was served by continuing to fight
on in a battle that the Canadian official historian described as 'a tragic mixture of
gallantry and ineptitude:" However, the ineptitude was not just Worthington's;
Booth and Kitching were also responsible for the events of that day.
The other operation planned for 9 August was for the capture of Bretteville le
Rabet by the battle group of Grenadier Guards, and this operation was far more suc-
cestu. Two squadrons advanced at 0330 hours from Gaumesnil, No. 2 Squadron
catrying a company of Lake Superior infantry, and after engaging in considerable
speculative shooting en route, the forming-up point for the attack was reached at
about o600 hours. One anti-tank gun was destroyed in the dark when its muz-
zle flash gave away its position. No. I Squadron, with the infantry, then sup-
ported the attack on Bretteville le Rabet. A troop leaders tank was knocked out
by a Panzerschreck as soon as it entered the town, but the infantry and tanks
worked well together and methodically moved through the streets, clearing enemy
postions. By 1s00 hours the town was secure. One tank ran out of petrol after
dang been operating since o1oo hours the previous day and had to be towed baus
While the tanks of the South Albertas and the Lincoln and Welland Regiment
cleared Langannerie and Grainville-Langannere further south on the caer
radise road, Brigadier Booth had the dual problems of a missing regiment anu
the apparently untaken objective of Point 195. Despite the Governor General Foot
Guards having been in reserve all the previous day, it was not until 1000 nouls that
Booth instructed the Foot Guards to urgently begin moving up to Gaumesnil.
nail an hour later the CO was given his instructions to push onto count tys do
quickly as possible. Somewhat ominously, a report of forty-five German tanks
Just east of Potigny was received at 0938 hours. Once again, the time for planning
was very short: the H-hour for the attack was 1330 hours.
A battle group of the
Foot Guards and A Company of the Algonquins, with a troop of anti-tank guns,
Was put together and did not advance until all the units had arrived at I430 hours.
Driving east of Bretteville le Rabet, the
group
progressed without incident to
Langannerie, where trouble struck. On reaching a hedge sooyds north of Quesnay
Wood, tanks from No. 1 Squadron began to be quickly knocked out by a largely
unseen enemy. Three tanks were destroyed and the track of the squadron leader's
tank was knocked off. German artillery and mortar fire began to land on the
exposed open ground and the Algonquin infantry
were forced to take cover
in the orchards of Grainville-Langannerie.
regiment had come into range
of the tanks of Kampfgruppe Wunsche, which had occupied Quesnay Wood
that morning. From the edge of the woods the Germans had an excellent view
down the gentle slope to Langannerie and Estrées la Campagne 1,5ooyds away.
No. I Squadron then tried to move around to the west of the woods but came
