The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
their weapons more tightly; the religious and the suddenly converted amongst
them offered silent prayers ...
Amongst the assortment of landing craft moving to the shore were dozens of
what looked like small boats but which were actually amphibious tanks, an Allied
secret weapon developed especially for this moment in history. As they moved
sluggishly through the heavy seas, several disappeared from view altogether.
Since the United States had entered the war in December 1941 and were
persuaded by the British and Churchill to follow a 'Germany first' policy, the
Americans had wanted to launch a cross-Channel invasion of France (Operation
Roundup) from Britain. They considered this the shortest and quickest route to
strike directly at Germany itself and honour promises made to the Russians to
start a second front. However, once the Americans had committed to the British
Mediterranean strategy in North Africa and Italy, Operation Roundup was repeat-
edly postponed until the British were finally forced to commit to a date of I May
1944 at the Teheran Conference in November 1943. Even then, the Italian Anzio
landings caused a further postponement of a month.
The secret amphibious tanks were the first armoured units to touch down on
French soil in a campaign that was expected to see the Allies victorious and the war
ended by Christmas 1944. In this book, attention is devoted to the performance
and deficiencies of the DD tanks; there are many fine accounts of the D-Day assault
and the "Funnies of the 79th Armoured Division already available, but the story of
the DD tanks has not been told in full before. The attack on each of the invasion
beaches is examined, with particular emphasis on the armoured debacle on Omaha
Beach, where the assault almost failed.
Both green and veteran armoured units were fielded by the Allies in Normandy:
a division from Canada, three divisions from Britain and two from the United
States. The Canadian 4th Armoured Division, the Guards Armoured Division, the
Tith Armoured Division and the US 3rd Armored Division were all inexperienced
units, although a veteran regiment from North Africa (the 3rd RTR - Royal Tank
Regiment) had been incorporated into the lIth Armoured Division. Montgomery
had transferred the veteran 7th Armoured Division - the 'Desert Rats' - from Italy
for the Normandy campaign. Independent tank brigades or battalions to support
the operations of the infantry divisions were also deployed. Opposing the Allies
were much-vaunted and experienced German panzer divisions (one untried in
battle) against which only the British had fought previously and for whom they had
developed a begrudging respect.
There are many accounts of the Normandy campaign already, but this is the
first from the perspective of the armoured units and their generals, commanders
and tank crews. It compares the intentions of both the Allied and German army
and corps commanders in the major battles of the campaign with the outcomes
of those battles and how they came about. It was in Normandy that the relation-
ship between Eisenhower and Montgomery became seriously strained, and the
background to this irretrievable breakdown is explored.
Introduction
The daily life of the tank crews is described as well as the organisation for the
repair and replacement of tanks and crews after the devastating consequences of
being hit by an armour-piercing shell.
Many historians have written only cursorily of tanks in Normandy, while oth-
ers, in writing about the major operations such as Goodwood, have stated very
different tank loss statistics. The main reference used by many historians is the
Military Operations Unit (MORU) report No. 23 prepared in October 1946,
which gives the daily losses for all the armoured brigades and their reconnaissance
regiments for the four days of the battle. According to the MORU report, a total
of 493 tanks were damaged, knocked out or destroyed, which has given rise to the
accepted figure of around soo tanks lost. Canadian Lieutenant-Colonel Roman
Jarymowycz, for instance, writes that the plain before Borguebus was covered
with nearly soo burning British tanks. Anthony Beevor gives 200 tanks as lost but
only writes about the first day, while Max Hastings claims 400 were lost. Others
are more circumspect; Eversley Belfield and Major-General Essame give a total
of 400 tanks lost but state that many were later recovered and repaired, while
Major-General Belchem gives no account of the losses. lan Dalglish also fails to
give a total estimate of tanks lost, despite devoting a whole book to Operation
Goodwood. John J.T. Sweet attempts a more rigorous analysis and arrives at the
figure of 300 tanks 'stopped' for all causes and 140-150 tanks actually destroyed.
This book establishes for the first time the true number of tanks lost in Operation
Goodwood and the other major battles of the campaign up to the closure of the
Falaise Gap in August 1944. This is achieved by using official documents, reports,
war diaries and regimental histories of the men and units involved, and, where pos-
sible, first-hand accounts of those tank men who were in the frontline. These have
been obtained from research at archives in Britain, the United States and Canada.
The performance of each armoured division in the campaign is examined in
relation to the tank training and doctrine of the time, along with the impact of
the bocage hedgerows, a terrain for which no Allied tank crews had prepared and
which perfectly suited those in a defensive role.
The development of the main German and Allied tanks is examined, as is the
considerable performance gap between the German and Allied tanks, which was
well known to British leaders (who attempted to prevent any negative reports from
reaching the press or the tank regiments).
It took considerable courage for tank crews to go into combat: four or five men
crammed into a metal box with little visibility when under fire and expecting to be
hit at any second by an anti-tank round that could mean a fiery death...
This is their story.
