300
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Given no time to reconnoitre or plan the attack, the loth SS Panzer Division
had thrown its forces in waves straight at the front of the two boxes instead of
employing their usual tactics of infiltration or attacking the flanks. The objective
at La Pavée of Point 224 was reported as captured by the panzergrenadiers but then
reported lost. As daylight faded, the German attacks diminished and after having
been compelled to pull back into a tight harbour, the La Pavée position remained
unbroken. The Hussars also managed to hold, despite having been considerably
weakened by the withdrawal of the two tank squadrons overnight. British artillery
fire played a significant part in breaking up the attacks by the panzergrenadiers.
At about midnight, the roth SS Panzer Division broke off its attacks in order
to regroup before travelling to Mortain. By end of the day, the loth SS Panzer
Division only had five Mark IV tanks and five Stug IIIs operational, and was in no
condition to take part in the Mortain counterattack.
7 August
On 7 August, C Squadron of the 23rd Hussars was relieved at midday by the tanks
of the 3rd RIR and withdrew to La Barbiere to join the rest of the regiment.
Attacks on the 2nd Fife and Forfar position continued. Tank losses made it neces-
sary to amalgamate A and C squadrons and the composite squadron knocked out
two Mark IVs that came too close. Two Tigers, which had succeeded in occupying
a hilltop east of Le Haut, opened fire at long range, knocking out ar tanks tha
were exposed. The Tigers were engaged by a troop of tanks and one was knocked
out, although this was later towed away by other ligers. I was dot until lie deat
day, 8 August, that the tanks of the Scots Ge y regiment arrived to take over from
the znd Fife and Forfars. Meanwhile, five American divisions finally completed the
capture of Vire with 3,000 casualties.°1
On the XXX Corps front, the disengagement of the toth SS Panzer Division
and the shortening of the German frontliut e permitted some territorial gains agaris
little resistance, including the capture of some long-contestea positions.
soth Division finally captured Villers Beige on 4 August, and the 7th Armoured
Division entered Aunay on § august. Ine miss of capturing the wont tinyon
feature was then taken away from the 7th Armoured Division and given to the
43rd Wessex Division with the 8th Armoured Brigade in support. The 129th
Infantry brigade plus the tanks of the 13th/18th Hussars would lead the assault on
the imposing steep-sided plateau. After unsuccessful attacks on 4 and § August, On
6 August the Hussars broke through the German perimeter and found a perilous
are w track on the side of the plateau to the summit. One tank shipped sideway
and overturned in a quarry and another had a track blown of by an anti-tank gu
but under the cover of the smoke sereen, one tank reached the top and the six
others quickly joined it.? Once the infantry arrived and began digging-in, a fog
descendat on the whole plateau; this fog inhibited any German counterattack and
Operation Bluecoat
301
prevented anti-tank guns from shooting at the regiment's tanks climbing the track
to the summit. 3
After eight days of fighting, the stated main objective of Operation Bluecoat, the
capture of Mont Pinçon, had been achieved although fighting continued around
Estry (Operation Grouse) for another week.
Aftermath
After a slow start, the British attack in Operation Bluecoat made a break clean
through the German lines and caused the redeployment of three German armoured
divisions from the Caen area. As Montgomery's strategy was to keep the German
armour occupied around Caen whilst the American army broke out in the west,
the movement of these panzer divisions westwards was an unfavourable outcome.
As the panzer divisions were no longer required around Caen, they were then
allocated to the Mortain counterattack.
rowever, by bigg these formations into a bacte in a cerem sector, the
ensuing fighting served to weaken these already depleted formations further
although this was not an objective of Operation Bluecoat. The loth SS Panzer
Division reported on 7 August that it had only five tanks and five self-propelled
guns operational (from a total of thirty-five available at the beginning of August).
The gth SS Panzer Division was similarly reduced to a total of twenty-three fit
armoured vehicles. These losses would have important consequences for future
German plans.
Having made the breakthrough and advanced rapidly, the British did not ex-
ploit the situation. Instead, they stopped to await the German counterattack and
handed the initiative back to the Germans. The opportunity to achieve a breakout
as decisive as Operation Cobra with the capture of Vire was lost. If the objective
of Operation Bluecoat was the capture of Mont Pinçon to
the east, why was
the point of main effort switched to VIII Corps on the second day of battle?
VIII Corps could not have been expected to swing due east and advance across
the front of XXX Corps units. Having displayed flexibility in the operation by
giving VIII Corps the task of continuing to advance south and capturing Le Bény
Bocage, this flexibility was then disregarded in favour of defence as soon as the
first units of the znd SS Panzer Korps arrived and the great strategic prize of Vire
went unclaimed.
Vire was reported by the patrols of the Household Cavalry on i August as being
largely undefended and could have been easily occupied by the and Northants
Yeomanry and supporting infantry on either that day or the next.
The confusion
as to which army had the responsibility for Vire originated from Montgomery but
there was certainly no confusion amongst the Americans in XIX Corps; General
Bradley had directed FUSA in his orders of 29 July to capture an area that included
Vire. " If there was any confusion at all, it was up to Montgomery to clarify the army
