94
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
also difficult and the tank crews were frequently forced to wear the same clothes
for weeks on end. The daily life of German tank crews in Normandy was similar,
We had plenty to eat. Besides the good combat rations which the company sergeants
brought forward at night, we obtained a small butter barrel and a cream pot from
a dairy in the combat zone - an excellent nerve relaxer. This was necessary to survive
the almost constant fire from the artillery on the ground, from the air, and from the
sea. In general, one heard the detonations subliminally if they were not in the immed-
ate area, but one could still not sleep deeply. My excellent crew and I slept in a deeply
dug, covered trench under our panzer. Those who had no overhead protection had it
bad. The trees and bushes blocked one's vision but not the shell fragments from above,
which were set loose by very sensitive fuses that were set off by the thinnest branch
.... There was a problem with water. There were no nearby streams. Undressing and
bathing were excessive luxuries but one took every opportunity to shave. The dry
summer weather and the constant strain on the nerves caused a powerful thirst, so
we drank large quantities of cider, calvados, wine and cognac without getting drunk.
Rations could only be delivered at night. They were often taken with our nerve save
from our dairy, the butter and cream. To relax ourselves we smoked cigarettes. Ther
blue haze could not worsen the already unhealthy air. 3°
Allied tank crews were ordered not to drink the local homemade Calvados spuri,
as it was implicated in stomach upsets, but this did not usually stop them. Run
was occasionally issued to the OKs, and the de cers at regimental He otten had
a well-stocked mess truck that also supplied spirits as required. The policies for
rum rations varied trom regiment to regiment, sometimes squadron to squadio.
Some regiments issued rum rarely whilst others ensured that each tank had a fill
water bottle.3I
A regular supply of mall was very important for morale and mall deliveries wer
made to the tanks by the rear ech dons. Letters written by the men were censored
by their officers and most men did not want to relate the horrors of war to their
loved ones so as to not unduly alarm them. Only officers were permitted to keep
diaries, but this regulation was often broken.
Like all soldiers, tank crews were always short of sleep and took naps whenever
they were allowed and the opportunity arose. At ght it was customary, and a pat
of British doctrine, for the tanks to withdrawleom the frontline into what Wa
called a harbour (also sometimes called a 'laager' or 'leaguer') for to stay in the
frontline there was the threat of enemy infantry - eeping up on them in the dars
ness. Each squadron's tanks were arranged in a defensive perimeter and the crew
then nad - dig shit trenches to sleep in; sometimes the tank was driven over the p
ot the trenches to provide added protection from German artillery or mortar tire,
or the occasional nocturnal visit from the Luftwaffe. A tarpaulin fitted on a rai
on one side of the tank could be pulled out to make a temporary shelter under
which the men could sleep with some protection from the elements. If there was
Fighting the Tank
95
no time, or the men came under fire before any trenches could be dug, the crews
slept in their tanks. Before anyone could go to sleep, however, the tanks had to
be refuelled and rearmed and any essential maintenance carried out so the tank
crews often did not get more than 4 or s hours of sleep a day. Each Sherman tank
carried more than 100 rounds for the 75mm gun; this load was typically made up
of fifty to sixty High Explosive, forty armour-piercing and ten smoke rounds, all
of which had to be manhandled and stowed in the tank. Petrol or diesel fuel was
supplied in 4-gallon jerricans, which had to be lifted up individually onto the rear
deck and emptied into the fuel tanks. Twenty to thirty boxes of machine gun am-
munition also had to be loaded. While the tanks were being resupplied, the troop
and squadron leaders would attend an Orders Group with the commanding officer
to debrief the day's events and work out the plans for the coming day. The attack's
objectives, supporting troops, start times, availability of air and artillery support,
and information about the enemy all had to be discussed and understood." The
tank crews themselves then had to be briefed on the return of their commanders
before anyone could have a meal or attempt to go to sleep. Despite being in the
rear areas away from the frontline, many harbours were anything but quiet and the
constant firing of nearby artillery batteries would often make sleep difficult. Deep,
unbroken sleep was rare as the night was regularly disturbed by changes of sentries,
mosquitoes and enemy aircraft overhead. The Luftwaffe always made sorties over
he Allied beachhead at night and those sleeping would inevitably be woken by the
fire of anti-aircraft guns and the occasional falling bomb. As it was midsummer,
the nights were short and with most operations beginting at dawn, revelle for the
tank crews was often at four or five o'clock in the morning.
When not in action, other maintenance had to be regularly performed on the
engine, suspension, wireless and armament. As the workings of the tracks could
often mean the difference between life and death, particular attention was paid to
them every day. The crew worked with the squadron fitters if necessary to replace
rollers, suspension bogies, track pads and sprockets. When the engle was not
running, a small petrol-driven generator inside the turret was used to charge the
batteries and this often gave a lot of trouble, requiring regular overhauls. The main
sun had to be cleaned daily with a long rod to remove any dirt or impurities that
had built up in the rifling of the barrel.
Organisation
A British or Canadian tank regiment was organised into three fighting squadrons
of nineteen tanks in each with a regimental headquarters of four more tanks. Each
quadron was divided into either four troops of four tanks or five troops of three
tanks with the balance of tanks forming the squadron headquarters. There had
been some debate in the tank regiments about the merits of the squadron com
mander controlling lour or five troops at once and the arrival Or onerman ve rueny
