At I800 hours, the fifteen Shermans of C Squadron and a depleted company of
fifty-five men of a company of Argylls advanced the 2 miles to St Lambert sur
Dives where one tank was promptly knocked out by an anti-tank gun in the vil-
lage. The squadron was then strafed by two Spitfires and, unable to locate the
hidden anti-tank gun, withdrew to a harbour just to the north of St Lambert.
There were many Allied Thunderbolts and Typhoons in the area that day and
friendly fire incidents became increasingly common in the fluid battle where both
German and Canadian ground forces were on the move. After the episodes during
Tractable and Totalize, Canadian troops were very wary at the approach of any
aircraft. The South Albertas regimental HQ had just arrived in Louvieres en Auge
When it was attacked. The commanding officer, Colonel Wotherspoon, made an
angry report afterwards:
One squadron of Spitfires of the RAF started to engage my headquarters shortly
after and two flights had bombed and strafed the headquarters and set fire to a vehicle
trom another formation a few yards away. Yellow recognition smoke was thrown and
vehicles with Allied recognition markings were in the open but with no effect even
with the planes diving as low as 200 feet.*4
As bullets and cannon shells hit the tank and vehicles, the CO ordered his own
Crusader A A tanks to open fire on the Spitfires but was forced to countermand this
when the regiment padre, realising that something had to be done to stop the at-
tack, grabbed a Union Jack flag normally used for burials from his vehicle and held
it down on the ground in the village square as the planes lined up for another pass.
The padre displayed the flag during the attack by the first plane but fortunately
was not injured, and the rest of the flight passed low overhead without firing.
Afterwards, the padre was apparently shaking like a leaf but was recommended for
the Military Cross.'S
The Polish were also frequently attacked by Allied aircraft and that night they
reported, 'Units and brigade headquarters have been continually bombed by own
forces. Half the petrol being sent to and Armoured Regiment was destroyed
through bombing just after 1700 hours? The Polish casualties from such friendly
air attacks during the three days of 16-18 August were seventy-two men killed and
I9I wounded; the friendly fire casualties of the 2nd Canadian Corps in the same
period totalled seventy-seven killed and 209 wounded.1*
Could see rising clouds of dust, and on closer examination by field glasses, found that
we were witnessing, what we later found out to be the remnants of the German forces
in France trying to escape the pocket. The columns were about three or four miles
from our location and seemed to consist of every type and kind of vehicle, gun, tank
and horse drawn equipment that the German army possessed. The column stretched
as far as the eye could see. It was an awe inspiring sight and from a distance appeared
to be a crushing force.!3
THE FALAISE POCKET, 16-20 AUGUST
St-Pierre-sur-Dive
XXX CORPS
VIII CORPS
XIX CORPS
(ASILIYA)
ARMY
XI! CORPS
_XXIV CORPS
13)
CORPS
LXXXIV
CORPS
LVIII PZ
CORPS
DIV
FIRST US ARMY
• La Ferte Mace
CORPS
XLVN PZ
CORPS
2nd
orteaux Couliboeuf
Hordouseaux
Argenten
363rd Inf Div (group
Coudehard
43rd Inf Div (group)
4th Inf Div
Elts 275th Inf Div
Elts 9th Pz Div
Oth SS Pz DIv
20 Elts 708th Inf Div
2nd Pz Div
22 1st SS Pz Div
23116th Pz Div and
elts 9th Pz Div
@2nd SS Pz Div
C17th SS PzGr Div (group)
51st Div
British formation/thrust
Canadian formation/thrust
2nd Armd Div
3rd Armd Div
Polish formation/thrust
French formation/thrust
US formation/thrust
XV CORPS
THIRD US ARMY
Sées
Army boundary
Army Group boundary
German front line, p.m. 16 August
German front line, p.m. 19 Augus
German counter-attack, 20 Augus
The closing of the Falaise Gap: movements of Allied units 16-20 August 1944, adapted from the Victory Campaign
386
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
