80
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Americans arrived in Normandy with no uncertainty around their doctrine
for the employment of tanks.
The independent tank battalions had been created
to support the infantry divisions and the armoured divisions were designed for
exploitation once a gap had been created in the enemy frontline, in much the same
way as British armoured divisions. 'The most suitable areas for the employment of
Armoured force units are on the open flanks or through existing gaps created by
penetrations of the enemy's positions."
A significant difference between American and British doctrine was that the
Americans (General McNair) believed that the primary role of American tanks
was not to fight German tanks, which was the function of the tank destroyer bat-
talions with their towed or self-propelled anti-tank guns (MIos). There remained
some debate regarding the merits of self-propelled tanks versus towed anti-tank
guns but General McNair's views prevailed and the emphasis was on towed tank
destroyer battalions, despite the obvious limitations of these weapons being used by
an advancing force on the battlefield.
Tank Comparison
The main battle tank in use by the Allies in 1944 was the American Sherman
M4 and its variants.
The British War Office and the tank industry had failed to
develop an adequate cruiser tank in the first few years of the war and following
the emergency shipment of 318 Shermans to North Africa after the fall of Tobruk,
the British adopted the Sherman tank for its armoured units from September
1942 onwards.
The Sherman was based on the hull of the Lee/Grant M3 tank to which a turret
capable of mounting the 75mm M3 gun had been added. Because of a shortage of
engines, various different models were developed to utilise the engines produced
by different car manufacturers and modifications then had to be made to the hull to
accommodate these changes. Other differences were in the manufacturing process:
some hulls and turrets were welded and others cast.
the main variant used by the british Wed the M4A4, which was designated the
Ontamar V. Tils was powera by a munabank Orave Unrysit tas cugies, which
required the hull to be lengthened. The next most common British variant was
the M4A2, or Sherman III, which usecal, diesel engine. The M4A4 was actually
rejected by the US Army for overseas service and the US Army generally used the
M4A3 with a Ford V8 engine or the M4 and M4AI with an aircraft Continental
ed97s engine. Mechanically reliable, the Sherman became popular with British
crews and helped turn the tide of war in North Arica. Nevertheless, the Sherma
a feature that did not endear it to crews:
acquired a reputation for catching fire and rapidly exploding when hit, which was
Fighting the Tank
... as we were sitting on top of an underfloor magazine of shells with machine gun
ammo each side of you, 100 gallons of high octane petrol behind you, and many
gallons of oil in the gear box and final drive in front of you there were much better
places to be when it caught fire, and they certainly did very quickly!?
81
The tank was nicknamed the Ronson (as in the cigarette lighter advertisement,
'lights every time') by the British and the 'Tommy cooker' by the Germans. Based
on combat experience, extra plates of 25mm armour were welded on the sides of
the hull (applique armour) at certain places where penetrations were thought to
contribute to the tank catching fire or exploding.
Attempts were made to improve the armour-penetrating ability of the M3 gun
and a 76mm version, M4AI (76mm), was available from mid-1944 but, following
reluctance from senior officers at FUSA and Patton's Third Army to adopt an un-
proven tank and incorporate it alongside existing M4s, was not issued to American
units in time for Overlord. The 76mm M4 would only be used in separate tank
battalions and for the time being would remain at depots in England. o
The Sherman was 108in (2.74m) high, only just over zin (6cm) higher than the
Mark IV and lower than both the Panther and the Tiger. The vertical slab sides,
which did nothing to deflect any armour-piercing shot, gave the appearance of
being overly high, leading to a myth that the Sherman had a high profile that made
it an easy target. The Sherman was steered by means of two levers (one for each
track) which when pulled, slowed one track or the other (but did not stop them),
allowing the Sherman to turn. This gave the Sherman a very large turning circle
compared to other tanks. There were no power controls, and the driver needed all
his strength at times to turn the tank according to the commander's orders.
A powerful electric motor traversed the Sherman's turret at much faster speeds
han German tanks were capable of sutsumbat this was sometimes an duvantage.
However, all German tanks were capable of skid turns by stopping one track and
very often the driver performed this manoeuvre in combat to help line up the main
gun more quickly, at the risk of throwing a track.
Despite adopting the Sherman as its main cruiser tank, British industry con-
unued its efforts to produce a tank of its own and in 1944 this resulted in the
A27 Cromwell tank. The Cromwell had a number of variants, like the American
M4, based on different engines and armament. The model in use in Normandy,
mainly by the 7th Armoured Division, was the Cromwell IV. This was powered
by a modified Rolls Royce Merlin engine known as the Meteor and was armed
with a 75mm gun based on the British 6-pounder gun modified to fire American
75mm ammunition.
The Cromwell was fast and manoeuvrable, and used the same Christie suspen-
sion as the Russian T34. The Christie system had been offered to the British before
the war but was rejected by the War Office. The Cromwell had a low profile
and despite some teething troubles was mechanically reliable. However, it was
never fpal with crews - a particular weakness was the lay doured hoot
