pg_0033.pdf:
9.811844 3984
8m ALaas 0600 hrs.
Moon
Sum Sets 1900 hrs.
rises at 8300 hes.
MaRRAX An a provinee of the kingdom of Kent, with
strong revolutionary
tendenoles.
She has, in the past,
sivon considerable trouble; and on
moro than one occasion
the armed forgos of the Crown have hud
to be enlled
restore low and order.
append commian one corelan gold, and inoited by
agitators, called a lightoning stelke.
thie was Collowed,
that sene evening by a suggesstul pevolution which plaood
the industelal port of the Island in their honie.
The moon's Zelige was destroged at maniaht and such
forges as wore nt the lisposal of the zovolution ry londers
wore disposed in this aros.
the Kenbish inbinet met on July 11th, and decided that
againat the rebels,
in Shoppey might well spread to the minioni.
Governent atrorut zeported that at loon on July 11ch
disturbancos sui
general moronent sooned to be limited to the
Worth and Rest of the Island,
and that as prosont no marual
conditions could be obsarred South und Sale of BIS20k.
SPECIAL IDEA+
About ton time on 11 July 1936 Lt-Col. HARHIS Condg•
1/Komt Rifles was in his tent
in the mi. Camp at SETTLIUBOURNE,
mon he was visited by Brig. Al BECKERE Condg. 1 KENT Edo. who
had motored from his lad. at GANTIlBURY,
The Brigadior, after firet giving the lateot news of the
SHEPPEX povolt Issued the following inatructions i-
"You have been placed in com and of a striking force composed of
the following unite beuidos your ow in.
34 ad. Bty•
NEMENOTON.
Dno Goy. & Bel. Bae.
HON IXBOURTS
One Inf, set of Folling Boat Squipment
with an important tast of
securing the ferry at MARTY PaRIX and
holding the crossing until I can arrive with my Bde. tomorrow.
1 ahail empoot to be thoro by 1800 bre.
Peon what I can learn
you will not have any atrong forces against you, as the rebele
nave not got had much Collowing in the Baot of the Island, onc
on their armed tos. vill
be watching the QuEENS Finit bridge
the Mascal egis or the Aruda f. Zeonenry bave gone ovor to thi
abola after aundering many loyal officers and 8.0,00., but
think you stand a vami good clance of
settlos across the Shal
unmolented - but ov ry moment in of vital importance.
The OsaGe Ub3.s
0. Coyes
Pd, Bty. and Pd. P6x
Coy • have been
mered to n8e6
you here and anould be arriving at any sonant.
Remember we've got to hit these rebale hard und soon, or the
hole acuntry may
your effort
to-night,
may a pee to soon of treate a divance
altlaste quashing of the rebollion.
Got a nove on with your alon noving unite and remember that the
Pron OILLINOHAM though sono diatance ory, are sechanizod.
No. 3. Sqn. Kalal, +111 coraper-be v16h you.
eLephone passage received from lala CAME DUE 1-
"Information received from reliable source reports one flight
Landed in fog at morgonoy landing ground
in ignorance of Rebellion.
Acroplanas have been
by Rebels and may be axpectad to be operating againat you........"
(Lasuod at 1630 hrs. 11 July 1936.)

