pg_0002.pdf:
ntments (Sec. 36), and
nd his representatives.
my, war duties will be
• NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.-
-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
(S.D.1),
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret...
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service
co-operation which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(ili) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174),
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
ay of mobilisation or
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
subordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above)
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
(See F.S.R., Volume II),
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon for
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies of
the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/c
н.Q
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information or
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the te
instructions regarcing War
summares
are
contained in
Regs.,
and the Staff
Diaries will be en
If this
not available,
and for Intelligence Summaries
cover will be prepared in manuscript
Month and Year. June 194+
Place
Date
Hour
- WAR DIARY
Field
D Day
D + 1
Summary of Events and Information
1 Jun
2 Jun
A Sqn and 1 Tp. B Sqn enharked on ISts at GOSPORT
LAD and 3 Fitters M.]4 Half Tracks embarked on ISIs at GOSPORT.
The remainder of the regt embarked on IcIs at GOSPORI..
4 Jun
embarked on HNS LOCUST, 9 Bde HQ Ship•
Owing to a gale warningthe sailing was postponed for 24 hrse
5 Jun
Ito DoS. BELIMAN RHQ Ip Idr was disembarked suffering from boils.
The convoy sailed for France at 1730 hrs.
6 Jun 1315
1412
ICTs came under fire ff enemy coast guns.
The craft withdrew out of range.
Icts touched down and commenced to nove across the beach to the assembly.
Arrived in Assembly Are Tenkos dewaterproofed and took up posns as plarmed.
1730
Enemy posns as follows: - in strength in CRESSERONS,
and being reinforced.. Inemy still in HUMMAN and CROSSINY, also elements..
in OUISTROHAM®
21. Pz Div has been identified as being in the area.
2735
B"Sqn has adv ups in the outskirts of LION-SUR-MIR Four PV.Of 726 Gr. Regt
716 Inf Div have been captured by 4 1p.
Lt. GOODWIN was wounded when
mounting MaJ MATTHEWS. Tank to give him informetion.
1930
A San arrived in assembly area and
i over B Sgn posns. 1 Tp A Sqr
destroyed one enemy half tracked carrier, © Sga moved to area 070770.
Destroyed one A Ik gun believed to be 88 un and two light AA posns. C Sgn
in this operation lost one Sherman and two met..
2015
2130
Regt ordered to move via HHRMANVILLE and COLVILLE to a concentration area
at 084779.
Moved to new post.
Arrived in new posn.
7 Jun
Quiet undisturbed night.
04 Peed Sea tot die bed mehte of hidea ground Off vata a view to
taking up posns there.
M3524/1218 1200M 10/11 H.B. & Co.Ltd. 51-1541)
ORIGINAL
Unit.
East Riding Yeomany
Army Form C. 2118.
Commanding Officer Ito Col. T.C. WL
AMSON
280.
References to Appendices
V
V.
"WAR DIARIES SEOTION
1 AUG 1944
G. Ha. 2nd Echelor

