70
Supplying War
That the Grande Armée suffered enormous losses during its
march to Moscow is true, as is the fact that hunger and its con-
sequences - desertion and disease - played a large part in causing
these losses. It would, however, be unwise to attribute this solely
to the problems of supply. The need to protect enormously long
lines of communication and to leave garrisons behind, and the
effect of distance per se were also factors of major importance. As
regards the army's material losses, there is reason to believe that
much if not most of the equipment abandoned on the way to
Moscow was later retrieved.8o
In 1812 Napoleon's main force
marched 600 miles, fought two maior battles (at Smolensk and
at Borodino) on the way, and still had a third of their number
left when entering Moscow. In 1870, as in 1914, the Germans,
operating over incomparably smaller distances, in very rich
country and supported by a supply organization that became the
model for all subsequent conquerors,
reached Paris and the
Marne respectively with only about half of their effectiveness.
Compared with these performances, excellent as they were, the
French Army of 1812, for all its supposedly worthless service of
supply, did not do too badly.
In reading modern accounts of Napoleon's logistic system, one
comes across so many misunderstandings that the question as to
their origins inevitably presents itself. That only a first class writer
could have
given rise to these errors is beyond question. The
threads of investigation in fact point to the greatest military cri-
tic of all time, Clausewitz. It is not altogether surprising that he
should be the source of these errors, for the Prussian's whole doc-
trine was based on the assumption that Napoleonic warfare was
qualitatively different and represented an entirely new depar-
ture. It
was, after all, Clausewitz
who called the Emperor
'the God of War', and who invented the term 'absolute war' in
order to describe what he believed to be the essence of his
system.
Clausewitz assumed as a matter of course that a revolution in
warfare as fundamental as that effected - in his view - by Napoleon
could not have taken place without an equally profound change
in the logistic methods employed, and this led him to invent
an army which did without magazines, lived off the country,
'An army marches on its stomach'
71
paid no attention to considerations of supply and sometimes
seemed to grow
wings in its marches from one European
capital to another. That this picture was exaggerated, contem-
poraries were well aware. Writing about the campaign of 1805,
the much-maligned Bülow rightly observed that the French army
had never been able to do entirely without magazines and attri-
buted its speed of movement less to any freedom from logistic
shackles than to the absence of heavy baggage." If an excuse for
Clausewitz can nevertheless be found in the fact that he was so
close to the events and thus lacked perspective, this does not
apply to modern historians, especially as they have shown Napo-
leonic warfare - his strategy, tactics, organization etc. - to be the
logical outcome of progressive developments originating in the
previous thirty or forty years. e2 That the only aspect of Napoleon's
operations which, to this day, is believed to have been not merely
completely original but actually regressive in comparison with
earlier practice is remarkable and should in itself have led to
second thoughts.
In this chapter, we have deliberately concentrated on the two
campaigns representing the extremes of Napoleonic warfare -
the unprecedentedly
successful war of 1805 on one hand, the
disastrous one of 1812 on the other. We saw that, during the
former, the French managed without either magazines or a well-
organized transport service because there was insufficient time to
set them up. We saw also that the number of vehicles with which
Napoleon originally intended to provide his army was exactly
similar, in proportion to its numerical strength, to that accom-
panying the forces of the much maligned 'unfortunate General
Mack'. The fact that he did not succeed in getting hold of this
quantity of wagons or in manufacturing the provisions necessary
to fill them compelled Napoleon to change his plans and shift the
direction of his advance from a poor,
thinly-inhabited part of
Germany to another that was richer and offered more resources.
In this respect, far from being free from the tyranny of logistics,
Napoleon's practice was similar to that of Wallenstein and Gusta-
vus Adolphus 170 years previously.
Having arrived in Ulm, however, the Emperor realized that he
would not be able to go on in the same way. He therefore organ-
ized a transport service on an unprecedentedly large scale, and
his provisions for its establishment may well be regarded as a
model of their kind. He caused huge magazines to be set up in
MAN LIBRARY
FRINITY
