74
Supplying War
requisitioning, and this was, of course, suspended again as soon
as was practicable and opportune.
Given this dependence on the country it is not surprising that
Napoleon's forces, like their eighteenth-century predecessors, ran
into logistic trouble whenever they stayed for too long in any given
place. This was the case round Mantua in 1796, during the enforced
pause before the battle of Austerlitz in 1805, when the army was
confined in Löbau in 1809, and during the stay at Moscow. How-
ever, perhaps the most revolutionary aspect of Napoleon's system
of warfare was precisely that he usually knew how to prevent
such pauses from taking place, that he was able to go straight on
from strategic march to battle and then to pursuit, and that he
avoided sieges. How right he was to do this is also demonstrated
by the experiences of his marshals in Spain, where geographical
circumstances
made siege-warfare inevitable and where one
French army after the other accordingly suffered from starvation.
There were many factors that gave rise to the unprecedented
momentum that enabled the French armies to do what their pre-
decessors had normally failed to do, namely to march from one
end of Europe to the other, destroying everything in their way.
These included the corps d'armée system which, by dispersing
the army's units, made it easier to feed them from the country;
the absence of baggage (more important, this, in hampering the
movements of eighteenth-century armies than any supposed de
pendence on supply from magazines); the existence of a regular
apparatus responsible for
making requisitions;
the fact that
Europe
was now more densely populated than previously (this
is stressed, and rightly so, by Geza Perjes); and, to quote Napoleon's
explanation,
the sheer size of the French armies which
made it possible to bypass fortresses instead of stopping to be-
siege them. In the final account however, none of step material'
factors adequately accounts for Napoleon's sues these suggests
that, even in a study so mundane as the present, the role of genius
should not be underestimated.
3
When demigods rode rails
Supply from Napoleon to Moltke
Scarcely had the guns of Waterloo fallen silent than soldiers
everywhere began the process
of studying
and analysing
Napoleon's campaigns with an eye to learning from them lessons
for the future. Since the mobility of the French armies throughout
the revolutionary period was legendary and universally recog-
nized as a crucial factor in their success, the problem of logistics
was subjected to a particularly searching examination, a process,
indeed, which had started several years previously as comman-
ders strove to imitate Napoleon's methods ad hoc.
Thus, for
example, the establishment of wagons, pack horses and baggage
authorized to Austrian formations was
drastically cut down as
early as 1799-1800, and again after the defeats of 1805, with the
result that, in the campaign of 1809, the Austrians were able to
match the marching performances of the French for the
time.? Again, on their way from Saxony to the Rhine in 1813, the
allies showed that they had absorbed some of the lessons taught
by the great Corsican.
Following this attempt to study and emulate Napoleonic logis-
tics it did not take long for two opposed schools to appear. Of
these, one is perhaps best represented by André de Roginat, a
French officer who had taken part in the Emperor's wars and
who publishe who had toes on them as early as 1816? In a
chapter entitled Des grandes operations de la guerre offensive en
Europe', Roginat sublected Napoleon's administrative arrangis
ments to a scathing criticism and reached the conclusion that his
ultimate failure was due shove all +o the inadequate attention he
paid to the lines of communication. In Rosinat's view. strategic
penetration deen into the enemy's country was all very well as long
as it was carried out by small armies. Modern forces, however,
