68
Supplying War
end put to the troops' marauding. All our sources agree that the
country became more abundant the closer one got to Moscow,
which, together with the (justified) hope that the Russians would
not give up their capital and holy city without a fight, was prob-
ably why Napoleon went there instead of terminating the cam-
paign at Vitebsk.
The above facts also dispose of the attempt, recently made," to
refute Clausewitz's objections to Pfuel's plans for the defence of
Russia and show that the latter were correct after all. That Pfuel
relied on the logistic wisdom of the age is undeniable, but this in
itself is not enough to prove him right. The plan's main fault was
that the camp at Drissa was too close to the frontier, and would
surely have been reached by the Grande Armée regardless of the
economic circumstances on the way; that more than a few day'
starvation were needed to put France's troops off the scent was
demonstrated time after time throughout the wars of the Revolv-
tion and the Empire. As it was, Napoleon's army in 1812 suc-
ceeded in reaching Borodino in sufficiently good order to beat
both the Russian armies combined, despite the enormous dis-
tances and logistic problems involved. What would have been the
fate of Barclay de Tolly's troops had they waited for the Emperor
behind their trenches at Drissa is only too easy to imagine.
While bad discipline did, as we saw, play a crucial role in the
failure of the campaign, the arguments attacking the French
army's technical proficiency appear largely unfounded. It may be
true that Napoleon reduced the supply of his army over the 200
miles closest to the frontier to an arithmetical problem, not tak-
ing sufficient account of the ubiquitous 'friction' of war,
though
it must be remembered that he had to make his calculations for
the campaign on the basis of inadequate information. That the
quality of the French train-personnel left something to be desired
is certainly shown by the surviving evidence, but then this was
due above all to the difficult circumstancest? and not to any lack
of experience, for the train-organization had by this time been in
existence for five years.
Above all, the claim that the French
troops and commanders did not know how to live off the country
is utterly ridiculous and unworthy of its author; their expertise in
this field was deservedly famous and indeed had reached such
heights that it helped them, within the unprecedently
brief
period from 1800 to 1809, to overrun all Europe and set up an
Empire the like of which the world had never seen.
100 miles
Russia
Bobri
Grand Duchy
Wars aw
BALTIC
•Stettin Pr us s/i a
Austria
4. The Campaign of 1812
SOLLEGE
RAMAN LI
