38
Supplying War
country to the contractors, whose depredations were such that
armies could starve even in the richest territories. 80
If long, rapid marches were comparatively rare, and if military
critics insisted on the need to base any campaign on long
prepared magazines, this stemmed not from any inability - much
less, unwillingness - to live off the country but from the fact that
late seventeenth- and eighteenth-century warfare concentrated
above all on sieges. This in turn was due, partly to a military
system (the standing army) that made soldiers too expensive to be
lightly risked in battles. partly to a conception which regarded
war primarily as a politico-economic (as distinct from moral or
ideological) instrument aimed at the attainment of definite, con-
crete objectives, and partly to the fact that, unless the enemy de-
cided to stand and fight, a strategic march deep into his country
was likely to hit thin air. Add to this the extraordinary power of
a town fortified by Coehorn or Vauban, and the fact that for-
tresses are by nature unable to run away, and the reasons why
sieges were so frequent, and rapid marches so relatively few, will
become apparent.
Had an army of, say, 100,000 men, wanted to bring up all its
supplies for the duration of the campaign - usually calculated as
180 days - from base, the resulting burden on the transportation
system would have been so great as to make all waatare utterly
impossible.
Calculations as to
quantities that would be
needed in such a case were sometimes made, 80 but, there is no
indication that they ever constituted more than a theoretical exer-
cise.
To even imagine that the huge quantities of fodder that
were required by the 60,000 horses which accompanied such a
force could ever be brought up from base borders on the ridicu-
lous.
That logistics did exercise an influence on the two centuries of
warfare under discussion is of course true, but this influence had
little if anything to do with supposed 'umbilical cords of supply'
restricting the movements of armies. Rather, the problem facing
commanders from the Thirty Years' War onward consisted pre-
cisely in that armies, with their hordes of retainers, had grown
too
large to remain for long at any one place; like the Flying
Dutchman, they were forever doomed to wander from one loca-
tion to another. Under such conditions, some of the most famous
marches of the age - notably that of Prince Eugene from the
Tyrol through Venice into Lombardy in 1701 - really consisted of
The background of two centuries
39
'Aights forward' and were carried out for no better reason than
that, since money for magazines was not forthcoming, it was im-
possible to sit still.®1 Furthermore, these conditions turned every
one of the many sieges that had to be undertaken into a race
against time. It was in order to solve this problem, not to secure
any increased mobility, that Le Tellier and Louvois first set up
their system of supply magazines.
In this they were successful,
yet we have seen that the magazines never contained, nor could
contain, more than a fraction of the army's needs, and that French
troops on the march continued to live off the country as a matter
Finally, in one sense, the whole concept of supply from base
was contrary to the spirit of the age, which always insisted that
war be waged as cheaply as possible - an age, indeed, when wars
could be launched for the sole purpose of making the army live at
one's neighbour's expense rather than one's own. To imagine that
rulers as parsimonious as Frederick II ever took away from their
own country a single thaler that could possibly have been stolen
from another is to misunderstand, not merely the eighteenth cen-
tury but the very nature of that horrible and barbaric business,
war. This fact, no mere 'enlightenment' has to date done much to
correct.
vast mends
