12
Supplying War
Estates General had now had enough of his aimless manoeuvring;
they categorically forbade this move, and Maurice settled down
to besiege Grave. 1° It has been claimed that Spain failed to con-
quer the Northern Netherlands because there were too many
rivers; on their side, the Dutch made no headway in Belgium
because there were not enough of them.
Even those commanders who did not bother overmuch with
the state of their supplies, however, were dependent on the rivers
to some extent because of the enormous weight of the artillery of
the period. For example, in the artillery of Maurice of Nassau,
who among other things was a great artilleryman, the heaviest
pieces - the so-called Kartouwen - weighed about 5k tons and
had to be taken apart for transportation. Even so, they required
no less than thirty horses each, of which perhaps twenty to thirty
per cent were expected to die annually of exhaustion. A modest
artillery train consisting of six half-cannon, each with its 100
rounds of ammunition,
required about 250 horses to draw the
guns proper, as well as the wagons loaded with shot, powder,
tools and engineering materials of all kinds." Normally, the
artillery required twice the time to cover a given distance than
the army as a whole, giving rise to complex order-of-march prob-
lems on both the advance and the retreat. Not all contemporaries
were content with this state of affairs. Maurice's cousin, Johan of
Nassau, was but one among many who made practical proposals
to lighten the artillery. More important were the efforts of
Gustavus Adolphus, with whom this problem became something
of an obsession. To solve it he abandoned the super-heavy
murbräcker, had the barrels shortened and their thickness re-
duced, and also introduced a series of ultra-light pieces, the most
famous (if not most effective) of which was the leather gun.
Though these reforms made it possible to reduce the number of
horses and wagons accompanying the artillery by almost fifty
per cent they did not, as we shall see, free his strategy from the
limitations imposed by the relative immobility of the artillery;
nor did they prove lasting, and after his death heavier cannon
were again cast in Sweden. 18
To sum up, the fundamental logistic facts of life upon which
seventeenth-century commanders based their strategy were as
follows. First, in order to live, it was indispensable to keep mov-
ing. Second, when deciding on the direction of one's movements,
it was not necessary to worry overmuch about maintaining con-
The background of two centuries
13
tact with base. Third, it was important to follow the rivers and, as
far as
possible, dominate their courses. All three principles are
well illustrated by the career of Gustavus Adolphus, whose opera-
tions are generally believed to have been more purposeful than
most and are used to demonstrate everything from the importance
of having a base to the virtues of the indirect approach.
In fact,
logistics determined his course of action from the moment he
landed at Peenemünde in July 1630. Indeed, were it not for the
fact that supply difficulties
prevented the Imperialist general,
Conti, from concentrating his superior force against him, the
landing might not have been possible at all. Even though the
King's army numbered only 10,000 men, he found it impossible to
feed it in devastated Pomeranial® and had to expand his base
first. To this end he moved this way and that without any
apparent strategic aim, taking towns as he went and providing
each with a garrison. The process gradually enlarged the area
from which he could draw for supplies. However, it also proved
self-defeating in that, the more numerous the fortresses besieged
or otherwise taken, the more troops had to be found to hold them
down. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that he took
until the spring of next year before he was able to collect a field
army of any size and start operations in earnest.
Having eaten up whatever was left to be had in Pomerania,
Gustavus Adolphus felt the need, during the winter of 1630-1, of
expanding his base still further. 20 Since not even
his artillery
could be moved except by water, he had the choice of two routes,
either reaching west and southwest in order to get to the Elbe or
marching south up the Oder. He tried, but failed, to do the first,
and then set out to add Brandenburg to his area of supply. It
was during this period that the King,
whose promises had in-
duced the
citizens of Magdeburg to rebel against the Imperial
authority, should have gone to the town's aid. However, he could
not do this as long as he did not possess the fortresses of Küstrin
and
Spandau, respectively
guarding the
confluences of the
Wartha with the Oder and the Spree with the Havel. These all-
important waterways could only be secured by negotiations with
the Elector Georg
Wilhelm. By the time they had been thus
secured, however, Magdeburg had fallen.
Almost a year had now passed since the King's landing in
Peenemünde, and throughout this period he had lived much as
did all other armies, at the country's expense. On 18 July we find
