5097706
Deca
LINI SUVAN
212
Supplying War
Another factor which prevented the shortcomings of the
logistic apparatus from exercising too negative an influence was
the planners' overestimate of consumption. This resulted partly
fact that tactical progress
slower than
expected - by D + 19 the Allied lodgement covered only about ten
per cent of its anticipated area. With distances limited to no more
than a few dozen miles in any direction, vehicles consumed only
a fraction of the POL provided for them. How inaccurate the
planners were is illustrated by the fact that, although unloading
on the Continent continued to lag somewhat behind expectations
throughout the months of June and July, it actually proved
possible to land additional divisions ahead of schedule from
If the slow unfolding of tactical operations reduced consump-
tion of some supplies, it also caused problems in other felds.
Thus, expenditure of ammunition - particularly small arms, hand
and mortar bombs - in the Normandy bocage was
heavier than expected, as were losses in ordnance. Storage space
was hard to come by so that camouflage and dispersion often had
with. The volume of vehicular traffic in the
shallow lodgement caused congestion and was soon to lead to
the deterioration of the relatively few roads available. Though the
railway network in Normandy was captured, against expecta-
'almost intact''4 rail-traffic was uneconomical owing to the
small distances involved. The fact that the front was only some
twenty miles away from the beaches gave rise to friction between
COMZ and the Armies, since the latter were naturally reluctant
to relinquish control over their supplies in favour of the former.
Friction also arose between COMZ and ADSEC, with the result
that the former's transfer to the Continent was carried out ahead
While it is therefore true that the slow unfolding of tactical
operations in June and July 1944 caused some logistic problems,
the net effect nevertheless was to create a lodgement area that
was packed with troops and supplies. On the eve of operation
'Cobra', the breakout at Avranches, there were confined within
the space of 1,570 square miles 19 American and 17 British divis-
ions totalling a million and a half men, with supplies for the
former alone averaging 22,000 tons a day. Though almost 90 per
cent of this tonnage was still being discharged over the beaches,
it was already clear that Cherbourg, once opened, would easily
War of the accountants
213
exceed the cautious estimates of its capacity made before D day. 18
Owing to the small distances, reserves
of POL reached un-
high levels while the state of ammunition supply
improved dramatically during the lull in the fighting that pre-
ceded the breakoutle Yet amidst this cornucopia Allied supply
officers continued to worry, making gloomy forecasts of shortages
that were expected to materialize in the fall (when the weather
would make the unloading of supplies over the beaches imprac-
ticable) and thinking of fresh variants of plans whose purpose it
was to acquire the Brittany ports after all.
Uncomfortable about the
of supplies in Normandy,
General Lee of COM tended to regard the continuation of
operations in France with greater pessimism still. As originally
conceived, the logistic plans for 'Overlord' had been based on the
assumption that the Wehrmacht would fight a systematic defen-
sive campaign, putting up resistance along one river line after the
other. This in turn was expected to result in an Allied advance
almost as slow and deliberate as that of 1918. While logistic
support for this advance would have to be furnished mainly by
motor transport (it was thought that up to seventy-five per cent
of the railway network in France would be out of action due to
either German demolitions or attacks by Allied aircraft) its rate
would be sufficiently low to make it possible to leapfrog the rail-
ways from one river to the next. Supplies would thus proceed in
an orderly manner from beach (or artificial harbour, or port) to
railhead and from there to truckhead and Army dump. Operating
in this way, the Allies hoped to reach the Seine by D + 90 and the
German border around D +360.
In the event, tactical developments assumed a very different
form. By 25 July - D +49 - the Allies were still only holding the
line they had hoped to reach on D + 15. If the Seine was to he
reached on schedule the distance between it and this line would
therefore have to be covered in forty-one days instead of seventy-
five as olanned. A staff study, aimed at finding out whether such
an acceleration was possible, was ordered by the SHAEF G-4
(supply officer), General Crawford, but concluded that it could
not be done, for a deficit of no less than 127 quartermaster truck
D+90 and serious
(GTR) companies was to be expected on
logistic difficulties encountered even as early as D +80. This was
a very pessimistic view indeed of logistic capabilities.
Fortunately for the Allies, a decisive leader took charge of the
