92
Supplying War
each consisting of a commander and 50-100 men, including 10-20
specialists - who were attached to the three Armies operating in
the field. All served tolerably well, but proved wholly inadequate
for the magnitude of the task. In particular, labour was lacking
to complete the line Berlin-Görlitz, as well as to build emergency
lines round the fortresses of Josephstadt and Königgrätz. All
supplies had to be run over the single line Dresden-Görlitz-
Reichenberg-Turnau, with results that have been described in
previous
section. 45 In 1870,
the number of railway-
detachments had been increased to five (including a Bavarian
one), each just over 200 men strong and commanded by a
höherer Eisenbahntechniker, who also served as adviser on rail-
way questions to the General-Etappeninspekteurs. '* In the early
stages of the campaign, however, these preparations proved not
so much inadequate as irrelevant. Well-trained and well-equipped
as the railway troops might be, they were powerless to do any.
thing against the French fortresses barring the way, particularly
that of Toul. True, as one historian has written, reducing this and
other fortresses 'was only a matter of time and concentration"',"
but in spite, or perhaps because, of this it was not achieved until
25 September, when the French regular armies had already vir-
tually ceased to exist and Moltke's forces were approaching the
gates of Paris. That the reduction of Toul was not allowed higher
priority was, therefore, itself an indication of the fact that the
Prussians found it possible to make do perfectly well without any
great need for the railways.
Meanwhile, after a somewhat muddled start, the Franco-
Prussian War was developing into one of the most spectacular
campaigns of all time. After Spicheren, there came Froeschwiller
and
Vionville-Mars-la-Tour,
following
which
Bazaine
160,000 French troops found himself penned up at Metz. Having
won this victory, the German II Army med pied in two; four
of its corps were left behind to invest Metz, while the remaining
three were designated the Army of the Meuse and sent to the
northwest in order to help fight the other part of the French army,
now concentrating around Sedan. There followed, on 18 August,
the battles of
Gravelotte and Saint-Privat. By 1 September,
Napoleon III had been surrounded at Sedan, and two days later
he surrendered. The way to Paris was now open.
Having been compelled by the configuration of the railway net-
work to open the campaign on a broad front without any very
Roulsane
Frankfurt
start of the Stage of Pates the
Carlsruhe
uthArmy
trachoura
Sabson
_Pont-à-Mousson
I Frouard
Nancy.
Switzerland
5. The War of 1870-1
