MANAM LIBRAR
RINITY
GOLLEGE
232
Supplying War
army to be and when; it takes much knowledge and hard
work to know where you can place your forces and whether
you can maintain them there. A real knowledge of supply
and movement factors must be the basis of every leader's
plan; only then can he know how and when to take risks
with those factors, and battles are won only by taking risks.
The history of logistics has been divided into periods according
Following the tradition originating in
Clausewitz and Moltke, some writers have identified three distinct
periods of logistic history in modern times, based on the supply
systems used. The first of these comprises the age of standing
armies, when military forces were magazine-fed,
embraces Napoleonic
predatory' warfare, and the third, opening
in 1870-1, is marked by a system of continuous supply from base.
Variations on this classification have occasionally been produced,
e.g. by one authority who regards the Etappen system as essen-
tially a modification of the rolling magazine of the eighteenth
century'? This implies that the development of logistics was,
apart from a short and regressive period around the beginning of
the nineteenth century, a smooth and continuous process.
Alternatively, inquiring into the causes behind the successive
developments in logistics, other authors have concentrated on the
technical means of transportation employed. This made it possible
to divide the history of warfare into neatly compartmentalized
periods: the age of the horse-drawn wagon was succeeded by that
of the railway, which in turn was superseded by that of the motor
Though each of these methods of transportation had is
own characteristic qualities and limitations, the overall trend was
nevertheless towards carrying ever greater loads at ever higher
speeds. With the exception of Napoleonic practice, the develop-
ment of logistics could be pictured as a continuous process.
In the light of our investigation of the details of the logistics
systems employed during the last century and a half, there does
not appear to be much accuracy in either of these classifications.
The image of eighteenth-century warfare as magazine-fed, its
movements shackled by its own supply apparatus, is largely false.
Napoleon, far from regressing to more primitive methods, in fact
made more extensive use of his predecessors' normal practice and
ended up by constructing what was by far the most comprehen-
sive system of supply the world had ever seen. Pace Molike and
Logistics in perspective
233
the demigods, the arrival of the railways and the Etappen system
did not effect any revolution in the supply of mobile operations,
with the result that, even as late as 1914, the German troops were
expected to live off the country and actually did so. Seen as an
exercise in more or less well-organized plunder, the history of war-
fare from Wallenstein to Schlieffen forms an easily-recognizable
whole. The period is characterized above all by the fact that arr
could only be fed as long as they kept moving. Once they came
halt in front of either Mons (1692) or Metz (1870), however,
experienced immense difficulties, which had to be overcome
resorting to 'artificial' means. This was so even in 1914, as Germ
troops investing Antwerp found to their cost. 3
If this continuity was finally broken in 1914, this was due not s
much to any sudden humanization of war, as to the fact that, follow
ing the enormous rise in the consumption of ammunition and other
prerequisites of war (including,
for the first time,
motor fiel
armies found themselves no longer able to take the majority
their supplies away from the country. Whereas, even as late as 1571
ammunition had formed less than 1 percent of all supplies
tons were expended as against 792,000 tons of food and fodd
consumed, in the first months of World War I the proportion
ammunition to other supplies was reversed,
and by the end
World War i subsist sue accounted for only eight to twelve fet
cent of all supplies.
These new demands could only be met
continuous replenishment from base. Thus it now became relately
easy to support an army while it was standing still, almost impose
ble to do so when it was moving forward fast. It is not suprising that
it took time for this reversal of all previous notions to be inde stone
Until the problems thus generated could be overcome, a type a
warfare evolved which, precisely because the railways could
replace the horsed wagon,
entailed supplies and sometimes
troops, being kept in the same place for literally years on
Huge quantities of supplies (e.g, one-and-a-half million shels is
the single offensive launched by the British on the Somme
1916) were brought up the front, dumped at the railheads
could never again be moved forward, backward or laterally.
180 *
far greater extent than in the eighteenth century, strategy became
an appendix of logistics.
The products of the machine
shells.
bullets,
fuel, sophisticated engineering materials had finally
superseded those of the field as the main items consumed by
