106
Supplying War
Austria. Unlike modern historians, Moltke recognized this fact,
and it led him to the logical conclusion that his order of priorities
was right. This, of course, was proved to be the case in 1870. The
advancing Prussian forces simply bypassed the fortresses, and not
until the mobile phase of the campaign was over did the latter
turn into serious obstacles.
Another aspect of the war of 1870 about which many writers
have been mistaken is the alleged superiority of the German rail-
way system over the French one. Exactly how this erroneous
opinion originated I am unable to discover, as there is not the
slightest evidence in its favour. Since the German railways are
supposed to have played such a large role in the victory, most
historians seem to assume that they must have been superior in
some way. This, however, was not the case. On practically every
account, the French railway system in 1870 was actually better
than the German one.
This was even more true of the military
aspect than of the civilian one, for political factors made it easier
for France than for Germany to take strategic considerations into
account. During the 1860s, therefore, it was thought that nowhere
did the French enjoy as great an advantage as on precisely this
point,? In any case, as had been recognized long previously, the
distinction between a 'civilian' and a strategic' railway network
is largely unreal: 7e
While every State will undoubtedly hesitate to undertake
the expense lof constructing military railways]. it will
naturally try to accelerate the traffic of people and goods
in the directions dictated by the density of the
population and the volume of trade. However, these
directions, these routes of traffic and commerce, are usually
- indeed, almost invariably - identical to the lines of
operations of armies.
That these sensible words could be written by the Bavarian
minister of war in 1836, when experiments with the military use
of railways had hardly begun, is a sad testimonial to the readi-
ness of many historians to copy each other's words without giving
the slightest thought to the evidence on which it is based.
It is true that great difficulties were experienced by the Ger-
mans in using the railways for military purposes during the cam-
paign, yet the problems experienced in transporting supplies from
When demigods rode rails
107
the railheads to the troops were probably greater still. To over-
some attempts were made to use road steam-
but without much success. Since the engines were
only able to use good roads, they were frequently forced to make
large detours. Their ability to negotiate slopes was limited, and
they were slow and difficult to manoeuvre. Road locomotives
were used to bypass the fortress of Toul, to circumvent the
demolished tunnel at Nanteuil on the railway from Nancy to
Paris, and to go round the destroyed bridge at Donchery (this
attempt broke down completely, the cargo finally reaching its
destination with the aid of forty-six horses, eleven drivers and
twenty-five pioneers). There were seven other attempts,
marked by breakdowns and a tremendous waste of time, since the
loads transported, usually railway locomotives, were too heavy to
be carried in one piece and had to be dismantled, transported and
finally reassembled at the point of destination. That these experi-
ments did not give rise to any great enthusiasm is understand-
able. ?7
Given the failure of the train service to discharge its proper
function, the entire German campaign of 1870-1 was only made
possible by the fact that France is, after all, one of the richest
agricultural countries in Europe, and that the war started in a
favourable season of the year. For much of the mobile phase of
operations, the Germans were therefore able - indeed compelled,
bu the failure of their sunoly annaratus - to live off the country
much as Napoleon's soldiers had done seventy years earlier. In
this, they were helped by the fact that Europe had grown far
richer since 1800, and if eighty people per square mile were con-
sidered very good in 1820 the average in 1870 was nearer 120.
The size of armies had of course also risen, but this was largely
offset by the fact that all of Moltke's forces in 1870 were never
concentrated at any single point and were able, following the
French defeats early in the campaign, to spread out their corps
over a wide front. Thus, during the march of II Army from Metz
to the Loing, it was estimated that the country traversed had no
less than 100,000 tons of flour and 100,000 of fodder in store,
against a consumption by the army during its passage of only
1,080 and 5,500 tons respectively. As the intendant of II Army
wrote, 'in the enemy's country it is unnecessary to economize as
much as at home' 18
Though it was, therefore, usually possible to feed the Armies
