84
Supplying War
intention of Moltke and the General Staff to deploy the Prussian
army around Görlitz, so as to enable it both to cover Silesia and
to take in flank an Austrian advance through Saxony to Berlin.
The Prussians, however, started mobilizing later than did the
Austrians, and to make up for the delay were compelled to make
use of all five railways leading to their frontier. This resulted in
their forces being deployed on a 200-mile-long arc, and thus
Moltke's subsequently celebrated 'strategy of external lines was
born, not because of any profound calculations but as a simple
accident dictated by the logistic factors of the time - space and
the configuration of Prussia's railway system.
As it was, the use of the railways during the war of 1866 could
hardly be regarded as a resounding success. Mobilization, it is
true, proceeded smoothly; in twenty-one days, 197,000 men,
55,000 horses and 5,300 vehicles of all kinds were deployed, and
it is said that an officer visiting Moltke during this period found
him lying on a sofa and reading a book. The subsequent opera-
tion of the railways, however, was far less satisfactory. For the
frst time it became clear that sending subolies to the railheads
was very much easier than getting them from there to the troops.
Having failed to allow for supply trains in the mobilization time-
tables, Moltke made matters worse by taking his railway expert,
von Wartensleben, along to the field. He thereby deprived the
entire system of a central directing hand and made it possible
for the corps quartermasters to rush forward supplies in great
abundance, without taking the slightest notice of the railhead'
ability to receive them, the result being that they became con-
gested and then altogether blocked. Thus, towards the end of
June, it was estimated that no less than 17,920 tons of supplies
were trapped on the lines, unable to move either forward or
backward, while hundreds upon hundreds of railway wagons
were serving as temporary magazines and could not therefore
have been used for the traffic even if the lines had been free to
carry them. While bread went stale, fodder rotted and cattle died
of malnutrition, field commanders were at least free to ignore the
effects of logistics on operations because, as the troops had com-
pletely outrun their supply convoys, all connection between them
and the railways was lost. Between 23 June, when the first for-
mation crossed the Austrian border, and the end of the battle of
Königgrätz, the railways did not, therefore, exercise the slightest
influence on the progress of the campaign. 28
When demigods rode rails
85
After the victory of Königgrätz, the Prussians found that their
inability to make use of the Austrian railways hampered the con-
tinuation of the advance into Austria. On 2 July, Moltke de-
manded that the railway from Dresden to Prague - said to be
'essential...with an eye to our very difficult supply situation' -
be opened at the earliest possible moment, but four days later he
was forced to recognize that his exhortations were having no
effect.* In particular, the fortresses of Königstein,
Theresien-
stadt, Josephstadt and Königgrätz blocked the lines to Barduwitz,
and inquiries as to whether it would be possible to circumvent
them by building emergency lines did not lead to any results
before the campaign ended.25 As it was, the Prussians decided to
ignore the fortresses and march towards Vienna, leaving them
behind, with the result that, during the second part of the cam-
paign also, the railways were unable to exercise the slightest in-
fluence on the course of operations. Meanwhile, the troops lived
by requisitioning, impressing what local transport they could find,
and behaving as if the railways did not exist, which, effectively,
was the case.
In a letter to Bismarck of 6 August 1866, Moltke drew the
following conclusions from this. The campaign, he wrote, had
demonstrated how easy it was to repair minor damage to the
railways: 'the only obstruction of any duration' had been caused
by the fortresses, and the chief of the General Staff therefore re-
commended that Prussia's own railroads should be made to pass
through the perimeters of existing ones whenever possible. How-
ever, this did not mean that more fortresses should be constructed.
The Prussians, after all, had been able to continue their march to
Vienna in spite of the blocking of the railways, and at no time
had the Austrian fortresses become more than a nuisance in their
rear. Consequently it was with rails, not brickwork, that the
future lay. What Moltke neglected to say, however, was that,
from the completion of the
deployment onward, the Prussian
army's railways, and to a lesser extent its train service as well,
had proved a complete failure and were irrelevant to the outcome
of the war.
Whatever part they may have played in the Austrian-Prussian
War, Moltkes railways are almost universally supposed to have
given him a crushing margin of superiority which, four years
later, played a vital role in Germany's defeat of France. A de-
tailed examination of the nlace of loristing - including supply by
