54
Supplying War
wide, the corps ought to have advanced with little friction and in
fact did so apart for some minor incidents - for example, an
error of Berthier's almost sent Davout across Soult's line of march
on 30 September. Two days later the routes of Lannes and Ney
crossed each other as the former pushed from Stuttgart towards
Ludwigsburg. Lannes' corps was so unfortunate as to share a
road with d'Hautpoul's cavalry division preceding it and the
Guard following in its wake. Repeatedly, Murat complained that
Ney was poaching on his preserves. Bernadotte, whose original
itinerary included the city of Frankfurt, was turned away from
there at the last moment, the result being that he had to reach
Würzburg by circuitous roads and so exhausted his troops that
they had to be granted three days' rest upon arrival. Difficulties
were also experienced in feeding the artillery park making up the
army's rear, with the result that convoys had to be sent to it from
Spires. On the whole, however, the army did well enough during
the first ten days. Soult, Lannes and Ney all made large requisi-
tions, and Davout was able not merely to live very well' off the
country but to build himself a reserve of six to nine days in
addition to the 200,000 biscuit rations following his corps of
25,000. Complaints only came from the two corps on the extreme
left wing, whose difficulties probably stemmed from the fact that
Napoleon's orders for biscuits to be baked at Würzburg had been
only partly obeyed. At the same time, the fart Würzbugsed to sell
anything to Bernadotte's men crossing their country, 1* It was to
Bernadotte, too, that Berthier wrote on 2 October: 'as to subsist-
ence,
it is impossible to feed you by magazines. the entire
French army, the Austrian army even, lives off the country'.
As they gradually turned requisitioning into a fine art, the corps
ordonnateurs were able to draw enormous quantities of supplies
from the towns and villages on their way. Thus, for example,
Soult forced Heilbronn and its surroundings - total population
perhaps 15,000-16,000 - to surrender no less than 85,000 bread
sations, 21,000lb. salt, 8,600 bushels of hay, & thon 85,00 of oats.
5,000 pints of wine, 800 bushels of straw and 100 four-horse wagons.
Hall and its district probably had only about 8,000 inhabitants
but
were
nevertheless made to yield
60,000 bread rations,
35,000lb. meat (seventy oxen), 4,000 pints of wine, 100,000 bundles
of hay and straw, 50 four-horse and 100 other carts, as well as 200
horses with harness. Even much smaller places were able to bring
forward truly astounding quantities. For example, Marmont and
'An army marches on its stomach'
55
his 12,000 men stayed for five days in the village of Pfhul (forty
600 inhabitants) and
Bugeaud's famous question to his sister, 'judge for yourself if
10,000 men arriving in a village can easily find enough to eat',
should be answered in the affirmative!
As the army approached the Danube, however, the situation
suddenly worsened, probably reaching its nadir round 9-12
October but slowly improving thereafter.
responsible for this state of affairs, especially the fact that the
enemy was now close at hand which made it impossible to pre-
pare stores in advance. Instead of being centrally organized, the
task of requisitioning devolved on the divisional commissionaires
and sometimes even on individual regiments. This in turn led to
every unit fending for itself, with the cavalry in particular racing
ahead and occupying the villages that had been earmarked for
the infantry and making it almost impossible for the latter to find
any supplies at all. Occasionally instances of gross mismanage-
ment occurred; for example Marmont complained about the
'scandalous behaviour' of one Baron Lienitz, master of the Circle
of Wasstertrudingen, who had caused 20,000 biscuit rations pass-
ing through his territory to be held up. Most important, however,
was the fact that the Grande Armée was now operating in a
relatively restricted area. Its original front, which on 30 Septem-
ber had stretched over more than 100 miles from Freudenstadt to
Würzburg, had contracted to just forty-five on 6 October.
While much has been made of the difficulties afflicting the
army during this period, one should not lose sight of its achieve-
ments. For example, considerable Austrian stores were captured
at Memmingen, Friedberg, Augsburg, Donauwörth and Sald-
münchen where they had apparently been piled up to await the
arrival of the Russian army. Though no corps had been ordered
to take along stocks of fodder we find a total of ninety-eight
wagons loaded with that commodity passing through Heidenheim
on 7 October, of which ffty-four belonged to Ney alone; at one
ton each, this should have been enough to feed his 2,600 horses
for at least two days. At Hall. Davout had requisitioned fodder
for no less than thirty days, and on 10 October Dumas informed
the Emperor that he had just seen 3rd Corps 'beautiful train'
with stores for six days passing through Neuburg. Nor is it entirely
true, as is so often claimed, that Napoleon's armies could only live
as long as they kept moving fast. Although considerable diffculties
