HARAM LIBRARY.
TRINITY
GOLLEGE
208
Supplying War
and extensive sandy dunes. The Bay of Biscay area afforded a
number of good ports but was beyond the range of fighter sup-
port. In their attempts to examine the 3,000 miles of German-
dominated coastline and arrive at the best possible combination
of all the relevant factors, Morgan's men might well have kept
looking forever were it not for two basic considerations. First, it
was imperative to launch the invasion somewhere not too far
away from the Allies' main base in Britain so as to allow the
landing craft and other shipping to turn quickly, a condition
which in itself ruled out both the Mediterranean and Norway,
leaving only the western coasts of France. Second, the landing
sites had to be within reach of the RAF's Spitfire planes operat-
ing from Britain. Taken together, these two factors limited the
choice by about ninety per cent, leaving only north wester
France, either the Pas de Calais or Normandy.
From a strategic point of view, the Pas de Calais presented the
shortest and most direct route into Germany, as well as the oppor-
tunity of cutting off all German forces south of the Seine by
means of a bold thrust eastward to Paris and beyond. On the
other hand, it was also the most heavily defended area, and one
which could be quickly reinforced by means of an excellent road
and railroad network. In finally selecting Normandy, the Allies
settled on an area which, owing to its geographical configuration
as a peninsula jutting westward into the Atlantic, was relatively
easy to isolate from the rest of France. However, this very factor
was equally likely to operate against them in their attempt to
break out after obtaining their initial foothold.
The landing sites having been selected, a comprehensive plan
for logistic support during the first ninety days was worked out.
The plans laid down exactly how many troops would be landed,
where, when, and in what order; the procedures for clearing and
operating the beaches, as well as the places where dumps were
to be established; the point at which one system of unloading
would be replaced by another (e.g. the shift from landing craft
and DUKWs operating over the beaches to Liberty ships coming
from Britain and later to other deep-draft ships sailing directly
from the USA); and even
the moment when one method of
packing would be substituted by another (e.g. the replacement of
jerrycans by bulk POL on D+ 15). To make sure that all these
hundreds of thousands of items would be unloaded at the right
time and place, a rigid order of priorities was worked out, laying
War of the accountants
209
down detailed procedures for the storing, requisitioning, packing,
forwarding and distributing of literally every single nut and bolt.
Since the Allies intended to capture a whole series of ports and
use them for unloading troops and supplies, restoration plans for
more than a dozen of them - including
even those capable
of handling no more than a few hundred tons a day - were
worked out, an attempt being made to determine in advance just
what resources would be needed for the purpose,
where, and
when. This planning was certainly comprehensive, and it is not
surprising that it took all of two years to complete.
In view of the unparalleled scope and thoroughness of the
plans, it might be expected that the victory was due largely to
their successful implementation. This, however, did not prove to
be the case. Within hours of the first landings, all plans for orderly
unloading were brought to nought by the heavy surf and, espec-
ially in the American sector, in face of fierce enemy resistance.
A navigating error led to the landings being carried out in the
wrong place and in the wrong order, with the result that engineer
units preceded the assault parties to the beaches and, consider-
ably reduced in men and material, had to work without the latte's
protection. For several days after D day progress in clearing the
beaches was slow and not enough exit roads could be opened,
with the result that the whole area became hopelessly congested,
a perfect target for the Luftwaffe, had it been able to intervene.
The waterproofing of many vehicles turned out to be inadequate
and numbers of them were lost. Required to make voyages of up
to ten or twelve miles in a choppy sea, overloaded DUKWs ran
out of fuel and sank. Since lorries were in short supply, DUKWs
travelled further inland than would otherwise have been the case,
thus taking longer to turn and performing poorly. Under these
circumstances, supplies unloaded on the beaches during the first
week amounted to only one half of the planners forecast. Short-
ages, particularly in ammunition, quickly developed and made it
necessary to resort to rationing.
While many of the above diffculties were due to the hazards of
combat, some resulted from faulty planning which, in its desire
to ensure that all the components of the logistic machine would
mesh perfectly with each other, was too rigid and too detailed.
Thus, only 100 tons of shipping per day - rather less than one per
cent of the supplies to be unloaded even as early as D+12 -
were set aside for emergency purposes. Provisions for fying in
