7
War of the accountants
GOLLEGE
ПАПАМ
LIBRAR
The pitfalls of planning
In the course of our inquiries so far, we have deliberately con-
centrated on a number of the most spectacular mobile campaigns
of all time, and though some of these ended less happily than
others, there does not appear to have existed any very clear con-
nection between the amount of preparation involved in a cam-
paign and its success or lack of it. For example, Marlborough's
march to
the Danube certainly
entailed incomparably less
administrative difficulties than did the least of Louvois' sieges -
which was probably one reason why he undertook it in the fist
place. Two of Napoleon's most successful campaigns - those of
1805 and 1809 - were launched with almost no preparation at al,
while although his war against Russia was prepared on a scale
and with a thoroughness unequalled in the whole of previous
history,
this did not prevent it from becoming a monumental
failure. In 1870, the Franco-Prussian War came as a surprise
even though military preparations for it had been going on for
years, with the result that there was little connection between the
course of the campaign and Moltke's plans. Nothing daunted, a
generation of staff officers before 1914 spent every minute -
including even Christmas Day - planning the next war down to
the last train axle, yet when war came it was totally unexpected,
and the meticulously prepared plans led to nothing but failure.
Twenty-five years later,
the entire German invasion of Russia
was nothing but a huge feat of improvisation with a preparation
time of barely twelve months - not much in view of the magni-
tude of the problem. Rommel's African expedition was launched
without so much as six-weeks' preparations and with no previous
experience whatsoever, yet is commonly regarded as one of the
most dazzling demonstrations of military skill ever.
War of the accountants
203
Given the very short preparation times allowed to many of
these campaigns, it is not surprising that they had to be conducted
on a logistic
shoestring. Napoleon in 1805 did not succeed in
obtaining even one half of the wagons with which he intended to
equip his army. In August 1914, the outbreak of war caught the
Great General Staff in the middle of a major reorganization
involving the complete overhaul of the gigantic railway deploy-
ment plan.' In 1940, the Wehrmacht's invincible Panzer divisions
consisted, for the most part, of Mark I and II tanks - small
nachines that had never been intended for anything but training
purposes.
Though German equipment was not designed with
desert warfare in mind, much of it proved more suitable to the
North African theatre of operations than anything the
British
possessed. Together with one modern authority, the men who
prepared and conducted these campaigns might have said that
'the central problem of logistic planning' involves the differential
in lead time.? While it might take years to design and perfect a
new piece of equipment, and more years to mass-produce an
existing one, operational - not to mention political - requirements
can change in a matter of weeks or even days. In view of these
facts, the greatest soldiers of all times knew there is a limit to the
length to which planning can, or should, go, and those who did
not recognize this were not normally the most successful.*
Shifting
political
constellations and changing
operational
situations have probably prevented the vast majority of past
commanders from conducting their wars with anything resem-
bling the number and type of resources they would ideally like to
have.
This has meant that commanders have needed certain
personal qualities, such as adaptability, resourcefulness, ability
to improvise, and - above all - determination. Without these
qualities,
even the most clear-sighted commander with the best
analytical brain would be hardly superior to an adding machine.
For him to exercise them,
however, it is necessary to have a
flexible staff and a system of command not made rigid by over-
organization.
Exactly how large the 'brains' of an army should be in compari-
son with its body is not easy to say, but again it must be noted
that there is no obvious correlation between
this factor and
success in the field. Thus, Napoleon's Imperial Headquarters
expanded endlessly until it came to resemble a little army of
10,000 men. Much of this was useless ballast, however, for the
