72
Supplying War
the towns of Bavaria and provided for convoys of wagons and
boats to bring them to the advancing army. If these arrangements
failed to have much effect on the conduct of operations, this was
due above all to the intolerable crowding of such enormous forces
on a very small number of roads. At one stage as we saw, no less
than five corps had to share a single road between them. Under
such conditions any army was doomed to suffer logistic hard-
ships. Even present-day armies with their tens of thousands of
mechanical vehicles® cannot easily solve the problem of supply-
ing such a dense mass of men. If some supplies nevertheless got
through, if the army did not starve, nor the majority of its units
disintegrate, this was due, not to any supposed neglect of logistic
considerations but to a triumph of foresight, organization and
leadership. Such a triumph, however, could only be achieved by
a genius of Napoleon's own calibre, and it is therefore no acci-
dent that, precisely during this period, we find him dozens of
miles behind his advanced spearheads and allowing his care for
logistic organization to seriously interfere with his conduct of
It is scarcely surprising that Napoleon should have rested con-
tent with the military machine - its administrative and logistic ser-
vices included
- that had made a victory of the magnitude of
Austerlitz possible, but he nevertheless took sufficient cognizance
of its shortcomings to order that larger reserves should be carried
along during the subsequent campaigns. In 1807, moreover, he
took a step that was, at the time, revolutionary: for the first time
ever, the Grande Armée was given, in addition to the vehicles
accompanying the troops, a regular train service. This consisted,
no longer of requisitioned and hired vehicles and drivers but of
fully militarized personnel and equipment. Far from reverting to a
more primitive practice, therefore, Napoleon - in this field as in
most others - was ahead of his rivals; that the train service, novel
as it was, did not at first fulfil all expectations is not astonishing.
This brings us to the campaign of 1812. As we saw, the inva-
sion of Russia was not started without adequate preparations; on
the contrary,
Napoleon's measures exceeded anything Louvois
ever dreamt of. Even so, the technical means of the age made it
hopeless even to try and feed the men - much less, the horses -
from base, a fact of which Napoleon was fully aware and which
led him to plan a campaign which, for the most part anyway,
would be won and finished before the defects of his logistic appara-
'An army marches on its stomach'
73
tus would become apparent. In the event, the blunders of his sub-
ordinates - above all his brother, Jerome - made it impossible to
cut off and annihilate even that part of the Russian army which
seemed within his grasp, with the result that he found himself
a Vitebsk - the furthest point to which his logistic system
might, albeit only by means of a supreme effort, have proved
adequate - without having achieved his objective. Faced with the
alternative of either retreating or making another attempt to
force the enemy to battle, the Emperor hesitated, vacillated, and
finally decided in favour of the latter. This was made easier by
the fact that the poorest part of Russia had already been left
behind and that requisitions could be made in a country that
became richer the further east he went. That good results could
be obtained provided discipline was kept is shown by the fact
that the Guard reached the Russian capital virtually intact.
During the advance to Moscow, the train service of the Grande
Armée broke down as Napoleon always expected it would. How-
ever serious its own shortcomings, there can be no question that
this was a consequence of the impossible circumstances, and had
comparatively little to do with the inexperience, indifference or
corruption of the personnel. In 1870, and again in 1914, the Ger-
mans with their immeasurably superior and excellently organized
supply apparatus utterly failed to feed their armies from base and
had to resort to requisitions, in spite of the fact that the distances
involved were smaller by far, the roads available very much
better and more numerous.
Coming now to the actual methods of requisitioning, Napoleon
had at his disposal an unrivalled administrative machine in the
shape of the sposan an uns and the commissionaires de guerre, to
whom he owed a large measure of his success. Perfectly aware of
the harmfuve a large measure requisitioning had on the morale
and discipline of an army, he tried to avoid such a procedure
whenever possible, either by having supplies collected in ad-
vance - as did Marlborough, albeit against ready cash, in 1704 -
or by levying
contributions with which supplies were subse-
quently purchased ri ationas the standard practice of every
eitheenth-century commander. Either way, receipts were given
and accounts kept, even in enemy country, the intention being to
settle with the - hopefully defeated - opponent after the war.
Only in extreme necessity, e.g. during the time when 150,000 men
were massed around Ulm in 1805, did Napoleon resort to 'direct'
