82
Supplying War
good lateral communications between them, whereas the entire
Austrian army had to march by two roads only."7
A joker in the pack
The second half of the nineteenth century was the great age of
the railways, and no part of Moltke's system of warfare has te
ceived so much attention and praise as the revolutionary we
made of this novel means of transportation for military purposes.
Before going on to analyse the role of the railways in the Franco-
Prussian War, therefore, it is necessary to say a word about their
development as an instrument of war and conquest.
As is well known, one of the first to suggest that armies cold
benefit from the utilization of railways was Friedrich List, an
economist of genius who, in the 1830s, foresaw that a well con-
ceived railway net might enable troops to be shifted rapidly from
one point to another hundreds of miles distant, thus multiplying
numbers by velocity and enabling them to concentrate, fit
against one enemy, then against another. Surprisingly enough, the
first to grasp the full military potentialities of this were the Re
sians 28 In I846, they moved a corps of 14,500 men, together with
all its horses and transport, 200 miles from Fradisch to Cracon
in two days by rail. This was followed, four years later, by the
Bohemia, this being perhaps the first time when the railways
Austrians moving 75,000 men from Hungary
and Vienna to
played an important part in international power politics, by help-
ing to bring about the Prussian capitulation at Olmütz. Seven
years subsequently, however,
it was France's turn to give a
startled world an object lesson in the strategic use of railways.
From 16 April to 15 July, 604,381 men and 129,227 horses were
transported by rail, involving all the French lines then in exis-
tence, of whom 227,649 and 36,357 respectively went directly to
the theatre of operations in Italy, 19
In Prussia, by contrast, the idea that the railways might be use-
ful for military purposes at first met with nothing but opposition.
The heirs of Frederick II echoed his saying that good communi-
cations only made a country easier to overrun. Attempts by com-
mercial interests to construct new lines often met with determined
is position on the side of the army, which fe met with desafety of
its fortresses, and a committee set up to deal with the question
concluded, in 1835, that railways would never replace high-
When demigods rode rails
83
roads.20 This kind of thing went on until 1841, when the debate
died down owing to lack of interest.
The Prussian army only began to take a serious interest in
railroads during the revolutions of 1848-9, when moving troops by
road became unsafe. This, together with the revolutionaries re-
peated use of the lines in order to make good their retreat, finally
ed to a volte face. Progress was slow initially, and the Prussian
troops using rail in order to get to Olmütz, arrived there in such
confusion that they were unable to face a much better organized
Austrian force. Though some of the worst shortcomings had been
corrected by the time Prussia next mobilized in 1859, the perfor-
mance of her railways in the military service was still eclipsed by
that of France. This was partly due to the fact that there were in
Germany at this time dozens of different companies operating
lines, between whom there was little coordination and less con-
trol. Though efforts to provide some measure of uniformity and
central control by the German Bund started in 1847, the system
that was to permit the unrestricted use for military purposes of
the railways in time of war was not completed until 1872.21
By the mid-sixties, enough progress had been made to enable
the Federal Army - which in practice meant those of Prussia and
Austria - to make effective, though scarcely spectacular, use of the
railways for military purposes. Accordingly, from 19 to 24 Janu-
ary 1864, the Prussians transported an infantry division (15,500
men, 4,583 horses, 377 vehicles) by rail from Minden to Harburg,
using a total of forty-two trains - an average of seven per day -
to move this force over 175 miles. Subsequently, use was made of
the railways to bring up supplies, an average of two trains per
day being employed for this purpose between Altona and Flens-
burg during the second half of February. Towards the end of this
period, it also became possible to send trains further north into
Schleswig. Since the scale of these operations was so very small,
no lessons of any importance were learnt. Traffic usually worked
smoothly, though there was one accident. More significantly for
the future, it was found that the unloading of trains created a
bottleneck and experiments were accordingly carried out with
mobile wooden ramps, unloading trains from the rear instead of
sidewards, and the like.22
During the campaign of 1866, the railway-network dictated not
merely the pace of Prussia's strategic deployment but also its
form. In preparation for a a var against Austria, it had been the
