Supplying War
until the end of November were the railheads pushed forward
sufficiently to relieve the wagon-park and make it possible to em-
bark on the stockpiling of ammunition for the bombardment of
If, during the greater part of the war against France, the Ger-
man armies lived off the country and did not depend heavily on
a supply of food from the rear, consumption of ammunition was
so small that an instrument to care for its replenishment was
hardly necessary at all. As in 1866, expenditure of infantry am-
munition was so low that the reserves carried with the troops
were only partly consumed. Thus, in five months' campaigning,
an average of only fifty-six cartridges were fired by each Prussian
Landser, which was rather less than what he carried on his back
and only about one third of the stocks available in the corps
organic transport. If temporary shortages nevertheless occurred
(above all at I Army during the battle of Mars-la-Tour) this was
due, not to any shortage of ammunition, but to the inability of
the troops' wagons to carry it forward during the battle.*
The figures for artillery ammunition are as follows:®5
4 August
guns:
expended:
Weissenburg
Wörth
90
1,497
234
9,399
14
16
18
30
31
1 Sept.
Borny
156
2,855
Mars-la-Tour
222
19,575
Gravelotte
34,680
Beaumont
645
per gun:
16
40
18
88
53
270
6,389
Noiseville
172
4,353
Sedan
606
25
54
33,134
Since not all the guns took part in all battles, however, overall
expenditure was much lower than these figures indicate, amount-
ing to an average of only 199 rounds per gun for the entire war.
The normal number of rounds carried inside each corps was 151,
therefore the turnover was so low that the troops could afford to
disregard the entire Etappen system and refill their vehicles
directly from the railways, even though the distances involved
were sometimes very considerable. Moreover, so small was con-
sumption that the troops did not hesitate to part with their
vehicles for weeks on end. For example, after Sedan, the wagons
When demigods rode rails
103
of III Army were sent back to Nancy to refill, and did not rejoin
the corps until after the latter had reached Paris.®7 It is clear,
therefore, that in this respect also Moltke's army did not depend
on supply from the rear to any very great extent. Rather, as in
the campaigns of earlier days, a very large proportion of the am-
munition required was simply carried along at the outset, with
the result that the army was self-contained for the greater part of
the war.
Did wheels roll for victory?
In the annals of warfare, the operations of 1870-1 are often said
to occupy a special place, because they were followed by 'a
of communications, stretching
[troops] to their base' and served by a 'meticulously organized'
train apparatus. This apparatus is said to have been 'so inti-
mately interlocked with the force it served that any separation of
the formation from its own particular sources of supply... must
spell dislocation in its movement and may mean disaster', 68 In
addition, it was the first time - in Europe, at any rate - that the
full potentialities of the railways as an instrument of war were
realised, the beginning of a process, in other words, which gradu-
'the secret of strategy' from the soldiers' legs and
transferred it to wheels instead.
Asic charm in the chaue nades. these cloims are entirely with
out foundation. That they have nevertheless been accepted for so
long, is a ma. kable testimony to Moltke's ability to impress his
own account of events upon
history, and, to an even greater
extent, to the credulity of historians and their readiness to accept
without question the words of a commander whom fate has
crowned with victory, in spite of the fact that all the evidence to
the contrary has long since been published and is readily avail-
A detailed analysis of the shortcomings of the Prussian army's
logistic system will take us too far and can, in any case, merely re-
peat what has already been said in the preceding pages. Never-
theless, the following points appear worth making:
(1) While the Prussian army did, in 1870, have a supply ser-
vice theoretically capable of catering to its needs,
proved an utter failure in practice.
Though marching perfor-
mances were not terribly high - the pace of the advance seldom
