28
Supplying War
to speed up this process in order to prevent him from drawing
near,"' it was normally carried out without hurry. One simply
stayed in one's place until the resources of the surrounding coun
try were exhausted. The first commodity to go short was in-
variably fodder, and when this happened one gathered whatever
supplies were still to be had, struck camp and moved to another
area.
While the strategy of 'eating all there is to eat' did not require
any very great administrative resources - its very purpose, in-
deed, was to make it possible to wage war without such te:
sources a - problems were bound to occur whenever a siege lasted
longer than expected. To capture a town before the resources of
the surrounding country gave out was a cardinal problem of war-
fare, and to solve it the curious (if logical) arrangement under
which the terms obtained by a garrison stood in inverse propor-
tion to the length of its resistance was instituted. Even in the
eighteenth
century however, such expedients did not always
work, and when they failed it became necessary to set afoot those
tremendous supply-operations that have become the laughing
stock of all subsequent critics. To mention but one example, and
that the most famous of all, in 1757, Fredrick II was compelled to
raise the siege of Olmütz because an indispensable convoy with
3,000 vehicles was intercepted by the Austrians. Later in the
year, therefore, we see him taking great precautions to avoid a
similar disaster. First, 15,000 men were used to escort a convoy
from
Tropau to Olmütz, then 30,000 to bring another to
Königgrätz, and finally 8,000 to secure the line of communications
to Glatz. It was, in Clausewitz's words 'as if the whole Prussian
war-engine had ventured into the enemy's territory in order to
wage a defensive war for its own existence'. That this was so
on this occasion is undeniable. The implication that Frederick's
army was too cumbersome to move, however, is false, because
this state of affairs was caused, and could only have been caused,
by the demands of siege warfare.
That Frederick II could move very fast when he wanted to is
proved by his performances in the field. In September 1757, he
took thirteen days to cover 150 miles from Dresden to Erfurt; two
months later, he covered 225 miles from Leipzig to Parchwitz in
fourteen days. Again, in September 1758, he took just one week
to march 140 miles from Küstrin to Dresden and a year later he
covered 100 miles from Sagan to Frankfurt on Oder in a week in
The background of two centuries
29
spite of having to fight the battle of Minden on the way. As
Clausewitz himself points out, Frederick did away with his bag-
gage and supply convoys in order to carry out these marches; nor
were they needed, for an army moving from one place to another
could always find something to eat.
This brings us to the so-called 'five days' system', the methodi-
cal shuttling to-and-fro of wagon columns that is supposed to
have exercised a paralysing influence
on eighteenth-century
strategy. As described by Tempelhoff, the limiting factor con-
sisted above all in the number of four-wagons operating between
the field-bakeries and the magazines in the rear; since 1/9 of
these were emptied every day, the maximum distance that an
army could get away from its base was 9:2=4.5 marches, or
approximately sixty miles. Even Tempelhoff himself, however,
admits this to be an underestimate, conceding that it was possible
to extend the range by another forty miles by using the regi-
mental bread-wagons to carry flour as well. In fact, the entire
system was a myth, the clever invention of an armchair strategist.
Even Frederick II, the only commander who is said to have tried
it out in practice, helped himself by other means whenever the
opportunity presented itself. Nor, it should be remembered, was
the system complete even in principle, for only a very small percen-
tage of an army's needs was ever supplied from base. In particular,
the problem of transporting the huge quantities of fodder required
was so difficult that its solution was never even attempted.*e
How relatively simple it was to organize the supply of an army
on the march even when the distances involved were considerable
is proved by Marlborough's famous movement from the Rhine to
the Danube in 1704. This was not a very large affair by contem-
porary standards; the Duke had with him just 30,000 men and
was joined by another 10,000 on the way. The practical details of
this march are well known. Setting out at dawn, the troops would
cover twelve to fourteen miles each day and reach camp at noon.
The cavalry went ahead of the infantry and the artillery which,
in the charge of the Duke's brother, got stuck in bad weather and
consequently fell well behind schedule. Nevertheless, between
20 May and 26 June, some 250 miles as the crow flies were cov-
ered, though the actual marching distance must have been closer
to 350. After this performance,
men and horses were still in
sufficiently good condition to win Prince Eugene's unstinted ad-
miration.
