60
Supplying War
same day the Emperor also provided for a depôt to be set up at
Braunau, the aim being to bake there 50-60,000 rations per day
in preparation for an expected stand by the Russians. When the
desired
combat did not take place it was decided to tum
Braunau into an advanced centre of operations. Flour for three
million rations was to be concentrated there and baked into bread
at the rate of 100,000 rations per day. Transportation to the army
was to be carried out both by water and overland. for which Soult.
Ney and Bernadotte were ordered to disgorge surplus transport.
Meanwhile, the equivalent of three allied divisions were detaled
to guard the line of communications.
Important as these measures were, they were destined pri-
marily to form a hedge in case of failure and could hardly con-
tribute much to sustain the operation which, as Murat informed
the Emperor, was beginning to assume the character of a fight
forward.?8 Happily for Napoleon, Vienna was now near at hand.
Here, there were such vast quantities of arms and ammunition
('enough to equip three or four armies', as the Bulletin put it) that
all the Grande Armée's difficulties in this respect were solved at
one stroke. More important still, 10,000 quintals of flour and 13,000
bushels of fodder were found in the Imperial magazines alone.
The town was ordered to find food to last 80,000 men for three
weeks, which involved the delivery of 75.000lh bread 25.000lh.
meat, 200,000l. oats, 280,000lb. hay and 375 buckets wine in one
day alone. Exactly what requisitions were made during the sub-
sequent period we do not know, but an indication of their magni-
tude can perhaps be found in the fact that the demand for wine
alone rose to 677 buckets per day from 26 November onward. To
enjoy these replenishments, the Grande Armée was granted three
days' rest even though this meant that Kutuzov was allowed to slip
away at Hollabrünn.
Our sources have left us with scant details concerning how the
army fared on its way to Austerlitz. On 20 November, Murat in-
formed Napoleon that the supplies for 300,000 rations had been
found at Pressburg, and this was followed by an order to establish
ovens capable of producing 60,000 rations per day at Spielberg. It
is also useful to note that the Grande Armée now stood with its
back to Bohemia, a country which at this time was classified by
experts as sufficiently rich to support an army,? and that the dis-
tance to Vienna was by no means excessive even for horse-drawn
vehicles.
'An army marches on its stomach'
61
Operations having come to a standstill, Napoleon's army soon
found itself in supply difficulties even though requisitions were
being made far and wide.?º Luckily for him, the allies were faring
still worse and were ultimately compelled to attack the Grande
Armée on pain of disintegration.31 As a result, a battle was fought;
and the Blitzkrieg from Boulogne to Austerlitz was over.
Many roads to Moscow
As sole commander in chief possessing absolute authority Napoleon
was not in the habit of drawing up detailed memoranda, hence
there is no information as to how he assessed the pertorm-
ance of his army's supply apparatus nor what lessons he drew
from it. To judge from his subsequent actions, however, it appears
that the Emperor was at first well-content with his own system.
When the Grande Armée took the field again the following year
it was still operating in exactly the same way and, indeed,
achieved similar results by thrashing the Prussians in a war that
lasted just six weeks. This time the army took with it provisions
for ten days, and prior to the battle of Jena-Auerstädt lived
largely off the country. After the victory, huge requisitions were
made at such towns as Weimar, Erfurt, Leipzig and Küstrin,
enabling the troops literally to wallow in luxury during the
months October-December 1806. With the new yeat, however,
the army entered Poland where very little could be found, and it
became necessary to establish a regular line of communication
back to Saxony. It was at this stage that Napoleon first came face
to face with considerable opposition and partisan activity between
the Oder and the Vistula. The transport service was organized by
Daru with the help of German contractors. Use was also made of
the waterways (Havel, Spree, Oder, Wartha, Netze, Bromberg
Canal, Vistula) which, since the winter was exceptionally mild,
were serviceable from, she middle of February onward. None of
these measures fully met requirements, however, and so the estab-
lishment of a military train consisting of seven transport-battalions
with 600 vehicles each was decreed on 26 March.
Again, we have little information on the logistic aspects of the
1809 campaign. This time the Austrians stole a march on Napo-
leon and took him by surprise so that there was no time to form
a proper base even if he had wanted to. Nevertheless, some
stores were apparently concentrated at Ulm and Donauwörth,
LAM LIBRARY
