86
Supplying War
rail - in the Franco-Prussian War will have to wait until later in
this chapter, and here we will only point to the fact that, during
the 1860s, the German - and Prussian - railways were inferior to
the French ones from almost any conceivable point of view. Brea
as late as 1868, the anonymous officer who wrote Die Krieg
führung unter Benützung der Eisenbahnen felt that, the reent
campaign against Austria notwithstanding, the 'overall French
[railway] performance exceeds the Prussian. by far'?" This was
due to the following factors:
a. French trains of all kinds travelled faster than German
ones, this being made possible - in the case of troop
transports - by an arrangement which required the men to
take their provisions along, instead of having them
disentrain in order to be fed at the stations.
b. Owing to political difficulties, the German railway
network was less unified, and its material less standardized,
than the French.
c. Only twenty-four per cent of the German lines were
double-tracked, as against sixty per cent of the French
(this was the case in 1863; after 1866, a start was made to
improve the situation).
d. In general, the capacity of French stations was larger
than that of the German ones; this, of course, governed the
crucial factor of how long it took to unload.
e. The quantity of rolling stock per mile of track
available in France exceeded that of Germany by almost
one third.
t. The number of daily trains that could be run over a
French double line was far larger than its German
equivalent; in theory, the figures were said to be seventeen
and twelve respectively, but in practice the French were
capable, in 1859, of running as many as thirty trains a day?*
In the military as opposed to the civilian sphere, the French
advantage was thought to be even greater than these fonte indi
cate, for strategic considerations had guided construction from
the very beginning. This was not the case in Germany, where
political fragmentation meant that economic and local interests
played a much larger role. The French combination of lines run-
ning parallel to the frontier, and connecting the major fortresses
When demigods rode rails
87
with a spider web of routes extending from a central nucleus was
considered ideal for the needs of war, comparing most favourably
with the 'geometric network' of north-south and east-west lines
characterizing Germany's railway system. The assumption that
France's railways were superior to Germany's was shared by
Moltke himself, and figured large in his intention to stay on the
defensive in a war against France.
After the war of 1870, French and German writers accused
each other of having constructed their railways with intent to
wage aggressive war. That Moltke had a say in the planning of
the German network is true. Apart from minor detail, however, he
was satisfied that commercial lines were good enough to serve his
purpose. On one occasion only did he propose the construction of
new lines for purely military ends, but the only response he re-
ceived to his suggestion was a polite letter of thanks. In 1856,
a similar proposal led the Prince of Prussia himself to write to the
Minister of War:31
General Groeben…..advises the construction of railways
along the right bank of the Rhine, to which purpose he
asks for nine million thalers to be allocated.
The events of recent times have shown that enough
private capital is available to build railways, so that
burdening the treasury does not appear justified.
Far from driving through military considerations in the construc-
tion of new lines, the soldier-prince was perfectly content to
leave the development of this crucially important lateral line to
private enterprise, though hoping,
of course, that the military
would benefit later on. At the very least, this seems to show that
the claim, so often heard, that the Germans allowed strategic
considerations to play a larger role in the planning of their railway
system than did the French, requires some evidence to support it.
Finally, it is a curious, but seldom understood, fact that Ger-
man theoretical writings on the influence of railways on strategy
were absolutely wrong. The early exponents - including Ludolf
von Camphausen, Moritz von Pritwitz,
Heinrich von Rüstow,
and one chief of the Prussian General Staff - General von Reyhe
- all expected that railways would work in favour of the side
operating on internal lines s2 as did List himself, who hoped that
they would 'turn the central situation of the fatherland, which
