34
Supplying War
complex, well organized operations. ° The troops of the time being
'the scum of the earth, enlisted for drink', these foraging expedi-
tions led to much desertion, and it was to prevent this that the
Austrian army set up the first supply-corps in 1783. Far from
being expected to help bring up supplies from base, the task of
this corps was to collect them from the country."]
That the density of Europe's population, and the development
of its agriculture, made it perfectly possible to feed an army as
long as it kept on the move the following figures will show.?? An
army of, say, 60,000 men, required 90,000 bread rations per day.?®
At a baking ratio of 3:4, twelve ounces four were needed to pro-
duce a pound of bread. Assuming a daily consumption per head of
two pounds the total quantity of flour needed in a ten day period
90,000 X 3 × 2 × 10
= 1,350,000lb, or 600 tons. At a density of
forty-five people per square mile and assuming a region was
self-sufficient, the quantity of flour available in April - when
campaigns normally started - must have amounted to six months®
supply, or probably around 180x2x45=16,2001b, arsind seven
tons. Given a strip of country 100 miles long and ten wide -
which meant that foraging parties had to go no further than five
miles on either side of the road - the total quantity available must
have been around 7,000 tons, of which less than ten per cent
would be needed to feed the army during its ten days march-
through. Problems, therefore, could only arise when it became
neg assary to stay for long in any one place, in other wit ds aur-
ing a siege.
More difficult, but essentially not dissimilar, was the provision
of fodder. Even upon the most pessimistic assumption, an acre of
green fodder could feed fifty horses,? The 40,000 animals accom-
panying an army would therefore require 800 acres per day. Tak-
ing ten days to cross a strip of country ten miles wide by 100 long,
an army's horses would therefore devour the fodder grown on
8,000 acres, i.e. 1/80 of the total area.?® That a much larger area
must have been devoted to growing fodder, however, is easy to
prove, for 8,000 acres would only have fed 4,000 horses for one
year," a number which, compared with that of the inhabitants, is
much too low. 8 Lacking exact figures, it is not possible to say just
how long an army was able to stay in any given area. All we know
is that, whenever a siege was conducted or a camp maintained
for long, fodder was invariably the first commodity to run out.
The background of two centuries
35
Since only a fraction of the victuals needed for man and beast
were ever
available in ready-made form, however,
an army
staying for long in any one place was turned, inevitably, into a
food-producing machine that milled grain, gathered wood, baked
Hour, and reaped fodder. Since the tasks involved had to be car-
ried out rhythmically every few days, it is easy to see how much
they interfered with the regular functioning of an army.?* Indeed,
it was perfectly possible for an army's military function to be vir-
tually suspended in favour of logistic ones for entire periods.
This was especially the case when fodder had to be reaped, and
extraordinary precautions to avoid being surprised during such a
time were necessary.
Before drawing our conclusions from these facts, a word must
be said about the consumption of ammunition in the wars of the
two centuries preceding the French Revolution. That figures on
this problem are so very hard to obtain is itself an indication that
it was not very important. Compared to the provision of subsis-
tence, that of ammunition was to remain insignificant until well
after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870.30 Indeed, so small were
the quantities required that armies normally took along a single
supply for the entire campaign, resupply from base being effected
only on comparatively rare occasions - most frequently, of course,
during sieges.® In the first half of the seventeenth century, an
army going on campaign took along a basic load of 100 balls for
each artillery barrel, which is not surprising in view of the fact
that, even during a siege, no gun was expected to fire more than
five times a day.82 Later in the century, Vauban calculated four
rounds per gun per day, so that consumption of ammunition re-
mained negligible beside that of food and fodder. 83 The figures
for field operations were lower still; during two battles in 16368,
the Bavarian artillery only fired seven shots per gun in eight
hours, though these figures owe their survival to the fact that
they were regarded as a record low.84 Frederick II, who relied
heavily on his artillery, usually took along 180 balls on campaign,
and instances when a shortage of ammunition forced him to alter
his plans only occurred during sieges. Apart from this, there is no
evidence that the problem of ammunition supply had any in-
Auence on the conduct of operations, nor is the issue mentioned
by even those exponents of eighteenth-century warfare who most
strongly insist on magazines as a conditio sine qua non for a suc-
cessful campaign.
