LIBRARY. TRINITY
COLLECL
220
Supplying War
not, of course, be effected without abandoning all orderly prove-
dures and employing emergency measures. With petrol in thet
tanks and rations in their pockets, combat units, faced with vey
little organized opposition, could accelerate their progres alms.
at will. Not so COMZ, however, which found it impossible to
make depôts keep pace with the rapidly advancing front Ni
sooner had a site been selected than it was left behind, and after
several attempts (each costly in terms of transport) COMZ gue
up in despair and concentrated on bringing up the most estl
items from bases that were sometimes as much as 300 miles in the
rear. The transport to carry the supplies across these distant
came from hundreds of units considered less essential - hey
and anti-aircraft artillery, engineers, chemical warfare, and te
like - which were stripped of their vehicles and left immobiled,
sometimes on reduced rations, as were three divisions news)
arriving in France, whose organic trucks were taken away ad
formed into improvised TR companies. While rations, POlL ad
ammunition were being rushed forward, the supply of everything
else, including, in particular, clothing and engineering str, ad
to be deferred. Air transport was used on a grand scale but filed
to deliver more than an average of 1,000 tons a day because ci
the lack of airfields near the front line and, even worse, because
aircraft were withdrawn to take part in a series of wouldbe
airborne operations that never materialized. The most famous ci
all these expedients to supply the front was the Red Ball Expres
a loop system of one-way highways reserved exclusivel fit the
supply service over which thousands of trucks rumbled night and
day.
These emergency measures notwithstanding, the flow of sup
plies reaching the front gradually diminished until, on 2 Septem
ber, 3. Army's advance was brought to a halt. 1. Army struggles
on for a few more days before it too came to a standstil. Con-
pared with deliveries to both Armies of over 19,000 tons a day
during the second week of August, COMZ could only promise
7,000 at the end of the month, and it is doubtful whether era
this figure was in fact met.3o Stocks in the hands of the front line
units dwindled at an alarming rate, e.g. from 10,5 days of POi
supply at 1. Army on 5 August to 0,3 days on 2 September and
zero one week later. " Mean while, reserves available in Normandy
actually rose as they could not be transported forward. Though
consumption of ammunition had fallen off by thirty to ninety per
War of the accountants
221
cent since July, deliveries fell so short of demands that a single
corps (the XX) could request supplies in excess of all the tonnage
allocated to 3. Army, to which it belonged, put together. Since
whatever
ammunition dumps that could be established were
quickly left behind, both 1. and 3. Armies resorted to the creation
of rolling magazines, a procedure which, though effective in en-
suring that at least some supplies would always be available,
wasted transport.
As always happens when supplies are short, friction and even
tension arose between the front-line troops and the supporting
the top lis
services in their rear. 3. Army in particular was notorious for the
unorthodox means it employed in order to obtain what it needed.
Roving foraging parties impersonated members of other units,
trains and convoys were diverted or hijacked, transportation com-
panies were robbed of the fuel they needed for the return journey,
and spotter planes were sent hundreds of miles to the rear in
order to discover fuel-shipments. Inside the zone of communica-
tions itself, the strain on men and material working around the
clock led to fatigue, accidents, malingering and occasional sabo-
tage. Vehicles went without maintenance until they broke down
and the number of major repairs needed rose rapidly. Record-
keeping of the movement of supplies, which had always been a
weak point in the Allies organization, became even worse during
the rapid advance of August, with the result that some of the
limited transport available was wasted on items which the Armies
had not requisitioned and did not need. Occasionally, instances of
a worse kind of waste occurred. Thus, out of 22,000,000 jerrycans
more than half had been lost by the end of August,
with the
result that this humble item limited the entire POL supply system.
Suonly discinline especially at 3. Army, was poor and led to
enormous quantities of equipment, particularly
left behind, so that the salvage companies were swamped with
work.& Instead of trying to capture French locomotives and
rolling-stock, Patton's men deliberately shot them up - finding
them, as one author puts it, 'a rewarding target in more senses
than one'.33
Though the logistic situation of the British forces operating in
Belgium was also strained, it was not as dificult as that of the
two American Armies. Distances here were smaller - 21. Army
Group was operating on the inside track' along the coast - and
roads were more numerous than in Lorraine. On 30 August, when
