22
Supplying War
were not included in the standard fare and were supplied, some
times free, sometimes at half or quarter their market price. O
one occasion the army as a whole might benefit from 'the Kings
generosity, on others, the infantry only. Concerned with dis-
cipline as he was, it did not apparently occur to Louvois to exer-
cise control over consumption, the result being that the men
frequently wasted their food or, alternatively, bartered it for
wine.
Louvois' reforms are said to have allowed increased freedom
of manoeuvre, made possible greater speed in movement and
extended the length of the season during which it was possible
for the French army, and especially its cavalry arm, to stay in the
field. « To some extent these claims are indeed valid, as is demon-
strated by the first campaign wholly organized by Louvois, This
was also his most successful and, in more ways than one, marks
a revolution in warfare. For Louis XIV's war against the Dutch in
1672, Louvois built what was perhaps the largest field army since
Xerxes, 120,000 men strong, mobilized from all over Westem
Europe. The approach to Holland from the south being barred
by row after row of river fortresses, it was decided to launch the
invasion from the east through Guelderland. The army was to be
kept supplied from a chain of magazines established in advance
on the territory of France's ally, the Elector of Cologne, who ear-
marked four of his towns - Neuss, Kaiserswerth,
Dorsten - for the purpose. The next step was to send agents into
Cologne who, while ostensibly working for the Elector, were to
have those magazines filled. The principle followed throughout -
one that may sound strange in these days of 'export or die'
- was
to procure from one's own country only that which could not be
got at abroad. In this particular case it was necessary to bring up
the artillery from France, but everything else was acquired out-
side her own frontiers. The powder and ammunition even came
from Amsterdam by means of the good offices of a Jewish banker
there, Sadoc. At the same time, France's own magazines along her
northern frontier were also filled.
The campaign proper opened on 9 May. Turenne with 23,000
men and 30 guns left his camp at Châtelet (near Charleroi) and
marched down the Sambre. Taking Tongres and Bilsen on his
way, he reached Maestricht and invested it. At this point he was
joined by Conde's Army of the Ardennes which had come march-
ing down the Meuse. On 19 May the united Army left Liège for
The background of two centuries
the Rhine. Condé crossed the river while Turenne stayed to its
left, both marching north along the opposite banks until re-united
at Emmerich on 11 June. The Rhine was crossed on 12 June and it
was now that the war began in earnest. In just one week the
French had reached Amersfoort, sixty miles from Emmerich and
perhaps twenty from Amsterdam. At this point the Dutch opened
their dykes and, in face of the rising water, the campaign came
to an abrupt halt.
From Châtelet to Emmerich the army had marched mainly over
friendly territory. Far from drawing away from its magazines, it
was in fact getting nearer to them with every day's advance. In
spite of these exceptionally favourable circumstances it did not
cover more than about 220 miles in thirty-three days, averaging
under seven miles a day in what was to be the most mobile of all
the campaigns of Louis XIV. It was not until enemy territory was
reached that performances somewhat improved, aided by the fact
that distances were short and opposition almost nonexistent. It
was, to be sure, a highly successful campaign, but one perhaps
more marked by the thoroughness of its organization than by any
extraordinary mobility.
Coming now to the limitations of the system, it is important
above all to keep in mind how incomplete it was.
method, indeed the very aim of warfare in this period was to live
at the enemy's expense. As Louvois himself put it in a standard
formula that he used whenever informing his intendants with the
army of a forthcoming campaign, 'His Majesty has...a consider-
able army assembled. in order to enter the lands of His Catholic
Majesty and live at their cost until the governor of the Catholic
Low Countries will give in to his demands...[the intendant] will
be responsible for making the Spanish lands pay the taxes that
will be imposed on them??4 Even when it was Louvois' express
intention to 'avoid burdening the country',
modity that had to be taken away from it on practically every
occasion. 35 Usually, however, there was no room for such niceties.
French commanders were instructed to
live off what you can
find on the way' even when it was only a question of making a
relatively short flank march, and to this purpose were authorized
to use means every bit as ferocious as those employed by Wallen-
stein, including the destruction of houses and the seizure of men,
beasts and movables.36 Even in the early phase of a campaign,
when part at least of the army's demand had to be met from a
