44
Supplying War
from the fact that the army had spent the last year and a half
preparing for a landing in England. Given the superior British
strength at sea, this operation had no hope of relying on a regular
line of communication leading back to the Continent. Once it
got across the Channel by one means or another, the French
Army would have had to live off the country - which, after all,
was rich enough to support it - while its hopes for returning to
France would have rested entirely on a rapid victory in the field
and, following this, a dictated peace. The army at Boulogne was
therefore almost totally without any means of supply and trans-
portation. Even if we assume that Napoleon's project for invading
England was never more than a feint, however, he could not have
created the machinery for waging war on the Continent without
alarming his enemies. But, as was always the case,
a major con-
sideration governing Napoleon's logistic arrangements for the
Austerlitz campaign was the need, at all cost, to preserve opera-
tional surprise.
Thus, the campaign of 1805 faced the Ministry of War and the
army's Intendanture with the gigantic task of hurriedly scraping
together the entire transport and supply apparatus for 170,000
French troops in the space of a few weeks; a problem made all
the more formidable by the fact that, during all this time, the bulk
of the units for whom this apparatus was destined were not sta-
tionary but marching from their camps round Boulogne to the
deployment area on the Rhine. An additional complication was
presented by the 80,000 new recruits whose organization into units
had to be completed even as the process of deployment was in
full swing. Indeed, the fact that it telescoped the normally separ-
ate stages of mobilization and deployment into a single, com-
bined operation was not the least unorthodox aspect of Napoleon's
plan of campaign.
Having decided, on 23 August, to go to war against Austria,
Napoleon's first move was to order his forces to their areas of de-
ployment. Of his eight corps, two - commanded by Marmont and
Bernadotte - came respectively from Holland and Hanover and,
forming the Army's left wing, were to concentrate first at Göttin-
gen and then at Würzhurg. The remaining corps were originally
supposed to deploy along a line stretching for some fifty miles
from Hagenau northward through Strasbourg - where more than
three corps were to be concentrated - to Schelestadt,® for which
purpose five of them had to cross the entire width of France from
'An army marches on its stomach'
45
west to east, while the sixth consisted of recruits arriving in bits
and pieces from every corner of the Empire. The march towards
the area of deployment thus presented problems of coordination
and supply on a gigantic scale. It speaks volumes for the efficiency
of Napoleon's chief of staff, Berthier, that he could start sending
out his orders on 25 August and report on them to the Emperor
just 24 hours later. And these orders were detailed; they laid
down not merely the sequence of formations but also the exact
quantities of provisions that each regiment was to draw from each
Under Berthier's master plan, the divisions forming the cavalry
corps were the first to leave the Channel coast, which some of
them started doing as early as 25 August. Then followed the in-
fantry corps of Davout, Soult, Ney and Lannes marching along
three parallel routes arranged from north to south so that only
the last two had to share a road between them.
Recording
Napoleon's instructions, Berthier wrote that 'it is the Emperor's
intention. to feed the troops on the route as they were in camp',
ie. by means of the machinery provided by the Ministry of War
in coordination with prefects, sub prefects and mayors on the
way. Provisions were to be distributed every two or three days,
and as he issued his orders to the corps Berthier also wrote to the
various local authorities informing them of the coming movement
and asking for their cooperation. Marching from Holland over
friendly territory, Marmont was told to live off what the country
can supply'; whereas Bernadotte was to take along seven or eight
days supplies of biscuits in order to 'avoid burdening' the neutral
country of Hesse-Kassel.° Within this general framework much
initiative was left to the marshals, each of whom was to send his
ordonnateur and commissionaries ahead in order to make the
detailed arrangements.
Excellent as Napoleon's orders may have been in principle, the
organization of the march left something to be desired, both
because the time allowed was too short and because local authori-
ties everywhere were reluctant to cooperate with the army which,
thanks to its system of recruitment, was already becoming un-
popular. On the other hand, there were cases when too much co-
operation led to drunkenness and disorder. Davout's corps in the
north found it dificult to secure appropriate quarters and had to
spend more than cue night in the open. The right-hand corp.
fared hotter in thie racnent hut cudered when their suboly-system
