46
Supplying War
broke down while on the final leg of their march. Apart from a
phenomenon of 'temporary desertion' - men exploiting the fat
that they were passing in or near to their homelands in order to
slip away for a few days and then rejoin their units on the Rhine
- discipline was excellent and moved at least one prefect to write
Berthier that he had 'nothing but praise' for the troops passing
through his department. Others were less content, and on Il
December - almost five months since the beginning of the cam-
paign and a week after it had been crowned by the victory of
Austerlitz - the Minister of Finance was still complaining to
Dejean about the army's failure to settle accounts with the dis-
tricts through which it had been passing in August and Septem-
ber. 10
On the whole, however, the men did well enough on the
march; there are records left of extreme fatigue," but not of
hunger. The same could not be said of the fatigue hich sufered
heavily from bad roads, rain and a shortage of fodder. Nearly
every commander who depended on the animals to carry his troops
or haul their equipment had cause for complaint, either because
the riders were untrained and caused injuries to their mounts, or
because the horses were too young and broke down, or simply
because there were not enough of them. By the time the con-
centration on the Rhine was complete the horses of the cavalry
corps were starving because there were no funds to buy fodder.
Soult had only 700 animals to draw his train instead of 1,200 he
needed, whereas Marmont's cavalry suffered from the offents of
having been cooped-up for five weeks aboard ships in preparation
for the abortive invasion of England. It was the old story that we
shall see repeated right up to 1914; in every case feeding the
horses and keeping them in good health proved a good deal more
difficult than doing the same for the men.
Exactly
what Napoleon's operational plans were at this stage
we do not know. In his letters to Talleyrand, his foreign minister,
and to the
Elector of Bavaria, his ally, he did not go beyond
generalities - marching to the aid of Bavaria at the earliest pos-
sible moment, sending 200,000 men to Vienna, and beating the
Austrians before they could be reinforced by the Russians. How
and in what manner he hoped to achieve these objectives the
Emperor did not say, possibly because he was determined to
maintain secrecy but more probably because he did not vet I-now
himself. Nor are there any real clues as to his intentions in the
'An army marches on its stomach'
47
instructions he gave for the conduct of reconnaissance in Ger-
many. Thus, Bertrand was ordered to carry through a thorough
survey of Ulm and its surroundings, then to proceed east along
the left (north) bank of the Danube while paying special attention
to the exits through which the Russians might debouch from
Bohemia. Murat, presumably in preparation for the operations of
Marmont and Bernadotte, was instructed to follow the Main to
Würzburg, then to reach the Danube, which he was to descend
to the Inn. Travelling south along that river, he was to reach
Kufstein before turning west and, after crossing Bavaria, to
return to France by way of Ulm-Rastadt which he was to recon-
noitre with special care. A better understanding of the Emperor's
intentions can perhaps be obtained by looking at his orders of
deployment. These initially included a very heavy concentration
at Strasbourg, where Petiet was supposed to prepare tents for
no less than 80,000 men, or enough to house almost half of the
entire Grande Armée. Add to this the fact that Napoleon asked
his Bavarian ally to prepare large stores of provisions at Ulm,
and it becomes fairly clear that, whatever his ultimate purpose,
the Emperor's first intention was to forestall the Austrians in
Bavaria by marching there over the most direct route, the one
through the Black Forest. The fact that he did not have this area
reconnoitred does not gainsay this conclusion. The Black Forest
was after all, the route traditionally followed by French armies
during the wars against the Habsburg Empire, and its features
must have been well known.
While Napoleon was pondering his operational plans and
supervising the vast process of deployment and concentration,
Dejean, Petiet and Murat - the latter acting in his capacity of
commander of the army in the Emperor's absence - were making
great efforts to complete all material preparations within the
short time allowed. Dejean's ordeal began on 23 August, when
a curt order from the Emperor instructed him to prepare 500,000
biscuit rations at Strasbourg and another 200,000 at Mainz, all to
be ready within twenty-five days. A similar if more polite note
went to the Elector of Bavaria who was to prepare no less than
a million biscuit rations equally distributed between Würzburg
and Ulm.!2 A comparison of these figures with the number of
trops involved shows that Napoleon's preparations were by no
means as sketchy as is usually supposed. The 700,000 rations con-
centrated in the area of deployment would have lasted the 116,000
