GOLLEGI
214
Supplying War
situation. Unlike the majority of his fellow commanders, Ceneral
Patton refused to be tied down by the logisticians tables. Indeed,
such was his indifference to them that, throughout the campaign.
of 1944-5, he only saw his G-4 twice - once before he assumed
active command and again in the last week of the war." Made
operational on 1 August, Patton's 3. Army began its stormy carer
two days later by ignoring all plans and feeding no less than sit
divisions through the Avranches-Pontaubault bottleneck within
seventy-two hours. At Pontaubault, they spread out like a fan and
began advancing east and south-east, even though the single road
serving as their artery of supply was still being counterattacked.
By 6 August Patton's forces were threatening Laval and Le Mans.
On 16 August they were in Orleans, and three days later the
Seine was reached at Troyes. Moreover, Patton's advance out:
flanked the positions from which the Germans had been trying
to contain the Allied lodgement in Normandy and threatened to
cut them off, with the result that, after the failure of their cou-
terattack at Mortain, they rapidly fell back and thus enabled the
remaining Allied forces, Hodges' 1. U.S. Army and Montgomer's
21. Army Group, to effect their own breakout and reach the
Seine.18 This they did, and the river's western banks were finally
cleared on 24 August - fully eleven days ahead of the schedule
which, according to the logisticians, could not be met. Mean-
while, in a manner reminiscent of the proverbial kettle ratting
behind the dog's tail, those same logisticians continued to inst
that what Patton and Hodges were doing was impossible.
While it may be true that erring on the safe side is normally
preferable to its opposite, the discrepancy between expectation
and actual performance in this case is so great as to call for an
explanation.
Such an explanation is readily found when one
realizes how modest were the demands that the planners made
on the means at their disposal. Thus, for example, it was assumed
that a truck company could provide no more than fifty miles
forward lift a day (that is, overall distance covered in 24 hous
was not supposed to exceed 100 miles?®) whereas actual perfor-
mance turned out to be at least thirty per cent higher. Almot
unbelievably, the plans had been made on the assumption that
the state of the French road network would not allow supply by
motor transport at more than 75 miles from the railheads" - a
gross
underestimate that was exceeded at least three or four
times over. Finally, consumption by a single Allied division was
War of the accountants
215
put at 650 tons a day, whereas a force engaged in pursuit actually
required only a fraction of this amount, possibly not more than
Even when these facts are taken into account,
seems dificult to reconcile the pessimism of the Allied planners
with the superabundance of the means at their disposal. In late
August 1944 there were twenty-two American divisions in France.
Of these, sixteen were operating on or near the Seine at a distance
of some 250 miles from Cherbourg whereas the remaining ones
were still disembarking in Normandy or facing east towards
Brittany. Putting their average distance from the ports at 200
miles and assuming that consumption did in fact amount to the
regulation 650 tons, 22x200 × 650=2,860,000 ton/miles forward
lift per day were required. There is no evidence of just how much
transport was available at this time, but even as early as 25 July
it had totalled 227 GTR companies plus the equivalent of 108
more in rail transportation facilities.?3 Overall forward lift there-
fore amounted, even if only according to the regulations,
3,350,000 ton/miles a day - and this does not take account of the
fact that additional GTR companies were brought in
August, nor that the divisions were furnished with truck com-
ponents so lavish that they were capable, as subsequent events
were to demonstrate, of hauling a substantial fraction of their
own supplies over hundreds of miles behind the Armies' rear
boundaries.24
While the evidence is far from complete, the above facts suffice
to show that the Allied advance from Normandy to the Seine,
however successful and even spectacular strategically, was an
exercise in logistic pusillanimity unparalleled in modern military
This is even more astonishing when one compares the
conditions prevailing during this campaign with those governing
some of the others that we have studied. Not only were the Allies
possessed of more motor transport than any other army had ever
dreamt of,
but they were
operating in favourable
weather and over a road network that was among the best and
most dense in the world. There was little enemy air activity,36
and a friendly population furnished considerable assistance rather
than engaging in sabotage. Yet for all these advantages, the
Allied offensive had to be carried out against the logisticians'
advice. To paraphrase a famous quotation, in the kingdom of
supply something was rotten.
