64
Supplying War
however well organized, could sustain him all the way tra!
Niemen to Moscow, as the following figures will show. a
he were to arrive in the Russian capital with only one third th
original 600,000 men, taking sixty days to do so (in fat he h
eighty-two overall consumption during this period would ta
come to 18,000 tons for the men alone, which was almost di
the overall capacity of his supply trains, which, moreover, wil
have to supply other parts of the army as well. utens
daily consumption in Moscow would have come to 300 on, e
to cater for this at a distance of 600 miles from base assuming
very high performance of twenty miles per day by the sup
columns) 18,000 tons of transport would have been needed. a
gardless of whether he used his trains as rolling magazines art
shuttle (in relays) between the army and the frontier, there.
there was not the slightest chance of feeding the trop in th
way during an advance to Moscow.
As it was, Napoleon took with him into Russia twenty-foc
days' provisions, of which twenty were transported by the tre
battalion and 4 on the men's backs. However, it is improbate
that he expected the campaign to be over in twelve days (on ta.
assumption that the army would have had to march back as wel,
as one modern writer'' has implied. Rather, he must have be
thinking in terms of a war lasting for about three weeks this, wa
remember, had been the duration of both previous campaigns a
the Danube Valley) during which time he would have penetrate
Russia to a depth of over 200 miles, hopefully more than enoug
to catch the Tsar's army and bring it to battle. After that, prov-
sions would have been supplied to the victors by the vanquishel,
as was Napoleon's normal practice. 12
Whatever the Emperor's exact intentions,
there can be no
doubt that he allowed logistic considerations to play a crucia.
part in the planning of the campaign. The supply from base of
odder for the 250,000 horses accompanying the army being an
utterly insoluble problem, the beginning of the war had to be
postponed to the end of June. He also started off from Kovno and
proceeded to Vilna for logistic reasons, for whereas a deploy-
ment further north would have met very great obstacles in view
of the appalling Polish roads (which Napoleon knew from his
experiences in 1806_7) one further south would have made it
difficult to use the Niemen in order to supply the army. Whether,
during the last weeks before the start of operations, the Emperor
'An army marches on its stomach'
65
intended to break through the enemy's centre, or to envelop him
from the north, or the south, we do not really know. Nor does it
matter, for logistics determined his strategy in a way that would
have delighted Louvois.
Similarly, the Russians' plans for the defence of their country
also rested on logistic considerations. That only the factors of
distance, climate and supply could defeat the French army - the
largest ever assembled, and commanded as it was by one of the
greatest generals of all time - the Tsar's advisers unanimously
agreed. The question was not whether to retreat, but where and
how far. Here political considerations seem to have played some
role, for the nobles were afraid that too long a retreat would lead
to a revolt of the serfs.* Another difficulty facing the Russian
planners was how to compel the French to follow their retreating
forces instead of ignoring them. To solve both problems, the
Tsar's chief military adviser, General Pfuel, set up a fortified
camp at Drissa,
midway between the roads to Moscow and St
Petersburg, assuming that Napoleon would not be able to bypass
the camp during his advance against either city. If the French
were to follow the Russians to Drissa, they would find themselves
operating in poor country where they would find only a fraction
of the necessary supplies.* At the same time, another Russian
army was to operate in Napoleon's rear, making the task of feed-
ing the French troops more difficult still. The interest of this
much maligned plan does not lie in its supposed weaknesses,
ridiculed as these have been by Clausewitz. It lies instead in the
fact that, like Napoleon's own schemes, it rested on logistic rather
than strategic considerations.
In the event, the plans of both sides came to nothing. Napoleon
crossed the Niemen on 23 June. Two days later, he was already
angrily exhorting Berthier to send provisions to Tilsit where the
army 'is standing in great need of them'« Such cries of distress
were to become a standard feature of the campaign, and there is
no need to go through them all. The main reasons for the failure
of Napoleon's logistic plans were as follows. First, the army's
supply vehicles proved too heavy for the Russian 'roads', a prob-
lem aggravated still further when thunderstorms during the first
fortnight of the campaign turned them into bottomless quag-
mires.*7 Secondly, the river Vilnya, on which Napoleon had relied
for shipping supplies to Vilna, turned out to be too shallow to
allow the barges through. Thirdly, discipline in the army was lax,
