24
Supplying War
magazine set up on home territory, 'the means.. that will enable
[the troops] to live more comfortably' had to be taken from the
enemy and consumed at his expense."? That this was a truly
monumental understatement the following few figures will illu-
strate. A typical army of Louvois' day numbering, say, 60,000
men would have 40,000 horses hetween cavalry, artillery and bag.
gage.?8 At two pounds per head, the men consumed 120,000lb.
bread per day. In addition there were quantities of other food
and beverages weighing, at the very least, another 60,000lb. The
horses' rations could vary very considerably with the season of the
year, but would normally amount to about ten times those of the
men, i.e. twenty pounds per head, making a total of 800,000 a
day for the whole army. Overall consumption would thus amount
to no less than 980,000lb. per day, of which only 120,000 - or just
over eleven per cent - were ever stored in magazines or moved in
convoys. All the rest was procured locally as a matter of course,
either because it was impossible to store and preserve for any
length of time - as in the case of food for men - or because it was
too bulky by far for its transportation to be even remotely pos-
sible, which was the case for the horses' fodder.
It is obvious that the need to obtain the ninety per cent of sup-
plies that were not brought up from the rear must have done
more to dictate the movement of armies than the ten per cent that
were, but this has been ignored by the great majority of critics
beginning with Guibert who censured Louvois' 'mania' for maga-
zines, and ending with modern writers who, echoing this criticism,
have described contemporary warfare as being 'shackled' by an
'umbilical cord of supply' 3º There were instances of the system
of supply from the rear limiting the movements of armies, one of
the most glaring examples being perhaps the inability of Luxem-
bourg to find transport in order to bridge a gap of just sixteen
miles between Mons and Enghien in 1692, yet on the whole it was
the availability or otherwise of local supplies, much more than
magazines or
convoys,
that determined the
movements
Louvois' forces just as it had those of Gustavus Adolphus. This
applied even to the King himself who, together with his 'army -
that is, a party numbering 3,000 men - could not be assured of
finding provisions on his way to assist at the siege of Luxembourg
in 1684 and had to postpone his departure by two weeks. 10 Read-
ing through the annals of the War of the Spanish Succession, it is
this problem that crops up most frequently. On one occasion
The background of two centuries
25
Bourgogne could not reinforce Tallard at Bonn because the latter
had barely enough flour to feed his own army while the surround-
ing countryside had been all eaten up. On another Houssaye
explained to Louis XIV that it was impossible to lay siege to
Landau
because its
surroundings had been
occupied twice
already during previous campaigning seasons and could there-
fore support neither
the besieging
nor
covering
armies.41
Accused by his royal master of dispersing his troops and thus
exposing them to attack, Puységur replied that the Spanish
Netherlands were too poor to keep them supplied if they were
concentrated in a small area.12 But on no occasion is the depen-
dence of Louvois' army - the one whose supply system was the
envy of all Europe - on the resources of the country brought out
more clearly than in June 1684, when Louis XIV was hesitating as
to whether his next victim ought to be Mons, Ath or Charleroi.
The capture of the former was thought to constitute 'a real blow'
to the Dutch, but would present 'invincible difficulties' because
there was no subsistence available locally. This being so, Louvois
concluded his letter by pointing out to the King that 'it is better
to take one of the other places than to do nothing at all'. 43
If warfare in the 'siècle de Louis XIV' often appears to us petty
and unenterprising, the reason for this was not so much the sup-
posedly exaggerated dependence of armies on their magazines
and convoys but, on the contrary, the inability of even the best
organized force of the day to do without local supply for practi-
cally all its fodder and much if not most of its provisions.
From
Louvois' correspondence it appears that bodies of troops march-
ing from one place to another beyond the area dominated by
France - and sometimes within it as well - were either made self-
sufficient for the duration or told to 'live off what you can find on
the way'. In no instance that I have come across is there any
question of a force on the move being supplied solely by convoys
regularly shuttling between it and its base, and it has even been
claimed that the mathematics involved in this kind of operation
were too sophisticated for the military commander of the age to
tackle." From beginning to end, the most difficult logistic problem
facing Louvois, his contemporaries and his successors was much
less to feed an army on the move than to prevent one that was
stationary from starving; witness the pride with which the Duke
of Marlborough recorded this particular aspect of his operations
in front of Lille on the victory column at Blenheim Palace, 1o
