108
Supplying War
from the country, this was only true as long as they kept moving.
When operations came to a halt, as they did during the sieges of
Metz and Paris, very great supply difficulties were at once ex-
perienced. In the case of Metz, these were only solved after a
considerable period of time by the great efforts of the train com-
panies, aided as they were by the fact that the railheads were
relatively close at hand. In the case of Paris, it was necessary
virtually to suspend the military functions of the army for the
duration of two months and have the troops look after their pro-
visions instead. This employment of an army as a food-producing
machine is, to my knowledge, unique in the annals of war after
1789 and would have caused much amazement to Napoleon. Cer-
tainly, it was the last occasion when a large force belonging to an
advanced State was so utilized. It is the fact that Moltke's forces
could only live as long as they kept moving, and experienced the
greatest difficulty in staying in one place for more than a few days
at a time, that the supreme proof lies that the military instrument
in his hands did not, after all, belong to the modern age.
4
The wheel that broke
State of the art
For Europe as a whole, the period between 1871 and 1914 was
one of very rapid demographic and economic expansion. In just
forty-four years, population grew by almost seventy per cent,
from 298 to 490 millions. During the same period, industry, trade
and transportation developed by leaps and bounds until, on the
eve of World War I, they had totally transformed the face of the
continent. In 1870, the combined production of coal and lignite by
the three leading industrial countries - Britain, France, and Ger-
many - amounted to just under 160 million tons a year; by 1913,
it had more than trebled to reach 612 million tons. Similarly, in
1870, the production of pig iron in the same three countries was
around 7.5 million tons a year, whereas by 1913 it had grown to
29 million tons, an increase of almost 300 per cent. This expansion,
needless to say, was accompanied by vast changes in the pattern
of occupation and residence. If the industrial revolution may be
said to have begun a hundred years before 1870, it was neverthe-
less the Franco-Prussian War that truly ushered in the age of
coal and steel.
As factory chimneys grew ever taller, so did the size of the
military instruments maintained by the major continental powers.
In fact, the expansion of European armies and navies during the
period under review, particularly in its second half, was even
more rapid than that of population and industry. Social progress,
increasing administrative efficiency,
and, above all,
almost universally
adopted principle of conscription,
made
it
possible to raise huge forces which, in relation to the size of the
politico-economic systems supporting them, were far larger than
anything previously recorded in history. For example, in France,
the second-largest military power, the pool of trained military
