GOLLEG
230
War of the accountants
small force. As for knifelike thrusts, they may be successful if
conducted over a distance of a mere 130 miles but become
distinctly risky and even reckless when launched in search of
objectives 400 miles away - and with the nearest base another 300
miles to the rear. Nor could such a thrust by even eighteen divi-
sions have been supported logistically. Rather, Montgomery's
staff were thinking in terms of twelve only. The latter's main-
tenance would have to be reduced to 400 (in some cases, 300)
tons per day and even this was more than 21. Army Group could
manage with its own resources.® As Eisenhower has rightly said,
nothing but certain destruction could have resulted from such a
move.
In the final account, the question as to whether Montgomerys
plan presented a real alternative to Eisenhower's strategy must
be answered in the negative. Though our computations seem to
show that the means required for a drive to the Ruhr could, in
theory, have been made available, it is not at all certain that,
even if strategic developments could have been foreseen in time,
the supply apparatus could have adapted itself with suffcient
speed or displayed the necessary determination. Given the exces-
sive conservatism and even pusillanimity that characterized the
logistic planning for 'Overlord' from beginning to end, there is
good reason to believe that this would not have been the case. It
is impossible to imagine the prudent accountants, who considered
the advance to the Seine impracticable even while it was being
carried out, suddenly declaring themselves willing to take the
risk of supporting an
'unscheduled' operation across the German
border. That the SHAEF logisticians were not cast in the heroic
mould it seems impossible to deny. Yet it is hardly for us, who
have seen so many great campaigns come to grief owing to a lac
of logistic support, to condemn one which did after all terminate
in an undisputed - if possibly belated - success.
8
Logistics in perspective
Looking back over the present study, particularly its latter chap-
ters, it sometimes appears that the logistic aspect of war is
nothing but an endless series of difficulties succeeding each other.
Problems constantly appear, grow, merge, are handed forward
and backward, are solved and dissolved only to reappear in a
different guise. In face of this kaleidoscopic array of obstacles
that a serious study of logistics brings to light, one sometimes
wonders how armies managed to move at all, how campaigns
were waged, and victories occasionally won.
That all warfare consists of an endless series of difficulties,
things that go wrong, is a commonplace, and is precisely what
Clausewitz meant when talking about the 'friction' of war. It is
therefore surprising that the vast majority of books on military
history manage to pay lip service to this concept and yet avoid
making a serious study of it. Hundreds of books on strategy and
tactics have been written for every one on logistics, and even the
relatively few authors who have
bothered to investigate this
admittedly unexciting aspect of war have usually done so on the
basis of a few preconceived ideas rather than
on a careful
examination of the evidence.
This lack of regard is in spite - or
perhaps because - of the fact that logistics make up as much as
nine tenths of the business of war, and that the mathematical
problems involved in calculating the movements and supply of
armies are, to quote Napoleon, not unworthy of a Leibnitz or a
Newton. As a great modern soldier has said: 1
The more I see of war, the more I realize how it all
depends on administration and transportation...It takes
little skill or imagination to see where you would like your
