SAAMAM LIBRARY TRINITY
GOLLEG
224
Supplying War
the Allies did not possess enough logistic resources to support a
simultaneous advance by all their forces and, in trying to be
strong everywhere, would end up by being too weak to gain a
decisive victory at any one point.* While Eisenhower refused to
halt Patton - instead, he authorized him to continue eastward at
least as far as Rheims and Châlons-sur-Marne - Montgomery
gained his point in that Hodges' entire Army was ordered to
advance north of the Ardennes in conjunction with 21. Army
Group.15 However, Eisenhower intended that the main objective
of the northward thrust would not be the Liège-Aix-la-Chapelle
gap, but the port of Antwerp, without which he believed no
further advance into Germany could be sustained.46
With that, the first round of the great argument came to an
end. It took
place at a time when Montgomery was only just
completing his eighty-mile approach to the Seine, whereas Patton,
who had far longer distances to go, was already across the river
and advancing fast. Apart from all considerations of national.
prestige and public opinion, it is not surprising that Eisenhower
did not want to stop his most dashing commander in favour of
one who, up to that point, had scarcely proved himself a master
of pursuit operations. Ten days later, however, 21. Army Group
had pushed forward 200 miles and was closing on the Ger-
man border. With his position thus immensely strengthened,
Montgomery wrote Eisenhower that:47
1. I consider that we have now reached a stage where one
really powerful and full-blooded thrust towards Berlin
is likely to get there and thus end the German war.
2. We have not enough maintenance resources for two
full-blooded thrusts.
3. The selected thrust must have all the maintenance
resources it needs without any qualification and any
other operation must do the best it can with what is left
over.
4. There are only two possible thrusts: one via the Ruhr and
the other via the Saar.
5. In my opinion the thrust likely to give the best and
quickest results is the northern one via the Ruhr.
The wording of this message was extremely unfortunate, for the
objective mentioned - Berlin - was still over 400 miles away and,
War of the accountants
225
as we shall see, definitely beyond the reach of the Allied forces at
this time. Nor did Montgomery aid his cause by sending, a few
days later, an 'amplification' in which he spoke of a 'knifelike
thrust. into the centre of Germany' 48 These exaggerations sub-
sequently enabled Eisenhower to claim, with some justification,
that the British Field Marshal's proposals were reckless and ill-
considered.
The confusion as to the nature and direction of the proposed
offensive in the north increased still further when, on 8 Septem-
ber, the first V 2 landed on London and caused the British govern-
ment to demand that 21. Army Group overrun the launching sites
in Holland. This led to Montgomery modifying his ideas once
more, and instead of striking east at the Ruhr he now decided to
move north to the Zuider Zee. In so far as he authorized the
Arnhem operation,
Eisenhower supported him. However,
remained adamant throughout that no advance into Germany was
possible unless Antwerp was first opened up. to
Thus, Montgomery's own ideas as to just what he wanted to do
were much less clear than he would have us believe. His original
'solid mass' had been whittled down to a 'knifelike thrust', and
his mentin of Berlin as the obiective continued to bedevil all
discussion.50
confusion
surrounding
the issue,
however,
should not be allowed to obscure the main question, namely
whether it was logistically possible, in September 1944, to capture
the Ruhr without first opening Antwerp.
The argument as to
whether or not Germany
was at
time on the
point of
collapsed is not directly relevant to this question, for there is no
doubt that, whatever forces filer was or was not able to mobilize
in the centre of Germany' & the way to the Ruhr lay wide open
in the early days of September. The only question, therefore, is
whether the logistic meats at the Allies disposal were sufficient
to support a drive for the Ruhr.
First, a few delinitions must be made. For the purpose of our
inquiries a 'drive to the Ruhr' ic taken to mean an advance by 2
Britich and 1 Amarinan Armies with a combined total of 18
divicions, to Dortmund, a move which would have left the Rubr
encircled. The starting point of the British
forces would have
been the Meuse-Fscant Canal (that is if the Arhem operation
had not been launched), whereas the Americans would have set
out from the Maastricht-Liège area.
The distance from these
starting points to the obiective of Dortmund is almost equal and
