COLLEGL
SAAMAM LIBRARY
222
Supplying War
Hodges and Patton had run out of fuel, Dempsey informed
SHAEF that his supply situation was 'very favourable'." Though
the length of their communications increased to almost 300 miles
during the subsequent week, the British coped by reducing un-
loading at the ports from 17,000 to 6,000 tons per day - thus
freeing truck companies - and immobilizing many units, includ-
ing one complete corps (the VIII).»s So rapid was the advance
that the Belgian railroad network, the world's best, was captured
intact, though its utilization was delayed because the Americans
did not hand over rolling-stock as scheduled.3o Above all,
Montgomery's advance did not take him away from the ports, as
did that of Bradley's forces. On the contrary, it put him in a posi-
tion to clear up a whole series of ports along the Channel - includ-
ing Le Havre, Dieppe, Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk - so that
their situation regarding unloading capacity promised to become
much better than had been expected even a month earlier.
Meanwhile, what of the German enemy? Since D day, the
Wehrmacht's casualties in the west had been staggering; 400,00
men, 1,800 tanks and assault guns, 1,500 other guns and 20,000
vehicles of all kinds had been lost.37 The units that still remained
had been battered beyond recognition by Allied air and land
forces, had been compelled to withraw from a series of pockets
such as those at Falaise and Mons and had lost all resemblance
to organized fighting formations. Thus, for example, 1. SS division
escaped over the Seine with only 40 tanks and I,000 fighting men
left. 84, infantry division had 3,000 men whereas 2. armoured divi-
sion had only 2,000 men and 5 tanks; 2. parachute corps, despite
its name, numbered only some 4,000 men - hardly more than a
strong brigade - with all but light weapons lost. 38 According to
its own estimates, the Wehrmacht was outnumbered along the
entire front by ten to one in tanks, three to one in artillery (this
particular imbalance was regarded as 'not too serious" in itsel,
but the Germans suffered from a shortage of ammunition) and
'almost unlimited' extent in the air.? Hitler, moreover,
concentrated most of his forces on the Moselle in order to stop
Patton, with the result that, according to Eisenhower, he only
had the equivalent of two weak' armoured and nine infantry
divisions available north of the Ardennes, all of which were said
to be disorganized, in full retreat and unlikely to offer any appre
ciable resistance. Indeed, such was their state that a member of
Eisenhower's staff (probably COS Bedell Smith himsell) con-
War of the accountants
223
sidered it 'possible to reduce the strength of the Allies' forces
in this area by 3 divisions and, far from prejudice the advance, aid
it' * In short, the route to the Ruhr - Germany's industrial heart,
where more than half of her coal and steel were produced - lay
wide open. As Liddell Hart has written, rarely in any war had
there been such an opportunity.
In order to understand why this opportunity was missed, it is
necessary to return to the spring of 1944 when the Allies' basic
strategy for the coming Continental campaign was laid down. In
a memorandum of 3 May - signed, incidentally, by British officers
- it was laid down that Berlin, while forming the Allies ultimate
objective, was too far away and that their first goal in Germany
should therefore be the Ruhr. While it was recognized that the
easiest and most direct route to this area led north of the
Ardennes through Liège and Aix-la-Chapelle, it was decided that
there should be a second thrust through the Saar in order to
compel the Wehrmacht to stretch its resources and keep it guess-
ing as to the Allie' intentions. On 27 May, the principles formu-
lated in this memorandum were embodied in a directive issued
over Eisenhower's signature.*
Whether the best way to utilize an overwhelming numerical
superiority such as the Allies possessed is to split it up so as to
enablo the enemy to operate on internal lines will not be dis-
cussed here. Suffice it to say that the battle for Normandy had, as
we saw, developed in a manner very different from
what had
been expected. While progress had initially been slow, the break
through when it came proved much more decisive than anyone
had hoped. In view of this, Field Marshal Montgomery began to
entertain second thoughts as to the wisdom of the Allies strategy
and - so it seems - first voiced them to his American colleagues
on 14 August 42 Three davs later, his ideas had crystallized suffi
ciently for him to tell Bradley that after crossing the Seine, 12.
and 21 Army Groups should keep together as a solid mass of
forty divisions which should advance northwards. with their
right flank on the Ardennes', 3 Montgomery, however,
see Fisenhower til 23 August and bu then had modifed his
argument. Instead of demanding that the whole of 12. American
Army Group be deployed to protect his right flank in Belgium, he
now considered that this task would have to be carried out by the
nine divicine of Hodes, Army alone, The rest of 12. Ármy
Group - that is, Patton's 3. Army - was to be kept in its place, for
