SARAM LIBRARY TRIMITY
SOLLEO
216
Supplying War
'Broad front' or 'knifelike thrust'?
Of all the problems raised by the Allied campaign in north.
western Europe in 1944-5, the question whether it would have
been possible to put an early end to the war by means of a quick
thrust from Belgium to the Ruhr is perhaps the most important.
The literature on this subject is vast and still growing. Here we
shall only
attempt a brief summary of the main views. These
appear to be as follows:
(a) The one put forward by Chester Wilmot and, above
all, Field Marshal Montgomery himself. These two have
argued that the strategic opportunity presented itself in
September 1944. Given a clear-cut decision and a willingness
to stake out a meaningful order of priorities on the part of
the supreme commander, 2. British and 1. American Armies
could have captured the Ruhr - and perhaps Berlin as well.
Eisenhower, however, refused to concentrate his logistic
resources behind Dempsey and Hodges. In particular, he
did not want to halt Patton's 3. Army. Consequently, the
opportunity to end the war in 1944 was lost.28
(b) To counter Montgomery's accusations, Eisenhower
has defended his decision on strategic grounds, claiming
that a thrust by part of his forces into 'the heart of
Germany' was too risky and would have led to 'nothing but
certain destruction' 27 Subsequent writers have produced
more arguments to justify his decision, including the need
to avoid offending Allied (that is, American) public opinion
by halting Patton, differences over the structure of the chain
of command in France, and - last though not least -
(c) Finally, Basil Liddell Hart has suggested that, while
the opportunity to go for the Ruhr did exist, failure to
utilize it lay not so much with Eisenhower as with
Montgomery himself. In particular, the discovery at the
critical moment that 1,400 British-built lorries had defective
engines was decisive. Given this, there was little that
Eisenhower could do to help, for Patton's 3. Army was
receiving so few supplies that not even by stopping it could
enough transport have been made available to enable
Montgomery to occupy the Ruhr.29
War of the accountants
217
Although the accounts of the situation that faced the Allies
early in September 1944 differ in conclusion and even in detail,
there is little doubt that operations in the period just preceding
had been among the most spectacular in history. Having sent its
advance formations across the Seine on 20 August, Patton's 3.
Army covered almost 200 miles in twelve days until it stopped in
front of Metz. Hodges 1. Army on his left advanced even further,
reaching the Albert Canal in eastern Belgium on 6 September.
Montgomery's 21. Army Group, whose rate of progress had
hitherto been markedly slower than that of the American forces,
now surpassed itself by surging forward across northern France
and Belgium, capturing Antwerp - its port virtually intact - on 5
September and only coming to a halt on the Meuse-Escaut Canal
four days later. It was a performance of which the originators of
the Blitzkrieg would have been proud, and one which the Allies
themselves had not foreseen.
As might have been expected in the light of previous events, all
these operations were carried out against
the advice of the
SHAEF logisticians, who declared them to be utterly impossible.
Compelled to revise their cautious estimates of July,
they com-
pleted a new feasibility-study on 11 August. This showed that if
a whole series of conditions was met it might be possible to sup-
port a tentative offensive by four U.S. divisions across the Seine
on 7 September. Even this conclusion, however, was qualified by
the suggestion that operations south of the
should be
halted in favour of an attack on the Channel ports, and that the
liberation of Paris should be postponed until late October when
railways from the Normandy area would hopefully be available
to carry relief supplies.
As it was,
Paris was liberated on 25
August.
By the target date of 7 September both Patton and
Hodges had already gone 200 miles behind the Seine. A week
later 16 U.S. divisions were being supported, albeit inadequately,
on or near the German frontier on both sides of the Ardennes
while several more were engaged on active combat operations in
Brittany. All this was achieved in spite of the fact that the condi-
tions laid down in the paper of Il August had been only partly
met. Seldom can calculations by staff officers have proved so
utterly wrong.
Supply over the rapidly expanding lines of communication -
those in the American sector grew from 200 or 250 miles to over
400, and those in the British one from 80 to nearly 300 - could
