50
Supplying War
to men happened to be exactly the same as in the Austrian army
under General Mack. 1 Again, the 2,000 wagons left to the service
des vivres after the artillery had taken its share of 2,500 would
have sufficed to carry provisions for 116,000 men for eleven days
if one assumes that consumption amounted to three pounds per
day and that the average load of a four-horse wagon was around
one ton - which is probably too low. As it was, only a small part
of this transport materialized. The wagons from Boulogne were
sent to the wrong place owing to a bureaucratic error, whereas the
Compagnie Breidt only had about a fifth of its vehicles ready in
Finally, the drivers of carts impressed in large numbers
along the Rhine used every opportunity to desert, taking their
horses along when possible.
If the Grande Armée suffered from a shortage of transport, this
was due to the lack of time in which to set up proper trains rather
than to any preconceived determination on the Emperor's side to
do without them. Exactly when he first became aware that it
would not be possible to meet all his demands we do not know but
a clue may perhaps be found in a letter to Dejean in which, on
28 August. he ordered the 500,000 rations previously assigned to
Strasbourg to be distributed between that town, Landau and
Spires. What is even more significant in our context is that there
is no mention at all made of the 200,000 rations ordered for
Mainz, nor do they reappear in any subsequent document. Im-
mediately after this reduction in the total amount of provisions
an order was sent to Savary to reconnoitre, for the first time, the
crossings of the Neckar in an area well to the north of that which
Murat had previously been instructed to traverse. Finally, on 30
August, there came a whole series of orders altering the army's
area of deployment and shifting it sixty miles to the north so that
extended from Strasbourg through Hagenau to Spires
with a strong concentration of forces on the left wing. In accor-
dance with these new dispositions the bulk of Napoleon's forces
would now move through the rich territories of Baden and
Württemberg instead of by way of the Black Forest whose defiles
had witnessed the sufferings of many a previous French army.
Discussing the reasons behind this change, Alombert and Colin
claim that it could not possibly have been due to logistic causes
because the poverty of the Black Forest must have been well-
known to Napoleon long before he gave his original orders. If,
however, one agrees with our above conclusion that the Emperor
'An army marches on its stomach'
51
never intended his troops to live by requisition while on their
way to Bavaria, and that he first perceived the inadequacy of the
means at his disposal during the very last days of August, this
objection falls by the wayside.
The area of deployment having been changed, preparations to
receive the approaching columns of the Grande Armée con-
tinued. Towards the middle of September Murat returned from
Germany and began inspecting the work done, sending back en-
thusiastic reports to the Emperor. On 17 September he was at
Landau, on the next day he visited Strasbourg, and three days
later he spoke to Petiet who, Murat said, was fairly bursting with
enthusiasm and sure he could lay hands on everything down to
the last detail. This feeling was shared by few of the marshals as
they started arriving on the Rhine. On 22 September Soult in-
formed Murat that 'whatever the intendant general may say' his
troops at Landau were in danger of running out of bread, while
there was nothing left to be purchased in the country around. On
the next day, Davout presented Petiet with a list in which he
expressed his dissatisfaction with every single detail of his corps®
material preparations.1 The shortage of transport in particular
was such that barely enough vehicles to carry the army's ammuni-
tion were available, the result being that Marmont had to send
forty per cent of his ammunition by way of the Rhine, Arriving at
Mainz, it was found that there was not enough water in the Main
for the barges to continue their voyage to Würzburg, and so the
on minus much of its ammunition and heavy
Napoleon himself had meanwhile arrived in Strasbourg where
he reprimanded the officers responsible for the army's logistics
(carry out the orders I gave you', he snapped at Dejean) and
busied himself with the details of marching and feeding the army
once it had got across the Rhine. His orders for the corps were
laid down on 20 September. Davout, Soult, Ney and Lannes were
to cross the Rhine on 25 and 26 September, each marching by a
separate route according to the usual Napoleonic system. Mar-
mont and Bernadotte were also given their marching orders, the
latter being ordered to cross neutral Prussian territory at Ansbach
in order to avoid congestion. However, he got into trouble when
the Prussians who had originally granted passage for thirtv-five
days, suddenlv revoked their permission and so caused the French
marshal to be separated from his heavy baggage which remained
