GOLLEGE
LIBRARY
210
Supplying War
6,000lb. per day of emergency stores did exist, but there was no
way to effect a resupply within less than forty-eight hours of
requisitioning. As might have been expected, the attempt to
adhere to a rigid order of priorities in unloading supplies on the
Continent led to great confusion and interminable delay, with
men in small boats bobbing from one ship to another in order to
ascertain the nature of their cargoes. The timetables goveming
the reloading of ships and landing craft upon their return to
England were too tight and did not allow for delays, with the
result that ports became congested and had to be cleared by
emergency measures, in the course of which many a unit was
torn apart or simply lost. Confusion in the ports was increased
still further by the fact that no less than three organizations -
MOVCO, TURCO, and EMBARCO - were responsible for em-
barkation. But the plans' greatest fault was that they did not allow
sufficiently for the inevitable friction of war. Intended to elimin-
ate waste, their tightness actually caused it because diffeulies
at the lower end of the pipeline would immediately reverberate
all along its length.
Beginning on D+1, a start was made on the construction of
the two artificial harbours. Highly complex and extremely costly
to build and tow across the Channel, these installations failed to
meet expectations. The British one in particular reached Nor-
mandy only after forty per cent of its component parts had been
lost at sea, with the result that performance fell far behind
expectations.12 The American artificial harbour arrived more or
less intact, but had hardly started operating when it was swamped
by a gale and literally blown to pieces. In the event, it was the
time-honoured device of blockships that proved most useful in
providing protection for the landings. Much of the complicated
and expensive equipment of the artificial harbours (some of
which had been designed for entirely different operations and was
apparently taken along simply because it was available) only
served to clutter the landing area with wreckage and thus in-
creased the danger to shipping. Here, as elsewhere, the men who
planned operation 'Overlord' had clearly violated Hindenburgs
maxim that, in war, only the simple succeeds.
While beaches and artificial harbours had to be relied upon to
support the early stages of the operation, its ultimate success
restored to use.
could onlv he accurad if deen water norts were cantured and
Since tactical developments on the Continent
War of the accountants
211
proceeded more slowly than had been
these hopes were at first disappointed. Thus,
anticipated, however,
Cherbourg - by
far the most important port in Normandy - began operating six
weeks behind schedule and it was several more weeks before it
reached its scheduled capacity of 6,000 tons per day. Saint-Lo,
supposed to fall by D+9, did not in fact do so until D+48.
Granville and Saint-Malo were expected
to start operating
around D+27 but remained in German hands until D +50. The
proximity of the Normandy landing sites to the Brittany ports,
Brest in particular, had played a major role in their selection for
'Overlord'. In the event, these ports were only taken months
behind schedule and by then proved too far away from the front
to be of any use. Other ports, such as Grandchamp and Isigny,
were occupied more or less on time but were too small to make
any significant contributions to Allied supply. As a result of all
these factors, total American supplies
disembarked during the
a whole series of operations -
month of June reached only 71 percent of program, which led to
'Swordhilt' - being successively initiated,
considered and rejected for purely logistic reasons.?8
If the above facts did not lead to the collapse of the Allied
operations in France, this was due to the fact that the beaches,
even though deprived of the protection that was supposed to be
afforded by the artificial harbours, proved capable of discharging
supplies far in excess of what the plans had allowed for. This,
however, was achieved only by disregarding all the plans. The
first breakthrough came on D + 2 when it was decided to ignore
the predetermined order of priorities and unload everything
regardless. Having for months resisted the beaching of its craft
during low tide (a fact, incidentally,
that had done much to
determine the exact date and hour of the operation) the Navy
suddenly discovered that such a procedure was feasible after all,
thereby making it possible to discharge cargoes directly to the
shore and dispense with many of the laboriously
boats, floating piers, pontoon causeways and the like.
loading proceeded not so much in accordance with the plans as
without them, and in some cases against them, which was addi-
tional proof that the planning staffs had grossly overestimated
the value of complex artificial arrangements and underestimated
what determination,
common
sense
and improvisation could
achieve.
