78
Supplying War
with requisitioned horses and vehicles. Similarly, nuclei of quali-
fied NCOs to train the necessary personnel were not established
and the entire organization had to be built up from scratch during
mobilization.
During the events of 1848 and 1849, these arrangements were
tested for the first time and, as might have been expected, found
completely inadequate. The main problem lay in the quality and
quantity of the personnel. The commander of the trains, a Majo
von Freudenthal, was 69 years old while his principal collabora-
tors were
veterans of the campaigns of 1812 and 1813, the
youngest of them being aged 55. No officers were available to
command the field hospitals and bakeries, which consequently
had to be entrusted to NOs, some of them invalids who had never
previously even ridden a horse. Equipment, especially clothing,
was so short that some of the men spent fourteen days at the
depôts before finally being issued with their uniforms. Arrange.
ments for feeding the horses had not been made, and dreadful
confusion ensued when officers tried to group men whom they did
not know into units that did not exist. Under these circumstances,
the trains were unable to reach the area of deployment in time,
which led that soldier-prince, Wilhelm of Prussia (subsequently
King and then first German Emperor) to write that supply and
transportation were the weakest points in the entire Prussian
army organization.
In 1853, thoroughgoing reforms were accordingly initiated by
the Minister of War, von Bonin. In January, the training in peace-
time of train officers and NCOs was provided for; this was fol-
lowed three months later by a more detailed order signed by
Frederick Wilhelm himself, specifying that each corps should
detail a staff officer for the establishment of a 'nucleus' (Stamm)
of train personnel, and that this personnel should engage in sup-
ply-exercises
during fourteen days each year. In 1856, these
nuclei of train personnel were expanded into regular train bat-
talions which, moreover, were now made subordinate directly to
their respective corps headquarters. A train battalion consisted of
a staff,
five provisions-columns (overall capacity 3,000 Zentner
four, approximately eight days' consumption), a field bakery, a
remount depôt, one main hospital and four field hospitals. How-
ever, when the army was mobilized against France in 1859 many
of these turned out to exist on paper only. After demobilization
measures aimed at bringing the trains of all corps up to establish-
When demigods rode rails
79
ment were introduced.
Finally, in June 1860, there came yet
another reorganization which turned the train troops into an inde-
pendent arm (Waffe) of the army and gave them their own inspec-
tor-general. This inspector was subordinated, not to the General
Staff, but to the Ministry of War, and was responsible for training
and nominating the train-commanders.
Each of the nine corps
into which the Prussian army was now divided was given its own
train battalion which, in peacetime, consisted of 292 officers,
NCOs and men. The personnel were listed as combatants, and
accordingly wore the regular army uniform.
Complete in theory, these arrangements were not really tested
Danish campaign of 1864 because Prussia put into the
feld on that occasion only 43,500 men (rather less than two com-
plete corps), 12,000 horses and 100 guns - a fraction of her overall
military strength. During the period of concentration, the army as
a whole was provisioned by quartering. However, magazines of
flour and fodder were set up around Kiel, as was a reserve wagon-
park, 1,000 strong. It being winter, some difficulties were ex-
perienced with the weather because the roads were iced over,
which made marching difficult. As distances were small and the
country rich, the organization functioned smoothly on the whole,
though problems were caused by the lack of training of some of
the personnel. In any case, it does not appear that the experiences
of this little war led to any important changes in the service of
supply.
Very different were the experiences of the Prussian-Austrian
War of 1866. Though the train organization should theoretically
have been capable of catering to the army's needs, the sheer size
of the problem was overwhelming; 280,000 men, concentrated in
a single theatre of operations, were to be supplied from base, an
enterprise far exceeding anything previously attempted, with the
exception of Napoleon's ill-fated Russian adventure. As in 1864,
the troops were fed during the neriod of concentration mainly by
quartering, supplemented by free purchase. It was intended, how-
ever, to supply ple evance a rainst Austria from the rear, 1. Army
in particular making its arrangements as if Saxony, where it was
to operate, were a desert." In the event, nothing came of these
plans. The trains generally succeeded in keeping up with the
trops until about 29 June (a time, however, when the invasion of
the Austrian territories had not vet dot very far) but were subse-
quently left behind and did not succeed in catching up until
ABRE
TRINILY
