6
Supplying War
multiplied their size many times over between about 1560 and
1715.
As armies grew, the impedimenta surrounding them increased
out of all proportion. Unlike the spruce, well-organized force that
Alba took with him to the Netherlands, the armies of early
seventeenth-century Europe were huge, blundering bodies. A
force numbering, say, 30,000 men, might be followed by a crowd
of women,
children, servants and sutlers of anywhere between
fifty and a hundred and fifty per cent of its own size, and it had to
drag this huge 'tail' behind it wherever it went. The troops con-
sisted mostly of uprooted men with no home outside the army,
and their baggage - especially that of the officers - assumed
monumental
proportions.
Out of 942
wagons
accompanying
Maurice of Nassau on his campaign of 1610, no less than 129 were
earmarked to carry the staff and their belongings, and this figure
does not include a perhaps equally large number of 'extracurri-
cular' vehicles. All in all, an army of this period might easily have
one wagon, with two to four horses each, for every fifteen men?
Under special circumstances - when it was necessary to try and
make a force self-sufficient for an unusually long time, as during
Maurice's 1602 campaign in Brabant - the proportion might even
be twice as much; on that occasion, no less than 3,000 wagons
were collected to accompany 24,000 men.®
In view of the ever-growing hordes of troops, women, servants
and horses, the methods used to feed them are of some interest.
By and large, the military forces of every country consisted of
mercenaries; the army as such owed them little more than their
solde, out of which they were expected to purchase not merely
their daily food but also, albeit often helped by an advance from
their company captain, their clothing, equipment, arms, and, in at
least one case, their powder. Always provided the treasury sent
money and that the officers were honest in distributing it, the
system could work well enough as long as the troops were sta-
tioned more or less permanently in some well-populated place. A
regular market could then be organized and put under the super-
vision of the intendant, who was responsible - to the government,
not the commander in chief - for finding out what could be sup-
plied and for policing the premises allocated for commerce and
exercising price and quality control.* The trade between the
troops and the local population was generally conducted on a
voluntary basis except when some shortage was expected; in such
The background of two centuries
a case it might become necessary to prevent the richer soldiers
from buying up all the available stock for their own use." The
system, as is well known, was subject to endless abuses that
worked against the interests of almost everyone involved. Never-
theless, there was not in principle anything manifestly impossible
about it.
Once the army had to operate away from its permanent station,
however,
situation
became
very
different.
Establishing
markets takes time, and the local peasants could not be counted
upon to sustain the force unless, as was usually the case, its move-
ments were slow and marked by lengthy pauses. The prospect of
gain could induce some larger merchants - the sutlers properly
speaking - to follow the army, but they and their wagons would
increase still further the size of its tail® while their stocks could
not in any case last forever. In friendly territory it was sometimes
possible to send commissionaries ahead in order to organize the
resources of this or that town and set up a market. In a very few
cases, when armies were repeatedly using the same routes for
years on end, more or less permanent stations would be organized
in which everything required by the soldiers was available for
sale.' Another method of keeping an army on the move supplied
was to quarter it on the inhabitants of the towns and villages on
the way. In addition to free shelter, salt and light, these could be
expected to provide other necessities en lieu of cash payment. In
practice, of course, this did not always work out well; as often as
not, the soldiers would both take their food and keep their
money, not to mention that of their hosts.
On the other hand, no logistic system of the time could sustain
an army embarked on operations in enemy territory. Nor, indeed,
was the need for such a system felt prior to our period. From
time immemorial the problem had been solved simply by having
the
troops take whatever they required. More or less well-
organized plunder was the rule rather than the exception. By the
early seventeenth century, however, this time-honoured 'system'
would no longer work. The size of armies was now too large for it
to be successful. However, the statistical data and administrative
machinery which, in a later age, would help to cope with this
increase in numbers by turning plunder into systematic exploita-
tion did not yet exist. As a result, the armies of this period were
probably the worst supplied in history; marauding bands of armed
ruffians, devastating the countryside they crossed.
