SAAAM LIBRARY. TRINITY
GOLLEGE
228
Supplying War
and 1. American Armies, twelve out of the forty-three Allied
divisions in France would have been completely immobilized and
their truck complements taken away. In addition, seven divisions
coming up from the Mediterranean in operation
'Dragoon' were
irrelevant to the main effort, so that only twenty-four would have
been left over. Of these, six belonging to 1. Canadian Army
would have been operating against the Channel ports. For the
advance on the Ruhr proper, only eighteen divisions would have
been available - a fairly small number, admittedly, but one which
would in all probability have sufficed to break through the weak
German opposition at this time.
Since distances to be covered inside Germany were relatively
small, providing air support for the exposed flanks should not
have been unduly difficult - as it would no doubt have been in an
advance on Berlin. Instead of having to cross four rivers, which
was what the Allies tried to do during the Arnhem operation,
they would have found their way barred by two only. The road
network leading eastward to the Ruhr was excellent and superior
to that leading north into Holland.
Since transport to set up substantial forward dumps in Belgium,
in addition to daily consumption, was not available, the drive on
the Ruhr would have to be launched with the Allies' main supply
base still hundreds of miles in the rear. This would no doubt
have entailed long delays between the requisitioning of supplies
and their arrival at the front, a fact that could have serious con-
sequences in case of a sudden emergency. However, an allocation
of 650 tons per day was generous almost to a fault, and Allied
communications in France and Belgium - especially railtrans-
portation facilities! - were being rapidly and daily improved. In
view of this, the risk of operating at such distances from base
could have been accepted, especially as the Luftwaffe was power-
less to interfere with the line of communications.
Against this, it has been argued that the Allies, having already
twice preferred strategic to logistic considerations during their
advance across France, ' could not have done so a third time
without stretching their communications to the breaking point.
This view, however, ignores the fact that the distance from
Baveny to Dortmund ic no londar than that which Patton covered
from Cherbourg to Metz. In other words, the Allies did succeed
in supporting their forces over 450 miles - but did so in the
wrong direction.
War of the accountants
229
An interesting aspect of the problem is the fact that, contrary
to what is generally believed, acceptance of the plan for a drive
to the Ruhr would not have entailed the transfer of transport from
American to British units, with all its consequent complications.®2
Rather, it was a question of switching vehicles from one American
Army to another. Of the three Allied commanders in Belgium -
Crerar, Dempsey, and Hodges - it was Hodges whose supply
difficulties did
most to prejudice Montgomery's plans.®s Had
Patton been stopped, it was to his 1. Army that the transport
thereby freed would have gone.
refusing to halt 3. Army
Eisenhower made his prophecy come true that no advance into
Germany would be possible without Antwerp,
for it was only
when that port was opened in late
November
that distances
behind Hodges were cut from over 400 miles to seventy.
The
British did not need Antwerp, as they were by that time living
comfortably from the Seine and Channel ports.º4
If Eisenhower must therefore be held responsible for failing to
realize where the centre of gravity lay and adjusting his priorities
accordingly, it cannot be denied that to have done so would have
required almost superhuman foresight. At the time when the idea
of a change in the Allies' fundamental strategy was first voiced,
Patton was marching at full steam whereas Montgomery - even
though the distances he had to cover were much smaller - was
merely inching his way forward towards the Seine, By no stretch
of the imagination was it possible to foresee that,
during the
next two weeks,
this normally so cautious
commander would
suddenly surpass himself and advance 200 miles to the German
border. Nor, it will be remembered, did Montgomery at first even
ask that Patton be halted. On the contrary, he wanted him to
protect the flank of his own offensive,
and for that purpose
demanded that the direction of Patton's advance be altered from
east into Lorraine to northeast into Belgium.
By the time he
realized that forty divisions carrying out the Schlieffen Plan in
reverse' could not be supported logistically it was already too late,
as he himself admitted. es
Montgomery did even more to prejudice acceptance of his
plan by engaging in loose talk,
first of an advance on Berlin and
then of a 'knifelike thrust into the heart of Germany. While there
is good reason to believe that a drive by eighteen divisions agains
the Ruhr would probably have succeeded, there could be no
question of occupying the greater part of Germany with such a
