TY
GOLLEGE
ANAM LIBRAR
234
Supplying War
armies, with the result that warfare, this time shackled by im-
mense networks of tangled umbilical cords, froze and turned into
a process of mutual slaughter on a scale so vast as to stagger the
Whether or not the subsequent products of the machine -
trucks, tracks, airplanes - have enabled armies to overcome the
of mechanized warfare is a moot point. Comparisons
between modern mobile campaigns and those of earlier days
have sometimes been made, but their results are hardly convinc-
ing in view of the difficulty of finding the right things to com-
pare.' A more fruitful approach to the problem would seem to be,
not to measure the speed of present-day armies as against that of
previous ones, but to try and see to what extent they have been
able to realize their maximum theoretical speed as determined by
the technological means available - in other words, to measure
the effects of that elusive factor, 'friction.' Looked at in this way,
it appears that the
sustained speed of eighteenth-
century armies was three miles per hour - the pace of a marching
man - and that they were occasionally able to cover as much as
fifteen miles per day for two or three weeks on end. As against
this ratio of 1:5, modern vehicles - even tracked ones - can easily
cover fifteen miles an hour, but no army, not even the British
'Blade Force chasing Rommel in North Africa or Malinowskys
armoured columns in pursuit of the Japanese in Manchuria, has
managed to sustain a pace of seventy-five miles a day for more
than a very few days at a time.
Another way of looking at the same problem is to consider the
so-called 'critical distance', i.e. the maximum one at which armies
can, with the aid of a given type of vehicle, be 'effectively' sup-
ported from base. We have already had cause to remark that the
concept itself is not very useful, dependent as it is on a very large
number of accidental factors. Nevertheless, a theoretical examina-
tion based on it appears interesting. Assuming a wagon of one-ton
capacity drawn by four horses, each of which consumes 20lb. of
fodder per day, the maximum distance the vehicle can travel
before using up its entire payload is 20 x 2,240
=555 miles, of
which probably no more than 120, or approximately twenty-two
per cent, have ever been utilized in practice. Compared with this,
a 5-ton World War II motor truck loaded with nothing but fuel
could probably travel at least 5.000 miles before getting through
Logistics in perspective
235
its load. However, no more than, at the most, 500 - or ten per cent
of the maximum capacity - have ever been utilized in a European
campaign. Even Rommel, a commander who understood the art
of squeezing the last mile out of his transport like no other, ran
into insoluble difficulties when he tried to double this figure. It
follows from these facts that, far from eighteenth-century armies
being slow and magazine-bound, they managed to do very much
better in relation to the theoretical limits of the means at their
disposal than do modern forces. This is only to be expected, for
the friction within any machine - human or mechanical- increases
in proportion to the number of its parts - a prime example of the
law of diminishing returns.
Given these facts, and in spite of the development of all means
of transportation in the thirty years since World War II, the speed
of mobile operations cannot, in our opinion, be expected to rise
dramatically in the foreseeable future. It was demonstrated in the
Israeli-Egyptian campaign of 1967 that not even an army operat-
ing under ideal conditions, enjoying complete superiority in the
air and taking a second rate opponent by surprise, stands much
chance of covering more than forty miles per day.' To conclude
from this that the 1944-style army is 'dangerously obsolete, how-
ever, is to misunderstand the development of logistics during the
present century, characterized as it is by the fact that the speed
and range of successive new means of transport have been largely,
if not completely, offset by the enormous increase in friction and,
above all, by the quantities of supplies required. Hence, even if
an entirely new and unprecedentedly effective means of transport
were to appear tomorrow, it is to be expected that only a small
fraction of its maximum theoretical capacity will ever be utilized
in practice, and that its effect on the speed of mobile operations
will therefore be marginal.
A further
interesting question
concerns the proportion
of
service to combat formations. This proportion is frequently cited
as a rough indicator of an army's efficiency - a low proportion
representing a high efficiency.
But this is to misunderstand the
relation of service to combat units. Romantically heroic politic-
ians and gung-ho generals notwithstanding, the aim of a military
organization
is not to make do with the smallest number of
supporting troops but to produce the greatest possible fighting
power. If, for any given campaign, this aim can only be achieved
by having a hundred men pump fuel, drive trucks and construct
