32
Supplying War
swept the country bare, with the result that he, like Wallenstein
before and Napoleon after him, was unable to traverse the same
country twice. This caused him to split the army into detachments
when following the beaten Franco-Bavarian forces back west-
ward after their defeat at Blenheim.02
As regards supplies other than food, Marlborough followed a
similar procedure. Rather than taking the trouble to accumulate
stocks, he simply purchased whatever came his way, hiring trans-
port to bring the goods into camp when possible, marching the
army or part of it to fetch them at the place of manufacture when
necessary. " Far from constructing magazines to support a war of
movement, Marlborough did so only when the army stopped mov-
ing around. Thus, we find him writing from the camp at Aicha in
Bavaria, where he had arrived after completing the march from
the Netherlands, that 'we came to this camp on Friday, and have
since been drawing what corn and provisions we could for erect:
ing a magazine in this place, intending to leave a garrison here.
And again, from another camp at Friedberg: 'since we are going
to stay here for some time, take care about the magazines' ®* Nor
were these isolated incidents; rather, they formed part of a
strategy which, late in July and early in August 1704, was moti-
vated almost exclusively by logistic considerations.
The aim of Marlborough's operations during this period was, in
his own words, to prevent his opponent - the Elector of Bavaria
- from getting the least subsistence out of his country. Coming
from the
northwest, he beat the Elector at Donauwörth and
forced him to retreat across the Danube and southward along the
right bank of the Lech at Augsburg, where he made use of the
town's fortifications to establish himself safely. The Duke also
crossed the Danube, and marched along the opposite bank of the
Lech until reaching the above-mentioned camp at Friedberg:
Having thus interposed himself between the Elector and his
country, he set out to ravage Bavaria, sending out flying columns
which, after taking away everything movable, set fire to the rest.
Marlborough himself described this
operation, sometimes as
coercive, sometimes as punitive - intended either to force the
Elector to defect on his French alliance or to punish him for not
doing so.® The real object, however, was military. Faced with a
numerically superior enemy - the Elector had now been rein-
forced by Tallard's French - Marlborough preferred to starve him
out rather than risk a battle. He therefore intended to move
The background of two centuries
33
against Ingolstadt and Ulm, from where the Franco-Bavarian
troops were drawing their supplies. He did not, however, feel
strong enough to carry out this move to the north and west of
his opponents while still leaving a force to guard the Lech. It was
necessary to find some other means to make the crossing of the
river not worth while for his opponents. Having achieved this by
plundering Bavaria, Marlborough retraced his steps along the
Lech and returned to the Danube. Rather than sitting still at
Augsburg and watching the noose of starvation draw tightly
around their necks, however, Tallard and the Elector raced the
Duke to the Danube and, by occupying a strong position at
Hochstadt, blocked his way. Instead of depriving the enemy of
supplies, Marlborough was now faced with starvation once he
got through the provisions taken from Bavaria. No help could be
expected from the Empire, and though 'it was thought a very
hazardous enterprise to attack such a numerous army, as they
were so advantageously posted', there was little to be done but
risk all. Thus, the battle of Blenheim was fought and won.
By exercising careful foresight and sometimes accompanying
his requests for supplies with barely disguised threats,
Marl-
borough was able to feed his army without much difficulty. Prob-
lems only arose when he halted at any one place, in which case
fodder was invariably hard to come by. On the move, however,
there was no need for a complex logistic apparatus to encumber
his troops and prevent them from making marches hardly in-
ferior to those of Napoleon one hundred years later. The com-
parative rarity of such marches should be attributed, not to their
impracticability but to their ineffectiveness in an age when a
state's main strength consisted in its fortresses.
The battle of
Blenheim did not, after all, end the war against France, while
the march of Marlborough and Prince Eugene against Toulon
proved to be a blow in the air.
The relative ease with which it was possible to feed an army
on the move also explains why it was unnecessary to establish a
regular supply corps. Proposals in this direction were sometimes
made, ° but met with no reaction; in spite of all abuses, the rulers
of the age were unanimous in considering it cheaper to employ
contractors whose main advantage was that they could be dis-
missed after the war was over. The contractors, however, never
supplied more than a fraction of the army's requirements; in
particular, fodder invariably had to be gathered on the spot in
