42
Supplying War
becomes impracticable when many troops are concentrated'. Hence
it was necessary, in addition to requisitions from the immediate
neighbourhood, to have supply convoys coming in from places
farther away. That 'this [combination] is the best method'
Maurice de Saxe would have readily agreed.
While Napoleon's determination to concentrate all his troops
at the decisive point led to his insisting that garrisons should not
be provided by the field army but made up of the local popula-
tion or the national guard, this does not mean that he regarded
fortresses as entirely without value. His armies, however, were
large enough to invest a fortress - more than one, if necessary -
and to continue on their way forward. As he once wrote while
commenting on Turenne's maxim that an army should not exceed
50,000 men, a modern force of 250,000 could afford to detach a
fifth of its number and yet remain strong enough to overrun a
country in short order." Far from abolishing fortresses altogether,
therefore, it was merely necessary to have them relocated in new
places. Instead of fortifying the frontier (which he regarded as
folly, since it meant exposing one's depôts and centres of arms-
manufacture) they had to be located deep in the rear, preferably
round the capital.® Carrying out a siege under such conditions
would inevitably cause logistic difficulties, as the Germans - the
railways notwithstanding - found out, to their cost, in 1870.
Napoleon, in short, realized that it was the eighteenth-century
predilection in favour of siege warfare that led to endless logistic
difficulties.
As he himself was able, thanks to the size of the
forces under his command, to do without sieges he rendered the
logistic apparatus of the eighteenth century largely superfluous.
Hence the explanation for a fact which, at first sight, appears in-
comprehensible. Although the technological means at his disposal
were by no means superior to those utilized by his predecessors -
indeed, he was rather conservative in this field, rejecting new in-
ventions and doing away with some old ones - Napoleon was
able to propel enormous forces right across Europe, establish an
Empire stretching from Hamburg to Sicily.
and irreparably
shatter an entire (old) world. How it was done, the following
example - concentrating as it does round the campaign of 1805,
his most successful ever - will try to show.
Boulogne to Austerlitz
The amount of attention paid to bureaucratic and logistic detail
'An army marches on its stomach'
43
was not, as is well known, one of the strongest points of the Re-
publican armies that came to be established after 1789, and
though the French army had come a long way since Napoleon
found it, to use his own words, 'naked and ill fed.. among the
rocks', its administrative organization in 1805 was still by no
means impressive.
All questions of administration were the
domain of the Ministry of War Organization, whose head at this
time was Dejean. Responsible among other things for feeding,
dressing and equipping the army with transport, the minister's
authority ended at France's frontier. In the field, responsibility
for administrative matters - supply and transportation included -
fell on the army's intendant-general whose powers, however, were
strictly limited to the zone of operations. While administration
and supply at both ends of the pipeline were thus well regulated,
it was typical of contemporary warfare that there existed no per-
manent machinery to control the zone of communications or ex-
ploit its resources. Here the Emperor would make ad hoc arrange-
ments, usually by thrusting responsibility upon commanders
whose achievements in the field he deemed unsatisfactory and to
whom employment on such a task was therefore something of a
reprimand if not an actual punishment.?
In 1805, the Army's intendant was Petiet. Under him came
four war-commissionaries and the heads of the various branches
of supply (régisseur
des vivres-pain,
des vivres-viande,
fourage, and the directeur général des équipages de transport).
Napoleon, however, constantly bypassed this central organization
by sending orders regarding transportation and supply directly to
his corps commanders. The latter had on their stafl an ordon-
nateur whose job it was to look after the corps' supplies in accor-
dance with the broad directives laid down by the intendant at
Imperial Headquarters. Each divisional stafi also included a
commissionary who received his orders partly from
the corps
ordonnateur and partly from his direct superior, the divisional
commander, two anthorities that could, and sometimes did, come
into conflict.
The material means at the disposal of these officials were totally
inadequate. This had nothing to do with any lingering Republican
tradition of hungry, marauding hordes living off the country -
since the Peace of Amiens, Napoleon had had ample time to cor-
rect this state of affairs had he wanted to - nor to any misconcep-
tions as to the importance of a proper train. Rather, it stemmed
TARAM LIBRARY
