66
Supplying War
with the result that the troops plundered indiscriminate ima
of carrying out orderly requisitions, the outcome being, precis
cally, that the officers - at any rate, those who refused ti
part in such excesses - starved even when the men found emp,
to eat." Furthermore, the troops' indiscipline caused the thi
tants to flee, and made the establishment of a regular admis
tion in the army's rear impossible. Fourthly, some of the tog
notably the German ones, simply did not know how to help ta
selves. Finally, there was deliberate destruction by the Risin
This sometimes assumed disastrous proportions, eg, early in le
when Murat reported he was operating in very rich cout
which, however, had been thoroughly plundered by the ist
soldiers.
Though innumerable grumblings and complaints accompet
the Grande Armée's march to Moscow, this did not mean that
the troops were invariably and equally badly off. In particle.
the advance guard usually fared better than the rest of the amy
because it was the first to enter new territory. The rearguard -
consisting of Napoleon's darlings, the Imperial Guard - also di
comparatively well, either because the Emperor took good are t
them or, which seems more likely, because they were marching i
some distance behind the rest of the army and thus found the he
habitants of the villages on the way already returning to thei
dwellings." Davout's corps, marching well to the south of the.
main force in an attempt to cut off Bagration's 2. Russian Army,
repeatedly found 'more [food and fodder] than I ever hoped,
and at one point deemed it necessary to emphasize that, in spite
of the glowing reports, the troops were not wallowing in luxury!"
On the other hand, the forces operating away from the Grande
Armée's main body - those
under Princes Poniatowsky and
Jerome in particular - fared worse than most, as did Murats
cavalry, who found it so difficult to obtain fodder that half of
their horses had died by the time the Dvina was reached.
At that point, however, the thinly populated areas of Lithuania
and Belorussia had been left behind, and the worst of the army's
suffering was over. Napoleon must have known before he em-
barked on the campaign that the regions round Smolensk and
Moscow were comparatively rich
the number of inhabitants
varied from seventy to 120 per square mile, This, in all prob-
ability, was the major reason behind his decision to continue east-
ward after the disappointment of his hopes to beat the Russians
'An army marches on its stomach'
67
near the frontier. Nor did the Emperor's calculations prove wrong.
From about the middle of July onward, unit after unit reported
that while the villages on the way had frequently been pillaged
the country was 'improving with every step forward', 'very good
and well cultivated',
'magnificent',
'covered
with wonderful
crops', and 'offered the most abundant harvest'. That many of
these reports originated with the Guard, which was making up
the rear and could therefore expect to find the country it entered
already plundered and devoid of resources, proves conclusively
that the Grande Armée's troubles stemmed less from any shortage
of provisions in the country than from a lack of discipline that not
only drove away the inhabitants but also extended to pillaging
the army's own
convoys.
Nevertheless,
even those
eternal
grumblers, Eugène and Schwartzenberg, found the going easier.»
As a private letter sent back from around Smolensk on 22 August
put it,
'the country which we are entering is very good; the har-
vest is abundant, the climate agreeable. You may imagine that it
offers great resources...the health of the army is excellent. We do
not lack either bread or meat. As for wine, there isn't as much as
in Bourgogne, but we have no reason to complain.'54
The present chapter is not intended to belittle the logistic difi-
culties facing Napoleon's invasion of Russia, especially in view of
its disastrous outcome. It should be recognized, however, that the
worst shortages were experienced during the first two weeks of
the advance (i.e. precisely the period for which Napoleon had
made his most careful and extensive preparations) and that the
situation
gradually improved afterwards.
Grande
Armée's problems were at all times - including the retreat from
Moscow55
- largely due to bad discipline. This, of course, was
itself partly due to logistic shortages. However, the fact remains
that those units whose commanders were strict disciplinarians
(e.g. Davout's) consistently did better than the rest, while the
Guard even managed to keep such good order that, far from run-
ning away, the inhabitants enthusiastically welcomed it. Nor is it
true, as is so often maintained, that the country as a whole was too
poor to support an army.
Writing from
Drissa early in July,
Murat - operating as he was in an area which Pfuel had selected
for the erection of his fortified camp precisely because it was sup-
posed to be without resources - informed Napoleon that while the
region around was tolerably well provided it would be possible to
exploit it only after a proper administration was set up and an
