10
Supplying War
notably different from anybody else's. Except for a few special
cases, it was therefore strategically impossible to cut seventeenth-
century armies off from anything except, sometimes, their areas of
recruitment. Campaigns having this last objective in view were
occasionally launched.i Subject to the limitations discussed
below, armies could - and did - follow the call of their stomachs
by moving about freely to whatever region promised supplies,
while largely indifferent to their own communications with non-
existent bases.' Far from calling for speed in operation, this kind
of warfare did not even make for a sustained and purposeful
advance in any well-defined direction.
As against this almost unrestricted freedom from lines of
communication, the strategic mobility
of seventeenth-century
armies was severely limited by the course of the rivers. This nor-
mally had little to do with the difficulty of crossing as such; rather,
it stemmed from the fact that the shipping of such supplies as
were carried along by water was always very much easier than
dragging them overland. While this particular consideration
applied equally to all armies it was found, paradoxically, that the
better a commander organized his supplies the more dependent on
the waterways he became. This was due both to the enormous
carrying-capacity of ships as compared to that of horse-drawn
wagons, and to the fact that the former did not create additional
requirements of their own. Thus, one of the foremost military
engineers of the century calculated that 100 lasten flour and 300
lasten fodder could be contained in just nine ships, whereas on•
land no less than 600 wagons were needed in order to transport
the former alone, 15
Of all the commanders of the age, none showed himself more
adept at exploiting the advantages offered by water-courses than
Maurice of Nassau - and, conversely, no one found it more difi-
cult to operate without them. By rapidly shipping his artillery
train from east to west and back along the great rivers - Maas,
Rhine, Lek and Waal - Maurice succeeded in surprising the
Spaniards time and again, appearing now in Flanders, now in
Guelderland, always catching the Spanish fortresses before they
could be made ready for defence. Once he got away from the
rivers, however, he was lost. This is best illustrated from his cam-
paign of 1602, which, incidentally, was one of the very rare con-
temporary instances of an attempt to win a war by means of
purposeful strategic manoeuvre.
The background of two centuries
11
Crossing the Maas, Maurice planned to avoid the fortresses on
his way, penetrate deep into Brabant, bring the Spanish army to
battle and finally swing west into Flanders; the ultimate aim being
the liberation of both provinces. For this purpose, a large field
army - 5,422 cavalry and 18,942 infantry - was concentrated; he
also had thirteen cannon, seventeen half-cannon and five field
pieces, but of this artillery train only twelve half-cannon were to
accompany the army in the field, the rest being sent by water to
meet him.
The force was supposed to be self-contained for the
first ten days, and was accompanied by 700 wagons carrying fifty
lasten flour; another fifty were to go by water. In spite of these
not inconsiderable preparations, there could be no question of
even trying properly to organize the army's supplies for the dura-
tion of the campaign; all the above-described measures were only
supposed to last the army until it should be possible to harvest
the fields on the way and process the grain into bread.
As it was, the campaign was launched too early in the season.
Crossing the Maas on 20 June, it was immediately found that the
corn of Brabant was not ripe for harvesting. The stores carried
along also proved disappointing, the army's English contingent in
particular wasting its allocated share and having to be assisted by
the others. Maurice thereupon wrote the Estates General that he
did not know how he was to continue the campaign, that he
would try and bring the Spaniards to battle, but would have to
return to the Maas if he was unsuccessful. Having marched for
just one week, the army came to a halt on 27 June; for the next
three days the process of baking fresh bread was pushed ahead
'with great industry', so that the advance could be resumed on
2 July. When another pause for baking had to be made three days
later, Maurice definitely made up his mind that, if unable to
force a battle near St Truijen, he would return to the Maas. By
8 July, St Truijen was in fact reached, but then it was dis-
covered that only sixteen out of the fifty lasten supposedly follow-
ing the army by water could be found. Faced with starvation,
Maurice decided to retreat. After the remaining flour had been
distributed and baked, the march back started on 10 July but had
to halt on the next day because it was 'exceedingly hot'. On 12
July, the English contingent had again wasted all their bread
and had to be helped out by the army. Back on the Maas, a large
consignment of bread and cheese reached Maurice on 19 July,
whereupon he determined to march into Flanders. However, the
