56
Supplying War
were caused by the corps settling down to besiege Ulm or to
form a strategic barrier round Munich and Dachau it did enable
the system of supply to be put on a more organized footing?" the
result being that provisions became more plentiful after about 20
October.
Throughout the march from the Rhine to the Danube most
questions of supply had necessarily been the responsibility of
the individual marshals, Napoleon himself being able to con-
tribute little but reprimands (general Marmont had an order to
obtain four days' bread and have four days' biscuit baked; he
cannot count on anything but his own resources') or exhortations
to improvise, replace one commodity by another, and secure the
troops'
provisions 'by hook or by crook'. Though 'forced by cir-
cumstances' to march without magazines he fully realized the
danger of such a procedure, and accordingly began his efforts to
put the logistic apparatus on a more sound basis even before the
fall of Ulm. On 4 October the Emperor decreed the establishment
of a second line of communication back to Spires in order 'to
have a secure service of subsistence by this route.2 On 12 Octo-
ber all the corps were ordered to disgorge their surplus of requisi-
tioned transport and put it at the disposal of the artillery park.
Twelve days later the Emperor issued instructions for the estab-
lishment of a huge base near Augsburg, the aim being to con-
centrate no less than 3,000,000 rations - enough to feed the army
for 18 davs - within the next fortnight. In addition, the marshal
were at this time drawing provisions for themselves from such
towns as Munich, Ingolstadt, Landshut and Landsberg.
These
efforts resulted in even Ney, whose corps was not normally noted
for the excellence of its organization, obtaining a twelve days'
supply. To transport these quantities the Emperor appears to
have relied on the arrival of the vehicles promised by the Com-
pagnie Breidt, as well as a flotilla of barges then being organized
at Augsburg.
Meanwhile, the service of communications back to France was
also being vastly expanded. An order of 23 October divided the
line from Strasbourg to Augsburg into seventeen sections, each
of which was to be covered by sixty four-horse wagons shuttling
to and fro. Assuming that each wagon was capable of making a
return journey each day - not an exaggerated requirement in
view of the distances involved? - the overall capacity of the
service must have amounted to between sixty and 120 tons per
'An army marches on its stomach'
57
day consisting mainly of clothing and ammunition. These arrange-
ments may appear sketchy by today's standards. At the time,
however, they represented a triumph of organization in making
possible the maintenance over unprecedented distances of a
regular system of supply and transportation such as Marlborough
marching over the same country a hundred years previously
neither wanted nor needed. While the quantities involved were
admittedly small, they were clearly regarded as ample at the time
- the proof of this being that, far from expecting a shortage, the
same order made explicit provisions for dismissing some of the
transport should there be too much of it.
As to the Grande Armée's ammunition supply, we saw that, in
the eighteenth century, the latter exercised little or no influence
on the strategic movements of armies owing to the very small
quantities involved. Napoleon, however, allocated 2,500 out of
4,500 wagons with which he intended to equip his forces to the
artillery park - which also carried two thirds of the supply of in-
fantry ammunition - and only 2,000 to the service des vivres. A
typical division of 8,000 men took along 147-300 rounds per gun
but only 97,000 infantry rounds in addition to the sixty to eighty
carried on each man's back. 2 While the quantities involved were
thus by no means negligible in either relative or absolute terms,
the fact that they could not as a rule be procured in the theatre
of operations prevented them from becoming a brake on strategy.
Like his
predecessors, Napoleon was taking along at the outset
most, if not all, the ammunition required for the duration of the
campaign. Far from being indifferent to this aspect of his logistic
requirements, the Emperor was in advance of his time when he
established, immediately after Mack's surrender at Ulm, a great
artillery depot at Heilbronn through which went a daily flow of
75,000-100,000 rounds of ammunition. This is perhaps the firs
example of a continuous resupply of ammunition ever recorded,
and together with the previously mentioned relay service suggests
that, far from reverting to a more primitive logistic method,
Napoleon's system was one link in the chain of developments that
was ultimately to make modern armies truly shackled to an
umbilical cord of supply.
Resuming its advance
down the Danube, the Grande Armée
engaged on what was effectively a completely new operation. The
main enemy at this stage was no longer the Austrians but the
Russians, and the aim of the advance, not to beat an opponent
