100
Supplying War
road. The country being very rich, no great difficulties were ex-
perienced, and it even proved
possible to form a surplus at
Rheims and Châlons. However, the closer the Germans came to
Paris, the more often villages were found deserted, crops bunt,
and cattle driven off.°1 Similarly, I Army after the fall of Met
set out on its way towards Paris through the valley of the Seine
without making any special logistic preparations, Reliance was
again placed on requisitioning, though in this case results proved
disappointing and it became necessary to resort to free purchase
on a grand scale.82
considerable preparations prior to its march from Metz to Or-
leans. Although the siege of Metz lasted for about two months, the
difficulties of feeding the investing troops were finally overcome.
In mid-October, ample provisions were available around the city
despite the need to feed, in addition to the German forces, 150,000
French prisoners. This enabled the Intendantur of II Army to
issue an
Loing with their provisions-columns fully loaded, the intention
being to replenish them from the rear in order to arrive with these
stocks still intact. To this purpose, the Army was able to take
along a total of 4,750 tons of food and fodder; at seven pounds
per man per day, this should have sufficed to supply 100,000 men
for 17 days.®3
In the event, only the first part of these plans proved capable
of realization. Around 20 Octphet, Il Army departed from Met
with its provisions-columns fully loaded. The transport convoys
earmarked to replenish them from the rear, however, were hope-
lessly unable to keep up with the pace of the advance, so that
requisitioning had to be resorted to on this occasion also. As the
country in question had already been scourged by the French in
order to victual Paris, it was decided that this could be best
achieved by paying in cash, which was acquired by laying the
towns on the way under contribution in exactly the same manner
as Wallenstein had done two and a half centuries earlier. Thanks
to this lack of respect for private property, the Germans did in
fact reach the Loing with their provisions-columns full. Eventu-
ally, even the formality of paying for the requisitioned goods was
abandoned as the French built their 'national' armies and the
war assumed a less chivalrous, harsher character.
Having crossed the Loing with its provisions-columns full or
When demigods rode rails
101
replenished, Il Army continued its march to the Loire through ex-
tremely rich territory, though some difficulties were caused by the
fact that, since many of the inhabitants had been called up to
serve in Gambetta's new armies, labour to bring in the harvest
was short. However, the potato crops had already been gathered
and they were abundant. Meat and vegetables were also plentiful,
and when any problems arose it was always possible to supple-
ment the men's rations with the famous Erbstwurst. Throughout
this period, II Army was more or less out of touch with the rail-
ways. Hopes for the rapid transfer of the railhead from Blesmes to
Montargis had been disappointed, and even when it was finally
advanced to Lagny at the end of November the distance to be
covered by road still amounted to some 130 miles in both direc-
tions, so that the troops preferred to help themselves.
While II Army was thus engaged in a leisurely tour through the
heart of France, very great difficulties were experienced in supply-
ing the three German Armies now concentrating in a small area
around Paris. Under conditions of static warfare, requisitioning
soon ceased to be satisfactory, and so far away were the railheads
that the wagons of III Army, for example, took ten days for the
return journey. Moreover, all the Armies had lost much of their
transport - that of I Army was down to exactly one per cent of its
original establishment - so that not enough vehicles were avail-
able to bring up even half of the quantities consumed each day.
As usual dith ulties were experienced with the railways, which
in this
period were constantly being blown up in addition to
being burdened by the transportation of heavy artillery for the
bombardment of Paris, which Moltke had ordered on 9 September.
To solve the problem of subsistence, which was greater by far
than anything experienced since the beginning of the war, the
German forces around Paris were turned into a gigantic food-
producing machine, the like of which had not been seen on the
battlefields of Europe since the end of the eighteenth century.
Thousands of soldiers were taken away from their posts in order
to gather in the harvest (corn. potatoes veretables) and to pro-
cess it bu meane of laaal machinery cuch as threshing machines,
mills, bakeries etc. Regular markets were established and kept
supplied by the French peasantry.
To supply the troops with
water, a river was diverted The army had therefore been made
largely colf sunnorting and for thia reason could ant nd the
time or the resources to engage on its proner business, war. Not
