104
Supplying War
averaged more than ten miles a day for a fortnight at a time -
the method of deployment had thrown the train apparatus out of
gear even before the campaign started. Train troops were insuffi-
ciently armed, and thus unable to defend themselves. Marching
discipline was slack, and repair facilities for vehicles so inade-
quate that nine out of every ten wagons had to be left behind.*
Is a result, it soon became clear that the hopes pinned on the
train were incapable of fulflment. Not merely the provisions-
columns, but the entire elaborate organization of mobile feld
bakeries and butcheries failed to work, making it necessary for
the troops to help themselves on the great majority of occasions.
Indeed, so irrelevant were the trains to the army's supplies that
commanders were indifferent to their whereabouts, with
the result that they frequently remained without orders for
weeks on end and finally had to go looking for their units on their
own initiative.?0
(2) As regards the supply of ammunition also, the success of the
campaign was due less to any elaborate system of replenishment
from the rear than to the fact that expenditure was very small
throughout the campaign. This more than made up for the fact
that, at the outset, estimates concerning the relative expenditure
of infantry- and artillery ammunition proved to be wrong!" On
the whole, despite shortages here and there, providing the troops
with ammunition was a very much easier task than keeping them
fed. In this sense, as in so many others, the campaign of 1870 can-
not be regarded as 'modern'.
(3) The role of the railways during the war has been grody
over-estimated, most historians being all too ready to accept the
extravagant claims made by Moltke and his ' demigods' as to
their importance." In fact, the railways fulfilled a crucial fun-
tion only during the period of deployment, following which they
ceased to play a major role until well after the mobile phase of
the campaign was over and the war all but won. This was due,
partly to difficulties with the railway traffic itself, partly to the in-
ability of the railheads to keep up with the advance, and partly to
the impossibility of moving supplies from them to the front.
Altogether, these three factors made it possible for the railvays
to play a role only when operations were more or less stationary,
and even then - as around Metz - the greatest difficulties were
experienced in their operation.
An interesting aspect of the railway problem is the failure of
When demigods rode rails
Moltke and the General Staff to learn from experience. Every one
of the obstacles that arose in 1870 had already been rehearsed in
1866, and yet they were allowed not only to recur but to become
infinitely worse. In part, this was due to the inherent limitations
of a system of supply based on the unfortunate combination of the
technical means of one age - the railways - with those of an
earlier one. It is no accident that the worst difficulties occurred at
the transfer points from one system to the other, i.e. at the un-
loading stations. However, errors in organization did also con-
tribute to the confusion, and for this Moltke was undoubtedly to
blame. Enough troops to guard the lines against sabotage were
not available, and difficulties seem to have been experienced in
the transfer of rolling-stock from the German civilian railways to
the army,? Despite the experiences of 1866, a central supply- and
railway-transportation headquarters for the whole army had not
been created, with the result that the contractors, in their anxiety
to make as much profit as possible, pushed forward the maximum
quantity of supplies without regard to the limitations of the rail-
ways.?* Labour and vehicles to help in the unloading of trains
were short. German troops frequently dismantled the signal and
communications gear of captured lines, an evil that successive
orders were unable to eradicate. Consequently hundreds of thou-
sands, indeed millions, of rations were allowed to rot away. This
was in spite of the fact that the demands made on the railway
network were, in reality, very modest. Consumption of each corps
being only about 100 tons a day (fodder included), the entire
requirement of the Prussian army could have been covered by
six or seven trains. This was well below the capacity of one well-
organized single-tracked line.
More significant than the above, however, was the fact that the
railways were entirely unable to keep up with the pace of the
advance. This, as we saw, was due less to any lack of preparation
for their restoration than to the fact that the Eisenbahntruppe
were helpless against the French fortresses blocking the lines.
That Moltke had failed to foresee this is difficult to believe. He
had, after all, written a memorandum on the influence of the
Austrian fortresses on the events of 1866, and the rapid recon-
struction of a railway around Metz was a military masterpiece.
Rather, the failure to draw conclusions from the events of 1866
must have been due to the fact that, contrary to what is generally
thought, the railways did not play a major role in the war against
RANA
