SATIAM LIBRARY
TRIMTY GOLLEG
236
Supplying War
railways behind each combatant, then 100:1 is the optimum ratio.
To work out this ratio with its thousands of component parts in
theory, however, is an almost impossible task, involving as it does
a model of tremendous complexity, worthy of a battery of com-
puters presided over by a mathematical prodigy. Moreover, when
all the calculations have been done, and the preparations made
on the basis of them completed, there is always a strong possibility
that a fresh strategic or political requirement will render them
worthless.
In practice, there is scant evidence that the task has been
attempted by the majority of twentieth-century (not to mention
earlier) operational planners. Rather, most armies seem to have
prepared their campaigns as best they could on an ad hoc basis,
making great, if uncoordinated, efforts to gather together the
largest possible number of tactical vehicles, trucks of all descrip-
tions, railway troops, etc., while giving little, if any, thought to the
'ideal' combination which, in theory, would have carried them
the furthest. Nor, as we saw, were the results of the only com-
prehensive attempt that was made in this direction particularly
encouraging. In spite, or perhaps because, of the fact that the
plans for 'Overlord' made detailed provisions for the last pre-
packed unit of fuel, they quickly turned out to be an exercise in
conservatism, even pusillanimity, such as has not often been
equalled. Not only did the actual development of the campaign
have little in common with the plans, but the logistic instrument
itself functioned very differently from what had been expected.
Consequently, it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that the
victories the Allies won in 1944 were due as much to their dis-
regard for the preconceived logistic plans as to their implementa-
tion. In the final account, it was the willingness - or lack of it-
to override the plans, to improvise and take risks, that determined
the outcome.
It is perhaps fitting that the present study - starting, as it did,
with the determination to avoid 'vague speculations' and concen-
trate on 'concrete figures and calculations' - should end with an
admission that the human intellect alone is not, after all, the best
instrument for waging war and, therefore, understanding it. The
intellect must play a central role both in planning and execution,
if only because no better instrument is available to us; but to
believe that war, or indeed any other aspect of human behaviour,
can ever be grasped by means of the intellect alone is to give
Logistics in perspective
237
proof of a hubris like that evinced by those who built the Tower
of Babel and deserving similar punishment.
To recognize the
truth of Napoleon's dictum that, in war,
the moral is to the
physical as three to one; in the final account, this may be all that
a study of the influence of logistics on mobile operations may be
able to teach us.
