76
Supplying War
were enormous in size and made demands in subsistence, am-
munition and replacements on a scale that was more enormous
still. Roginat further emphasized the difficulties that inevitably
follow an army living off the country, including desertion, indis-
cipline, and trouble with the population. Calling the Austerlitz
campaign 'the height of madness', he accused Napoleon of allow-
ing 300,000 men to starve to death in Russia and another 200,000
in Saxony. To remedy all these evils, Roginat suggested that the
future lay in a
'methodical', step by step, system of warfare.
Armies were to be loaded with a maximum of eight days' pro-
visions, then to advance to a distance of no more than thirty to
forty leagues from their base, at which point they were to stop,
take stock, and wait for the armée de reserve, which Roginat con-
sidered essential for any successful military enterprise, to catch
up. Stores would then be accumulated and a new base estab-
lished. Not until everything was complete could the process be
repeated.
Very different were the deductions of another, and greater,
writer, Karl von Clausewitz. When it came to nuts and bolts
Clausewitz was, surprisingly enough, less impressed with the
rapidity of the Emperor's strategic movements than were the
majority of his contemporaries. Pointing out that the need to
make requisitions, especially if it could not be done directly by
the troops, could impose delays quite as bad as those made neces-
sary by a system of supply from base, he used Murat's famous
pursuit of the Prussians in 1806 in order to demonstrate that there
was nothing here that Frederick II, for all his great train and
baggage, had not been able to do equally well.» Clausewitz, how-
ever,
thought that the French system - or lack of it - became
more advantageous in proportion as distances grew; it alone had
made possible those tremendous marches from the Tagus to the
Niemen. Whatever his reservations, therefore, Clausewitz was
ready to see the wave of the future in supply by the country.
Contradicting his own detailed examination, he concluded that
such was the superiority of a war carried on by means of requisi-
tions over one dependent on magazines that 'the latter does not
at all look like the same instrument'.
While this may be taken as the considered theoretical opinion of
the post-Napoleonic generation, attempts to put it into practice
soon showed that mere plunder was an unsatisfactory method of
feeding an army. Thus, the Russian Administrative Regulations of
When demigods rode rails
77
1812 charged the intendant general to use requisitions, purchase
and contracts to exploit the resources of occupied countries for
the army's benefit, while only resorting to our own stocks.. in
special cases'. In practice, however, Russian commanders did
not possess enough initiative to maintain their men in this way,
with the result that 'much suffering' took place during the cam-
paigns of 1828-9 (against Turkey) and 1831 (in Poland). Conse-
quently, 'ambulant magazines' were introduced in 1846 together
with trains of field bakeries and butcheries. These arrangements
did not, however, prove themselves during the Crimean War,
with the result that innumerable carcasses of men and horses
lined the routes to Bulgaria and Sebastopol.*
Unlike the Russians, who were forced by geography to con-
duct their wars in poor and thinly populated areas, the Austrians
in 1859 found themselves operating in the rich country of north
Italy whose resources should easily have fed the army. Requisi-
tioning was therefore resorted to as a matter of course. The troops'
organic transport, however, did not arrive on time, while attempts
to organize columns of local vehicles took so long that the troops,
who were strictly forbidden to help themselves, starved. In addi-
tion, cooperation between the intendant general and the corps
was not without friction; so that the entire organization was subse-
quently characterized as a 'complete failure'.
As organized in 1814-15, the Prussian train-apparatus was a
comparatively sketchy affair, consisting of provisions-columns
(theoretically capable of carrying four days' food for the army),
field bakeries, remount depôts, and ambulance wagons. A Royal
order of 1831 organized these into 'train companies", of which one
was allocated to each corps, a train company consisting of seven
subsequently reduced to five) provisions-columns, a field bakery
column and a 'flying' remount depôt. To manage the service of
upply, a body of train officers (with personnel detached from the
avalry) was established in 1816. In the same year, the corps were
instructed to appoint commanders of the trains, though the latter
were made subordinate to the inspector of trains and thus inde-
pendent of the formations they were supposed to help maintain.
Apart from the designation of officers who, in time of war,
were to command the
trains, an organization responsible for
operating the service of supply did not exist.
Only part of the
materiel for the trains was stored in depôts and was thus im-
mediately available for use. It was intended to supplement this
RAMAM LIBRARY
