90
Supplying War
east behind the river Rhine, thus sacrificing, if necessary, the en-
tire Rhineland to an almost unopposed French advance."0
As for the actual distribution of the troops, it was dictated less
by strategic considerations and by what was known of the enemys
intentions than by the physical configuration of the raiway
system. As in 1866, the demand for speed made it imperative to
exploit the greatest possible number of lines; hence the decision
to deploy the 13 corps into which the Prussian army was now
divided on a very broad front all along the Franco-German
border. In this way, six lines were made available for the Prussian
forces and three more for their south German allies, and not more
than two corps had to share a single line. 37
In the actual transportation, priority was given to the combat
troops, those of the two corps on each line following one another
directly, while their transport and services were supposed to
come up later. This arrangement was logical, but it meant that the
logistic instrument, the fragility of which had already been
demonstrated in the previous campaign, was thrown out of gear
before the war against France even started. More significant still,
the burdening of the railways by trains carrying troops made it
impossible to push supplies forward, and when trains carying
subsistence finally started running on 3 August the lines quickly
became blocked.? The result was that, as in 1866, the supply
services could not even begin to tackle the task of feeding the
troops in their areas of concentration. The General Staff had
ordered field ovens to be set up at Cologne, Koblenz, Bingen,
Mainz and Saarlouis, fed from peacetime magazines, and sup
plies were purchased in Holland and Belgium and shipped down
the Rhine. But as the troops had been separated from their trans-
port, these supplies could not be distributed, and when com-
plaints were made to Moltke he replied that quartermasters
should limit themselves to what is strictly necessary and avoid
bothering the railway authorities', 39 Under these circumstances,
the Army commanders were forced to use their own initiatives.
Requisitioning transport at 400 wagons per corps, they purchased
victuals on a grand scale because they were afraid, rightly as it
turned out, that the experiences of 1866 would be repeated and
the General Staff prove unable to cater to their men's needs."
Since the troops were at this time being fed by quartering, it was
not surprising that shortages soon developed even though the
country was rich and the population ready for sacrifice.
When demigods rode rails
91
When the German advance into France started on 5 August,
their I Army had as its line of communication railway line F; II
Army had lines A, C, B and D (the latter in common with III
Army) and III Army relied on lines D and E. To a large extent,
however, these arrangements had already ceased to function, for
the stream of supplies from the rear was such that the railheads,
especially those behind II Army in the Palatinate, were becoming
blocked even before the deployment was completed.* Once the
advance started, moreover, the railways were quickly left behind
and contact with them was lost. For example, it was not until
after the battle of Spicheren on 6 August that the railhead behind
I Army was advanced as far as Saarlouis, still inside German
territory. The railhead of II Army was advanced to Saargemund
on 11 August, then, four days later, to Pont-à-Mousson where it
was destined to remain until the mobile phase of the campaign
was all but over. III Army's railhead was at Mannheim, and this
too could not be advanced beyond Mars-la-Tour.42 Thus, the
experiences of 1866, when the railways had been left too far
behind to exercise any influence on the campaign, were repeated,
with the one difference that, profiting from the lessons of the
previous war, the Prussians had made preparations to construct
an emergency railway round the fortress of Metz and were able
to achieve something of a coup by the speed with which these
preparations were translated into practice. 13
While the fact that congestion similar to that of 1866 was
allowed to recur points to the conclusion that German railway
organization still left something to be desired,* the difficulties
experienced in the rapid advancing of the railheads were not due
to any lack of foresight. In countless memoranda covering the
years 1857-70, Moltke had concerned himself with the possibili-
ties of demolishing and rebuilding railways in wartime. In 1859,
he had ordered the first Eisenbahntruppe formations to be set up,
whose task it was to deal with these novel aspects of the military
art. The idea behind their creation was that they should carry
out minor repairs and build small bridges, work of a larger scope
being left to civilian experts. The railway troops formed part of
the pioneer force and were expected to guard the lines as well
as restore them. Although the former task was formally taken
away from them in 1862, it was found that, in practice, comman-
ders often refused to allocate other units to this purpose.
In the war of 1866, there were three Eisenbahnabteilungen -
