16
Supplying War
army could be supported unless some new conquests were made,
Once again, the direction of the march was determined by go
graphy. The Swedes moved east along the Danube, crossed th
Lech, then set about holding Bavaria to ransom.
Before th
summer was out, however, it was realized that even the hug
sums extorted from such towns as Nuremberg and Augsbuy
were insufficient. To prevent disintegration, the army had t
continue its 'flight forward' along the Danube? The march t
Vienna was soon interrupted by the news that Wallenstein, by
debouching from Bohemia and infesting the Lower Saxon Circle,
was endangering the Swedes' communications with the Baltic I
a show of concern that was rare for his day - he was in fat
operating hundreds of miles away from his 'base' - Gustavs
Adolphus left Donauwörth and, after some marching and counter.-
marching, arrived at Fürth near Nuremberg where he set up
camp. Here the army remained for the next two months, Gus
tavus Adolphus and Wallenstein each doing his best to starve the
other out. As it was, the latter proved more adept at this kind of
operation; by early September, the King was forced to march, m
matter where. It is a telling comment on the state of the seven-
teenth-century art of supply that Wallenstein's troops, even
though they had just won their first victory over the Swedes al
Alte Feste, were too sick and hungry to follow up.
Back on the Danube, Gustavus Adolphus continued his labor-
ious advance eastward into Bavaria. In October, his communica-
tions with Sweden were again in danger of being cut, and so he
took along 20,000 men and marched for Naumburg in order to
seize the crossings over the Halle, covering 270 miles in twenty
seven days. Of all his strategic marches, this was the only one in
which the Swedish King even approached Napoleonic perfor-
mances, and it was made in retreat through territory that ha
already been occupied and garrisoned.
Gustavus Adolphus' place in the annals of military history is
secured above all by his tactical and technological innovations
Apart from impossibly grandiose dreams about a concentric ad-
vance by five - or even seven - armies on Vienna, 25 however, his
strategy typified rather than transcended that of his age in that,
far from exploiting the comparatively small size of his field fores
to move about freely, he was unable to stay for long at any ot:
place and compelled by his supply system - or lack of it - to
march wherever and whenever his stomach, and that of his horse,
The background of two centuries
17
led him. With a latter-day monarch, the King might well have said
that it was food and forage, not he, which commanded the army.
In the next generation, however, efforts to rid strategy of this
particular kind of dependence on logistics began to be made.
Rise of the magazine system
'History', wrote Richelieu in his political testament,
'knows
many more armies ruined by want and disorder than by the
efforts of their enemies; and I have witnessed how all the enter-
prises which were embarked on in my day were lacking for that
reason alone.? Dating to the period when the Thirty Years War
was entering its last, and worst, stage, when Central Europe was
already so devastated that it could no longer support armies as
large as those of the early 1630s, the words well reflect a situation
in which, following the departure from the scene of both Wallen-
stein and Gustavus Adolphus, the problem of maintaining armies
of
any size
was becoming well-nigh insuperable. Tortenson,
Baner and Wrangel were never able to concentrate more than
15,000 men at any one point. As the war degenerated into a series
of more or less deep cavalry raids against enemy towns, most of
which were destined to disintegrate owing to a lack of supplies, it
looked as if military art was about to make a return to the middle
ages. 27 That it did not end up by so doing was due primarily to
the efforts of two Frenchmen, Le Tellier and Louvois. Between
them, this pair of father and son established a system of maga-
zines which, during the next century and a half, is said to have
exercised a decisive influence upon the wars of the age.
Magazines,
of course,
had
never been entirely unknown.
Throughout history, it was frequently necessary to wage war in
poor, or ravaged, country. To make sure that designs would not
be frustrated by this, military writers of the early seventeenth
century advised their readers to set up numerous magazines in
conveniently situated towns and fortresses. A well-appointed
camp should always have fifteen days'
provisions in store, to be
touched only in emergency.28 These and other principles (never
put too many eggs in one basket') are as old as warfare itself.
However, the limited size of armies did not make it necessary to
put them into practice except for rare occasions.
Like magazines, regular convoys serving to bring up supplies
from base were needed only in exceptional cases. Even then, the
