STANAM LIBRARY
TRINITY
GOLLEGE
Supplying War
amounts to some 130 miles. It is assumed that all railway trans-
portation facilities in Germany would have been put out of action
and that no supply by air to the forward troops would have been
possible owing to the non-availability of airfields. All calculations
are made in terms of 200-ton American GTR companies, which
was the practice of the SHAEF logisticians themselves. The target
date for the start of the attack is taken as 15 September.
If a consumption of 650 tons per division per day is assumed
(as an average for both American and British units, this may be
somewhat too high) overall supplies required for the operation
would have amounted to 18x650=11,700 tons a day. Of this,
the British with their 9 divisions would have accounted for 5,850
tons. This quantity would have been brought forward to the
starting bases in Belgium by rail (2,800 tons); by air, in planes
diverted from the Arnhem operations, to Brussels (1,000 tons,
and by road, in American trucks taken from three divisions
immobilized in Normandy (500 tons), making a total of 4,300
tons. 53 The remaining 1,550 tons Montgomery would have had to
bring up from the Caen-Bayeux area by means of his own motor
transport. Assuming that each truck company was capable of no
more than the regulation 100 miles per day, forty-six such com-
panies would have been required for the purpose. The operation
itself, assuming a turning time of two days for the distance of
260 miles"* to Dortmund and back, would have required
(5,850 × 2):200=58 GTR companies in support. Since the British
at that time possessed a grand total of 140 such companies, s
thirty-six would have been left to supply the six divisions of 1,
Canadian Army and for port clearance. It could be done - though
By contrast, the situation of Hodges 1. Army was considerably
more difficult. His nine divisions consumed 5,850 tons per day,
but his allocation at this time amounted to 3,500 only - and COM
Z found it difficult to deliver even this. To bring up the difference
from the railways south of the Seine, 200 miles away, approxi-
mately thirty-five additional GTR companies would have been
required. The advance on Dortmund itself would have necessi-
tated fifty-eight such companies, so that the total deficit amounted
The question, then, is how many lorries could have been freed
if 3. Army, instead of being allowed to continue to the Moselle,
had been halted on the general line Paris-Orleans No detailed
War of the accountants
227
figures as to the
amount of transport supporting Patton are
available, but a rough estimate can be made. On 15 September, 3.
Army was receiving at least 3,500 tons per day - possibly some-
what more, for Patton used his own trucks for hauling the line
of communication, instead of confining them to the zone of
operations. To move this quantity over the 180 miles between the
above-mentioned line and his front, the equivalent - in one form
or another - of fifty-two GTR companies must have been em-
In the middle of September, a U.S. corps - the VIII - was
operating against Brest. Originally meant to secure adequate pit
capacity, this operation had by now become out of date.
was nevertheless carried out, the reason was simply prestige.*
Though detailed figures of consumption and transport for this
operation are, as usual, not available, a rough guess can be made.
At that time, the Allied-operated railway in Normandy reached
from Cherbourg to the Dol-Rennes area.
To bring up supplies for
three divisions over the 80 miles from there to Brest, some fifteen
CTR companies must have been kept busy.
In addition, there were the organic trucks of all these units.
Though no detailed figures are available, there is reason to think
that is formed into provicional transportation companies,
vehicles of the nine divisions involved could have increased the
quantity of supplies reaching Hodges in Belgium by another 1,500
tons ® His overall requirements would thereby have been cut by
twenty-two GTR companies, and of the seventy-one such com-
panies needed to carry out the drive on Dortmund 52 + 15 = 65
would have been available.
though necessarily
tentative, " must therefore be that it could have been done,
though only just.
On the basis of the best information available, we have calculated
that in September 1944, enough transport could have been found
to carry Dempsey and Hodres to the Ruhr. The number of truck
companies at hand, however, is only one factor among the many
involved. To complete our investigation, these must now be
briefly considered.
Had Eisenhower accepted Montgomery's proposals and con-
centrated all his logistic resources behind the thrust by 2. British
