3 o he mia
Krem
R. Rednitz
leiden
Rothenburc
Palatinate
• Kufstein
'An army marches on its stomach'
49
men that formed the main body of the Grande Armée (excluding
the corps of Marmont, Bernadotte and Augerau; the latter was
to take no part in the early stages of the operation) for six days,
which together with four days' bread would easily have taken
them to Bavaria. Here, another four days' supply was supposed
to be waiting at Ulm. Preparations for feeding the northernmost
corps were just as extensive, arrangements being made to have
supplies to last 55,000 men (including the 20,000 Bavarians whom
Marmont and Bernadotte were to pick up at Würzburg) for no
less than nine days in addition to the normal four days' bread. All
in all, the army's subsistence was thus to be secured for a full two
weeks, which was more than enough to enable them to reach
Bavaria without making any requisitions at all.
As it was, meeting all of the Emperor's demands did not prove
possible. In the area of deployment proper, only 380,000 biscuit
rations, or just over half of the number originally demanded,
could be made ready by 26 September. Another 300,000 were
ready in the rear but could not reach the army in time for the
beginning of operations.18 The Bavarians failed to prepare any-
thing at all either in Ulm - which, in view of the surprisingly
rapid Austrian advance to that place, was just as well - or at
Würzburg,
and on 15 September they had to
be asked 'for
heaven's sake' to prepare at least 300,000 rations in Würzburg,
the response being that it could not be done because prices were
high and biscuits unknown to the bakers. Nevertheless, it appears
that when Marmont and Bernadotte arrived at Würzburg they did
find some biscuits awaiting them, though how many we do not
know,14
While the preparations made to secure provisions were thus
falling behind the Emperor's expectations his instructions for pro-
viding the army with adequate transport also proved incapable
of fullment. According to the original plans, the army's vehicle
park was to consist of the following: (a) 150 wagons brought up
from Boulogne; (b) just under 1,000 wagons to be furnished by
the Compagnie Breidt, with whom a contract had been placed in
May; and (c) 3,500 wagons to be requisitioned in the French de-
partments along the Rhine. The total number of wagons supposed
to accompany 116.000 men - Marmont and Bernadotte had been
warned that they could 'expect nothing' from the army and told
to find their own transport - may seem meagre by modern stan-
dards. It was less transport - me, and in fact the ratio of vehicles
KANAM L
