62
Supplying War
and following his experiences of 1805, the Emperor organized a
flotilla of boats to forward these stores along the Danube. Since,
however, the campaign unfolded with extreme rapidity from the
start of the French advance on 17 April to the occupation of
Vienna just three weeks later, it is unlikely that this measure was
of much use. Rather, the troops must have lived by drawing on
the reserves carried along - this time put at twelve days - and of
the country. 32
Looking back upon these campaigns, all so successful in spite
of being conducted - involuntarily, for the most part - on a logis-
tic shoestring, it seems ironical that Napoleon's first major failure
resulted from the operation that he had most carefully prepared.
For the invasion of Russia was no ill-conceived adventure as it is
so often described. Of all Napoleon's wars, it was the one for
which he had assembled means, human and material, out of all
proportion to anything that went before, not merely in his own
day but during the previous centuries as well.
It is inconceivable that Napoleon did not know what was clear
to every other military man of the time, namely that in 'the waste-
lands of the Ukraine' (Guibert) it was impossible to live off the
country. He had in fact written his son in law that 'the war in
Poland will hardly resemble that in Austria; without adequate
transportation, everything will be useless'. Not only had the
Depôt de Guerre received, as early as April 1811, an order to
amass all possible information on Russia, but he was familiar
with the history of Charles XIIs Russian campaign and must
have known that the Swede was faced not merely with a thinly-
populated country but one that had been systematically ravaged
by the retreating enemy. Nor were his experiences during the
1809 campaign - the last he had commanded in person - of a
kind to encourage logistic neglect. After the halt inflicted on it at
Aspern, the Grande Armée had found itself cooped up in the
island of Löbau and laboured under great supply difficulties.
Hence preparations for a defensive war against Russia had
started long before the Emperor made up his mind to attack
For example, 1,000,000 biscuit rations were ordered for Stettin
and Küstrin as early as April 1811.34 At the same time, Napoleon
also increased the size of his train service.
These preparations,
however,
had a purely precautionary character - proof that
Napoleon was reckoning with the eventuality of a Russian attack
and did not intend to be caught off-balance.
'An army marches on its stomach'
63
Towards the end of 1811, the measures taken to improve the
army's logistic system in Poland began to assume a more offensive
character. In January 1812 the provisioning of Danzig with vic-
tuals was ordered. By 1 March, subsistence to last 400,000 men
and 50,000 horses for fifty days was to be concentrated there. In
addition, further 'large stores' were to be stockpiled on the Oder,35
To carry these provisions, the train service was vastly expanded
until it numbered no less than twenty-six battalions (in proportion
to the army's size, rather more than those accompanying Moltke's
'modern forces in 1870), eight of which were equipped with 600
light and medium vehicles each, and the rest with 252 four-horse
wagons capable of carrying 1.5 tons.; 6,000 spare horses were also
made available. e The decision to concentrate on heavy vehicles
has often been criticized, for they proved unable to negotiate the
atrocious Russian tracks. More than most modern writers, how-
ever, Napoleon was aware that lighter carts would have spelt an
even greater number of horses and, consequently, increased diffi-
culty in feeding them.37
Similarly, the equipment of the army with ammunition was
carried out on a grandiose scale. Here, the main depôt was at
Magdeburg whence huge quantities of shot and powder were
shipped down the Elbe and so on to East Prussia.38 A note of 1
May 1812 gave the stocks available at Danzig, Glogau, Küstrin,
Stettin and Magdeburg as follows: 3º
for
59
34
330
pounders
24
20
12
rounds
82,612
32,804
226,568
69
53,835
314
365,982
All of this was in addition to the siege artillery. 1º Thus there were
available between 670 and 1,100 rounds per barrel for most
calibres, figures that do not compare at all badly with those of an
industrialized and highly militaristic Germany one hundred years
Exactly what Napoleon intended to do with all these prepara-
tions is hard to say, for none of his operational plans - if such
ever existed - have survived. It can only be conjectured, there-
fore, that he recognized that no horsedrawn supply system,
FRINITY
