18
Supplying War
transport did not form part of the army's establishment; rathe
wagons were provided on a makeshift basis, either by commerd
contract or, perhaps more frequently, by requisitioning loci
peasant-carts for which payment was subsequently supposed t
be made upon presentation of a suitable receipt. The transporte
tion of supplies, or for that matter of anything else, was apt to b
a dangerous business. Centring as it did round fortified towns
seventeenth-century warfare paid scant attention to the gap
between them and did not normally know well-defined 'front'
to separate enemy from friends. The providing of escorts to pro
tect the convoys was therefore essential under all circumstances
and cases are recorded when whole armies found themselves thus
employed. Quite apart from the absence of a suitable financial
and administrative organization, this factor must have played:
major role in the relatively late appearance of a regular system d
supply from base. With armies unable to form any kind of con-
tinuous defensive lines, or even to thoroughly dominate any large
area, a system of this kind was far too vulnerable to cavalry raids
Appointed intendant to the Army of Italy on 3 September 164l
Le Tellier set out for Turin where he spent the next two cam-
paigns (1641 and 1642) in trying to improve administration. Be
sides demanding more regular pay for the troops he attempted to
combat corruption and, though he did not feel able to dispense
with contractors, strove to make them improve on their jobs by
imposing stricter contracts, retaining transport through the winter
months, and forcing them to keep at hand at least some mage-
zines. These measures were thus directed towards a more effec
tive implementation of existing arrangements rather than towards
the creation of entirely new ones. It was only after being created
secretary of war in April 1643 that Le Tellier could start rebuild-
ing the supply service in earnest.
The first prerequisite for any regular logistic system is, di
course, an exact definition of requirements. So elementary is this
point that it may sound self-evident, yet it was necessary for li
Tellier to begin his reforms by laying down in regulations jus
how much tood and other supplies each member of the army was
entitled to. The figures varied enormously, ranging from the 10
rations per day allotted to the commander in chief to the single
one allowed the private infantryman.
Similar provisions were
made for the horses carrying or hauling the officers' persons,
valets and baggage, the exact number again being dependent on
The background of two centuries
19
rank. He followed this up by drawing up standard contracts to
replace the multitude of ad hoc agreements by which the army
had hitherto been supplied. Under the terms of such a contract,
the war ministry undertook to pay the sutler, exempt his convoys
from tolls and other duties. and also to provide them with an
escort. Arriving in camp, the sutler was assured a place to ply his
trade, protection against excesses by the soldiers and, if necessary,
compensation for losses. In return, the sutler undertook to deliver
the agreed quantity at the royal depots where its quality would
be checked by the général des vivres. Responsibility for transpor-
ting the provisions from the magazines to the army also rested
with the sutler, who was authorized to requisition wagons along
the way and pay for them at the normal rate. Having brought the
flour into the proximity of the army, the sutler was authorized to
engage civilian bakers - by force, if necessary - and make them
work 'day and night'. Le Tellier did not therefore depart from
existing principles in that he continued to restrict the tasks of the
army proper to control and supervision, for which purpose he
created a special corps of intendants in August 1643. His greatest
single innovation was the establishment of the équipage des
vivres, a permanent vehicle-park which, guided by specialist
army personnel, was designed not so much to carry provisions
from the rear as to accompany the army in the field as a rolling
magazine with a few days' reserves.
Given these arrangements, the use of magazines gradually be-
came more frequent. As early as 1643 we find Le Tellier amassing
provisions at Metz, Nancy and Pont-à-Mousson for the siege of
Thionville and to assist Turenne's manoeuvres on the Rhine. In
1644 he established a magazine to feed the cavalry - always the
first force to run out of subsistence during a long stay at any one
place - while participating in the siege of Dunkirk. Again, in 1648,
he told Marshal Gramot to erect magazines at Arras and Dunkirk
in preparation for the siege of Ypres.?º But Le Tellier's greatest
achievement came during the very successful campaign of 1658
which, since its course was determined largely by logistic con-
siderations, is worth following in some detail. Turenne left his
winter-quarters at Mardic for Dunkirk in mid-May. We are not
told how he lived on the way, but it appears that his force had
been made self-sufficient during the ten days' march. Arriving at
Dunkirk, he laid siege to the town and, after a few days, began to
receive supplies by sea from a magazine established at Calais.
