88
Supplying War
has hitherto been a source of endless evil, into a source of the
greatest strength'.38 In the event, far from facilitating operations
on internal lines, the events of 1866 and 1870 were to show that
railways helped the belligerent operating on external ones - in-
deed, in the former case, they compelled him to do so. By con-
trast, the French railway network in 1870 presented them with
magnificent opportunities to exploit the advantages of intemal
lines, but this did not, of course, prevent them from being
thoroughly beaten.
Another error, and one that involved Moltke personally, has
been made concerning the effect that railways were supposed to
again, List led the way, writing that:
The most beautiful thing about it all is the fact that all
these advantages [i.e. of operating on internal lines] will
benefit the defender almost exclusively, so that it will
become ten times easier to operate defensively, and ten
times as difficult to operate offensively, than previously.
In List's view, 'greater speed in movement always assists the
defender', the reason being that he 'must adapt his moves to that
of the attacker'. A well developed railway system would there-
fore raise the defensive power of a great nation 'to the highest
degree available', to the point that, in the view of List and others,
would become altogether impossible and peace reign on
earth® - another of those predictions that are apt to accompany
the appearance of new instruments of war but which somehow
seem doomed to be always disappointed.
List was no military man, and derived his conclusions merely
from a healthy human understanding. However, his opinion was
shared by Moltke, whose reasoning was that whereas a defender
would have full use of his own network, the attacker would not
be able to rely on any lines in advance of his front.? Hence, the
railways would help the defence more than they did the attack
a conclusion not substantiated by the fact that Moltke did, after
all, wage some of the most successful offensive campaigns in
history,
which were followed by half a century of attempts to
show that railways had made the attack into the best, indeed the
only, way to fight a war.
Exactly what one is to make of these facts is not easy to say.
When demigods rode rails
89
Certainly, they tend to show that the common view attributing
much of the Prussian victory over France to the excellence of her
railway organization is wrong. Given the shortcomings of their
network and the errors in their doctrine, the Prussians must have
owed their triumph either to some exceptional gift for improvi-
sation that enabled them to overcome both problems during the
campaign, or to the fact that railways did not, after all, have
much influence on their conduct of the war. Which of these two
interpretations is correct, it will be the task of the following pages
to investigate.
Railways against France
On 13 July 1870, Bismarck released the edited version of the Ems
telegram and two days later Prussia, together with the remaining
German States, found itself in a war against France. Having ex-
pected something of the kind to happen, the Prussian army was
ready; at the outbreak of war, it was only necessary to push a
button in order to set the whole gigantic machine in motion.
Between August 1866, when the war against Austria came to
an end, and July 1870, Moltke frequently addressed himself to
question of mobilizing and deploying his troops against
France. Since the French army - unlike the Prussian one - was a
standing force, it could be expected to be quicker off the mark.
Assuming that Napoleon would exploit this advantage by launch-
ing an early offensive, the problem facing Moltke was not so
much to prepare for an advance into enemy territory, as to em-
ploy the railways in such a way as to achieve numerical super-
ority at the earliest possible moment. The further forward the
deploument was carried out the less German territory it woul
be necessary to give up. Nevertheless, there
were compelling
reasons for concentrating the army well to the rear In the first
place, it was necessary
to reckon with the possibility
French offensive would disrupt the German railway
near the frontier. More important still, the number of trains that
could be run over each line per day stood in an inverse ratio to
the length of the section to be covered. Hence, the desire to hold
as much German territory as possible clashed with the need to
concentrate the army at the greatest speed, and it is typical of
Moltke that his final nan (apparentlv brenared in the winter o
1869_70) provided for the concentration to take place far to the
