52
Supplying War
stuck at Hanover. The same orders also provided for each corps
to take along bread for four days and biscuits for another four,
the latter to be regarded as a reserve and touched only in an
emergency. As it was, few of the marshals succeeded in taking
out these strongly reduced quantities and even Davout, who was
accused by Soult of creating for himself a reserve for seven or
eight days at his (Soult's) expense complained that he did not
have enough. Mutual recriminations among the marshals and
complaints to the Emperor were to mark the campaign from be-
ginning to end, yet one cannot fail to recognize the vigour of the
young commanders and their readiness to assume responsibility
in leading tens of thousands of men hundreds of miles away from
France with nothing but an incomplete supply apparatus to sup-
port them.
Once across the Rhine, Napoleon kept his corps well apart and
provided for them all, except the southernmost one, to live off the
country to their left,' an arrangement which must have caused
some hardship as units had to find quarters at distances greater
than those that might otherwise have been necessary, but which
was probably meant to overcome the shortage of maps and allow
the troops to forage without friction. The details of the operations
were fixed by each corps separately and the instruction issued by
Ney can be taken as a model of its kind. The normal method of
subsisting the men was to quarter them on the inhabitants to-
gether with their horses. Rations for men and NCOs were fixed at
1½lb. bread, half a pound of meat, one ounce rice (or two ounces
dried fruit) per day, while wood for cooking was also to be sup-
plied by the unwilling hosts. No exact scale of rations for the
officers was laid down, it being determined merely that they were
to be 'decently fed in accordance with their rank' but without
making
'excessive demands'
upon the inhabitants.
Whenever
the corps' troops were too closely packed together for this method
to be
practicable the ordonnateur
was responsible for com-
mandeering supplies from the neighbouring areas. He and the
divisional commissionaries were to inform local authorities of the
number of men and horses to be fed and the demands made on
each of them, as well as fixing the place or places to which the
provisions were to be brought. No payment for anything was to
be made, but receipts specifying the exact quantities appro-
priated were to be handed out in all cases so as to make it possible
or the French treasury to settle accounts with the State authori
'An army marches on its stomach'
53
ties at some unspecified future date.18 In issuing these orders, Ney
did not forget to tell his men that they were to treat the inhabi-
tants as if they were French. In theory at any rate the Grande
Armée was therefore very far removed from a mere host of
marauding plunderers. Rather, its supply system resembled that
of Marlborough in that provisions were accumulated in advance
along its route, the only difference being that the Duke paid in
cash and not in paper receipts. As to the actual method of pro-
curement, we have already seen that Marlborough could be quite
as ruthless, though perhaps more polite, as his successor one
hundred years later.
When the Rhine had been crossed, the bridges over it were
closed in accordance with an order of 29 September which
directed that all traffic to and from the army should pass through
Spires.
The town was put under the command of an officer
(General Rheinwald) who was thus made responsible for the
upper part of the pipeline leading to the army. Every five to six
leagues (fifteen to eighteen miles) a relay station was set up,
while the line of communications was policed by auxiliary troops
of the Baden army as well as brigades of gendarmes. Through
these points streamed reservists and
convoys, and also sick,
wounded and prisoners on their way back to France. The original
line of communication was the road from Spires to Nördlingen,
but on 5 October the commander of Spires was made responsible
for the entire area to the right of the Rhine and ordered to see to
it that all transports to and from the army went through Heil-
bronn. At this stage the line of communication still ended at
Nördlingen which served as an advance base from where distri-
butions were made to the corps.
While Napoleon's orders were admirable, their execution was
less so, particularly because of the ubiquitous shortage of trans-
port. Whatever the corps could raise from
the country they
naturally retained for their own use, the result being that the line
of communication services desperately lacked wagons and horses.
The cavalry and the corps wagon-masters stole and hid all the
animals they could lay hands on, and by 11 October it was no
longer nossible suan to maintain a regular courier service with
the homeland. Napoleon thereupon intervened in his usual de-
cisive manner and ordered the corps to give up their surplus
transport.
Starting as they did from a front that was well over 100 miles
TRIMET
