94
Supplying War
clearly defined Schwerpunkt, the German army had now become
grouped into two great parts. One of these, consisting of I and I!
Armies, was besieging Metz, where, although Moltke's foresight
made it possible to advance their railhead to Remilly on 23 Sep.
tember, very great difficulties were experienced in keeping this
stationary force supplied. Further to the north, III Army and the
Army of the Meuse were preparing to follow up their victory at
Sedan in order to march on Paris,
despite the fact that, as the
railways had been opened only as far as Nancy, they had almost
totally lost touch with their bases of supply. The two halves of
the German army being separated by the Argonnes, communica-
tion between them was very difficult, and giving mutual support
even more so. That Moltke could still, under these conditions,
order a further penetration hundreds of miles into enemy terri-
tory shows how little dependent on regular supply from base the
German armies still were.
As King Wilhelm's troops started marching on Paris, chaos on
the railways behind them was swiftly assuming monumental pro-
portions. This was due to many different factors, including the
continued attempts of supply agencies in the rear to rush supplies
forward without regard to the ability of the unloading stations to
receive them; a shortage of labour for the quick emptying of
trains; the inability of the army's horsedrawn transport columns
to clear the stations of the
goods that kept piling up; and the
tendency of local commanders to impress railway wagons as
convenient temporary magazines.
a result,
lines became
blocked for hundreds of miles, the backlog of motionless trains
stretching back as far as Frankfurt and Cologne. Though frantic
efforts were made to clear the mess by unloading all goods re-
gardless of the facilities available to store them (which, of course,
meant that much of them was simply left to rot), on 5 September
there were standing on five different lines no fewer than 2,322
loaded wagons, containing 16,830 tons of supplies for II Army
The traffic jams also contributed to an acute shortage of
rolling stock, which led Moltke to write to the Army commanders
on 11 September and ask them to use their cavalry in order to lay
hands on t. ench wagons and locomotives. Soon after the start
of the campaign, difficulties were being caused by francs-tireurs
who attacked trains and obstructed the lines, and on 12 October
Moltke wrote that it would take months to repair them at the
places where they had been demolished. 1º Thus, although traffic
When demigods rode rails
95
was by no means very heavy - an average of only six supply trains
per day for the whole army went to France during the first
months of the war - congestion was such that, from 1 to 26
October, only 173 out of 202 trains sent from Weissenburg to
Nancy ever reached their destination. 50
The chaotic situations on the railways in the rear, however, did
not prevent the Prussian armies from continuing their inexorable
advance into France. On 6 September, the march on Paris got
under way; by the end of the month, the ring around the city was
in the process of being closed. Further in the south, Metz delayed
the Germans until 24 October, when Bazaine's surrender made it
possible for I Army to march west in order to join the siege of
Paris while Il Army was sent further south into the Loire Valley.
During this entire period the railheads remained, as they had
been ever since the end of August, around Nancy.
In the event, it was not until December 1870 - when Moltke's
forces had extended south to Dijon, southwest to Orleans, and
west to the English Channel - that the situation on the railways
in their rear started improving. Three lines were now running
across the frontier from Germany into France, but one of them -
passing from Mulhouse through Vesoul and Chaumont to Paris -
remained blocked by the French fortress of Belfort until the end
of the war. Another line reached Paris through Metz, Mézières
and Rheims, but this was blocked by no less than three fortresses
and did not become available to the Germans until the fall of
Mézières on 2 January 1871. These facts limited all German rail
transport to a single stretch of railway between the
Moselle
Valley at Frouard and the Marne Valley at Blesmes, though even
this line did not become available until the fall of Toul on 25
September, by which time the German armies had already
reached Paris, and then demolitions of bridges and tunnels in the
Marne Valley delayed the advancing of the railhead by another
two months. The state of the line of communications behind II
Army in the Loire Valley was even more difficult. Until 9 Decem-
ber the railhead remained at Chaumont, for demolitions in the
valleys of the Seine and Yonne had rendered the lines further west
impassable. Later, the railhead was advanced to Troyes, but by
this time II Army had got still further away to the Côte d'Or.
This particular railway was also exposed to numerous attacks by
francs-tireurs, with the result that, towards the end of November,
an entire army corps had to be detailed for its guard.
