20
Supplying War
The town fell on 25 June. Turenne continued to Brégues whid
held out for a few days only. He then marched inland, taking ou
town after another as he went, and having his supply-boats follor
him all the time. Early in September he reached Oudenaard
which, again, held out for a few days only. Not having enough
food on hand, he was unable to continue to Brussels. Instead, be
marched to Ypres which, besieged on 13 September, fell a fort
night later. This conquest enabled him to march up to the Escat
and camp comfortably on its bank. Having wasted some weeks a
the river, he made a drive for Brussels in November but foundi
was already too late in the season. Turenne thereupon saw toi
that the places he had taken were fortified and provisioned for th
winter, then left for Paris.30
Acting on the sound principle that it was possible to supply!
campaign - really a series of sieges - only by water, Turenne hal
thus started the year's work at Dunkirk and subsequently made
his way inland.
Boats loaded with bread
and
ammunition
followed him wherever he went, and use was made of recently
conquered places in order to set up an expanding network d
magazines. The only item for which the army was almost entirely
dependent on local supply was, as usual, fodder, and shortages t
this commodity did in fact appear whenever it was necessary to
undertake a siege of any duration. As it was, it speaks well for
Turenne and Le Tellier's organization of the campaign that on no
occasion did logistic difficulties force the suspension of a siege.
though such difficulties certainly did play a central role in de
ciding which places should be besieged.
Important as they were, the reforms of Le Tellier belong un
mistakably to the age of the 'horde army' in that they bore
temporary, makeshift character. Magazines were established, and
stores amassed, in order to support this or that operation; there
could be no question of creating any kind of permanent reserve.
Indeed, so far was this from being the case that any surplus was
always sold immediately after the termination of the campaign,
the aim being both to 'relieve the King's subjects' burdens' and
to fill their master's pockets. It remained to Le Tellier's son,
Louvois, to introduce the first permanent magazines. With thai
we find ourselves leaving one era and entering another, that d
the standing armies.
Louvois, in fact, created not one type of magazine but two. The
first of these was supposed to assist in the defence of the realm by
The background of two centuries
21
designating a chain of frontier towns and fortresses as places fortes
du roi, which were to be made permanently ready to stand a
siege by being always filled with enough provisions to feed the
garrison for six months and their horses for two. More revolu-
tionary were the magasins généreaux. From these it was intended
to meet the requirements of field armies embarking on campaigns
beyond France's own borders. Both kinds were placed under
governors whose duty it was to see that they should be well
stocked at all times, and a good part of Louvois' correspondence
contains admonitions to his governors to resist the temptation of
using the magazines in order to meet day-to-day needs. Like his
predecessors, Louvois as secretary of war supervised rather than
negotiated. He did not purchase directly for the State but dealt
with contractors, the reason being not merely the absence of a
suitable administrative machinery but also a shortage of funds.
His
procedure as it emerged from innumerable letters and
memoranda was generally as follows: first, he would calculate
consumption by multiplying the number of troops by the number
of days the campaign was expected to last, usually set at 180.
Then he wrote down the price he was prepared to pay for each
separate item and, by adding the price of transport, storage and
distribution to that of purchase, arrived at the total cost. Con-
tracts were then drawn up with the State normally asking for
credit. This was perhaps the weakest point of the whole system
because, unable to pay the contractors in time, Louvois was help-
less in face of their depredations.s1 As it was, the evils involved
could not be eradicated and were to last as long as did the
ancienne régime itself.
Louvois made no innovations in the hauling of provisions from
magazine to camp. Regular transportation-corps being still a long
way in the future, the normal method remained the employment
of locally-requisitioned vehicles supplemented by barges where
possible.
It was, perhaps, in
the system of distribution that
Louvois made his most important change. For the first time, it
was established as a matter of principle that every soldier was en-
titled to have his basic daily ration free of charge. Standard fare
consisted of two pounds of bread per day, sometimes replaced by
the hard biscuit which, a century later, was to serve as the fuel
propelling Napoleon's armies to and fro across the European con-
Pinent. This basic ration was supplemented according to circum-
stances by meat, beans, or other protein-containing food 3 These
