2
Supplying War
basic, this kind of calculation does not appeal to the imagination,
which may be one reason why it is so often ignored by military
historians.
The result is that, on the pages of military history
books, armies frequently seem capable of moving in any direction
at almost any speed and to almost any distance once their com-
manders have made up their minds to do so. In reality, they can-
not, and failure to take cognizance of the fact has probably led to
many more campaigns being ruined than ever were by enemy
action.
Though it has been claimed that civilian historians are
especially prone to overlook the role of logistics,? the present
author has not found this fault confined to any class of writers.
Napoleon's tactics and strategy have attracted whole swarms of
theoreticians, historians, and soldiers who between them were
able to show that both were natural, indeed necessary, out-
growths of previous developments. The one field of Napoleonic
warfare that is
still believed to have been fundamentally
different from anything that went previously is the logistic one,
which is itself enough to suggest that the subject has been
neglected. Similarly, no one has yet made a detailed study of the
arrangements that made it possible to feed an ambulant city with
a population of 200,000 while simultaneously propelling it forward
at a rate of fifteen miles a day. To take another example: though
Rommel's supply difficulties in 1941-2 are probably mentioned as
a crucial factor in his fall by every one of the enormously
numerous volumes dealing with him, no author has yet bothered
to investigate such questions as the number of lorries the Africa
Corps had at its disposal or the quantity of supplies those lorries
could carry over a given distance in a given period of time.
Even when logistic factors are taken into account, references to
them are often crude in the extreme. A glaring instance is Liddell
Hart's criticism of the Schlieffen Plan which, while concentrating
on logistic issues, does so without considering the consumption
and requirements of the German armies, without saying a word
about the organization of the supply system, without even a look
at a detailed railway map.' All we find is a passage about the cir-
cumference of a circle being longer than its radii, which reminds
one suspiciously of that 'geometrical' system of strategy so be-
loved of eighteenth-century military writers. And this passage is
put forward by some, and accepted by others, as 'proof' that the
Schlieffen Plan, the details of which took scores of highly-traine.
Introduction
general staff officers half a generation to work out, was logistically
impracticable!
Clearly, this will not do. Instead, the present study will ask the
fundamental questions: what were the logistic factors limiting an
army's operations? What arrangements were made to move it and
keep it supplied while moving? How did these arrangements
affect the course of the campaign, both as planned and as carried
out? In case of failure,
could it have been done? Wherever
possible, as in Chapters 5, 6 and 7, an attempt is made to answer
these questions on the basis of concrete figures and calculations,
not on vague speculations. Yet even where, as is often the case,
the sources available make it impossible to go into such detail,
one can at least analyse the main logistic factors at work and
assess their effect on strategy. And one can do this without ad-
hering to stereotypes such as eighteenth-century 'magazine
chained' or Napoleonic 'predatory' warfare.
An undertaking to study logistics and its influence on strategy
during the last century and a half is very ambitious. To compress
the topic into the space of a single book, and yet avoid mere
generalities, this narrative concentrates on a number of campaigns
between 1805 and 1944 (with an introductory chapter on the
seventeenth and
eighteenth
centuries) selected to present
different aspects of the problem. Thus, the Ulm campaign is com-
monly regarded as the most successful example ever of an army
living
'off the country', whereas that of 1812 represents an attempt
to utilize horse-drawn transport in order to cope with a problem
that was too big to be solved - if it could be solved at all - by
anything but the means offered by the modern industrial era. The
Franco-Prussian war of 1870, of course, is said to have witnessed
a revolution in the use of the railway for military purposes, while
1914 allows a glimpse into the limits of what could be achieved by
that means of transportation.
The German campaign against
Russia in 1941 is interesting as a problem in the transition towards
a wholly mechanized army; whereas, in the Allied forces of 1944,
a we transition had been completed. Finally, Rommel's Libyan
campaigns of 1941 and 1942 present some aspects worth studying
because unique. From beginning to end, we shall be concerned
with the most down-to-earth factors - subsistence, ammunition,
transport - rather than with any abstract theorizing; with what
success, remains for the reader to judge.
