30
Supplying War
How was it all done? It has been said that 'the essence of Marl-
borough's system of transport and supply. ..consisted of a con-
tract with one Sir Solomon Medina who supplied it with bread and
bread wagons', This is an oversimplification. The Duke had
originally hoped to steal a march on his enemies by establishing
magazines and preceding them into the field,"' but money for
this was not provided by the Dutch Estates General and nothing
came of the project. Nor could such magazines have provided
him with more than an initial push, since problems of transporta-
tion and preservation made it all but impossible for their contents
to be carried very far. Instead, Marlborough got his bread from
the brothers Medina who in turn purchased it in the surrounding
country, employing no doubt local agents. Everything else the
troops were expected to buy from their pay, for which purpose
each company and regiment had individual contracts with sutlers
great and small. We are thus presented with a charming picture.
The troops arrive in camp around noon each day and are greeted
by the sutlers with soup kettles at the ready. The local peasants
have also been alerted and are happy to sell their products to
soldiers who, for once, were well able to pay their way. One eats
one's fill, settles accounts, then goes on siesta.
Reality, of course, was different. Small though it was, Marl-
borough's army was too big to simply buy its way forward.
Rather, it was necessary to make sure in advance that enough
supplies would be ready and available for purchase. To this pur-
pose, the Duke would send ahead impeccably polite letters, e.g
to the Elector of Mainz: 'it would please your highness.. to sec
to it that we may find provisions on our way, pending prompt re
payment. It would be very advantageous for the troops and also
for the country in preventing disorders if [this].. may be ai-
ranged by sending officers
ahead to regulate everything.
Similarly, he informed the Estates of Franconia that he had sent
ahead munitionaires of the army to collect supplies and asks for
cooperation. When such cooperation was not forthcoming the
consequences could be dire.
'surprise'
Marlborough would express
his
at the resulting disorder, then inform the recalcitrant
town that, since they were now presumably more ready to accept
his 'protection' than before, he was sending a detachment for
the purpose with orders to scour the surroundings and bring in
everything edible for man and beast, a task in which the magi-
strates were kindly asked to assist.®* Marlborough's advance thus
Spanish
Netherlands
France
— Marlborough's march
-→ Bavarian army
- - - French army (Tallard)
= Franco-Bavarian army
50 miles
Cologne
1, Bonn
Lorraine
Strasbourg ®
Blenheim
Biberach
2. The Campaign of 1704
NAHAM LIBRARY
