ЛАПАМ
LIBRARY.
TRINIT
GOLLEGE
206
Supplying War
businesslike, even magnificently rational. To find out just how
effective it was is the task of the rest of this chapter.
Before embarking on this task, however, it remains to note
that, from the historian's point of view at least, the exercise of
combing through the SHAEF documents is a disappointing and,
for this very reason, a singularly instructive one. The amount of
information provided in the bulky files is huge, the number of
graphs, tables and statistics far in excess of anything found in the
papers of other modern armies (e.g. the Wehrmacht in 1941), not
to mention previous ones. Yet when all these masses of material
have been sifted and digested, in the final analysis little of real
informative value can be found. To say just why this is so wil
only be possible after the completion of our study. Meanwhile, it
is worth noting that of all the campaigns studied in this book the
one waged by the Allies in 1941-5 alone gave rise to the question
whether, in view of the balance of forces involved, it was a walk-
over.® To answer this question is not our purpose, but its very
existence is surely indicative.
Normandy to the Seine
"War', Napoleon is said to have mused on the eve of the battle of
Borodino, is a barbaric business in which victory goes to the side
that knows how to concentrate the largest number of troops at the
decisive spot.' Depending on one's point of view, identifying this
point may be a matter either of genius or of sheer good luck.
Once it is identified, however, the feeding into it of men and
material is a question of bases, lines of communication, transport
and organization - in a word, of logistics.
that the success of an eventual Allied invasion of Europe would
The men who planned operation 'Overlord' were well aware
depend above all on their ability to feed-in troops and equipment
at higher rate than the enemy. While the problem itself was
not in principle different from those facing commanders of all
ages, the Allies' approach to it was unique.
Starting approxi-
mately eighteen months before the invasion, a huge theoretical
model consisting of thousands of components was gradually built
up, the aim of the exercise being to achieve a comprehensive view
of all the factors that would affect the rate of flow.? After some
months had been spent on the construction of this model, the
most important of these factors were identified as follows:
War of the accountants
(a) The number of landing craft, coasters, troop
transports, cargo ships, tankers and lighters likely to be
available on D day. These determined the maximum
amount of troops and equipment that could be landed
within a given time. Moreover, since they all had to return
to base (wherever that may have been) in order to reload,
it was vital that those bases should be as near as possible in
order to reduce turning time.
(b) The size and number of the beaches, their gradient (a
vital consideration if ships of all types were to come as
close ashore as possible, thereby dispensing with
complicated transfer-arrangements which would inevitably
have become bottlenecks) as well as the prevailing
conditions of tides, winds and waves. Access from the
beaches to the areas further inland was vital. Since it was
thought that the beaches, however well selected and
operated, would not be able to meet all requirements for
long, it was decided to supplement them by constructing
two artificial harbours and towing them across the Channel
in sections, which again meant that certain geomorphologi-
cal and meteorological conditions had to be met.
(c) The availability at a reasonable distance from the
beaches of deep water ports of considerable capacity (which
itself depends on a whole series of interrelated factors').
It was assumed that only such ports could secure the
Allied foothold on the Continent in the long run,
especially as the landing craft and artificial harbours
would present only a temporary solution until the advent of
winter conditions made their operation impossible.
(d) The feasibility of providing air support, on which
depended the Allies' ability to hamper enemy operations
and slow down his attempts to bring up reinforcements.
Having constructed this model,
the planners under General
Morgan went to their maps and began looking for places in
Europe where these conditions could be met. In doing this, they
soon discovered that an ideal' landing site did not exist, as the
conditions set in the model often contradicted each other. Thus,
beaches that appeared ideal from the point of view of their
gradient (as in some places along the Pas de Calais coast) did not
allow easy access to the country beyond, being bound by high
207
