1387700
TRINITY
204
Supplying War
Emperor always did everything himself. The organization set up
by the elder Moltke did not number more than perhaps two
dozen officers, yet managed to win some of the most brilliant
victories in all history. Schlieffen's Great General Staff may have
been as perfect a machine as can ever be built out of fallible
human components, yet its strategy was doubtful and its logistics
probably even worse. In 1941, the Germans unhesitatingly put up
to 70 divisions under the command of a single Army Group with
no more than 800-900 working rooms at its disposal; which did not,
in spite of everything, prevent them from winning a series of stun-
ning triumphs. Rommel frequently managed with hardly any head-
quarters at all, either touring the battlefield in his 'Mamut ' radio
truck or flying over it in his Fiesler Storch reconnaissance plane,
against this background of ill-prepared,
assembled forces, often only partly equipped with the wrong
hardware, and ordered to launch a campaign at a moments
notice, the Allied Expeditionary Force invading France in June
1914 represented a triumph of foresight and organization. Here
was an army which was free to dictate the starting date of its own
battle whose every movement had been planned in detail for two
years on end, an army which, to an extent unprecedented before
or since, was able to select, design, develop, test and manufac-
ture the hand-tailored equipment it claimed was needed for the
task at hand, and which was commanded by men who, perhaps
because they had behind them a number of large-scale seabome
invasions in two world wars, insisted on making detailed provi-
sions for the loading and unloading of the last jerrycan of fuel. In
short, an army which like no other in history relied on systematic
planning in order to prepare its operations and carry them out,
and on whose structure of command a word ought therefore to be
said.
As constituted in September 1944, the Allied Expeditionary Force
in France was made up of 47 divisions, divided into three Army
Groups - two American, one British - with six Armies between
them.
Overall command over these forces was in the hands of
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), a
mixed Anglo-American organization which was itself divided
into an Advanced Section of vast proportions and a Rear Section
larger still. Coordination between
these bodies,
as well as
between them and the other armed services of both nations, was
achieved by means of an immense network of committees, boards
War of the accountants
215
and liaison officers. To concentrate on the logistic services of the
U.S. troops alone, there were in November 1943 no less than 582
officers and men engaged on planning.
These were distributed
between a rear and forward headquarters (known as CONZ and
ADSEC respectively) 90 miles apart, so that it was necessury to
set up 'a rapid courier service' to enable them to communicate."
The system of split headquarters had originally been created to
solve the Communications Zone's problem of operating on buen
sides of the Channel, but it was retained long after everybody
had moved to the Continent and led to friction between the two.
particularly when ADSEC tried to break away from its parent
Both COMZ and ADSEC, moreover, were sub-
ordinated directly to SHAEF,
with the result that General
Bradley, the senior American
ground commander in France.
could ask for supplies to be divided between his Armies but was
unable to order it. The 1944 army, to sum up, resembled a Bronto
saurus, except that, in the case of the latter day monster, the
brain was large out of all proportion with the body, instead of
Apart from its structure, the thought-processes of the brain of
an army' deserve comment. These can best be studied, not on
the basis of some supposed 'national' characteristics but from the
actual records produced by the instrument of command. Headed
as it was by a man who thought the greatest military quality to
be the ability to weigh calmly the factors involved in a problem
and so reach a rock-like decision', SHAEF in 1944 seems to have
adopted Moltke's slogan Erst wegen, dann wagen" (first consider,
then risk) without, however,
knowing how to strike the balance
between its parts. As the records reveal, decisions - often on very
minor issues - were made as follows. First, an order to work out
some matter - e.g. whether a particular port should be made to
handle rations or POL - was issued. Responsibility for this was
then handed down the chain of command until, inevitably, it
reached somebody who was no longer able to pass it on. A recon-
naissance of the port in question would then be made, and a
report written on every aspect of the question. Next, the memoran-
dum would start its climb back through the hierarchy with every
successive authority adding more
arguments, reflecting a pro-
gressively wider point of view, until it finally reached the man in
charge. On the basis of all the information thus accumulated, he
would then announce his decision. The process appears systematic,
