8
Supplying War
Even from a strictly military point of view, the consequences
of such a situation were disastrous. Unable to feed their trops,
commanders were also incapable of keeping them under control
and of preventing desertion. To overcome both, but also in order
to secure a more regular source of supply than could be afforded
even by the most thorough plundering,® commanders during the
last few decades of the sixteenth century began to see the need
to have the army furnish the soldier with at least his most elemen-
tary needs, including food, fodder, arms, and sometimes cloth.
This, again, was done with the help of sutlers, with whom con-
tracts were signed to supply the army; the resulting expenses
were then deducted from the soldiers'
pay." The beginnings of
this new system can be traced almost simultaneously in the
armies of two of the largest powers of the time, France and Spain,
led respectively by Sully, Minister of War to Henry IV, and
Ambrosio Spinola.1°
Whatever system of supply was used, the first requirement for
a well-ordained army was invariably money. During the second
half of the sixteenth century, however, the growth of armies far
exceeded that of their governments' financial possibilities. Even
the richest power of the time, Imperial Spain, was bankrupted no
less than three times by military expense during the period from
1557 to 1598. By the time of the Thirty Years War, no major
European State except the Dutch could afford to pay its troops.
Consequently, it was necessary to resort to the system of contri-
bution. Though ultimately adopted by all belligerents, it is
generally recognized to have originated with Wallenstein, the Im-
perial commander." Instead of demanding provisions from local
inhabitants
which were to be paid for by treasury receipts,
Wallenstein extracted large sums in cash which then went to the
Army cashier, not to the individual soldier or unit. While frankly
based on extortion, the system had two distinct advantages: it
assured the soldier of regular pay on one hand, and relieved him
of the need to rob for his own personal benefit on the other. In
intent it was more orderly, and therefore more humane, than its
predecessors; though in practice it worked out so terribly that,
shocked by its horrors, Europeans everywhere were still making
efforts to avoid its repetition a century and a half later.
So much for the supply system of the period. In assessing its
effect upon strategy, the most striking fact is that armies, unless
they were more or less permanently based on a town, were forced
The background of two centuries
to keep on the move in order to stay alive. Whatever the method
employed - whether
'contribution' à la Wallenstein or direct
plunder - the presence of large bodies of troops and their hordes
of undisciplined retainers would quickly exhaust an area.
This
state of affairs was particularly unfortunate because it coincided
with a time when the spread and development of the bastion was
rapidly reinforcing the defence as against the offence. If Charles
VIII had been able to conquer Italy 'col gesso', the strength of a
late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century power no longer
consisted mainly in its field army; instead, it lay in the fortified
towns, and a country liberally studded with these would even
find it possible to wage war without any real field army at all.
Under such conditions war consisted
primarily of an endless
series of sieges; whereas a strategic move into enemy country
often struck thin air.
When it came to deciding just which fortress was to be be-
sieged, or for that matter relieved, considerations of supply often
played a very important role. The logistics of the age being what
they were, a town whose surroundings had been thoroughly
devastated might well be immune to either operation. This is well
illustrated by the Dutch failure to relieve Eindhoven in 1586, a
failure caused less by the difficulty of feeding a force of 10,000
men on its fifty-mile approach march to the place than by the
inability to do the same when it was encamped beneath its walls.12
Since a really protracted siege would cause the surrounding
countryside to be completely eaten up regardless of its previous
state, it was only possible to conduct an operation of this kind
under exceptional circumstances. Thus, Maurice during the siege
of Ostend could keep his army supplied from the sea; unfortu-
nately the garrison was able to make use of the same means, the
result being that the siege lasted for a record-breaking two years.
In so far as it was possible to eat up one place after another
commanders found it easier to operate in the field. Since armies
were not supplied from base, and also because in many cases they
did not even expect to be paid by the states in whose name they
were fighting, lines of communication were of little moment in
determining the directions of their movements. The system of
contributions made Wallenstein's hordes almost self-sustaining.
The same is true of most other forces, including those of Gustavus
Adolphus who, from the beginning of 1631 onward, was extract-
ing the bulk of his supplies from the country in a manner not
