96
Supplying War
Though 2,200 miles of French track were being operated by
the Germans when the war came to an end, traffic on them
always remained chaotic and sometimes hazardous. Trains were
involved in crashes, were derailed, and fell into the Meuse. Some-
times this was due to sabotage, but in most cases the accidents
stemmed from incomplete and hurried repairs, the inexperience
of the German personnel and slack discipline. Nevertheless, the
Germans tended to attribute every failure to the action of sabo-
teurs, which led to Moltke's notorious order that French hostages
should be taken along on the locomotives.52
There is no doubt that the German siege and bombardment of
Paris, involving as they did the concentration in a small space of
very large masses of men and heavy expenditure of artillery am-
munition, would have been wholly impossible without the ral-
ways. Also, the view that the German use of the railways to de-
ploy their forces at the opening of the campaign as a supreme
masterpiece of the military art is amply justified, though we have
seen that this triumph was only achieved at the cost of disrupting
the train apparatus before the war against France even got under
way. Between these two phases of the struggle, however, the
railways do not seem to have played a very important role, party
because of difficulties with the lines themselves and partly
because of the impossibility of keeping the railheads within a tea-
sonable distance of the advancing troops. Most surprising, how-
ever, is the fact that none of this had much influence on the
course of operations, or indeed caused Moltke any great concem,
which can only be understood by examining the actual methods
by which the German army of 1870-1 was fed.
Logistics of the armed horde
Ever since the Franco-Prussian War, historians have regarded the
supply organization as one of the Prussians®
greatest achieve-
ments," a belief that Moltke himself helped create when he wrote
that, in the entire history of warfare, no army had been as well!
fed."* It is true that the German forces did not suffer from grave
supply difficulties during most of their campaign against France,
but it is not true that this fact was due to any superb feats of
organization. Failure to recognize this has tended to distort, not
merely accounts of the war itself, but also most attempts to allo-
cate it a place as a stage in the development of the military art.
When demigods rode rails
97
The shortcomings in the supply apparatus that were revealed
by the 1870 campaign were not, admittedly, due to any lack of
organization or foresight. From a very modest beginning, the
train service of the Prussian army had by this time developed into
an impressive machine, each corps being served by a train bat-
talion with 40 officers, 84 doctors, 1,540 men, 3,074 horses and 670
wagons. The marching order of these was not rigidly fixed, but
the combat troops could expect to be followed closely by the bat-
talion's spare horses, pack horses, medicine cart and mobile can-
teen, all of which were supposed to stay with the battalion even
during days of combat, and were known as Gefechtsbagage. Next
came the so called small baggage, consisting of the wagons of the
divisional staff, those carrying infantry ammunition, the field forges,
the remaining canteen wagons, the troops' provision columns, plus
one reserve provision column and one field hospital per infantry
division. Finally, there was the heavy baggage; this consisted of
ammunition columns, officers baggage, the field bakery, the field
hospitals not forming part of the divisions, the remaining pro-
visions-columns, the pontoon-column, the second echelon ammu-
nition columns and the remount depôt. Replenishment of the
troops' vehicles was to be carried out when half of them were
empty, for which purpose they were to be left behind - to en-
able the train columns proper to catch up with them - or driven
to the rear during the night, in order to avoid crossing other units
on their way to the front." To help the corps in emergency, each
Army also acquired a reserve wagon-park of several thousand
vehicles by requisitioning.
On paper,
these were impressive
arrangements. From the beginning, however, they failed to func-
tion, and for this Moltke himself was largely to blame.
As we saw, Moltke's swift deployment of his forces on the
Rhine was only achieved by separating the troops from their
transport, with the result that, when the campaign got under way,
the latter had not yet arrived in the areas of concentration and
was unable to discharge its functions. Given the relative speed of
movement of troops on foot and transport by horse, especially
since the latter was supposed to shuttle between the front and the
railheads or at least stay in place in order to be replenished, this
ap was not easy to close. Therefore during their advance to the
trontier, the German troops had to be supplied by quartering and
purchase, a procedure that caused friction and hardship to the
civilian population. When the German-French frontier was
