26
Supplying War
Since the system's aim was to sustain armies at times when they
were not moving - that is, during sieges - the whole image of
forces operating at the tip of a more or less extended 'stem' con-
sisting of regular transport - albeit hired or requisitioned - is a
false one. Rather, there was likely to be leading to a besieged
town not a single, long line of communication but several short
ones - normally two to four - each feeding from a magazine con-
taining either bread or ammunition. One for fodder might some-
times be established in order to supplement the resources of the
country, never to entirely replace them."o Under this logistic
system, speed and range counted for very little. Rather, it was a
question of disguising and dispersing one's preparations - then
as now, dispersion was an essential element of surprise - and of
minutely coordinating the movements of troops, siege-train and
supplies with their different modes of transportation and control-
ling them in such a way as to make everything and everybody,
from Vauban to the King, appear in front of the selected town at
exactly the right moment. It was in demonstrating how to do all
this without disturbing normal trade and without arousing the
suspicions of the enemy, while overcoming the defective means
of communication, administration and transportation of the day,
and drawing, when possible, on the enemy's resources rather than
one's own, that Louvois contribution to the art of logistics really
lay, not in a futile attempt to endow strategy with any greatly in-
creased freedom of movement.
The age of linear warfare
Of eighteenth-century armies it has been said that they could not
march on their stomach but only wriggle on it, and a picture is
drawn of forces which, while endowed by their magazines with a
certain freedom to choose the direction of their movement, were
limited in speed and range by these very magazines and, further-
more, forever concerned with protecting their all-important lines
of communication. *7 All authorities agree that the resulting type
of warfare was slow and laborious; a few have gone so far as to
call it pettifogging and pusillanimous. However, when it comes to
analysing just which elements of the logistic system imposed this
relative lack of mobility, and how, confusion reigns supreme.
Eighteenth-century armies are supposed to have fed from maga-
zines in their rear, yet the very writers who emphasize this point
The background of two centuries
27
most strongly also claim that the aim of warfare normally was to
subsist at the enemy's expense', a phrase employed as a matter of
course even by the prophet of mobility', Guibert himself. 18 It is
said that it was impossible for a commander to get more than fifty,
sixty, or eighty miles away from their base ('the limit for horse-
drawn vehicles') yet all armies seem to have been 'encumbered'
by something called 'rolling magazines' which, if the term has
any meaning at all, surely implies wagons loaded with provisions
which, by making the army self-contained for a time, should have
allowed it to move in any direction, to any distance, for as long as
stores lasted. The picture, then, is contradictory. Clarification is
called for.
Apart from everything else, the character of eighteenth-century
warfare was a direct consequence of its political ends. Wars were
regarded as personal feuds between sovereign princes; one had a
claim or a 'grievance against one's neighbour, to obtain satisfac-
tion of which one sent an army into his territory and lived at his
expense until he gave in. If there was any hope of permanently
keeping the province in question after the war, care was taken to
preserve one's future capital; if not, exploitation could be ruthless.
In any case, magazines would only be established to provide the
army with an initial push. It would then cross the border, march
into enemy territory, and select a convenient place - easy to de-
fend, situated near a good road or river - to set up an entrenched
camp. The procedure to be followed from this point onward is
well described by that incomparable writer on eighteenth-century
warfare, Maurice de Saxe: 'provisions will not be lacking for pre-
sent consumption, but some management is required
method of procuring supplies for future exigencies.
In order to
accomplish this it will be necessary to fall upon a method of
drawing supplies of provisions and money from remote parts of
the country... the best way is to transmit to these places. circular
letters threatening the inhabitants with military execution on pain
of their refusal to answer the demand made from them' 50 Parties
numbering twenty to thirty men, commanded by an officer, were
sent to gather the contribution, failing which, the magistrates®
houses could be either plundered or burnt down as appropriate.
The money having been collected, a combinatis app force aed
persuasion was used in order to purchase or commandeer supplies
at prices suitably fixed by the army's intendant. While the pres-
ence of an enemy in the neighbourhood might make it expedient
