80
Supplying War
after the battle of Königgrätz was fought and won.? While the
trains became entangled in monumental traffic jams and batled
for priority on the roads, the troops were fed by quartering, re
quisitioning, and sometimes not at all. As Moltke himself wrote to
his Army commanders on 8 July, this failure was caused by the
following 'abuses':
a. The trains were crowded off the roads by columns of
infantry, cavalry and artillery, sometimes being immobilized
for days on end and thus became separated from the
troops they were supposed to supply.
b. Field police, who should have been available to
supervise marching discipline, were frequently employed
on other jobs. Moreover, their commanding officers used
the fact as an excuse for not carrying out their proper duties.
c. Supply trains tended to become inflated by
unauthorized vehicles, many of which were not suitable to
military purposes.
d. Congestion was especially frequent in defiles and
other narrow places, because of the lack of leadership.
Columns and individual vehicles behaved as they pleased,
often resting on the roads and thus blocking them.?º
After Königgrätz, the army continued to live mainly by requis:-
tion, which compelled Moltke to suspend the standing orders and
permit corps, divisions and even battalions to skip the services of
the quartermasters and look after their own supplies in order to
save time." However, Bohemia did not yield very much; villages
were frequently deserted, and all transport had been taken away
by the retreating Austrians. The only item that was really plent-
ful was meat, while bread was very short, sometimes for weeks on
end. This occasionally affected operations, e.g. when 2 Guards
Infantry Division was brought to a halt on 19 July. 12 It is the
opinion of at least one expert that, had the campaign been pro-
longed, these shortages might have been catastrophic.18 Even as
it was,
the strain of weeks of marching coupled with under-
nourishment led to a bad outbreak of cholera. Fortunately, how-
ever, the Seven Weeks' War ended a mere twenty days after
Königgrätz, before the shortcomings of the logistic apparatus
were even properly understood.
Though the Prussian army of 1866 did have a well organized
supply apparatus, it was not, in regard to the actual methods used
When demigods rode rails
81
to feed the troops in the field, very much more modern than
Napoleon's Grande Armée sixty years previously. The same was
true for the supply of infantry ammunition. In spite of being issued
with the needle gun, Moltke's soldiers were able to carry all their
ammunition inside the corps, a total of 163 rounds per rifle being
distributed between the regimental wagons, the battalions' carts
and the men's backs. Arrangements to provide for a constant flow
of ammunition from the rear did not exist, nor were they needed in
view of the extremely modest consumption. Throughout the cam-
paign, no more than 1.4 million rounds were expended, an aver-
age of seven per combatant. As a result, the number of rounds
transported in the various wagons was reduced after 1866, while
that loaded on the infantryman's back was increased until it
formed one half of the total supply - another indication of the
still comparatively primitive state of the logistic services. 15
One very significant consequence of the attempt, however un-
successful, to feed the troops from base, was a new and severe
limitation on the maximum number of troops that could be
marched over a single road. In Napoleon's day, this limit was im-
posed by the need to secure for each unit a piece of country suffi-
ciently large to allow it to forage; under Moltke's organization,
however, the number was dictated by the distance that his horse-
drawn supply trains could travel each day. Assuming that this
was 25 miles, the maximum length of a column of marching
troops could not be allowed to exceed 12.5 miles if the convoys in
the rear were to reach the advance guard and travel back to re-
plenish in a single day. In theory, it was possible to multiply this
figure by employing large numbers of wagons divided into
echelons each carrying a day's supply, but this would involve the
regular shuttling of columns past each other in opposite direc-
tions, an operation not at all easy to carry out on the roads of
Central Europe in the eighteen sixties. In practice, it was found
that no more than one corps - 31,000 men - could be marched
over each road, which led Moltke to make the celebrated dictum
that the secret of strategy was to march separately, fight jointly.
As it was, it was not always possible to observe this rule. After
Königgrätz in particular, the shortage of victuals at 1. Army stem-
med partly from the fact that its three corps were crowded on a
single road so that the supply trains could not get through?o
Even so, recognition of the principle led each of the three Prus-
sian Armies approaching the battlefeld along five roads, with
COLLEGE
