36
Supplying War
'An umbilical cord of supply'?
In the annals of military history, late seventeenth- and eighteenth-
century strategy is often said to occupy a special place. Opinions
as to the exact nature of its characteristics vary. To some, it was
a 'civilized' age when the ideas of the Enlightenment and the
decline of religion as a motivating force allowed some humanity
to be introduced into the business of war, to others it was the
period of 'limited warfare' and 'strategy of attrition', both of
which meant that campaigns supposedly aimed not so much at
the complete overthrow of the enemy as at the attainment of
definite politico-economic goals, by making it more expensive for
him to continue the war than to make concessions. To another
school, the limits of warfare in this period resulted not so much
out of choice as from necessity, and among the factors contribut-
ing to these limits, logistics are usually allowed pride of place.
Given the enormous effect that 'the shackles of supply' and
the 'tyranny of logistics' are supposed to have exercised upon
strategy in this period, it is a curious fact that research into the
actual methods by which armies were supplied and kept moving
has not to date advanced far beyond what was known 150-200
years ago. As we saw, it was Tempelhoff who invented the 'five
days' system' that subsequently came to be ridiculed in virtually
every book on the subject, and it was Clausewitz who, more than
anybody
else, emphasized the
difference between Napoleon's
logistics and those of his predecessors. Between them, these two
writers have been allowed to dictate what is to this day the
'accepted'
view on the movement and supply of eighteenth-
century armies.
A detailed examination of the logistic methods employed, how-
ever, shows the whole of this picture to be absolutely without
foundation.
Pace Tempelhoff, not even Frederick II ever em-
ployed the
'five days'
system'
except perhaps during the first
three years of the Seven Years War, and even then the limitations
inherent in the technology of the age made it impossible for him
to transport much more than ten per cent of the army's require-
ments.
Clausewitz notwithstanding, eighteenth-century armies
lived off the country as a matter of course and at least one of them
- the super-scrupulous Habsburg army - even organized a special
supply corps with precisely this objective in mind. As a conse-
quence, eighteenth-century armies were capable of marching-
The background of two centuries
37
performances much better than is usually acknowledged; ironi-
cally, some of these marches are spelt out by Clausewitz himself.
That armies did not usually cover more than ten miles a day for
any length of time is true, but what force, its men limited to
their own feet and unmetalled roads, has ever been able to do
Contrary to the impression given by many modern books on
military history, whose authors seem to delight in calculating the
size of the 'tail' needed to feed the armies of a Louis XIV or
Frederick II, such descriptions are rare in contemporary sources.
The scale of baggage allowed - especially to the officers - was
admittedly generous, but, this had nothing to do with the need
to supply the army from base.87 The only case I have been able
to discover when a commander actually explained his inability
to carry out an operation by the size of the supply columns oc-
curred in 1705, when Houssaye told Louis XIV that, to besiege
Landau, a train fifty-four miles long would be needed 88 Nor was
this due to any weak-heartedness or reluctance to live off the
country; rather, Landau had already been besieged twice in pre-
vious years (by Tallard in 1703, by Marlborough in 1704) so that
the surrounding area was thoroughly exhausted
As for supply convoys accompanying armies in the feld, there
is little in contemporary sources to suggest that their presence in-
evitably acted as a brake on the movements of armies, nor that
they could not be got rid of when the occasion demanded. In any
case, it was primarily when sieges were undertaken that such con-
voys were needed at all; and it was only then that there could be
any question of a regular resupply from base.
For the rest,
eighteenth-century armies lived as their predecessors had always
done, and as their successors were destined to do until - and in-
cluding - the first weeks of World War I; that is, by taking the
bulk of their needs away from the country.
That eighteenth-century armies did not, in comparison with
their successors, show much expertise in the art of living off the
country may be true, but this was not due to any excessive human-
ity. What was missing was an administrative apparatus specifi-
cally responsible for feeding them in the field.
As a result,
foraging had to be engaged on by the troops, and since this was
rightly thought to cause heavy desertion it could only be carried
out in complex, highly-organized operations. Wary of the latter,
commanders were usually content to leave the exploitation of the
