98
Supplying War
crossed, the trains had still not succeeded in catching up. For
example, those of III Army only reached the front in mid August,
after several battles had already been fought and won, and Ger-
man troops had crossed the Meuse.
During the advance into France, the supply problems faced by
the various German forces were very dissimilar. On the left, I and
Il Armies marching against Metz did not have very far to go anc
could be kept within reasonable distances from the railheads.
These, however, were too congested to be of much use, with the
result that, even though three trains per day were supposed to
arrive for II Army,5e both Armies had in fact to be fed mainly by
requisitioning, supplemented by captured French supplies." This
worked well enough as long as the German troops kept on the
move.
Once operations came to a halt around Metz, however,
'enormous difficulties'
were experienced. The distance from the
railheads now amounted to some forty miles, part of which were
crossed only by narrow mountain roads. Congestion on these was
extreme, and when they were weakened by rain a shortage of
labour made it impossible to have them repaired. Having finally
settled down, the troops around Metz were required to give up
part of their transport to help the forces besieging Paris, which,
at least, went some way to solve their supply problem because,
as always, fodder had proved especially difficult to procure and
the number of dead horses was legion.
Though it will be remembered that careful preparations had
allowed a railway to Remilly to be built quickly, this was nullifed
by the fact that congestion forced supplies to be unloaded
wherever labour and space were available, which was often in
stations far to the rear. Provisions were unloaded without regard
to storage facilities and left to rot, and since no labour was avail.
able to bury them (the local population proved reluctant to carry
out this task, nor did it possess the necessary tools) the stench soon
rose high. These difficulties were just beginning to be overcome
when, following the battle of Sedan, I Army and the Army of the
Meuse started
obeying Moltke's order to send back captured
rolling-stock, with the result that the station of Remilly was con-
gested still further. 8 All in all, keeping I and II Armies supplied
during the siege of Metz therefore proved considerably more diffi-
cult than it had done during the previous and, as we shall see,
the subsequent period.
Meanwhile, on the left flank of the German advance, III Army
When demigods rode rails
99
was free from these difficulties because it lived entirely by requi-
sitioning. Its supply trains had only just succeeded in catching up
with the troops when an unforeseen strategic opportunity arose,
as Macmahon's army was reported standing between Rheims and
the Meuse on the Germans' right. Faced with the choice of either
plunging into the Ardennes without properly organized supplies
in order to cut off the enemy, or waiting until the logistic situation
improved at the risk of allowing him to escape, III Army decided
to march. A rest-day that had been ordered for 27 August was
summarily cancelled, and the troops were instructed to look after
themselves by living off the country, supplementing their finds
with iron rations when necessary. This was, of course, the correct
decision. Shortages of victuals did appear towards the end of the
month, but this was a small price to pay for the victory at Sedan.59
The experience of the other force which took part in the battle
of Sedan, the Army of the Meuse, was somewhat similar. When it
had been decided to send four corps of II Army to the northwest,
a reserve to supply them for fourteen days was built up at Mars-
la-Tour. However, the Army was unable to bring this up because
too many wagons had been given up to transport troops, or to
help with the construction of the railways. Consequently, the
Army during its march had to be fed by the usual combination
of quartering and free purchase, and while these sufficed on the
whole, shortages did arise during the last days of August when it
became necessary to resort to the iron rations. Once again the
victory justified the decision, though both German Armies were
marching without any reserves and would have faced disaster it
the battle had gone against them.
With the heavy concentration of troops around Sedan during
the last days of August, supply
difficulties naturally
though these were alleviated by the fortunate capture of French
stocks at Carignan. Not until after the battle had ended did the
supply columns of the two German armies succeed in catching up
with them, though by this time it was found that their load had
been much reduced through their own consumption. It was im-
possible, therefore, to build up a proper basis for the advance on
Paris, the more so since the nearest railhead was still at Metz, some
80 miles to the rear. These difficulties were made good, however, by
the fact that a French army capable of opposing the German troops
no longer existed Consequently. the latter were able to spread
out over a broad front, with each corps marching over a separate
