58
Supplying War
who stayed put in his place, but to try and come to grips with one
who, though he might occasionally put up a rearguard action,
was forever retreating and slipping away, threatening to draw
Napoleon behind him into the endless spaces of Bohemia, Poland,
and elsewhere.? The 'mechanical' problem presented by this
retreat was all the more formidable because the nature of the
terrain did not allow wide outflanking movements in the best
Napoleonic style but instead tended to funnel the army into the
narrow space between the Danube and the Alps where the num-
ber of roads was constantly decreasing. There were five roads
leading from the base on the Isar to the Inn, three from there to
the Enns, but only one from there on to Vienna. Attempts to find
additional roads through the mountains farther south failed and
the corps which tried to get through (Davout's) got stuck in the
mud. Consequently, numerous corps had to share a single road,
columns reached monstrous length, and the army as a whole
tended to lose its cohesion as well as the ability to concentrate the
corps.
Throughout this march the Emperor thus found himself
racked between the desire to catch the Russians and the fear that
the advance guard might become engaged against superior forces
while out of touch with the main army, a dilemma which he did
not succeed in solving and which was finally to compel him to go
way beyond Vienna to Austerlitz.
Having been instructed to procure themselves an eight days
supply of bread and biscuit in Bavaria, the corps forming the
Grande Armée crossed the Isar in three columns with forty miles
between them on 26 October. Murat, Davout and Soult marched
in the centre, forming a column fifty miles long; Lannes was on
the left, Bernadotte on the right. It was intended, after the initial
supplies gave
out, to feed the corps once more by
means of
orderly requisitions carried out by the ordonnateurs and paid for,
even though this was enemy country, by receipts. To this purpose
an attempt was made to allocate each corps a separate foraging
area, Davout, for example, being ordered to leave the country to
his right untouched so that it could be utilized by Soult follow-
ing him. Marmont, who from 27 October was marching behind
Bernadotte, was told to
go as far as necessary' to his right in
order to secure supplies from an area already traversed by the
latter. Some of the marshals, notably Davout, Lannes and Soult,
also had convoys from Munich following in their wake, though
the speed of the advance was such that there was no hope for
'An army marches on its stomach'
59
them to catch up with the troops over roads which, in addition
to being crowded, were also covered by snow and ice.
Logistically as well as strategically, the army's march from
Munich to Vienna may be divided into three stages. The first of
these brought the French to the river Inn. As the country in
between was wooded and extremely poor? the troops must have
crossed it by consuming the stores requisitioned from the inhabi-
tants of Bavaria who, as the Bulletin of 28 October euphemisti-
cally put it, had demonstrated 'great zeal and industry' in cater-
ing to their needs. From the Inn to the Enns the country opened
up and it was possible to make considerable requisitions. As the
Inn had served as Mack's original area of concentration, some
Austrian magazines were also captured at Braunau, Altheim and
Linz. During the first few days of November many divisions
could consequently be fed by means of regular requisitions at the
hands of the corps ordonnateurs. Far from any grave shortages
arising, some units at least seem to have enjoyed a surplus which
the troops, strict orders to the contrary notwithstanding, either
sold or simply threw away.? Finally, there came the week-long
march from the Enns to Vienna. It was at this stage that serious
difficulties arose and complaints similar to those already heard
around Ulm were voiced once again. However, this had nothing
to do with Napoleon's system of supply or lack of it; since four or
five corps were now crowded on a single road, problems were
bound to appear whatever the method adopted. Yet the only
alternative was to cross the Danube and advance along both its
banks, which was a dangerous thing to do in view of the fact that
all the bridges had been burnt by the retreating Russians and any
force operating north of the river thus became exposed to being
caught in isolation. In the event, so bad did conditions along the
road to Vienna become that Napoleon decided to take the risk,
which led directly to the best part of a division being annihilated
in the 'affair' of Dürnstein.
This reverse that the Grande Armée suffered was due partly to
the fact that the Emperor allowed a sixty-mile gap to develop
between himself and the advanced spearheads, which in turn was
caused by his determination to personally supervise the organiza-
tion of his supplies at Linz.
Thus, far from being 'indifferent' to
his communications, he allowed his care for them to interfere with
his conduct of operations. The establishment of an intermediate
magazine at Haag was ordered as early as 29 October. On the
