2
'An army marches on its stomach!'
The end of siege warfare
It may be that no fanfares greeted Napoleon's decision of August
1805 to go to war against Austria. However, in the annals of
military history,
his campaign marks the transition from the
eighteenth to the nineteenth century. Brilliant and even novel as
the future Emperor's early exploits may have been, they belonged,
in more ways than one,' to the previous age. In 1805 his strategy
changed,
and what subsequent critics were to term Vernich-
tungsstrategie was born and came of age at one and the same
moment. It is not easy to say just what constituted Napoleon's
new style of warfare; too many factors were involved for a simple
definition to be possible. Much has been written about the 'new
and 'democratic'
character of the French army of the time, whose
impregnation with a revolutionary ideology endowed it with an
altogether new type of driving force, and about Napoleon's single-
minded concentration on the defeat of the enemy's army instead
of the attainment of geographical objectives, and his determina-
tion to wage war à outrance, to break his opponents' heads rather
than chopping off their limbs. That there is much truth in every
one of these explanations none would deny, yet they seem to
ignore the central point; namely that, in order to adopt a 'new'
system of strategy, it is necessary first of all to find new means to
carry it into practice. It is above all on these means that the pre-
sent chapter will concentrate.
Owing to the enormous size of the forces under his command,
the logistic problems presented by Napoleon's new strategy were
of an order of magnitude that was altogether new. We have
already tried to show that long strategic marches were, even in
the eighteenth century, by no means as impossible to carry out as
is usually assumed. If they were invariably small scale affairs,
'An army marches on its stomach'
41
this cannot be attributed
primarily to logistic considerations.
Rather, the difficulty was that, whereas the relationship between
offence and defence was such that one field army could engage
another of equal size with reasonable hope of success, a numeri-
cal superiority of no less than 7:1 was thought necessary in order
to besiege a strong, well-defended fortress. Therefore such an
operation could only be engaged on by a large force, e.g. the
120,000 men that Marlborough concentrated round Lille in 1708.
When such forces were not available, however, the only thing
that could be done was to march and fight - multiplying numbers
by velocity, no doubt, but even so without much hope of achiev-
ing a decisive victory as long as the enemy's fortified places re-
mained intact. Between 1704 and 1712, Marlborough and Prince
Eugene followed up one victory in the field with another, yet
France's power remained unbroken, and she ended by making a
favourable peace.
If Marlborough with 40,000 men marched to the Danube,
therefore, and Eugene with 30,000 to Toulon, this reflected not
merely their 'casting off the tyranny of logistics' but, to an even
greater degree, the fact that to use such small forces against even
a single first-class fortress was a hopeless undertaking. Given such
small armies, indeed, it was impossible even to merely invest for-
tresses while simultaneously pushing forward. This, more than
any supposed dependence on supply from magazines, explains
why such strategic marches as were embarked on normally skirted
the enemy's territory instead of penetrating deeply inside it? Had
Marlborough been forced to seal off, much more capture, even
one strong fortress on his way from Flanders to the Danube the
whole of this famous strategic manoeuvre would surely have come
to nothing.
It was, in fact, his inversion of the relationship between sieges
and battles - between the relative importance of the enemy's
fortresses and his field army as objectives of strategy - that con-
stituted Napoleon's most revolutionary contribution to the art of
war. Early in the eighteenth century,
Vauban counted 200 (un-
successful) sieges but only 60 battles during the previous two
centuries.' Napoleon, however, conducted only two sieges during
his entire career. and his experiences in feeding the army rounc
Mantua demonstrated that solving the logistic problems of siege-
warfare was far from easy even for a Bonaparte.
As he wrote
to his stepson in 1909 the method of feeding on the march
