pg_0007.pdf:
Idrootive to Snipers under It. J.N. BARCOT.
APPINDIX 'O'
Copy No..... 8.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Snipers will be posted so as to cover enemy movement about: -
the road. funation LE MESNIL 133725.
road junction 140728.
CHATEAU SI COME 139740.
rond Junction PREVILLE 135745.
road junation IT PLEIN 128753.
It» BERCOT will doataat 10021 inhabitants so as to obtain information
of vantage points for observation, probable enemy novement and any
enemy locations or quislings in the immediate arca.
I consider that,
genemlly sporking,
tho poor people of the distriot will be the best
for first contaot.
After snipers are positioned the "get away men" will position himself
conomled so is to protect their rear and be amilable to love, under
covered route, with vital information.
Snipars will only fire on worthwhile targets, such us,
032i0ers
D.Rs.
Trivers of enemy ors, if contrin of killing.
O.Ps,
Rocoe parties,
Wiroloss sets.
If the enany should coupy the high ground they will inflict the
maximum important casualtios and prevent eneny observation of the
IZ, within thoir area of responsibility, This my recuire considerable
novanent.
When the dormandos and Canadians come into the area they will.
contact
the nenreat Cormander,
hand over all inforation they have
obtained and withim to Battalion Headquarters in RANVILLE.
Fron the RV the "get away men" and It. BERGOT and his batman will
each collect a fol'ing bioycle from 0.0. 'ig' Coy. (see para 57,
Op. Order).
When in their areas thoy will notc all available tot and will return
to Battalion Headquarters by transport if possiblu.
Any time after H+3 I @peat that Commandos, vering green berets and
with Union Jaoks, and. Canadians wearing steel helmets and with yellow
celanose trianglos,
may come through their ares.
In acdition the
9th Parachute Batialion, equipped the same as the Onadians, may come
the NORTI seotor.
Some men of the Inlependent Parachute Company may pass through LE FLEIN
at about P+2 hours,
Ench pair will have one 38 set.
Wireless silene will NOT be broken, except in most urgent ciroumstanoes
mti] H+l hours.
roguonois aro issued by the Signal Offioer • diagram attached to
Instructions regardin wireless silence will be
Men returning with vital information will pass that information on to
battle sutposts through which they my pass.
Oormanding,
13th Bn. (Lenoashire) The Parachute Regiment, A.4.0.

