pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PArA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iji) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
Important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Jor Tererenice
(ji) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA.
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelo
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(ii)
The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infanty brigade or higher
formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the o
1/c
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or o1
aches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, i
Sown.
War Diaries
and internsence
nstrucuotts
ontained
1o. hers.
WAR DIARY
Army Form C. 2118.
Monthly
will be. legs in A.r
available,
2n0
Unit. 2nd En RoST
Interizence
will
prepared in manuscript.
INTELLIGENCENSUMMARY:
Month and Year. July 1944
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer Licut Col C•G•
MILLERT
Date
Hour
Summary of Events and Information
References to
Appendices
BIEVIIDE
There was no great change in the situation today. At 0400hrs enemy shelling
BEUVILLE
.3
..4.
caused six Cas, but at 0415hrs our own arty carried out a VICTOR Shot on
on LUBISHY WOW •
During the night there were signs of enemy activity in LABISHY. A number of
flares and MG Bursts brought down our DE Arty Fire, and no enemy counter
attack material sed. There was sporadic enemy shell fire during the day.
The new Bde Coma, Brig BOLS, arrived at 0800hrs and visited the Bn at 1800hrs,
just in time to see the completion of our relief by 2 WARWICKS • We took up
our former posns at BNUVIlll without interference from the enemy, in spite
of his direct observation of the BIVIIE po no
Throughout the day there were intermittent periods of enemy shelling In-
dications that our own enemy's 192 Pz Gren Regt were recently relieved by
units of 16 CAR DIV were confired by a deserter on the 8 BDI front. The unit
now in LIBISHY is 31 GAF Regt. Hy Arty cone were put down on INBISTY at
first light.
Wt,84859, 1676 800,000 11/43 W. H, & S. 61-7676
1t PerLoa
EBBEEBEBEEEBEEEE
#FERREFEREEEEEE
EEBEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
###*##########E##
OBE

