INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. L.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :—-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(üi) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
ept from the first day of embodiment.
VoTe B- See aiso A C. dos of 1941, Daras. 2. 4 and 8.
(iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
ions, topographical and climatic.
mportant phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
Incers and the
of other ranks or followers and
or tears ana bies the nashs an he not of
(vii) Meteorological notes.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
oCcur, oT oF to no slould be entered up, not in yever ( men th i hut he ho time they
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
"*) A come of to field return is. 30 te e see a to cate operatione or
routine order or instruction
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
ParA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
reamsation and admisuration.
.. C. i be entered bently hath entry ratial and ete on et detaild to, heep it, on
from ar day is note ne ted that be extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
na decisions taken.
i Daily ations cements to strenty-fos hoot asid prese
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
a) important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ave a brief descriptive headin, iv above).
to appendices will be
rade in the last column of AliCE naming the autor. References
(See
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
e forwarded on the first day of the succeeding
direct to the officer i/c 2nd Ech
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
ormation yin to the duristin any oo late, The War to the he / 2nd Eche,
i the diaries of units Under- Secretary of State, Th
sides ol unus will be sent within a
end Echelon to be transmitted to record ofices at home for sate custody.
The duplicate copies
the unit concerned.
SPECTAT NOT The
he the one entered should be the time the storm at neror, er.
Place
the cover in be
Month and Year... January, 1944.
vate n
Hour
WAR DIARY
Army Formi
C. 2118.
Unit635. Bulk Petrol Transport Coy.
R. A•S.C.,
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer. Major L. Hall.
Summary of Events and Information
Bradford
Ist
2nd
References to Appendices
Weather: Unsettled. Cold.
Sgt. Walker completed detail, delivering ]l x 6Ton Mack Vehicles from
L. E.P. Transport Ltd. GOOLE, to No 5 V.R.D. Shropshire.
Heather: Fine.
Ord
Weekly Strength Alterations: -
Posted In.
1 Pte Coachtrimmer.
3 Drivers 1/c.
- tapuen.
4th.
5th.
6th.
7th
Posted Out.
2 Pte Fitters.
2 Pto Electricians.
1 Driver 1/c.
Weather: Showery.
Weather: Cold and Fine.
Weather: Cold and Fine.
Weather: Cold and Showery..
Unit inspected by D.A.A.G., Nb 1 RASC Mobilization Centre.
8th
Weather: Cold and Fine.
System of Training Revised. One Platoon to be left free each week to
complete Training Programme and Exercises.
Vt.47724,998 2,000,000 8/13 W. H. & S. 61/6375
Weather: Cold and Fine..
nion
its in your
• Bulk Or
have requested,
of your doc
ocuments are in
