ITION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
f mobilisation or
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or
followers and of
animals should be noted.
lunate command.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
ents (Sec, 36), and
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Apperdices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
his representatives.
war duties will be
the wee die or it reton fate Wa tee covere yet a each operatime of
outine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2014 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
and To provide dar on vich to it object in rovemen a historia tract, griptions,
organisation and administratioch to base
or oNer pete tient be made cel, that the ofice he ali to the in rier a he commander
PARA. 3.- Omitted.
Para. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issuec
• cecisions taker
ii) Daily locations. Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
farch tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
ographical and climatic.
sketches showing positions of troops at
will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
uming the author. References
PARA 6- All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
3) Un towarder in are is, the or the cope of a martia dy fet the he cing to chil!
be forwarded on the first day of the
nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
c hint on in evel should be she time the trem in tho
Burgery Tank 2
ancing sues;
WAR DIARY
Month and Year: July 1944 Saut INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
ummary of Events and Information
The mint moved in long for OThEY YoRKs to a
Buriac area at BURGHLEY PARK MeN STArIFORD a
Army Form C. 21
Unit 635 COY RASE (BUNK PETROL Ter)
Commanding Officer
Signe mayn
Commending 635 bulk Terences 10 Appendites
Operatian Order N= I
appendix Nº 1.
jung to ementiation Aren
War showing
some ne on date detent as preten on dis i
Wether: War Samary.
To mit commenced watergerying all riles a stres
Posted Out: 2 Dries IC
WAR DIARIES SECTION
Weather: Wam, Cloudy
3 AUG 1944
0. 4.0 2nd Echelon
We then: Warn Candy
WL. /721,998 2,000,000 3,48 W. H & S. 51/6675
iblo
Nº 1
ocuments in your Bulk Oi
ate you have requested,
more of your doc
ments - Enquire at
nore documents are in ust
on Desk for full details
