F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the
11) Unit commanders
(ji) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NotE A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTE C.-
Any question of doubt whether or n
or sub-unit,
will be referred, thr
o dant witchant, to the diady secretary or state a it
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
ind to
PARA. 2. - A war diary is Secrel.
data upon
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and ad unist ation
• duprovements
their formations or u
nay be of benefit for sho
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the
number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted
n addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
( pop of eat lat reton it. sing the pete: covered ay the eure votion of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
or other person 1
Not. It shend be nade clear, hat the fier he details the ent ier is the commander
nentioned in para.
1, not the officer he details to do the
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
() Ingotaint oster, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and isued,
i) Daily locations.
aul laDies in the
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
ase of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(tii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
rict descipry tea, 4, i aboveleen the account of
ling the author. References
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
ncluding an
which may
they should be included
/ have been marked " personal" (provided the writer considers
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
structions regarding War Diarie
the unit concerned.
SpECT NOT The tin entered should be the time the Biven i tha te
out as the formation te order react
SHAST 1•
Unit 635 COV RASC (Bulk Petrol TrAN
Commanding Officer ....
Month and Year.....
JUNE 1944•
Place
"A" Marshalling
Area •
191.
2nđ•
3rđ.
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Lavington Camp.
10th
11th
12th
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appenui
Weather : Clear Fine.
Post In : 1. I.M.T. Clerk.
Heather : Clear Fine.
Weather : Dull.
Weather : Clear Fine.
Post Out : 1. Cpl. Butcher. 2 Carpenters. 1 Veh/Mewh
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
Weather
:Showery •
Weather : Clear.
6 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon-
Weather : Clear Fine. Post Out. 1. Driver.
Weather : Clear Fine.
Weat her : Showery •
Weather : Cloudy. Unit moved from Special Duties in "A" Marshalling Area
to Lavington Camp Nr. Devizes. Post In: 6.D/Mechs.
Post In : 1. D/Mech.
Weather : Sun Slight Wind. Post In: 19 Drivers.
Weather: Sunny •
Post In: Major J.Diggle from 503 B.P.T.C. Command of Coy
assumed by Major J. Diggle.
Wt.47724/998 2,000,000 3/43 W. H. & S. 51/6375
ques
cuments in your Bulk Oi
te you have requested.
more of your doc
nore documents are in
on Desk for full details
