F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
() Each tea or sut the sto in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(i) Unit commanders.
(ili) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept trom the In the case emorianines and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important hographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
IN one Pete to should be entered up not in the ever a given bring it at the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(* Act of act felt retion A ding the per overed by of cure o voline of
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
and To provide data pon is to e bie i provemen a hi trial record of riptione
organisation and administration.
(iv) Copiding in which mad relevant demarofia lesters roma the vite contion,
iney should be included.
See PARA Volume In.
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
of or pete held be de ale that the offer wed it to the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
BEEN
Month and Year Alie 1944
Keloeda
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
60 Tra
Commanding Officer
ItA. No 8 Bare Suh Area.
Suo Training fa entire mint Uncreeful. 10s
ace Priselege rohal leave prom
uneverfue
5A.
Preparalón admin Order receivel Thro I1Q Poser
document through different channel.
Fash Aid Trainis a an RAMS lasterantan ace
Manho present.
WAR DIARIES SECTION-
15 MAY 1944
G. H:Q. 2nd Echelon
ished:
