INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
Li) Unit commanders.
(ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept from the In the cast emboditions and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NoTE B.— See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
matic eat sketant out pos, bas of trooping
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establuthen foster rah. As
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
in adition the case of then tanks of lowers id of a, transport, d be noted
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
) A cop of dad fall retion sue. is the pet., overed) ay the cuch votion of
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
operations furnished in have a bif the dipy (
compered, and each i have a briat destinie edine. m
naming the aupe. References
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
indy show be himay have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
later for the fit fry sithe War.
oF other perin then he made dear, hot the offer who is to do it die a tv commander
PARA. 3.-0mitted.
preparing a diaty so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
) Imd deant asters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and isued,
« pay ation. i can data to at any don hour and prent dispations.
WAR DIAF
CE SI
Month and Yuar... Ma lem.
ORIGIN.
WAR DIARY
No. 60 transit Cam.
Peon Ist lay 1944 to 3 June 19A4.
mplad. Colche le
tre fruit mail
mtact inth leat
MAy G. H.O. 20d =00
l portel to unit por
21 Afp ACe. pure.
moree ti ItEMINESTONE delainin at
NEEDHAM MARKET a them laT. to /emiaptie.
lil accamodatel in repisitimal hriedigo
Spec
e guaranteed t
