INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
creation o. the partial dia min de kept in unlicate from the first day of mobilisation or
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
pt from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
operations, topographical and climatic.
at leat shetan hours post fact of troping
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casuali a the names and rants o.
in adi and the nice of it on ta . of Colowers a in to an, trasport, e be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to noticé.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
PARA, 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
isation and administration.
i Cort or contand ere as, opines are omened to s, clude in the war diarien ce
to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operation which
nay be the fist ry shot tear research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
on A. C. diary. "i sentented that heck tray in and et ente of details, no keepi,
Tom a a diary tin obe ted the be car stion a A retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
or other person ment he made deal, that the offer who is to the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diaty so far as they are applicable, the following points shoald be recorded when
(1) Imp desist osters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
( ay cation can dure the at trenty to hour nd present dispositions.
Appendices will be
to mered as wal be i have a belt descrip oh a dinn
(iv) Copies ot important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
they sinuad be which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Place
Month and Year...
Date Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
60 Transir Camp
Commanding Officer.
vies la Arra callies. Name Training a priparalia for
Lague at partence transer Arra poles ly light bivraceng,
Barban free - Some rain durip night o Last pres of ai.
crast persis or head.
References to Appendices
Bole Arcis lo for 1:3o
Pant rohie toproce msero, oc, bo Trusin Camp
Hug A Branch (Rune) 1t.9.21 Amaz group Lafid ent Dolan
daten 3i May 1944 -
V. 47724.998 2,000,000 3/43 W. H. & S. 51/8375
guaranteed ti
ay have st
snea
