Unis
Commanding Officer
Month •and Year.
LOCATIONS (Map Ref.)
sintments (Sec. 36), and
e and his representatives.
Army, war duties will be
8.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
it vil ey queti, through the with hart, to the diade should be of t a u.
Forne War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.- A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
one tortion a data histratic, to base future improvements in army training, quipation,
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
day of mobilisation or
a subordinate command
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature in destinin of fred engine ing works constanted, be quarters occupied.
ranks or rolands anal a the na sho and e note of
in ade and the under of then ta i of lowers a in stras, transport e be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
!
or maps relating thereto
a supplement the account of
ming the author. References
( Copat imprint nd at ye demit i ten come in of onion.
(See PASA., Vol diries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
or oNet per e menta be in be cia, hot the ofter who tail to the ent die ia the commander
PARA. 3.- Omitted,
preparing a diay to far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Impotent us tak, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
Month and Year./
ния н4
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Army Form C. 2
Unit..
60 Transit Camp
Commanding Officer
References to Appendices
Trespat at herpool threer to lake unit totichna i
13 7р.
cutatation an 1000l arcel loot, Rubetes
in 8S Tiait 1200k _ Pulled on ali Chamela Lau
pidly am i do it of el ent idea
WAR DIARIES SECTION
1/ JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
так орий не Неід o Drok -
of chipo caregio livado the truel head den pa
minisned:
