INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
1. The
objects of a war diary are two-fold: _
OBJECT.
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as
upon which to base future improvements in Atmy training, equipment,
constructive
(b) To furnish an historical record of, the war.
Te of, the marions of commanders are welcomed for ain purpose.
2. A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the Unite
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
importance hat compete dial sid be submited promity in accorden a with the in the a i an
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area o
in the of
b) Unit commander
(c) Commanders of a headquarters
or unit on detachment
Base
auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
comoica war alary as is touna convenient.
4. *Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: -
(a) Cover;
(b) Index
as printed on cover;
Narrative;
(a) Appendices.
5. All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or ser
officer.
t is a secret documen
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is
fence under the Official Secrets Act
In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as po
11ll be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one excepton, or copl
of documents issued and received
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendice
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a) Áccount of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them
(c)
(d,
Nature and d scrip on of card engineering works constructed.
above was spent.
Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
or other pren a copier prepared a open a permit ten the special i do, pin
oin sim
ropine crool ice orde
The appendices will be assembly and reference easy.
assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
the appropera pace in the indon.
uments to be included in the appendices the word " NIL." should be entered in
In cases where additional
unis the relent paper should de pendice a er pial for the rodney, on he are to radia
* Formations and units belonging to the
will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate
WAR DIARY
Unit 60 Traceit Camp
References to Appendices
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Lai
Dale, hot
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer
Transit Camp- Islander a braces paro tragh Oli
Date Hour
Place
Ryes France 1
in The duplicates of TOP SCRET suppleenth
type referred to
reer and sech
this
Love Stilia by RAf, AREs or as dis strip li co pillo
afiring la bianne area.
Left To jan his Rugs, Be hang Lander nor hides -
WL.1724,998 2,00,000 8/43 W. H. & S. 61/5975
uaranteed tr
ay have sp
08
