INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
(a) To provide information from
OBJECT.
upon which to
The views
and
base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organ
theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as
constructive recom
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
oadon
mendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
A section of the War Office has be eration i want it in i th
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the term of me i e
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
GENERAL
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and are at s
on the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries tri
combined war diary as is found convenient
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of : —
(a) Cover;
Index as printed on cover;
Narrative;
All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent uni), p
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
officer.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or seni
It is a secret document
offence under the Official Seczets Acts.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
3.. The narrative should be written up daily
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not
a precis of any of them
it shand contain.
Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Notes of how orders were
Nature at ho description of caried intering works constructed.
any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome themid be specie
Brief notes of the time of receipt and lose as orders and type of mine, esca, ho tene no
Appendix letter and folio number;
and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
Intermediate movements of unit
formation.
b) Noper of to impera no visit hid ano received by coma dedions ta se
paid and received by commanders and senior stafi officers. It is es
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENeRAL.
or other imponent documen i prepar diary. chen will be mide at the time spectically fou
order, appreciation, letter
ving dow
hould be placed in the war diary
ommand is esperal that no desi a message doch con in it be pl of operational important
rouping of the Appendic
OT in simple chronological ord
This ip intended to makess
he appropriate space in
Vira peein the documents to be included in the appendies the word "Ni." should be caket
Appendix " A." The forms which constitute
hendauarters of divisions and below
active operations or not.
The for will be apati an in a to one on e
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
WAR DIARY
Army Form G. 211
60 Trenset Camp
References to Appendice:
Month and Year Aughst 1qu+
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer
Hour
Summary of Events and Information
reveal a runt of Faltie ung transin ara nichris some Kho it
Rys france
Recries duris periot 281 o/to 66560005 His, 28 Fracted 365-
12 tracher Who 4/2 Chested iho 4SP8us Sus 87 M/Cs Rubertes pir
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No...
T9SEP 1944
G. H:Q: 2nd Echeten
dung the period iscluded 10 Polish Air a 1 Police Arand. Dis
Lin be la poli i tens ser dress lo gase ex cast beatens
so lie to tune percis thral - Ara can do connell
The a book at in Escapes suracions.
Nots of adi. Just ne Horo parts scenes i treesir.
VI. 47724, 908 2,000,000 3,28 W. IT. & S. 61/37.
Wt.47724,993 2,000,000 3,43 W, HI. & S
61/0375
ished:
uaranteed tr
ay have sp
the
in
35/9/0
the
11,
and
Tho
of these
eding,
enlised
nsidered
n for
each
ment is an
t with.
