230
= NEPTUNE
their backs and M-1 rifles slung over their shoulders trooped aboard the
LCTs at the hards, and after a brisk ride across the wind-tossed harbor they
climbed up cargo nets hung over the side. Several days later, on the other
side of the English Channel, they would reverse the process, climbing down
those nets into the LCTs or the smaller Higgins boats to make their way to
the invasion beaches.I6
For many of the embarked soldiers, the on-board waiting was worse than
waiting in the sausage camps. Even more than the big LSTs, the smaller
ICTs bounced around energetically in the blustery weather, rising and
swooping with the wind and waves. Keyed up by the prospect of imminent
action, the soldiers and crewmen now had to endure a period of unknown
duration waiting for the "go" order. There was little to do but to look around
the harbor, exchange small talk with their buddies, and think about the
forthcoming operation. On a number of ships, chaplains held religious
services, which were well attended. On his flagship, the Bayfield, Moon
authorized showing a film to help pass the time, and the soldiers sat down
to watch George Sanders and Herbert Marshall in The Moon and Sixpence,
a 1942 drama about a middle-aged stockbroker who, like Paul Gauguin,
settles on a South Sea island to paint and go native. This naturally led some
sailors to make jokes about the old man showing a movie about himself and
his salary.!7
At least there was plenty to eat. This was especially true on the big
attack transport ships and the LSTs, both of which were well equipped
with galleys designed to feed hundreds of men at a time. On some of the
LSTs, the cooks served up a full steak dinner on June 3. While it was
much appreciated, a number of men wondered at the symbolism. Was
this the last meal of the condemned man? The fare was more Spartan on
the LCTs. Each LCT had been stocked with fifteen days of food, but
much of it consisted of K rations, which came in small cardboard boxes
containing a can of meat or cheese, four crackers, some malted milk balls,
a pack of coffee, four cigarettes, and a candy bar. It was not uncommon
for a soldier to put the cigarettes in his pocket, eat the candy bar, and
throw the rest away. Slightly more tolerable were C rations, which in-
cluded a canned entree of hash or stew. Curtis Hansen, on LST-315, tried
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 231
loheat up a can of stew from a C ration pack by placing it on the engine
manifold. That worked just fine, but such was the state of his constitution
that when he took the first bite, his stomach rebelled, and he threw up
over the side. 18
Some tried to sleep, though with so many men on board, space to stretch
out was at a premium. A few soldiers "hot-bunked" in the available racks.
Others climbed into the back of the trucks and sought to find room amidst
the crates and equipment, ignoring the fact that much of it consisted of am-
munition. Still others climbed on top of the trucks, making a hammock out
of the swale of canvas between the metal supports. They found that if they
wiggled down deep enough in the truck's canvas top, it would block the
wind and the stinging sea spray. Then it began to rain. To escape it, they
sought refuge below deck. That proved to be a problem for some of the
answimmers on board, who, suspicious of being at sea at all, had inflated
their inner-tube-style life vests as soon as the LCT backed away from the
hard. Now they discovered that they were unable to go below because the
hatches on an L.CT were not wide enough to accommodate a man wearing
an infated life preserver. Before very long, almost everyone on board was,
in the words of one, "wet and miserable."19
During the lengthy loading process, senior officers occasionally dropped
by one or another of the embarkation sites to ensure that things were pro-
gressing satisfactorily. Both Eisenhower and Ramsay visited Portsmouth to
chat with the soldiers and sailors and offer encouragement. Even King
George showed up. Robert Evans was busy loading jeeps and other equip
ment onto LCT-271 when a black Rolls-Royce pulled up on the hard and
King George VI stepped out wearing the uniform of a five-star admiral in
the Royal Navy. Evans knew the proper protocol was for him to come to
tention and salute, but instead he, and everyone else in the immediate
area, started cheering and waving. The king took it all in good spirit and
waved back. At another site, the king strode toward the ramp of a ship that
ias being loaded, only to be confronted by a young American quarter-
master, clipboard in hand, who had been told not to let anyone on board
without first checking his identity and recording his name. That led to this
curious exchange:
