VUL
320 = NEPTUNE
work got done, the components got to sea, and on the day after the land-
ings, the first elements of this vast project appeared off Omaha and Gold
Beaches.28
All five of the invasion beaches were to be protected by the artificial
breakwaters called gooseberries, but two of them-Omaha and Gold-
were to host complete artificial harbors composed of several elements.
First, some two thousand yards off the coast, the Allies would position so-
called bombardons: enormous floating steel pontoons, each of them more
than two hundred feet long, that were strung together end to end, like a
Brobdingnagian pool float. Then, another thousand yards closer to the
beach, the tugs would maneuver the giant Phoenix units into place and sink
them in a long row. Inside the protection of these concrete structures, sev-
eral steel pier heads, known as Lobnitz piers for their designer, Henry Pear-
son Lobnitz, would be connected to the beach by "whales," which were
long, floating roadways. These causeways required more than thirteen
thousand steel pontoons that would be anchored to the sea floor by more
than two thousand special anchors called
kites.
The roadway sections
would float on the surface and rise and fall with the tide. In theory, at least,
once all these elements were in place, fully loaded ships could maneuver
into the sheltered harbor created by the Phoenix units, nose up to the Lob-
nitz piers at either high or low tide, quickly disgorge their tanks, trucks, or
cargo onto the floating roadway, and then immediately back off again for
another trip. The whole project was a marvel of imagination and engi-
neering—if it worked.
The first elements to be put in place were the corncobs that made up the
gooseberry breakwaters. Off Omaha Beach, the gooseberry was anchored
at its western end by the former Royal Navy dreadnaught HMS Centurion,
which was wrestled into place by the tugs early on the afternoon of June 7.
The Germans immediately opened fire on this battleship, which in their
view had been foolish enough to come within artillery range. When the
pre-positioned charges on the Centurion were detonated and the big ship
settled to the bottom, the Germans thought they had sunk her. That night,
Goebbels himself announced this triumph of German coastal defense
forces on the radio.29
THE PLAN FOR THE MULBERRY HARBOR
OFF OMAHA BEACH
English
Channel
- REHEAOS
ast piers 25 tons
BOMBARDONS (24)
PHOENIXES (13) Middle
HMS CENTURION
Low water line
_GOOSEBERRY (15 blockships)
erville-sur-Mer
Les Moulins g
St. Laurent-sur-Mer
