YUL
316 = NEPTUNE
rum. After his American visitors climbed aboard, the beach master poured
out three generous tumblers and handed them around. The two Americans
sipped cautiously and found the rum alarmingly potent. Irwin felt it burn
"like a red hot poker all the way down." Not wanting to be thought either
unappreciative or unmanly, he waited until the beach master turned away,
then poured the contents over the side. Afterward, he wondered if that
explained why so many of the British beach masters seemed to have such a
"ruddy glow." 18
Other sailors sought to effect repairs to their wrecked and stranded ves-
sels. Many of the Higgins and Mike boats that had been shot up during the
initial landings were so full of holes that they looked like sieves. To effect
repairs, each vessel came equipped with a sack of tapered wooden plugs,
and the crewmen began hammering these into the holes from the outside,
leaving half-inch-long stubs sticking out. By the time they finished, one
sailor thought "the old boat looked like it was growing something"l9
Food was a problem for many. The sailors had each been issued Krations
when they left England, though many had simply tossed them over the side
after extracting the cigarettes and the candy bars. Now, after several days on
the beach, even K rations sounded pretty good. They soon learned that
while most of the small boats were out of food, the larger LSTs and trans-
ports were still well stocked, and some of them, at least, were willing to
share. One of the Royal Navy LSTs was, in effect, a floating bakery; when
smaller vessels came alongside, the British tars handed over a few loaves of
bread. Once the word got around, there was nearly always a long queue of
small hoats nearhu though at least one U.S. Navv sailor complained that
"the bread was so hard you could hardly chew it"2o
Those boat crews that had been stranded on the beach and were unable
to visit well-stocked ships offshore had to improvise. On June 9, a crew-
member from a grounded Mike boat stumbled across a wooden crate filled
with cans of beef and chicken stew. He alerted his shipmates, and they dug
a shallow pit in the sand, used diesel fuel to start a fire, and heated the cans
on top of a SO caliber machine gun sight, which they used as a grate. Not all
Crews were so fortunate, and some simply went without. One boat's crew
survived for two days on nothing but canned tomato juice.21
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 317
Once the LSTs had been emptied, they retracted during the next high
bide and headed back across the Channel in convoys to take on another
ked I a representative example, LST-S43 discharged its cargo on D-Day,
came back across the Channel on June 7, loaded up again at Southampton
on the eighth, delivered that cargo on the tenth, recrossed the Channel on
be tet and made another delivery on the fifteenth. It was exhausting
work. Atten knots, a round trip from Spithead to Normandy took eighteen
bous. That meant that to sustain this schedule, the ships had to be con-
stantly steaming, loading, or unloading. Most LSTs made at least forty or
ity such round trips, and one crewmember was sure that his ship had made
the crossing at least a hundred times." No wonder they looked forward to
drying out. Inevitably, confusion crept into this frenetic schedule, but when
i did, the ships and their crews simply muddled through. As an example of
that, Admiral Morison tells the story of an American LCI that off-loaded at
Viah Beach, then returned to Portsmouth for more. Once it had loaded up,
however, no orders were forthcoming, so on his own the skipper joined an
oubound British convoy. As the ship left the Solent, a signal station on
shore flashed the message "Where do you think you are going?" to which
the skipper replied, "I don't know." After a short pause, the response came:
"Proceed"22
As chaotic and frenzied as it seemed, the delivery of men, vehicles, and
supplies over the beach became increasingly efficient after June 10. The pre-
invasion goal of 8,000 tons per day on Omaha Beach was reached and sur-
passed on June 12 when some 8,529 tons came ashore. By June 15, the
backlog of unloaded ships had been cleared, and Hall noted with some
pride that "all previous records for stores landed on the Force O beaches
was broken on each successive day? In the five-day period from June 12 to
June 16, the Allies landed a total of 75,383 men, 10,926 vehicles, and 66,571
tons of supplies on Omaha Beach. That was roughly the equivalent of a fully
equipped infantry division every day—and there were five Allied beaches
where this was happening. If the Allies could maintain that pace, it would
overmatch anything the Germans could do.3
Bringing men and supplies in over the beach remained precarious, how-
ever. Nightly raids from the Luftwaffe and occasional sorties by E-boats
