A long row of LSTs discharge their cargoes onto Omaha Beach. Unloading across
a beach was more time-consuming than at a pier, especially if the LSTs "dried out"
through a tide cycle. On the other hand, the broad beach allowed many more LSis to
come ashore simultaneously, and despite the loss of Mulberry A at Omaha Beach, the
come ashore simultaneously, and despite tuildup and the logistic supply line for the
armies in Normandy. (U.S. Navy Photo
D- Day: The Beaches =
2711
however, they concluded that this was as close as they were likely to get,
and they dropped their ramps into the water. The coxswains hollered,
"Berybody out," and, released at last from their long purgatory inside the
claustrophobic confines of a Higgins boat, the soldiers staggered out into
the hell of the beach itself.
Though they were on time, their company and platoon leaders saw
almosta once that they were in the wrong place. A steady three-knot south-
esterly current had pushed most of the landing craft well to the left of their
intended targets, especially on Utah Beach. The boat drivers had been sup-
plied with composite photographs assembled painstakingly over many
weeks from pictures taken by Army Air Forces pilots who had swooped in
low over the beach to photograph the terrain. The idea was that the cox-
swains could nise tha nhoto images to guide them into the drover landing
area. But with the ubiquitous smoke and dust over the beach, picking out
recognizable landmarks was all but impossible, especially on Utah Beach,
where the terrain was unrelievedly flat. During the approach of LCT-853,
the skipper kept asking his exec if they were headed for the right beach. The
exec examined the composite photograph, glancing up from it regularly to
study the beach, but he was "totally unable to see anything because of the
smoke. Like almost everyone else, the skipper of the 853 simply headed for
the closest piece of open beach he could see. Consequently, when the sol-
diers finally staggered ashore, their officers looked about them in vain for
any of the landmarks they had studied so carefully for all those weeks back
in England. 4
The set of the current was strongest off Utah Beach, where the men came
Rejecting the notion that they should work their way back to the right to
reconnect to the careful minute-by-minute timetable of the invasion plan,
Colonel James Van Fleet, commanding the 8th Infantry, and Brigadier
Canaral Than deur Rongevelt Tr increal made the Commonsence decision
to on farmand fan, Less they tars Tike his father who had encountered
1: "rowded Lan» at Vatle Will in Cuba some toltv-six vears earlier
hower to lot him land wett tha Geat wore at TItah Beach. Almost at once he
