258 = NEPTUNE
would, at the very least, utterly demoralize the defenders, if not actually
stun them into submission.
Though Allied bombers had been busy over Europe for months, they
had focused relatively little attention on the Normandy beaches in order to
avoid tipping their hand. Instead, in accordance with Eisenhower's "trans-
portation strategy, they had targeted the railroad network in northern
France to make it difficult for the Germans to rush reinforcements to the
threatened spot. Churchill had worried that this approach would result in
heavy civilian casualties, but Ike had insisted on it, writing Churchill that
"casualties to civilian personnel are inherent in any plan for the full use of
Air power to prepare for the assault." In the end, this transportation strategy
proved remarkably effective, though of course it also meant that the prepa-
ration of the landing beaches themselves was limited to a relatively short
bombardment in the brief half hour of twilight just before the landings.
Moreover, because senior Army officers worried that dropping 500- and
1,000-pound bombs on the beach would create craters that could impede
Allied tanks, the ordnance packages on many of the Allied bombers con-
sisted of 100-pound antipersonnel bombs. These would make no craters on
the beach, but neither would they seriously damage even modest concrete
fortifications.?9
More than two thousand bombers took off from half a dozen airfelds in
East Anglia late on the evening of June 5. As the planes circled to gain alti-
tude, darkness closed in around them and made assembling into forma-
tions a dangerous undertaking. Just as the Allied ships in the invasion force
maintained their positions during the Channel crossing by watching the
blue light on the fantail of the ship in front of them, so, too, did the pilots
hold their position in the formations by watching the blue lights on the
wingtips of the other planes. 30
After assembling over the English Midlands, the bombers flew south in
several enormous formations While they did so, the battleshins and cruis-
ers of the bombardment groups took their assigned positions off the coast.
According to the operation order the shins were to open fire at 5.50 a.m.,
just minutes before official dawn at 5:58. On the American beaches, they
were to maintain a steady and concentrated fire against designated targets
D-Day: The Invasion =
259
for exactly half an hour, then lift fire in time for the men and the tanks to
storm ashore at 6:30 amid the dust and smoke. Due to the later landings on
the British and Canadian beaches, the bombarding ships there would have
an extra hour to soften the defenses.
Without doubt, a longer pre-invasion naval bombardment would have
been more effective. The Americans had learned from operations in the
Pacific, at Tarawa and elsewhere, that extended bombardments, often
lasting several days, were needed to knock out hardened defensive posi-
tions. But in the Pacific, the Americans were attacking islands where the
defenders could not expect any reinforcements. Army leaders argued
that a lengthy bombardment of the Normandy coast would alert the Ger-
mans and provide them time to dispatch reinforcements to the threat-
ened area. In the end, the Neptune planners decided that surprise was
crucial, and so they opted for a short but concentrated pre-invasion blitz
that they hoped would knock the defenders back on their heels while the
invaders came ashore. Rear Admiral Morton Deyo, who commanded
the bombardment group off Utah Beach, recalled, "We hoped that by
sending our crashing salvos into the midst of all the known enemy posi-
tions, we could sufficiently terrorize their none-too-patriotic crews
enough to distract and drive them from their posts." It proved a vain
hope.31
Deo directed his ships into position off Utah Beach between St. Martin
de Vareville and St. Vaast-la Hougue at 5:00 a.m. There they were only
eleven thousand yards (just over six miles) off the beach, and silhouetted as
they were against a rising sun, they made an irresistible target. At 5:05 a.m.,
the 1701mm (67-inch) German ouns in the battery at St. Vaast-la Hougue
opened fire, the first enemy shots of the day. The Germans directed most of
their fre at the still-active minesweepers and at the Roval Navy cruiser
Black Prince, which was closest, though shell splashes also erupted around
the American cruisers Quincy and Tuscaloosa, the latter of which Deyo was
using as his flagship.*
* Deyo used the same cabin on the Tuscaloosa that President Roosevelt had used during
avacation trip to the Caribbean in December 1940. It was in that cabin that Roosevelt
came up with the idea for Lend-Lease.
