154 = NEPTUNE
order to execute Neptune-Overlord on May 1. Instead, a variety of factors
conspired to hinder both their production and concentration, and very
soon it became evident that a shortage of ISTs was the Achilles hel of the
entire Allied invasion effort. Indeed, the history of the LST construction
program offers singular insight into both the friction of war and the conflu-
ence of strategy and logistics.
BORROWING HEAVILY ON BRITISH PLANS, naval architect John Nieder-
mair, who ran the Preliminary Design Branch at the U.S. Navy's Bureau of
Ships (BuShips), drew up the blueprints for an American LST early in
1942, and the first keel was laid in June of that year. One curious but valu-
able aspect of Niedermair's design was that the LSTs were equipped with
ballast tanks which, when filled, would prevent them from bobbing like a
cork when unladen, but which could be pumped out when carrying a full
load so that the draft remained relatively stable.
Though LSTs were full-sized, oceangoing ships with a length of 327
feet 9 inches and a SO-foot beam, the majority of American LSTs were
built inland, mostly along the Ohio River, at cities from Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, to Evansville, Indiana. They were constructed on building
ways parallel to the river and were launched sideways, an event that gen-
erated an impressive wave that slapped up onto the opposite riverbank.
The first LST hit the water in Pittsburgh in October 1942, only weeks
before the Torch landings. Manned by a skeleton crew and placed in the
charge of a river pilot, it made its way fifteen hundred miles down the
Ohio and Mississippi Rivers on a nine-day journey to New Orleans.
The Navy men on board followed the civilians around to learn how the
ship worked. Many remembered that journey as "a great adventure,"
since for most of them it was the first time they had been under way on
board a ship. The ISTs were formally commissioned in the town of
Algiers, Louisiana, across the river from New Orleans. There, the boat
davits were installed and they were equipped with Higgins boats-
initially two or three to a side. Then, proudly bearing a commissioning
pennant, they steamed out the mouth of the great river and into the Gulf
of Mexico. Some lingered for a week or two near Panama City for a series
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" =
155
of beaching exercises; others rounded Key West and headed up the
Atlantic coast to the Navy's Amphibious Training Base at Little Creek,
Virginia, where the Commander Amphibious Forces supplied new offi-
cers and the rest of the crew. 13
For the most part, the crews on the LSTs were as fresh and untested as
the ships themselves. The complement for an LST was nine officers and 110
sailors, a larger number than on a comparably sized cargo ship because of
the need to man the guns when at general quarters. Save for the command-
ing officer, usually a Navy lieutenant in his twenties, most of the officers
were ninety-day wonders who had come straight from civilian life and
endured thirteen weeks of midshipman training at one of several desig-
nated colleges before being sent directly to a ship. As one graduate of the
program recalled, "we learned close order drill, plane identification and
signal flag recognition. That was about it." As for the crew, a handful of petty
ficers brought critical experience; most of the rest were teenagers straight
from boot camp. One officer recalled that on his ship, "the ages of our crew
ranged from 17 to 22. Not one of them had ever seen the ocean."14
Manning the smaller LCIs and LCTs was even more problematic. They
often boasted only a single commissioned officer, and like the department
heads on the LSTs, they were often complete novices. When Ensign Philip
Goulding reported on board the LCIL) 506, the commanding officer, a
lieutenant, junior grade, asked him: "Goulding, do you know anything?"
"No, sir," Goulding replied earnestly. "I just got out of midshipman's
school. I don't know anything at all."
To Goulding's astonishment, the lieutenant slapped his hand down on
the wardroom table and exclaimed: "Thank God for that. Nobody on this
ship knows anything and I was afraid those idiots were going to send me
someone to spoil it. Siddown and have a cup of coffee." S
The training in Chesapeake Bay seldom lasted more than a few weeks.
The officers and crew on the big LSTs learned how to run the engines,
operate the bow doors, and maneuver the ship while under way. They
worked on emergency procedures, tactical maneuvering, precision anchor-
ing, mooring alongside, and underway refueling. As on all Navy ships, offi-
cers sought to keep the crew physically fit, though this occasionally proved
