84
= NEPTUNE
he never quite accepted Hewitt as a true warrior, writing home to his wife
that "poor old Kent" was "such an old lady" 18
Three days out, the convoy from Norfolk rendezvoused with the war-
ships of the covering force that had steamed south from Casco Bay in
Maine, and soon afterward it joined up with the carrier force steaming up
from Bermuda. The transports and cargo vessels formed up into nine col-
umns with the ships following one another at thousand-yard intervals.
Cruisers and destroyers scouted out to both sides; the oilers for refueling
trailed behind. After them came USS Ranger, the four smaller carriers, and
their escorts. Altogether, the formation covered some six hundred square
miles of ocean. 19
The troopships were tightly packed. Upon boarding, each soldier had
been handed a canvas cot with a metal frame that he hung on the bulkhead,
where there were slots for them in tiers of four. In many cases the men were
not billeted with their company mates since in order to keep track of who
had embarked, the men had filed aboard in alphabetical order rather than
by unit. That meant that officers were unsure of where their men were, or
even what ship they were on. Officers tried to track down the men of their
command using the short-range talk-between-ships (TBS) radio, but the
Navy soon put a stop to it because the air waves were being so clogged with
messages it sounded, in the words of one Navy officer, like "a Chinese
laundry at New Years. Unsurprisingly, many of the GIs suffered horribly
from seasickness. Crowded as the ships were, the men could not all be
allowed on deck at one time, and most of them spent the two-week crossing
below decks as the ships rolled in the Atlantic swells while the convoy exe-
cuted a zigzag course to discourage submarine attacks. The conditions were
hardly improved by the miasma of odors that resulted not only from thou-
sands of unwashed soldiers living and sleeping together in a confined space
but also — and especially — by the lingering stench of mal de mer that could
never quite be eliminated. 20
One day before the Americans left Norfolk, forty-six British cargo ships
escorted by eighteen warships left the Firth of Clyde in Scotland bound for
Oran on the north coast of Algeria. A day behind them came thirty-nine
more transport ships carrying the men for the Eastern Assault Force bound
OPERATION TORCH, NOVEMBER 8-11, 1942
MOANGDORT FLEEI
North
FORCE H and X
2 hattleships
2 hattlecarriers
Londor
FRANCI
Bay of
Bisca
VICH)
FRANCE
PORTUGAL
Tishon a
Madeira
Canary Islands
SPAIN
Madrid
Gibraltar
Mediterranean
* Algiers
Port Lyautey SPANISH
EDENCH
Casablanca
MOROCCO AT.GERII
FRENCH
MOROCCe
