For Roosevelt and his advisors, it was now no longer a question of con-
tingency war planning. The contingency had arrived. Roosevelt instructed
Stark to fight back, and the order to "execute unrestricted submarine and air
warfare against Japan" went out to the fleet that first day. Longer-range
plans, however, were now muddied. So much of the strategic planning of
the past two years had focused on Germany and on cooperation with Brit-
ain to achieve Hitler's defeat. All of the men who now sat in Roosevelt's
Oval Study had been part of that planning, and all of them still believed that
Hitler was the more dangerous foe. They also believed it was more than
likely that the United States would be at war with Germany soon enough.
For now, however, more detailed planning would have to await events.36
Later that evening, after a meeting with his cabinet and another with the
leaders of Congress, Roosevelt called his personal secretary, Grace Tully,
into the Oval Study. "Sit down, Grace, he said. "I'm going before Congress
tomorrow. I'd like to dictate my message. It will be short." He spoke slowly
and deliberately, voicing the punctuation marks: "Yesterday comma
December seventh comma..." When he finished, he told Tully to type it
up double-spaced so that he could edit it. She was back in only a few min-
utes, and Roosevelt bent over the text with a pencil in his hand. He read the
first sentence: "Yesterday, December 7, 1941, a date which will live in world
history..." As serious a student as he was of world history, he felt the sen-
tence lacked the impact he sought. He crossed out those words and above
them wrote the single word "infamy."37
CHAPTER 2
ARCADIA
W
INSTON CHURCHILL GOT THE NEWS later that night. He was
spending the weekend at chequers, the estate in Buckingham-
shire, north of London, that had served as the country home of British
prime ministers since 1917. As it happened, he had just finished having
diner with two Americans: John G. "Gil" Winant, the U.S. ambassador,
and Averell Harriman, whom Roosevelt had sent to England to coordinate
Lend Lease shipments* After dinner, Churchill switched on a small port-
able radio (a gift from Harry Hopkins) to hear the latest war news The
the men listened to reports about events in Russia and Libya. Then, near
* Thoughitis not clear that Churchill was aware of it, both Winant and Harriman were
taking rather severe advantage of his hospitality. The married Winant was embarking
on an amorous affair with Churchills twenty-seven-year-old daughter Sarah, while the
equally married fifty-year-old Harriman was sleeping with the prime minister's
trenty one-year-old daughter-in-law, Pamela, who was married to Churchills only
so, Randolph, serving in Egypt. Thirty years later, with much water having passed
under the bridge, Averell, by then nearly eighty, and the fifty-one-year-old Pamela
were married.
