138.
= NEPTUNE
the Japanese in the Far East, he argued, the Allies would need "unified com-
mand" in the field 25
Marshall had been thinking about this for some time. An avid student of
history, he knew that the absence of unified command had caused prob-
lems in America's past wars. At the Virginia Military Institute he had studied
almost literally on top of a Civil War battlefield, and he was very much
aware of how the absence of unified command between the Union Army
and Navy had undercut the North's numerical and matériel superiority.
Marshall had also encountered the perils of disunity during the First World
War when he had served on Pershing's staff. Not until the very end of the
war did the Allies overcome the suspicious nationalism of the associated
armies to create a unified command on the Western Front. As a result of
both his reading and his experience, Marshall had urged closer Army-Navy
cooperation during the interwar years, establishing a joint command of the
Caribbean in December just days before Pearl Harbor. Now he argued that
having separate and independent commands for the U.S. Army, the U.S.
Navy, the British Army, and the Royal Navy was a recipe for duplication,
confusion, and disaster. It was essential, in his mind, to have one man in
charge.26
It is difficult in hindsight to appreciate what a radical proposal this was.
The very idea of putting American soldiers under British command, or
British soldiers under American command, or soldiers of any service under
naval command, was little short of heresy. Even Stark instinctively recoiled,
though King offered some encouragement. Portal suggested that perhaps
"the committee here in Washington" could act as a kind of unified com-
mander. But Marshall rejected the idea of command by committee out of
hand. "I am convinced, he wrote, "that there must be one man in com-
mand of the entire theater— air, ground, and ships. We cannot manage by
cooperation." The British already believed that the Americans were un-
tested novices and that it would take some time— perhaps years - for them
to become competent managers of war. They now imagined the conse-
quences if battle-hardened British soldiers were placed under the direc-
tion of inexperienced and overeager West Pointers. They could not say any
of this, of course —they needed the Americans desperately and could not
Arcadia =
39
afford to insult them, so instead they voiced skepticism about the whole
notion of unified command. 27
Marshall realized that he had sprung this idea on the delegates without
having done the necessary staff work about how it would operate. It was
unlike him. After the meeting, he pulled aside his young deputy, the newly
promoted Brigadier General Dwight Eisenhower (whom everyone called
"Ike"), and asked him to prepare a formal proposal for presentation the
next day. Marshall told him that it should be written in the form of a letter
of instruction to whoever was chosen to direct Allied forces in the Far East.
Eisenhower stayed up late that night to write it. It probably never occurred
to him as he did so that he was establishing the precedent for unified com-
mand that would later make possible his appointment as Supreme Allied
Commander. Eisenhower's goal was to alleviate the suspicions of the Brit-
ish, and he therefore went out of his way to emphasize what a theater com-
mander could not do. He could not relieve an officer of another service, he
could not change the tactical organization, he could not use the supplies of
one country to support another, and he could not "assume direct command"
of the forces of other nations, only direct their strategic movements,28
Meanwhile, Marshall did the necessary legwork. He pitched the idea of
unified command to Stimson, who liked it, and he and the secretary of war
went again to see the president. Roosevelt listened and expressed general
agreement, as he often did, then told Marshall to talk to Knox, for it would
be essential to ensure that the Navy was in agreement. Even more than
Knox, Marshall had to get the admirals on board, for few of them would
welcome the idea of serving under an Army officer. Marshall met with the
Nary' senior admirals in Stark's office. They remained skeptical, and they
were especially concerned that the Army Air Force would somehow gain
control of naval aviation. It was King who broke the logjam. To him it was
simple logic that "effective operations would be impossible if three services,
representing four different countries, should operate on their own without
some immediate superior in the area." Once King signaled his support, the
others fell into line?9
The British service chiefs were cautiously supportive about the idea, and
a few were openly enthusiastic. After Marshall made his proposal, he was
