YUL
300 = NEPTUNE
critical role. In his postwar memoir, Bradley acknowledged that "the Navy saved
our hides." Colonel Mason, who several hours earlier had tried to convince Hall
to quit the bridge and go down and talk to Huebner on the Ancon, declared that
"without that gunfire, we positively could not have crossed the beaches." 7
BUT CROSS THEY DID. When every instinct was telling the soldiers to stay
down and keep still, their officers insisted that they needed to get up and
get moving. Among them was the assistant commander of the 29th Divi-
sion, Brigadier General Norman "Dutch" Cota, who had landed with the
second wave at seven-thirty. Cota worked his way along the line of men
behind the seawall telling every officer he saw: "We've got to get these men
off this Goddammed beach." Another was Colonel George A. Taylor, com-
mander of the 16th Infantry Regiment, who made the choice clear. "There
are two kinds of people who are staying on this beach, he told the men.
"Those whn are dead and those who are going to die. Now let's get the hel
out of here' Thanks to the destroyers, and emboldened by the zeal and pas-
sion of their officers, the soldiers began to move forward. 18
The original plan called for them to advance up the several gullies, or
draws that cut narrow valleys through the cliff line The Germans had
anticipated that and heavily fortified the draws. To escape the killing ground
of the beach, many of the solders now ran forward to the base of the lift
itself. There they were shielded from the German artillery, but they were
hardly safe. German infantry crept to the lip of the bluffs, held their ma-
chine guns out over the edge, and fired blindly down onto the Americans
below. Their aim was erratic, yet it was evident that the base of the dif was
only marginally less deadly than the beach itself. Resolving this tactical
dilemma was complicated by the fact that many of the GIs crowding up to
the base of the diff had become separated from their commands, and the
units were hopelessly intermingled. In some respects, the mass of men at
the base of the cliff was less an organized military force than a collection of
survivors: men who had, against the odds, somehow lived through the long
passage to the beach, the struggle from the surf line to the hillock of beach
sand at the high tide mark, and the move from there to the cliff face. There
were sailors as well as soldiers among these survivors: a handful of NCDU
D- Day: The Crisis = 301
tam members who had been cut off from their teams, and sailors who had
benforced to abandon their vessels when they were wrecked on the beach.
Allof them recognized that they now depended on each other, and amid
the chaos, they formed up into ersatz teams led by majors, captains, lieuten-
ant, and sergeants. And then, in an act rivaling the Union Army's ascent of
Missionary Ridge in the Civil War, they began to climb the cliffs, working
their way upward, hand over hand, using rifle fire and grenades against the
startled defenders.!9
In this, too, they received help from the destroyers offshore. Still patrol-
ling the beachfront between Vierville and St. Laurent, Beer saw some GIs
pined down "behind a big house in the Dog Green area." It was, in fact, a
group of soldiers that had been collected by U.S. Army Major Sidney Bing-
ham. The men had captured a large three-story stone house on the beach
near the Les Moulins draw, but they could not advance beyond it. Beer could
notse what was keeping them pinned down. Still, he directed the Carmick's
fire into the cliff face above them, and after a few salvos he saw the GIs charge
forward and begin to ascend the bluffs. Beer then elevated the Carmick's
guns to the top of the bluffs, and he maintained a supporting fire ahead of
them as the men scrambled up the clif"'s face.?0
Among them was Robert Giguere, a seventeen-year-old seaman who
had lied about his age in order to join the Navy and who had been stranded
on the beach with his NCDU team since early that morning. Cut off from
his shipmates, he had sought cover behind the low seawall along with eve-
ryone else who could still move. After enduring what seemed an eternity of
machine gun and artilleryfire, he heard an Army officer say, "Let's...knock
out some of these pill boxes. We might as well get killed inland [as] here on
the beach." The men responded and began to run forward. Giguere went
with them. "At this point," he recalled later, "I never thought I'd see my
eighteenth birthday.?1
While Giguere and hundreds of others scrambled up the cliffs, others
sought to fight their way up through the draws. Among them was Navy
Ensign Karl Everitt. His ICT had wrecked on a beach obstacle during the
landing, and he and his crew had been forced to abandon ship, joining the
hundreds of others who took cover behind that low rise of sand and stones,
