66 = NEPTUNE
Other than the evacuation from Dunkirk and the fall of Singapore, few
catastrophes of the war constituted a heavier blow to British arms. Tobruk
was the citadel of British power in Libya. A thirty-three-thousand-man
British Commonwealth army held that citadel against a German army
barely half its size. Churchill had counted on Tobruk to be the anvil for the
hammer blow he hoped to strike in North Africa. Now with the citadel
taken and its entire defending army made prisoner of war, it seemed pos-
sible that the Germans might drive all the way into Egypt. As he contem-
plated the consequences of this disaster, Churchill had to sit down.37
Roosevelt was instantly and instinctively sympathetic. "What can we do
to help?" he asked. Churchill replied that American tanks-some of the
new Sherman tanks—might allow the British to hold Egypt. On the spot,
Roosevelt ordered Marshall to reconfigure the shipping tables to send three
hundred Sherman tanks and a hundred self-propelled 105 mm guns to
Egypt immediately. Apparently the president was willing to go further. As
others drifted out of the room, he asked Marshall to stay. What did he think
of sending an American division to the Middle East to fight alongside the
British? Marshall was horrified. Here was a perfect example of the kind of
dispersion of resources that he believed would doom the Allied cause. Not
trusting himself to speak, he excused himself and left the room.38
There was one more strategy session in Washington before Churchill left
to return to London in order to deal with the crisis in North Africa. At that
meeting, Brooke met the American president for the first time. He had
planned to change into his best uniform beforehand, but Churchill insisted
there was no time and brought him along as he was. Brooke was impressed
by Roosevelt ("a most attractive Personality, he wrote in his diary) and
apologized for his dowdy uniform. Roosevelt waved it off and told him to
take off his jacket and be comfortable.?9
Aware that this was his last chance, Churchill pushed hard for an aban-
donment of Sledgehammer and a commitment to Gymnast. This time,
however, Roosevelt was less amenable. Bolstered by memos from both
Hopkins and Stimson (who wrote Roosevelt that "it would be a mis-
take... to risk BOLERO for the sake of GYMNAST"), as well as Marshall's stal-
wart defense, he resisted the eloquent appeals of the prime minister. The
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 67
final memorandum stipulated that "Operations in Western Europe" would
"rild greater political and strategic gains than operations in any other
theater." On the other hand, that same memorandum stated that if "despite
all forts, success is improbable, we must be ready with an alternative," and
that the best alternative is Operation GYMNAST."40
Marshall sensed that the tide was flowing against him. To demonstrate to
Churchill and the British that the Americans were making great strides
toward the creation of an army that might yet be able to do something in
Europe in 1942, he took the whole British delegation by train down to
Fot Jackson, South Carolina, to watch a scheduled army exercise. South
Carolina reminded Churchill of "the plains of India in hot weather," but he
was an eager observer as ten thousand men and hundreds of vehicles
maneuvered purposefully across the pine barrens. He was especially
mpressed by the spectacle of six hundred paratroopers dropping from the
dy and he enjoyed trying out the new "walkie-talkie" handheld radio. It
did not, however, change his mind about the wisdom of hurling such troops
as these against the coast of France. When he asked his military assistant,
Hastings "Pug" Ismay, what he thought of the American maneuvers, Ismay
replie,." To put these troops against continental troops would be murder.41
ROOSEVELT HAD MADE IT CLEAR that he wanted something to happen
that year. Whatever that something was, Marshall wanted it to be in
Europe, but it was becoming increasingly evident, even to him, that Sledge-
harmer was doubtful. On July 8, Churchill finally pulled the plug, sending
Rogerel a cable that did not mince words: "No responsible British gen-
tal, ara, rair marshal is prepared to recommend Sledgehammer as a
paticable operation in 1942, he wrote. Unsurprisingly, he had an alterna-
tie in mind. I am sure myself that Gymnast is by far the best chance for
fate relief to the Russian front in 1942"42
That let Marshall with only one card to play. He shared with Stimson
a idea for a "showdown" with the British, and to some extent with the
priest to. the British won't go through with what they agreed to,"
he told the secretary of war "we will turn our backs on them and take up
te that'S sinson encouraged him, and when Marshall brought
