YUL
322
= NEPTUNE
Two more of the corncob blockships were pushed into place and sunk
astern of the Centurion that same afternoon. The German gunners con-
tinued their barrage, and the civilian crews of the derelict ships began to
wonder if they had made a bad bargain, even though they were being paid
what was all too accurately called "danger money" for the job. At all five of
the invasion beaches, the old freighters were pushed and pulled into place
by the tugs, the explosive charges were detonated, and the ships settled
more or less into position. At Utah Beach, the corncobs were placed a mile
farther south than the plan indicated, to comport with the revised landing
site. The plan for all five beaches called for the ships to be sunk bow to stern
in a straight, unbroken line, but this proved difficult to do in the insistent
current and swiftly running tide, and several gaps between the ships made
the result an imperfect breakwater. Even so, it resulted in a dramatic reduc-
tion in the volatility of the sea. Combined with the decision to allow the
ISTs to dry out on the beaches, the placement of the gooseberries contrib-
uted to a continued acceleration of the supply effort. The gooseberries of
both of the American beaches were completed by June 12, and on June 14
more than 27,000 men, nearly 2,000 vehicles, and another 7,752 tons of
supplies came ashore on Omaha Beach in a single day.30
Even before the gooseberries were completed, the giant concrete
Phoenix units were being towed into place off Vierville on Omaha Beach
and Arromanche near Gold Beach. Huge and balky as they were, and with
the tide and current so assertive, the tugs struggled to nudge the Phoenix
units into the proper place and keep them there while the men on board
them opened the sea cocks and the units settled to the bottom. Even with
four ocean tugs pushing all at once, the Phoenix units were difficult to hold
in nace against the current Mecasionally one would drift awav on its own
no matter what the tugs did. As with the corncobs, the eventual alignment
of the Phoenix units only superficially resembled the straight lines drawn
on the planning maps.31
Then the Lobnitz pier heads had to be set in position inside the pro-
tected anchorage. These were big, complex structures, two hundred feet
long, sixty feet wide, and ten feet high, with giant metal posts called "spuds,"
sixty feet long, sticking up at each corner. To at least one observer, they
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" =
323
ambled age water bug with its four retracted spud legs sticking up
lie after into the sky. Once the pier head was in position, the
you' vere overed to the seabed to become its legs, and the steel plat-
imon the Lobnitz pier hung suspended from steel cables attached to the
ripofthe spuds. Unlike the "whale" roadway, it did not float. Rather, diesel
agines raised or lowered the pier with the tide, and a permanent crew of
ten managed the "maze of complicated diesel electric hoisting gear. 32
Totansport the tanks, trucks, and other equipment from the pier heads
the shore nearly a mile away, the Allies constructed a floating steel
meday- the "whale" —composed of hundreds of eighty-foot-long pre-
thirted sections. To keep the whales stable, the Americans anchored
ery ther section to the ocean floor. The more careful British anchored
frey section of their whale roadways. The Americans thought that, as
sal, he British were being overly careful, though as it happened, the Brit-
in would have the last laugh. For now, however, it allowed the Americans
to complete the Mulberry off Omaha Beach three days ahead of schedule.
At443 p.m. on June 16, the entire Mulberry workforce at Omaha Beach
pased to watch as LST-342 eased up to the end of the middle Lobnitz
pier. The ship dropped its ramp onto the metal platform, and one by one,
seventy-eight vehicles rolled out of the LST onto the pier and then drove
along the whale to the beach at a steady fifteen miles an hour, emptying
the ship in a mere thirty-eight minutes. Soldiers and sailors cheered lustily,
and the exhausted managers of the Mulberry project congratulated one an-
other on a remarkable engineering triumph. Over the next thirty-six hours,
ten more LSTs unloaded at the Lobnitz pier, and the average unloading
time per ship was only sixty-four minutes. The visionary champions of the
Mulberry project had been vindicated. Or so it seemed.
Though each LST unloaded quickly-much more quickly than they
could over the beach, especially if they were drying out — each Lobnitz pier
head could accommodate only two LSTs at a time, whereas the beach
could, theoretically at least, host dozens of them. It was a trade-off between
the swift unloading of a few ships and the slow unloading of many ships. It
was not immediately clear which would prove more efficient. After the
Mulberry was opened for business on June 16, the daily tonnage of cargo
