264 = NEPTUNE
Hicken, commanding LCT (A) 2227, the Texas's guns sounded "like a giant
door slamming," and another recalled that the very air vibrated with the
sound and set everyone on board trembling. 36
The American battleships off Omaha Beach were supported by two
French cruisers, Montcalm and Georges Leygues, as well as the British heavy
cruiser Glasgow and the light cruiser Bellona. It is easy to imagine the mixed
emotions of the sailors on the French warships as they opened fire on
French soil. The skipper of the Montcalm, Captain E. J. H. L. Deprez, mused
that "it is a monstrous thing to have to fire on our homeland." From his ship,
he flew a giant French tricolor flag, sixty by one hundred feet in size, that
could be seen from the shore.37
The greatest firepower in the Allied armada was off Sword Beach. There,
two British battleships each carried a battery of eight 15-inch guns. These
were the Warspite, known as the "grand old lady" of the Royal Navy, and
Ramillies, named for the 1706 battle during the War of the Spanish Succes-
sion that had been won by Churchill's ancestor, John Churchill, the firs
Duke of Marlborough. This group also included HMS Roberts, another so-
called monitor with two more 15 inch guns. That gave the Allies a total of
eighteen I5-inch guns at Sword Beach, and from those guns the British
could fire nearly thirty-five thousand pounds of high explosives in a single
salvo. To that was added the firepower of five cruisers and fifteen destroy-
ers. And because the Sword Beach landings would not take place until later
that morning, these ships had an extra hour to prepare the beach. The heavy
guns, the sheer number of them, and the extended time on target all had an
impact. The commander of Force S, British Rear Admiral Arthur George
Talbot, believed that the enemy was obviously stunned by the sheer weight
of [gunfire] support we were meting out. 38
There were no Allied battleships off Gold or Juno Beaches, though there
were half a dozen cruisers and two dozen destroyers. The cruisers off Juno
Beach included HMS Belfast which, if King George had not intervened,
Wonderister me the sins company. As it
happened, the Belfast escaped harm during the operation, and Churchill
afterward made a point of saying, in effect, "See, it would have been all
right."39
D- Day: The Invasion = 265
There had been plenty of discussion about the best way to direct the
naval gunfire. The Army preferred to rely on shore-based fire control parties
(SFPs), while the Navy wanted to use air spotters. In the end, the Allies
did both, which proved invaluable when the fire control parties on shore
were decimated by the unexpectedly heavy enemy fire on Omaha Beach,
andin any case, shore spotting could not begin until the troops landed. Air
spotting was best conducted by slow, two-seater aircraft that could linger
over a target. Since the Normandy beaches were blanketed with anti-
aircraft batteries, that was not realistic on June 6. As Deyo put it, "Slow sea-
panes such as we normally used would not long survive over that country."
Instead, the Allies used British Spitfires, which, over the American beaches,
were piloted by U.S. Navy volunteers. The Spitfires worked in pairs, with
onepilot reporting the fall of the shot, while the other scanned the skies for
potential Luftwaffe interference, though given Allied mastery of the air,
sucha precaution was probably unnecessary. The Germans did, however,
put up an impressive amount of anti-air ground fire. An observer on the
Teas thought that the German tracer fire looked like someone "taking a
gurden hose and wiggling it back and forth." The fire came up from several
sites at once, so it "kind of crocheted the AA fire" across the sky.40
The long flight from airfields in Britain meant that the Spitfires could re-
man over the beach for only about forty minutes, but when one pair had to
depart, another pair arrived to take its place. At any given moment, there
kre at least six spotter planes aloft for each beach: two overhead, two re-
timing, and two en route. Spotting remained problematic, however, be-
cuethe high speed of the fighter planes made them imperfect for the task,
ad because the clouds of smoke and dust generated by the fall of thou-
sandsofrounds of high-explosive shells made for poor visibility. Then, too,
Alted adio communications were disappointing. Deyo's flagship, Tusca-
losa, established contact with its spotter plane at 5:38 but lost it ten minutes
hit and did not regain contact for over half an hour.*l
The Allies sought to make up for imperfect spotting with sheer volume.
Inthe half hour dedicated to the naval gunfire off Utah Beach, the Nevada
done fred 37 rounds of 14-inch shells and 2, 693 rounds of 5-inch shells.
The gun barrels grew so hot they had to be hosed down with seawater. 42
