YUL
348
= NEPTUNE
withdraw." Ramsay, too, was complimentary, praising the "skill and deter-
mination" of Deyo's command. Yet in the aftermath of the naval assault on
Cherbourg, it was evident to nearly everyone that despite recent experi-
ences in the Mediterranean, heavy-caliber coastal artillery, strongly forti-
fied and well served by trained crews, remained a very tough opponent for
guns afloat. After the war, Bryant himself wondered if the naval attack had
"advanced the surrender [of Cherbourg] one hour: 26
It may well have. Though the naval assault on June 25 did not cause the
Germans to throw up their hands, it almost certainly had an impact, how-
ever indeterminate, on the defenders. Like the aerial assault three days be-
fore, the naval bombardment further eroded the already flagging morale of
the German garrison. Even von Schlieben was losing his nerve, and he
wired Rommel to ask, "Is the destruction of the remaining troops neces-
sary?" Seeking permission to negotiate, he declared, "I must state in the line
of duty that further sacrifices cannot alter anything." It didn't matter. Rom-
mel wired him back: "You will continue to fight until the last cartridge in
accordance with the order from the Fuehrer." Von Schlieben would obey,
however reluctantly, though both he and the men he commanded fully
appreciated the hopelessness of their situation. Surrounded on three sides
by Collin's ground troops, bombarded from the air, and now assailed from
the sea, many-perhaps most —looked only for a swift end to the battle.
And a swift end to the battle was exactly what Collins had in mind?
IN THE END, CHERBOURG FELL to the soldiers on the ground. The men of
Tubby Barton's Fourth Division sealed off the city to the west, and on June
25 the men of the 9th and 79th Divisions fought their way into the outskirts
of the city, even as Deyo's and Bryant's ships continued their bombardment.
The final assault was a collage of small-unit actions, many of them marked by
astonishing individual heroism. Forte du Roule surrendered when Gls who
had clambered up onto the ramparts lowered explosives down the ventila-
tion shafts and the Germans inside rapidly appreciated their vulnerability?
When the Allies learned that von Schlieben himself was in a nearby
underground bunker, they blocked the tunnel entrance and sent in a
German prisoner with a Jamand for bie curander Obadient to Hitler's
"A Field of Ruins" =
349
order to fight to the last, von Schlieben refused. The Americans then
brought up a few tank destroyers-tracked artillery vehicles with 3-inch
guns-and fired a half dozen rounds into the mouth of the tunnel. That was
enough. A German voice called out for a cease-fire, and a German-speaking
American officer went into the tunnel to tell von Schlieben he had two min-
utes to surrender. He didn't need two minutes. Within seconds, hundreds
of German soldiers were streaming out of the tunnel under a huge white
flag -very likely a bedsheet. Von Schlieben had hoped to stage a formal
surrender, but he was swept along with the others in the general stampede,
his dignity in shambles. The American officer on the scene, the bespecta-
ded and cherubic Major General Manton Eddy, was stunned to find him-
self addressing not only von Schlieben but also
the
German naval
commander at Cherbourg, Admiral Walther Hennecke29
Eddy sent both men to see Collins, who pointedly asked von Schlieben if he
was surrendering on behalf of his entire command. Fearful even now of pro-
voking Hitle's wrath, he answered no, he surrendered only himself. Collins
was furious and asked von Schlieben how he could justify "having his soldiers
fight on when he saved himself by giving up." Von Schlieben made some re-
mark about how small groups operating independently might still delay the
American victory. A disgusted Collins made sure that the news was broadcast
to the defenders of the city that their commanding general had saved his own
skin by capitulating while condemning his men to die in the last ditch. 30
Other strongpoints capitulated one by one. The final obstacle was the
naval arsenal, where the German commander, Major General Robert
Sattler, wanted only to ensure that he could assert he was compelled to
bow to overwhelming force. When Collins sent in a flag of truce, Sattler
indicated that he would surrender if the Americans fired a few shells at
the fortress for show. The shells were duly fired, and Sattler and four
hundred men marched out with their bags packed. The forts on the outer
breakwater held out for two more days. Kirk sent the destroyer Shubrick
and six of Bulkeley's PT boats to test their resolve, but the Germans
there still had some fight in them, and once again shore batteries proved
more resilient than expected. They finally surrendered on June 29 after
being repeatedly strafed by American aircraft. By then,
Collins had
