140
= NEPTUNE
training area in America in the months before Operation Torch, he had
appropriated a site in California that was over ten million acres (sixteen
thousand square miles). In England, that would have constituted one-third
of the entire country. The necessarily restricted area set aside for training in
Britain meant that much of that training consisted of small arms prctice
and road marches, with only limited opportunity to maneuver in units
larger than a battalion. One American soldier estimated that he had
marched some three thousand miles while in England, but during all that
time, he had very little training in combat exercises. Navy signalman Paul
Fauks recalled that "there wasn't a lot of training," and when there was, it
consisted of going into a field, pitching a tent, digging a hole, and sending
out practice messages in code. Such exercises soon "became repetitive
and very boring." It didn't help that even in southern England the nights
were cold and damp in what one officer called "the moisture-laden,
bone-chilling Devon countryside.28
If the training was boring and repetitive and the weather often cold,
at least the surroundings were picturesque. Aside from Cornwall, the
County of Devon is the westernmost piece of England, stretching from
Dartmouth, Paignton, and Torquay on the Channel coast fifty miles north
to the Bristol Channel. A barren and rocky moor (Dartmoor) occupied
the middle of it, but it was along the coasts that the Americans estab-
lished their bases for amphibious exercises: Appledore, on the north
coast near Barnstaple, and Slapton Sands, on the English Channel just
west of Dartmouth. To many Americans, South Devon in particular
looked exactly like what they imagined England to be: small cottages dot-
ting low rolling hills that were checkerboarded with vivid green pastures
separated by hedgerows. In a typical reaction, one GI noted upon arrival,
"The land... is lovely, divided by hedgerows, green and beautiful." Those
hedgerows looked benign enough, though in fact they were thick rock
walls from which a heavy growth had sprouted over several centuries.
Indeed, one reason for choosing South Devon as a training site in the first
place was that the hedgerows there were superficially similar to those in
the bocage country in Normandy where the Americans would have to
fight after they had seized the beaches.?9
Brits and Yanks = 141
Devon was also desirable because of its relative isolation. Large-scale
amphibious training could proceed there without attracting too much
attention. South Devon was therefore endowed with the new title of "The
American Army Battle School," and to ensure that the training was realistic,
with full use of live fire, the three thousand or so residents were told that
they would have to move out, abandoning their farms and villages, their
churches and their pubs-indeed, empty the countryside altogether-in
order to make way for the Americans. This came as a complete shock to the
Devonians. It was one thing to turn farmland over to the Americans for
their campsites and their armored training; it was quite another to tell Eng-
lishmen who had lived there all their lives to get out. Some of the families in
South Devon had been there for as long as anyone could remember; in a
few of the villages, the Norman churches dated back to the twelfth century.
lis one more measure of the British willingness to bend over backward to
accommodate the Americans that the Churchill government approved this
eviction. With very short notice, the residents of South Devon packed up
and left, hoping that the Americans would do no more damage to their
homes and farms than was necessary. GIs who arrived at one Norman
chure in narabandoned village found this note tacked to the door:
This church has stood for several hundred years. Around it has grown
a community which has lived in these houses and tilled these fields
ever since there was a church. This church, this churchyard in which
theirloved ones lie at rest, these homes, these fields are as dear to
those who have left them as are the homes and graves which you, our
Allies, have left behind you. They hope to return one day, as you hope
to return to vours, to find them waiting to welcome them home. "
Whilethe isolation of South Devon was an advantage in many ways, it
was also a logistical nightmare. Between those green but solid hedgerows,
the country lanes, most of them unpaved, were barely wide enough for a
single vehicle or horse cart. Occasional turnouts allowed one vehicle to
pass another. Should two vehicles meet face-to-face, one or the other of
them had to back down to the nearest turnout so they could squeeze past
