xvi
= Prologue
It included women, too, who served not only in uniform but also in the
factories and shipyards that produced the tools of war: the planes, tanks,
trucks, and especially the ships needed to put a million men ashore on a hos-
tile beach and sustain them there. There is an old saw among practitioners of
the military art that "amateurs talk strategy; professionals talk logistics." In
the spirit of that aphorism, this book illuminates the essential role of Allied,
and particularly American, war production with a special emphasis on the
construction of ships of every kind at hundreds of American shipyards. As-
tonishing as their productivity was during the war years, Americans learned
that there were limits after all on what could be done. There was only so
much steel, only so many workers, and only so much time.
The third element of the story is the operational one: the training, the em-
barkation, the landing, and the eventual mastery of the beaches, accomplished
not only by the soldiers who won the battle and eventually the war but also by
the men who swept the mines, carried the soldiers to the beach, cleared the
beach obstacles, provided critical naval gunfire support, and of course kept
the soldiers supplied with food and ammunition. A tendency to look back on
historical events as inevitable encourages a belief that the outcome of the inva-
sion was a foregone conclusion, that the Allied armada on D-Day was so enor-
mous, and the planning so meticulous, that despite the horrors of Omaha
Beach, success was a near certainty. It was not. The Allied armada was indeed
large, but so, too, was the armada that left Spain in 1588 to conquer England.
In studying Neptune-Overlord it is helpful, perhaps even essential, to con-
front the story as if the ending were unknown, as it certainly was for those who
lived it.
In order to tell all of these stories, this book begins with the American
entry into the war on December 7, 1941, and chronicles the strategic dis-
putes, the logistical bottlenecks, and the all-too-human experiences of the
soldiers and sailors themselves: the erstwhile civilians who found them-
selves herded aboard ships, sent across the Atlantic, trained in a variety of
exotic specialties, and then thrown into a hurricane of violence. The goal is
to follow the central thread of this Olympian event from the first tentative
conversations by British and American officers in Washington in the winter
of 1941 to the storming of the Normandy beaches in the summer of 1944.
Prologue
xVIT
In the belief that people are the driving force of history, this narrative
highlights the particular contributions of key individuals whose actions
and decisions determined the course of events. Some of them, such as
Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill, are obvious. Others who were
household names at the time are too often overlooked or underappreciated
today: George Marshall, Alan Brooke, Ernest King, Frederick Morgan, Ber-
tram Ramsay, Harry Hopkins, and Louis Mountbatten, to name a few. Stil
others have become nearly anonymous some seventy years on: the juni
officers, coxswains, gunners, demolition specialists, men of the Constru
tion Battalion (CB, hence the name Seabees), and the ordinary sailors c
the Navy and Coast Guard. The perspective here is that of the Anglo-Amer-
ican Allies, with a respectful nod to the Canadians, and because of that, the
roles of the Russians, French, Italians, and even Germans are chronicled
only insofar as they influenced Anglo-American decision making and
operations.
One last note: in May 1995, on the fiftieth anniversary of V-E Day in
Europe, I was taking time away from my position at the U.S. Naval Acad-
emy to spend a year teaching in the Department of Strategic Studies at Bri-
tannia Royal Naval College, the British naval academy. As part of the
curriculum there, I participated in what civilian colleges call a field trip, but
which military organizations call a staff ride, to the Normandy beaches.
Along with two score of my students-British midshipmen on the cusp of
their commissions-and Evan Davies, my colleague in the Strategic Stud-
ies Department, we crossed the Channel to Normandy, peeked into the
still-extant German pillboxes and gun emplacements, and climbed the bluff
from the beach to the American cemetery. There, arrayed across a broad
stretch of impossibly green grass, was a virtual sea of white marble
crosses —9,387 of them, I later learned —with occasional Stars of David in
their midst. My students sensed the emotional impact of that vista, and one
of them whispered, "We know you need a moment, sir. We'll be right over
there." I did indeed need a moment. It is in long-delayed acknowledgment
of the debt that all of us owe to the men entombed in that cemetery, and to
tens of thousands of others, British, Canadian, and American, that I offer
this story of their arrival on that historic and iconic beach.
