70 = NEPTUNE
Allies could eat their cake and have it, too. As he told one officer, "he could
see no reason why the withdrawal of a few troops in 1942 would prevent
BOLERO in 1943."48
Marshall knew better. He saw clearly that once the Western Allies became
fully committed, the momentum of events and the logistical realities of
attempting to assemble, mount, and execute a large-scale amphibious
assault in Africa would make a spring invasion of France in 1943 impos-
sible. Bowing to reality, however, he acknowledged that the pressures of the
moment, both political and logistical, compelled the decision for Torch.
Time was running out. It was past midsummer, and the Germans had begun
a two-pronged drive, code-named Case Blue, aimed at the capture of both
the Baku oil fields and Stalin's namesake city, Stalingrad. Something had to
be done, and Torch was the only thing that seemed doable. On July 30,
Roosevelt formally announced that "as Commander-in-Chief, [he] had
made the decision." The invasion of North Africa was now to be America's
"principal objective, and the distribution of ships, men, and matériel for
that operation was to take precedence over all other options, including
Bolero. Disappointed but dutiful, Marshall prepared to execute the new
strategy.49
CHAPTER 4
THE MEDITERRANEAN TAR BABY
EVEN BEFORE ROOSEVELT STEPPED IN to make the final decision for
- Gymnast/Torch at the end of July, Marshall sent Eisenhower to Eng-
land assume the role of commanding general of U.S. forces in the Euro-
pean theater. Eisenhower replaced Major General James E. Chaney, who
suited from two flaws: he maintained leisurely eight-hour work days,
even wearing civilian clothes to the office, yet (according to Eisenhower)
le betrayed an excessive concern for minor regulations and rules." Chaney
eumed to the States to take over training for the Army Air Forces, and
Eithover sumed command in England on June 24. Because of that, Ike
his pesent at Claridges Hotel in July when Marshall, King, and Hopkins
lid their plans for the showdown with the British over Sledgehammer vs.
Grast ade, twas Eisenhower who wrote the briefing paper that had
gued, GYNAST is strategically unsound as an operation either to sup-
pot ROUNDUP or to render prompt assistance to the Russians." He was in-
bly dressed by the decision to go to North Africa, predicting that
future historians would mark July 29 as "the hackest day in history" Soon
