42
= NEPTUNE
an invasion of Africa. Marshall acknowledged that he could probably as-
semble three divisions, one of them a Marine division, for the proposed
movement to North Africa, but that would leave no ships left to do any-
thing else in the Atlantic. Churchill was crestfallen and declared that he
would be "frightfully unhappy" if they had to scrap their plans on account
of insuficient shipping. He suggested that perhaps the Allies could use bat-
tleships to carry troops. Roosevelt was dubious about that, though he
promised to see what he could "dig up." Given the realities of the shipping
problem, it seemed evident that an invasion of North Africa, at least in the
near term, was simply unrealistic. 32
In spite of that, Roosevelt and Churchill wanted to keep the prospect of
Gymnast open. At one of the last meetings of the conference, on January
12, Roosevelt asked how soon an invasion of North Africa could be
launched, assuming that the shipping could be found to support it.
Churchill declared that it could be done by March 3— less than two months
away. Marshall demurred. He noted that "the shortage was not in troop car-
riers (alone] but in cargo carriers." It was not enough merely to put soldiers
ashore, even if the ships could be found to do so. They also had to be main-
tained there. King agreed. At the very least, he insisted, any such operation
would have to wait until mid-April.33
Despite the obvious skepticism evident in these responses, the eternally
optimistic Roosevelt announced that planning should begin at once for
what he labeled "General Marshal's plan. "We will make Beaverbrook and
Hopkins find [the] ships and will work on Super-GYMNAST at the earliest
possible date." Thus did the Allies take their first hesitant steps toward
North Africa and the Mediterranean 34
THERE WAS ONE MORE important result that came out of the Arcadia con-
ference, one with significant long-term consequences for the Allied part-
nership. It emerged from the implementation of the ABDA command
under General Wavell. According to Eisenhower's memo, Wavell was to re-
ceive his orders from "an appropriate joint body.. The problem was
that there was no such body to develop strategic plans. To create one, Roo-
sevelt suggested that a permanent committee be set up composed of three
Arcadia w
43
American and three British senior officers, with occasional representation
from the Dutch and others on an advisory basis—in other words, a body
very much like the one that had come together for the Arcadia conference.
It seemed logical, too, that this permanent body should meet in Washing-
ton, not only in recognition of the fact that the United States was likely to
provide the bulk of the men and materials during the war, but also because
Washington was geographically located between the two theaters of war.
Meeting in Washington would be easy enough for the American service
chiefs, but clearly the British heads of service could not be expected to
remain permanently in a foreign capital while a war was being fought at
home. Someone other than the service chiefs would have to represent the
British. The solution to this was near at hand. As Churchill had foreseen,
Dill could stay on in Washington to represent the British Army, and the
Royal Navy and Air Force could be represented by the senior members of
those services on the British Joint Staff Mission in Washington. Stark would
go to London as commander in chief of U.S. Naval Forces Europe (CINC-
NAVEU), and that would allow King to take over the duties of chief of
naval operations as well as COMINCH. The new decision-making and
supervisory body thus created would be known as the Combined Chiefs
of Staff (CCS) 35
For the rest of the war, though the heads of government made the impor-
tant strategic decisions, the CCS implemented those decisions, made the
plans, drafted the orders, and pretty much ran the war. That included a re-
sponsibility to prioritize, allocate, and distribute the tools of war, which in
practical terms meant distributing the products of American industry. This,
of course, was another of the principal issues that had brought Churchill
and his advisors, including Beaverbrook, across the ocean to talk to the
Americans, and they were ready as ever with a specific proposal on the mat-
de. The British urged the creation of a Supply Board that would establish
procurement priorities for the war effort; similarly, a Munitions Board and
a Shipping Control Board would set priorities in those fields. The Ameri-
cans were suspicious. They wondered why a board composed of 50 perce
British representatives should decide how to distribute material that w
100 percent American-produced. In the end, they agreed to establish tw
