40
= NEPTUNE
somewhat astonished when Pound ("the old admiral," as Marshall called
him in his reminiscences) came hustling out of the meeting to catch up
with him and vigorously shake his hand. Then Dill came up and literally
threw his arms around him. For all their enthusiasm, however, it was evi-
dent that they would follow Churchill's lead, and the "former naval person"
was likely to be a hard sell. In a conversation with Roosevelt in the White
House on the night of December 27, Churchill maintained that unity of
command might be all very well in principle, and might even be appro-
priate in a continental war, such as that of 1914-18, where the soldiers of the
Allied armies had fought side by side, but in a global war, where forces were
scattered all over the world, it was simply not practical. Beaverbrook and
Hopkins were both present, and Beaverbrook took it upon himself to pass
a note to Hopkins: "You should work on Churchill. He is being advised. He
is open minded [on this] and needs discussion." On the basis of that,
Hopkins arranged for Marshall to meet with Churchill one-on-one. With
Hopkins's prodding, Churchill invited Marshall to come and see him in his
White House bedroom the next morning. Very likely Churchill was confi-
dent he could overwhelm the soft-spoken American general with the force
of his personality. It was a meeting of the irresistible force and the immov-
able object.30
Marshall found Churchill propped up in his bed with state papers spread
out all around him — his usual morning workspace. Marshall declined the
invitation to sit and remained on his feet, striding back and forth to make
his presentation. He was, quite literally, a moving target. Churchill, as usual,
began with a monologue. Marshall remembered that "he got off quite a
spiel." Churchill insisted that "a ship was a very special thing" and could not
be put under an army commander. "What would the army officer know
about handling a ship?" he asked. Marshall shot right back: "Well, what the
devil does a naval officer know about handling a tank?" though that was not
the point. When Churchill began to recite the centuries-long tradition of
naval independence, Marshall interrupted him: "I was not interested in
Drake and Frobisher, he recalled saying, "but in [creating) a united front
against an enemy which was fighting furiously." Churchill was not used to
being challenged so directly. After a while he got out of bed and went into
Arcadia w
41
the bathroom. Marshall waited patiently, and eventually Churchill emerged
from his ablutions wearing only a towel. Somewhat grudgingly, he agreed
to discuss the issue with "his people," and in the end he gave way. "It was
evident," he wrote later, "that we must meet the American view."31
It helped considerably that Marshall let it fall that the man he had in
mind for a unified command in the Far East was an Englishman, General
Sir Archibald Wavell, who in due course was appointed supreme com-
mander of what was called ABDA, an acronym for Australian, British,
Dutch, and American forces. Wavell held his command for only forty-nine
days. For all their unity, the Allies simply lacked the wherewithal to stand
up to the Japanese onslaught in the Far East, especially in the air. The unex-
pected and astonishing fall of Singapore on February 15 marked the col-
lapse of the experiment, and ABDA was dissolved a week later. But
Marshall's efforts had not been in vain, for they established the precedent
for a unified theater command, and in the long term the principal benefi-
ciary of that would be the man who had drawn up the proposal, Brigadier
General Dwight D. Eisenhower.*
THE QUESTION OF NORTHWEST AFRICA proved more difficult. Churchill
had endowed his plan for an Allied landing there with the code name Gym-
nast, and an even more ambitious scheme of occupying all of French
Northwest Africa was called Super-Gymnast. As the Arcadia delegates
sought to juggle their scarce resources to match the almost uncountable
demands of global war, however, it became increasingly evident that such
plans were little more than a chimera. As always, the bottleneck was ship.
ping: there was simply not enough of it to continue the convoys to Britain
and Russia, keep the lines of communication open in the Pacific, and mount
* An exception to the principle of unified command was the agreement reached at Arca-
dia that the United States Navy "will remain responsible for the whole Pacific Ocean
east of [the Philippine Islands. Of course, the U.S. Navy then had to negotiate its
command responsibility with an equally assertive authority in the person of General
Douglas MacArthur, who was subsequently endowed with command of what was
clled the Southwest Pacific Area (SoWesPac), including Australia and the Philip-
Pines, whit the U.S. Navy presided oWesPa, including Australia A under the
overall command of Admiral Chester Nimitz.
