44 = NEPTUNE
boards, one American and one British, to recommend priorities. The rec-
ommendations would go to the Combined Chiefs, and that body would
make the final decisions. This additional power—to determine where to
send the ships, tanks, and planes of American industry-gave the Com-
bined Chiefs additional control over the direction of the war. 36
The British and American publics were entirely unaware of these nego-
tiations, and for them the most important consequence of the Arcadia con-
ference was the formal announcement, on January 1, 1942, of the
Declaration of the United Nations. Roosevelt came up with the term
"United Nations" to replace "Allies" because the United States and the
Soviet Union were not in fact allied -thev were merelv on the same side.
The new declaration was largely a restatement of the goals spelled out in
the Atlantic Charter but extended now to embrace all of the nations that
were at war with the Axis. It confirmed the principle of "national self-
determination"
and announced that the signatory nations believed that
"complete victory over their enemies is essential to defend life, liberty, inde-
pendence and religious freedom, and to preserve human rights and justice in
their own lands as well as in other lands." For that reason they were "now
engaged in a common struggle against savage and brutal forces seeking to
subjugate the world." There was some back-and-forth with the Russians about
the inclusion of the phrase "religious freedom, but in the end the Russians
agreed to sign, as did the representatives of twenty-five other nations.?7
BY NOW, CHURCHILL WAS EAGER to get back to London to resume his
hands-on management of the war. Roosevelt and Hopkins personally es-
corted him, Pound, and Portal to the train station and bid them goodbye—
Dill, of course, was staying on. A special train took Churchill and his party
to Norfolk, where they boarded a big four-engine Boeing 314 Clipper flying
boat for a flight to Bermuda, where they were to reboard the Duke of York
for the six-day voyage back to England. Churchill, however, was impressed
with the size and comfort of the big flying boat, and he asked the pilot,
Kelly Rogers, if the plane could make it from Bermuda all the way to Eng-
land. Rogers said it could, and so in the end that was how Churchill made
his return. It had been less than fifteen years since the world had celebrated
Arcadia =
45
Charles Lindbergh's solo flight across the Atlantic, and now heads of
government were making the flight. From then on, leading figures in
the Anglo-American alliance would visit one another by air, thus shrinking
the geographical gulf between them. 38
Churchill's trip had been a resounding success. Both the Germany-
first strategy and the continuation of Lend-Lease support had been
reconfirmed, the Declaration of the United Nations created an umbrella
under which all the countries fighting against Germany could shelter,
and a mechanism for global strategic management had been established
in the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Churchill later mused that "future his-
torians" would view the founding of the Combined Chiefs of Staff as
"the most valuable and lasting result" of the Arcadia conference. He had
been forced to acquiesce to a unified command for the Far East, but the
Americans had agreed to send several divisions of soldiers to Iceland and
Ireland to relieve British divisions for the war in the Middle East. More-
over, though the American high command had not embraced his Gym-
nast plan for an invasion of North Africa, the idea had found favor with
the man who mattered most: the American president. To be sure, some
differences had emerged as well. It was obvious that the Americans were
convinced that sooner or later, and preferably sooner, a full-scale am-
phibious assault aimed at Germany's heart would be necessary. Churchill
accepted that reality, but he continued to hope that by 1943 such an
invasion might constitute only the final shove that brought a tottering
Nazi regime crashing down. 39
On the negative side, the Arcadia conversations had exposed the Allied
weaknesses in matériel that made an early invasion of any kind problematic.
Even Gymnast would prove difficult unless the Allies could somehow over-
come the quandary of insufficient shipping-too few troopships, cargo
ships, tankers, and especially landing craft. To overcome that lacuna would
necessitate not only an unprecedented building program but also neutrali-
zation of the German U-boat menace in the Atlantic. Before the Allies
could seriously plan an invasion of any hostile shore, they would first have
to secure the Atlantic sea-lanes, gain air superiority over the prospective
enemy beaches, and assemble a stockpile of munitions and supplies. These
