INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR
DIARY
(P.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
1.
The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
(a) To provide
upon which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation
information from theatres of war in suficient detailip in, suganisation an a movie data.
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
Kingdom in order to extract all pohoble
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
normation of value under - (a)
above.
t 1s therefore of
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of par a the ow.
GENERAL.
A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a)
Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
Unit commanders.
(a) Ease audiary a headquarters pour on detache
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(b)
cover.
Index
as printed on cover;
c) Narrative;
All details of the unit and formation if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit); perio
covered and folio numbers of appendices v
ill be shown on the cover
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
officer.
The was di seei do igned once, exa report, d tention of appendices, mapes, ete, from a war diary is an
It is a secret document.
retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
I1 he conveved in appendices consisui
with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
he narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendic
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
8. The precisive should be write up daint it should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
of any of them.
Account of
operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Votes of how orders were carried ou
ature and descriptior
Note
of any administrative difficulties encountered and
iction taken to overcome them
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
type of training, etc., should be specified.
messages and a reference to the
1) Notes of any important visits paid and reor the visit and decisions taken
commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down polic
or other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diary
command is, espersal that copie - importans document in instrue placed in the war diary, inchuding
lemi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importana
NOT in simple at the ice cider This inned i a sembly in the no as
ppendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
he appropriate space in the index
In cases where additional
unis the releva i pre a dinal a pendie a eat pi able for the bachin of gin he uner or for corala
10. NoTEs.
Appendix " A." The forms whice
Constil this ompeted are inter ted fit or for matra is unised i
unit or formation is engaged in
headquarters of divisions and below.
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicat
WAR DIARY
Army Form C. 21 8.
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit 9 Brit Inf Bde
Commanding Officer Brige G.D. BROV/NE.
References to Appenaves
tom by ply that vita vere avaitine collection at CRS. 'A' Beh were instrusted
1630
Div Cond Maj-Gen IG WHISTLER came to Bde HQ and, after conferring with Be Cond,
stayed to tea.
'A' Coy 2 Mx have now been
withdrawn fran Ide Gp and are
for the nove, will
weather was te on y Trit Int Ede
Appx 'D' Folio 6.
2 RUR attd to Bde IQ for adm duties.
0715
3 Brit Inf Div issued orders for the move of the Div to its new conc area TAST
collected from DiY tomorrow
mo antertainment provided fox
to all ranks,
of bivouacs small seems a
sparsoly.
the innovation of
parasity housed agricultural areas
12 and dow at 856148 area LA OHAIl and proceeded on ita long jowmey
"want with the bns was est early during the nove and mint via 22 set
to the large number of "foreign convoys" on the rds, minor
especially so between LE NEUBORG
As We stin end, caused
a further lengthy delay.
51-2.541)
Booking summary
• Name: ALBERT DUA
• Date of visit: Friday 10 October 2025
• Reading room: Docum
• Seati
Reader's ticket number. F203207
99919 6
Booking reference: RR219-681-06162E
Document order
Document 1:
WO 171/2363 our
WO 171/2419
WO 171/5998,
WO 171/889
WO 171/1112
Document 11:
Document 12:
9€ 66 S 1 0002/20/60
2ZE/121 OMA
E6228E
Ofncer
Month and Year..
Sep 44
Month
Date Hou
WO 171/617
14628111
