C.I. ENGINE PRINOIPALS.
on road vohicle uncines.
The four atroke is usunily
oporation is as follows:
ar only iu camittod to tho cytrado tho
During the induction stroko,
high compression ratio Is uned so that
to over 9005a' chainbor
is compressod until tho tompraturo
dona contro a chargo of fuct oil antore the conbustion
form of a spray.
compressod air which
this is ignited by the
high tomporature
causes a furthor rise in pressure
and the piston ia forcod down on
power stroke.
follows.
Tho
powcr output ie
controllod by varying the amount of
not
by throttling
nir intoleo.
omprossod no burning is possiblo until aitor injection
as started
and,thid allows the yao of
tho high comprossion ratio's
20 - 1.) which are nodenary to dotain good combustion.
COMBUSCION IN O.I. ANGINES.
It is
possible to burn
only a limited amount or fuc]. oil in a givan
quantity of sir,
any oil over this amount will not burn duo to tho
lock
In ordon to be ablo to burn the mazinum quantity of fuol
full power in required und to ensure porfeet combustion undor
conditions,
it la nocoonary to obtain
a thorough ordorly mixing
eir and cho Pucl, so thats all the fucl may find the oxygen
Tho combustion chenbur of all C.I. Engines Is vaca
diractional
combustion chambor aro carpica away
injecting togothor
required to support burning
whilst frosh air is boing fod past the injoctor to recoivo its supply
aclivery valavo
snaps back on its nonting.
cago uncovors the spill port
If this was a simplo valvug
in tho deliveryn pipo betwoon tho
In a column of oil undor high prossura, boing trappod
This pressure vould aroyna fom which would not burn, rosulting in a
and s dirty ongine.
This valvo has a piston shaned collar formed on the aton,
ground and lapped to a match fit with the bore of the seating, Almost
immediatoly aftor thu volve atarto its seating, thio unloading collar
doun tho bore on tho
action thus incroneing the volume
delivery valvo body with a piston liko
of tho delivory ripo
lovering the pressure, thorchy topping any tendancy to dribblo at the
Injoctors are usually placod in tho cylindor hoad.
Thoy aro dosignod
atonize the fusl as it
in injoctod and to control the direction of
Correct atonization is obtrined by forcing the oil through a small
hole or holes at
great spood as it passos into tho combustion spaco.
Tho direction of the spray is controllod by the sizo numbor position
ana chope of the discharge bolos.
On the C.A.V, type injoctor tho degroo of atomization of the luol, its
ponertrating powor, and tho direction of the apray aro variablo by an
adjustment for the
broak prosaure ond intorchangable nozzols, whicg
carry the dischargo holos, thus chabling thom to bo casiliy adopted to
difforent typos of cogine.
hon uning the bench tosting meching there cro throe main points to
Correct break pacosure.
Correct shope of apray with ovon appearcace.
Loakago past tho nonsel vlove soat chould not aaccod two
drop por minato with the prossure hold just undor tho
set brook pressure.
