AND DONATS.
DOse punctual
in
8057
5644
The handbook of the R.A.S.C. Regimental sonation gives all information
B, 594 arch 1942.
ranbership is - lize Menbers 1427 and orcinary members
ALl cadets at the O-C.I.J. spoild ra caseitus of the opportunity of
ecoming rembera o? the R.A.S.U. Regimental snociation.
0 an 12 9 unt t hang inn dre dress in the on onart.
(8) Entertainmenta.
When asked to any other miss on entertainment do not outstay
our velcome. Then attending as a guest representing your ness with other officers,
eave when the zenior of the party does so.
...../Cont'a sheet 3.
atus: Open
/10/2025 12:49:13
7/20г/I t
Ibert duan
20/11/2025 12:49:13)
RECRRATION AND TETYARI
Th 2o2 i road 1 18 16 70 1031.
getting botails of all sporta and how to sun them are to be found in "Sports and
Games in the irmy" published by the Amy Sporte Control Board.
DANGERS OF BOREDOM.
rent it, tea ave en o at order a weapon. if no stops are ta en to
falo y one to t evelt of employmont on the population in the years
before the war. An Army's Job is to fight, when it is not fighting it may be
said
to be unemployed. Something must therefore be found as a substitute or it will
lose its efficiency and its morale will decline.
This substitute is training and
careful, attention to mental and physical welfaze.
BALONG ROUND.
A.T.IL. No. 42 Appendix C.
- "On being Browned Oft"
In order to administer the right medicine a doctor must understand his
patient's needs.
He sets out to do this in many cases hy discovering the manner
of life his patient has led, so that he can for a proper Jua gement of cause and
effect.
In short he seeks the baokground of the disease.
(b) No less should an officer reek the background of the men he has to lead.
interest in all their activities.
This ho ta by perent ontat ana hena reset in 82 the tivities.
who enters the Ria.S. C.
(a). The Corps unlike the County Regiments of the Line, may receive men from
North, South, East oz West.
Thus
different languages that is dialects and hav
there are in on tent a loe men who speak
(e) The role of the Corps required the type of can who is generally to be found
in the towns - artificers and drivers of moser whic. es:
(f) Tho townsman is used to a routine in a factory or shop. He is used to having
his amusements close at hand and he lacke the
pover of observation of his friend from
the country. He is used to well lighted streets and would find it difficult to fina
his way in the dark. The man in the Pastory has the Trade Union outlook bred in him.
He expects to have and is used to heving everything he wants on his doorstep - electric
light, wireless, cónema, his favourite football
married in the same town. He has worle herd and ravea tó make his own home of wich he
s justly proud.
tean. In many cases he has grown up and
