19111
1.
2.
3.
4.
Objeot.
Te pravide, an
not within si
to employ acte
The need for a
The Colunn Cb:a
(a)
Every vil
( 3)
The wheale
at hallis o
maintenarad
The Drill.+
It is essential
tan knows it as "
Sequence en ino uri
(a) Plateen falls
(b)
First Order
4625446
Return by (20/11/2025 12:49:1
Drive
1. 0.01
1203 2
then =
On halting u 1/0 16 a
Pacing tho zar on of
N.C. 0в
7 1/1ф6/1
9991969 (Albert duan)
Closure status. Open
09/10/2025 12:49:13
ingrodients for bread maling which is another responsibility of the Rói.s.C.
Petrol installations are also established for receipt of Potrol, Oil and
Jubicants (P.0.I.) in bulk for filling into sultable containers and for distribution.
(NOTE: - Ammunition is the responsibility of the R.A.0.C., but thoy also havo
depots at the base and along the L.of C. for raccipt storage and issue)
Supply and Potrol installations of trpes similar to those at the Base tuy ciso De
Located at stratogio points long the In of Co particularly here distances are great,
or conmunications diffioult for other reasons.
The requirements of troops in thó Lo
of Co area me met by the provision of
smaller depots, sited wherever required.
Throughout the vole arca will be found minoche of. Coneral Transport Companies
carrying on casential work at all linds, as
woll as couponies forning port of fom-
ations for doronco or the loóf Co aroa, or hold in resceve.
Each Sub-aroa will have an P.A.S.C. orPicor mho is rosponsiblo to tho PoAus.G.
ropresentative at H.Q. L. of C. for supplies ni trensport in his
sub-aroa, the
representative at loQ. Lo of C., in turn is responsible to the DoS.C. at C.l.O.
N.B.
Tho above notes are basca on the assumption that a successiul campaign has boon
in oporation for sufficient tine to onable a 3ase Port and I. of c, to be
established.
In the opening stages of an invasion vory difforent considorations
arico and thoso aro tho subjeot of a lator lecture.
The main principles,
however, romain the seme and are altered to suit the circunstances of cach case
by the adoptability and isprovisation o Ro.S.C. Officors.
LECTURE TIT
Mr. C
11.
OBJECT OF IRCTURE.
To introduce organisation forward of railhead.
12.
4, CORPS IN ME? FIRLD.
In advance of railhoads will be the fora ions those forard olonents orc
ongaged with the chony, Assuming that there is a Corps in the Ficla,
the arca allotied
to it will bo lnow as CORPS PEA which strotchos iron a line innodiatoly in front of
railhoads up to and including the actual battle area, or Tonrora Dofonded Localities.
(E.D.LS.) •
Parts of this corps Aroa aro allotted to Divisions hich ac Imoin as DIVISIOLAL
ARRAS and.
thesc,
evon Scotion Arcas, tho groater always including the loss.
in tum, aro usually dividod into Brigado roas and so on, down to
G.H.Q. Arca will also be locatod forward of Railhead.
13. TRANSPORT ORGANISATION.
Phero are throo links of road transport fonard of mailhont tinier are mow ass-
i.
3rd line tronsport
ii.
2nd line transport
iii.
Ist line transport
Whore the 2nd lino units are rofilled.
322 Lino Transport (R.A.S.C.) is providod to vort normally betreon milhonds and points
2na Line Iransport. (Ro1.S.Co) is nortly rolliod by 3rà lino ma convoys natorinl to
points moro the lot line units are ro illou.
Ist lino or Unit Transport, is an intogal port of the units which are served as out.
Inod above, and is usunily divided into "" and "3"
Icholons "y" is composod or
thoso vehioles which the comandor nocds to accorony the unit in battlo nna "3" those
which con be loft in tho roar. The corposition of those ocholons varios aocording
to 100al
/requiroments
