Ediblon 53 0-
THE TRANSPORT OCLIMAN
Publiahed by 21 Trensport Galuma RASO.
29 pot 44.
NEWS.
BRITTEN & CAN ALLAN EMOTERS.
lo its are dontinuing that advange beyond S'HERLOGUNBOSCH and also beyond
TILBURG The Second Taotioal Air Pored Ta working in olose co-operation with the
ground Fordes and Mitchell. Bombers have anashed a bridge acrosa the Lower MAAS,
which was a main escape route for the Carmans.
aquiemey are now lose than 3 milos From the Bri+lah doop who ended one along the
BEVELAND ISLAND.
AIR Last night the RAY made, the heavlest attaok of the war on COLoNart
Fortresses yesterday attaoked HAMS..
Three planes were lost. In the attack on
COLOGNE the RAF lost seven bombers.
PATRE Aerican troops On LAYS ISTAND are now advancing on all sectors and the
Japanose resistance is light and limited to small delaying sotions. It is, now
known that in the big Navel battle two Japanese battleshipe were sunk along with
one heavy and one light cruiser and six destroyers, ta, cruisers and four destroyers
whioh afterwards got away were eventually sunk by air attack.
General Stilwell has
been recalled from his post in the Bast Asia theatre, and is to be given another
important assignent, This theatre, 1s to be divided into two seations under separate
TAX & weather has brought Fighting In TAY AIrost to a standat11}. There are
signs that the Germans are preparing to get out of SALONIKk to the Narth of CRUNCE.
RA57 RuE Lan troops have drit, the serians out of e tom a Fow miles AW Of WARSAN.
Jugo-Slav troops have oleare more than a hundred miles of the ADRIATIO Coast
above He and have borate that at earl, Ar. Aleto assesent has
VIEWS ON CURRENT NEWS"
In noving the seoond rooting of the Bill extending the life of the present Parliament!
for a further twelve month MR CHURCHit has scotched' the possibility of an early
General Election. Most people will agree with the provorb doaling with the
stupidity of changing horses while crossing the stream', and this certainly
applies to the present position i
AROUND THE COLUMN,
CRASC HO.
WHAT'S COOKING?
An Inguisitiva ouserver, upon entering the cookhouse this norming observed two bastas
full of a weird substance that was rapialy assuming the pronortions of barraso-
balloon. The attention of the dooks - who at that moment vero dream slanning, their
post-yar sohenes was drawn to this phenomenon, pusslorent aproad over. their faoes
as the apparition grew largor and larger, threatoning to fill the Cook-housc. A
serious calamity had prison.
but, fortunatoly takingthe lino of least rosistance it
oventually made its way to the swill-bin. Investigations vore made and it was
discovered that Baldng Powder had been used instead of Custara Powder. This was a
pardonable error, in vow of, the faat that this is the first time this delectable
sweet hes been used by our Cooks. It was learnt later that one of them had ambitions
as a'baliatio expert. (SIDNAY the COCK)
FOOTBALL
It to a well known taot that ne sen never tell what might acrive from 41 Tot Coln,
and HQ CRASO 21 ipt Column aro wondering what"aotalls thoy will have to contand with
this aftemoon at La TRiMETAY The visitors are to be entertained after the matah
by the hong tran,
HIST DRIVE
usual Drive' will take place at Ho thibrevoning at 2000 hrs.
