(M)
4B AA PARIS
Broalfást is available between the hours al 0730 and 0930 hrs, Peace time
Les such as scape fruit fian part of the fare.
The Hoteliitself 1s well
vided
with indocr amusements, and a danoe is arrangad with bartners in excoss.
band which in itself is novel,
consisting mostly
of ladies,
condone me to, tha
and
surely there are worsa fates than gliding around with a pretty Parfalone to.
haunting straing: of. 'Dreaming of a Whito Chriatmas!.
Irsty alsqiplas of BACCHUS
will also Lind their noeds not with a well supplied bar.
Those are, but
trimings;
Teave this, MaCCA showing gout Emotion as those who at last, have
found their spiritual hone.
In passing, it da olear, to see that nuch work and organisation has been
King all this about, and all who are and have participated will meninously
J012 trith the writer in this appreciation and thanka. THE STRdER!
SPORT
HO. 21, CRASC
FOOTRATE
HARCOURT (FRANCE) AIL
This natch was lated at HARCORI before a good attendance, of local people. The gamo
oponed with the CRASC side indulging in a snart short passing gane, but the Fronch
toan soon got into their stride and quiakly took the Iniative in this respect.
They
wero vory fast, and moved into position quiokly and their short passing gone, soon had
-the CPASC defenders working hard. Play moved from ond to end with the looal side
graduell gaining the upper hand,
and after sone 20 minutes play a bout of short, passing,
and good footwork by tho homo inside, forwards loft the inside loft some ten yards from
Goal,
and promptly switched the ball over to the right pf the goal, instead of shooting
as nost English players, would, have done,
but the centre forward had antioipated this,
pass and fron close, range and at an oute angle, he opened the soore with a grand shot.
CP/SC forwards made play on the loft wing through Jack andsuilth, and there were one
two noar misses. Thore was an inclination for too much finesse and not enough
shooting with the result that the faster french dide goularalways got the ball away.
After 30 rinutos play,
Harvey slipped the ball up the nidalo for Jackson to tako it
in his stride and score with a fine shot,
acrobatic local goalkeepor. Play continuod on even lines, but the French side were
decidol dangerous and it was only with the ald of a ver
twice kept out splendid shots,
that CRASC were on lovel terns at the interval. The
, gane had boon fought at a fast pace and the sporting attitude of the French players
was vory pleasing.
They took the charging, which is not usully permitted with
Continental toans,
in good part and retaliated whenever the chance
occurred, but it
was noticod that thoy are very prono to use their arms instead of the shouldors.
Five ninutes after the rosumption, Simons was tripped whilst naking his way through
and fron a resultant frec kick, some 35 yards out, Robins scored a grand goal.
goal keeper advancod a little too far in his effort to save and could only push the
ball over his head into the not. With CRASC now leading, play warnod up, and the local
contre forvard had more than one fine effort. He was vory fast and could shoot with
cither foot!The CRiSC inside forwards still dallied with the ball and did not 100k
like sooring. Many timos they were within easy range but no'er a shot came fron their.
Ipokers! At the ond of 65 minutes play, the local inside mon got noving again and the
oentre burst' through CRASC defcnoe and scored, with a fine low shot,
fron Painter's left hand. The sane dilatory finishing was being exhibitad by CRASC
inside non and Simons set a Captain's example by scoring with a finely placed shot
fron sone 25 yards range, proving that, good as the I00al goal keeper was, ho could not
stop every shot. Furthor sooring efforts word made by Taylor, from full back, who carr
two occasions the woodwork did nore than the goalkoper could havo done! A very fast and
intoresting cano finishod in favour of CRASO by 4, goals to 2 •
CANDIDATUS.
