- 12 -
Div n that the borchos on the Westor end of our soctor were clonr of tho
chomy•
it approxim toly 1300 hrs, the bonch dumps were bombod,
starting with the
Potrol Duny chu with thr consequent explosions, firos woro startod which ultimatoly
rosultod in an ammunition dump boing blown up.
Enormous quantities of ammunition
and supplios wore destroyca und approximtoly 100,000 mallons of Potrol lost.
With huncreds of tons of ammunition going off in all diroctions,
the beaches
time wore nothing lilo our concoption of a nomnl French hoalth resort.
Everyone took what covor ins anilablo, but,
it was, for a couple of hours, an
oxcoodingly dangerous spot.
Ninny nots of gallantry ure rocordod,
the citations
aro attachod, for which.
up to now, be cromley has recoived tho M.M.,
rocommended for the M.M., Capt. Cartor recomended for the G.M.,
and Sjt Jacks
roaonmendod for tho C.M.
Fron those citations it should be vasy to approciato
tho general spirit of the troops.
OC 237 Petrol Depot,
Copt. Erdal,
and sulnequntl died of these injuries on 11 JUNE.
Sqveral ORs suffored from
Five DUKWs anil two 4xhs voro dostroyed in a firo.
In this firo the
Commandor 6 Leach
Group was woundou and oncucted,
ler. ing the Sub Aron Commander
minus both Boach (roup Commandors.
The OC 238 Potrol Dopot,
a magnificont example to all rinks and quickly organizod portics
for ovacuating
Ho locations word roccod during the coning and normal work of discharging
cargoes continued.
is a rosult of this fire and the
onormous targot it nado,
the bonchos and the rachorard wore again subjected to hoavy attacks from the rir
as woll as shulling from long rungo guns.
RAF artificors of the Beach Flights undor conmand of n Flight Lioutonant
reportod to 39 Coy RASC (GT) whoro they carried out very usoful work for a period
of a fortnight.
D + 3. 9 JUNE 14.
A11 RASC units were calloc upon to work 'flat
out' and during this day 2,000
tons
of storcs were
put into now dopots an? 164 ensualtics evacuatod.
Tho beaches
were agnin bombed and shelled both by day and night.
the evening 5 out of 7 boached ISTs wore hit by shell fire.
then docided that no more
ships of this class would be beached on these beaches.
Soveral potrol and anmnition ships wore hit by sholl firc but this did not at
any tine doter the DUKi drivers fron going alongside to collect thoir loads.
Maắn HQ moved to IPWAWILL loaving day HQ working on the boron.
D + 4. 10 JUNE 44.
At 0400 hrs the now potrol dump vas bombed.
At is time the AA had boen
told to cense fire for one hour to allow for an Airborno landing
and it was during
this period that enomy aircraft broko through and hit the Potrol Depot.
lonlisad and only 8,000 gallons woro lost althouh thoro was approximatoly
35, 000 1a11 ons on
job was agnin done by Capt. Carter,
2IC, Liout. Erskine, togethor with all ranks of the Potrol Depot.
When I arrivod at approstantely 0430 hrs, overything was undor control.
discussed with the Corkador of 101 Decch Sub Area the wisdom of allowing tho
Potrol Depot to remain in this position.
loavo it in situ until it was possiblo to open up the iMA.
wing to lnck of room,
to tho procarious position of all typos of Supplios,
At this stage,
all unit domestic transport
was mobilized under cormand ORASC. for tho carriago of storas ovor tho boachos.
On this day the tonnage lift was 1,830 tons and 611 casualtios ovacuatod.
continuod main throughout tho night.
odd snipers woro still activo,
roporting without his Motor Cyclo which had licen hit on route by a bullot.
transport orinnization wns no runnin: smoothly and Control Points working offect-
ivoly. Supplios, at this stago, were rivon priority over the bonchos.
The Div Commandor oriorod,
without provious n tico, the Div to draw rations
for 2 doye, which mado wur than a sorious inrond into our Supply situation, ns
