• 3 •
just thron the last box of renades clor when some caploded.
It is considerod
thạt by his cotion this ICO robably sovad the lifo of the officer concerned.
The rhove statonon connot be corroborated, but ins obtained as a result of
hearsay.
F/14312666 DVD INGOTDEY PG. -
299 ODy RISC (GP)
..B.E.M..
At approximately 1200 hrs D + 1 Durs Gibson and Ingoldby were approacing, a
coastor in ordor to collect. locd whon thoy saw another DUkW in difficulties.
Thero is a strong son runing nt the tino and oventually, the DUkW was swangod.
Drivors Gibson and In oldy inmodiately stored their DUKW to where the other
and betwoon then they vore able to pull the driver out of the sea by
menns of their boat hook.
Ho ins unconscious nt tho timo and whilst one rave
artificial respiration, the other tried to find the socond driver of the swamped.
In this they woro unsuccessful and proceodor ashore giving continual
artirical respiration to the cosunlty.
By the time they renched the Beach
Drossing Station the drivor was arain conscious.
T/12329131 DUT GIBSON CHI
292 Coy RASC (GP)
At caproximately 120 hrs on D + 1 Drivers Gibson and. Incoldby wore approach-
ing a constor in order u collect a lord when they saw another DUKW in difricul-
There was a stroar sed runnin at tho tine and evontually tho duti was
Drivers Gibsr..
and I oldby inodintely stored their DUKW to whore
the other hạc sunk,
and intwoon them thoy were able to pull the driver out of the
son by noons ve their to hock.
Ho wes unconscinus at the time and whilst one
rave artificial respiration,
the othor tried to find the sacond driver of the
smimped DUKT.
they wore unsuccessful and proccouch ashoro civine
continurl crucicial regimtion to the cooulaty.
By tho time they reached the
Borch Dressin: Station ün Uriver ins arcin conscious.
F/48608
39 Coy SC (GN)
M.B.E.
This W.O. has for thu post 18 months carried out the duties of MSM in a most
conscienti us ani! loyal in nor.
lays choerful, trott 1 and willing to do thet
little extra which neans so nuch.
Duri. the timo
he hec boon on motivo servico ho has continued to fulfil his
duties in a most ofticioni and comondable inner.
For the pas: month, wring so tho donth of Cant. Davios (Worshops Officer),
this W.O. has carriod out the duty of officer IC Workshops in a most officiont
nannor.
RECOND DATION FOR MEANTON IN DESPATCHIS'
299 Coy RASC (GI)
This officor i rsonally ur mised the rocce of the GT Park which wes still
occupied by small clenchts of the rostor.
His orgonisction was jarticularly
well cone end a vury conciso ricture ns givon to me sone two hours Intor whon
This officer throu h tho death of Major E.H. Person took command of
299 Coy RASC (GT.),
cue to sonc oxtont to Mrjor Jackson's londorship
has carricd on a first olast job.
His coolness at all tines has beon a dofinite
exemple to the mon under his control.
167849 injor PANTOR IL
11Q 21 Eransport Colun.
This orricer ssiste In Marshalling the DUKVs at son on the initial landing,
not only in vory bre worthor but also under sholl and mortar firo (the DUKW in
which ho vas ridin,; dong lit by sholl firo).
Ho organised the DUKWs at son until
ivon tho vort to brin: the eshore whon a clonr passagos mac.
In adition
