• 2
8.
ARREST
To an on can sion
In cases where gircunstances, e.g. the gravity of the offence, or the
risk of the accused attempting to escape, meke it impossible to use a "warning
to attend", the accused will be arrested:
The person ordering arrest may specify that it shall be 'open' arrest,
otherwise it will be 'close' arrest,
The consequences of close and open arrest are set cut in detail in K.R.
559, 560, 561/566 and sumarised in N.A/D. jara. 1.
The chief points are
effects on (1) liberty, (2) duty, (3) pay.
Officers, Warrant Officers, if.C.Os in close arrest will be
under an escort, preferably of same rark;
in open arrest they will be
pernitted to. leave the barracks area only within certain linits for certain
Private scldiers in close arrest will be confined under charge cf a
guard, picquet, patrol, sentry or provost narshal. In open arrest will
not quit barracks.
2. Duty. Clicers or Warrant Officers in lose cr open arrest will
perforn no duties other than perscal routine duties.
As to relinquishnent
of rank by officer in arrest see A.C.I.:83 cf1942.
N.C.Os. in open or close
arrest nay be ordered to perforn all nornal dities, but this is not usual at
home stations.
Private soldiers in open arrest usually perforn all duties;
in close arrest the position is as for N.C. 0s+
In no case nay any additional duties be ordered.
N. C.Os. and Private scldiers forfit pay for every day in close
arrest on charges: -
For offences of which they are later comicted by C.M.
for absenting thenselves without leave if sentenced to detention cr
Field Punishnent by C.O: (A.A. Sec 158 (1), Pay Warrant, 942.)
Close arrest will only be ordered for sericus offences, e. g. discbedience
to an order distinctly given (K.R. 559(e). or ta prevent escape; but note that
open arrest has little usefulness and unles close arrest. is necessary a warning
i to attend is usually sufficient.
Officers ano Warrant Officers shoula not normally be arrested save upon the
written authority of the c.o.
While a case is under investigation - during a@journnents - while an
accused person is awaiting trial by. Con
wa C.0. has discretion te change the
form of arrest or to orded release without prejudice to re-arrest (K.R.559(i),
v577, 579)2
Power te Order arrest.
An officer nay arrest an offiaer, of inferior rank or any soldier of any
corps of any branch of the service.
There is power, very rarely exercised, to
arrest a superior officer if that superior officer is actually engaged in a
quarrel, fray on disorder,
A Warrant Officer or N.C.O:
eig appearing on parade drunk (4.4. Seo 45(3)) •
my arrest any soldier. - A Lance-Corporal
with less than 4 years service ordinarily will not place a private under arrest
(K.R. 559(h)).
tr
7.
Nor.
cent
VI.
780 of 1940 and 419 cf 1942::
Nethod of arrest.
An Officer, Warrant Officer or N.C.0. ordering close arrest will order
one or nore privates to conduct the offender to the Guard Roon and will avcia
ooning into personal cohtact with him; untess in a serious
case to prevent
escape (K.R. 559(g)) • Note inevitable variations when in the Field or "en
the line of march".
Stops, to be tolen so thome state to casua that lo one is unnecessarily ot
maliciously kept in custody of awaiting bial.
(a)
The Officer, W.O. or N.C-O. ordering arrest nust deliver at the tine
or as soon as practicable itine.
2+ hours
a use oy hind unet to the done for the
the Guard
/The tine linit....
