Bo/. S.C. 0.0.3. 0. (202):
BATTLE 30.001.
For Issue to students.
RITES: OF. PAX:
Looture I. =232
OBJECT: 4s a P1, Colander with many cuties to perfom it is obviously impossible to
be an expert on every subjeot,
but it is
essential that such an Officer shall
have a good general knowledge or this subjeot.
often results in hardship to the soldier when he is
Ignorance or carelessness
ca]1 od
upon to ropay money overpaic. to him or on the other hand, when ho is
not paid the full amount to wich he is entitled.
sufficient inforation to enable an officer to
avoid mistakes and to enable
him to
N.C. Ofs or men.
2. BASIC PAL•
Details of pay will be found in the Royal Warrant for Pay etc - 1940 .(P.W.)
supplemented by 1.C.I.s.
Soldiers are dividod into two nain categories for purposes of pay:-
Those drawing normal rates of pay (P.IT, 829): this clasa includas
all soldiers not classifica as tradesmen.
according to rank, and consist of basic pay, plus proficiency pay
and any other extra pay to which tho soldior nay be entitled.
Those draving tradesmen's rates cô pay (P.l.838). These are
soldiers who have passed a standar test in one or other of a series
of recognised army trades, and who are employed at their trades
within a definite establishnent or tradesmon in their units,
There is a further, but less i portent civision into those who enlisted
before 26th October 1925, and those to enlisted after this date.
The former
were given the choice, in 1938, of coming on to the post-1925 rates.
As the majority of soldiers are on post-1925 retes this precis applies to
such men.
3. PROFICIMNCY PAY
(P.l. 1002-1013. •C.T- 756 of 2940.)
In addition to basic pay there are varicus kindsor additional pay, one of
which is proficiency pay.
(a) Proficiency pay is admissible for all. British soldiers except boys
(1.e. under i7z) up to and including lance-sergeants who draw normal
rates of pay at post-1925 rates.
It is not admissible for:-
Soldiers enlisted for service as tradesmen but drawing normal
rates of pay while learning a trade.
Soldiers in receipt of tradesmens rates of pay.
Educational Proficiency Pay.
Conditions: -
a)
Possession of 2nd class Ary Certificate of Education.
C)
Entry on nan-service (17z years of age).
On completion of 6 nonths service after 3rê Sept. 1939 way continue
in issue to a soldier not receiving ar Proficiency Pay.
Amount - 3đ a day.
Military Proficiency Pay.
Conditions:-
a) One years colour service before completion of 6 months servico arter
3ro Sept. 1939.
Certifictefrom C.O. that nan is in all rospects a thoroughly trained
and efficient soldier.
o) Physioal.
