MEMO. EV. 8.
GOVERNMENT EVACUATION SCHEME.
MEMORANDUM.
Review of Evacuation.
The evacuation plans under the Government scheme which
prepared and put into operation by the local authorities
e based on the view of the Government that the outbreak
var was likely to be followed by heavy bombing attacks on
large cities. As one of the measures of civil defence, and in
e with the preparations made under the emergency hospital
acuation plan was put into operation before the outbreak of
ar, in order to save the lives of the children, to lessen the
roblems of national civil defence and to preserve the morale of
le people in the large cities.
2. This plan provided for the evacuation of 3 million women
ind children of whom Iz million were school children. Full
publicity was given to the scheme and every encouragement
was given to parents to allow their children to be evacuated.
The final decision, however, was left to the parents. When the
time came to put the plan into operation rather less than 50 per
cent. of the parents were willing for their children to be
3. Bombing attacks did not take place at the outbreak of war,
but the Government hold firmly to the view that this danger of
air attack is not removed, though the moment of its impact is
not calculable.
They are therefore still of opinion that the
removal of children from the large cities is a substantial advan-
tage to the national prosecution of the war, and they regret that
so many parents failed to respond to the offer and that so many
have since brought their children back to the evacuation areas.
4. A return made by the receiving authorities in January
shows, however, that over 400,000 out of the 700,000 un-
accompanied school children who were evacuated under the
Government scheme still remain in the receiving areas.
5. It must therefore be the first objective of policy to ensure
by all practicable means that there is no further drift back of
these children to the evacuation areas.
6. It should be made clear to parents of such children that,
since it was decided to put the evacuation plans into operation,
large expenditure has been incurred and great sacrifices made
making the conditions for the life and education of these
children in the receiving areas as good as possible during war
3. Number and sex of children
billeted
4. Number and sex of adults
billeted
5. Nature of complaint
(Pull particulars are
required).
NO
939•
Defence
Lodge a
equired to
• R. Day,
of Regulati
Rules 1939
e a complain
writing stat
m Clerk or C
om the Chairm
airman of the
• furnish in
he grounds of
idered and dea
e after it has
; of the compla
lake such inves
not dispose of
= opportunity t
ires".
