5.
6.
SC
of
USI
of
I/ SPE/I ti
VII.
TWO MAIN CIuSSES.
Corrasive - which burn the lips and noush - usually strong aoids or strong
alkalis.
Treatnent.
If lips and nouth burnur
i Bive an emetic but de give an
antidote which will neutralise the poison.
If the poison is known to be acid give one of the following
alkalis - line water in large quantities, or a tablespoonful of
whitening chalk or nagresia in half a pint of water repeated
If an alkali is known to be
the poisen at once give one of the
following acids - vinegar o. lenon juice or line juice, each
diluted with a? equal quantity of water, by the tumblerful.
If these antiucies ure
ant readily available or it is not kncwn
the corrosive poisons an acid or an alkali give copious
draughts of cold water,
of milk.
C. apply hot compresses te front of neck and give butter plive cr
salad cil on medicinal paraffin.
Non-Corrosive - Lips and nouth ret burned.
i.
Give an ematic - Twe tablespoonfuls salt in a tunbler of water cr a
tablespoonful of nustard in a tumbler cf water.
Repeat every five
ninutes.
ii. • after the enetic has acted give we tablespoonfuls of castor cil.
In ALL cases of poiscning, nilk,
raw eggs beaten up with nilk or water crean
and flour beaten up together or strong tea, my help.
SCALDS AND BURNS. - Scalds caused by ncist hesi, burn by dry heat.
Friction,
electricity
er corresives.
Don't use tannic acid preparations on dirty burns or on burned areas with a
bottle-neck circulation.
Treatment. 1. Carefully renove the clot ing from the injured parts unless it
sticks to the scin - out cund adherent porticns.
2. Place the injured pari in worm weter until suitable dressings
can be procured.
bress the injurea paits by applying strips of lint, linen ar
gauze scaked in(e.) fresh sclution cf baking soda - a dessert
spoonful te a ping of wam water. (b) warm strong tea.
4. Cover with ontton wool anu, bandago lightly.
5.
Treat for shock,
Southend.
Deo 42.
located as near the
and a Field Surgical Unit.
(at least cher per Corps, nore if
necessary).
Group III cases (i.e. not requiring either immediate resuscitation or
urgent operatin) are evacuated fren a.D.s. by M.a.C. cars or other
transport tc
vi. Casualty Clearing Station (C.C.s.) which is like a snall hospital, its
nain functions being to provide surgical facilities for Group III cases,.
accommodation fer sick and wounded until evacuated, etc.
(Iwa per Corps) -
: (NOTE: -
Gas cases will be dealt with at treatment contres provided fron
the nornal nedical organization, e.b. at a Corps F.D.S. er C.C.s.)
/Cases. •
