"Approciation is illitery rovior of tho
sả suation based on all availablo
inforation,
cul inated in a statemont of tha ncasures recommandod to noot it."
In ranor tootios on oppreciation is puroly a nontal considoration of a
problon fros shich a foolproof plan can be produced.
In larger operations a
writton sypreciction naturally
becocios nocossary in ondor that nono oi sho
nu orous factors are overlookod.
In var under nodor Battle conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion vill only
Do possible if tho
find is trained to worle to an accoptod
sequenso of thought.
111 appreciations, whothur mritton or nontal, vill bo in the folloting
10G. I• 897/42 - Extract.
5. Record of issues and receipts of stores, supplies, etc. (including R.E. stores,
issued as such, clothing and ration items). -
(a) For stores, supplies, etc. (except. those covered by the record dealt with in
Pera 6 below), issued to the United States Forces the British issuing officers will
send five umpriced copies of issue vouchers to the United States receipients and
will ask that two of these be returned receipted.
These two will be endorsed
"UoS. Forces" in red ink.
One will be held by the issuing officer for the
purpose of the return described in sub pra (c) below. (Purchases under para 3
(a) (1) above will be taken on charge by the depot, etc, concerned, and will be
struck off bu issue voucher; the special procedure in this sub-paragraph will then
be followed)
(b) Similarly for stores, supplies, ete, received from the United States, five
copies of vouchers will be received from the United States Authorities, three
signed copies will be returned to the United States Authorities, and the other
two will be endorsed "U.S. Forces" in red ink. One of these two copies will be
used to support the relevant accounts and the other will be held by the recipient
for the purpose of the return descrited in sub-para (c) below.
(c) At the end of each calender month, the issuing officers, ete, concerned will
forward to the command paymaster the copies of "U.S. Forces" issue and receipt
vouchers specially held in accordance with sub-paras (a) and (b) above. The
vouchers will be accompanied by covering lists rendered in triplicate showing:-
(i) Name of depot, etc, forwarding the lists.
(ii) Serial number of liste
(iii)ritle of account.
(iv) Month covered by the list.
(v) Reference numbers of vouchers attached.
The command paymaster will sign one copy of each covering list and return it
to the officer concerned. He will retain the second copy of the covering list
and will forward the third copy with the relevant vouchers to the War Office (I.8),
quoting this &. C. I•
The command paymaster will not combine lists fron different
issuing officers.
(a) The classification of condition on issue to, and receipt from, United States
Forces of stores, ete, will be limited to "Serviceable" and "Unserviceable" ( the
latter to include all non-serviceable conditions and salvage). On vouchers which
