U
References: -
TRAINING SCHOOL.
ORGANISATION OF VIB Roaos.C.
RoA.S.C. Training ranphlets Nos. 2 & 5.
LECTURE 1.
1. Object of Leoture.
Te introduce the work and organisation of the R.a.s.C.
2.
History.
The R.s.S.C. is a cozbatant Corps with an interesting and traditicnal
background.
Its records and that of its
predecessers,
as outlined in :
"A Short History of the RohuS.C." reveals that nuch good work has been done in t
the past. In the presentwar speed of movement and increased neans for attack
202 O.C. T. U., R.A.S.C.
TRAINING SCHOOL.
WATERERUORING OF VALLOLES.
INTRODUCTION.
During Beach Landing Operations vehicles are driven ashore from the
landing craft in which they are carried
To enable vehicles to negotiate the stretch of water between
the
landing craft and the beach waterproofing measures have to be carried
out to protect:-
The engine from temporary or pernanent damage (sea water and oil
form an emulsion which has a very harnful effect on steel bearings,
etc.
2.
3.
Components becoming waterlogged and therefore ineffective.
Aluminium parts from damage
This metal is attacked by caustic soda
which is formed as the result of salt water coming into contact with
ferrous metals):
4.
Exposed working parts from subsequent damage by rust.
Landing craft beach in about 3-ft of weter.
The ramp of a landing
craft has an extreme gradient of approximately l in 3 and the forward
part of the vehicle may be in water to a depth of 4' 6" while the rear
end is still on the ramp.
However slowly a vehicle moves through the
water a "bow-wave" is created which may result in the fore part of the
vehicle and the engine being immersed in depths up to 5'.
THE DRIVERS'
RESPONSIBILITY.
_It is the drivers' responsibility to mterproof his vehicle and
drive it ashore.
Driving Ashore.
- Orders will be given for drivers to start up their
engines for the purpose of warming them up approximately 15 minutes
before they are due to land.
This is necessary so that the engine will
respond immediately to wide throttle opening, thus giving the fullest
power output for the trip to the beach.
An overheated engine must be
avoided as this may have a damnging effect when the engine is suddenly
immersed in cold water.
The driver will engoge a gear equal to the lowest gear in a normal
four speed box.
He will engage the clutch and put his loft foot on the
foot brake and his right foot on the accelerator pedal.
Both his hands
/will be on.....
es
t's
(EL:6+:
6291
