1679
For issue to Staments.
R.A.S.C. 0. C.I.U. (202) •
TRATNING SCHOOL.
EVACUATION OF CASUALITES.
• 4e
5.
SO
of
6. USE
of
VARNI
nil
1.
Object ef Lecture.
Ic describe in outline the general systen of evacuating castelties in a
theatre of war, and nore particularly the part played by the R.a.s.cr in this
cperation.
2.
Definition "Casualties".
Includes both sick and wounded, both our own and prisoners of war.
3.
R.A.S.C. Responsibility
The R.A.S.C. is responsible for the perasion and initial mintenance of the
vehicles of all nedical and ambulance units in a Field Force.
nc werkshop platon cf their cwn, the mainterace of their vehicles is carried out
by a R.a.S.C. Coy tc which they are "affiliatec".
attention to the weunded is
given by R. A.M.C. personnel; thus sche units comprise beth R.a.S.C. and R.A.M.C.
4.
Systen of Evacuation - General Principles.
Regimental aid Post (R.A.P.) is established by each Unit under the
Regimental mediaal Officer. Ic this point the Reginental Stretcher Bearers
(nen cf the unit) bring all casualties.
After such attention as can be given by
the wi.O., casualties are then carried by stretcher Bearers and or transport of the
Field Anbulance to
the t ting it which it at leted peas by cations
Walking wounded will alsc be ecllected at such points..
Fron here the casualties are evacuated by i. B's and/cr Fa umb Cars tc
savanced vressing Station (a.).S.) established by the Hou. of the Field
Ambulance.
fanctions cf the d.D.S. are diagnosis, essential first aid,
accumentation, sorting and labelling of cases in order i priority fer, and
evacuation tc,
correct destinations for further treatment.
Casualties are
dividea intc Grcups I (Severe shock), II (Severe wounds) and III (all ther
cases) •
Group I cases (i.e: requiring innediate resuscitation) are dealt with
at the A.l.S. or evacuated by Field ambulance Cars te
Fiela bressing Station(F.D.S.) to which casualties of any kind are alse
admitted fron troops in the vicinity.
The F.D.S. will usually be sited on the
nain divisional centre line, and as olose to a.D.S.s as pessible.
(In divisions
having 2 F. D.ss the second should be in reserve ready to "leap-frag" if required).
Group II cases (i.e. requiring urgent perations) are evacuated fren
A.D.S. by Motor anbulance Concy (WA.C.) to
Advanced Surgical Centre (a.S.C.) which is nernally under Corps Contrel,
ighting zone as possible, and is a combination of a F.D.S
(at least cner per Corps, more if necessary).
Group III cases (i.e. not requiring either inadiate resuscitation or
urgent operatin) are evacuated from a.D.S. by M.a.C. cars er other
transport tc
vi. Casualty Clearing Station (C.C.S.) which is like a small hospital, its
main functions being to provide surgical
facilities for Group III
accomodation fer sick and wounded until evacuated, etc.
(Two per Corps) -
(NOTE: - GAs cases will be dealt with at treatment contres provided fron
the nornal nedical organization, e.g at a Corps F.D.S.
or C.C.S.)
/Cases.......
