(o)
phyluotta cumene faration, dad. motiot tea and 2e a watering
Jivewes away fran water and native
Rabia J5 4 HOStaS:
aliva, and humans
12 months In the case be thang yous
son the siuvere bite on the
ta tal an a try are on a do the much the Sit a the vi in thing in ronoh
risinfootunt athout dolay, and thy Long inousatio.
bruin of tris animal" ocnoerned should be
Lice are the ohier carriars
and-abrasions in the skin.
s mych us 75,0 if proper aare
ana considerable
clothins, bedding and ogul cont, and the destruction of lioe.
Persocal cleanliness is the prize pretontatio.
and purticularly in Beypt.
The
te the naked eye,
are affected fren the sall haisy sviming oreatures just visible
which enter the
blood strust and sut up an irritation which gives
riso
to the syaptons of the disease.
"It ra ind chlorinated before censumption.
the prevation - "Pila"-(The House Fly).
(b) Diarrhea is considored a dise in trival acuntries and must be repertea
• At sO thoy annet liva in the knut is they hag cong at hose, una that
they aust, take their personal hygiene and son on more seriously.
Drink water unless it has buch
They must net: -
wash in the canuls, rivers or
Bảt mruit unless it has beus amerily washed a fer
Defiaz witheut pernission.
preference sanned as well.
occked or washed,
Sleap in the native huts cor
swurters.
Josquito and/or sand-fly infected areas great care nust be taken cr
zosquite and/or sand-fly netting issus, onu it must be properly used.
/2)....
09/10/2025 12:49:13
Closure status: Open
9991969 (Albert duan)
Return by (20/11/2025 12:49:13)
14625446
WO 171/306
9B
1679
+/ 307/It
ROSAL RUD SERVICE CORRE.
eH1100
SONATION & MICETONS.
No. 3. Vater suppiue a vatur butloa.
Reft RASC Pruining Pas. N0.17.
stur is nocossary for
ncrtart
В. казив: непі-кова
short it su wrou
nood for water
aysantry, darrhcoa,
rehiolas varies greatly
vit titon h role on out it donation At gurus to all lie ta
LIC KET.
intanla
10 gullena - Hermil
- adntau.
For the ossential purpoaus of winking and cooicing,
gallen is the nernal
thit nen l
infly allowance fer ouch :
"o, nolution,
Elve
tor Per driniding and ecoldng
vuitolos could the
RESPONSIBILITY.
On notive service all watur for huun acruticn must be censidered unsafe
and after investigatien must be puritiot.
Tho suladl sorvice must satisfy itself
that the troops receive sufficient watur xer there
LILLY 10008, VA0 108 04002040
units will huve their own
sterilization necessary,
bulk supplies are tenlt vith the ley 1 engineers held these respensibil-
During nobile pper tions,
the an tra euge of Baall detached bedies of
drinking water has frequently to bu
purifieu in anall containers such as
144ce vas 304 1260r 0006L08
freutest inpertande, therefore,
fer treating yater in such receptaclus ith thi use cl individul sterilizatica
apparatus.
General zenarke fer 0.C., Unite and Plausen ufficers: -
(a) Lien who are employeu in water dutios, in the sule wuy as these employed in the
ceckhouse, must be above suspicion witn
eguru ta general health.
b) They should not be enployou in these suties if they have suffereu fren any of
the water borne
cisenses.
(o) They should be instructeu te report sick iredatoly they suffen fron diarrhea.
Water duty persennel and cocks
sanitary personnel be engloye in the purification of water er in the prepar-
ation of feed.
ure interchingunble but en ne acccunt will
(e) Renenber that not enly uriniang nator, but blution water alse is a source of
infection.
(e) 11 water containers shoula be cluane vegularly by sorubbing with a stiff
rush, and a streng sclution of blunching pewéur
g) Water will net be left in water bettles win set in use.
SOURCE OF 2y baon mentioned that tie
te responsible fon the bulk
supply and the satisfaptory state ei wite, in tho firet instance - whether it coses
frea reservoirs, rivers, underground aupplies ur frena salt water astilling ship -
but the Rok.D.C. neve the water by neund cf the w tur tank conpandes, using water
tank trucks (200 gallens) anu witer tune trailers (150 gallons), both ara fittea
/with punps.....
