-3 -
Transport being the limiting factor, the establishment of a
new roadhead may also mark the beginning of a limited rail or in-
land water transport service.
The new source of supply may also
be obtained by the opening of a new port nearer to the troops.
TRANSPOR! IN FRONT OF ROADHEAD.
Delivery forward from the roadread will be by third line
to Corps Refilling Point Areas stablished by Corps
within rarge of second line.
transport.
These areas are termed
"Field Maintenance Centres" and consist of a
number of dispersed
sites for each class of store, each of which is capable of being
developed into a dump,if necessary.
The replenishment of
second line is carried out at F.M.Cs,
It will be noted that this
system makes Corps responsible for the selection and running of
Refilling Points
the F.M.C.
"This is contrary to the present
R.A.S.C. practice which places
the responsibility for their
organization on Division.
It is considered more appropriate
that this function should now devolve on Corps:
F.M.Cs are best organised and controlled by C.R.A.S.C. Corps
Transport Column:
Although in the Middle Last a small
quarters (2 Officers ana 9 O.Rs) was employed, for this purpose
it is considered that the establishment of a headquarters of a
transport column (7-offrs and 33 O.Rs) is adequate to cope with
this duty as well as its other duties.
The headquarters Corps
Transport Column would act as a Report Centre: for any other units
that Corps may wish to locate in the F.M.C.
It would also be a
report and information centre for all maintenance movement forward
to the Corps Area.
The third line transport echelon provided for all formations
is adequate for a distance between the roadhead and F.M.C. of at
least 40 miles.
As the advance proceeds and the F.M.C. moves
forward-General Transport, Coys will be allotted by Army to Corps
to give the required daily lift based on a reasonable daily
mileage for all units employed.
Both third line and additional
General Transport Coys will run through in daily groups from
roadhead to F.M.C. staging as necessary en route.
Thus if the
These distances are noi rigid.
For instance, a group might
load over night,
drive 100-120 miles and bivouac.
Deliver early
in the morning and do 80 miles as
the return journey on the
on the third day it woula, complete the journey. re-
load, and return to its coy location near roadhead possioly by
midday, thus allowing the remainder of that day for rest and
maintenance.
When the turn round becomes longer the allotment
and the running of transport must be so arranged that one full day
in seven is allowed for rest and maintenance.
No hard and fast
distance for each stage can be laid down.
The detailed
organization must be left to the C.R.h.S.C.Corps Transport Column
acting under the gencral instructions of the D.D.S.T.Corps.
• 12. The platoon is a self-contained unit and transport will
normally move in platoon conveys.
Each convoy should draw at the
Ting and petrol in item me me men teen.
If the trip is a long one the vehicles required for petrol will
appreciably reduce the carrying capacity of the platoon.
This method ofmovement by self-contained sub units is
applicable also to movement on the Löf 0.
The principle is that
the whole unit moves with its reserve drivers etc. Relief and a
cortain amount of rest for the drivors not at the wheel is obtain-
od while on the road.
