handhiona
1р. ари. н3.
5 40S 43
MAINIINANCD BY RO44, IN DUROPEN THENCRE.
ki .
GENERAL PRINGIPLES:
In any oporation on the Continent it muy ba assumed that no
railwaye will be'available for
a considerable time,
therefore, be necessary initially lo rely entiroly on the system
of road transport.
Evon whon rati traneport bogine to como into
uso it will caroly keep pace with an advance.
transport in the fiela falle into throo catagories, 11.0%-
(a) At the Baso - from storughip to dapots
(b) on the L of o' - from dopot to a point, whore
stords are taken
over by the transport of
fiold formations;
(c) Formation transport - delivory to the
ne troops.
The basto principlos ot a road transport syston are: -
(a) Trans-shipment and the consequent hanaling of
storos must be képt to a minimum, not only
to econonidse labour and time, but alao to:
prevent damage and loss.
(b) Tho oconomic usa of transport allowing for rest
and maintenanco.
(c) simplicity and floxibility, depodially Corwara.
(a) The gontrol of transport units must be exercised
through normal commandors.
(6) Tho systơn shốulá bế a 10g1 cại"
development;of
normal maintenance by, second gia third line
transport
Such a system has beon evolved in the Middle fast, and is
gonorally applicable to the conditions which may, be expected in
operations in Europe.
3.
The normal daily
radius of action of both second and thira
line traneport may be taken as 40 milos, toe, a round trip of
80 miles.
The same distance is genorally applicable to any
General Transport Coy, or indeed to any, vohicle: enployed on
transport work.
This distance allows of time for loading and
unloading, any unforgseen delays, and also fou rest
maintenanee.*
and
oxtension.
Under favourable conditions thesa distances are capable of
Units running on good trunk roads between, terminal
points with which they 'are familiar, vehicles which are atready
under lond and vehiclos or units which are staging can obviously
cover greater aistances in the day.
circumstances arrangemonts must be
Howevor, in these
allowed periodicolly for rest and maintonance.
made for a free day to be
TRANSPORT AT THE BASE.
4.
mainly on a definito circuit.
Tho transport service betweon the ship and the depot is
The same routes are used daily
botwoon fixed terminal points and vehicles return to taoy head-
quarters whon thoir work is finished.
roturning to thơ same garage.
The problem his very
similar to that on a London bus sorvice with the vehicles always
.,will ho, to make the fullost use of the transport availablo, it
If it is necessary, as it probably
In possible in thoso circunstances to apply a system of, driver
