-Law zr
Approciation is lilitary revior of tho situation bacca on all availablo
infonation,
oul inatod in a statemont of the noosures rocomondod to toot it."
In minor tactios on appreciation is puroly a nontal considoration of a-
problom fron which a foolproof plan em be produced.
In larger operations a
writton syprociation naturally
becones necessary in ordor that none of sho
numorous frators are overlookod.
In var under nodern Battlo conditions a notiodical considoration of a
probion will only bo possible if the
ind is trained to wort: to an accepted
soquenco of thought.
177. omaniations, whethor mitton or sontal, will bo in tho colloving
ROETMENTAL CANISENS - FURCHASE OF SUPPLIES FROM ROA. S.C. ON RSPAYMENT
NCO 2680/43 e amended ly NCO 1720/43
All existing certificates issued to Unite by Headquarters, Northern Command, for
the purchase of R.A.S.C. supplies for Regimental Canteens, will be cancelled with
cancelled with effect from 3l Dee 43 and will be renewed if required as stated in
para 2 below.
Units who require a certificate for the purchase of R.A.S. C supplies for use in
a regimental canteen after 3l Dec 43 will submit their application through the usual
channels to Command Headquarters. Applications will be made in accordance with the
proforma, as, shown in Appendix A to this Order and will be rendered in duplicate.
When approved one copy will be returned to the Unit concerned through the usual channels
and the. duplicate. copy will be, forwarded by Comnand Headquarters, to the appropriate
Commana, Supply. Pepot:.....
3. When certificates are no longer required they will be returned for cancellation
o Command Headquarters, who will inform the appropriate Command Supply Depot.
• *•When a Unit has a change of station which entails dealing with a new Command Supply
epot, the certificate will be returned to Command Headquarters for cancellation and
i a new certificate is required, application will be
made as stated in para 2 below.
Certificates, will. bear, a serial number given by Command Headquarters, who will
intain a register of all certificates- issued and notify C.S. Ds of any amendments.
Supplies drawn under this concession must be indented for separately.. Indent
rm A.F. G. 820 will anvariably be used for this purpose and will be endorsed
gimental Canteens."
Indents must be signed by an Officer and bear the Unit office
атр.
The certificate authorising purchase must be produced at the Command supply
ot as and when required.
The • indent must be accompanied. b a certificate signed by the 0.C. Unit or
achment that the quantities indented for are not in excess. of the following scale:-
ax 1/10 0z
For each hot beverage served in the
sed Milk 2/5 oz (British or Dominion)
) Regimental Canteen
ed Milk ½ Oz ( U SA)
1. 02
) per man weekly for 50 per cent of the Unit/
arine 2 oz
) Detachment strength.
To enable the Officer i/c Supplies to check the entitlement to the demand, the
wing information must be given on the indent.
(i) The strength of the Unit or Detachment for which the supplies are demanded
(ii) The authority for the Regimental Canteen.
