(2'
Lotually, of course there are mmerous points that on be evidenced both for and
against present rates of Arny Pay. Howeyarion the whole, I personally consider that,
in the ag regate the pros carry wore weight than the cons. Let us take the case of
the single; soldier who'is making no allowance but getting no grant from his oivilian
enployer, and is getting 30/- per week - and remember there are many now in receipt
of considerably more than that sun. Now how does he stand? on a very frail finanoial
footins you probably think, but you will grant me'I do, not doubt that were he getting
'fiver' he wouidst be so badly off. Well tet me tryaad show you sonething akin to
not so much lens than the aquivalent of that figure, that he is getting. It cannot be
gainald that the 30/- is anything more then poeket money, and it 1s no paltry amount
for that sutposo. Apart from such sundry articles as soap and toothpaste he has little
to spend this rone; on apart from bigarettes and beet, and personally I think an
outlay of aise weeis on these items should ba ample for any man. Thorefore,
incide: tall there is no reason why our hypothetioal soldier should'nt save
10/apr works, and the wisdom of saving has already been pointed out already in this
journal. To got back then, nur "Tormy", has 30/- pocket money. Now ho gets threa and
In many hases four square meals a day, and despite the conventagnal complatnts, it
cannot to denied that they are far better in quality and quantity to those of his
civilian counterpart. Conservatively, it can be estimated that were ho a civilian,
he would be paying, at least 25/- a week for food. Thén ho has warm olothing that
oosts his nathing. To be perfectly nodest we'll put this down at being worth a mere
10/ ver wek. 'In 'Oivy Street' he would have torpay 10/- or 15/- for lodging.
Then would be boat repairs. Pares to and from his work night easily cost him. 5/-
or nore a weck. He gets fred cinena shows, concarts, and other forms of entertaiment
for which, as a civilian, he would have to budget not far short of a dollar. Then
for a swallor insurance fee he is entitled, if neoessary to the finest and most
modern of medical sorvices. And it must be remenbered that he gets concessions such
as reduoed prices for cigarotoga apart fron free issues.
The above enunerated
icems represents in hard cash at an undoubted under-estimate, a tal of at least
25/. So that means a soldior who only raceives 30/- in sterling really gets -:
30/- + 25/- + 10/- + 25/- and bearing in mind the conservative figures quoted is
after all, not so short of £5. Béfore drawing this article to a olose I should
like to anticipate pointa whiob will be made by Osssius in, hia, artiole to the
contrary, and they are as follows:
serviceman's arility has lessened'. On the contrary - due to pourses and
treining he is probably a better man mentally and physioally.
2. 'Cancers have suliered! In sherly all oases posts are kopt open fof the soldier's
3. 'Basio rates mall la comparison with(a) Civilian war workers (b) American serving
men. (a) Getuan serving men.
(a) Civilian workers pay is not just pooket money.
(b) American serving nen have to pay for any kit exohanges, and they are far away
from home. ( This is in relation to Cassius remark re Home Service Men) (o) I
poliove Coman soldiers also has to pay for kit exohanges, but in any case we oan'
• get alog vithout noting omen ideas.
Married & Single men shruld receive identioal basio rates. Unfortunately thero
had hảs wey •
are many marriod mon whose wives would see many weeks without wages if 'Cassius
Everyone has to, live, and practically everyone exoept the "Tony'
has to pay to do so. Finally, let me ask you to remamber that this artiole has
not been written for any cifioial prrp: nda purposes. I am not a 'frowsy! old
brass hat I an just an dinary On like Jourself, and also share your moans
think. (CRUTUS)
about alaciplino, about grub, and yes - sometimes about pay... until I stop to
Re query on quiz in Baition ge presalon 'Thirtlos refora to the persoa
1930-40. Most of our quiz's are of BBC ortgin, but the one in'question was of
'hone WInt, got. We note I. Petersen la In the Army and not the RAF. Thank you!
(Editor)
ions
2.0
Late in
sible.
