DeNie 11.
APER CLICION: ID SULECEING LUEN OF -DUAITOE.
"Approciation is nilitary
rovior of the sisuation based on all available
infomation,
culminated in a statement of
the noasures recolmendod to hoot it."
In minor tactics an appreciation is purcly a nontal considoration of a
problen fron which a foolproof plan cnn be producede
In larger operations a
written approciation naturolly becones necessary in ordor that none of the
nurerous
factors aro overlooked.
In war undor nodorn Battle conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probian will only be possible if tno ind is trained to work to an accepted
sequenco of thought.
who thor mitton or tental, will be in the folloving
1рyд AC I 67/1442
QUARTER - MASTER CEDARAL®
6% Army Agricultural sohone - Pig and Poultry Keuping by Units.
%. Cortain Unite have contravenod the "LiVestock (Rostitation on
Slaughtering)
(110-2) Order, 1940",
whereby no person sholl slaughter
Livestocic for luman consurption without a 1100n00.
2. In future, no unit will be allowed to purchase, feed, move or
slaughter, pigs or poultry without authority from the Carmand Agrioul tural
3e All Unita keeping pigs or poultry vill nake imdiate application
for permission to continue to feed them, and ay Unit wishing to start
poultry-cooping, eto, must antialy the Cornand Agricultural officor
that thuy are unable to dispose of swill and have sultable acconodation
for the keeping of the stocke
Lo Special considezation, hovever, will be givon to applications from
very anall and isolated units whioa desire to koup enall numbars of
piza or poultry. The Comand Agrical tural Offioos will bo consulted
rogarding the proviaion of meal for such applicants and units concernad
vill be advisod accordin ly. No charge on publio funde will be pemittod.
5 whon a Unit maius application to tho Command Agricultuml officer for
authority to sell its om pige, and expressos a desire to retain sono or
all of the pork for ita omn consmption, pomission to do so will only
be given on the striot understanding that the quantity so rotained for
consumption shall count against the nomal ration entitlement of the units
and that any charges involvod in rospoot of the slaughtering of the pige
wi22 be born by unit funds Units alvon authority to retain pork for
consumption will endorso the relovant zation indent with the anount of the
poric so rutainod, quoting this A.dol. Tho Officer 1/a Supplies will reduce
the nomal meat entitlement accordingly, and keep a record of the anount
of pork rutainod by the unit, in order to be able to corply with para.6
below
6. At tho end of tha messtag portod a credit voucher (1.2.0. 1630) wili be
prepared by the 0a1/ce Suppliea concerned, showing the nano of the Unit
and tho total quantity of pori consumed during the period. The value of
the pork will be calculated at the cheapest rate for book as notified
to comands fron timo to time. The anount iwolved will be crodited
to the unit concerned by the Comand zaymaster®
7. Units permitted to keep poultry will unsure that the birds are used
for eug production and not for fattening purposed
be lar offico letter 53/Coneral/6253 (04), dated 18. Juno. 1941 (*Pig-scoping
by Valts"), la hureby cancolled
