"Approciation is inlitary
roviar of the situation based on all available
infomation,
culainatod in a statonont of
the nodsures recommendod to toot it."
In minor tactics an appreciation is purcly a nonsal considoration of a
problon frou which a foolproof plan con be producca.
In larger opcrations a
writton appreciation naturally becones necessary in ordor that nono o2 tho
nuerous factors are overlooked.
In war under nodor Battlo conditions
a nothodical
consideration of a
probion will only be possible if the and is
trained to work to an accepted
sequence of thought.
111 orreciations, whothor mitten or mental,
will bo in the following
REGIMENTAL CANTEENS-ISSUS OF R. A.S. C. SUPPLIES ON REPAYMENT.
NCO 2805/41•
NCO 1680/43
store an olen ly Order 62 08 1942 (as amended by 622 of 1912) and
Northern Command Order 2234 of 1941..
It has been reported that in certain areas a
considerable nunber of
Headquarters authority for the existence of the regimental canteen will in
future be quoted on any indent submitted to the Command Supply. Depot for R. A. S. C.
supplies, together with a cextificate that the quantities indented for are not
in excess of the entitlement laid down in the relevant War Office letters (i.e.
sugar 1/10 oz and condensed milk 2/5 oz (or U.S.A. 2 oz) for each hot beverage
served, tea y oz and margarine 2 ozs per man per week for 50% of unit strength).
- Authy : - W. O.U.M. 53/General/6004/(s.T.6) dated December 9, 1941.-
NC0 187/43
1. Regimental Canteens will be authorised only in cases whore NAFI are unable to
provide an Institute Service.
2. All Units wishing to conduct canteens regimentally for the Unit, or detachments
thereof, under the conditions set forth in para l above will apply to Headquarters
Northern Command through the normal channels on certificate as set out in the appendiz
to this Order.
3. Formations will satisfy themselves before forwarding such applications to Command
Headquarters, that the conditions indicated in para l above have been fulfilled ana
that the issue of a certificate is justified.
4. Managers of NAAFI Supply Depots will not issue supplies to Regimental Canteens
except on production of a duly authorised certificate.
5. On change of station within the Command, Units will return the existing
certificate through the normal channels, together with a fresh application for
authority to draw supplies at the new station if the circumstances justify this.
6. Units leaving the Command will return their certificate direct to Headquarters
Northern Command.
7. For security reasons no mention will be made in the certificate either of the
Formation to which the Unit belongs or of that which it may be joining.
8. Northern Cormand Order 2234 of 1941 is hereby cancelled.
N.C. No. 39/3/Q.1.
