- 2 -
with the performance of their vehicles.
It is interesting to note that not one .
DUKW was lost in the Assault due to bad handling or driving:
We were also fort.
unate that whilst in tho North of Scotland numerous training exeroises in driving
on and off assault craft were carried out which stood us, in very good stead.
Navy co-operated with us in these exercises in every possible
It was unfortunate that we were never given Motor Launches until the oporation
actually took place as very much more use could have been made of them, and the
Lawnah personnel would also have been trained in DUKW control.
This part of the
organisation was rough, whergas, given a few weeks, it could have been made very
simple for all. concerned.
The late allocation of 39 Coy RASC (GT) to a Beach role did not help in
It was fortunate that this was a very good company.
This company's
first operation exercise - LEAPYTAR - was undertaken without any porsonnel having
been trained in waterproofing and the drivers had not even the vaguest idea of what
a Beach Group or a Beach Sub hoa really nant, or what thy were called upon to do.
The company did, howover, in the vory short time they had for training,
renarkably good job, as, in the aotual assault, they put up a magnificent perfor
Tho Potrol Dopots and DIDs were wall trained, although several of the exercises
lacked the actual stores.
It was, in the carly stages,
difficult to make them
understand the aroas that would be roquired to handle the tonnages needod of them,
but, once having grasped this, the work was carried out well and efficiently.
PART II.
Planning.
Outline planning was carried out in London in the erly part of February
and lasted approxinately one month.
This was done with 3 Br Inf Div and 1 Corps,
under whose com.and we cane in the Assault.
As is usual in planning,
was done which cane te nought.
The Sub Area Comnander, the two Beach Group
Cormanders, the CRE and nyself, scttlod upon a First Key Plan
had to bo ohunged in detoil soveral tines, but it is interesting to note that,
having inde it, and after approval by Corps and Div it was nover changed as far
as the major installations vore concerned and those did, in fact,
operate in the
places chosen on Operation OVERLORD.
• RASC point of view it vas a
constant battle with other Survices to keep the spaco
1located - so many times
other Arus vere wanting to encroach particularly on tie space allocated to Gencral
Transport parks - nono were aware of the amount of room required to accomodate 2
DUKW Conpandos 1 - 4 platoon G.T. Company, nor were they entirely aware of tonnage
requirements and space required for DIDs and Petrol Depots.
Fortunately,
we kept
thé spacos chosen on the First Koy Plan - it was a good thing we did insist, other-
wise there would not have boon sufficient root.
It was a pity that a firn Order of Battle was not produoed at the start -
each day found new units and formations as part of the set up.
Consequently
Supply, POL, Water and all the other figures were changed fron day to day.
addition, to produce Staff Tablos for shipping was an endless job and did not,
in faot, finish until ve were alnost due
Again, thô number of times
was necessary to alter our phasing in of personnel and vehicles, owing to linited
shipping space, mado a lot of extra work.
is realised, of course,
as necessary, but I a quito sure that if a firm Order of Battle had been known
it would have made things very much casior.
In the outline planuing the Navy were
somewhat hazy as to their requirenents but here again it was largely due to the
uncortainty of what thoy would really have when the tine carie.
really laid down (at loast if it woro,
it nover reached us, as to who was bidding
for what - It was arranged that Arry should bid for Army overheads, Corps for Corps
and so on, but this did not work as,
right up to tho tine of going into concentrat-
ion, we were having to alter figures for all sorts of comoditics because it was
found that their own pooplo had not mado suitable provision for them.
tho outline planning was finished and on the Staff Tablos produced exercise
LEAPYEAR was carried out.
The Plarning Staff at this stage had consisted of nyselr
and onc Serjoant Clerk.
We then went to Aborlour Houso, Aberlour to get down to
dotailed planning along with our Div (3 Br Inf Div).
The Planning Staff was
