Kneel at one side of patient facing heud, place hand on small of
patient's back with upper border of your fingers belcw lower border of
his ribs, keep your arns rigid and swing forward counting 1-2 slAwly,
swing back counting 1-2-3. repeat - artificial respiration nust be
ontinued perseveringly until respiration is restored or the body i:
retting cold or life has been proncursed extinct by a Medical Offioer
IV. FRACTURES The object ef first aid treatinent c. fractures is to guard against
further injury or aggravation, especially to prevent a simple fracture
fron beconing compound.
V.
General signs and symptons of Fractures.
Pain at or near the seat of fracture.
Swelling about the site of fracture.
Defornity - linb assunes unnatural position.
Irregularity cf the
bone.
6.
Unratual ncbility.
7.
Crepitus - bony grating.
General Rules for Treachent of Fractures.
Treat on spot, unless life is in danger fren other causes
Treat haencrrhage first, if present, covering wound with field
3. If possible detail sonecne te steady and support the injured linb
sc that further novenent is prevented.
With great care and without force plase the linb in as natural
a position as possible.
apply splints' and bandages.
anything that' is firm encugh tc resis; bending can be used as a splint
provided it is long encugh tc go above the
eli, grove the fracture and below the
jcint below the fracture and in the lug the
mino ca splints always go down te
the heel:
• If only one splint is avaialie w
ys put it on the outside.
no splint is available the upper linb, if tractured, nay be tied to the trunk,
and in all cases a fractured lower linb sheila be bandaged te its fellow.
cf bandages - fix ends of splint first
apply bandages above and below the seat
of fracture, apply handages round ary joinis within the compass of the splint.
IN ALL LOUBTFUL CASES TREAT AS A FRACTURE-
SHOCK - 4 condition of sudden depressian of the nervous systen, resulting fren
and cocurring after injmy.
appearance and sympions very similar tA
internal haencrnhage inereased by heemorrhage, pain, cold, anxiety.
2.
Pronote warnth of the body.
Enourage e better circulation of bleed in the brain.
3. Keep patient's rind and body at rest.
Treatnent - Innediate.
Stop bleeding.
2. Lay patient flat ou a rug, coat or blanket with his head turned to
Loosen tight clothing.
Prerent aggravation of injuries.
Cover well with blankets er ccats.
Reneve to shelter.
VI.
On renal to shelter.
Wrap in blankets and it possible apply hot bottles or hot bricks,
quiside one blankes,
to the feet.
to the pides of the body, between the legs and
If able to swallow give the
sugar in it except when injury to tr internal egan is present or
act tea or coffee with plenty of
BOISONS
- Don't Inse your head in one of you unit has taken peison - nany
recever with, or in spive ci, Ist wilt
cin.
Lae.
