SUNILO
War Office Directorates responsible for the training of Cadets a+
The
o.C. T. Us.
are
D.M.T.
All arms other than those specified below.
R.A.C.
D.A.F.V.
...
D.A.A. and C.D.
R.A. (A.A. and C.D.).
Pioneer Corps.
D. Lab.
Unit Procedure
6. In battalions and equivalent units the C.O.
board under the 2nd-in-command to which names of likely candidates will be
will appoint a selection
reported by
unit a Card Index
(A.F. B 2624) will be maintained to show details of :
Record
(0) Contese in are tea merin a rommedia by Vat
(b) Potential candidates awaiting War Office Selection Board.
(c) Potential candidates under observation in the unit before recom-
This Record will be shown to Senior Officers visiting or inspecting the unit,
and will accompany a potential officer's documents on transfer or posting.
7. C.Os. will constantly review their unit in search of potential officers,
and must ensure that those whose names have been reported to the unit
selection board are watched during their work and training.
8. Except in the case of University and Reception Unit candidates,
potential officers will normally be selected from other ranks holding the rank
of acting corporal or above and whose powers of command and leadership
have been tested, but a candidate below this rank whose promotion is not
possible owing to lack of vacancies in the rank of corporal may be selected
Officer is of the opinion that the candidate's selection
held the appointment of lance-corporal and have been in command of troops
is in the interests of the Army. In such a case the candidate must have
for at least six weeks, and the Commanding Officer will certify that, owing
to lack of vacancies, promotion to the rank of corporal was not possible prior
to interview by a War Office Selection Board.
In units where facilities do not exist for the testing of powers of command
and leadership, local arrangements will be made for candidates to be attached
to suitable units for a period of six weeks for this purpose.
The O.C. the
unit with which attachment is carried out, will submit a report on the
candidate, which will accompany A.F. B 2617 when submitted.
Potential officers as soon as selected by their Commanding Officer, will be
employed in an instructional and executive capacity and will be promoted
without delay as soon as vacancies occur in the non-commissioned ranks of their
units, so that they may have the fullest opportunity of developing and exercising
theirpowers ofleadership. Promotion will not be withheld because the individual
may be leaving the unit.
9. When a soldier has been registered by the unit selection board, it is
important that final judgment should be passed on his qualifications early and
that he should be finally approved or rejected by the C.O. as soon as possible.
A.F. B 2617 will then be completed without delay in accordance with instruc-
tions in paras. 12-19. Part I of A.F. B 2617 will be completed by the candidate
in his own handwriting.
9:13)
1679
Age Limits
10. The minimum age for entry to an O.C.T.U. is 18 years and 6 months
Soldiers over 40 years of age should not normally be recommended unless
have technical or special qualification; such cases will be considered by the
Maximum and minimum age limits for certain arms are as follows :—
R.A.C.
-...
Candidates over 30 years of age will not be
accepted unless in possession of exceptional
qualifications.
Candidates under 23 years of age will not be
R.A.O.C.
Pioneer Corps
accepted for the Administrative Branch.
Candidates of Medical Category Al or A2
under 30 years of age will not be accepted,
unless aliens of enemy nationality.
Special Qualifications
11. Special qualifications and medical categories required for cadets are
shown in Appendices A and B.
Completion of A.F. B 2617
The following
instructions
will be adhered to closely in completing
A.F. B 2617.
Failure to do so causes unnecessary work in many offices and
delays the training of individuals.
12. Birth and character certificates
Birth and character certificates will be obtained by candidates immediately
A.F. B 2624 is prepared in accordance with para. 6, except that in the case of
certificate is required.
These certificates will accompany A.Fs. B 2617 when submitted to the
War Office in accordance with paras. 20 and 23 and Appendix C.
certificates will be returned to candidates after posting to an O.C.T.U. or
after notification of rejection.
where candidates are unable to obtain birth and character
certificates owing to original residence abroad, A.F. B 2617 will be endorsed
to this effect by the C.O.
The nationality of candidates will be checked as soon as birth certificates
are produced, and if the candidate or either parent is not British A.F. B 2617
completed at Parts I and II only will be forwarded, accompanied by birth
direct to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) for verification as
eligibility for selection for an emergency commission before the candidate is
put forward for interview by a War Office Board or selection for an arm for
which interview by a War Office Board is not necessary.
Where the applicant or his father has been naturalized, the date and number
of Certificate of Naturalization will be stated on A.F. B 2617.
of verification.
A.Fs. B 2617 will be endorsed by the War Office (A.G.1.E.) showing result
Appendix C.
Instructions for the granting of commissions to aliens are contained in
13. Candidates with previous service
If A.F. B 2617 shows that a candidate has previous service as an officer
or as a cadet at the R.M.A., R.M.C., or in an O.C.T.U., it will be forwarded
to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) before interview by a War Office Board, for
7
