THE TRANSPORT COLUMN*
29 pot. 44..
Ediblon 55.1
Published by 21 Transport Column RASC
NEWS
BRITISHI & CAS AMAN ANCIERS
The tES are continuing their savenge beyond & HERTOGNBOSCH and also beyond
TILBURG The Second Taotioal, Air Poree la worlding in olose co-operation with the
ground forden and Mitchell Bombers have amashed a bridge across the Lower MAAS,
which was a main escape route for
the Cermans.
Bauseway are now loss than 3 miles from the Brielandia go adanoing alone the
troops who landed on Say
BEVELAND ISLAND,
IRe cast night the RAF made the heaviest attack of the war on COLOGNE+
.350
Fortresses yesterday attaoked HAMAs
Three planes were lost. In
the attack, on
COLOGNE the RAF Jost seven bombers.
PHILLIPINES.
The hierican troops on LEYTE ISLAND are now advancing on all sectors and the
Japañose resistance is light and limited to small delaying aotions.
It is, now
mown that in the big Naval battle two Japanose battleshipe were sunk along vith
one heavy and one light cruiser and six destroyers. In, cruisers and four destroyers
which af toryards got away wore eventually sunk by air attacke
Goneral Stilwell has
been recalled from his post in the Fast Asia theatre, and is to be given another
important assigment, This theatre. 1s to be divided into two sections under separate
oommanders.
ITALY & GREECE.
Bad woather has brought fighting in INATY aImost to a standstill. There are
signs that the Germans are preparing to get out of SALONIKh to the North of GREECE.
BASTERN FRONT,
Russian troops have antn the jermans out of a town a few miles NW of WARSaw.
Jugo-Slay troops have cloare more then a hundred miles of the ADRIATIC Coast
bove DUBROVNTO and have liberated the Post of SPLIt An Anistioo agreenent has
been sinod 14 Moscow botween the Lies and Bulparia,
VIEWS ON CURRENT NEWS
In noving the seoond roating of the Bill extending the life of the present Parliament
for a further twelve month MR CHURCHIt has Isootched' the possibility of an early
Central Election. Most people will agree with the proverb dealing with the
stupidity of changing horses while crossing the stream', and this pertainly
applies to the present position.
AROUND THE COLUMN
CRASC HOM
WHAT'S COOKING:
In Inguisitive ouserver upon entering the cookhouse this norning observed two basiar
full of a weird substance that was rapialy assuming the pronortions of barraso-
balloon. The attention, of the dooks = who' at that moment were arean slanning.
Post-var sohones was drawn to this phenomenon, Purslorent-aproad over their faoes
their
as the appsrition grew largor and larger, threatening to fill the dook-house.
serious calamity had prison,
but fortunatoly telling the lino of least rosistance it
everitually made its wey to the swill-bin. Investigations vere made and it was e
discovered that Baking Powder had been used instead of Custard Powder. This was
pardonable error, in viaw of the faat that this to the first time has detect vio
sweet has been used by our Cooks. It was learnt later that one of them had ambitions
as a'balistic expert. (SIDNEY the COCK)
FOOTBALL
It to a well lown taot that ne on never tell mat might aurive from 41 Tot Coln,
and HQ CRAS 21 ipt Column are wondering what details! they will have to contend with
this afterngon at LE TREMpLAr The visitors are to be ententained after the matah
by the hono then.
WHIST DRIVE
The unday Drive' will take place at HQ thit evoning at 2000 hrs.
