QU
STIO
5 12:49:13
pen
uan)
2025 12:49:13)
zw
(ii) Over 22
years of age.
the following educational and technical qualifications :—
— In addition to I (i) should possess more than one of
(a) Be a qualified and licensed dominion land surveyor.
(b) Be an officer of a colonial survey department.
(c) Hold
Institute.
a special diploma in land surveying of the Chartered Surveyors
(a) Be a graduate are given of coat a veces od aversity versity
diploma in mathematics.
(e) Be or have been a member of a firm engaged in the practice of land sur-
veying throughout the Empire.
(f) Have practical experience in trigonometrical and/or topographical sur-
veying.
(g) Have knowledge of the theory and practice of the rectification of air
photographs for the purpose of mapping.
(B) Printers.—Should possess :—
(a) A standard of education equivalent to the school certificate.
(b) A working knowledge of printing processes and administration.
(c) A recommendation from the Federation of Master Printers or similar technical
body.
They should if possible be members of the Federation of Master Printers
or members of the Young Master Printers Association.
III. R.E.—TRANSPORTATION
below :—
The following qualifications are necessary for candidates for the types of units detailed
(a) Railway Construction.-In addition to (C)I (i), outside experience of railway
line maintenance, railway construction, road work, drainage of sewer wropen
(b) Railway Survey.-In addition to (C)I (i) familiarity, with use of theodolite and
level.
(c) Railway Operating.
(i) Iraffic.-
-Practical and outdoor experience in the traffic department of a
Must include knowledge of railway clearing house or equivalent
rules covering block working,
etc., and of station
depot and yard working, signalling and train control.
(ii) Loco.—Practical and outdoor experience in the motive power department
of a railway.
Must include some knowledge of railway clearing house or
equivalent rules covering block working, emergency
working, etc., and
knowledge of locomotive practice, and should also include knowledge
of rolling stock maintenance.
(d) Workshops (Railways and I.W.T.) and Docks (Maintenance).—Must have had
experience either as production manager of a workshop or have been in charge
of à shop forming part of a works or have been pupil or apprentice in mechanical
workshops.
(e) Ivansportation
(Stores).—Must have specialized knowledge of the
materials
used in civil or mechanical engineering (including locomotive) and one of the
following :—
(i) Experience in the system of receiving, issuing and accounting for stores,
both in bulk and detail.
(ii) Experience in compiling or amending a catalogue or vocabulary of stores.
(iji) Knowledge and experience of value of different types of stores, especially
in connection with purchases, salvage and disposal of surplus.
(J) Docks Operating.-
Outdoor experience and outside experience of general dock
operating, including practical knowledge of stevedoring,
i.e. loading and dis-
charging of general cargo ships, cargo handling gear and crane operations.
(g) Inland Water Transport (Operating).—Experience in yachting, boating and barge-
manship is desirable, but candidates without these qualifications who are willing
to learn may be accepted.
(h) Port Coditton on aida tea met 26,
in addition, candidates
construction of docks and whar years ot fulfil the requirements perch (il) and,
construction of docks and wharves in of age must have had experien
waters and of bridge construction.
IV. MOVEMENT CONTROL
(a) R.E.—As for (C) III (c) (i) Traffic or (f) Docks Operating.
(b) General List-Those not qualified under (a).
(D) R. SIGNALS
1. In order to
ensure a reasonable chance of completing the course successfully, it is
essential that candidates whether from R.
Signals units or from other arms should possess
qualifications as below :-
Educational
approximate to that
matriculation
the
ex-regular soldiers, possession of an Army first-class
education.
In addition, either a reasonable mathematical ability corresponding
ordinary mathematics
in school certificate,
or a knowledge
and magnetism corresponding to a credit in school certificate in a
science group which includes electricity and magnetism.
2. In addition to the above requirements a candidate who has any of the qualifications
below is particularly suitable for the R.
Signals :—
(a) Has been a student in electricity or mathematics or physical science at a recognized
university, technical college or institute;
(b) has been an accepted member or student of the Institute of Electrical Engineers :
(c) has practical and theoretical electrical experience with the G.P.O. or with some
recognized organization or firm engaged in communication engineering :
(d) has, as a result of practical experience or as an amateur, acquired a sound practical
knowledge of electricity in any of its
branches.
(E) ROYAL ARMY SERVICE CORPS
Educational standard to be approximately that of matriculation.
Older candidates require practical experience in operation, maintenance of repair of
vehicles, in wholesale distribution of commodities or service in oil companies.
vacancies exist for chartered or incorporated accountants.
(F) ROYAL ARMY ORDNANCE CORPS
1. Administrative
Age ...
•.
Education
Experience ...
Not under 23 years.
To approximate to matriculation standard or school certificate.
Must have received a sound general business training, or have
held an executive position in a reputable firm ;
or be a qualified chartered or incorporated accountant,
or
secretary, and be considered likely to make a good adminis-
trative officer.
2. Mechanical Maintenance.
(a) For appointment as ungraded subalterns.
General Education.—To approximate to matriculation standard or school certificate.
Technical Education and Experience.-Two categories should be considered :—
(i) Those who possess academic qualifications but little practical experience,
i.e., an engineering degree or diploma of a recognized
the Institution of Mechanical Engineers
as exempting from the
graduates membership examination of that institution; of
Passed the graduate membership examination of one of the following
Institution of Mechanical Engineers.
Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Institution of Automobile Engineers.
(ii) Those with no academic qualifications but with considerable practical
experience, i.e. served an apprenticeship with a reputable engineering
firm and held a responsible appointment in a mechanical, electrical or
automobile engineering firm.
21
