(2)
FOOTBATE. MATCH
510 COY. VI CRASO HQ
A, koen match was spotled yesterday at te femblay by a strong
any doubt domineted the wholo of the
wind which without
game.
CRASO HQ lost tho toss and 510 quiokly
making, the most of the natural advantage pressed strongly into the home tean's
arga,:
CRASO fought beok, the defence putting ih some useful. if not, speotaoular work-
After a series of rushes Davison of 510 oponed, the soore shooting into the net at
hart range. The game assumed a'ding dong" affoot. GRASO hitting back doggedly against
510 who attompted to set tho pace,
once or twice chaad brake, through but goula not
1-. sufficient pover beling the balt to soore, and half time stall tound the soore at
Tha sepond half opened with CRASC going into the attaok,
but were not with an
equally obstinate, defenco.
Eventually they broke through and after battoring 510'a
goal mouth many times Magnillan equalled the scare.
GRASC HQ, then attempted to
obtain a load but the whistle blew with honours even.
THERE'S A TAVERN IN THE TOWN
The Press Conference reported to be held at "Tha Canteen! in Le Neuborg the other
evening,
is quito in keeping with a tradition wheraly many great enterprises have
had modost beginnings under the hospitable roof of a
Coffee House' or
Taveim'
The excellent premises at Le Noborg carrias with it an atnosphore not unlita
that found in established Coffee Houses usually situated in the business quarters
of some of our big cities. In these placos, important transations have bech
arrangod, and contraots involving large suns have been enterod into cver
the convivial
cup of tea or coffee.
This perhaps is a speoial feature in the City of London where
in most cases
the
'Caffo, Tavern was the progenitor of many of its Guilds and
Institutions. The great House of lloyas whose underwriting and insuranco activities
are known the world over.
'Hatton Garden' the hono of the diamond trade is also a
plaoe whore the merchants find the atmosphore of a Coffee House condusive to business.
Other aotivities of perhaps a nore vital nature has had origins in this apparently
harmless and deceptive atnosphera of light refroshment. Affairs cf state have been
discussed, plots and conspiracies hatched which have made history, and the apparent
harmless' coffee house' has been the vortex of sone incalculable whirlwind ousis
"havoo' in huran affairs.
" THE STROLLER'
WANTED,
QUIZ CORNER
SPORT.
Can a golfer hole in 0?
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
, Who produced and starred
in FIGNALION?
ANSWERS
Champion Sprinter - Jack Donaldson in Fub 1910°
won the championship in 9 secs.
GUARDS REGIMENTS - Five.
Can anyone in the Coys let us have the words af the song entitled -
'DOWN THE LEAFY LANES OF NORMNDY". This was sung
by a soloist before a
film show at Lo Neuborg soveral wooks ago. Full inforation regarding origin,
composer and music if any.
Editor.
