The Ninister recognises that if t
operation they
must make
responsible
authoriti
and the householders
however,
that in the
made,
it would
been made in these
service.
this notice will necessarily be short, and it is essential that
organisation of the local authority should be in such a st
to enable it to function at short notice.
28. The general principles on which plans for transfer sho
be based, subject to such modifications as are necessan
meet local requirements, are as follows:-
(a) The areas to be evacuated will be the same as th
evacuated in September, 1939.
(b) The evacuation of all these areas
sarily take place on the same day.
evacuate any area will be taken in the light of prevail
(c) Not less than 36 hours'
notice will be given off
evacuation of any particular area.
(d) The evacuation will be.
planned to avoid undr
pressure on and dislocation of traffic.
It will according
take place between the heavy peaks of morning and eve
ing traffic.
(e) Specified parties will, so far as possible, be taken t
specified destinations.
(f) The rate of delivery of the children to each pat
of
the receiving
areas should be steady over the whe
period during which evacuation lasts.
(8) The trains should, wherever possible, reach to
detraining stations before dark.
(h) Subject to (d), (e), (f) and (g) above, the evacti
tion should be completed as quickly as possible; it is hop
that the evacuation of provincial areas can be completed i
four to five days.
(1) The Railway Companies will endeavour to notify the
receiving authorities of any change in the plans nhe
have to be made whilst the evacuation is taking place.
Procedure to be adopted by Evacuating Local Authorities.
en. The evacuating authority should put in hand array
ments for the registration
desire them to be evacuated at such time as the Governmen
school children whose parents
determine, in the light of the development of air raids on land,
operation.
that these further evacuation plans should he thrus ont in
30. It is important that the matter should be brought to th
notice of the parents of each such child now in the evacati
area, and it is suggested that on first sten a len fot ernlain
householder in the area.
he plan with a form of registration chould he cont to ead
7 1/1% /1
679
Ap
NO
9
3I. A copy of a leaflet and form suitable for distribution is
appended to the Memorandum (Appendix B)
and supplies are
being forwarded to the authority separately; if any additional
supplies are required they will be furnished on application.
32. Arrangements have been made with the Post Office to
deliver the leaflets free of charge and unaddressed to all house-
" household " delivery.
holders in the evacuable area as a
The authority should therefore consult with the head postmaster
for the district, who will indicate the offices to which the bulk
supplies of the leaflets should be sent.
If the area is one which
is only partly evacuable, it will be necessary for the authority
to inform the head postmaster, by reference to specific streets
well-defined boundaries,
of the area
within which the
delivery is to be made.
Similar information will also be neces-
sary in the case of areas which are totally evacuable wherever
the boundaries of the area do not coincide with the head post-
33. A form of application for registration bearing the imprint
denoting the prepayment of postage, which is
to be returned to the local authority, is attached to each leaflet.
It will be necessary for the authority to have stamped or printed
on the back of this form the complete postal address to which
they wish the forms to be returned.
The Post Office will not
accept the leaflets for distribution until this has been done.
leaflets will be sent to the local authority unfolded to facilitate
the printing of the address.
authorities they should be folded in four.
Before being sent to the postal
No doubt this will
normally be done by the printer, but there would be no objection
to the local authority's engaging additional staff for the work in
case of need and charging the cost to the evacuation account.
Every effort should be made to ensure that the bulk supplies are
in the hands of the postal authorities for distribution not later
than the end of February.
34. Every endeavour should be made to obtain from each
parent a statement whether he desires his child to be evacuated
or not, and every opportunity should be taken to impress on
specified for registration;
(I) that the decision must be made during the period
child who will be evacuated;
(2) that when evacuation takes place it is the registered
(3) that when evacuation is put into operation it is the
duty of the parent who has registered his child to send him
area until the party returns.
with his school party and to leave the child in the receiving
35. The evacuating authority should make all possible
arrangements for affording any necessary explanation of the
939•
Defence (
Lodge a co
equired to
1. R. Day,
of Regulati
Rules 1939
se a complain
writing stat
in Clerk or C
rm the Chairm
airman of the
o furnish in
che grounds of
idered and dea
e after it has
of the compla
make
such inves
e
not dispose of
opportunity t
ires".
3. Number and sex of children
billeted
4. Number and sex of adults
billeted
5. Nature of complaint
(full particulars are
required).
