- 9 -
1.
Ho got as many vehs, both wheeled and tracked, off the beach as soon as
possible and procodod with his own Suction to the SSDs vith the pre-
loads of 6 pdr Tic runs for 1 BUCKS and 5 KINGS Rogts.
By his action
this NCO undoubtodly enablod a larro number of vehs to leave the beachos
which may otherviso have been destroyed by the enciny.
He then dolivered
his runs to tho corrcut site under fire from onemy mortars to
to be in action. aguinst the cnomy in dofonce of the BNA.
Throu hout the ensuing 24 hrs this No, along with Cpl Wybourne,
an inspiration to all ranks, and played a great part in the off-loading of
very valuable ammutition from beached ICTs roquired for the carly stages of
tho oporation.
These are typical examples of tho mannor in which all ranks of the RASC per-
formed their duties on this day.
after discharging their pro-loads,
were imnediately put to work on
tho bea. Iud IcTs.
11 thesc ICTs wore at this time full of ammunition and with the
beach being mortared at sholled the job was not without its risks.
Throughout
the whole of this time I can only say the work of all ranks was magnificent.
• Drivers, NCOs una Officors just carriod on and did the job we had trained for.
the rocco party under my Adjutant (Capt. G.M. Jackson) roported
back (thoy landon at H + 3) with information that our frensport Parks were ther
not clo: af the onemy -they were, however, cloured later in the day and when tho
other vohiolos came ashore were ready for each company to set up its own HQ.
were on the sites originaly choson.
At that time and until D + 2 the sito for our
own HQ was being sod by lIQ 8 Inf Bdo.
DUKW and voiial. Control Posts woro set up
and normel organisation and work wont on.
CRASC Adv HQ was get up on thu boach noar
to 101 Beach Sub Area Command Post -
tho first sito chosen was found to bo somont dangorous as to hid dug oursolves in
a few fect away fron two cioctrically arivon Hun tanks full of explosives (Bootlos) -
so to moved n fow feet further away.
It was a littlo difficult to know whoro to
dig as we found a lurco quantity of mines and various other impodimenta which were
not desi med to do is much mood!
The second spot choson was one we remained in
At this stago,
in ridition to the DUkil of 101 Coy PASC (GT) ,
22 DUKWIS OF 'A'
platoon of 633 Coy RASC (CL') vore landed.
They were all pro-loaded with armunition
and Modigal stores,
their nission being for Casualty cvacuation.
They discharred
their pro-loads of ammunition to the SSDs and their Med: 1 storos to the CEP which
located betwoon ROGER and QUEEN baachos.
All thesi vohicles were employed on
dischar in cargo from the dried out' ICTs and continued on this work until lato
in the ovoning when crovalty ovacuntion started:
Tho drivors difficultios at this time were many,
wrocked Naval craft,
vehicles of all types,
enemy beach obstacles,
our cim and chemy dead and
wounded litterca the beaches and in consequence drivors had to be particularly
The oxit fron the koachos to the first Intoral vos undor constant mortar
and sholl fire and in additim thero was a guod donl of sniping from the houses.
The work of discharging to DUKis and chicles into the SSDs was continued
with Majors Paynter and Taylor,
(Major H.S. Armstrong) in chargo.
torother vith tho Corpany Comnandor 101 Coy RASC (GT)
In accordance with our Opcrational Instruction,
sholters vere distributod.
vohiclo canopies for boach
were ostablishod.
Tho POL Dumps at tho Drained Vohiclo Parks and for tho
ness for smoking of the bonchus and anchorage.
In addition, smoke gonerators were distributed in readi-
At this tino, tho Che,
find the position of the Dumps in the BMA.
DAA & QNG and mysolf madon rocco of tho hintor land to
It was discovered that these positions
wore still in enomy hends end after consultation with Commandor 101 Boach Sub Area
it was decidod to off loal incoming, storos into the oxisting SSD$.
In tho oarly ovoning, 4 coastors berthod anc. DUKis wor put on to discharge
• thoso.
Portions of the barch wore cloural of obstaclos by Psi to allow the DUKVs
moro room to operato.
