. - 2 -
277814 4/Capto R.E. SWN.
IQ 21 Transport Jolumn.
Military Cros's.
It LA BRECHE on 6 JUNE 44 Capt: Swan from 39 Coy RASC (GT) was tho officor
rosponsiblo to mo for
tho landing of trunsport, guns and ammunition from the ICTs
which boachod ct H +
Capt. Swan Innded on the first vehiclo and took chargo
of the sitution,
notting his vohicles off the beach under fire and forward to
thoir positions to drop guis.
On his roturn fron the forvard position ho the organised tho off-loading and
by his coolness enc. loatorship was an inspiration and oxamplo to all undor his
To a large mensuro his offorts rosultod in the ammunition Incin programo
ovor the assault phasc.
For the first 36 hours, at whi time thu job had beon
completed, ho kept vehiclos novin
and constantly reporto? the
position to mo.
For the grunter port of this first 36 hours the area was under firo.
22024_W/licjor J.O. WYLOR
HiQ 21 Irensport Colui. : O.B.E.
This officor took. port in the original rocco for tho GT Pork along with
I/Major G.M. Jackson.
lio did an excollent job in this respect and also assistod
in tho coordination of trens:
ort by DUkt to the Sector Stores Dunps, this boing
done whilo the berches were still undor shell and mortar firc.
He ondeavounod
to localize tho fire whon the emmunition dump uns dostroyed and throughout has
shon courage under all cincunstancos.
I/113204 DVI WILISHIRE G. F..
101 COy RASC (GT)
Military Modal.
On the aftemoon of 24 JUT 44 Dvr Willshiro was out at soa with DUKV B7
and a second trivor.
A conster was hit with & sholl and a part of its load exploding.
Billshire took his DUKi! alongsido anc. transferrod some casunitios to a Modical
DUKT and also instructed his
socond crivor to go ashore.
A shell narrowly
nissed tho stor of his DUlli causing damage and allowing, watur to enter, nover-
tholoss Dr Willshire considered the
danage not sufficiently serious to provent
taking a load.
The chomy uns still sholling nd ammunition on the coaster wns
still oxploding; but Dur Willshiro took on a lord of 5 - 1,000 I bombs.
Whon he returned ashore it ns found that a tyrc had buon torn and tho
Officer IC DUlls told drivor Willshiro to loave his DUK. and have his too hila
Workshons regiroc. the DUKY.
1. litto lator it ns found that ho had obtainod
a spare whocl from anther Dukli, changed his whocl and srfoly coliverod his load.
1/10687383 Dr DUVEY GoT.
39 Coy RASC (GI)
Militery Mouc1.
it BRECUE bonchos, PuCE on 21 JUNE 44 at about 2245 hrs Dvr Davey volun-
teorod to drive fron tho lunch vehicles wich had been abanioned.
icles vero abendonod close to an amunition coaster which was on firo with amn-
unition ox luting in all ciroctions,
in addition
of bein: jut out of notion by the incomin tide.
to which thoy were in danger
By his initintive an courge Dvr Davoy drove way two vchicles which may
have otheriso hare soon dostroyed or rut out of nation for some timo.
The abovo oct rs committod with the full knowlodro that the ship mi ht
ox loco nt ty ninuto.
I/6101475 H/Op1 DAVIS i. J.
39 COV RASC (GT)
B.E.M.
At COLLEVILLE On 9 JUNE 44, I/Cl Davios wns driving his voiclo in the WHITE
boach Socior then a Joor,
a long ning.
Tho trailer caught firo.
con; a trailor drivon by an unknown RiOC officor foule
iclo and ren ovur to the scone of tho
his NCO immodiatoly got out of his voh
incidont. Ho unlonded the trailer und had
