Open
025 12:49:13
duan)
2025 12:49:13)
z00
APPENDIX C
GRANT OF CONNISSTONS TO OTHER RANKS WITH ALIEN CONNECTIONS
• mended for appointment to emergency commissions.
Warrant officers and other ranks of the following categories may be specially recom
1. British subjects :—
(i) Persons who were themselves
British citizenship by naturalization.
aliens by birth and have subsequently obtained
(ii) Persons who have acquired British nationality by
in blast tetutom
reason of having been born
but through foreign parentage possess another nationality
(iti) Persons who are themselves British subjects by birth, the sons of fathers who
(2.e. dual nationals).
or allied country, including a country in enemy occupation and
Each of these categories may be divided into those whose connexions are with a neutra
British nationality by marriage.
are British subjects by birth but whose mothers were alien by birth and acquirer
chelly country,
Austria and Italy
Both categories are
equally eligible for consideration and may be recommended for commissions in any corps
Enemy aliens and aliens of states which are under the control of the
Allied or neutral aliens may similarly be considered for emergency commissions
2. Persons who are still alien.
belligerent, and stateless aliens, may be specially recommended.
enemy but are non-
on its merits.
Each case will be decided
appointment to a commission in
be interviewed by
the Director of
2617 accompanied by birth certificates for such other ranks will be forwarded direct t
the War Office (A.G. 14) by units for interview by the Director of Labour to be arranged
24
APPENDIX D
COMPOSITION AND DUTIES OF WAR OFFICE SELECTION BOARDS
1. War Office
Selection Boards
permanent presidents have been
established
to effect
a levelling in the
andads of dendidates and to grade them according to their
qualifications and suitability.
Presidents will be allocated to commands and will
be assisted
members as
of War Offide
guards will be detailed brist in
of commands on will bonel
Members
who will ensure
cially suited to the task
assist in A S., and R.A.P.C.,
of the technical suitability
are andidates for
or in attendance
arms
number of candidates to be interviewed for the arms stated.
at Boards according to the
3.
War Office Boards will judge the fitness of candidates to become officers and allocate
them to arms according
to suitability and
demand for officers, consideration being
given as far as possible to the choice of the individual.
The technical qualifications of candidates
will be judged by the representative of the
technical arm detailed
as a member
or in attendance at the Board.
After allocation to the
which considered most suitable, the Board will grade
candidates as under, according to their qualifications and ability.
Grade A.—Outstanding and recommended for the earliest vacancy at an O.C.T.U.
Grade B.—Well up to average.
Grade C.—Below average (reserve).
The allocation and grading of candidates will be recorded at Part IV of A.F. B 2617 and,
where applicable,
representative of the technical arm chosen, or to which allocated,
will complete Part V of A.F. B 2617.
4. Presidents represent the War Office, and have power to override the opinion of
members in regard to acceptance or rejection of candidates.
They will, however, accept
the opinion of representatives of technical arms as regards technical suitability.
5. When a War Office Board considers a candidate more suitable for an arm other than
the one of his choice, they will explain to the candidate that this is in the interests of the
If the candidate refuses to accept the Board's decision, he will be informed that
he cannot be accepted for an O.C.T.U.
A candidate's acceptance or refusal of their
decision will be recorded on A.F. B 2617 by the President and counter-signed by the
6. In the case of candidates not considered suitable for commissions or not suitable
without further training, boards are in a position to render great assistance to the efforts
now being
made to place individuals where they can
give the most effective service.
Recommendations may therefore be made for the posting of individuals to a different
unit or for transfer to a different arm, with or without the suggestion that they may be
suitable for commissions after further training in the ranks.
A.Fs. B 2617 for such candidates will be forwarded through commands to the War
Office (A.G.1.E.) where the necessary action will be taken, and the progress of the individual
as a result of the change followed up.
7. In addition to interviewing candidates, presidents of War Office Boards will act
as travelling inspectors in commands and will
visit units, including O.C.T.Us.
They
will advise units regarding the standard and requirements of potential officers to
be
brought forward for interview and will inspect the arrangements within units for bringing
forward potential officers.
8. Candidates serving under London District will be interviewed under arrangements
made by Headquarters, South-Eastern Command.
The G.O.C., British Troops in Northern
Ireland, will obtain the services of a president from the G.O.C.-in-C. Western Command, as
required.
25
