- 4 -
showod, initintivo id oxamplo hon the Ammunition Dump ves hit assisting in
the oncuation of mon und vehicles under difficult conditions.
126037 A/Mc.jor ARMSTROIT H.S.
101 Coy RASC• (CT):
This officer landed on the first DUKW to touch down.
He inmodintoly comm-
encod tho organisation of DUKi Control and pushing vohicles forwari, to the the
Sector Storos Dumps whilst tho Benchos were still under fire.
Throu hout the
operation this officer has shown gruat powers of loadership.
140123 5/Majur II.J.E. COTLEY._
39 Coy RASC (GT):
This officor,
right from the time of lunding has shown keennoss and initia-
tive in the organisation of transport under difficult conditions.
296320 A/Cort. ERSKUT AJ..
237 Potrol Denot RASC.
This officor while: noting as 2IC at 237 Potrol Dopot RASC, has shown prent
courago cht. resource on
to occasions when the Potrol Depots was blown w.
ho has helpoc in nacurling men and stores and by his oxemlo ap offorts has
saved many tons or stora which would othormiso have boon dostroyod.
7/203606 to RICKMAN IT.
39 Coy RISC (CI).
This soldier has been the means of keying a nunbur of vehicles on the rond
under most difficult conditions.
On several occasions,
by morter and sholl firu thus rendoring thon inoperativo.
Pto Rickman,
definitc occasions locatec other wreckod vehicles from which ho has obtained
the necessar, soro arts to put vehicles again in cormissio.
His coolnoss
undor firo whilst obininin; those spere ports is r mattor for comenantion.
53375 F/Csit. G.D. CROS
CROST WAITE.
39 Coy RISC (GS).
This officor has, for the pest 12 months, worked willingly and officiently
under all conditions.
Ho has been of groat assistance in the treining of the
Coy and has by his exanple oncouragod othors to do that little extra.
the tine ho has been on notivo service he has carriod on in a most efficiont
manner and during the recated sholling of both the Berch and the Coy location
has sot an exemple of coolnoss and dotorination,
133526 I/Capt. E.G. JOY..
HQ 21 Transport Colum.
Sinco Indin; on D day this officer's work has almost continuously beon
carrica out on the Doach.
Ho assisted in the orranisation nocessrry for tho
general issue of supplios and subsequently has sharod the responsiblity in conn-
ection with tho use of all Unit transport undor command.
His dutics have nec.
essitated lon and arduous hours 'on duty' with periods when it has beon nocess-
ary to work both doy aac nicht.
From D dny until D + 30 the Beach has boon
almost continuously we sholl fire but throughout the whole of this oriod
Capt. Joy has cono an excollont job in a very capablo munner.
115940 T/Cout. C.J. DANSOi
138 DID RASC
As OC 138 DID TUSC, Cept. Dawson hes,
beon responsible for the sitin:
along. with Capt. Morris, 96 DID RISC,
orgenisation and efficiont vorking of the two DID:
D'ring the initicl stages extromely difficult conditions wore
exporioncod due to almost continuous bombin and sholling, but, chroughout Capt.
Daws on has corrice on with the job of seoing' the Suplios through in a most
Ho hes boun an inspiration to all ranks under his command.
