7 1/1%6/1
SHORDI.
"JANTZIN" L
will obtain from Stats. Sec. daily at 0900 information as in
(d) Conference will
Coma RS Sect
All officers RS Sect
at which final Daily Ipt Programne (Annex 3) for the following day will
be detailed to C.T. Coys.
Duips and Depots must conform, and
represented at this Conference.
Atabove conference Tpt. Details, in the form of Annex 2, will be handed to
Coy Comds, or if not ready will be sent on as confirmation later.
They will normally be for a complete Ipt Pl.
be com anded by an officer.
) Each detail (Annex 2) will have a seriel number, to be quoted or
A.B. 158 carried by drivers.
(g) Coy. admin will be fully detailed on the spot but the following metters
will be included to tio in with the general NSC working : -
(i) All Ipt Pls will be serially lettered -
551 GT Coy RASC -
905 GT Coy RASC -
and will carry this letter, with the serial no. of the tpt. detail
on a board on the front lorry of each Pl. when moving.
(11) GT Coys will report completion of each detail by filling in and sending
by DR to RS Section No. 2 copy of Tpt Detail (Annex 2) which (inter alia)
shows times travelling, witing, loading, unloading; mileages; sumary
of loads; discrepancies and queries (if any).
(iji) As far as possible individual Coys and Pls will be confined to particular
types of stores,
thus workin,, as much as possible between the same
dumps, depots and RHs.
Regard will also be paid to the suitability of different types of
vehicles for different types of stores. These are matters which can
only be settled on the spot.
RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
A (i) Ipt Details issued by Cond. RS Sec will be in triplicate end will be
distributed
simultaneously as follows: -
Copy No. 1 GT Coy concerned
2 GT Coy concerned for use of Tpt Pl and return to RS Sec
on completion of detail.
3 Dump or Depot to be drawn from.
(ií) Action on and disposal of above.
Copy No. 1 Filed by GI Coy in serial no. order, completed with all
details copies from copy No. 2 on completion of detail.
Copy No. 2 Handed to 0. 1/c Ipt Pl.
Filled in by the latter with appropriate details and
signatures as the detail progresses.
Countersigned by OC Coy on completion of detail.
Sent by DR inmediatoly on completion of detail to RSSect
with completed copies of A.B. 158 used by R$ Sect in
compilation of returns to Stats Sect and in compilation
of tot statistios.
Filed by PS Scot, separately by RHs, and under RHs in
serial nol order.
Copy No. 3
Serves is demand on the dump ro depot to issue supplies
or stores at a certain date and time.
Retained by dunp or depot and used as they wish.
