- 13 -
loavo us without rations 'on the cround'. Fortunately one of the
thon lying off was carrying 250 tons of Compo which was off-loaded during
t, thus putting tho situation on its foot aain.
rouler smokin; of the beaches by day and night still cousod a cortnin
of troublc to the DUKW drivors - but thoy carrica on.
Some interesting
voro to be soon in tho anchorage.
tho Hun sholling started it bogan
a coimon sicht for tho constors to 'up nichor' ar
move out of range vary
Sonotines Dulls worc alon side or about to draw in to thoir tying up
The DUKW drivors, horever, wore novor proparod to cono ashore vithout
d, in fact, it was a point of honour with thon that thoy novor did so.
oforo followed the constors ani whon anchorod outsido wint was hoped to bo thu
or rund, they ro loaded and come ashoro.
Often it was nocossary for the
2o five or six milos to so in ordor to obtaina load.
There woro nun-
us occasions on which the chomy startod shollin the anchorage whilst unload-
was in progress but nt no tino did the DUkis conso oporations on this account,
it ves during ono of choso periods of sporadic shollin that Dur WILLSHIRE,
01 Coy PASC (CI), borroriod thi
foat for which ho uns subsuquently awardod tho
lilitory Modal (300 citation ettachoi).
On this occasion ono of the first sholls struck the KOWLION, a coastor
lyinr, to the East of tho chorago, and startod a fire in the dock cargo at tho
aft ona of tho ship which includod
AA anmunition for our on Ocriikon guns and
othor inflammablo ana dangorous stores.
Onsualtius occurred upon the IOWLTON,
and tho mater, to avoid furthor damage fron sholling or damage to other ships
in the anchorago, raisod anchor and stuanca out to soa.
The firo was got undor
control and oxtin wished without more sorious damage.
DDST, 1 Corps, visitod my IQ on this day and congratulntod all ranks on the
show they had put up.
I was also visite by It. Col.
THOMPSON,
ADST Second Arny
Troops, who inforned ac that we cone under his comand, and of his various
ments rogardiny rotums.
This was soothing quite now and I am afraid thrt my
ro-action to orders of this kind at this timo woro not entircly conducivo to
good tempor.
(It was aftorwards proved that this information ins not correct
'but it was very disturbin. to all RASC installations to stort recoivin: orders
• fron now peoplo at such n time.
The work of CRASC Adv HQ comprising Major Taylor, ant. Joy,
C21. Bailey, Cyl O'Flahorty, Durs Enton, Donnelly, Souter and Pte
desurve spocial mention.
Thoy vorc still in thoir hole in the ground,
attending in RASC matters on the Boach by cay and nicht.
During the wholc of
this time the boaches were undor constant sholl fire and durin the nirht woro
subject to tony erony bonbing ai tacks.
The vork ins don erous, tryin and very tiring as there was little oppor-
tunity of sl00p.
A classic oxenple of the spirit of this HQ es when a coaster
tho DU VEGAN: IRAD, carrying RAl borbs,
oxplosivos a pronades was beachud right
orposite our HQ.
Sho was hit by sholl fire and the oxplosive and
pronados dos"
The lover mrt of the corro, 1,000 b RAI bonbs, vore still in the
and the slip on firo
It was cortainly & dangerous pleco to be in, but, as
was trensport which had to bo porting in the vicinity it was nocossary for the
personal or cho div EQ to romin to make such divorsions as were requirod.
ship wns left stending on
tho Boach for sono time aftor the
firo wns oxtinguished
but dig not oxcioco as it ins thought it would.
Whon the firo diod down normal
work was rosund with the DUKWs and other drivers cerrying on as usual although
wo never kne whother tho ship would explodo or not.
₽ + 5.-
11 JUNE H•
WIISON, ADST 11 I of C, arrived and ve word advisod that as fron
1600 hrs on this dato ve wore to come undor their comand.
It was a good thing
this happoned as numerous Potrol and Supply Stuff Officors had onlled in the past
48 hours - nil clainin control of the DIDs and Potrol Dorots and calling for
many and vriod roturns.
This ng I think,
loaving England we had done our bost to find out how and whore the
a very link in tho chain as prior to
come, but it was,
to say the lonst, a muddle.
It socnod thon as
tio up would
it dous now,
that sone diroction should have boon riven by hi her nu ority as
doing a rund job.
Thore vors constant nir raids, both by day ani ni ht.
to what would
A at this time
