7 1/1% /1
EXERCISE - "JANTZIN".
SE OR
will obtain from Stats. Sec. daily at 0900 informatic
in
(b) From
the above and (b) (iv) RS Sect. will decide what súpplies and stores
hould be moved from dumps anc
(o) Provisional tpt programme
and do drafted fool on de submitted to
RH Sect
(1) NG (Control)
being adjusted as necessary and agreed with them.
(a) Conference will bo held at 1200 hours -
Comd RS Sect
All officers RS Sect
(O5C 3 G I Coys.
RH Sect
Rop MC (Control)
detailed to G.I.
Coys. (Dumps and Depots must conform, and
in the form of Annex 2,
will be handed to
(e)
(f) As
regards tpt deteils -
(1) They will normally be for a complete Ipt Pl.
A.B.158 carried by drivers.
(g)
Coy, admin will be fully detailed on the spot but the following matters
will be included to
tie in with the general NSC working : -
(i) All Ipt PIs will be serially lettered -
59 GT Coy RISC -
905 GT Coy RASC -
and will carry this letter, with the
serial no. of the tpt. detail
on a board on the front lorry of each Pl. when moving.
(ii) GT Coys will report completion of each detail by filling in and sending
by DR to RS Section No.
2 copy of Ipt Detail (Annex 2). which (inter alia)
shows times travelling, witing, loading, unloading; mileages; summary
of loads; discrepancies and queries (if any).
(iii) As far as possible individual Coys and Pls will be confined to particular
types of stores, thus workin, as much as possible between the same
dumps, depots and RHs.
Regard will also be paid to the suitability of different types of
vehicles for different types of stores. These are matters which can
only be settled on the spot.
RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
A (i) Ipt Details issued by Cond. RS Sec will be in triplicate and will be
distributed simultaneously as follows : -
Copy No. 1 GT Coy concerned
2 GT Coy concerned for use of Tpt Pl and return to R$ Sec
on completion of detail.
3 Dump or Depot to be drawn from.
(ii) Action on and disposal of above.
Copy No. 1 Filed by GI Coy in serial no. order, completed with all
details copies from copy No. 2 on completion of detail.
Copy No. 2 Handed to 0. i/c Ipt Pl.
Filled in by the latter with appropriate details and
signatures as the detail progresses.
Countersigned by OC Coy on completion of detail.
Sent by DR imediately on completion of detail to RSSect
with completed copies of A.B. 158 used by R$ Sect in
compilation of returns to Stats sect and in compilation
of tpt statistics.
Filed by RS Sect. separately by Ris, and under RHis in
serial no. order.
Copy No. 3
Serves as demand on the dump ro depot to issue supplies
or stores at a certain date and time.
Retained by dunp or depot and used as they wish.
caps lock
shift
