The company wist move by cond to location
wap Rel. sheet
Weston Park and wall disperce by Platoons Aid.
later to be
detailed upon arrival by o.C.
Inder. of MArch. H.Q, & *G",
- "A"
"p" (workahops.)
verify quantities said to have been despatched. Subject to such verification,
and after being satisfied that the consignee's report indicates a thorough check.
and regular action at the receiving end, the discrepancy report will be
accepted and endorsed as indicated in para 6 Below.®
Thereafter, consignor will
await notification from C.P. Railways Branch, Aldershot, as to the outcome of
claim against the Railway Company and will then deal with write-off as may be
necessary, in accordance with Arny Order 86 of 1942.
5.
• In general, the consignor should accept responsibility for the clearance of
discrepancies. Where, however, the consignee has already given a clear receipt to
the Railway Comany, or has failed to notify them of a discrepancy within the
resbribed time limit, he should not ssue a discrepancy report but should, firstly,
form the consignor of the circumstances by letter (in case the latter may be aole
admit the discrepancy after verifying his records), secondly, clear the consignor's
ue Vouchers, and finally, take write-off action in accordance with Army Order 86
942. If, as a result of thefirst action, the consignor does in fact admit a
epancy, correction will be made by passing an adjusting Issue Voucher with a
explanation endorsed thereon.
iscrepancy reports (A. F. G. 783) will be accepted at once by the consignor, and in
umstances will they be held up pending the outcome of claims outstanding
the Railway Company. They will be endorsed "accepted and admitted" or
L but not admitted," followed by a brief note of the adjusting action being
Ly, where discrepancies are found in spite of the fact that seals of trucks
on arrival at consignee's end, the O.C. at either end should regard
s being for his personal investigation. The reason for this will be
nerally speaking, the discrepancy can only be due to faulty loading/
reparation of documents. It should, therefore, be the rule and not
for an officer personably to supervise loading and offloading of
