•29.
= w
24.
STANDING ORARS.
21. OFFENCES (CONTINUED).
Chergus by caul donor.
scidior mo reocives,
othurwiso than
through his 0.0. a
sunnons issuel be civil court in raspoct of azy sifunco, vill
onco ruport the nattor to tho c.s.hl.
22.
SICK LIPADES.
1I1 N.c.Og and mon wiching to report sick will do so to thuir
Matoon Oriorly Corporal by 0730 nours.
Soperato sick roports
will bo
rondurud to Hot. by och tlatoon.
Lorry loavos for lI.
Room st 0800 hours cally•
lach min vill ba in possuasion of
Stocl Helnot, Rospirator and enoll kit.
23• WIL.
Tho address of the Unit is -
905 Gonoral Transport Coy RoiaS.Co-
"Clarunont",
Sandforth Rosa,
Wost Dorky,
Livorp001.12.
Io raciliteto aorting of nil into Zlstoons for distribution
N.6.0's and mon are raquostod to ada nano or lottor of thoix
I'latoon
to the abovo address.
Máil vill ba
oolloctod fron Crof.0. by tho l'ost Corporal, sorted
by lIntoons, ant hended to ¿'itoon Corporals for distribution
at noel. times.
- IND
The following safety precautions will be strictly
observed :-
(a) airlos will only be lordod by order of en Orricer, or to
with the onomy.
When rilles tro loadod nagnainas only will be chorged, and
no round flood the hroach.
(e) anirios will not lucd: round into tho broach until thoy
havo challengod three tinos, or unless they are actually
(a) Riflos and ofter pens vill bo insrocted by en officor or
M.G.0. boloro and attor evary perado.
(a) Bovolvors vali only ba locted won carrica on the person.
at all othor tines they vili be uloaded.
(5) Orricura betron will on no account handle loaded revolvors.
VEHICLES.
(a) Enching - Smoking or galad lights in the vicinity of
vohiclos in prohibitod.
vithout a signed authority, from ilntoon Officer or Sergoant.
(Suo Vone Miogets para. 5 bolow).
Rory driver o1 8. Do vehicle must bo in possession of the
Polloving :~
1. ..F..
2038 - Idontification Card.
2. sonid at Report. (oF.4.3676) •
3. Standine Orders Ior Drivors.
4. Copy of the Highway Code.
5. Work Ticket (do2.G. 2518) auly Pillod in and authorised.
6. Vohialu Los Book (1B.212) - will be kept in ilatoon
ortice oxcopt when the vehiclo is on detail or it is
requirol for the drivor i/e for other purposes, i.o.
maintomne., onco
1le soon Borpcante wiil oneuro that the above order in
atrictly onforced.
In cose of breakdom, drivers will innociatoly
contech thoir letoon Otteor, and mar having boen notiiiod
estatenee Au boing sont, thoy vill on no socount nove from
thoir portion until such assistance arrivos.
(a) Orders. Drivors will not tole ordors for driving details
For oftions othor then those in this unit, without first
notoring the attor to thoir iictoon or Corpany Hoos.
(a) Spood Jit. intil wether notico, the spock limit in tho
