peroentage sparo,
It is essontial
that the syston be worked on
ot tho
so that in, effeat it
or hisassistant driver
his vohiclo
tho prinoiplo
This principle has been'punc
equipment is maintainca.
not only in tho army but in civil lifo,
to be tho only
onsures a vohicle being proporly
facilitios for ropair that
shortago of vohicles
may be expectod, this maintonanco aspect
of vital importance.
voniclos and a pool of
Any system which envisagos a pool
for which they have
drivers so
no responsibility is foredoned to failure.,
the initial stages while formations are concentrated with-
In a bridgehead area maintenance will be direct fron temporart is
depots using the normal
formation transport echelons.
probable that during this static period second line transport will
and if cirgumstancos permit,
first line may also
be used if it
organised so that, supplies, stores, etc. are
drawn in bulk for formations.
I of c and ROADHEAD.:
Before any operation wich will culminato in a considerable
advance is undertaken, stocks af supplios and stores of all
descriptions likely to be required must be established as far
forward as possible.
This collection of aunps or temporary
depots becomes in effect a modified Advanced Base....
Advanced Bases would be established undor the general
airection of G.H.Q. on the scale of one per, Army.
The control
and the detail work in building up the stocks may be delegatod to
Army Headquarters:
The Advancod Base would cover a considerable
area and for its organization and local administration the
provision of a headquarters I of C Sub-Area would be necessary.
Tho staffs required for the various dumps or dopots, together
with the necessary pioneer labour must also be allotted by
If the bridgehead is shallow the distancos from the
temporary base depots to a perimeter may be so snall that it
would not be worth while setting up the Advanced Base
organization.
In, such a case formations would continuc. to
draw from temporary base depots when the advance proceeds.
The normal. form of transport used for stocking, the Advancea
Base will be I of C General Transport Coys, probably equipped with
10-ton lorries, but in the carly stages when the shortage of
transport is acute it may be nacessary to employ. formation
transport. Third line, and even second lino, if it is not
being used for the day to day maintenanco of formations, can be
utilised.
If these echelons aro used they must revert to their
formations in sufficient time to be rested and ready in every
respect to carry out their normal duties before operations start.
field formations.
The Advanced Base thus formed is the source of supply of
od railhead, riverhead or roadhoad, according to the form of
It is the head of the L of C and may be term-
transport used to build it up and maintain it.
it is referred to hereafter as "roadhead".
In this paper
It will contain
supplies of all natures for sovoral doys and in its neighbourhood
may be grouped such units as Mobilo Bakeries.
pack trains, or by bulk delivory.
Stocks will be
maintainod oithor by formation pack dolivories, corresponding to
Tho roadhead will only be
moved. forword by rolativaly largo bounds (c.g.100-150 miles).
oporations, and may even be the causo of it.
Such a movement would probably coincide with a pause in the
