7/ 2р к/ [
1679
645 Lup Beecee
(1) Bach driver will report to the duty or task allotted to him with his vehiole immediatoly
etch will do te
the Order from either
whistlin
a Detes let toon of the Platoon
Sergeant.
(2) It is imperative that each men uses his own initiative on being ordered to his
particular job,
so that each mans
work synchronises with the others, in order that as
much time be saved as in possible, Lime la of vital importance, Think fast and work fast.
Drivers 1/c Vehicles will ensure that their petrol tanke are at alll times filled, no
engine will be lacking in maintenance, oil level will be checked daily, tyres, canopy.
checked daily, unless these rules are complied with it is
impossible for the movement to take place with success.
(4) After each vehicle has been loaded the driver will fall in the Convoy in his allotted
place, he will on no account leave his vehicle without instructions, and then only
when relieved by another driver.
(5) One N.C.0. and three men litailed will be responsible for seeing that all kits and
Blankets are packed and put on the lorry allotted for same.
(6) If Convoy halte for any period of time after moving off,
the driver of first vehicle
and rear vehicle of platoon will stand down from his vehicle and take over traffic
control on the opposite side of the road to the Convoy.
If during the Convoy you have to fall out through mechanicle trouble, immediately
notify the D.R. patrolling the Convoy, if the trouble is easly rectified and having
done same, you will then proceed forward to your previous place in the Convoy, again
D.R. that everything is in order, its important that the D.R. is contacted
as stated above, so that the Convy Commander is kept aware of Casualties, if the
trouble is serious you will contact the Workshops Breakdown Vehicle at the rear of
the rear D.R. travelling with W/S will go forward to your Convoy
Cormander and notify him to the extent of casualty.
(8)
All tilts will be tied down secure, and tail boards secured with pins for same, all
O. Ros riding in the back of vehicles will not sit on the tail board.
(9) During the Convoy great notice will be taken of the D.R's patrolling the Convoy, they
receive their instructions from the Convoy Commander, and these orders must be strictly
adhered
(10) Distances may change during the Convoy, and if you are given instructions to change
distance act immediatly, always give hand signals to the vehicle behind you, only
by working together will you get a successfull Convoy•
(11)
Mc/1388/4 d/4 20 2448 on file %/.8
are bares pa Standing order (bas) par k0, Plation
y are to be clapica po
white Campany, detailu
вири
17 / mac ts.
