z ilst
0. 1/0
"29
Gr
2:
The
6586
det;
BARTLLING I.
ORDERV ZION AD CONCIMTI JIVE.
toldoraft is the uso of notuml cover and conditions in conjuration with t
It is the art of the huntor who has to
novement and the e-ployment of weapons".
outwit has quamy and if ho fails he ney lose his om life.
To pover of sodom treapons has increesce the tactical importance of tround.
vety little maulation end. Pold Is now of importanco, ane. mon must loam
to get
the nazi un valuo from ground on their on iniative.
the
must use ground. not
gave thomselves covor, but also to enable
then to use troir weapons to
only to
the groatest advontage.
The uso of ground is not a natural instinct to nost
men as it is with wila
carciul training is essential.
The
I.
Forsonal Concoalmont.
To face and hands show up nore cloarly than the rest of the body:,
Therefore,
the outline of tao cace Any
a branch or bunch of grass shoula be used to blot out.
Onourlago point or nua are very effoctive in concealing the face and hands.
equipnent that nay rattlo at nigit nust be secured. .
2. Movenont.
Stillness is the ossance of concoalment...
There must be no suddon movement
which catches the eye of an observer,
Slow gracual novement,
Rapid movement
may be better whan crossing a gap.
Caps must be crossed as a scotion, not by
nen singly folloving cach other to be picked off one by one.
Thon a position
is loft ten should badt off it slowly, i.o.
"Padd' away!.
'Freczing" is one of
tho first natural instincts employed by onimals
or concealnunt.
Iny mowenent
within a location should bo under dover to avoid air observation.
3. Hovenont at Night.
lovement at night by Patrols should be lept to the lor lying ground as far
as possible to avoid skylines and
io got the oneny silhouetted against the sly.
Then a non fires a round at night ho should at once jump to tho right or leit
as the enemy will fire back at the muzzle flash.
with coughs.
Silent novement. The Ghost walk and cat crawl.
No: rattling equipmont or non
4a Isolated Covor.
There id great danger in occupying isolated and obvious cover.
to ring down fire on.
It is
only covor from view and provides an casy target for the chony section comiendor
5. Iuportanco of Background and Shadow.
Background is cover.
Tone in with background.
Use of shadow.
providos concealment froin the air. Keep well bac. in the shadow.
6. Folds in the Ground
Shadow
to the observer.
Folds in the ground ofton offer the bost cover frou vie being less obvious
7. Brokon Ground,
It is moro difficult to locato a man in brokon cover than thon ine breaks a
lion should look round and not ovor cover.
Points for observer to note.
a) Object is to sec without being seon.
3) ways try to imagine the viow the gnomy has.
a) Look round objects and not over.
c) Avoid skyline, silhouctting and sudden movement.
Select coreful background and shadow,
1) Well back fron cover hother bushes or buildings.
Soarch ground systentically frou might to left, foreground, ziddlo distoung, backe
