200 8, con to alon
She 1036
to sedat at no get to d
serenancy repart will'oo
Mereafter, cotsignor will
rsiot, as to the dutcare of
2 vita write-at? as may be
→ for the clearance of
iren a clear receipt to
panoy within the
i bat shoald, Pirstly,
• latter may be aole
clear the consignor's
ith Lony Order 06
fact adrit a
ucher with a
signor, and in
ding
1 being
trucks
1711305
18SSAE
Saby 6112925 12-49:13)
Goose sous Oven
C9/02S6 124813
APER OLICION ND SUTROSINE LICENS OF DAOD.
to worle to an accoptod
montal vill bo in tho folloing
Gry ACI 67/1942
QUARTER - MASTER CITIRAL.
67. Any Agricultuml soone - Pig and Poultry Kooping by Units
1 Cortain Unite have contmvenod the "Livostock (Roatstation on
whereby no person shall slaughter
thom, and ary Unit wiahing to start
Comand Aerioul tural officor
svil1 and have suitable acconodation
poul try-cooping.
for the keuping of the stocke
4a Special considoration, hovovor, will bo givon to applications fron
very anall and isolated units whlon desire to koup anall numbors of
pige or poultry. The Camani Agricultural Officor w117 bo consulted
rugarding the provision of meal for such applicants and units concerned
will be advisua aocordingly. No olarge on publio funds will bo pomittod.
So Whon a Unit maices application to the Comnand Agricultuml Officer for
authority to sell its own pigo, and expresses a desire to retain some or
all of the poric for its omn consumption, pomission to do so will only
be given on the striat understanding that the quantity so retained for
will be borne by unit funds. Units given authority to retain pork for
consumption will endorso the relevant ration indent with the enount of the
poric so rutainod, quoting this A.C. T. Tho Officor 1/c. Supplies will roduce
the noral meat entitlement accordingly, and koop a record of the anount
of pork rutainod by the unit, in order to bo able to comply with para. 6
below.
6. At tho ond of tho messing portod a crealt vouchor (1. 3. 0. 1630) wil). be
prepared by the 0.1/co
Supplias concerned, showing the none of the
and tho total quantity of pori: consumed during the period. The vo
the pork will do onlounted at the cheapest rate g
to comanda fron timo to time. The amount Lavolv
to the unit concerned by the Comand. Paymaster®
7 Units permitted to keep poultry will unsu
for eze production and not for fattering pu
sod
Ba lias offic lotter 53/Conoral/6253 (
by Unite"), le hureby concollode
