Ejela General Court Martial.
Compositich
subject to the exigencies ef the
Service (R.P. 107) there nust be not less then three officers of when the
President will be of Field rank, if available.
111 nembers should be officers
who have held comissions for not less than a year and if available officers
of not less than three years stardin? w.
.. appointed. R.P. 106 (as anended) •
PowLes.
do ry all ranks for any offence
(except treason, treason-felony, nurder, nans aughter and rape when connitted
in the U.K.) and to inpose any of une punishments detailed in A.a., Sec 44,
subject to the maximum prescribed for particular effences.
If twe nembers
only, then the Court cannot impose death e. penal servitude.
Guidance as tc
appropriate sentences is given in K.R. 681213 ana, subject to the requirements
of discipline, such sentences should be laght
The machinery for trial by F.G.O.M. is intended to simplify trial on
active service as far as is compatible with justice and may be nodified to suit
conditions in the Field (RoP. 121).
22.
PROCEDURE AT COURES-MARITAL.
After certain preliminaries the Court will nornally be open to the public..
The accused will be askel te plead "guilty" or "nct guilty" co the charge.
If he pleads "grilty" no, evidence as to facts need be called, the character
of the accused will be irvestigated, and the Court closed for consideration
of sentence.
"Inis will not be disclosed until after confination by superior
authority, i.e. generally the convening oreiger er in certain cases the
G.O. 0. -in-c. .
In the plea is not guilty
tre pincedure is as fcllows: -
Prosecuter nakes opening speech.
First witness sworn (A.A. Sec 52).
Prosecutor eranines first witness (evidence in chief - no leading questions.
Defending officer, Counsel or accused orces-examines.
Prosecutor re-exanines.
Renaining witnesses for prosecution foller as above.
Speeches and/or evidence for the delunce then fellow in the crder
prescribed by RI. 40 and 41 according te canticular circunstances.
Witnesses for the Defence will bu trained, cross-exanined and re-exanined
in the same way as witnesses iot
so ercepeation.
Plosecutor vll "have the las nort:
ti annesses as to facts (cther than
the accused) have been called for the de ence.
Court closes to conside: fading-
If "not guilty" then Court re-pens
and finding ansounced.
If "guilty" Court re-opons and evidence as tc
character given,
inceedings forwarded to confirming officer.
23.
DUTIES OF PROSECUTOR AND DEPENDING OFFICUR.
The Presecutor must be scrupulously fair.
7.. R. 674 and R.P. 60.
The Deferding Officez nas (R.F. 87) the sane rights and duties as Counsel
eog., must not express his own opinion (R.P, 92 (a)).
24 SUSPENSTON AND FEVER OF C.M. SEINERNCES.
See A.do Sees 57 and 57A.
A. C.I: 2178 of 1941 and 374 of 1942.
INCTURE 6.
25. PRINCIPAL RIGHTS OF
ACCUSED.
(a) On Warning te appear
To be inforned of the chars
(b)
On Arrest.
Сору доГ. 3252:
Identity of person charging hin.
Release without prejudice te re-arrest if no A.F. B.252 cr ther
evidence within 42 heer.
Investigation at earliest emortu.s
nernally within 24 hours,
special repert to c.0.C. if none within 48 hours (R.P. 2.)
(c) un Envestigation.
Before 0-0. Sub-Unit or C.O.
To: - (i) Insist on......
B.E.F.
h
lier,
1).
LC -
vhole
Lng
al)
ot
ir
27
the
1 the
ee
anj
