N
1679
1/2025 12:49:13)
duan)
3.
en
12:49:13
1/
References: -
B.105.0., 0.0... (202) :
TRAINING SCHOOL.
ORGAVISATION OF THE R.A.S.C.
R.a.S.C. Training Panphlets Nos. 2 & 5.
LECTURIS 1•
1. Object of Lecture.
Te introduce the work and organisation of the R.n.s.C.
2. History:
The R.h.S.C. is a conbatant Corps with an interesting and traditional
background.
Its recorde and that of its predecessers,
as outlined in
"A Short History of the R.A.S.C." reveals that nuch good work has been done in i
the past.
In the presentwar speed of novement and increased neans for attack
upon the supply lines and installations cf the
epposing forces, demands an
even higher standard of work and devetion to duty on the part of those wnc
serve the units engaged in the actual fighting.
as in any ether arn cf the
Service, nuch depends upon the courage, deternination and intelligence of the
junier
Officer.
RoA.S.C. RESPONSIBILITIES.
(a) supplies.
Prcvision, holding and issue cf food, ferage, fuel, light,
disinfecfant and hospital supplies.
The Supply
service is
alse charged with the
provision,holding and issue of petrel,
fuel cil and lubricants for all categeries of I.T. vehicles.
NOTE: - The air linistry is responsible for the provision of
petrol
etc. for aircraft - the R...S.C. nornally for the
holding and issue of sane.
(b) Transport.
Operation, inspection and initial naintenance of all vehicles
in R.a.S.C. units or driven by R.a.S.C. personnel (including
of vehicles) •
NOTE: This applies to a nornal theatre cf war. In cther®
of war the R.a.S.C. nay have further responsibilities
fof exangle,West africa where the R.A.S.C. is alsc
responsible for ist line transport.
Receipt custody and issue of barrack stores, including water,
fuel and light (not active er field operations) •
Protection. R.a.S.C. units are responsible for their own protection at
4.
(o)
(a)
PERSONNEL.
(a)
Officers - are organised on a reginental basis, are inter-changeable and
(b)
de not specialise.
Other Tanks - are organised into two branches, supply and Transport and in
each branch there are tradesnen and non-tradesmen.
Supply Branch, tradesmen: - Butchers, bakers, Clerks.
nen-tradesmen: - issuers.
Transport Branch, tradesmen: - artificers of varicus trades.
non-tradesnen: - drivers.
5. UNITS.
RonS.C. units are divided into twe categeries, supply Units and Iranspert Units
but both are mutually dependent upon cne anther.
Supply Units - deal with supplies, are nestly non-nobile and, in a theatre cf
war, are nernally to be found at the base or on the lines of connunication.
Transport Units - known as "General Transport Conpanies" - carrying and
distributing the arny's requirenents.
Each Company his a nobile workshop
of varying size accoring to the needs of the unit.
The transpert element
in each Company consists of a nunber of Transport 2latcens.
The majority of Units, both Supply and Transport, are named according to the
duties they perforn. e.g• Base supply Lepots,arncured Bde Cey, Troop Carrying
Cey. The name "General Transport Cey" usually refers to a Cenpany which has
/not been
