APER CLICION ID SELECHING LUER OF.
"Approciation is nilitary
inforation,
rovior of the
si suation based on all availablo
aultinatod in a statonant of the ncasures rocormendod to foot it."
In ranor tactics an appreciation is purcly a nonsal considoration of a
problen
frou which a foolproof plan can be produced.
In larger operations a
writton approciation naturally
becones necessary in ordor that none of tho
morous factors are ovorlooked.
In ter under nodom Battlo conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible if tho
and is trained to work to an accepted
sequence of thought.
mittor on mental, vill be in the following
COPI.
SUBJECT: - Detail Issue Stores - Safeguarding Supplies.
NC/811/ST(S)
CONFTDANTIAL
A. D. S.T. East Riding & Lines Disto
O.C. R.A.S.C. North Midland Dist.
West Riding Dist.
Catterick Area•
Northumbrian Area.
1.
D. I. S's as now established in this Command save little short of 1,000,000
vehicle miles and 100,000 gallons of petrol each year. This is an economy that has
serious aspects in that
(a) N.C. Os are frequently i/c D.I. S's and
(b) D. I. S's have to be staffed from existing W.E. So
therefore in some instances throwing an added strain on C.S. D. staffs.
2.
The necessity of (a) above causes large stocks of supplies to be controlled
by N.C. O' so While illicit disposal of supplies has not come to light, having in
view shortage, of certain foodstuffs, there may be a temptation to dispose of, supplies
•incorrectly. The necessity of (b) may make accountancy, stocktaking etc, an
additional burden for personnel concerned.
3.
So that the saving now being effected continues to be carried out with the
greatest efficiency will you please ensure that the following procedure is carried
out forthwith:-
(i)
The 0.C. parent Depot will carry out an inspection of each D. I.S. each week,
during the visit he will check stock.
(ii) Days of issue from D. I. S's will be arranged so that an Officer from the parent
Depot is present during issues.
(iii) Meat for issue arrives at D. I. S's cut up ready for issue to units ie: when
not delivered direct to D.I.S. by Contractor.
(iv) Stocks held at D. I. 's are strictly restricted to a maximum 7 days for strength
concerned except where quantities in excess are authorised by this H. go
(v) The District or Area Supply Officer will inspect each D. I.S. twice each month,
this inspection will be carried out at irregular hrs and on any day between Ist and
15th and 16th and last day of each month, and on each occasion stock will be checked.
(vi) Any abnormal discrepancy discovered at any inspection carried out under (1)
or (v) above will at once be the subject of an immediate investigation Iwo reports
