IN SL DuTC II.
APER OLIZION: IN SIERCING LIE OS DUNTOS.
"Approciation is military rovior of tho
information,
si suation based on all available
culminatod in a statenont of the noasures rocol endod to noot it."
In mánor tactics an oppreciation is purcly a nonsal consideration of a-
In larger operations a
written approciation naturally becozes necessary
tho
nu orous factors are overlooked.
In tar undor nodorn Battle conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible if tho and is trained to troite to an accepted
soquence of thought.
-eton an siental, till bo in the following
Maximan possible notice must be given to the O.C., C.S.D.- concerned, in
order that Petrol remains can be checked and agreed with the Unit. 0.0.,
C. S.D. will give the Unit a clearance on A.F..G. 1033 for Petrol and
Equipnent ete and will advise O.C., RoA.S.C. of equipnent handed over
and the anount of Petrol remaining in the tank. The Petrol will be taken
on charge by C.S. D. pending disposal instrutions.
(iii) It is essential that District/Areas keep 0.C:, R.A. S. C. fully inforned
regarding noves of Units.
3.
(a)
DISPOSAL OF FUMES.
Should a pump be no longer required Unit/Fomation will notify 0.C., R. A.S. C.
District/Area.
(b)
0. C., RoA.S.C. District/area, after confirmation with District/Area Headquarters,
will decide whether or not the pump is likely to be required in near future
and issue instructions accordingly.
9.
(a)
SUPPLIES OF PAIROL, DERV AND GAS OIL.
• Unless otherwise instructed units will obtain sup lies of Betrol and Der for
all noral military purposes, in bulk through pumps requisitioned, hired or
installed by V.D. These pumps will be replenished by the Petroleun Board.
(b)
Gas oil and Derv can be obtained on a barrel for barrel basis in 40 gallon
barrels, when the unit requirements are too small to justify bulk delivery.
( c)
All demands for Petrol, Derv and Gas oil will be made by Units through R. A. S. C.
chamels.
It is the responsibility of the Unit to keep the tanks full and
immediately there is room for 200 gallons this quantity should be demanded.
(a)
Special attention is drawn to A.C.I.s 293 of 1942 and 901 of 1941, regarding
use of fuel for Diesal engines.
(e)
Issues and replenishnents of P. 0.I. will be made in accordance with A.C.I.
921 of 1942 and pamphlet "Mechanical Iransport Vehicle Records, ete" notified
in A.C.I. 1287 of 1942.
(1)
Petrol and Derv in 4 gallon N/R tins, the primary use of which is operational,
may only be issued on authority of Command Headquarters.
10. COASTAL SPINS).
District/Area. Headquarters, when authorising O.C., Ro1.S.C. to requisition or
hire a new pump in this area, will ensure that the special defence considerations
are taken into account.
District/Area Headquarters will give specific instructions as to the maximun
anount of petrol to be held in that pump, both to 0.C., RoA.S.C. and the Unit
concerned.
