ter nuport.
The Howing 1.0. O. was plead in charge of the Salvage Room and
arranged to sond in tho snivage he accumulated there as often as
ho conveniently could to the Salvoge Iransit Contro at
the R.A. S,
Jupply Depot.
For this puryose the lorry which fetched the
mtions was used.
The waste papor was sent in sacks which were
omptiod at the Salvage Transit
Contre and brought back.
Small
Itina such ne lund tubes or brolon oyeshields were packed in one
ut the 7-lb jam tine or other containers being sent in.
b.
On days when the ration lorry was not taking in salvage from the
thu N.C.O. arranged for it to take in the accumulated
inolncinted food tins or the u.r. salvage.
(note: 1. In objection is occasionally raised to the transport
of anlvata in a rtion lorry.
This shows that the objector
confuses salvagy with refuse. There is nothing which should be
aunt in to a Salvage Transit
Centre which could in any way contan-
into a food lorry.
Iven the incinerated tins should not dirty
the lorry if thoy nre sont in at frequest intervals, and not kept
kopt until thay are badly rusted.
tho ration lorry cnn still take
In onbos whore rations aro delivered and not fetched
in the salvage.
If more than one
unit it surved by ond lorry, arrangements should be possible where-
by the lorry nsion the units served last so that all can make use
it the roturn journoy. )
4.
Ivory
blo opportunity as taken of impressing on the men the
acursity. Cor saving everything poscible, or pointing out to them
tha cumintive affect of the small effort of every individual, of
bringing hono to thon illustrations of the many examples of
thoughtloss mate
which could so casily-be avoided, e.g.
unnoavonarily rough handling of cartons or oil drums thereby
nicing then unfit for re-use.
Local artistic talent was enlisted
to crow hunorour posters to illustrate these points.
Once the arrangenonts had bein made and becone routine, results were
achina with rockobly littlo extra trouble for anybody.
Tu pader that every unit gets full credit for its salvage efforts a receipt
should be obtuined for overy consignment of salvage taken by the unit to the
Salvage tronait Centre or Depott
War Office ray nave
Records of these deliveries are kept so that
a complote ploture of how the troops in the various Commends
ondonour to robum the naxin cuentity of snivage to industry.
1. 0. 3/6594/08.
XORL.
ледуя 1912.
Major,
Inspector of Salvage.
Northern Command.
SIT
LHY
CUT.-
