receinte from contraton
& period, for perusal and onward transnission
x "C") will be forwarded to this office as soon
action will, of course, be adjusted seperately
eat receipts book and the stock book. Deficiencies
/c Supplies will personally check the figures or
certificate voucher prepared in accordance with
period will nett surplus or dificiencies be
count (4.F. F. 754).
ill be dealt with in the manner Lan
J2 SUEDORINE LICE OF ADVANCE.
vic of tho situation basod on all availablo
stationt of the nonsures recolmendod to noot it."
reciation is purcly a montal considoration of a:
larger oporations a
of plan can be produced.
becones necessary in ordor that none of the
tlo conditions a nothodical considoration of a
if the and is
trained
to work to an accepted
reference
to Allowance Regulations 1938, para 34, the following
observed:- 1 Iroops in Billets or Hutted Camp.
only in exceptional circunstances will RUM be demanded or issued, e. g•
have become soaked and have no dry change of clothing, and then only
authority of the Conmander of the Division, Area, A.A. Bde, or Independent
concerned, supported by the recommendation of their Senior-Medical Officers.
(b) Cocoa, milk and sugar on the scale laid down in para 53, Allowance Regulations
1938 (1.e. for each pint: Cocoa, 1/4 oz;milk (condensed), 4/5 oz; sugar, ½ oz) may be
issued to those troops who have been subjected to hardship or exposure on the
recommendation of the Senior Medical Officer.
2. Troops under Canvas or in Bivouac
(a) RUM may be issued to individuals who have been subjected to severe exposure
if recommended by the Senior Medical Officer, and approved by the Commander of the
Division, Area, A.A. Bde, or Independent Bde concerned.
(b) Cocoa with milk and sugar may be issued under the same conditions as in 1 (b)
above.
3. Method of Rum Issues
If authorised it will be issued only to those individuals named by an Officer
or Warrant Officer, and such Officer or Warrant Officer will be held responsible
that issues are not made to individuals who have not ben subjected to the conditions
which gave rise to the issue.
NCO 1297. of 1940 is cancelled.
A. C. I. 2311/41 ISSUE OF RUM TO MIMBERS OF THE HOME GUARD
In circumstances where personnel of the Home Guard are taking part in an exercise
or in active operations, as an integral part of a unit or formation of the Regular
Army and an issue of rum (or its non alcoholic equivalents) is authorised for the
latter troops, and is consumed during the course of these operations, an issue may also
be made under the same conditions to the Home Guard Personnel taking part at the
normal scale, viz - 1/64th gallon of rum or one pint of tea or cocoa. Authority for issue
of run or its equivalents) to Home Guard pursonnel under the terms of this A.C.I.
will be vested in the officer approving the issue to the regular troops with whom the
Home Guard personnel are employed. In no circumstances will stocks of rum (or its
equivalents) be held on charge of Home Guard units. Requir ments for occasions of the
nature referred to above will be included in the indents of the Regular Army units
A. C. I. 1777/42.
SCALE OF ISSUE OF RUM
1. Attention is drawn to Allow Regs 1938 paras 34 and 35 as amended by Amends
erned.
(No 44) notified in Arny Order 92 of 1942, where in the scale of issue of rum was
concr
