recognises
that is
must
make
local
author
iseholders
at i
a rould me
meet
• Co
made in these
rice.
6
Scheme.
It is believed that the establishment of such.
would greatly facilitate the work of the billeting offices
explained that householders ne
changes of billets have to be arranged.
work will necessarily fall on th
20. A leaflet has been prepared for distribution to y
are reminded of their compulso
holders inviting them to notify the local authority that thp
the Government that these por
their names to be included in this roll.
A copy of this
voluntary response is insufficien
is appended to this Memorandum (Appendix A) and as
tion.
Whilst many householder
of them will shortly be sent to the Council. Arrangement)
to receiving children, the Governi
been made with the Post Office to deliver the leaflets b
general opinion behind them in er
will not absolve a householder
charge and unaddressed. Attached to each leaflet is a fo
obligation.
enrolment bearing the imprint " Official Paid " denoti
24. The local authority will
prepayment of postage, which is to be torn off and retur
arrangements for keeping the ro
the local authority by the householder. Before the leafe
name and address of each member.
delivered to the post office it will be necessary for thei
refuses without good reason to rec
authority to arrange to have printed or stamped on the bat
be removed from the roll. Person
the form the complete postal address to which they wish it
children are entitled to have their na
returned. The Post Office will not accept the leaflets for disti
should, in due course, be informed
tion until this has been done.
it will be appreciated if this informat
The leaflets will be sent to
the County Council and Senior Reg
local authority unfolded to facilitate the printing of the ad
Before being sent to the postal authorities they should be lit
25. This mobilisation of the billetin
lation of the community effort will 1
in four. No doubt this will normally be done by the printer,
success in coping with children who ha
in so far as the local authority may find it necessary to che
to the district.
It will also help in th
additional staff for the work the cost may be charge to i
tional billets as must from time to time
evacuation account.
administration of the present scheme.
2.I. The local authority should consult with the head p
be a certain amount of movement, e.g:,
master for the district who will indicate the offices to wit
leaving an elementary school in one dist:
bulk supplies of the document should be sent. It wil be nat
in another district, for which provision
sace for the authority to inform the head postmaster, by it.
in the receiving districts. It may be tha
enice to specific streets or well-defined boundaries, of the t
evacuating areas, as a result of the rest
Within which the delivery should be made. Every effort in,
education or for some other reason, in w
be made to ensure that the bulk supplies of the leaflet are
the hands of the postal authorities for distribution not later the
sary to offer to individual parents a fr
having their children evacuated to a recei
the end of February.
arrangements can be made.
22. It is suggested that where no reply is received in respon
26. In all such cases the evacuating
with the billeting and education authorities
in order that the
readily be made.
necessary arrangements
advance, and the Minister hopes that such
Evacuation of School Children in event
27. As indicated in the Circular with which
each other in a task that has been laid on the diatrint 951
whole. It does not follow that because a householder consens
to the inclusion of his name in the roll he will immediately bi
asked to receive children.
share of the work in turn with his neighbours.
He will only be liable to take
It should alsa be
is enclosed, further plans for large-scale evacl
are only to be put into operation when the G
that, in view of the development of air raids on
make this course necessary.
Advance notice
will be given to local billeting and education
3. Number and sex of
billeted
4. Number
