- 7 -
romin untal simallod from the shore to bring thom in.
All drivers had boon warnod that a 3/4 knot curront was known to bo running
• on this gort of the coast and tho consoquant troubles that thore vora likoly to bo
with stecring, woathor etc.
PART VI.
The Assault.
'D' day - 6 JUNE 44 - approxing toly 1200 hrs.,
Wo had a grandstand viow of the whold procoding and I am quito certain that
no ono was even tho sli htest bit approhonsivo.
The latest information as to how
tho Assault was progrossin was givon to me from the bridge - this was passod on
to all ranks - "3 Div had minod thoir first objoctive" - then tho
thunder of tho
guns from our battloships - then to our astonishmont,
a couple of shells quite near
our own IS (one of which dropped vory close to one
of our Drakes) from one
Hun shore battorios but no uno oron soom to mind this or to take vory much notice.
At this tine, approximtely 1130 hrs, wo ore botwoon 3 and 4 miles
tho woather was fino but a hoavy soa running - much hoavier then wo had ovor pract-
isod in. - tho Flotilla Cormandor callca mo to tho Bridgo and told me wo were to be
I do not think any of us had imaginod such a long run in,
with such a soa running.,
that those wore
Admiral's ordors, as it
was not safo for the ISIs to co in closor, wing to the nitention from the onomy's
shoro batterios.
ho DUKWs wore mannce having boon startod up and run for approximatoly 1!
inutes) and drivors oriored that they would not icave the ship-axcapt by ordo
of thoir Platoon Commander hanI had arranged to simal aftor tostin, tho vator.
The doors toro oponod! ani tho ramps loworod - the son at this time was washing
richt into the Tank Dock,
and I must say that I me moro than a little norvous
to whothor tho DUKV as coing to ston up to
this bashing conscoring the load it
was carrying.
• The take-ofi was porfoct and wa entered the sea at approximately
12 noon (H + 42).
It wns oxtromoly rough but in spite of this and although we
shippod. a cortain anount u walotin ordor for
the DUKY tuB nagnificent.
11ttlc thon, finding that it was
the other DUKWs to commence to off-
wo siralled to the thur craft anc. to tho Drakos to start off-loading and
narshalling all other DUK's.
We wore thon approximatoly 3z milos from the shore,
and at this distanco,
duc to the smoko of the battlo,
from our ships and from burn-
littlo difricult to pick out the land marks we had momorized
cross current ins more then a littlo tricky and it was necessary to
bo constantly 'tacking! to kiop on a courso. -
By this timo we wore thoroughly wot
through with spray and with tho waves broaking over the DUKW but my admiration of
tho machino increasod ovory mile wo wont.
It was woll down in tho wator but far
more sca-worthy than a lot of birror craft.
On tho run in I saw tho work of
marshalling the DUKWs from thoir IS's procooding necording to plan.
big ships giving birth to a lot of littlc ships
and was roally an amazing siht.
DUKs ovorywhero milliny, round, rondy and awniting ordors.
We touched down on QUEEN GREEN Boach only to find that wo wore too far Vost.
Wo had an exciting fow moments koaping our DUKW cloar of an ICT which had broached
to' ond was swinging,
and also to avoid a largo Tetrahedron.
The tide and tho surf
made the passago extremely difficult.
Wo drove the DUKW down to QUEEN RED Bench whoro,
a suitablo oxit.
oftor reconnaissance,
Wo mot Init of our rodoo party who had Inniod at H + 3 and
orocted our DUKV Control Sign.
Having found 101 Beach Sub Iron Command Post and roportad to Commnndor, I
contacted Major Taylor of this IQ who hac landed at H + 4.
work of rotting the DUds ashoro.
He and I startod tho
The boach uns a most unhoalthy place as to
voro bein hoavily mortarce and in adattion, minor battles wore bein? fought from
nearby housos and snipors vero still busy.
end with & few lapses in
which to trio cover (onco undor a beachod ICT fillod vith armunition),
wore pickod up by the DUkilc which waro then lying about 1 mile: off shore.
first betch led in by tho Platoon Commandor (Liout. Holmn finnlly touchod dowm
on QUEEN GREEN Bonch and hai. to bo diroctod along; tho bench to QUEEN RED.
