12:49:13
25 12:49:13)
z co
Conditions for Soldiers serving on Regular Normal Engagements
granted to soldiers now serving
33. The terms under which emergency combatant commissions will be
including army reservists recalled to the colours, are as follows eng
Regular
warrant
officers
pre-war regular engagements,
other
commissions in the
missioned in the rank of second-lieutenant.
emergency
combatant arms of the Service will be com-
service reckonable for
Article 111, to the rank of lieutenant,
under the Pay
If they have sufficient
Warrant, 1940,
they will be promoted to
war-substantive lieutenant in War Office Orders with effect from the
date of their first commission. In the case of commissions in other
the arm concerned.
arms, the initial rank granted will be that which is customary in
Officers commissioned under this authority who have sufficient
a leutenant.
reckonable service may draw the higher rate of pay laid down for
For the purpose of seniority, officers commissioned under this
authority will become junior in their rank and this will not be
affected by the fact that they may be eligible for the higher rate of
pay for lieutenant.
Officers of this category who before being granted emergency com-
missions under this authority had elected to draw pension under the
Pay Warrant, 1940, Article 1116 (see A.C.I, 733 of 1941) or who elect
to receive pension, if eligible to do so, when discharged to a com-
mission, will be dealt with as provided in the Pay Warrant, 1940,
Article 635, i.e. they will draw their pensions in addition to pay as
officers and not be eligible on the relinquishment of their
missions for the gratuities or retired pay laid down in the Pay
Warrant, 1940, Article 634, as modified by
the Royal Warrant
dated 7th February, 1941 (Army Order 20 of 1941).
Other officers of this category will, on the termination of the emergency,
be eligible to apply for appointment to permanent commissions on
terms which will be announced later.
commissions they will be dealt with as laid down in King's Regu-
lations, 1940, Appendix XXVI, i.e. they will be granted any gratuity
or retired pay to which they may be entitled under the Pay Warrant,
1940, Article 634, as modified by the Royal Warrant dated 7th
February, 1941 (Army Order 20 of 1941), or, alternatively, they may
apply to return to the ranks if they satisfy the conditions laid down
in the Appendix.
Reconsideration of rejected potential officers
34. A candidate who is rejected as unsuitable by a War Office Selection
Board, or returned to his unit after a period of training at an O.C.T.U., may
be reconsidered for a commission after a period of three months. Applications
for the reconsideration of such candidates will be submitted on a fresh A.F.
B 2617 which will be accompanied by a statement from the C.O. supporting
his recommendation for reconsideration.
If a C.O. finds cause to withdraw a candidate from the waiting list of
those approved for training at an O.C.T.U., he will notify the War Office
(A.G.1.E.) stating the reasons.
An entry will be made in the unit's Part II
Orders to give effect to this decision and the entry in A.F. B 64 will be cancelled.
12
Transfer of candidates between units at home or by posting
candidate is transferred or posted to another unit
interview by a War Office Selection Board has been carried out, A.F.B 2617
accompanied by A F. B 2624, will before atten to he new it and i pleted
If transfer or posting takes
to the War Office,
the War Stake (place at) the enticion of A.F.
36.
When a unit is ordered overseas to a locality where facilities for officer
cadet training exist in a particular arm, mobilization orders will state which
candidates will proceed with the unit and which will be posted to home details.
On the date on
which a unit completes mobilization for overseas,
the O.C
will notify the War Office (A.G.1.E.) of the names of potential officers for whom
A.Fs. B 2617 have been submitted and who will proceed overseas with the
The unit embarkation roll (A.F. W 5169) when completed will show
" Recommended for O.C.T.U." in the right-hand column of Section III against
the names of other ranks for whom A.F.
B 2617 have been submitted.
Potential
officers will not be included in drafts sent overseas as reinforcements.
37. Other ranks in training and holding units who have been selected as
potential officers other than
those posted or attached by the War Office
(A.G.1.E.) for " pre-O.C.T.U." training will, after acceptance by a War Office
Board, and completion of recruit training, be available for posting to a field
Part II orders showing the posting of such other ranks will state
that they are potential officers and the date of submission of A.F. B 2617 to
the War Office.
Posting to field force units will be notified to the War Office
Potential officers not required to be interviewed
by a War Office Board will be similarly made available for posting to field
Potential officers overseas
38. Potential officers for training at O.C.T.Us. in India will be selected
under separate instructions. At other stations overseas where facilities exist
of cadets, their selection will be carried
under local
instructions which will conform in principle to the procedure laid down in this
Candidates serving overseas,
who cannot be accepted for training at
O.C.T.Us. locally, will be reported to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) by telegram
showing choice of arm, grading and, where applicable, technical qualifications
(see para. 19).
Instructions for the disposal of such candidates will then
be issued. Those returned to the United Kingdom will be despatched to units
shown in Appendix J and their arrival reported to the War Office (A.G.1.E.)
and O.i/c. records by the units concerned. A.F. B 2617 will be prepared for
candidates before return to the United Kingdom, and will accompany
It will be completed except for birth and character certificates, which candidates
will produce after their arrival.
13
