OPERATION OVERLORD
HQ CRASC 21 TRANSPORT COLUMN
Document dictated by Lt Col HE Hopcroft, Commander 101 Beach Sub Area R.A.S.C.,
to Sergeant Richard Percival Pope Army No. S/14332109 (Sergeant Clerk) detailing
Training, Planning, Assault and subsequent activities.
Landed on Sword Beach, Red (La Breche, Hermanville). Landing badge Red Anchor on blue
background.
is now known, this was oventully dono by including, a Chast wiTn
conmend end control all RASC within the Beach Groups.
Many oxporiments vero carried out as to the correct method of working,
an now sure that the way ours ins split up was practical,
and worked smoothly ani
efficiently.
I may say thet in tho only storos thoro ins considerablo opposition
fron both Sub dron and Touch Group Commandors on the manner in which wo were to
and it uns only ritor consultation with DST (Cricadior CLOVER) and DDST (Col.
TESWICK), 21 Army Group thine an orlor was issuod by Ngh shovin; exctly how this
would be dono..
In the owly staros of trainin, it wes novor. roalisod how muon thi Rese-meant
to tho show as a holo - it was dirficult to mio the othor Arns undorstand that
Bonch Sub Arons and Borol Groups voro an Administrative urgenization,
Icast 70% of the wholo shor was on RiSC problon. Furth rmorc,
that the CRASC had,
the bingons commund in the whole set up.
The ROUNDABOUT Exorciscs wore
god valuo no thoy cave us the opportunity of training DUW drivers,
and also gave
us all opportunities of stulying tho lay-out of tho tik - it wes a pity that moro
tine was not spont on Prenshipent roas and sone proper rulos evolvod,
the tino camc for sottin: theso up,
thoro sooned littlo
coordination of thoght.
TEAPYCAR and FACIUS wore both oxcellont
oxercises and gave DUKW and GT Coy
drivers first class training end,
in addition,
the GT Coy ns able to practise
waterproofing which ovontually stood thom in very good stoad.
lost on thu actunl landing, due to this causo.
CROWN and. ANCHOR (both Inding
oxercises) voro good value shoving, the concestion on the benchos in an Assault
For 101 Barch Sub Arca our mothod of working was to attich one Captain, chown
as tho S& I roprosontativo with one Clork und ono Motor Cyclist to anch Ponch
This officor notod in mny rospocts as a BRIsCO,
Tho systom was found
to bo invaluablo,
and I was fortunto in having two first rato officors to do
Doth Beach Group Commandors artorwards statod. that they not only did
a first rate job but thet they vould havd had considorablo difficulty
Thuy denlt with all Transport ad Supply mtters within tho
Boach Group and ns these word onch ovor 4,000 strong with Navy, Amy end Air Forco
units undor commend, it vill be roclinod that those officors had no oasy tesk.
They also understudion tho Stuff Captain nt Douch Group H so that thoy wore at
nil tines, vury nuch in ovidenco in the Barch Group or miantion.
In addition to comnanding, all RASC units, the CRASC notod as S & I Advisor
to the Sub Aron Commandor.
In the casc of tho Potrol Depots and DIDs,
Group Commendors woro responsible for thum on Inning and
also for their sctting ui
and ourly operntion.
This compromisc ins agrood and vorked quito antisfoctorily.
They vere, after tho innedinto Issult phrac, the rosponsibility of CRASC.
DUst trining ns not vithout its ditricultios, owing to the supply position
of! the DUK/s,
but wo wore fortunato in hoving sufficiunt
to do a numbor of
nicht exorcisco in rolly rough worther which mide
the mon confident
