COLIN TRAINLIE HEMORANDU:.
NO. 1:
9/52 1-
Cho detail requirod the clourance of 10,000 amply degal taturolo
potrol core from HARSTON to ROYSTON Pet. Depot.
Onto 2l of
ompiogod.
Tho p1 crived ut HARSTON and corenced loading by sections.
That
Cond sot out with it for 201970
necompaniod by his L/sjt.
tro 21rot soction vas loadodhis lod at once to lnck of control at tito
londing point.
C130 2-
Tho 17. Cond should not ronain tied to hia vohiclos.
no chould have soon that the organisation at the loading point an actin-
inctory and vorl procouding smoothly, have givon hia Sjt a RaV. pouctioza
short o2 ROTATON und gone
the dolivery aron prior to
the arrival of tho first soction.
Ho might thon have not tho firat
lod if his Sjo,
at tho R.V., guided it to tho offlonding point,
and ensurod that offloading procooded smoothly.
No mould thon havo
handod over thin oporation to his Sjt and roturnod down the route to
and march discipline and to ensure that thore /mos
the loading ond.
This is ono altornativo only;
organisation and control.
butho job of the ll Cond Lo touco,
Ho should not rogard himsolf moroly as a
column loader and ho MJST mako the utmost uso of his M.C. 0s.
Duzing the semo dotail a drivor was injured by a falling
potzol can and roquirod modical attontion.
This wos not rondily
ablo as tho only vohiclos
to hand wore tho E
= toak vohicioa.
7l. Coma had come on his motor cyclo,
Iuckily, a V.Da our bagasave to
bo ut tho loen and tho injurod man tas takon for modical atontion in
chia.
As a rosult of this accidont the Pl Sjt had to buko ovor n
voh and deivo it bacis to 7l loon with hia motor cycic loadod innido it.
no no coliof avra had como out with the pl.
This lod to lack: of coln
control.
4080012.
(a)
Trough it is ossontial that all offro are thoroughly pruct-
icod in motor eyclo riding, it is by no moon nocessay that toy invaa
inbly do so.
It in sug ostod in fact, that whon on oporation
doteila which boho out a cholo pi, tho
Pl. Cond should rido in his co,
2 atr, particularly if a long run is involvod. Ho can, mhon nocos wry,
borzon a notor cycle fron ono of the soctions and in tho evont cr
incidonta like tho ono doscribod bovo wrining, the cur, 2 str, in
imodiatoly availablo.
Ao statod above, tho pl. conde jub is rocco,
organisation and control.
Ho wili not bo 100% fit to cary out those
dubios if at tho ond of a long trip ho is tirod, frozen and wot, an a
coult of moving up and down the coln all day on hia motor cyclo.
chould not, on the other hond, ride in his our throughout, but uhnnge
ovor: to a notor cyclo tron timo to timo to chock M.I.2. H and convoy
control ne roquired.
408202.
On all nomal oporational dotrils, a proportion of rolior
deivoca- suy one por coction - should acconpany the pins an ¿neuraneo
against battlo caqualtaos.
at tho vhool of a lorry.
An N.C.O, connot carry out his job progoziy
Knobnozthe
25
Cots 43.
MiLD DID.
(Signed) J. Chapman.
Commending. No.20.1 of C. Tpt, Coln. R. 4,3.0.
156.
RLS.
