Check the closing entries, entrica of ptocks, oto.
soo thut all income that ahould have been received,
including intorest on invostments, has actually been
brought to account.
(vil) Seo that all knom expenses have beon included.
(b) Rumente - Ensure that all payments ure aupportod by vouchers
and cronino all vouchers, paying attention to the following points: -
The nato of the porson to hon the vouchor is addreased.
and whothor it is n original
Tho dato of tho voucher,
1.c. do not rathout proper emplonation, accept
an "e/c rendered" bill.
Unothor properly rocuiptod and, if nocoanary, stamped.
The naturo of the paytient.
The account to which
tho item is charged.
That the bill lo a reasonable and propor chargo aginat
the alc concomod, and does not represent an irregular
mons of adjusting an error or omission in a "public" a/c.
Each voucher, md its ruceipt if on a acarto slin, should be con-
ácuoualy concolled shon pared, to provent tho same documents.'
boing produced. on a, subsement occusion.
1o) go on.
Roc polen ao fat-ad practicublo, c.g. with rogisters or
correspondence.
soo thit amounts uro creditod to the
correct accounte.
(11)
See thut the cash is at all times reducod to a minimum
by trinster to the bank, and ascertain the ronsons for
any deluy in paying in receipts.
(a)
Examine pass books or l00s0-leaf bank statoments as to
their authenticity.
(ii) Check bank pass books or loose-lcaf bank statements with
the bank columns of tho cash book.
(111)
Compare the bank cortificate with the roconciliation
statomont, and chock the latter.
(iv)
See from the counterfoils of the cheque book that the
(v)
list of outstanding cheques is correct.
See the actual reccipts from the bank for sums placed on
(vi)
ascertain that,
Thon a Regimental Fund was tronsferred
from one officer to another during the marter that the
cash book was b lanced at the date of handing over;
that
a bank statoment wes obtained for the purpose of checking
the bank uccount in the Cash Book and, thut the cash book
was signed by both officors concerned.
(4) They will chock the Stock Book as follows:-
Check reccipts of stock by menns of contractors invoicos.
Check issues of stock with the record of takings.
Check the additions of the stock book.
Ascortain if stockt kine in rogul Ily carried out, and
ovidence of the stocktaking should be avoil ble
signed recoras.
to the board in the for of properly uthenticated and
In an officors' mess and sergents' mess the stock book
at his stocktaking.
should hive boon signed ut prescribed perioda by the P.M.C.
5) Phoy vill check the Proporty Bool as follows: -
(a) Ascertain that all proporty acquired has boon ontored.
(p) Ascertain that all property is in possession ind proporly
(c)
cared for.
Ascortein that at loust once a quirter, and whenever a
change in the 0.i/c Tund has occurred that a physical
check has boon mide, that deficioncies havo beon invost-
igated und that evidonce that a check has boon mide is
recorded on tho innor covar of the Property Book.
/(a) ...
