- 5 -
• During, tho timo that we vere still in trouble over the vehicles, the same
vohicles, plus DUKWs had to be pro-loadod.
A major difficulty hero was that 3
• Br Inf Div had produood loading tablos for Ammunition (105 mm) which, with their
'casos wood packing' exccoded the weight that it was possiblo to carry on tho DUKW.
Consequontly, all this ammunition had to be uppackod and loaded as it should havo
Many othor troublos in pro-loads wero also axperioncod but ultimatoly over-
comc with tho nic of much unsomly languge and a loyal staff who workod days and
nights on ond and finally produced the answor.
PART IV.
Briofing.
The briofing of all ranks was donc at HAMBLEDON,
I first briofod all
my own HQ Officors, Coy Commanders and all othor officers.
HantS. After this each Company
Commandor briofed his oin company.
I had a part in tho briofing of every RASC
officor and man in so far that I attonded overy bricing and did as much of this
myscli ns time allovcd.•
I personally satisfiod mysolf that overy officer and man
In the concentration aroa I inspected cory officer and man of och
company and satisfiod mysolf that ovoryone was rcady and proparca for War,
PART. V.
'Soa Voyage.
The DUKWs wore loaded on to ISTs without incident - this drill had becomo quito
vell known to us by this time - a faw vore Inshod on to Rhino Forrics and some on
the davits of LSTs..
taking off part of the lon as the strain on
It vi loung thật thong on docke vas too great, and oracks
appcared in the iron decls.
1.11 DUKS were driven on to tho ISTs and backed off
into the sea then takin" nii.
We had always practisca t is voy as it vas found to
be much more satisfactory to got the hoavy part of the load awash first and soa
boinc.
Not onc single Dukw was lost or damaged ly this mothod which proved,
spite of only opposition to this principle, our contention and training was right.
When I arrived on ISt 362 on the ovoning of 3 JUNE (two days lato),
; working; extronoly satistactorily.
OC 10i Coy R'SC (GT) (Major H.S.
Armstrong had looked aftor the wolfare of RASC porsonncl wory well,
excopt, that by
that timo, thoro was a shortage of cigarottos thu troops had boon aboard two days
and thore were no other supplics).
I found by going round tho othor ships carry-
•ing our mon that the same ns happening to them.
With the assistance of onc of
our two Motor Launches
(that had now found us) to organised a party and wont ashoro
Where we purchasea sufficiont supplics for tho wholo of the RASC personnol in the
mon were in grand form, confidunt and in xecllent spirits.
Daily
Exorciso of any form was difricult owing to tho dock boing complotoly full with
vchicles.
On one ship they put their non on to Rhino Ferrios to do P.T.
of all kinds wore hold - concurts, baths,
and as much scop as possiblo was insistca
upon.
The food sonorally was good and cory assistanco given to tho Army by tho
Navy.
I short sorvico was hold on Sunday 4 JUNE which was much approciatod by all.
The woather was oxcollent and all ranks took advantage of the sun.
Unfortunataly,
the wonther startod to blow up and it ves soon abvious that vo
should not put off at
the aprointod timo.
In my ways it was a good thing as vo
vore ablo to got en extra days rost which, at that time, ins still badly neodod.
There vas a cortein mount of soa sicknoss,
pationinly on the netin, voyago
due to the oxtraordinary roll of tho
ISTs but no
drivor failed through sca sickness
to handlo his om vohiclu so fer as I am avaro.
Whilst on the ship I was able to
finally briot the
two Commanders
of the Motor Launches and their crows on the actual
part thoy would take in the oporution.
On Monday 5 JUNE the Cormander of our Flotilla Comendor Allison callod a
conference of all commonders of the other craft carrying DUKiVs,
on his HQ Ship (IST
I attendod this conference where wo made our plan of how the Ships would bo
positionod at a Dischraging Point for the DUKVs.
