LIO
49:13
200
No.
(a)
9. DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH IMMEDIATE ENERGENCY COMMISSIONS.
War Office Boards
may recommend a candidate for
mission in cases where he is
outstanding and considered
immediate
Without ther in B 2617 does not specificaly indicate that
qualihed con
appointment to an immediate
emergency commission,
recommend him if, in their opinion, the candidate is outstanding.
a candidate in sidatie tor
Board may, nevertheless, so
a technical nature.
In these cases,
a recommendation in Part IV of A.F. B 2617.
suitability to hold a commission for the appointment designated only, and will add suc
APPENDIX E
NOMINAL ROLL OF OTHER RANKs SERVINg WITH..
RECOMMENDED FOR TRAINING AT AN O.C.T.U.
(To accompany A.Fs. B 2617-see para. 20.)
Rank
(b)
Name
(c)
Arm chosen
by candidate
(d)
(List No..
Result of
interview
7/ 20 г/ I. t
APPENDIX F
IMMEDIATE
EMERGENCY COMMISSIONS FOR
MEN SERVING IN THE RANKS
1. QuALIFICATIONS
Candidates selected must be either :-
(i) outstanding from
mended for their own arm or corps, or
a military point of view, in which case they should be recom-
(ii) highly trained technicians or specialists who,
though not necessarily outstanding
a military sense, are otherwise suitable to receive commissions according
to their technical or special abilities.
2. NUMBER OF VACANCIES
tions as the situation
Details of arms and corps in which there are vacancies are not included in these instruc-
changes rapidly in this respect, but outstanding candidates for all
arms and corps should be recommended as they appear.
3. AGE LIMIT
The upper age limit for recommendations will be 40 years except for individuals with
special or technical qualifications.
Special cases will be considered by the War Office.
4. PRoCEDURE
The procedure of application will be the same as that for candidates recommended
the services of the candidate as an officer in their own unit, or consider that in the interests
without training at an O.C.T.U., and will state on A.F. B 2617 whether they wish to retain
for training at an O.C.T.U
C.Os. will recommend the grant of the commission immediately
of the man concerned he should start his commissioned service in another
Applicants for Infantry of the Line will amplify their choice of arm to show three
choices of regiment, in order of preference.
5. If a candidate is not considered by a War Office Board to be suitable for an im-
mediate emergency commission but to be suitable for a commission after training at an
O.C.T.U., the candidate will be dealt with as a candidate for training at an O.C.T.U.
6. A.Fs. B 2617 for candidates recommended for immediate emergency commissions
will be submitted to the War Office (A.G. 1.E.) in accordance with the procedure laid down
in para. 20 of the pamphlet.
7. The date of first commission of a candidate granted an immediate emergency
commission without O.C.T.U. training is the actual date of joining his new unit as an
officer.
NOTES.—(a) Nominal rolls will be numbered consecutively by units and completed at
columns (a) to (d).
(b) Column (e) will be completed by the War Office Board.
26
27
