9
"what was the condition of the road",
desirable
It will often not be practicable - or
- particularly at Summary Ir als, for the Rules of Evidence te be :
applied with equal strictness to the defence as to the prosecution.
All evidence must be relevant.
Each case nust be judged on its merits,
but note, as an indication of the working of the rule that evidence tending
to show merely that the accused is, because of his previous record, the sert
of person who would be likely to coit the offence alleged is inadmissible.
Exceptions: - (a) if accused clains credit for a good character or attacks
character of prosecution's witnesses, (b) if it is necessary in crier to
show system or intent under certain circustarces.
No hearsay is admissible.
Hear say is tre'cral or written statement of
a person not before the Court', for example, what the girl in the N.a.a.P.I.
tola the witness, or his nother said in a letter be produces to the Court.
1.
Such statenents are not sworn.
2.
Defendant has no epportunity to crous-exanine.
3.
Court has no opportunity to observe
the demeanour of the person naking
the statement te see whether or not la aprears to be truthful.
Exceptions.
The principal are; -
a very large number of docunents specifically mentioned in a.a. Sec
163 which should always be studied when preparing a case for Court
Martial.
2. Statenents
nade in the presence of th
accused, in so far as they
affect his reply or cther reaction to them
3.
Certain docunents such as a Birth Cer ificate, Certificate of
Conviction etc - not doctor's certificate.
NOTE: - A.C.I. 1311/1941 recognises that upon sunnary trial cf C.H.P.
cases,
it is desirable to acid unneesssury travelling and there-
if the accused does not dispute
statenents upon the back of
sto be given on Oath he
the facts or desire the
the C.U. can act upon the signed
Best Evidence.
If a document exisis ts contents nust not be proved
by cral evidence of by a copy.
Ic provide against.-.
Inaccurate quotation of the contents.
Inaccurate copyire, e. g. a telegram in the course ci transnission.
If the "'other side" (prosecution or defence as the case nay be) has
the criginal and refuses to proäuse it,
2. If the criginal is lost or destroyed.
Certain certified copies under 1.1. See 163.
The rule does not prevent proof ef a fact by one witness even
if 10 are available, nor
the use of indirect evidence when
direct evidence is abailable.
A witness nay not express his opinion upon any
natter which it
the Court to decide - for example,
the language of the accused
was obscene or his driving dangerous or his statesent an adnission of the
Exceptions,
The evidence of experts such as handwriting experts,
(Alsc cases of drunkenness,
though it is imperative.
that reasons for this opinion must a ways be given by
The prosecution must prove
"st a confession was made
- they will not succeed in this if it was nade under the
influence of a threat or pronise made by e
parsed in a position of authority.
That when nore than
one person is charged, a confession is cnly
evidence agairst the person naking
Privilege.
Witnesses need not answer acy mestion, the answer to which
tend to expose them te criminal prosecutior.
This does not protect
an accused fron cross examination about the offense with which he is charged.
Cliftori,
13/4/42.
FGHl•
