7 1/1% /1
1679
49:13)
UNIT
SALVAGE
ORGANISATION.
Officor Commanding,
The insignificant quantity of salvage received in the Salvage Transit
Centres from a great number of units is the more clcarly shown up by the quantity
sent in by those units which have appreciated the importance of saving all
re-lisaable maturial and have put in hand the small amount of organisation
nocussary to socuro this.
In case it may be of sone help to your Salvage
Officer in making his arringements, the Salvage Organisation of a conspicuously
successful wit is set
out belov.
This unit is stationed in a'hutted camp,
but very little adaptation would be needed for a unit living under other
conditions.
1.
nit Salvage Officer. It was considered necessary for an officer to
supervise the collection routine.
of the unit's salvage arises in tho kitchens, and also as the Salvage Transit
Contre is generally at or near to the Supply Depot, it was found that the
lessing Officer could most easily handle this job.
2. Colloction of Salvage.
a.
Every barrack room and office was given two receptacles placed
together and clearly labelled 'Paper' and 'Rubbish' respectively.
Four gallon petrol tins were found convenient for this.
b.
In every wash house a receptacle for razor blades (to keep them
out, of the waste paper where they are dangerous to sorters) and
another for used lead tubes of tooth paste or shaving cream were
fixed in a conspicuous position.
C.
It was the daily duty of each room orderly to bring in to the
Salvage Room (adjacent to the food store) all waste paper, bottles,
and lead tubes from the barrack rooms and wash houses for which
he was responsible.
d.
The Cook was responsible for sending in daily to the Salvage
Room the previous day's empty bottles, jay tins and other re-
useable containers and meat wrappers ull proporly washed, and also
for seeing that all other food tins were properly incinerated
and collected separately.
C.
The quartomaster's storeman was responsible for opening carefully
all cordboard cartons and for handing these in to the Salvage
Roon, folded flat and undanaged, together with any waste cardboard
or paper from his store.
He also handed in any unserviceable stores
which were not returable to Ordnance, such as damaged oyeshields.
Anti-gas.
1.
The bossing N.C.O. was rosponsible for the careful oponing and
handing in, in an undanagod condition, all crates and cartons
coning into his store.
G. The Salvage Officer kopt in touch with tho Transport Officer to
see that nil empty 4-gal. petrol ting and oil druns and all used
sump oil and vorn out tyres were sent in to the Salvgo Transit
Centre as they arose.
h.
Occasionally, whon hen were avadlable, serounging parties round
theconp and its environs were orgnisod to bring in any sorey
netal which raght bo tying around.
