Reoroational Training Contia.
stent a guaran an it one nunty a striot or he is sent stratsht
Reorcaticn also neans
sh i n i thing a man tin a got to ty co tut ri th people
( on ie an 2P10 Mind out:
Enceuruge new
OFGANIZZETON.
In a small unit one officer
(in Per Capita siborigtion tron d1 vics,
The last asculó be arcided if pussible
the do go has no can ten pinat
Cha furas are caninistered by an chis ser appointed by the unit commander
and Just ba furred $o thon ay providing aerities for then.
Commitude frot rancesenteviras of the men.
and sergeants nesses ard net entitled to banefit fron the fund in the
sane way as
In would be iroorrect for the fund do provide un officer with
bonte or an outing ior the Sergeants ness., There would ba no objection to
the fun? a virg travel ling expenses of a anit tean conocsed of all ranks, though
officers would normally lay their way.
(a) It chosla de reted the regreation grounds to a certain scale are
aóviced ere mainpeined sui or public funds, the sole is set
cut in W.O.letter
en 2 039 10 30 mund Sen unita betron 100 and 600
i can a at tate 25 a contand Sports Bon. ana a Command Sports
eurmal there da a Uozadd Welfare Ufficer with assistant or area
(e) pietribution of gita to the ureope fren philantrhopic bodies
asierase to scidiers in ant legel or financial problem..
PoLlone trepor 28 porst teu for reone ticka: purposes under the
Coe foundy per mai per foracett 15 Now. to 31 Murch one per week.
(8) Crease of du for a tige in there de. gor non
13) Net te places dope than 20 siles away or uncer 2 miles.
(iv). Not to De usea, pablic sanidesmenicles are aveilable.
/ cont
09/10/2025 12.49:13
ire status: Open
by (20/11/2025 12:49:13)
39 (Albert duan)
1/306
1679
macation mining Cont'd.
Liluvisa a concort
This in good exerciso
paradis on i. gone it on or a rod pat and that sohona for bonoral
sents prevent it.
King' s
attond dirine service.
Church Parades
There should be
men ahould to on puceo che ninimun of time.
arrange a in the one a do her to don sunday a are a hours for
everyone by staggering the break over the week.
CONCLUSION
conbatting this weapon of boredon.
It should not bo forgotten that the Chaplain on dive vistanto hope tho
Give him thorefore every assistanco.
atlosphere in your mit is not quite right the chaplain nay help you find out why.
Renember that besides the Church of England there are other denominations whose
their religious observences.
The suggestions given in this lecture are those which are generally
applicable to hone service.
In the midole enst
or even in ports of Europe,
buildings for recreation will not exist, nevestlolese the principle remains.
officer has got to keep his nen heaithy happi ara occupiea.
