12:49:13
25 12:49:13)
z00
1679
PART II
RELEGATION AND REJECTION OF CADETS
Responsibilities of Commanding Officers of O.C.T.Us.
39. The C.O. of an O.C.T.U. or of an officer cadet wing of a training unit
is responsible for recommending for commissions only those cadets who in
his opinion will, in every way,
rejecting cadets at any time
make efficient officers.
The responsibility for
during the course therefore devolves upon him
percentage of rejections is too high.
and he must in no way be influenced in his judgment by the fear that the
subjects, though they have power of leadership.
In some cases cadets will not be capable of absorbing certain of the
be transferred to an O.C.T.U. of another arm.
These might with advantage
In others, it will be found that
the most important qualities required of an officer are lacking, but the individual
is capable of holding warrant or non-commissioned rank.
Also, in other cases,
the knowledge gained by a cadet at an O.C.T.U. of an arm other than that tỏ
which he belongs may fit him for service as an other rank in the arm in which
he has been trained as a cadet and transfer to that arm will benefit both the
service and the individual.
The C.O. of an O.C.T.U. must weigh carefully the factors set out above,
and use the opportunity thus presented to divert the individual into such
employment where his capabilities will serve the Army to the best advantage.
Rejection of Cadets
40. The courses open to the C.O. may be summarized as follows :-
(a) Relegation for further training in the same O.C.T.U.
apply where weakness in one or more subjects can be corrected
by additional instruction.
(b) Rejection for further basic training at an O.R.T.U. and reposting
to the O.C.T.U.
(c) Rejection and transfer to an O.C.T.U. of another arm.
(d) Return to unit with or without recommendation that the cadet be
reconsidered at a later date.
(e) Rejection and transfer (where applicable) to an arm in which it is
considered the cadet will be more usefully employed as an other
(f) Return to unit,
suitable for training as a high grade tradesman or
as a warrant officer or N.C.O.
(g) Rejection on medical grounds.
In cases of grave misconduct, a cadet will be rejected immediately and
returned to his original unit or training unit.
Procedure for the Disposal of Rejected Cadets
41. A.Fs. B 2616 (Cadet Record Sheet) (A.Fs. B 2616A for R.A.S.C.)
will be prepared for all rejected cadets, initialled by cadets concerned, and
submitted to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) together with their A.Fs. B 2617.
A.Fs. B 2616 will show reasons for rejection, disposal of cadet and will, where
applicable, contain the C.O.'s recommendation regarding subsequent disposal
14
based on the courses open as shown in
para. 40.
It is essential that this
recommendation be included in the Cadet
Record Sheet for rejected cadets
forwarded to the
1 co the placing acter rejection is dependent on the information
42. In cases where transfer to an O.C.T.U. of a technical arm
see para
14) is recommended, the candidate will be interviewed before
B 2616
is completed, by a representative of the technical arm concerned.
Arrange-
ments for interview will be made by Os.C.
O.C.T.Us. with area headquarters,
and the result of the interview will be recorded in Part V or VI of A.F. B 2617.
43. Where transfer to another arm as an other rank is recommended and
accepted by the cadet, a certificate, as laid down in
Appendix B to A.C.I. 399
of 1940, will be completed and attached to A.F. B 2616.
44. In cases of rejection for further basic training
under para.
attachment A suit 260 R.., will be arranged by the War Offpe (A 6.1. E.)
on receipt of A.Fs. B 2616 and B 2617.
5. In cases of rejection under
be sent in sees days leave ane a /e records concerned dill) e requestel
by telegram to arrange for posting to a suitable unit on completion of leave.
Their subsequent disposal will be dealt with by the War Office (A.G.1.E.).
46. A card index will be maintained by the War Office (A.G.1.E.) for
rejected cadets and their subsequent career will be checked by periodical
The reasons for rejection will be notified to units concerned by
O.Cs. O.C.T.U.
47. The C.O. of an O.C.T.U. may appoint a rejected cadet to be unpaid
lance-corporal and this appointment will not be withdrawn by the C.O. of
the unit to which the cadet is posted within two months from the date of
posting, except for misconduct.
Every opportunity will be given to these
V.C.Os., consistently with the efficiency of the unit, to gain the necessar.
experience, and when suitable, further promotion.
Disposal of Cadet's Documents on Discharge during Training
48. Should a cadet be discharged or become non-effective while under-
going training, his discharge will be carried out by the O.C. the O.C.T.U.,
documents will be prepared and the pay accounts
will be adjusted by the affiliated O. i/c records, and the regimental paymaster.
Completed record documents and pay accounts will be returned to the record
and pay office of the regiments or corps to which the cadet belonged, for
Admission to Hospital
49. Cadets admitted to hospital will not be posted to the " Y" list of
their regiment or corps, but will be retained on the strength of the O.C.T.U.
at which they are undergoing training.
15
