• 14 -
During tho night,
tha onomy shollod transport juries, quito noor to our own
Tho Workshuys ofticor of 39 Coy RASC (GT), Capt. Devios, was killod and one
OR woundod - two lx2 vilioles destroyed,
Tho tonna to lift no 3,100 tons and 164 casualtios ovacuatod.
D + 6. _12 JUNE 12•
Constant air raids day and night.
Work ovor the beaches coasod at 2300
hours for the first tino sinco we landod.
All ranks were ordered to have 6 hours
Throe DUKWS c. C3 Coy wore hit by shell fire and dostroyea.
until this time tho casuitios to vohiolos duc to normal traffic accidents were NIL.
The total vehiclo casualtios by onomy nation from D day to data voro 16 DUKWs and
2 - 4x4 3 tonnors.
Tonnage lift for the dey 2,050 tons - casualtios evacuated 244.
GENERAL.
From this date onris, ovents wore roasonably normal, shollin and air raids
Both the achorage and tho beach honds voro rerularly sholled at
nicht and on soveral oucarions vohiclos wore hit and mon wounded, particularly
in the thicle cushi n, wich, of nocossity,
hac to be close to the beaches.
Gront caro and atton on ind toch paid to camouflago and disporsion.
fortunto in having a Luntr Captain Camouflago atirched to us who did an excollent
job of work both in ironim and in the operation.
Cannuilno report is attachod
111 ranks were du, ir i nomal defence precautions taken.
A number of noar
missos from shell firo is
rocorded, possibly
due to the foot that our own mediun
wore, at this time,
uns, these vere the resull of counter battory firo.
all arun our He end vchicle paris, and fi was probablo
It was decided evontually that ROCER an a portion of QUEEN beach could not
Do usod for Potrol ad frunition ships und so,
for a short time, only Supplios,
RE Stores,
Ordnanco Stors were brou ht on to our joaches.
Hero again, this was,
not ontiroly satisfactory as it was found that odd ships carryin these commod.
itics were,
fron time to vino, boing brouht in.
It was ultimately found that
theso beaches vero in ay case untonable ind a decision us reached that the
boaches from QUEEN GREEN Westwards should be used.
From 16 to 19 JUN?, oring to vory hoavy seas,
not possible to work
During this perici perconnel of Port Oporating Group wore on board
consters and lying in
the enchorago and it was ultimately found nocossary,
to food and water shortwo.
for thoso personnol
to bo brought ashore.
the Navy said it was not rossille to get clon sido, DUKi drivers voluntoored to
go out and brin ashero wit corsonol it was
possiblo to movo, and also to take
water and rations to oilar porcool who could not be
done and we were cong auntou by Admiml Talbot,
Connander 'S' Force, on the
manificent work of in DuKis.
The Navy had no craft carahlo of doing this job
and it is to tho credit of the DUkl drivers
that they handle? this job in tho
same manner that they ha" inadlod nil tho others 'It's our job and we'll do it'.
By D + 13 wo lnd lon tuch oneny action 16 DUKWs anc! 6 4x4s.
work for DUWs was round it ins soon obvious that the onomy had a nin picked ur
the range of the enchurogc.
Shalt tons place constantly and the DUK drivers job wes mado much moro
difficult due to to fect that ships wore continually wenchoring and movin ont
of range under cover of smoke scroon and whon this had lifto? the frivors had to
go many miles before they vern able to contect the ship they vore di chargin;
for drivers to vork at nirlit,
Due to the lous of tomaro lifto causod by the storm, it ves train nocessary
but this was dono choerfully and is a rosult the
tonna figures on those iuches vore, fron Diny to tho tino thoy vero handed over
to 102 poach Sub Aron, the highost avernro on tho whole front.
vould be suppliud for och tide.
In tho planning stafor it was aronsed that a borthing plan of tho anchorágo
This never mtorinlizod due
to the continunl
