ERACIS NO. 2.
770.
1 RIA-S.C.
MOBILIZANICN CRaTER.
----------------
DESIGN & ORRARICT OF tho SUN GOMPASS.
CROSS COUNTHY NAVIGATICN.
111------
123 torn "Cross Country Havigation" la intondod to covor all noveront of Motor
Irena port by nothode othor than tho nomial uno of mage in conjunction vith roads and
waysido landriara.
may bo obsontial in tho lidalo last, and olsovhoro.
Mavication in this sondo chould soldon bo roquirod in Buropo, but
It is aufficiont to noto
doaort country,
tho ground, and that conapicuous waysido lundracke nay bo nonoxigtont.
trao hich appar woll daitaod oa tho tap, nay bo indiatinguishato on
THE SUT COMPISS. BASIC PRINCIPLE.
can also bo usad as a roans
of indicating Irue Worth.
This con bo domonetratod as follows:
Whon a sundial is gorroctly positioned, it in
obvious that tho 12 osclock nork, i.o, whoro tho shadow falls at Noon, liôs in tho diroction
of Diuo Nor the
Tho sundinl can altays bo corroctly positionad by anyono whö, using a ratch and
ascortamnin ou tino, sots it us with tho shadow falling on tho appropriato hour mark.
"Onco this is undorstood, it will bo obvioua that to havo, in the sundial, a
potontial Conpass.
A ayaton of navigation has thoroforo boon dovinod, for uso in dosort country,
incorporating tho basic principlos of tho sundial.
CONSFRUCTION of tho SUN COMPASS.
_*-
--------
Tho Univorsal Sun Compass consists of tho following prts:
1•
A BASE FLAIR.
This is risialy fixod to the vohiclo in such a position that tho
tho sun may fall upon it from any anglo.
porinotor of this plato aro markod out the points of the compass in
dogroos, roading. anticlockwiso from 0 to 360.
A lino draw fron
O to 180 muat bo oxactly parallol to tho contro lino of the vohiclo.
Tre O mark should point to tho front.
A DIS PLATE.
nis is olliptical in shapo, and shows the hours of the day fron
dam to duak.
Pach hour is dividod into poriods of fiftoon minutos.
Thoss curvos of tino, as thoy are callod, aro intersootod by othor
curvos indicating tho dogroos of latitudo.
2. A DATE FLATR.
This is roctangular in shapo, and is intorposod botwoon the Baso
On this Dato Mato is a dioction arrow
o zactly conforing to tho position tho 12 noon nark on tho Time
Plato.
This plato alão has a scale showing tho monthe of tho yoar
dividod, into porioda of ton doye oach.
This scolo, is usod in
conjunction with tha Tino Unto to rogistor tho anclo of tho
doolination of tho sun at tho appropriato ting of tho yoar.
GNOMON.
This io a vortical rod, fixod' in tho contro of tho Baso Flato, and
dosignod to throw a woll dofinod shadow.
•To Tino Plato and Javo
Plato aro froo to rovolvo about thia Gonon, but can bo clampod in
position whon a particular courso hag boon got.
A SILDON GUID.
This is a notal bar fantonod at ono ond around the Gnomon, having
tho shaft froo to nove and lio in any dosirod position poross the
Tino Flato.: It is usod to diroct the oyo to tho spot on tho Timo
Lato whore the shadow of the Gnomon should fall, as tho, mazo of
curvod linos nay causo confusion.
