OPERARION.
OVERLURD. .
HQ CR/SC 21 Transport Column.
Koport on the Operation including tho training, the assault anû the activitios
immodiately subseront.
-ann-..
PART I.
Iraining.
This was long and arduous, taking in all ovor 12 nonths, but whon tho actual
tiro camo I thin' we all lookad upon it as just another ß..... Exorcise!,
I think, is a fair improssion of the men's thoughts at tho time of the actual
In all tho Exorcisos wo did, vory valunble lessons wore lorned.
Exorcise JANIZEN it was vory abvious that if tho job was to function officiontly,
a proper RASC organization would have to ba sot up within tho Beach Sub Aron.
is now known, this was ovontully dono by including a CRISC with a norn] HQ, to
connend end control all RASC within tho Beach Groups.
Many oxporiments were corried out as to the corroct mothed of working, nd I
un now sure that the way ours ins split up was practical, and worked smoothly and
officiently.
I may say that in the only stagos thoro uns considerablo opposition
fron both Sub Aron and Tonch Group Commandors on the manner in which wo wore to
and it uns only aitor consultation with DST (Cricadior CLOVER) and DDST (Col.
21 Army Group tint an ordor was issuad by NG. shorin; exnctly how this
would be dono..
In the orly stares of troinin, it ves novar. ronlisa how much the Rase-meant .
to tho shon as a wholo - it was difficult to male the othor Arms undorstand that
Boach Sub Arons and Dorch Groups vero an Administrative urgenization, ud that at
lenst 70% of the whole shor was an RiSc problen curator,
that the CRASC had,
the biagons cound in the whole set u?.
The ROUNDABOUT Exorciscs vorc
An a vius he they no wi the enortunity of tranite Dila drivers, end 150 ravo
us all opportunitics of studying tho lay-out of tho INk - it was a pity that moro
tino was not spent on Irenshipont rons and some proper rulos evolvod, as,
the tino comc for sottin: thoso up,
thoro sooned little co orcination of thought.
LEAPICIR end FArIUS vorc both oxcellont landing
oxercises and rate DUKY and GT Coy
drivors first ciss trainin ond, in adition,
tho GT Coy wns ablo to practise
waterproofing which ovontually stood them in very good stoad.
lost on thu acturl landing, due to this causo.
CROWN an! ANCHOR (both Innding
oxercises) wore good value showing the congestion on the benchos in a Assault
landin;
For 101 Bouch Sub Arca our mothol of working wns to attach one Captain, known
ns tho S& I roprosontative with one Clork end ono Motor Cyclist to anch Doch
This ofricor notod in mny rospocts as a DRisCO,
Tho systom was found
and I was fortunto in having two first rato officors to do
Doth Beach Group Commandors aitorwards statod that they not only did
a first rate job but thet they vould hovd hnd considorabld difficulty in orrying
Thoy donlt with all Transport and Supply natters within tho
Boach Group and ns those were ouch ovor 4,000 strong with Navy, Amy end Air Forco
it rill be roclisod that those officors had no oasy tesk.
They also understudion tho Stuff Captain nt Douch Group HQ so that they wore at
nIl tines, vory nuch in ovidence in the Doach Group orinniantion,
In addition to commanding all RASC units,
the CRASC noted as S & T Advisor
to the Sub Aron Commandor.
In the crsc of tho Potrol Dopots and DIDs,
Group Commendors wero responsible for thum on ladling and
also for their scuting ui
and only opertion.
this compromise mms agrood and vorked quito satisfoctorily.
They vero, eftor tho innedicte Issault phrac, the rosponsibility uf CRASC.
Duty training was nt vithout its dirficultios,
owing to the supply position
of! the DUKi/s,
but wo wore fortmate in having sufficiunt
time to do a numbor
of
beth day and night exorcises in really rough worther which made the mon confident
