3
October last they decided that the rate of payment in respect
of all unaccompanied school children who had attained the age
of Io years should in future be at the rate of ios. od. per week:
they have now decided that the rate of Ios. 6d. per week should
be payable in respect of all such children who have attained
the age of I4.
The new payments should be made available
for
householders during the week beginning Saturday;
2nd March.
I2. In considering the policy to be adopted in regard to the
children who are still in the evacuation areas the Government
feel obliged to assume that as rather less than half the parents
were willing to allow their children to be evacuated at a time
when there was a general belief that large-scale bombing would
follow immediately upon the outbreak of war, the number of
additional parents who are willing for their children to be
evacuated under present conditions will remain small unless
and until air raids on an intensive scale occur.
be a demand for evacuation on the part of parents. The further
13, The Cort meat hago, no out it, then ma ho tant.,
arrangements which the Government contemplate are, there-
fore, designed to be put into operation only if air raids develop
on a scale involving serious and continuing perils to civilian
population.
I4. These arrangements will provide for the evacuation of
school children in organised
parties under the charge of
teachers, from some or all of the evacuation areas according
to circumstances.
I5. In order to enable such plans to be carried into effect
much preparatory action on the part of the evacuating and
receiving authorities will be necessary. The organisation which
has been established by them in connection with the adminis-
tration of the present evacuation scheme will provide the basis
for the plans which are now being worked out.
I6. The accompanying Memorandum indicates in detail the
procedure which should be adopted and the Minister requests
that the authority will take the necessary steps to enable these
plans to be carried into effect, if the necessity should arise.
I7. The operation of the plans in general will, however, as
has been indicated, be dependent on the development of air
dions made ne cheat to put the vind date mina on an con-
respect of which of the evacuating areas action should be taken.
nce (Bill
a
compla
ed to
Jay, C1e
lation
1939
Lain
;tat
iri
the
in
