5.
"Approciation is militory
rovi cr
of the
si suation basca on all available
infomation,
urinatod in a statonont of the ncasures recommendod to noot it."
In wánor toctics on appreciation is purcly a nonsal considoration of a
problon frous which a foolproof plan con be produced
In larger opcrations a
witton approciation naturally
bacones necessary in ordor that none of tho
nurerous
factors aro overlooked.
In ver undor noñom Battlo conditions
a acthodical consideration of a
probion will only
bo possible it cho
ind is trained to work to an acceptod
sequence of thought.
44m on mental, will be in the following
TAL: Gosforth 51047 Ext 4
COPI.
Subject:- Condition of Supplies - Unseasoned Packing Cases.
RASC (A) 2018/43
To:- List 'A'.
From: - RASC, Northumbrian Area.
2.
Owing to the use of unseasoned wood for packing supplies there is a grave
danger of the tins contained therein being affected with rust when the wooa
dries out.
2.
This is a point which must be carefully watched as rust penetrates fairly
rapidly causing the tins to "blow" and contents rendered unfit for consumption.
3.
OsC, CSDs will make a careful examination of all supplies held which are not in
normal issue and packed in wooden containers, and a number of cases of each
manufacturer and warranty will be opened for examination®
4•
If it is found that the contents of a number of cases have been affected with
rust, the whole batch must be broken down and examined, and the following action
will be taken:-
(a) A few tins will be opened and if the contents are found fit for consumption,
and batch does not exceed 500-lbs weight, early issue for consumption will be
effected.
(b) Where, however, the contents of the opened tins are found fit for
consumption,/ the batch involved exceeds 500-lbs, the following infornation will
be forwarded to this H.Q. for orward transmission to Northern Cond. and issue
held in abeyance pending receipt of further instractions:-
(1)
Details of Contractor.
(ii)
Case Markings.
(iii) Original W.E. Date and any extension thereof.
(iv) Quantity of the batch.
(v)
General condition of the consigment.
If, on examination, the items are found unfit for consumption normal action will
be taken in accordance with the pamphlet "RASC SUPPLIES - INSTRUCTIONS
REGARDING INSPECTIONS, WARRANTY MARKINGS, TURNOVER, CONDEMNATION, ETC" and
A. C. I. 2275/41.
The above instructions amplify those already issued under para (a) of this H. •
letter RASC(A) 2058/43 dt 14 June 43.
Gosforth.
SI/HT
17 June 43
AdLo Onyens, 2/LT.
Major,
A/OC, RASC Northumbrian Area.
