The TiL
BuTe IIs
AEROLICION JD SETRO-INE LICEN OF ADVATOS.
"Approciation is military
rovior of tho sisuation based on all available
inforuation,
culinatod in a statonont of the ncasuros recomendod to foot it."
In tánor tactics
an appreciation is purcly a nontal considoration of a
problen frou which a
foolproof plan con be produced.
In larger operations a
writton appreciation naturally beconos necessary in ordor that none of the
nu erous factors are ovorlooked.
In var under nodom Battlo conditions a notiodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible if tho tina is trained to worle to an acceptod
sequence of thought.
mitta an centel, will bo in the following
(a)
(e)
(1)
10.
Maximum possible notice must be given to the O.C., C.S.D. concerned, in
order that Petrol renains can be checked and agreed with the Unit. 0.c.,
C. S.D. will give the Unit a clearance on A.F. G. 1033 for Petrol and
Equipment ete and will advise 0.C., R.A.S.C. of equipment handed over
and the amount of Petrol remaining in the tank. The Petrol will be taken
on charge by C.S. D. pending disposal instrutions.
(1i1i) It is essential that District/Areas keep O.C:, R.A.S.C. fully inforned
regarding noves of Units.
8.
(a)
DISPOSAL, OF LUMES.
Should a pump be no longer required Unit/Formation will notify 0.C., R.A. S. C.
District/Area.
(b)
0. C., RoA.S.C. District/area, after confirmation with District/Area Headquarters,
will decide whether or not the pump is likely to be required in near future
and issue instructions accordingly.
9.
(a)
SUPPLIES OF PATROL, DERV AND GAS OII.
• Unless otherwise instructed units will obtain supplies of petrol and Derv for
all noral military purposes, in bulk through pumps requisitioned, hired or
installed by V.D. These pumps will be replenished by the Petroleun Board.
(b)
Gas oil and Derv can be obtained on a barrel for barrel basis in 40 gallon
barrels, when the unit requirements are too small to justify bulk delivery.
( c)
All demands for Petrol, Derv and Gas oil will be made by Units through R. A. S. C.
chamels. It is the responsibility of the Unit to keep the tanks full and
imediately there is room for 200 gallons this quantity should be demanded.
Special attention is drawn to A. C.I.s 293 of 1942 and 901 of 1941, regarding
use of fuel for Diesal engines.
Issues and replenishnents of P. 0.L. will be made in accordance with A.C.I.
921 of 1942 and pamphlet "Mechanical Iransport Vehicle Records, ete" notified
in A. C.I. 1287 of 1942.
Petrol and Derv in 4 gallon N/R tins, the primary use of which is operational,
may only be issued on authority of Command Headquarters.
COASTAL (PINK), ARRA.
District/Area. Headquarters, when authorising 0.0., RoA.S.C. to requisition or
hire a new pump in this area, will ensure that the special defence considerations
are taken into account.
District/Area Headquarters will give specific instructions as to the mazimum
anount of petrol to be held in that pump, both to 0.C., RoA.S.C. and the Unit
concerned.
