have shown remarkable good will and have goo
the time of war in the danger areas.
and in many cases to considerable expens minimise the inconvenience to householders. Arrangements
7. Many thousands of householders i d
Children who, but for their efforts, woudle been and will be made to establish hostels for children
Every endeavour has been and will continue to be made
on private householders.
8. Arrangements have been made for che blish communal meals for children in districts where a
3. Arrangements have been made for che blish communal meals for children in districts where a
Parents to visit their children periodically, and mand has been found to exist: out-of-school activities and
rangements have been made by the education authorities to
been able to satisty themselves by such visit immunal centres have been fostered, and the billeting allow-
tion with the child's teacher or the householde ices for the older children have been increased.
tion with the child's teacher or the householde ces for the older children have been increased
are being well looked after. Receiving at 16. Whilst these supplementary measures will continue to be
arise in individual cases.
their billeting officers and welfare commite, leveloped, the homes in which the children are to live must,
developed machinery for the adjustment of at only on the ground of the total amount of accommodation
required, be found for the most part by billeting on private
9. Children were evacuated in school patis receiving areas is only one-fifth of the number for whom
education could be continued and they could ra voluntary offers of accommodation were received shows that
charge of their teachers and in the compazy di the problem is not insuperable.
areas have now in the main settled down, and te
Those children who have stayed in t equitable distribution. The importance of this cannot be over-
medical officers and from other observers show tim
I7. Experience has shown that many thousands of house-
tions of country life have had good effects on that
holders have continued, by individual unobtrusive efforts which
and weight, and have given the children new t
have undoubtedly made heavy calls on them, to show that
activities for which there will be still wider spe
steady resolution which is essential to success.
originally volunteered have not had the same calls made upon
veather improves and spring comes.
them or have not shown the same endurance.
there has recently been great difficulty in obtaining billets either
2os The educational arrangements in the recting
for the small movements of children which are
cessarily partial at first until accommodation con
some good educational reason or in replacement of billets which
cope with the increased numbers.
But in gener
from time to time become unavailable for one reason or another.
ucation is now being given in the receiving areas.
cI. Whilst the Government have decided to to
made in the Circular of the 17th November (Circular 1913,
Memo. Ev. 6). It is understood that these suggestions were not
sory education in the evacuation areas, such restor
welcomed by some local authorities on the grounds that they
y be gradual, and in some evacuation areas fillin
gave rise to many applications by householders to be relieved
cannot be expected for some time to come.
but did not produce any fresh offers to share in the work of
. The primary consideration is the safety of the do
receiving children. It is considered that the principle enunciated
n in the receiving areas.
therefore the Government's view that children l
in that Circular is right, but it is recognised that if it is to be
applied in practice steps must at the same time be taken to bring
home to householders their duty, not only from the national
Parents of children who are in these aregs shoul
i oin that so the his co tse their air share,
appreciated if the position is explained to householders in the
age parents to do so.
The receiving authorities both the billeting autho
I9. It is proposed therefore with this object in view that
cation authority, should take the same line.
householders in the receiving areas should be invited to enter
f the billeting
authorities,
y organisations and individual
generous assis
their names on a roll as being willing when called upon to share
he householders rose sunerior t
workers and t
with their neighbours in the work of receiving and caring for
I the education authorities have surmounted the
their immense!
children sent to the district under the Government Evacuation
1 of their services.
3. Number and sex of children
billeted
4. Number and sex of adults
billeted
5. Nature of complaint
(full particulars are
required).
939•
Defence
Lodge
a
equired
i. R. Day
of Regula
Rules 19
je a compla
writing st
wn Clerk or
rm the Chai
airman of t
o furnish i
che grounds
idered and d
e after it h
3 of the comp
nake such inv
not dispose
e opportunity
ires"'.
