THE TRANSPORT COLUMN
Published by 21 Transport Colum
Baltion 69
RASC
23 Nov We
NEWS
BIT STaR the British Seound Aruy are boating off German attacle ta the Gerian)
Irintier area. In the Netherlands ather Second Army forces are closing up to the
western bank of the MAAS.
AMERICAN SECTOR.
contre of the Allied front the American Third Arn yesterda; liberato
SAINT AVALD in the German defences covering the SAAR asin.:
Third art tanks and
Infantry are well beyund the German frontier along a line
French and American troops of the Seventh Army are prossing rapidly through the.
STOP FRISS.
The Amerioan First Arty advance troops
were last reported within fon milos
Of DUREN an the great mutor ruad tu COLOGNE,
AIR. Last. night Ianoasters and
Ilfaxes. of Bonber Corand in great strougth attacked
FREIBURG and anoti, patlay init: behind the Western Front, Over N.W. and central
Germany yesterday Anerican fighter planes shot down anothel ninety eight encuy planes.
In forty eight hours they destroyed some 1. 240; German fighters. More than five
hundred Mustangs and Thunderbolts attaoked enemy transport end acoounted for soventy
two locos and fifty oil tank cars. At the sane tine nord than 500 Anerican heavius
hammered rail centros on the PHINE.
A strong force of british Bombers aticacica
railway yards noar COLOGNE.
Two hundead and seventy. Lancasters without loss nado a
dawn attaak on MUNICH with 12000 'lb blast bombs. The famous DORTMUND EIS Canal has
again been broached by RAF bombs.
ITAIN.
It is raining again In ITALI, but the Eighth Arry troops continuo to close
in on PIENZA.
i!..
GENERAL.
MY EDWARD STETTINUS 1s to be Ameriod's now Scoretary of State, (ir Cordoll
Hull has resigned owing to ill health.
ARCIND JHE COLINAL:
GRASC HQ-
It was forecht in this journal on the departure ci the 'Huntsnastor' and Shootor of
Stags' that there would be a period of great leaness at this lit. Time has proved
this freoast to be correat, and although several hunting parties have recentlu
sallied forth, the results have been negative. Desperation ust hove set in,as
yesterday afternoon another larga posse intending (to rso a vill Imoin oliche)
to explore every avenue, and to leave no stone unturned, Boators boat, and guns:
went aff, but the afternoon's bag consisted only of two partridgos.
Then the local
hare sportingly decided to join in the fur, and showed hinaalf at corrot intorvals
1n order to allow all a roasonable opportunity. Now the gimlo aai ch oting an apple
aocording to tradition was the chief aause of the mar trcubios whion har afflioted
this wary world, and again in this instanoe this delectable fruit was the caung of
& thin table. Our 'Medico' who was in the party,decided at a vital menent tu consid
to c can , the c th the cite to ta van lost. faci this ou
and sample the dictio merits of an applo, and at this nomont!
our friond the hare
oan see the devarture of the Huntsmaster 1s indeed a Creat loss, and thoso affected
will no doubt in days to come refer to those tines as 'the hungry forties'.
