- 7 -
romain until simallod from tho shore to bring thon in.
11l drivors had boon warnod that n 3/4 knot curront was known to bo running
•on this port of the coast and tho consoquant troublos that thore wore likoly to bo
with stocring, woathor etc.
PART VI.
Tho Assault.
'D' day - 6 JUNE 44 - approxing toly 1200 hrs.,
Wa had a grandstand viow of the wholo procoding and I am quito certain that
no one was cron the sli htest bit approhonsivo.
The latost information as to how
tho Assault was.
progrossin wes given to me fron the bridge - this was passod on
to all ranks - "3 Div had grinod thoir first objoctive" - then tho
thunder of tho
guns from our battloships - thon to our astonishmont,
a couplo of sholls quite near
our own it one a which droppod vory closo to one of our Drakos) from one of tho
shore battorios but no uno oron soom to mind this or to take vory much notico.
At this time,
approximatoly 1130 hrs, wo wore botwoon 3 and 4 miles from the shore
tho woathor was fino but a hoavy soa runninp; - much hoavior than wo had
ovor pract-
isod in.- tho Flotilla Commandor called mo to tho Bridgo and tola mo wo woro to be
I do not think any of us had imaginod such a lon run in,
particularly
the Admiral's ordors, as it
with such a soa running.
safo for the ISTs to go in closer, wing to tho nitention from the onomy'g
ho DUKs wore manncd having boon startod up and run for approximatoly 15
minutes) and drivors oriored that thoy would not icave the ship oxcapt by ordoi
of thoir Platoon Commander whan I had arraned to simal aftor tostini, tho wator.
The doors toro oponod!
ani tho ramps lovorod - the son at this time was washing
richt into tho Tank Dock,
and I must say that I ins moro than a littlc norvous
to whothor tho DUKV ims moing to stung up to
this bashing considoring, the
was carrying.
• The tale off was porfoct and vo entored the sea at approximately
12 noon (H + 42) •
It was oxtromoly rough but in spito of this and although we
the DUKV tus narificont.
We drovo around a
shipped a certain anount ve waterin urder for the other pulls to coumence to egg-
finding that it was
load, wo sirmallud to the thur craft ant to tho Drakos to start off-loading and
marshalling all other DUK!s.
We wore then approximtoly 34 milos from tho
and at this distanco,
to the soko of the battlo, from our ships and from burn-
ing; housos, it was a
littlo difricult to pick out the land merks we had momorizod
Tho cross curiont ins nore then a littlo tricky and it was necessary to
bo constantly 'tacking' to koop on a courso. - By this timo we wore thorouphly vet
through with spray and with tho waves broaking over the DUKW but my admiration of
tho machino increasod overy milc wo wont.
It was woll down in tho wator but for
moro sca-worthy than a lot of bi nor craft.
On tho run in I saw tho work of
marshalling the DUKWs from thoir ISTs procooding necording to plan.
It lookod Liko
big ships giving birth to a lot of littlo ships and ins roally an amazing si,ht.
DUKs ovorywhero milling round, rondy and awaiting ordors.
We touched down on QUEEN GREEN Boach only to find that wo woro too far Wost.
Wo had an exciting fow moments koaping our DUKW cloar of an ICT which had broached
and was swinging,
and also to avoia a largo Totrahodron. Tho tide and the surf
made the passago extremely difficult.
Wo drove the DUKW dom to QUEEN RED Bench whoro,
oftor reconnaissanco,
a suitablo exit.
Wo mot mart uf our roooo party who hnd Inniod at Il + 3 and
erected our DUKV Control Sign.
Having, found 101 Bopch Sub Iron Conmand Post and roportad to Commandor, I
contacted Major Taylor of this IIQ who hac. lended at H + 4.
work of rotting the DUls ashoro.
He and I startod tho
The boach wns a most unhealthy place as to
wore bein hoavily mortared and in adattion, minor battles wore bein? fuurht from
nearby housos and snipers voro still busy.
to too cover (onco undor a boachod ICT fillod vith ammunition),
end with a fow lapses in
wore pickod up by the DUkilo which ware then lying about 1 milc off shore.
first brtch led in by the Pintoon Cormandor (Liout. Holmn finnlly touchod down
On QUEEN GREEN Bonch and hed to bo diroctod along; tho bench to QUEEN RED.
