Completion of Documents
59. For cadets serving on a normal regular engagement :-
On appointment to commissions, the following will be completed for
(i) Attestation will be closed showing
King's Regulations,
(ii) A.F. B 268.
appointed to a commission,,Para. 390 (xvii),
of discharge under
page 2, only need be completed.
Having been
(iii) A.F. B 108 (Certificate of Service).*
The front cover and items 6, 19, 20 and 21, on
(iv) Form U.I.3.X.S. (Unemployment Insurance Form).
60. For all other cadets :—
(i) Attestation will be closed, as above.
(ili) A.F. B 108B (Certificate of Transfer or Re-transfer to the Royal
(II A.F. B 268 as above.
Army Reserve, Discharge or Disembodiment).*
(iv) Form U.I.3.X.S.
* These certificates will only be prepared if required by
Closing of Pay Accounts
61. After completion of the documents given in paras. 59 and 60 cadets'
pay accounts will be closed and will be forwarded with all their documents to
the record and pay office of the regiment of corps to which they belonged, for
7/ 20 г/г
18
APPENDIX A
SPECIAL QUALIFICATIONS REQUIRED FOR CANDIDATES FOR O.C.T.Us.
(A) ROYAL ARMOURED CORPS
Technical Knowledge. -Preliminary experience with
motor vehicles and/or
wireless
or mechanical ability is desirable owing to the amount of mechanical knowledge which
has to be assimilated in a comparatively short space of time.
Physical Fitness.-Owing to the strain which
and operation in armoured
fighting vehicles involves, outstanding
down and mental alertness are essenti Physical fitness within the medical categories laid
Age Limit.-Not over 30 years of age, unless in possession of exceptional qualifications.
(B) ROYAL ARTILLERY (ALL BRANCHES)
Mathematics at least up to matriculation standard including a knowledge of elementary
trigonometry
and the use of logarithms.
The latter qualifications are not needed for
R.A. (Anti-Tank).
(C) ROYAL ENGINEERS
I. R.E.—FIELD AND L. OF C. UNITS
General Education.-
-Good mathematical education is essential, or cadets will not be
able to assimilate the instructions given in engineering subjects, such as the calculations
needed for bridging and reinforced concrete work.
The general standard required is the equivalent of the Army first-class certificate of
education, or school certificate with credit in ordinary mathematics.
Technical Education and Experience.—The minimum requirements are :
i) For candidates under 22 years of age.—Technical education cannot be expected
ut candidates must have a good mathematical education.
(ii) For candidates under 25
-Candidates must have either been
student in engineering for at least one year at a recognized university, technical
or institute, or be an accepted student of a recognized engineering
(iti) For candidates of 25 years of age and over, one of the following :-
(a) have passed the examination for associate membership or have the neces-
sary qualifications to exempt them from the examination, or any higher
qualification in a recognized institution;
(b) hold an engineering degree or diploma,
or be a student for a course of
engineering at a recognized university or engineering college ;
(c) have held a responsible engineering appointment in a civil engineering
or under a municipal corporation or similar body, or a large
mechanical or electrical engineering firm or business;
(d) have good practical experience of general engineering ;
(e) Candidates from R.E.
-In cases of candidates from R.E units,
who are serving on pre-war regular engagements, technical education
and experience in a civil capacity is not essential, provided that they
have done a full R.E. other ranks fieldworks course.
satisfactory service as N.C.Os. is required, and the candidates must
have sufficient mathematical ability
calculate strength of road-
bearers, guys, etc., without entire dependence on tables given in manuals.
The possession of a S.M.E. or company Q.1 certificate does not necessarily
indicate a satisfactory mathematical standard.
II. R.E.—SURVEY
Technical officers fall into two classes—
Surveyors.
Printers.
A candidate need only be qualified in one class.
(A) Surveyors
(i) Under 22 years of age.-As at (C)I (i) and ii) and should have read for a
mathematical or geographical degree at a recognized university.
19
