49:13)
т/ 2р г/ г.
PART III
PROCEDURE FOR COMMISSIONING CADETS FROM O.0.T.U.
Grading and Seniority
50. Throughout an O.C.T. course,
degree of capability and industry displayed by every
a record will be maintained of the
cadet, in order
eventually cadets may be graded in four categories of merit, namely :-
Category A. Outstanding.
Category D. Below average.
On appointment to emergency commissions, cadets are granted seniorit
in alphabetical order of categories of merit and in alphabetical order within
these categories.
Submission of Nominal Rolls for Commissioning (A.F. W 3053)
51. Two weeks before the date of completion of cadet training (three
weeks in respect of Intantry and M.G. the C.O. will submit two copies of :
nominal roll on a A.F. W 3053 to the Under-Secretary of State, the War Office
M.S.2.C.), Cheltenham (the War Office (F.9) in the case of R. A.P.C.), showing
the names of cadets who are recommended for emergency commissions in
categories of merit and in alphabetical order within categories (see also para
In the " Remarks
" column will be shown full details of all previous full
pay service with the colours (including boy's service) in the Army or Royal
The medical category will be shown, together with particulars of
the unit with which the cadet was serving when posted for training as an
officer cadet. Two additional copies will be retained by the unit for the purpose
52. If for any reason a cadet's name has to be removed from the nominal
roll after its despatch from the unit, the necessary amendment to the roll
will be telegraphed to the War Office (M.S.2.c.).
53. When cadets are required to be commissioned at short notice before.
the normal date in order that they may take up special appointments, the
day before they leave the O.C.T.U. will be reckoned as being the day of
completion of training.
Separate A.Fs. W 3053 will be rendered for any
cadets accelerated in this way together with A.Fs. E 562 and A.Fs. B 2616 to
the War Offce training branches concerned, as soon as possible after the receipt
of the posting order (see para. 5).
All cadets commissioned before the normal completion of their course will
be dealt with in this way and will not be treated as " Immediate " emergency
In every case where a cadet is required for employment outside a specific
arm or corps, the C.O. of the O.C.T.U. will state whether he has completed
enough training to be gazetted into the arm or corps for which he was originally
intended instead of into the general list.
Submission of Preference Forms (A.F. E 562)
54. Os.C. O.C.T.Us. other than R.A.P.C. will submit A.F. E 562 (Preference
Form) (or where no question of preference arises a smaller substituted pro
forma) in respect of each cadet, with the nominal rolls, to the Under-Secretary
16
of State, The War Office (M.S.2.c.). A.F. E 562 is the accepted authority for
the christian name(s) and surname, and the cadet himself will, therefore, be
required to write his full name in block capitals thereon in addition to his home
Cadets for Infantry (Rifle and M.G.) will give three choices of regiments.
Under the heading of " Family
" or "Territorial" claims,
mention all family connexions with the
regimental area, and previous service in the ranks of the regiment,
whether regular or T.Á.
The grading of a cadet at the end of his course will not give kim a claim
to appointment to Regiments of his choice,
as efficiency demands that the
various gradings shall be spread evenly.
Consideration will be given to the
choice of those cadets who possess strong family, service or territorial con-
nexions with a particular regiment.
Procedure on Completion of Training
55. On the day of completion of cadet training, the two additional copies
of the nominal roll, which are referred to in para.
amended by the deletion, in red ink, of the names of any cadets no longer
recommended, showing reasons, such as illness necessitating further training,
or failure to attain the standards required of an officer.
No alteration to the
original grading of cadets in categories may be made.
Thus, unless a cadet
is put back for further training the category in which he is graded under
para. 50 will be final. On that day, the nominal rolls will be signed by the C.O.
ind despatched to the War Office training branches concerned together witt
the cadet's A.Fs. B 2616 and B 2617.
2617 for R.A.P.C. will be forwarded to the War Office (F.9).
Nominal rolls with A.Fs. B 2616 and
Before despatch A.F. B 2616 will be initialled by the cadet to indicate
that he has seen the reports thereon. The form will also show his category
56. Cadets who are medically fit at the date of passing out will be
gazetted with effect from the day following the completion of their course
and will be taken on the strength of their new units from this date.
Posting on Appointment
57. Joining instructions will be issued by
the personnel branch of the
War Office concerned to the C.O. of the O.C.T.U. or cadet wing
of these instructions, the C.O. will at once inform each ca det of the wait the
will eventually join if he successfully completes the officer cadet traming
The C.O. will not distribute the joining instructions to the successful
cadets before their training as cadets is complete.
The joining instructions
for any cadet whose name has to be removed from the nominal roll before the
completion of training will be destroyed.
If time does not permit of this procedure instructions will be sent by the
War Office direct to the individual officer at his home address as stated on
A.F. E 562.
Accounting
58. Cadets will remain on the strength of O.C.T.U. up to and including
the date preceding that of their commissions, and will be taken on the strength
of the unit to which they are posted as officers with effect from the date of
their appointment to commissions.
17
