quie II.
NEER DI ZION: 1D SI
DIG LORE O2 DINOS.
"Approciotion is idlitary
rovior of the situation based on all availablo
information, cul anatod in a statonont of the noasuros rocommendod to noot it."
In larger opcrations a
nu arous factors are ovorlooked.
proh
In var undoz nodom Battlo conditions a nethodical consideratim no
COPI.
Subjec
RASC (A) 2028/42.
R. A.S.C. Officer i/c Supplies,
Command Supply Depot,
Hexhame Wooter, Rollary, Ponteland, leucaor
Under the authority of War Office U.M. 53/General/6733(ST6) dated 12th March 1942
and NC/613/ST(s) dated 18th March 1942 the following system in connection with
accounting for meat, will be adopted immediately.
(1) Receipts from Contractors.
(a) A record of receipts will be maintained in book forn (s. 0.129 or 124) in
accordance with pro-forma at appendix "A" hereto.
The Supply Depot scale wieghts
will be recorded therein at the time the meat is weighed - see para 115A
Regulations for S.T. & B. Services.:
(b) The lower part of the form and carry forward surplus (or deficiency) will be
completed in the Supply Office by comparison with the contractors advice note.
The latter will not be shewn to those carrying out the actual weighing in the meat
(c) The quantity taken on charge in the stock book will be the actual scaled weight
Less the authorised allowances for bone and wrappers.
(a) Discrepancies will not be taken up with the meat agents unless there is a
deficiency in the number of pieces, or the weight deficiency is in excess of a half
of one per cent and is not covered by accumulated surplus on previous deliveries
during the current accounting period.
(11) Payment and Contractors Bills
Bills will be cashed for payment at nett weight as charged on the advice notes,
subject to any correction made by the meat agents as a result of representations
as to déscrepancies made under (i) (a). Weights recorded on the advice note will
not be amended except by the meat agents or unless amendment is authorised in
writing by the meat agents.
(111 )Stocktaking Discrepancies.
An Officer will take stock (by weighing) of frozen and/or Fresh meat at frequent
intervals during each accounting period. Days when stocks are low prior to
intake of fresh consigments are particularly suitable occasions for these tests
stocktakings.
Records of all such stocktakings will be maintained in book form in accordance with
Appendix "B" hereto.
