In minor tactics an appreciation is puroly a nonial considoration of a
problen fron which a foolproof plan can be producca.
In larger oporations a
written approciation naturally bacones necessary in ordor that none of the
nuerous factors are overlooked.
In war under nodorn Battlo conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible if tho
ind is trained to work to an accepted
seguence of thought.
is thn mitten on tental, will be in the following
tys AC 1 67/1442
67•
QUARTER - MASTER CITERAL®
Amy Agrioul tural schane - PLg and Poul try Keaping by Units
1. Cortain Unite have contravenod the "Livestock (Reatezation on
Slaughtering) (110-2) Order, 1940", whereby no purson shall.
Livestodic for lunan consurption without a 11 can03.
2. In future, no unit will be allowed to purcase, feed, move or
slaughter, pigs or poultry without authority fron the Camand Agrioul tural
offican
3e All Unite keeping pigs or poultzy will make inadiate application
for permission to continue to feed them, and any Unit wishing to start
poul txy-icouping, etc, must satialy the Cormand Agrioultural Officor
that thuy are unable to dispose of avill and have suitable acconodation
for the keeping of the stock.
Lo Special consideration, hovever, will bo given to applications fron
very anall and isolated units whica desire to koup gna11 numbors of
paga or poultay. The Command Agricultuml Offioor will, bo consulted
rogarding the provision of meal for such applicants and units concerned
will be advisad aocordinly. No charge on publio funde will bo pemittod.
5e whon a Unit mias application to tha Command Agricultual offloor fos
authority to sell its oma pigo, and expressus a desire to retain some or
all of the pork for ite on consumption, pomission to do so will only
ba given on the strict understanding that the quantity so retained for
consumption shall count against the nomal ration entitlenent of the unit,
and that any charges involved in rospoot of the slaughtering of the pigs
w112 be borno by unit funde Units Elvon authority to retain pork for
consumption will endorso the relovant ration indent with the anount of the
poric so rutainod, quoting this 1.G.T. Tho Offloor 1/c Supplies will reduce
the noral mont entitlement nocordinAy, and keey a record of the anount
of pork zutained by the unit, in ordor to bo able to conply with parse6
6o At tho end of tha meastag period a credit vouchor (4. 8. 0. 1680) wi.11 bo
prepared by the 0e1/c• Supplios concured, showing the mano of the Unit
and the total quantity of pori consumed during the periode The value of
the pork will be ontoulated at the chapest rate for bock as notifiod
to comands fron timo to time. The anount involvod will be credited
to the unit concerned by the Comand Paymaster.
7 Units permitted to keep poultry will unsure that the birds are used
for elg production and not for fattening purposes.
Da lar offiou letter 53/Coneral/6253 (34), dated 18. Juno. 1941 ("Pie-keeping
by Vaite"), La hureby concollode
