(o)
- 3 -
4. Aotion by Dumps and Depote on recoipt of Ipt Dotatl.
(a)
Ipt Dotatla will arrivo, as doscribed in para 3(c), by RS
Sec Liaison OffT. Liaison Offra for particular types of storoB /
are chown in innox 1. 1i Copete and dumpe will invariably be visited
by these Liaison Offra daily.
(b) The Dotail will indioato gor rally the typo of itores required to
bu drawn, and the dump or depot will decice what grastly is to be isouod,
in conformity with the goneral indication edron.
(o;
Dumps or dopota will make out AB 156 (Annot 9) in triplicato for
oach lorry-load of stored immediately on roccipt of the Ipt Dotail. In
the following CoEos only AB 108 may take tho placo of AB 158, by arrango-
mont with RS Soc Liaison Officor:
(i) 111 unn drawings.
(i1) Drawings of Ord Storos from OBD only
• No dump or dopot may use AB 158 and AB108.
(a)
In "making-up" lorry loads and compiling AB 158 and AB 108 the
groatest possible care will be taken with the following:
(i) Weights shown will bo D/i and must be Absolutely accurate.
To assist depot-
ard dumps, ready reckoners giving weights of
packages, number of packagos per lorry load, etc, are being
issued through Umpire dennels.
(11) Loads must not be rixed excopt as allowed in the schedule
of stores classification given in innox 3.
Those
classifications
are mainly based on ultim to destinations, as it is essential for
the fulfilment of the schume that lorry laods are transferred
completo and direct at RH. into reil wagons.
t b.
pt A.
'ctald
(iii) No b roken or danaged storos, equipment or packages, leakers
otc, will be put on lorries with complete packages. They will be
put aside and sent in complote lorry-loads, clearly so markod on
(iv) It is anticipated that some of the stores handled will be
They will, however, be packed in oxactly the same way
and will have the same weight as the real stores, and will often
be of equ al value. No differentiation will be made in making up
loads of such stores or in making up iB 158 or AB 108: they will
be treated in all respects as the stores they reprosent.
(e)
On errival of the tpt to draw stores it will be given priority over
any traffic waiting or about to deliver from the beaches; in order that the
tpt programmo, and in turn the rly programo, can bo fulfilled. The tot will
hait short of the dump or depot (In Marshalling Area), and the 0 i/c. will
come in and make the necessory arrangmonts for loading, and tpt will be
Cont.
con
