and to And and kill many snipers who had remained behind in the days
following the irvasion and who rendered their work very dangerous.
Refecting on all these aspects and drawing on the lessons learned from the past
operation, the British created the special wits known as the "BEACH
In Gold Beach sector, two Beach Group units landed on the 6™ June. To the
west, on "I&" Beaches al Asnelles, il was the 10* Beach Group that took
charge of the organisation and securily on the beaches, and put the first depots
place, Do the east the I" Beach Group took charge of King beaches at la
Rivière (Ver-sur-Mer). Once landed, the 9" and 10" Beach Group regrouped
under one command named the 104" Beach Suh Area. The depots were installed
well hevand the beaches up to some kilomeses imland. This first logistic zone,
where the Beach Groups operased from the Beashes, was called the "Beach
Maintenance Area". This was the first step in the continuous expansion of the
logistic zone. The olher beaches Sword and June also used a similar type of
logistic organisation.
Each Beach Group was made up of 4.000 to 5.000 men, consisting of standard
army units, some specially formed units, units to supply the labour as well as
some attached RAF and Royal Navy units. All the units assigned to a Beach
Group had all been trained in landing operations and organisation of the
beaches. In addition, apart from their capacity for endurance and their ability to
work under intense stress, many of these men had infantry training worthy of the
best infantry battalions. These men were distinguished from other soldiers by a
large white band painted round their helmets and high up on the sleeves of their
battle dress they wore the Beach Group badge of a red anchor circled in red.
The 9"' Beach Group whose logistic zone extended right from the beach to
Crépon, set up their supply depot, the Nº2 Detail Issue Depot of the Royal Army
Service Corps, in the fields round the farm of la Rançonnière. It was
commanded by Captain E. Stallard. Besides its initial personnel, the depot found
that it had been allocated a handling team from a company of the Pioneer Corps
from the 9" Beach Group. Its food was supplied from the beaches by lorries and
amphibious vehicles. It received principally, crates of rations known as "Compo
Rations". These crates, each containing all the daily supplies necessary for 14
men, were then collected by the British units. The depot functioned night and
day and thousands of crates passed through each day.
Another unit settled in at Crépon : this was the chief mail centre, the Base Post
Office. It took over the large hangar made of concrete panels, which is there in
this d
of Cré
In mid
Crépo
Arromi
factors
as the
these d
Group,
reinfor
the batt
lines of
Extract
By J-F
Place d
14480 C
France
JF .Lecu
