PECONDNDATIONS FOR HONOURS AND AURDS.
3/5102385 927, HADDEN 0..
39 Coy RASC..
C. GTL....
Military Medal.
At COLLEVILLE, FRUCE,
on 8 JUNE L/+,
this NCO was,
in the courso of his duty
presont in the POL Dump of tho SSD whon it was bombed by tho onomy andmuht fire.
At tho time of tho incident, Cpl. Haddon was a distance of 30 yas from whore tho
first bomb fell.
Col. Indon immodintoly jumpod into the lording vehicle and
dotailod a driver to drivo tho othor vohiclo away.
Thoso two vohiclos were both
ladon at tho tine vith POT..
By his prosanco of mina, Cpl. Haddon's action pro-
ventod tho loss of 2 x 3 son vohicles and thoir louls.
7/14695148 DVr CONSTABIN A.
39 COy RASC (CT)
Military Medal.
At COLLEVILLE, FRANUE,
on 8 JUNE 44, Dvr Constablo was in the POL Dump of
tho SSD whon it wes bombed by the onomy and spt on fire.
called for a volunteor to drivo him through the firo to a boint from which he
could suparviso the salva ing of TOL.
without the slichtest hositation Dvr
Constabi. volunteurs? ani drove this officer.
It is consid-
ored this notion saved a cortai. amount of stores and vehicles which my other-
wiso have boon dostroyed.
T/123929. DV LUCK W.L:...
- 101 COY RUSC (GC)..
Military Modal.._
When the Ammunition Dump roccived a direct hit by bombing on 8 JUNE 44,
at COLLEVILIE,
PRICE, an went up in flames,
the shove nanod. shower great cour-
are by ruming to his Duk and triving sane out of the Dung.
his DUKT! at a safe distone: he returned end proceeded. to apronch another DuKi
but was atopped by an offacer (winorm)
I/14724792 DUr BRONTLY N.22..
96 P.I.D._
Military Medal.
Lt about 1510 hrs on 2 JUNG L the SSD ITO. 3 on QUEN boach was attacked by
oncy aircraft and the Potrol Dump firod.
Tho flames spruad almost at once to
tho adjacent Limunition Duniy end the whole area becane an infomo of bursting
Petrol cons and munition onloding
Capt. G.E. Carter, 1-0. 238 Petrol Dopot, RaSC, callod for'a volunter to
out of tho dump a loudod lorry.
This man i mediatoly stoppod forward
and at great personal rick, and with absoluto calm, drove the vehiclo clour of
the danger arca.
He is i yours of are and has boon in the Army only threc
I 131834.
Sit JACKS T.E.
101 COy RASC (CT)
Goorso Modal.
Whun the Amunition Du, rocoivod a direct hit by bombin: on tho 8 JUNE 44,
the above named,
otor Cyclo road introl,
left his maching and pro-
Ho drown out one DUKW which wns amty, loft it in safoty
and roturned to the Dump and c. out another DUKT that was lorded with anmunition.
This NCO is, accordin in his ruments, 48 yours of are and I consider his examplo
on this occasion showed comer! -ho courne and ins outstanding to all who may havo
vitnossod the occurrenco,
253254 7/Capt. G.E. CARTER.
238 Potrol Dorote RASC.
Goor o Modal.
On 8 JUNE 44. hon to Ammunition and Potrol Dunp was hit,
this officor showe?
roat courere and luadership in (i) attonding
to the sufoty of his men and (ii) in
roing into the Dung, which was thon a mass of finnos, and personally oncuating
throo vohiqlos carrying lords, of potrol.
Arain, on the mornin; of 10 JE whon the Petrol Dopot wns arain hit, this
officor or anisod n fire finting porty fron his on parsonnel for the localization
of the firo and in consore only 40 tons of Petrol was destroyed out of somo-
thing ovor 200 tons which ng then on tho ground.
Has attitude throughout has
boon resolute and courage: is.
