ẠP TOX AR ICIES
,: (Cont)
CASSIUS (AGAINST
(2)
"DO THE TROCPS CET ENOUGH FAY"
no question however, of the country not being able to afford the exponse, when it
is some i: lind that all pay is derived from Pullic Funds i.u, taxpayer's pockets.
As a nattor of interest Pu lic Fundé in England aro utilisod also to keep prisoners
u derzoing sentunce which costs the country anything from £3 to, 45 por
head for thoir keop while richind tho bars weekly.
The Serving man should receive
romunoration of an anount ocual to ohor classos of war wage camers. Wa furthor
"roof of thic inequality is roquirod than the War Savings of tho highly paid civilians.
Married and singlo sorvicenca shoula recoivo identical basic rates - there shoula bo
no question of allotnonts "in doductod.
If a marriad men rocolves adoquate
remorane choi that họ doos with his pay should be entirely his on business,
as in tha case of the singlo nan. This mathod is in existonco, I understand in tho
U.S. army. Tho sin-le man orton and very ofton, has more responsibilities than his
mrride corfroro, those hqu interests aro stabilised. Ton basic rates should be paid
to non servy in the FAR MAST - less ay should be allocatea to HOME SER /ICE men
compared to overseas personcl, practically
ciTilians. Voluntours
the larcor sacrificos, Sould a body of pon impodo the national effort in wartime by
heroos on a scale comeasurata with tho derroo of allantry porfored. • Rations and
clothing are saia to se part a the servioo man's rominoration. Does this not apply
to all uniforma lodios'. Ivoryone has to live - evcryone has to eat - unifom or
OThOr 135O) HAR ON SO WAR, Bofore drawin this artiolo to a closo, I should liko to
ansor one or two roints made by Drutus'. 1. £1 wokly is surcly a vory arall sun
in ter ti, and on a solcior dos sot 'noar civilisation' he usually wants to troat
sor of hio als to a drink ur two, and buy a fow prosents to send home at rogular
intervals, 2. When "Brutus! strosses the coint of oxondituro on civilian clothing.
he entiroly forpets that tha civilian var worker is drossod in old clothes or overalls
nusi o. tho tine ho is workinu and only woors his best suiti two or three times wookly.
3. Suprosina a solaior dogs save 10/- veckly. At the end of two: years in the Army:
ho has 250 i the bank, a noro trifla when it is known that 'many hundreds of poends'
arc subscrated individually cach yoar by tha vory workers with whom ho will contually
have to com, to arainst inthe labour market aftor ho is domobbed. By and largo,
the moro you nako couperisons, tho nore the question is looked into fron ovory
conceivable angle,, tho avora u soldion ta poorly compensated for his years of servico
to tho country. Molusc an Aborteantsm 'ho ta being mysed".
•-. GASSIUS. ..
KEEP SAVING.
Sir, The announpement made in today's papers that the Governnent is now prepared to
offer only 17% to Investors in Exchequer Bonds means that much nord money than
hitherto will be available for Cormero, This means a rise in industrial shares,
and also paves. the way for the narufagture and distribution of those articles
which have been in shot supply during the last five years. It is a very good
move which will in tie greatly add to the value of STaPLING, although at
present, it does not arcar to help the "SAVER".
"THRIFTY'.
