6.
The
broad principlos of traffic routoa,
und etacka from wha
iaving obtainod thoge fundmos
FOLICY,
To noot the
fcr and of (
ton vohs wo
c. cortoin t
It
nind.
boforo nuch
drar chould bo loft to
G.T.Coy to control and haston injut,
Londing and output
Lelrontt 1o tio drivora prinary job to tato on individunl und Intolla ent
toling into nacount bull and voight , a venn
ovon distribution of his load thoy deton inx; (throuch conatint annlin
Thero is a tondoncy to asawo
poanible/Fl Conds ahould givo drivers a load figure for thoir veh at tia londins
of ono cotroditiJ) the veigit, but more often guess at a von load.
The G.ll.Q. troining panpilos lnya empanaia on thia vitra
3.
JUILOR LEADESIUA
There is a groct donl of roon fox improvenent in nJl ite aphoron;
art sn the Oboration op aG.T.Coy two or threo napoata aro prrticularly ensontinl,
1a. of aooy should only rocco tha brand layout of a
FICOLTENISS/LCE.
Location docido policy within the directivo thoy havo roccivod, and rnko aia.
Tho pl cond muat ba oncouengod to eo
nocosstry controta with lo0r troops.
oz thond of his pl boforo nrrival at a location and docido hou ho onn buat lny-
tino aron allocatod to hin, and bo propnrad to shor hio aoction conês thoir
aub alloentions upon arrival.
Ho in thon froo (and this juat bo oncourogud)
This Inolodgo da ossontial to
to becono inquisitivo of his surroundings.
onoral woll being.
Thơ firot thingo ha nuat now, nd thon intomm
hic NC. O.s are oxact locations of coy ild., w/S end noarby units.
ahms tho nocossity of adv rocco by pi ond soction conda of R.ie,
Depota, otc.
mla necuiaition of sdy Imnoulodcod halvoa tho problone ond aavoa ondlona troubla
and tino.
It unabaos positive accion upon arrival of drivvero, onhancos
confidonce in thoir loadore, and onauresofficioney.
i grontor undorstanding of tho drivore probion in mnoouvering undor
difficult circunatoncos is nacesaory in Boc conda.
Tho sbove pointe oro only a fow which go tovards cronting floxibility.
Constöntly changing surroundings and conditiona domond conton aonco and
inintivo by nll ranka.
It ia un important point in training that vhoru a routo ic incorp-
orcted in an op ordor, it ie followod.
The route undor rovion woa diroct nith
tho orcuption of a divoggion through MILDINULL (to avoid rood ropaira).
it lonat ono pi did not
shza civorsion.
In an avuraong thontro con-
daquencoa night bo soriouo in tho oxtromo.
fron rolying upon sign-posta in this country.
A11 renia ahould bo dtincouragud
CONVOY DISCITEINE
GlvinE
troffic,
Drivors oro not conorally gaven/annd aigula in
Táo ia lorgoly sonponsiblo for "Concortinn" dipporanl at irvoluntory
atopo, and ia a dangorous inconvonionco to civilian vohs.
(11)
froquont ronowal on ranr ralo bonjos.
Rocr axlo lighting will aluaye bo usod in convoy• Whito print roquiros
Ciai)
Convoy gloça nust bo on tho firat und Inat JSK vuho not on pi oonda
2 otz enra und B/dovn voha hich neo linblo to bocoa dobachod fost tio convoy.
(iv) V.T.M. in fog ond blaolout should bo autontionlly ruducod.
On an ovoracos Lo of C., P.0o :11 probably opur to on tho rnintonor:a
On long runa in thio country or rhoru 1.0. doua not oporetos 08. Ge
wousd Do voll adviaod to inctituto a T.C.P at lonst ovory 50 milus.
conizot poinde would ropare eny unduo dolny to tof. by rc.
Infornation on
sush dol yo 4a vf vit.] inporinnoo to coln 1i.d in dociding futuro availability.
Thoy ciso hovo diroct booring upon tho off-loading prograrmo, tud ooy ndi.
(i) Thoro in roun for noro ingonuity in dofonco nt halta.
hnlts.
Thero i0 a tondoncy for dofonco trucko to runnin in puuition in thu corvoy at
innodintoly a holt io ronchod.
Pl conda ahould ruoco a cuitablo loo, if nocoau.ry off tha ruuto
org riood by 1.0.
(11) Whon a harboue aroa in soloctod fur tho holo ouy, dufungo oluuld bo
power and onnblos concontr tion.
Thio in aoco nonouro ovorcoroa thu inadoquacy of firo
Vonicla Standims.
It iu oaront that tho irpurtnaco of stinding voha on
hurd ground at all tinon in nt fully approcintod. It io ono of tho firat
thinge to bo chockod in cn harbour croc.
BRAFEIC CI
porirg traf
Thia
provon
axon
1nto
to D. P
tлuзo
тi1Z
always
