- 8 -
remainder under Major Pnynter had started to land on QUEEN RED Beach when the
DUKW following him recoivod a direct hit which blew the engine away and wounded'
both drivers.
The drivers were put ashoro and evacuated. but as at this time there
wore a numbor of DUKWs witing to co through the oxit
whole lot round and put back to soa.
It had, in fact,
bpon particularly heavy in the vicinity of tho DUKWs as
they were boing marshallod at sea, but fortunataly no othors wero hit.
DUKWs alroady ashore had been cloared through the exit,
the romaindor were brought
in and their loads
discharred at the various Sector Stores Dumps.
At tho samo timo the 4x4 vehiclos under Capt.
R.E. Swan were
discharging cargo
from boachod ICTs into tho Soator Stores Dumps.
Swan's report attachod).
Ono W.O. and two NCOs roccivod inmodiate avards. (Military Medal) for their work in
this part of the Assault, the citations for which are as follows :-
T/164917 CSM Paino B.F. = 39 Coy RASC (GI). .
At COLLEVILIE, FRANCE,
on 6 JUNE 44,
this W.O. was in charre of part
of the rocce olomont of this Coy and landed at H + 120 mins.
He wont for-
ward into enemy hold ground with Capt. SMITH, 1 BUCKS,
to carry out a racco
for siting of A Tk runs for 1 BUCKS,
which were for the protoction of part
CSM Paine roturned to the Boach and collected the vohs concernod.
CSM Paine was warned by British
SS Tps that tho path along whích ho was going
to procood was undor firo from tho
SS Tps sustaining, casualties nist
this W.O. was boing riven this information.
Despite this warning this V.o.
took the vohs to the proposod gun sito at which placo the gun was off-loadd
and placod in position.
By his initiativo and rosourccfulnoss and without
regard to his porsonal sucty,
onsured that tho gun was taken to
tho run sito.
Troughout tho wholo of D day this w.o. by his coolness and
goneral manner was an inspiration to all personnol of this Coy with whon ho
T/66994 Cpl Vybourno E. - 39 Coy RASC (GT).
The above naned NCO displayed outstanding initintiva and devotion to
duty whon landing on tho beachos at COLLEVILTE - sur MER on tho Fronch coast
at I + 120 minutos on 6 JUNE 44.
On bein: landed he obsorvod that one of the o: its was blocked by a
partly dostroyed un and that tho othor was
clogred with vohicles.
ing vas still in progross on and noar the first Intoral.
This was also
Col Wybourne mado a porsonal reace of
the sitos for No.s 2
ana 3 Sector Storos Dumps raspectively and placos to make a suitablo oxit.
He then proccodod to offect an oxit by organising a party of tho personnel
Io not as many vohs,
both whoalod and tracked,
off the boach
as soon as possiblo ana procoodal vith his om Soction to the SSDs. with
pre-loads of 6 par NIk uns for 1 BUCKS and 5 KINGS Rogts.
By his. action
this NCO undoubtedly onablod a larra number of vehs to leave the beaches
which may have otherwise boon destroyed by the enony.
He thon dolivored his
runs to the corrcet site under fire from enemy mortars to enablo them to bo
in notion against the onomy in defence of the BNA.
Throughout the ensuing 24 hrs this NCO
inspiration to all ranics,
was an
und played a frent port in tho off-loading of
very valuable ammunition from beachod ICTs roguired for the carly stages
or the oporation.
2/6350116 Cel Mooro C. - 39 COy RASC (CT).
Tho abovo named ICO displayod outstending initiativo and devotion to
duty when landing
on the banchos a COLIEVILIE sur NER on the French coast
at H + 120 minutos on 6 JUNE W4.
On being landed he obsorvod that one of tho oxits ins blocked by a
• partly dostroyed run and that the other was cloprod with ohs.
was still in progress on and noar the first latoral.
Cpl Mooro mado a porsonal rocco of tho sitos for Nos. 2 and 3 Sector
Storos Dumps
respoctivoly and placos to mako a suitablo oxit.
ceodod to offoct on odt by or anising; a party of the personnol on the beach.
