679
that the establishment of such a
he work of the billeting ofes
be arranged.
explained that householders need not fear that the whole of the
prepared for distribution tot
work will necessarily fall on those who enrol. Local authorities
tify the local authority that they
d in this roll.
A copy of this l
randum (Appendix A) and as
ion. Whilst many householders may have an initial objection
i to the Council. Arrangements:
to receiving children, the Government believe that they will have
Office to deliver the leaflets fe
general opinion behind them in ensuring that unwillingness alone
Attached to each leaflet is a fim
*ll not absolve a householder from sharing in a general
rint " Official Paid " dending:
ch is to be torn off and retur
24. The local authority wIll be responsible for making
ouseholder. Before the leafe:
arrangements for keeping the roll, which should include the
name and address of each member. If when called on a member
it will be necessary for tel
refuses without good reason to receive a child his name should
printed or stamped on the had
be removed from the roll. Persons who are already receiving
address to which they wish it
children are entitled to have their names included. The Minister
I not accept the leaflets for di
should, in due course, be informed of the number enrolled and
The leaflets will be sent to
it will be appreciated if this information may also be supplied to
ilitate the printing of the adie
the County Councl and Senior Regional Officer.
I authorities they should be fit
25. This mobilisation of the billeting resources and this stimu-
mally be done by the priter, i
lation of the community effort will be an important factor in
may find it necessary to a
success in coping with children who have already been evacuated
the cost may be charged to $
to the district. It will also help in the provision of such addi-
tional billets as must from time to time be found as a part of the
administration of the present scheme." There must necessarily
ild consult with the head f
indicate the offices to tich a
be a certain amount of movement, eg, among children who are
hould be sent. It will be le
leaving an elementary school in one district for higher education
the head postmaster, by E
in another district, for which provision of billets must be made
lefined boundaries, of the ar
in the receiving districts. It may be that cases will arise in the
be made. Every effort she
evacuating areas, as a result of the restoration of compulsory
* supplies of the leaflet 21
education or for some other reason, in which it is found neces-
s for distribution not later te
sary to offer to individual parents a further opportunity of
having their children evacuated to a receiving area as soon as
arrangements can be made.
" be m i to the hangin
The lace
26. In all such cases the evacuating authority will consult
scheme explained
with the billeting and education authorities in the receiving area
mist the heip in this word it
Valet
in order that the necessary arrangements may be made in
but of Women's
advance, and the Minister hopes that such arrangements will
readily be made.
organisations in the
ements for reception
ouseholders that the
nah bon that in Than
Evacuation of School Children in event of Air Raids.
27. As indicated in the Circular with which this Memorandum
n laid on the c
is enclosed, further plans for largescale evacuation of children
use a householder come
are only to be put into operation when the Government decide
Toll he will immediatel
that, in view of the development of air raids on land, conditions
only be liable to
ghbours.
It should to
make this course necessary. Advance notice of the operation
will be given to local billeting and education authorities, but
3. Number and sex of children
billeted
L. Harber and sex of admi
billeted
10
932•
Defence
Lodge
equired t
R. Day,
of Regulat
Rules 193
e a complai
witing sta
m Clerk or
on the Chair
airman of th
o furnish in
he grounds o
Idered and de
e after it ha
; of the compl
take such inve
not dispose c
e opportunity
ires" .
