2:
a iuonta.)
Sheet. 0. 8.
" Motoon.
3 tuart
Group to be taken for Deferce:
Airy 3,940:
1
E bown Torry?'-
1 3-ton:
1
Sotor Cycle.
detraled
and mill
Ref
upon arrival by 0.d.
a to 10c ty B2 toon th later
Sheet 36/
"B*F" (Workshops .)
5.
ZESPONSIBILTNY 2OZ RUNES,
(a) Immediately a Pump has been requisitioned/hired O.C., R.A.S.C. through
0.0., G.3. D. concerned will place the Pump on charge to the appropriate Unit.
(b) The Unit is responsible for the operation of the Pump and for its maintenance
(see para 6 (c) below).
6. REPAIRS ZO PULPS.
(a) 1 repair of Petrol Pumps is specialised work and with the exception of certain
electrical repairs, is undertaken by the Petroleum Board. Under no circumstances
will a Unit attempt to carry out repairs with military personnel. Electrical
repairs will have to be specially dealt with the Local Contractor or by other
arrangement, but it is expressly forbidden that a Unit should in any way tamper
with the electrical mechanisn of Electrical Pumps.
(b) Responsibility for notifying the Petroleum Board or other Contractor of repairs
required, lies with the 0. C., C.S.D. concerned, to whom Units must report full
details of defect and repairs required, stating at the same time whether the
repair is necessitated by fair wear and tear or by accident. O.C., C.S.D. must
be notified of the details. Attention is drawn to A.C.I. 2298 of 1942.
(o) On the other hand, maintenance of the Pump is a Unit responsibility. By
maintenance is meant the cleaning, oiling, exterior painting and general care
pf tho outfit. No disantling of mechanism will be undertaken under the
definition of (maintenance). This does not, however, in any way affect the
instructions applying to " immobilization "
7. HANDING OVER OF PUMPS.
(a) Io a relieving Unit
(i) Unit will hand over complete outfit including all immobilization equipment
where applicable and voucher over remaining Petrol.
(11) A certificate, countersigned by the relieving Unit, will be rendered by the
outgoing Unit to 0.C., C.S. Do concerned, who will notify O.C., R.A. S. Co
(iii) Outgoing Unit will ensure that an adequate supply of Petrol to meet the
requirenents of the incoming Unit is in the Tank
Where no Unit is relieving.
(1) Units will ensure that Petrol remains are reduced to a minimun, and whenever
possible to suction level .
(11) Units will handover complete outfit (leaving dipstick in tank), including a11
keys, and immobilization equipment where applicable to 0.C., C.S.D. Alf Petrol
remaining in the tank will be vouchered to the 0. C., C.S. D. 02 A.P. G. 1033.
9.
(a
(b)
( c)
(a)
(e)
(e)
20.
S
i
Dis'
hire
are
Diatr
anoun
