thon 68
I MANATELT OVEN
ublished by 2
Transport Calumn
RASC
NEWS.
27. Nov 4E:
AMERICAN FIRST ARNY.
Amerloan First
Arity traops have paptured WEISWElLER and were last night abcut
a nile beyond it.
MERICAN THIRD ARIE.
American Third Army troops supported by 2,000 fighter bonbers made substantia.
advances yesterday. Further south the enemy were in full retreat towards the FITNE.
ATRa Alliod sanes had a bis day shooting up traffio behded the Gorman tines,
bombing Pontoon Bridges across the river, RAT Lanoasters attacked targets in Waster
Germany caterday and all returned. Over 1100, American Heavios Pron Britain escurted
by 700 fighters attacked targets' in N.W. Gornny, noluding Germany's largest oil
onery fighters. Aerioan losses were 37 bonbers and 13 fighters.
GANGRAT SIR HINK BATTAND WILSON LA gUINg tO WISHINGION to tale the place ce
the late FIELD MARSHIE SIR JOIN DITh as head uf the BRITISH JOINT STAFF MISSICH. He
will aat aiso as MR CHURChILL's, Military Representative to MR ROOSEVELT.
LEXINDER is prompted to the rank of Fiolla Marshall fron June 4th,
tho day his armies
aptured ROME. He suodogs GENTRAL WILSON as Supreme Comandor in the Moditatamean.
GENERAL MARK CLARK takes the new Fiela Marshal'a pinoe as C in 0 of Allied foroes in
the Fiold (ITLIT).
FASTERN FRONT,
The Rustions have trison a railway junotion loss than 30 miles NoE. of BUDAPEST
and have gained ground in OZECHO SLOVAKTA.
PACIFIC.
SLTPAN.
Aerican Super Fortresses have made apother attack on TOKIO. They flew fron
AROUND THE @ ALUMN
'GAY PARED'. How ofton has the average Britisher heard this definition, aismissing
the proposition as being right out of his general scheme. Then cane the Arry, where
he ohecrfully dispensed. with his oivilion comforts, and when operations comnenoed,
ho learnt to appreciate, & rost on sone waggon, or in s'hole in the ground' with, perhaps
the weloome diversion of an oocasional football natch. Then the niracle happenned -
ho vas on a 48 trip to PiRIS!
The journes con be dismissod as Inoidental, thoughts being aocupied with
thinga to cone'. The weloone, and preliminary talk by the bluff but gental Sergeant
Major. What followed was as afficient and swift as the 'lifti which took you up to.
your room where the beon of olean sheets, and hot bath are awaiting. Ah! a creased
overcoat! 'Oui Messieur!'. Swift hands carry it away for valeting with an assurance that
it would be rendy far the evening excursion.
Having wished the traces of the journey away, you fell nare ready to cope
with the situation. A doscent to the Hotel Canteen to reouperate ones oigarettes and
othea essentials gives a better sense of propórtion as'the new sensations aro somewhat
stertling.
Dinner is to be served at seven, but light refreshmonts are availabla, then
without any further ado we go out on a rocomnissance. We sample the Metro and arrive
in MONTMARTy for an Irediate photograph to be roady before we lonto, the tine factor
is overthing.
The shops look attractive being fairly will stocked, and the afternoon soon
goes by.
It is dack by the time we returned; a wash and brush up, and dinner is served.
This consists of soup, followed by chiokon exoallently cooked, with doference for the
soldier's appetite, Caffee and suset naturally follow.
Now oones the diffioult part of the whold set up'. Where shall I got Below
Zies PARIS, Queen of Cities, scintillating, beokoning, waiting! What is a non to do?
Something is done 'Evening in Paris! assumos a new and persomi significanoe.
(Cont)
