OPERATION
OVERLURD..
1Q CR/SC 21 Transport Colun
the Operation including tho training, the assault anû tho rotivitios
immodiatoly subsewont.
PART I.
raining.
s was long and arduous, taking in all ovor 12 nonths, but whon tho actual
no I thin' we all loakad upon it as just another ẞ..... Exorcise!,
, is a fair imprassion of the men's thouhts at tho timo of the notual
In all tho Exorcisos wo did, vory valunble lessons vore lourned.
3e JANiZEN it was vory obvious that if tho job was to function officiontly,
or RASC organization would have to ba sot up within tho Beach Sub Aron.
known, this was ovontully dono by including a CRASC, with a norml HQ, to
d and control all RASC vithin tho Beach Groups.
Many oxporiments vere orridd out as to the corroct method of working,
i sure that the way ours ins split up was practical, and worked sinoothly and
I may say that in the only storos thoro ins considerablo opposition
both Sub Aroa and Toach Group Comandors on the mannor in which wo vore to
and it uns only tor consultation with DST (Cricadior CLOVER) and DDST (Col.
icK), 21 Army Group tint on omor was Issuad by NG. shorin; oxactly how this
d be dono..
In the only staros of trainin it ves novor roalised how muan thu Rise meant .
tho shor as a wholo - it vas difficult to mice the other Arns undorstand that
ch Sub trons and Boach Groups vero an Administrative urgenization,
and that at
st 70% of the whole shor vas an RiSC problon.
Furth rmorc, that the CRASC had,
the bingons command in the whole sot up.
The ROUNDABOUT Exorciscs wore
as they rave us the opportunity of training DUk drivers,
and also gave
all opportunities of stulyin; tho lay-out of tho IM. - it wes a pity that moro
no was not soont on Transhipent roas and sone propor rules evolvod, as, whon
no timo camc for sottin: theso up,
thoro sooned littlo coordination of thought.
APTER ana FAIUS were both oxcellont landin exercises and gave DUKi ina GT Coy
rivers first closs treinin and, in addition, the GI Coy wns ablo to protise
nterproofing which ovontually stool them in very good stoad.
No vohicles wera
Lost on thu acturl landing, due to this causo.
CROWN and. ANCHOR (both Inding
oxercisos, wore good value showing the concostion on the benchos in an Assault
For 101 Beach Sub Arca our mothod of working was to attach one Captrin,
as thoS & T ropresentative with ono Clork and ono Motor Cyclist to orch Bonch
This officur noted in mny rospocts. as a BRASCO,:
Tho systom was found
invaluablo, and I was fortunto in having two first rato officors to do
Doth Beach Group Commundors aitorwards statod that they not only did
a first rate
job but that they vould havd had considorabld difficulty in carrying.
on without them.
Thuy donlt with all Transport aid Supply matters within tho
Boach Group and as those were ouch ovor 4,000 strong with Navy,
Amy end Air Forco
wits undor commend, it vill be roclisod thes those officors had no oasy tesk.
They also understudiod tho Staff Captain nt Poach Group HQ so that they wore at
nIl tines, vory much in ovidenco in the Dach Group organiantion.
In addition to commanding, all RASC wits,
the CRASC notod as S & T Advisor
to the Sub Aroa Commandor.
In the ensc of the Potrol Dopots and DIDs,
Group Commandors wero rosponsible for thom on Inling and lso for thoir sotting up
and onrly operntion.
this conpromise ins agrood and worked quito artisfrctorily.
They vere, aftor tho innedinto Lasnult phrac, the rosponsibility of CRASC.
DUci training ns ni vithout its difficultios,
owing to the supply position
of! the DUlls,
but vo vore fortunato in having sufficiont time to
do a numbor
beth day and nicht exorcisco in rolly rough worther which made the men confident
