- 4/- .
PART
III,
Condentration and Assembly:
1N3 BeTal Day wth 101 Beeoh Sub Area, together with Corps and Army Overhouus
vert into oonoentration in the south of England at a fairly early stage.
the
necessary work in arowing now vohloles- preparing those alrely in possession -
drawing pre-loade checking Assault soales - olothing & documentation etc was
proceeded with.
Some of the Cange wore wall run, others not so good, but on the
whole the organisation was oxtremely well done.
Our major trouble whilst in this
aron mee with vohiolas and vehlolo mares. The pUKVs, aftor much hard work, wore
all colleotod, painted, signed, and ready, with the exception of one platoon of 633
Coy RASQ (cy) which was to be used for Modical evacuation and which arrived in a
This platoon
attention and last minute instructions. They wero also incomplete in domestio
vohioles and personnel, and gave us a very big headache.
die shar
Further trouble was experionaed by 39 Coy RASC (GI),
At tho very last moment
orders were received to collect their now vohioles - some lustin - somo Chevrolet -
sone Canadian Pords. Reprosentations wore made to higher, authority regerding this
It was pointed out that other formations, evon Div R'SC,
who
tut wo,
on when the responsibility restod for the maintenance of the Assault Div were not
copsidered of suspiciont importance to warant any, special aitention.
1s thoro were
only approximately 6 days left at our disposal, there was only qne thing to do -
get on with the job'.
Drivers were sent to collet these vehicles
Glasrow
Liverpool all over the country
that offloorerand en wireoul thot evary thing had to, bo done in suơh a mighly rush
but the most galling factor
of the whole thing was,
for nonths and could have bein collectod, run in, aid ready for the jub weeks before.
The voiclas, although new, were in an appalling state and to journey baci to the
campeny location and the ultimate assembly in location was a nightnero that I would
pot ask offioers and men to o through again under normal circunstances, much less
on the eve of an Assault.
The vohioles were literally littered all over the country with all types of
mechenioal troubles, some duo to faulty assembly and sono due, to damy etc caused by
having been standing about for months.
If anyone had really tried to wrock the party
it could not have been done more thoroughly.
In some cases vehicles had even been
assembled wrongly steering drop arms fell off,
nuts and bolts finger tight and
Innumerablo technical faults whioh should never have happenod.
This was a tine,
without being unduly critical, when the RASc sighed for its on vohicle orgunisation
once again, With only threo
days to go the vehicles arriva - most of them ind to
bo painted as they were still 'desertized" - signs put on and finally waterproofod.
The difficultios attendant upon this proceding were sanothing that I hope will never
happon again. we finally finished up with the whole of the Unit Workshops, somo
Airborne Div RASC Workshops who happened to be in the some Cuay, plus oue hundred and
ton fitters fron 3 Div RASC,
3 Div REME and any others we could lay our hands on -
and so the job was done for the most important Assault on the nost important front in
the most important War the British Any has ever been called upon to Right!
Tho.
crowning partof the final prepurations was the production of rAMIC b.
Oilers,
ounter orders and many other types of orders had been given regarding thess vut still
they did not arrive.
Officers and men were sent all over the country - everyone
contacted that could possibly be contacted but still no FAITO's.
Finally Connander
101 Beach Sub Area contacted GOC 3 Br Inf Div who in turn wis tropired, to go to
Genera. Montgonery.
I Saw DST Second try, who, through Ordance eventually got in
touch with an Ordnance Depot who were ordered to make up sonething suitable.
Those
vere collected but the last unkind blow was that the vehicles ordered to collect wort
lespatched to Hambledon, Surrey, instoad of Hamblodon,
Hants, although the correct map
reference had been given,
I personally collected thoso FAMIO's; issucd to tho last
vohioles to go and finally went to PORTSMOUTH whore I joined up with the Assault Craft •
on which I was, to-sail 2 days after tho tino that I was due aboard and only cot albarl
by a speatal caft lored to no by the Navy.
