- 2-.
amount of mortar and artillery fire on the sea and the beach.
grounding ICT 301 stuck on an underwater obstacle and the resultant explosion
blew a holo in her stern but she grounded well up the beach with her cargo intact.
At the time all'Army personnel were 'forward' ready to got off and sly Naval
personnel suffered.
ICTs 297 and 301 touched down side by side on QUEEN WHITE
Beach at H + 120 and all vehicles suocessfully drove ashore through 3'6" to 4'0"
At this time thore was only one exit from the Beach consisting of a wooden
bridge made of two joined wooden ramps.
The Boach was jarmed with AFVs and SP
guns kiting to get off.
The SP guns were engaging the enemy at a range
Shortly after we landod a towed 6 par A/Ik gun received a direct hit
whilst on the bridge and the offside whoel slipped down between the raps and the
lot ought firo.
An order was passed down by word of mouth from a source I was
unable to discover to dig in.
It was obvious to no that if this was allowed in
the vicinity of my vehicles, they, being the only untracked vehicles
then on the
would find it impossible to get off.
I therefore ordered that no holes
should be dug in their vicinity and those already dug should be filled in.
ordered my men to lie down and went
to recce an alternative exit.
possible to reach any others I instructed ny Corporals - Cpl Moore and Cpl Wybourne
to organise a party and probe through the mine
We Opened an exit about
15 yards wide.
By this time the blocked exit had been cleared and we were able
to get two streams of traffic noving.
Unfortunately,
one of the roads loading to
the main lateral which should have been clearod by AVREs, was blocked by a tank
whos track was broken and a half tracked vehiclo in similar difficulties.
cleared a passage to the side of the tank and I drove a lorry through without
arriving on the main lateral where the SSDs wer
sited approximately
As I could see when we beached that it would be some time
before we got
off, I made another 3 vehicles available for the SSDs by off-loading
3 guns on the beach and putting them on tow.
As tho majority of the guns were deploying
in the direction of Colleville-sur-
Orne I preceded them on ny /c but was
stopped by small arms and nortar fire from
the Carch tower at Colleville.
I halted the convoy and we engaged the enemy in
the towes with a Bren but with little apparent effect.
I was fortunate in
looating one of our SP guns in the vioinity which silenced the eneny with a diroct
After seeing the guns to their dispersal area I went back to the beach and
met LOTs 341 and 347 which were due to beach on QUEEN RED.
touch in there and beached on PETER RED.
347 was unable to
I took 3 guns
through to the OUISTREHAN
area and Capt. Smith, Oxs & Bucks Rogt, took away the other
During the course of the morning all vehicles returned to the beach with the
exception of one which was unable to leave the gun site owing to enery activity.
I looated it the next day and brought it in.
remainder of the day in offloading and conveying to the SSDs.
We worked stoadily throughout the
The chief difficulty
experienced being the fact that each of the Dumps was sited on a minefield.
often had to wait whilst further space was explored or nines exploded.
dusk snall arms fire broke out from the houses overlooking the beaches which was
answered by heavy and indiscrinate fire from the Army Personnel on the beaches and
in particular from 20 mn Cannon fire from beached naval craft.
Several of my
lorios were hit and one was set on fire and aurpletely destroyed.
considerable difficulty was added to the work of offloading by enemy action and
also the Smoking of the
beaches by the Navy.
Off-loading of the four craft was comploted by the following night and all
got off on the tide with the exoption of LOT 301.
