679
7/ 20 г/ I
кне
1943.
PART I
SELECTION AND POSTING OF POTENTIAL OFFIGERS
General
1. The importance of finding suitable personnel serving in the ranks for
training as officers has been constantly stressed since the outbreak of war.
Although the supply of candidates may exceed the requirements in some
cases, it is essential for the search to be continued. Where men who are fitted
to hold commissions have not been earmarked as potential officers and the
necessary procedure carried out, then it shows both a failure of duty and a
failure to appreciate one of the essential needs towards the complete war
In no circumstances will a potential officer be held back on the grounds
that he cannot be spared from a unit.
2. The duty of finding suitable men rests with the C.O. and subordinate
commanders, as only by close contact with individuals can those who are suit-
able be picked out.
The lives of men and the efficiency of the Army depend on a high standard
of leadership, and only those individuals with personality, power of command,
intelligence and ability must be selected. The qualities of leadership are made
up of character, knowledge and confidence.
3. C.Os. must impress upon their subordinate officers the desirability
Subordinates will be encouraged in every way to bring to notice the names
of developing leaders who may be found among men under their command
of suitable potential officers.
The selection and the subsequent training of
canardates while they are still in the unit are among the most important duties
which a C.O. has to perform.
To overcome the inevitable difference in the standard of candidates selected
by different units, War Office Selection Boards are established as a levelling
Procedure for Selection of Suitable Candidates
4. The procedure which has been designed to secure the selection and
training of all soldiers suitable for appointment to emergency commissions
consists of :—
(a) Recommendation from a unit.
(b) Interview, selection and grading by a War Office Board (vide
Appendix D) or by other interviewing officers as specially detailed.
(c) Submission of A.F. B 2617 to the War Office for the purpose of posting
candidates.
War Office Control
5. Questions affecting the selection of potential officers, allotment of
vacancies at O.C.T.Us., and transfer of cadets between O.C.T.Us. are dealt
with by the department of the Adjutant-General, and all communications on
these subjects will be addressed to the Under-Secretary of State,
The War
Office (A.G.1.E.). The training of cadets at O.C.T.Us. is dealt with by the
department of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff and all communications
on this subject will be referred to the appropriate branches of that department.
5
