2:
121 Futoon.
Sheet, 0. 21
посости 2g 1940.
150 tor
3-tol cycle:
Hap Ref. Sheet 36/
to be
upon arrival by 0.d.
Order-of Maroh. I.Q: & °C", "A" "B" »р" (workahopa,)
reducad fron 1/64th gallon (27 oz {1) to 1 0z (f1).
2. The terms of Allowanoe Regs 1938 para 34 under which an issue of rum (or tea/
cocoa in lieu) my be authories in exceptional circumstances, may be extended to A.r. S.
personnel.
A.C.I. 2117/42. ISSUE OF RUM TO MOWBORS OF THE HOME GUARD
The following amend will be made to A.C.T. 2311 of 1941 regarding the issue of rum
In certain oircunstances to personnel of the Hone Guard, consequence on the reduotion
in the scale of issue authorised under Allow Regs 19 paras 34 and 35 and 1.C.I. 1777/42
Line 7 Delete 1/64th gal and substitute 1 oz f1.
RASC (1) 2096/12PENANDS FOR RUI
4 case has recently occurred where the provision of D. R. 0. 93/42 and NCO 2242/41 have
not been complied with when demands for Rum, to replace quantities consumed from reserve
stock, have been forwarded to Officur 1/o Supplies.
Till you please note that NO demands for replacement of issues can be accepted
by Os 1/a Supplies unless all supporting docunents are attached for actual issues made viz
1. Unit indents indicating no of rations issued
2. S.M.O. 's certificate of recommendation.
3. Divisional Comander's covering approval.
The F.l. & Aolo will not accept the authenticity of any issue unless supported by
the above documents.
Failure to comply may, therefore, resilt in the perferment of a
charge for the value of the run consumed.
Stocks of run will be checkud periodically, at the same time as the inspection of
reserves rations is carried out, and a certificate will be forwarded monthly to
appropriate 0 1/c Supplies of the quantity held.
Records will be open to inspection at all times
You are reminded that rum held by you is on charge of the 0 i/c Supplies concerned
(Eron 0. C RASC Northumbrian Area - letter addressed to units copies to C.S. D. s)
APPROLIDION: ID SPECHINE ICER OB DVANCE.
witten or mental, vill bo in tho rolloving
NOTES ON THE METHOD OF DEALING WITH AND ADJUSTING
DISCROPANCIES IN CONSIGNENT OF ROA.S.C. SUPPLISS
Forwarded with W O I BM/1965/42 (S.C. 6.) 9 July 42.
If the methods of checking and loading at consignor's end, and checking and
off loading at consigne's ond are satisfaotory, there should be no discrepancies
excupt those which aru attributablo to loss on rail, with a consequent sound case for
for recovery from the Railway Company.
2.
More a consignor obsurved that ons particular consigne reports discrepancies
with any frequenoy, the circunstances will be reported through Command H. 2. (Food
Supplies) to the Inspeotor of Supply and Petrol Depots, B-M.A. Buildings, Tavistock
Squaro, London, V.C.l. in order that a special investigation on be arranged if
considered necessary. Sinilarly, Directorates responsible for dealing with
applications for writes-off received fron Supply Depots will arrange with the Inspector
of Supply and Petrol Depots for a detailed investigation where the number of losses in
consignment emanating fron a particular depot is comparatively high.
3. In dealing with discrepancies, the first consideration is for both the consignor
and consignee to verify, by thoroughly re-cheoking stooks and documents, that there is
no possibility of error in the figures recorded at either end. It is also
incumbent on the consignee to notify the railway company of any discrepancy whether
or not a olain is referred subsequently (see para 197 Regulations for Supply,
Transport & Barraok Services, 1930 and A.C.I. No 186 of 1941).
This action
should be taken in spite of the fact that the seals may be found intact or that
loading and off loading is performed by military labour; in this latter connection
attention is drawn to the Menorandum of Agreement between the War Department and.
Railway Authorities (dopendix XL, Rogulations for S.T.& B Services)
4. To assist in deciding who will accept and adjust the discrepancies the following
rules will be observed.
(a) Aotion b consignee
The first action must be accareful inspuction of seals prior to opening of
complete trucks. If, after initial offloading and checking, there is
a discrepancy compared with quantities charged, the 0.i/a Supplius will
innediately arrange a re-check of the stack or stacks involved. For this
purpose it should be the rule to verify that stocks prior to intake of the
consignant are in agreument with stock records. If the di serepancy is
confirned by the re-check, formal notification will be sent to the Railway
(b) Lotion by consignor.
Company and discrepancy report rendered to the consignor.
On recuipt of notification from consignee, action will at once be taien to
PIO
