then proceed by lisa.
VI.
cars to
General Hospital loated near fail or rcadhead and normally alletted
on a basis cf one per Corps.
This is a fully equipped hospital with 200 beds,
but capacity can be increased if requirsa. menbers of Q.4.I.li.N.S/ are provida
for work at C.C.Ss or A.S.Cs if situation pernits.
Cases nay stay here for
treatient er, where necessary, be evacuated, by in.d.C. Cars to
viii. Medical Rail or Rcadhead (M.R.H.)
Suitable cases will, of curse,
travel to this point direct fren C.C.ss and not pass through the General Hospital.
M.R.H. should be sited away fron other "heads" and there will nornally be one por
Corps. Fron here casualties will be caveyed down the L. of C. in ambulance
Trains and/or cars of the unbulance Car Coy R.A.S.C. to
Base Hospital, Convalescent Depots ote and, in suitable cases, to
Hospital Ships bound for Home or other places away fron the theatre of war.
arncured Formations.
The basis of the systen is the sane in an Incured Division, but owing to
greater nobility and the extensive area evered, the task ef ccllection is more
difficult.
The arna Regimental li.O. usually has a Secut Car and casualties nay
be collected in this or brought in on the back of returning a.F.Vs er, if
circunstances pernit, collected by S-Bs of the It Fd amb etc.
Casualties nay
have to be held at a.D.S. until evacuation is possible, and for this reason the
Hod. cf a It Fa anb is nore elabcrately equipped with nedical stores than is that
of a Fd anb.
Subsidiary A.D.us nay be forned by the Sections, which alsc have
a heavier complenent cf nedical equipment.
The prinary function of the unit,
however, is collection and evacuation.
In the Division the Tank Brigade works in close co-operation with the
Infantry Brigades and will thus be inclided in the Divisional plan for the
collection of casualties.
6.
7.
Organization affecting R.A.S.C.
Fiela Anbulance (Divisional Ircops. 1 per Inf Bde).
R.A.Di.C unit
with R.a.S.C. personnel attached.
Nernally works between R.a.Ps,
A.D.Ss and F.J.Ss.
Rozos.C. responsible for operating transport only.
(b)
Light Fiela unbulance vivisional Ircops (1 per rnd Bde) •
Sinilar
to Field ambulance, but sonewhat differently organized and equipped.
Fiela Dressing Station (Divisional and Corps Ircops).
with R.A.S.C. personnel for cperation of transport.
R.a..C. unit
Nornally works close up to h.D.ss when in a bivision.
Fully nobile.
Motor ambulance Convoy (1 in Corps Ircops).
own Warkshops and connanded by a lajer.
R.A.S.C. unit having its
leaical services.
Under peraticnal control of
Has a ledical Platcon attached.
casualties fron 1.D.Ss, F.D.Ss, A-s.C's and C.C.Ss as far as Wi.R.H.
Ambulance Car Company (I of C. Troops) •
Workshops and ocnnanded by a hajer.
R.a.S.C. unit, having its ewn
Medical Services.
Under operational control •f
for casualties nay be required.
Normally works in the L of C area wherever transpert
In aadition to (a), (b) and (e) there are other R.a.C. units e go ra
Hygiene Sections, Field surgioal Units, Field Transfusien Units, which have
transport, and in all such cases this is operated by the R.a.s.C.
Casualties in the R.A.59,0.
There is enly 1 l.0. provided fop the whole of the divisional R.a.S.C.
Normally, he establishes a R...P, with the Company, the position of which is nest
central in relation to the ethers.
of Roa.S.C. personnel must be trained in first aid.
Within each R.a.S.C. Coy an adequate number
R.A.S.C. casualties will be evacuated (direct, if necessary) to the nearest
/Uressing.....
5.
6..
