2025 12:49:13
Open
t duan)
1/2025 12:49:13)
1679
Royal Army Servica Corpu
No. 202 0.C.T.U
TRAINING.
1. INTRODUCTION. t cannot be strossed too often that The end of all training is the
Battlefield", and with this in view all practical training must be aB
possible,and every man must
roalize that this is the goal for which he is working,
and ho must thommon tot the bint deman one PleAse do, and poon thato)
defence - collective ( as in Field Training)
must be as seriously practised in the R.A.S.C.
The objact of this lecture is to indicate the organization and method
of training within R.A.S.C. units, and to bring before students some of the
difficulties they will encounter.
&. THE OBJECT DF TRAINING.
The object of military training is to produce eficient leaders, units
well disoiplined, hardy and skilled in the use of their weapons, and faniliar with
heir duties and responsibilities as part of the R.A.S.C. Training is not a
ime occupation, it is not something distinct from the daily work of the wit, i
should be going on all the time.
5. THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR for and supervision of training in a company rosts
with the Commanding officer, but the training of each platoon is supervised by the
platoon officer, who in turn is responsible for the training of his platon - as
individuals and as a platoon. He will work out his own training progamne, see that
it is carried out as well as
train his instructors and see they attend specialist
Newly commissioned officers will find on reaching their units that
much of their time is spent in
training. - either in making out and supervising
programmes or in actual instruction. They will also find a serious lack of instruotors
and equipment,as well as time in which to train - but all these difficulties' can be
overcome if they take periods themselves, borrow instructors and equipment from other
improvise, and make intelligent use of training grants. At a Mobilization
Centre these difficulties are less acute.
40 GENERAI, ORGANIZATION.
Training must beprogressive, interesting, alive and carefully
prepared and as realistic as possible.
Much can be done within the unit and men cal also be sent on
outside courses - either regimental or specialist.
The governing factors are - the policy of the commanding officer -
the time available in training hours - the state of training of the men - the
numbers of instruc-ors available - the equipment.
It is necessary to take a long term policy and make useof
available outside lecture - think very seriously before holding a man back from a
Always arrange to have a reserve of personnel trained in any
particular subject to make allowances for men on leave, courses and casualties.
5. METHODS OF. TRAINING.
Personality knowledge of his subject, intelligence and imagination
are necessary in an instructer, and there is not limit
in the way in wheih he can
teach. Methods of instruction are best considered under the following headings:-
(a) Lectures. - should be kept to a minimun and not longer than 30 minutes.
Keep language simple, change tone of voice, illustrate points with actual
happenings, and use of diagrams etc. and don't attract attention by your
idiosyncracies e.g. twirling of cane etc.
(b) Demonstrations.
Demonstration and practise go hand in hand, and most
subjects are best taught by such means. Training must always be practical
- either indoor (use of models, sand tables, diagrans etc) or outdoor
(use of ground, siting of road blocks ete)
Discussions - Must be controlled - instructor must be able to summarise
the results
and stress the points to be learned.
Under this heading come
those discussions and lectures out of working hours given sometimes by
outsiders.
TRAINING PROCRAMITE."
A good officer can keep his men fully employed and intestestedin
instructional work for four and a half hours each day at the maximum, and he can
do this only by working over 12 hours a day himself.
Arrange the programme by
the week - pu it up in a prominent place - give a copy to the instruotors and one
to the "course" - keep two file copies.
•.../over.
