TIO
49:13)
7/20 F/I t
verification of such
service.
Birth and character certificates are not required.
para.
A.Fs. B 2617 will be similarly endorsed as in
14. Allotment to Arm
Candidates are
permitted to show one choice of arm only. In allotting
vacancies to O.C.T.Us. consideration will be given to the choice, but recom-
mendation will be made by the War Office Selection Board and final allotment
to an O.C.T.U. at home or overseas by the War Office according to the needs
of the Service and qualification of the individual.
Commanding Officers will advise candidates on their choice of arm and will
reasonably satisfy themselves
that candidates
technical qualifications which they may claim.
possess the educational and
of the method of allotment as stated above.
They will inform candidates
O.C.T.Us. are provided for the following arms and branches :-
R.A.C.
R.A. -Field, Anti-Tank, Anti-Aircraft (Gun), Anti-Aircraft (S/L), Coast
R.E. - Field, L. of C., Survey, Transportation, Movement Control (General
List).
Leadership" the standard of assessment should be according to the candidate's
choice of arm, and not necessarily the standard required for the arm in which
he is serving or for command of a platoon, troop, etc., on active service in the
field.
In cases where a C.O. considers a potential officer suitable for training at
an O.C.T.U. in an arm other than that in which he is serving he will amplify
the certificate at Part III of A.F. B 2617 accordingly.
When the C.O. completing the recommendation of Part III is below the
rank of lieutenant-colonel, the form will be countersigned by an officer of that
rank in the arm in which the candidate is serving or by a ist grade staff officer.
The officer countersigning Part III will interview
the candidate concerned
before countersigning A.F. B 2617.
The C.Os. certificate on old prints of A.F. B 2617 will be amended to read
by persiality in inteligence to be trained with a view to beins tea
.......................is suited
missioned."
Interview by War Office Selection Board
Infantry of the Line.—Rifle, Machine Gun, Motor, Reconnaissance.
R.A.O.C.—Administrative,
Mechanical Maintenance.
(Candidates
for Radio Maintenance will be given training at a special school instead
of at an O.C.T.U.)
R.A.O.C. and R.A.P.C. are technical arms.
Candidates who specify one of these arms as their choice, and also candidates
for R.A. must support their claim with detailed particulars of qualifications,
which will meet the requirements given in Appendix A
Candidates for R.E. (Postal Services) will be referred to the D.A.P.S.
for acceptance before recommended for that choice of arm.
15. Candidates will not choose Household Cavalry or Foot Guards unless
they have been accepted by the major-general commanding the Brigade of
Guards.
Board. (See para. 23.)
16. Commissions in the Intelligence Corps will normally be granted to
cadets selected by the War Office (M.I.1.X.) while undergoing their training
Intelligence Corps will not, therefore, be accepted as a choice of arm for posting
purposes.
17. Commanding officer's certificate.
Part III of A.F. B 2617 will be signed by the C.O. immediately he considers
a candidate is suitable to be trained for a commission.
as possible will be given under the headings " Military Character" and " Powers
of Leadership," and a general statement of the candidate's ability and attain-
ments will be attached to the form. In completing the heading
" Powers of
8
given in Appendix "D".
19. Candidates for the Household Cavalry and Foot Guards and soldiers
serving in alien companies of the Pioneer Corps recommended for commissions
in that corps are not required to be interviewed by a War Office Board. (See
Potential officers brought home from overseas in accordance with para. 38
will, where necessary, be interviewed for the purpose of grading under instruc-
tions which will be issued by the War Office.
Members of the Senior Training Corps who are holders of Certificate "B"
will be interviewed and graded at universities by special boards which will be
attended by Presidents of War Office Boards under command arrangements.
Submission of A.Fs. B 2617
20. A.Fs. B 2617 submitted to Command Headquarters for candidates
to be interviewed by War Office Boards will be accompanied by birth certificates
and unit nominal rolls in triplicate as at Appendix E.
21. The original nominal roll after completion of interviews will be for-
warded to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) accompanied by A.Fs. B 2617 of candidates
The duplicate will be returned to the unit with the A.Fs. B 2617
of candidates rejected.
22. On receipt of notification of acceptance for an O.C.T.U. units will
make an appropriate entry in the candidate's A.B. 64, signed and dated by the
C.O. for accepted candidates. A notification will also be published in Part II
Orders. No entries will be made for rejected candidates in A.B. 64 or in Part II
Orders. A.Fs. B 2617 of rejected candidates will be sent to the O. i/c records
concerned by units for filing.
23. A. Fs. B 2617 for candidates accepted for Household Cavalry and Foot
Guards will be forwarded direct to the War Office (A.G.1.E.) after completion,
as provided for in para. 15.
