5.
with punps, filters.anu sterilizers.. Hoyever thigurce of Supply mir become l
inaccessible and local súpplies have to be used.
(a) When a river or stream is used by u unit thrse seporate snu flagged zones
should be worked out on the bank in the following crier startins upstream: -
i Drinking and rauiator zone
- mrkoc by a white flag,
(ii animal watering zone
mr by a blue flag.
(2i1) ablution, person, clothes
marloc with a reu flag.
and vehicles.
(b) When undergrcund supplies are used no soone ef contamination i.e., cesspoc,,
nanure heap eto.,
should be within 100. of the well, and the natural faw
of this ground water
should be frou the vei
te the possible scurce of
contanination.
All scurces ct water supplies in the io
"Chunt be
negarded as contaminated and
therefore have to be purifica bescre huma son
Tests, classification
and purification must be carried cut.
(a) Testing:
A Horrock's Caseris supplies for this pur
as well os a case cf water
testing (poisons), No both centuin actan instructions as to how the
different tests are performed. (Dha insur astor will exhibit a Horreck's Case, •
(b)
Clarification.
By a precess of sedimentation.
In the tropics purifisation -ust alse adiapuny the clarifications process
to aveia bilhazia.
When secinentation is perforned as purt ere routine purification it is
assistea by the addition to the water of a chenical ecagulate (alinine ferric).
This hastens the precipitation.
The process is generally carried cut in two curvas tanks, with the further
aid of Stellar filters anu Kuselghur (a powder which itself forms a filter
layer) •
(3)
Purification and Sterilization
a) This process is perforned by beiling er ning chemicals te the water.
The boiling of clarifieu water is a sure wuy ef rendering it safe, but the
resultant water is flat and incipid.
his nethou is of special value to
small numbers of men in an enorg m
(b) The follewing chemioals can be usa!
•**;
(i) Chlorine.
(ii) Kalazone tablets - invivicurl • waver bottles. Can alsc be used in
boiling process.
(iii) scuiun Hypochlorite - for sulk,
(iv) Liquia Chlcrine.
6.
Other chenicals used are:- tonin, crine, icuine, (4 crops in a Water
bottle - wash out and leave for z anu tour, mane potassiun permanganate.
The anounts te be used can be ascertaine. fred the testing by the Herrcok's
Box apparatus. This apparatus is not used in process of sterilization.
SULLAGE WATER.
(a) All waste water from ablution benches and fren cockhouses, etc., must not
be allowed to run to waste witheut troatuent because it in its cwn turn
will bring about all the conuitions to be arcideu in the previous previs.
(b)
Treatment.
Return to earth
is suitablo → by way of & grease trap or scakage pit;
Return to river belew cwn scurce of supply, cr,
Pr,
purify by chenicals - copper sulphate and line (both R...S.C. supplies) ,
Waste earth threwn over evaporate residue, and nark with sign stating
contents of pit anu date ef use..
Cliften.
april 1942.
ae
Ion
ons
cin.
ice.
