Immediate Emergency Commissions
24. Candidates considered suitable for appointment to immediate emergency
with the procedure laid down in Appendix F.
commissions without training at an O.C.T.U. will be dealt with in accordance
25. Other ranks for appointment to emergency commissions as
masters, etc., will be dealt with in accordance with A.C.I. 1045 of 1941.
Special Candidates
26. Certain individuals while at universities are recommended by
Ministry of Labour and National Service Joint Recruiting Board as suitable for
appointment to commissions and others were attested as potential officers at
reception units at the outbreak of war.
candidates is laid down in Appendix G.
The method of dealing with these
Facilities also exist for the
of candidates for
training - in
mathematics and science at certain universities with a view to their subsequent
appointment to commissions in the R.A.,
R.E. and R. Signals.
of such facilities are included in Appendix H.
Particulars
Young Soldier Candidates
27. Young soldiers serving in young soldiers units or at affiliated training
units are eligible to be considered for admission to R.A.C., R.A. (field and
anti-tank), R.E.,
R. Signals, Infantry, or R.A.S.C., O.C.T.Us. on completion
of three months' service and attaining the age of 18 years six months.*
potential officers will be interviewed by a War Office Board as soon as possible
after they are recommended by their C.Os.
Young soldier candidates for Infantry undergoing recruit training at
I.T.Cs. will continue training at the I.T.Cs. until interviewed by a War Office
Board.
A.Fs. B 2617 submitted for young soldier candidates will be endorsed
• Y.S." in the top right-hand corner.
re-O.C.T.U. Training
28. As soon as a potential officer is recommended by his C.O. as suitable
a commission he will, where necessary, be given a course of instruction
motor-cycle riding and M.T. maintenance.
The standard of military training
uired of a cadet on arrival at an O.C.T.U. will be that of a trained individual
lier of the arm of the service into which he is to be commissioned.
In the case of R.A. (Field, A.A. and Anti-Tank) candidates must be able
erform the duties of all gun numbers.
andidates for training at an O.C.T.U. of an arm other than that in which
are serving, will, as soon as accepted by a War Office Selection Board,
ached by the War Office (A.G.1.E.) to an O.R.T.U. of the arm concerned
maximum period of three months, under the conditions of A.C.I. 296
O as regards rank.
the end of this period of attachment, they will, unless already allotted
es at an O.C.T.U, or found unsuitable for the arm to which attached
sferred to the arm for which selected as a potential officer and posted
ield Force. From the Field Force unit to which posted, they will be
vacancies at an O.C.T.U, as available, without further " pre--O.C.T.U."
except where such training forms an integral part of cadet training
10
" Pre-O.C.T.U." training
will be arranged by
the War Office (A.G.1.E.)
as required in conjunction with the allotment
vacancies at O.C.T.Us.
29. Candidates who are considered unsuitable for further training for a
commission in
the arm selected while undergoing
pre-O.C.T.U
training
arranged by the War Office will be returned to their units by the O.C. O.R.T.U.,
and their names reported with reasons and any recommendation for training
in a different
arm more suited to their capabilities.
The names of those
pre-O.C.T.U."
before posting to
will also be reported, forecasting the date on which
pre-Ö.C.T.U." training
will be completed.
Posting to O.C.T.Us. and attachment to O.R.T.Us.
and date of recommendation
required.
Orders for attachment for "
pre-O.C.T.U." training and for posting to
).C.T.Us. will be issued by the War Office (A.G.1.E.) through Os. i/c records
with copies to headquarters of commands, O.C.T.Us. and O.R.T.Us.
orders issued to units by Os. i/c records will be repeated to O.R. T.Us. ang
O.C.T.Us. concerned.
Nominal rolls of non-arrivals will be submitted to the War Office (A.G.1.E.),
and a copy to O. 1/c records, seven days after each course begins.
The posting
orders of such non-arrivals will be regarded as cancelled and Os. ic records
will be responsible for notifying the War Office (A.G.i.E.) immediately a non-
arrival is available for re-posting.
Joining Instructions for Candidates
31. Candidates despatched to O.C.T.Us. must have been inoculated
with T.A.B. vaccine and against tetanus and have been vaccinated.
They
will be clothed according to war scales of clothing and necessaries laid down
All documents which accompany a soldier on posting or transfer will
be sent with candidates, who will be taken on the strength of the O.C.T.U.
with effect from the day following that on which they report. Pay accounts
will be transferred to the regimental pay office in which the accounts of the
O.C.T.U. are maintained and the candidate's attestations
documents will, where applicable, be transferred to the affiliated record office
as shown in Appendix I.
Rank and Pay of Cadets
32. All candidates under instruction at O.C.T.Us. will be designated
" cadets." They will wear the uniform of a private soldier with the addition
of white cap and shoulder bands.
Badges of rank will not be worn. Rank
and appointments held on arrival at O.C.T.Us. will (except for pay and
allowances) be regarded as in abeyance, subject to the conditions of A.C.I. 296
The rates of pay to be drawn by cadets while under training at an O.C.T.
are set out in Army Order 208 of 1939.
11
