202u0.
hoan brow,
On a Long
160, 500 ng
En110na de Potroli
Fit ous on a rosans operation
cookouse
out in thin o aration
to harboue in the Bome
aet up in
on bie Cheat ni jeo
van the laci.
o Masons bind out
tra achedalod
a tanyard bam,
I cooke and aruipment voro
Subsequently food tan circulasad to
except cools arrivod with Fla and
thoratoro a delay in proportion of accorn expor dunna, vi ma coula dare boon.
Ma from hayboxes.
aatisfactory,
02 cools could have boon justifiod.
Tho run fron tit Locution
this
to herbour trea vas only 35 miles and the worther readorably eloci, Do lo1gth or
and tal cooks travelled tata the Ment 1.
thu journoy, tos, und tho spaco bottoon ple
carriad havoroack rationa,
"Pooling" to be banicnily unsound.
niloa fron thu S.P.
and
All, drivora broadentod bofore latvings
120
coola vero sont on anoad to plax
bonoriting trom a troll cookod moal.
harbour arosa
laboured on routa for tho night.
Conditions pommittod 3 pla complotines
journey
ond
solf contrinod.
This provod boyond doubt tho noconaity for a pl to romain pu. 211. lavog.
policy may divort a pl. on routo.
Aport fron climatic conditions,
onony action or chango of
available), and
A pusgustod solution in tho provision of a amall collapsible blacked
out atruoture for each pl, (This noedn't precludo the use of burno oto.
a. drill made of 2/3rd cooling
day, in addition to proporation of havorsack rations, und bronfast.
the hot moal for the
aoy, 1n addition to preparation of havorsack rations. und proditant
Thia wil)
ontra) houtáng of tho nocl upon arrival in the noxt harbour area.,
Gool:a
2
advancod pi rocao party, but cortainly not out of oday contact by iI/c.
right bo sont on on hour boforo the moin body
ranchoa the herbour arou, vita on
for londinc
Roacuzone of Officore oud N.C.0.0 of G.I. Coy to arrencononts nada by Rot abat
Tho fact that this vos a rool lift brought out many pointo in thin
tho firac ossontial is that n11 ranka approciato that in tho intoroat ot
ho Jab in 3rad, ma in ordar to bonofit thonelvos lator in thu dies a Fol
TAKEN tOILISTEN CH
tho Dopot or Rod. by gotting tho
convoys clunr,
to tho stocks or truchs,
GET THAT LOADED
with a minimun doley.
Tizo actunz londing poriod must bu ono of foot thining, mad lich motiura
by all concornod.
"Evory loadine point is difforont, but tho objoets cro. No
aru tho nazi vol handy to rolla: the ono botoro imodiadole it in honduel
on to tha arch or truck.
Thia haa tho edditional advantago of Hooping tho
Londora varned up.
Onco thoy stop it tolos tino to got thou going gain.
idv, rocco by bi and doctiond Conde irmodiatoly bufore ontorino tao
Looding point to onauro that all laid :
What on bo dono to avoid congoation, ronorbor tho voh borind roy hu
Londod firot,
and must got way and bo ropincod.
Difficultion of rovorsing voho.
Whoro the convoy la boing mroholiod outsido the loding point.
loving obtained to "Picturo, it is givon to ouch und uvory drivor aa
ho coros up to tho loading point.
Soction NC. 0.s must bo particularly auli»
ful to drivors nt londing points.
(iv) Troffic Control of thu convoy approaching thy dopot,.
and the fooding for
word of vons ahould be a routino drill, and should MOr
fully ocewy the Sonior
Officor prosont.
It is ossontini that ho is in constunt lieson tith the Dupet
Ho must satiory hingolf that vohs aro looping thu loading pointo buny
all tho tino.
# friondly word with tho Dopot ron or 0. 1/c Labour vial damoc~
inbly inprovo rosulto.
Thin Officor must const atly co round tho locdiag noo
and got unch littlo reason for dolay cloarod up as it criedo.
It rust Do
runorbored thet onco the dopot errangonta cro socking snoothly, no deivora
and noction Couds cro arrivine, ond to liloly to nato tho a no riotaton na tho
provioua onod.
