"Approciation is ilitary revion of the
Sa DUA MO
inforation,
anauca tha statenone o the neasures ceconenace
In minor tactics an appreciation is purcly a nonsal considoration of a:
problon frou which a foolproof plan can be produced
In larger operations a
bacones necessary in order that none o sho
written approciation naturally
nu orous factors are overlooked.
In war under nodor Battlo conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible if tho ind is trained to work to an acceptod
sequence of thought.
mitten an mental. vill bo in the following
SUBJECT: - Hiring and Requisitioning of Pet Pumps.
RASC (A) 3041/43
To: - LIST "A".
From: - 0.C. RASC Northumbrian Area.
1. When pumps are requisitioned/hired, as already laid down they should only contain
pet at suction level wherever possible. Unless the pump is in use when requisitioned
this will invariably be the case.
2. In order to dispense with the present system of writing off "pump remains", it is
proposed to institute the following procedure:-
(a)
Pumps containing only suction level petrol.
Units taking over newly requisitioned pumps will make a note of the quantity
of pet at suction level and inform C, CSD who will take this quantity on
charge by CRV and will then voucher it over to the Unit. OC, CSD will call
for this information when handing over a new punp. This pet at suction level
will not be requisitioned as a similar quantity will be left in the pump when
it is de-requisitioned. On vacating the pump the Unit will voucher remains
back to 0C, CSD.
(b)
Pumps containing pet above suction level.
When pet is above suction level in a pump when requisitioned, the suction
level of pet must be agreed between the owner and OC, RASC, and this quantity
will not be paid for, but will be taken on charge by CSD as above. The total
quantity in the pump will of course be vouchered over to the Unit, who will
adopt the same procedure on vacating the pump as outlined above. Pet above
suction level will be paid for by OC, RASC.
3°
When it is not readily ascertained what the suction figure is, an agreed
figure should be arrived at by allowing say 20 galls in 1000 gall tank and 10 galls
in a 500 gall tank.
4. This procedure should considerably reduce write off applications as "suction
level" pet will be taken on charge by CRV and on de-requisitioning, finally struck off
charge by CIV by OC, CSD.
50
Please arrange for the above system to be adopted and advise this HQ of any
major difficulties which may be encountered in the working of the above mentioned
scheme.
GOSFORTH
CWTP/Hr
31 May 43.
Signed ??????
Lt. Col,
OC, R. A. S. C.
Copy to?- Pet Board, Corbridge.
