- 15 *
Horing of the coastors undor firo.
Tho officer aboard the Drako was
tod to supply this infornation nt the Post forry Control Conteranco of
Coy Commandors hold at Adv HQ.
Arain the beachos wore movod further Westwards until they wore at LUc sur MER
SO PETIT ENFERS, thes boaches joining up with 102 Beach Sub, Aroa.
atromaly difficult to viork es below shallow sand was a hoavy doposit of bluish
aly cun-poat which cousad a good doal of bosting:
' In addition,
at low bide, a
rocky formation had to bo traversod bofaro, ontoring tho soa.
Doth entry and
sen, was, thorofor vory difficult and by niht the job was somowhat
In suite of all tichts at moving out of range the long range runs from
HOVIGATE still porsistol, hitting sovernl ships and killin, and wounding several
mon on the beaches.
On D + 18 ono DUll wes hit by sholl fire and two ORs killed.
On D + 19 one
DUKi ins destroycd due to hitting an onemy mine.
On, this sane day onc OR was
killed and one wounded from an cnemy sholl dropping in the vehicle park.
21, onc vehiclo of 39 Coy RASC (GT) was hit und destroyed in the vohicle cushion
Intorostin figures wore produced on D + 22 (28 JUNE) showin,; the tomage of
Stores landed since Day por Beach Group.
Thes figures are quotod below :-
101 Boach Sub Arca
16,135
tons
102 Beach Sub
Arca
' 12,
609 tons
104 Beach Sub Area
12,211
tons
This tas considercü by all a fine achiovement takin: into account that 101
Boach Su, Area was, for the whole perial, subjected to constant enemy attocks
both air anc. land.
It is interosting, oven at this stare,
to noto that on D + 24, 130 onemy shells
wore dropped in
the nichorare in 6 hours.
Not only was
the onemy paying attention
to the anchorago but also tu the boach head and transport parks.
All typos of stors vore liftoa and in adrition to 'general stores R/F para-
chutos and contriners toro ro-shipped by DUKW to coastors and thenco
to England,
the valuo of which, it is understood, was in the region of £130,000.
The casualty position as on
the night of 30 JUNE was 5 officors killed, 6 ORs
killod.,
29 wounded ad cracurted.
18 DUKWs and 8 - 4x4 3 tons destroyod by enemy
Tho stato of the non's hoalth, RASC personinol totalling 1,350 all rnks, was
Botween 20 and 30 patients por day weru troator for minor ailments.
were no cases of V.D. ur contagious disonsos.
Tho congral fitnoss was vory good
the Iong hours workod under War conditions.
Possibly duc to Compo rations,
Inck of frosh vorotablos,
by the cnủ of tho month thoro was a tondency for
cuts and abrasions tiling longor to heal.
for bathing were pro-
vided by all companios and bodily clconliness ns good.
niso good and closely witchod at all timos.
Sanitary conditions wore
nD + 25 (1 JULY) owing to increasod shelling CRASC HQ und Coys undor commanc
vera forced to nove Ireation as the enomy was payin! particular attention to our
are unü after ngrcement with Cormandor 101 Boach Sub Aroa we move furthor Westwards,
HQ being at LUC sur MER with tho threo Coys in tho irnediate vicinity.
On 3 JULY it was found necossary to'stop off-loading stores over quir beach
duc to sholling of the anchorego both by day and nicht.
In spite of this,
moving, the DUKV Control Post further to the West, 1,?'4 tons of storos wore landed.
It is intoresting to note that during
the whole of these Operations DUK/s had
to be used for laying a smoke screen for the
anchorago.
This, as may bo imagined,
was arain a hazardous widertaking as they were undor obscruntion at all times from
the onomy gun position oporting East of the River ORNE.
On 5 JULY tho 2IC of this HQ, Major Payntor, nasistod in the roscuo and broucht
There was a certain
