CELIE
"Approciation is idlitary rovie of the sisuation based on all availablo
infornation,
cul inatod in a statonont of the ncasuros recommendod to toot it."
In tánor toctics an appreciation is purcly a nonsel considoration of a:
problon frou which a foolproof plan can be produced.
In larger sporations a
writton approciation naturally
becones necessary in ordor that nono of sho
nu arous factors are ovorlooked.
In var under nodom Battlo conditions a nothodical consideration of a
probion will only
So possible if to ind is
trained to work to an accepted
acquenco of thought.
112 appreciations, whothor written or uental, will be in the folloving
COPI.
Tel: Gosforth 53151 Ett. 82
SUBJECT: - Repairs to Pet Pumps on De-requisitioning.
RASC/3041/ST (PL
To:- 0. C.
CSD Newcastle, Rothbury, Hexham.
Ponteland, Woolere W Auckland.
From: -, RASC Northumbrain District.
1.
2.
Ref this H.Q. letter of even number dt 28.2.44.
The procedure to be adopted when repairs are required to Pet Pumps about to be
derequisitioned, will be as follows:-
(a) OC RASC is responsible for derequisitioning Pumps in receipt of OC CSDs
recommendation.
(b) When Pumps are recommended for dorequisitioning the following details
should be forwarded.
(1) Location, Pump No, capacity and site.
(11) State of repairs
Unit Commanders should notify CSD state of repair on handing back
• to Depot. OC CSD should then arrange for Pet Board to inspect the
Pump - A.F. G 828 being completed as normally indicating nature of
repairs. PIT. Board shoudd be requested to deal with the matter as
early as reasonably possible.
(iii) Execution of Repairs.
Il repairs can or cannot be effected by Pet Board this H.Q. should
be informed when the information vide 2b (i) is forwarded.
When repairs have been completed this Office should be notified
forthwith.
3.
The object of this instruction is to avoid the possibility of duplicate
payment for repairs required when finally W.D.L.A. de-requisitions Pump and to
obviate compensation over a prolonged period by effecting early repairs when
such action can be arranged with Pet Board.
40 1.
This matter should, therefore, be given careful attention when the provision
f this letter apply.
sforth.
/IHM.
une 44.
Signed ????
Lt. Col,
O. C. RASC Northumbrian District.
