Person el
el to war B/Down LOrry•
Motor Cyclist.
"y" Group
to bé taken for Jeferce:
1 3-tor cycle:
The Comply will move by road to location
cap Ref.
Sheet 26/
458668 Weston Park and will disperre by Platoons thry.
to be
detailed
upon arrival by o.0.
and if this supply is insufficient, it indicates that the carbons are of
inferior quality.
Any demand for carbons addit. to this basis must therefore
be accompanied by a used sample and details of the depot's experience of them
(8) Ready Reckoners and Instructions on C.S. D. Accounting will be demanded
as required.
2. Indents for platens and adding machines for use in C.S. Ds will continue to be made on
w. 0. 0. 2(c)• (Office Machinery) Curzon Street House, Curzon St, London, Wl. vice WOUM
No 16/General/9104 (S. T. 6) at 8 Dec 42, and No 26/Machy/B/2856(S. T. 6) at 3 Sep 42
respectively. Such indents however will be forwarded through the Supply and Petrol
Depot Inspectorate, RASC, Tavistock House (South) Tavistock Square, London, W. C. 1.
for checking.
3.
Indents (4.7. L.1350) for Army From F. 754 - Provision Supply Account (Home Stations)
and Arny Fom F. 757 - Indent for Rations - will continue to be made by OsC., C. S. Ds on
Army Forms Depot concerned.
4. Attention is directed to WOUM number as above dt 7 Oct 42 in which it was stated that
the most suitable indelible pencil for use with Army Form F. 754 was the black Copy
, Blue Soft - Code 48-29. Os i/c Supplies should therefore indent on HMSO for that type
of pencil. Owing to limited stocks of these pencils, their use should be restricted to
preparation of the Army Form F. 754.
5. In the event of C. S.Ds closing down, all equip used in connection with the scheme, unles:
required for use in newly formed depots, will be disposed of as follows :-
(1) Platens and forms etc will be returned to the Supply and Petrol Depot Inspectorate.
(i1) Adding Machines will be despatched in adequate packing by parcel post to:-
The Superintendent (Returns Section)
HM Stationery Office,
Leake Street, York Road,
London, S.E. 1.
and notification sent to the W.0. C2(c) (Office Machinery) Curson St House, Curzon
Street, London, W.1. The serial numbers of adding machines and date of despatch
will invariably be stated.
Transfers within the Command of adding machines and platens will be notified to
the Supply and Petrol Depot Inspectorate and C.2(c) (Office Machinery)•
(Signed) Major General.
