- 11 -
and tho orgonization started to shape in the way we had always intondod.
valuo of those reprosentatives to the organization as n wholo wes moro particu
larly brought out as the Commander 5 Boach Group was killod on landing, togother
with numerous othor key porsonnel of the Bouch Groups.
The coordination of
Transport and Labour was therefore of pormount importance at this time and this
link with the Boach Group MIOs was both necossary an! ossontinl.
It is interest-
ing to note that whatever job was boing, done it was nocossary for an § & I rop
resentative to be prosent as thi wholo problom controd around transport.
A ood. doel of tying up had to bo dono in rotting hatch gangs to tho coastors -
this was nlvoys a problom as the Port Operntiny, Companies voro always difficult to
got togothor and finally resultod in sharp words betwoon the OC Port Opurnting
Group and mysolf, aftor which time this troop carrying job started to ho properly
ormanizod.
hoover, always on of our probloms.
plund in enri va but soothing alvays soomod to go tran
It had bean proporly
Porsonnel woro novor
suro to which ship they hac to go with conscquent confusion.
Thoro wore over 1,000
mon to ho transporto and this had, of courso, to bo fitted in with othor jobs.
In the carly hours the romindor of tho RiSC transport and personnol were
Innied, oxcopt thor hela up by bad woather, comprising :-
Salanco of HQ CRASC
•Balance of 101 Coy RASC (GT)
299 Coy RASC (GT)
Talence of 39 Coy RA.SC (GT)
Balance of
96 and 138 DIDS
Dalanco of 237 and. 238 Petrol Depots
and totalling 388 officors and mon.
During the night the cnomy bombed tho bonch vory heavily and wo were unfort
unate to lose,
killoc,
the OC of 299 Coy (Major E.H.
Porson),
Capt. Skinner and
Capt. licAngus, torother with 2 Corporals, ull of the same Company.
Work continued all day and all night discharging stores as well as Modical
ovacuation.
Tho M.O. (Liout. J. Irogillus, RAMC) we
at this time working at
tho CEP whore he did & cmna job of work.
Tho mortaring; of the benchos had coasod by lato afternoon but we were still
beinr hoavily shelled both on
tho beaches and in the anchorage.
targets on the boach, Luvs, LOTs, Rhino Forrios, ll of which were plainly visible
to onomy pun positions, mado the work of the drivers of 39 Coy all the more commend-
In addition,
the DUKW drivers going to sea woro always liablo to bo hit
and the fact that their carroes at this staro vero mainly ammunition and potrol,
mado the job one of extremo danger.
Tha tonnaro landod on this day was 1,800 tons.
This was done by working all through the nicht once arcin althourh certain spolls
had to bo givon to drivers to take covor due to constant onomy air attacke.
CRASC's Adjutant, Capt. G.MI. Jackson,
ins riven command of 2,9 Coy RASC (GT)
vico Mrjor E.H. Porson (killod).
CRASC HQ ns movod to tho sito originally chosen,
Icaving an Adv HQ still opcratin; on tho Toach. • Tolophono conmusications were
sot up from Main HQ to Lùv HQ unc also to all Coys undor. command.
Part of this
systom ins installed by our um personnel ant continued to work all the time wo
were operating on the loaches.
I'milk round' for the dolivory of rations to all Sub Aroa units was commonced
and carrion out by HQ CRASC.
D + 2. 8 JUNE 44.
lift was 900 tons.
Bombing and shelling& the bonches continued throu hout the day.
The tonnage
From D day to this date 1,796 casunlties were ovacuatod by
Medical evacuntion by DUKW: was carriod
out by day and nicht undor difficult
ate which IST uns roceiving casunltios.
At night tho ISTs were often out of sight with no lights to indic-
Aftor an hour at sea DUKWs had to roturn
to tho CEP still loudod ns no IST was available.
the IST would flash the lottor M',
It is originally arraned that
but this, in fret, vas nover dono.
to some oxtent undorstendablo as at that tine all typos i onony nircraft woro
During the any it was confirod that contact hau boon made with 3 Can
