SUBUNGT ; Docentation for loavo, and rocedure for ranting
"A" Platoon.•
"B"
"C"
"H. Q"
o. C.
C.
S. M.
Leave Clerke
Standing Ordore Pilo.
i E. I. 14th June 1943 the following procedure is in force for leave
passes ete
to H. Q leave clerk by 0900 hours
Monday of oach
weok a nominal
toll
of non due for loavo during the following wool.
(b) Platoon Officors
will onsuro
(1) Every man includod on thoir lists has not beon on loavo for threo
mon the •
(5.i) The
total absence fron the Platoon at any time due
to privilogo
leave
doas not excoad 10,.
This percentago mist be roducod to 14/
it
applicationg are submitted for 49 hour passes.
(•) Mon notifiod to Platoons as
due for loavo will report to Hol. leavo
clork at 1000
on the day precoding commencement of leave in order
to givo in porticulars.
(a) Loavo Posses, Ration Cards and travelling warrants will be issued by
Company H, Se
They will be collected daily at 1645 hours by N.C.0.
i/c Regimental Polico fron Adninistration Officer.
(e) Passes will be issued only fron reveille on the day leave commences.
(1) A covering pass, enabling a man to colloct his privilose lonvo
docunents may be issued by Platoon Officers only if the leave address
is in
Scotland or noro than two hours journoy beyond London or Bristol.
2. Z2 hours Passes.
36 hours Passos.
Theso are not permitted in this
obe Contro, ma no applications will
be canbri thod.
3. 48 HowEs Bessose.
ppliontaon for 48 hours passon sa11 bo indo in writas to ilatoon:
Officors.
It approvad, ceases will to nado. out, initiallad by
• Platoon OfFicors sud givin fortsignaturo to H. Officon.
(b) L uplications fer 48 houts possos are considored, luavo quotr. rust
be-roducod is statod in Para 1(bi-
and not be eligible for nino
4. Compassionate Loave•
Application for corpassionate loave will be nade in writing or by interviow
So Platoon Officers who will consult the H.l. Officor.
• 5- Leto Passes.
(al Late parsos nay be grantod only on ilednesdays and Saturdays.
(b) Not nore than 10f of each Platoon nay be absent at any tire on lato pass..
6. Slooning out passes.
Sleeving out passes will be granted only in asceptional circumstancoss
Platoon Officers will recorrend approved epolications to 0.C. Company.
7- Day Passes.
Day passos for Sundays will bo submittod by Platoon' Officors in spooial cases
only, and will be signed by O.C. or officer deputed by hin. Day passos for
days other then Sundays will not be considered.
B. Goneral.
All passes will be collected fron Guardroom, and all porscnnel
below rank of Sergeant will book in at Guardroon on return to camp.
Кати / 2M4
IRENS. 1l.
16th June 1943•
Major,
, R,A.S.Co
Commending 645 Infantry Brigado Compony, RosaSO,
