2:
Persotel to wal
B) Down
tor Cyclist.
"* Group
to be taken for Jefece.
1 otor cycle.
The Company will move by
road to location
Ref. Sheet 36/
658668 Weston Park and will disperre
by Platoons 7h d
detailed upon arrival by 0.C.
"A"
"B" "pi (Workahops.)
and after being satisfied that the consignee's report indicates a thorough check.
and regular action at the receiving end, the discrepancy report will be
accepted and endorsed as indicated in para 6 Below. Thereafter, consignor will
await notification fron C.P. Railways Branch, Aldershot, as to the outcome of
claim against the Railway Conpany and will then deal with write-off as may be
necessary, in accordance with Arny Order 86 of 1942.
In general, the consignor should accept responsibility for the clearance of
discrepancies. Where, however, the consignee has already given a clear receipt to
the Railway Comany, or has failed to notify them of a discrepancy within the
presbribed time limit, he should not sue a discrepancy report but should, firstly,
inform the consignor of the circumstances by letter (in case the latter may be aole
to admit the discrepancy after verifying his records), secondly, clear the consignor's
Issue Vouchers, and finally, take write-off action in accordance with Army Order 86 •
of 1942. If, as a result of thefirst action, the consignor does in fact admit a
discrepancy, correction will be made by passing an adjusting Issue Voucher with a
brief explanation endorsed thereon.
6. Discrepancy reports (A. F.G. 783) will be accepted at once by the consignor, and in
no circumstances will they be held up pending the outcome of claims outstanding
against the Railway Company. They will be endorsed "accepted and adnitted" or
"accepted but not adnitted," followed by a brief note of the adjusting action being
taken.
7. Finally, where discrepancies are found in spite of the fact that seals of trucks
are intact on arrival at consignee's end, the O.C. at either end should regard
such cases as being for his personal investigation. The reason for this will be
obvious as generally speaking, the discrepancy can only be due to faulty loading/.
unloading or preparation of documents. It should, therefore, be the rule and not
the exception for an officer personaly to supervige loading and offloading of
consignments.
ve
Tiz
ed
P. s)
