71/1 ф6 /1
TA HOU
EXERCISE - "JANTZIN" •
MA DOM n Will Catain From Stats. Sec. daily at 0900 informatic
To don and tal
the abovo and (b) (iv) RS Sect. will docido what súpplios and stores
({8) NO (Control)
(a)
Comd RS Sect
All officors RS Sect
(OSC 3 G T Coys.)
Rep RH Sect
MC (Control)
bo detailed to G.T. Coys. (Duaps and Depots must conform, and
represented at this Conference.
Am 21 on 1a bo mended to
A.B.158 carried by drivers.
(g) Coy. admin will be fully detailed on the spot but the following matters
will be included to tie in with the general NSC working : -
(i) All Ipt FIs will be serially lettered -
59 GT Coy R/SC - Pls A.B.C.
551 GT Coy RASC -
905 GT Coy RASC -
and will carry this lotter, with the serial no. of the tpt. detail
fon a board on the front lorry of each Pl. when moving:
(ii) GT Coys will report completion of each detail by filling in and sending
by DR to RS Section No. 2 copy of Ipt Detail (Annex 2), which (inter alia)
shows times travelling, weiting, loading, unloading; mileages; summary
of loads; discrepancies and queries (if any).
(iii) As far as possible individual Coys and Pls will be confined to particular
types of stores, thus workin, as much as possible between the same
depots and RIIs.
Coma val cleo be pala to the suitability of diffonent t voice
vehicles for different types of stores. These are matters which can
only be settled on the spot.
RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
A (1) Ipt Details issued by Coma. RS Sec will be in triplicate and will be
distributed simultaneously as follows : -
Copy No. 1 CT Coy concerned
2 GI Coy concorned for use of Tpt Pl and return to RS Sec
on completion of detail.
3 Dump or Depot to be drawn
(ii) Action on and disposal of above.
Copy No. 1 Filed by GI Coy in serial no. order, completed with all
details copies from copy No. 2 on completion of detail.
Copy No. 2 Handed to 0. 1/c Ipt Pl.
Filled in by the latter with appropriate details and
signatures as the detail progresses.
Countersigned by OC Coy on completion of detail.
Sent by DR imediately on completion of detail to RSSect
with completed copies of A.B. 158 used by R$ Sect in
compilation of returns to Stats sect and in compilation
of tpt statistics.
Filed by RS Sect. separately by RHIs, and under Ras in
serial no. order.
Copy No. 3
Serves as demand on the dump ro depot to issue supplies
or stores at a certain date and time.
Retained by dunp or depot and used as they wish.
caps lock
shif
