679
MEMO, EV. 8.
GOVERNMENT EVACUATION SCHEME.
MEMORANDUM.
Review of Evacuation.
I. The evacuation plans under the Government scheme which
were prepared and put into operation by the local authorities
were based on the view of the Government that the outbreak
of war was likely to be followed by heavy bombing attacks on
the large cities. As one of the measures of civil defence, and in
line with the preparations made under the emergency hospital
scheme and the defensive preparations against air attack, the
evacuation plan was put into operation before the outbreak of
war, in order to save the lives of the children, to lessen the
problems of national civil defence and to preserve the morale of
the people in the large cities.
2. This plan provided for the evacuation of 3 million women
and children of whom Is million were school children. Full
publicity was given to the scheme and every encouragement
was given to parents to allow their children to be evacuated.
The final decision, however, was left to the parents. When the
time came to put the plan into operation rather less than 50 per
cent. of the parents were willing for their children to be
3. Bombing attacks did not take place at the outbreak of war,
but the Government hold firmly to the view that this danger of
air attack is not removed, though the moment of its impact is
not calculable.
They are therefore still of opinion that the
removal of children from the large cities is a substantial advan-
tage to the national prosecution of the war, and they regret that
so many parents failed to respond to the offer and that so many
have since brought their children back to the evacuation areas.
4. A return made by the receiving authorities in January
shows, however, that over 400,000 out of the 700,000 un-
accompanied school children who were evacuated under the
Government scheme still remain in the receiving areas.
5. It must therefore be the first objective of policy to ensure
by all practicable means that there is no further drift back of
these children to the evacuation areas.
6. It should be made clear to parents of such children that,
since it was decided to put the evacuation plans into operation,
large expenditure has been incurred and great sacrifices made
in making the conditions for the life and education of these
children in the receiving areas as good as possible during war
time.
3. Number and o
bin.
Appe
NO.
239•
Defence (Bi
odge a
comp
quired to
• R. Day, Cl
f Regulations
Rules 1939 wi
a complaint
riting stating
1 Clerk or Cler
n the Chairman
Irman of the
furnish in wri
e grounds of
lered and dealt
after it has be
of the complaint
ke such investig
ot dispose of an
opportunity to t
Peg"
