by the 0 3/o Tpt on tot mill not close up unless so detailed on the spot
to noot opecial local circunstances.
These will be laid down in Tpt Details.
At a later stage, when 1 Corps
have stabiltsed their traffic nap, standard routos will be medo up and
issued
to coys.
7 Halts
a To a 5) no hat ta part on the in hu to, opate, to, nine ana
Route Cards
Coy Comas will be responsible that overy dvr on overy detail carries a
written route card showins his starting ruint end destination,
naps rois of route,
placos passed through, vim and mih and tines and places of halts (if any).
On all dotatls complete naps will be carried at least down to Sec Coms.
10 Lights
Unless otherwise ordered, headlights will NOT, repeat NOT, be used.
All
vohs will; during hours of darkness, use nornal side and tail lights.
11 • Refuelling: POL
All vehs will refuel with POL innociately on return to coy location on
completion of detail.
Tonks vill at all tines be kept full.
12 Loading and Unloading
(a) Louding and unlvading labour has been laid on -t all dumps, dopots
and kHs,
Tpt personnel will not be required to lond or anload vohs.
(b) Mary den has the responsioility of seeing
that the loads on his veh
are properly trined,
that they nee in accordance with the AB 158 or 108
which he signs, and that as for es his instructions go the lond
is not over
3 tons or 6 tons, as the cese may be,
(c) the rasponsibility for checking that vehs are not loaded above their
nominal capacity rests on the 0 1/c Ipt Dotail, No overloads will be erried
without orders from Returned Stores Sec.
dershalling at Fits, Dumps end Depots
rG-assemoling (OMA).
cil will lie up waiting to go in (IMA), or
possible, and carouflaged, taking ravantage of ail cover.
In those was tot will be got as for off the ra as
(b) The 0 1/c Detail will normally be in the Ril, dump or deput, and his
senior NCO will be i/e the INt or OMA.
(c) Good halt discipltne is essential for concealment in these areas.
Grouna protection will ba disporer, M IMGS sited and air sentries and TO posted.
Other personnel will keay off the rd under cover.
In os around vohs. All personnel will renain properly dressed.
There will be no smoking
siced.
(a) In ce tain casos viure Ris oto are near coy locations no Old has been
In these cases 0 1/c tpu Detail will be responsible for
sending vells
one by seas under seu Noos, ani for checking their arrival on his own return.
A4.
- 3 =
Protection
(a) Ad INGs will be mounted and manned, 1/c of an NCO, on the move and at
the halt, and teams will be alert.
(b) Full scale of ann will be carriod with the gun, incl that in filled
magazines, but nagazines will NOT be placed on
the gun.
Gun will be loaded,
and fire opened,
only in the event of an actual attack on the convoy by an
airoraft within range, on the orders of the NCO i/c.
actual aircraft attack is obviously
15 Rations and Paoding
Porsonnel will have a hot meal both before end on completion of a Tat
Haversack rations as required will be taken on the detail.
Detail.
16, Arms, Am, Dress, Equipment, Bedding
- (a) Personal woapons will be carried by all ranks..
(b) All amn will be withdrawn from personnel and stored centrally by
pls or coys.
Personnel will be
Proper shirt sleeve order
nay be detailod by OC coy in respect of any dotail.
(a) Bedding will not be taken.
17 Smoking
Smoking is prohibited:
(a) in any dump, dopot or RH
(b) in INA ind OlA, except in areas off the rd and away from vehs
(o) in any veh and on veh porks.
18 Duties of 0 1/c Tpt Detail
(a) 0 1/c Tpt Detail will be given copy No. 2 of the Detail and will be
responsible that all particulars required by the Compliance Report at the foot
of
the form ore carefully and accurately collected and logibly filled in in ink
or indelible pencil,
as the detail procueds.
Much statistical data is to be
based on this information
(b) at the dung or depot he will go in ahead of his pl, which waits in the
to make arrangements:
depot; for loading; and for documentation.
for calling in his vehs as required by the dump or
No save and NO with B 158 or AB 108; and all three copies of the forms stened
No. 2 copy being retained by the
3 copies being collected by 0 ic Ipt Detail from the
durs before leaving the OMA.
other's copies of the Ipt Detail.
He and 0 i/c dump or depot will countersign each
Stores Sec, Jantzen Contoo, Ben-yeo a, a got 09/717467, 0 2 to sed
Note in the forn of Annex 11 attached;
figures for submission to Stats Sec of Control.
on these advices are basad 12-hourly
an idvice
/(e) ......
ISC
t E.
W, F
'ctal:
