Translation of a roadside panel dedicated to
Royal Army Service Corps in Crépon, Normandy
In the days that followed the Normandy Landings, logistics would play a vital
role. The Allies would have to supply their troops with whatever, where and
when necessary. They would have to transport supplies of ammunition, petrol,
oil, spare parts and all kinds of material necessary for the smooth running of the
operation and to ensure that the divisions of reinforcements coming from Great
Britain would reach the bridgehead. The stakes were high. The success or
failure of the invasion depended on the Allies getting everything in place before
the Germans.
Of course, everything was not simple. During the first weeks of the invasion the
Allies had no port where they could unload the hundreds of thousands of tons of
supplies and men necessary to build up the bridgehead. They were also at the
mercy of adverse weather conditions, which could at any time have ruined their
plans.
Whilst waiting to take Cherbourg and for the opening of the two artificial ports
of "Mulberry A" at St-Laurent-sur-Mer and "Mulberry B" at Arromanches, the
Allies had to make do with the beaches already in their possession. They scuttled
old warships and freighters along the coast to form breakwaters and reduce the
swell of the waves. These were know as the "Gooseberries". Then they beached
and unloaded the barges, coasters and "Liberty Ships". The larger ships,
drawing more water, were unloaded at sea, using floating docks "Lobnitz"
mounted on four sliding pillars. The caisson (chambers) rose and fell with the
tides. The cargoes were collected from the beaches with the aid of a myriad of
American amphibious vehicles, the "DUKW", and specially constructed rafts
were used to transport the vehicles to the beach, the "Rhino Ferry". Finally, the
small fishing ports of Courseulles-sur-Mer and Port-en-Bessin provided
enormous help to the Allied Logistics Units, despite their limited capacity.
To get the best logistical support for the combat units from the beaches was not
easy to achieve. Instead, these logistic units had been trained on, and used to
working from, a land base where the railways, then the transport vehicles,
carried their loads to well paced demers belind the font liner and where
generally the problems from the enemy come from the aid long rone artilion.
or sabotage.
In the case of beach landings, the logistics units were working in a recniced
perimeter where there were few roads out from the beach, where traffic jams
were frequent and where often confusion reigned. This was particularly true
during the landings of the 6" June 1944, where the logistic units were working
in the combat zones under enemy fire, especially sniper fire. On top of this, these
units were called upon to carry out more tasks than had originally been
envisaged. They were sometimes required to search the areas round the depots
