- 16 -
to shoro an Americon who had baled out in the soc. This wes done in an•
hibious Joey.
on the nicht of 6 JULY 39 Coy RiSC (GI) nd two on woundod by sholl fire.
At tho cnd of no month's operntion undor the nout difficult and trying
conditions possiblo,
the DUKWS
had vory fow mechanical Cafects and no DUKi was
OR for moro than 4í: hours duu to mochenionl troublds.
The tyres stood up to
tost extronoly well.
Further exenplus od thi spirit and courngo of Duk drivors are quotod in
tho attachod ditations and for which suitable recouchintions have boon mado.
Whon the lavy fimlly docided that it wes i mossible to work any more on tho
SWORD beaches,
idriral talbot sent for mo and congratulated no on tho magnificent show
nut up by tho
RASC with a vory spocini roference to the work done by the Duky
The it ins origimily inticipated thet the Fort of OUISTREHAN would opon,
it was docidal we should sot up m Adv HQ thor.
This, howaver, provoc. impract-
ionble as,
not only was thu sito chosen for our Ild destroyed by a direct hit,
the hole croa unsuitablo for wokrin transport in thoconditions thon provailing.
Tơ sot up an Adv HQ in CHEN on 12 JULY, whore,
for a timo,
we handled all
S & T roquiromonts.
This HI functiones for approximtely three wooks and all
S& T requirements
of the Garrison wore handlec until they were taken over by 7
Baso Sub Arça.
Tho Lav HQ was once arin denolishon by sholl firo.
vory mort diappointmont on 10 JULY won we were advisod by 101 Borch Sul Area
that our boachos wori tu closo down and Coys uider comend would como under
command 30 Tpt Coln Wi.c.f. 1800 hrs.
In viow of the
Ion associntion of tho HQ tud the wits under comind during
the months of hard training in England and what we corsidorod the snall part
playei by us in the success of tho Assault Inading
croat disappointment was
oxprossod by all ranks
o: tho suden broaking up of tho Column.
hac buen hich cat we ali colt that what nicht bo torme a sudden droprin; into
the Second Elovon uns not. ood for that spirit.
It was, no doubt, an oporational
did feel (ad still fool for
that matter,
that sonething night
done to keop, what we thou ht,was a roud side toother!
1 social word shula be rocoriod re ding the work done by the Motor Launches.
They were invluable ant the vorl. done by officors
and non attached to us was alys
of the highest ordor.
Ic nust be rememberor that thoso small ships
right up to tho timo of
the closing down of
uncor constant sholl
vore, on the onony and innacition the enchorce was niso fair ramo
Tho RSH of this HQ (RSM Fenton) was lonod to HQ 101 Beach Sub Area just
prior to tho hoscult ani work with thom throughout the erly stages of
the Assault.
(sco nttachod, report).
for my um pert I cannot spoak too highly of the port played by all officers
It was a rent. toam!
We vor. confident whon we startod and folt
confident of doing the job.
l'oo much stross cannot be put on the part playod.
Assault by the DUK Coys.
I am quito certain that without thein
was "not on'.
it rossiblo und
thoir spirit nover failod.
in the Assault doservo Buttlo Honours, it is theso non.
The work of tho RASC in 101 Boach Sub Aron throu hout its training and the
Assault brought tho following tostimony fron Colonol E.J. Montgonory, MuE,
Commander, 101 Boach Sub Aroc:-
"I nover hed any coubts or worries or ovch unonsy moments over tho RiSC,
sido of the recent operations.
onthusinsn and organisation - and the results,
I could not po ibly havo had botor
- völl, I don't
if they could haro beon improved on - thoy wore bottor then I had ovon
dreamed of."
muu tho run in'.
There was a certain
he
at
