REPORT
of
RSM HQ CRASC 21 Transport Column.
T/1055468 RSM Fenton C.A.
---
During the period prior to embarkation I was acting as RSM to 101 Beach Sub
Area and briefed to land as RShi to that HQ with whom I was to work until such time
as the HQ was considered sufficiently well organised
to allow for my return to
CRASC HQ 21 Transport Column.
Enbarked at SHORETA. with Adjt HQ CRiSC 21 Transport Column on 3 June.
The period aboard ship was uneventful and the voyage without incident.
final instructions prior to embarkation were as follows :-
To land and limediately report to tho Connar Post.
To recce the arca,, previously decided upon as a suitable location for HQ
101 Beach Sub irea.
In the ovent of the suggested location proving suitable to organise
labour innediatoly for the purpose of aigging out and providing the
necessary trench accommodation for the complete layout of the HQ.
addition, to be responsiblo for the layout of a suitable bivouac area
for Officers and Other Ranks of the H?.
To contaot ocher units within
the near vicinity and, from available
personnol,
coordinate a system of defence
and ensure that all possible
precautions had boen taken to ensure the mininum of casualtics in the
evont of attack from the air.
6 JUNE 1944.
'D' Day Of NOMiDT_ INV.: SION.
Landod on QUEEN RHU Boach L BRECHE, HERIT ILLE suc IR at approximately
1100 hrs with various personnel of 3 Br Inf Div.
At that tine mortar fire and
shelling was considorable.
This continued after landing and, in addition, there
was considerable sniping by nunorous pockets of resistance.
I reported immediately
to the Coumand Post and, as no Staff Officers vere availablo, I informed the iP on
duty thut I was going forward to recce the proposed location of HQ 101 Beach Sub
On prooooding tuvards HER ANVILLE I cane within fire range of a sniper
located in one of the hos on the Boach.
Shortly aftor taking cover in the first
available ditch with a Surjeant of the Pioneer Corps, two Gomans enorged from the
house and thercupon we opened fire,
killing one - soldiers of the Norfolk Rogt
accounting for the romaining German.
I arrivod at HARGVILLE at approximatoly 1215 hr and, upon reaching the
proposca location for HQ 101 Beach Sub Area, comploter a sketch in order to ensure
the bost possible layout.
At 1430 hrs tho Staff Captain of 101 Beach Sub Area
arrived and approved the layuut of the HQ I was now in a position to put forward.
Until 1800 hrs, when the necussary labour arrived shelling and shall ars fire
continued all around .
At 1800 hrs, aa soon as the Pioneor Section arrivod,
cornonced iinediatuly and proceaded through the night.
Ho Clorks arrivod togutler with Stores of the HQ.
During the evoning a few
as far as ever possible I unertook the dutios of Air Sentry.
In order to conserve man power
'D' + 1, 7 JUNE 1941°
At about 0930 tro onony aircraft suddenly attacked the Beach Hoad.
the aircraft dived towards our, location.
Slit trenches were now availble, due to
the work of the men throughout the night, and I at once ordered evuryone to take
Until this nonent, digging had been in progress and despite the fact that
13 bonbs vero dropped across the location only two mun of the working party recoivod
Five of thu Il staff wore killed in this sharp attack.
The Stores lorry:
which, at this tine, was being temporarily usod as an office caught fire and,
together with a batman I doublod to the lorry hoping tint
roscue the Pto Clerk trapped inside beforo amunition, which was now afire, exploded.
I was, however, ordored to take cover by an officor.
would be possible to
During the norning I detailod personnal of the HQ and servicos attachod into
defonce groups in ordon to onsure that overy approach to the He was protected as
