"Approciation is litry
rovic of the
si suation based on all availablo
inforation,
cul anatod in a statonont of the noasuros recommendod to noot it."
In ranor toctics an appreciation is
puroly a nontal considoration of a
problon frou which a foolproof plan can be produced.
In larger oporations a
mitton appreciation naturally becones necessary in ordor that none oz tho
nu erous factors are ovorlooked.
In tor under nodom Battlo conditions
a sethodical consideration of a
probion will only
be possible it tho
and is
trained to work to an accepted
Boquence of thought.
sen an mental. will bo in the following
PETROL PUMPS AUD TANKS - HIRING REQUISICIONING AND OPBRATION OF: -
NCO 952/43
1.
PROCEDURE TO AQUIRS.
(a) Petrol Pumps can be requisitioned by the appropriate Q.C. or hired by 0. G.,
_CS. D. but only on request from the 0.C., R.A.S. C. of the District/Area.
all demands for pumps will therefore be directed through the normal channels
to the 0.C., RoAS. C. District/Area concerned.
(b) It is the resposibility of the O.C., R.A.S. C. to consult the Petroleun Board
with regard to the suitability of Punps for requisitioning or hiring.
(c) 0.0., RoAS. C. District/Area is the only authorised channel of communication
with the Regional Manager of the Petroleun Board.
20 CONDITIONS OF HIRING.
(a) Period of hiring will not exceed two months.
(b) Hiring will be on a weekly basis at a rental not excueding 10/- per week for
each storage outfit (i.e. Pump and Tank)
(c) Hiring will be conditional on certificate being obtained from the Lessor to the
effect that the outfit is in good working order.
(a) Existing hiring agreements should not be disturbed provided the terms of such
hirings are considered reasonable. If the terns are not considered reasonable,
immediate steps should be taken to revise the agreement, but should negotiations
fall through, under no circumstances will requisitioning take place.
(e) 0. C., C.S. Do concerned is responsible for the hiring of pumps and for passing
the hiring charges for payment.
3.
REQUISITTONING.
(a) When a Pump is likely to be required for a period in excess of two months it
will be requisitioned by the Q.C. under defence regulations 51.
(b) In certain cases it may. be necessary to include in the requisition other parts
of the Garage which are necessary for the working of the tanks and Pumps, but
a right of access can be obtained under Defence, Regulation 52.
(c) Compensation for the requisition and claims for damage at the end of the
requisition period should be referred to the W.D. Land Agent concerned.
GENERAL CONDTIONS RITALING TO THE HERING OR REQUISTEONING.
(a) Petrol in tanks either hired or requisitioned should be taken over by the
0. C., RoA.S. C. under Defence Regulations 53. and the basis of compensation is
as indicated in Section 6 (2) (b) of the compensation (Defence) Act. This
compensation will be paid by the 0.C., ReA.S. Co who will also arrange for the
taking over of the remaining spirit.
