- 3 -
noreased by the addition of 2 Majors and one Opl Clerk.
Here we were given the
Div Coumander's Plan and also the Naval Plen in detail and fron this were able to
start to build up our final figuros.
The Sub Area Commander aid this in a very practioal way, whioh I am sure not
only saved a great deal of time but also made certain that each one of us knew
exaatly what the other was going to do, and what he wanted.
Each made his own plan
which was disoussed point by point at a daily, conference at which everyone was
• present.
' presented the RASC Plan, which was put up and knocked about until i
ras finally agreed. In this plan equipment, arms and personnel eto were detailoi
by: vohdoles,as to hat they would carry, where they would go and what they would do -
all phases of the Assault wore covered.
The Boooh Group Conne Ca La Part Cerating Group, SignaLs, DADAS, DAPM,
oto all made and submitted their plans, which, when finally approved went to make
a Sub frea Operation ardor, whioh was, in faot, the real order for the Operation.
I oan say that the work on those plans was extromely well done and covered the Assault
We were sonowhat apprehensive towards the ond of the detailed planning at tho
inclusion of 22 vahiclos, in a now rolo, of 39 Coy RASC (GI) for curyng in
Anti-Tank guns of the Beaoh Battalions and also for the purpose of disoharging 4
beachod LOTs into Seotor Storos Dipa, as tro as a to yoord that this part of"
the works of our provious plans.
the Assault worked extremoly well and complated a really magnificent job.
Tho pre-loading plan for DUKWs was the subjeot of much discussion and after
considerable argument we were ordered to oarry a pre-load of 3 tons of encunition,
POL or other stares.
As the Anericans laid don a Z ton load. (which they in faot
used in the Operation) it was thought to be a somewhat hazardous proceeding,
Particularly in view of how much was at atake,
for the future work of the DUKW.
tinofore, to satisfy ourselves that this vas pracutentio, tostetere
carriod out in the MORAY FIRIH which, proved what could bo carriod.
Pre-loads were decided upon and, in addition to the aotúal Operational pre-
load, the following had to be included as operationally necessary and because there
was no othor way of getting them ashore :-
Spare drivers and kits.
Sparo Jerricans.
Water.
Compo•
Motor Cycles.
Sleepers.
Cargo Nets.
Camouflage Nets.
Tools and spare parts.
'All personol of DUKW Companies togethor with oertain other key'
personnel.
It was planned that the gross load should not exocca y tons 11 owts but I am inolined
to think that in most cases this was exceeded although evorything was done to keop
within the limits.
10 tons.
Eventually, the oomplote wight of the DUKW was approximately
Sono diffionity wus axparionned in this detailad planning stage as a private
arrangement was mado between DA & QIG of Div and DAA & OMG of Sub Area as to tho
allocation to Div of RiSC' Sub Aron transport'- consequently we were left complotely
in tho dark until a very much lever dato (i.o., when the job had to be done physionlly)
when it was found that it was not possiblo to carry the loads so arranged.
would havo saved a greut deal of time, troublo and frayed tempers if the RASC had
been given the wholo job instoad of young Staff officors trying to arrange sonething
about which they know vory little.
This also caused delay to our Oporational Order.
(copy attached) which was only produced the night before Briefing commenced.
this stage it would have helped considerably had tho War Establishment of this HQ
been made up and would have placed us in a vory much strongor position with the
Beach Groups and Beach Sub Aroa at a vory difrioult time.
had been nade, it was oventually increasod, which undoubtedly made a considerable
difforonco in and after tho Assault.
Litor strong, roprosontation
