"Appreciation is military rovior of the eituation banca on all avestable
inforsation,
ou antca in a statoont of she nonauros rocomendod to toot 1t."
In larger oporations a
writton opprcolation naturally booones necessary
nu orous factors aro ovorlookod.
In tag under nodom Battlo conditions a sottodical considoration of a
probian vill only bo possible if sho ind is trained
to more to an accepted
Boguenso se thought.
on mental, will bo in the tolloving
1 March 43
16/General/9104 (ST6).
SeS. De Accounting - Supply of Offico Machinery, Army Forms, Stationery, Etc.
1.
Ref W. O.U.M. of above number dated 8 Dec 42 and 9 Jan 43 regarding the
introduction of a revised system of accounting in C.S. Ds.
It has been decided that the distribution to C.S. Ds of :-
A. F. F. 758 ~ Ration Issue Voucher
A. F. F. 759 - Supply Depot Issue Sheet.
Carbon Sheets, large and small, for use with the above.
Special C.S.D. Ready Reckoners,
Instructions on C. S. D. Accounting,
will, in future, be made by the Supply and Petrol Depot Inspectorate, RASG.
Indents should be addressed to :-
Inspector of Supply and Petrol Depots, RASC
9 Whitehall
London, S. W. 1.
Distribution will be arranged quarterly, but C.S.Ds in each command will
indent for and receive their supplies in specific months. - It is therefore
necessary for all os i/c Supplies to comply with the undermentioned arrangements
(a) C.S. Ds in Eastern, Northern and Western Conmands and London District
have supplies estimated to meet their requirements to the end of the
MARCH messing period.
(e) All officers i/c Supplies will therefore notify the Supply and Petrol
Inspectorate on the dates indicated in the table below the exact number
of units being rationed by them on that date. Inspectorate will make due
allowance for the possible fluctuation in the number of units rationed, and
for the usual "Sundries" and "Special" accounts. In this way supplementary
indents will be obviated.
Command
C. S. Do
Indenting Dates
Supplies for
use in month
Eastern
Northern
• London (Dist)
] May 43
1 June 43
1 Sep 43
and so on each quarter
(f) Regarding carbon sheets, it is essential that care should be used in
their handling and the fullest use made of them. They have been provided
on the basis of 13 sheets of each size per quarter for every 30 units,
S
