CAPT. R.E. Swen.
REPORT
from
HQ ORASO 21 Tot Colm
ASSAULT LANDING.
Approxinatoly throu wooks prior to the Invasion, I was dotailed to supply the
transport for the re-stowage of ICTs 297, 301, 341 and 341 wich were thon lying at
the Hards, SHOREHAM.
As this presented an excellent opportunity for all ranks to
familiarise themselves with the load and for the drivers to pactice backing on to
LOTs, I allotted to each craft the personnel who would sail on it on the Assault.
Tho craft were unloaded and re-stowed according topriority for unloading.
Each craft had an identical load of 200 tons of Amunition and some RE stores -
mostly track material.
The space left for the stowage of the
lorries was very
limited but,
when the loading was corpleted, I was satisfied there was sufficient
space left for then.
New vehicles were c.. lected (Austin 3-ton 4x4 GS) which wore pre-waterproofed.
examination, I considorud the pre-waterproofing to bo inadequate and this
necessitated working on them for nearly a weck to ensuro they wore mochanically
sound and the waterproofing perfect.
The pre-loads werr collected and these
consisted of 12-6 par i/ik guns and ammunition, 2 loads
rarps for offloading guns
and 8 loaäs of Sumuerfol: tracking•
In addition, 10 MCs wore curried - one each
for my section Corporals, 1 for myself, 1 for PMO and 4 for Cur.
We were then sealca in Camp A 14 and briefed.
The plan was for iCT 297 and •
LCT 301 1- beach at !! + 120 and ICT 341 and ICT 3:7 at H + 240 - 6 vehicles to each
craft to transfer their cargoes to four SSDs which would be set up on the first
lateral road. Vehicle pre-loads were to bo duped chare also,
My pre-load was increased by the arrival of 12-10 cut irailers, loaded with a
small amount of Machine Carbine Immunition - these to be tood in fur the Marine
Comrando.
Shortly before 'D' Day my party was divided into two - one piut, remired at
A 14 for erbarkation later on LOTs 341 and 347 and the othur accoupanied me to Camp.
A 15 for cabarkation on Lots 297 and 301.
On arrival at A 15 I recoived an amendment to my original instructions viz,
'The i Tk guns, with their crews, were to bo delivered to the gun sites on the
perimeter of the BMA'•
I liaised with the OsIC gun detai cunts and arranged with
then that they should go forward and recoe the sites whilst my two Corporals and I
would bring up the guns.
I also arranged to supply then witt additional guides
fron a recce party of 39 Coy RiSC (GT)•
Three days prior to 'D' Day wo loft Comp A 15 and prococded to the Haris at
GOSPOT, arriving at approximatoly.
I found that since the re-stowing,
additional RE Stores had been loaded and thore was
now insufficiont space for the
Also, due to the weight of the load,
the ICTs were unable io get up to
the Herds to allow the vehicles to drive on dryshod.
I was partioularly anxious
that ny vehioles should not bo exposed to the water as,.
that time,
of the period it would bo nocessary for then to ronain a-vard.
recoding everyone was engaged in partially re-stowing the loud and finally we drove
aboard through about 2ft of water and managed to get off with the
were engaged until dark in securing tho loud and, in particular, the trailurs,
which had to be stowed on top of the fumunition.
The next day was
spont at the sane mooring.
On tho morning of D - 1. I was
informed by OC Craft
that a nessage had been received from Naval sources - 'Push on
and Good Luck' - and we sailed at approximately 1000 hes.
The passago was rather unconfortable duo to the small anont of space left for
the 75 Arty persomel.
Tho craft was low in the water because of the weight oi the
load and consequently very wet.
Cooking was done on a Hydro burner hetween tho
ran and the water tight doors.
At approxinately H + 40 minutos we commenced tho 'zun in'.
There was a certain
