MeN
Date of visit: Thur
Reading
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept rom the fins the case of loraines
- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NoTE B.— See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
Piers and the number of other ranks or toards casualties the a mes and ranks of
(vii) Meteorological notes.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
and of animals should be noted.
(vli) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
No one to motiould be entered up, not in the erder given try, it t the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
their foret this uni and ideas, opinion a are ecommened tone, clade in the war diarience
may be of benet for short fee te, earth si,
nay be the History of the War.
it-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be o
of other per in healt he in pete hot the fier who initia to the entir in tive commander
preparing a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
nt orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) pay locaties in the care on taurine the past twenty-four ho
urs and present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the
ti) Copies of orders or instructions,
or reference.
(* A copy, if each namative or
if no longer required
dinate formation
the
References
(iv) Copiediot im
they sho
(See F.S.R., V
PARA. 7.-6
Disposal will L
(ders
(i) The duplicate hit
the sport Ng - The tim cha
Return by (20/11/2025 12:49:28)
WO 171/360
14625448
M. 122831
Feb 1944.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit.... H. Q. 30 Corps troops
Commanding Officer ...
It 0ol A.H. W-
References to Ap!
Many more V.O.UM. 's received mobilising Corpa Troops - Hedical and RASC
Units and Amd Car Regt.
_circularised all concerned.
visited DAgIG.
8th And Bde - one of their units, that is mobilising,is passing fran
command....
Discussed the problems arising from this change.
Five more Railway wens arrived.
Vehicle releases for 27 L.A.A, Regt
received - No guntowers yet available.
Spoke to Mobilisation Branch, C.O.D. Donnington re the changes in 8 Arnd.
Arranged for two MS of 8th Ad Bie to proceed to Domington on
5th to check their G1098 quipment.
A. D. O.S, visited Dump and arranged
with R.Es to repair lavatories and alter lights.
One railway truck from C.0.D, Old Dally.
Unable to visit units, car off road. A.D.O.S. visited siding, 3 trucke
being cleared, all from C.O.D. Old Dalby.
Moved to new location at Landsdone House, Newmarket.
Spoke to B.O. W.0,
8th Amd Bde re personal equipment for his Units. Proceeding satisfactorily.
Vt.17724,008 2,00,00 3,18 W. IL. & S. 61/0275
Closure st
S
WO 171
1462559
Return by
9991969
