pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF TH
DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBTECT.
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as to provide, data
upon which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration.
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1. (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
(c)
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(d)
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note:
In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4.
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(a) Cover;
(b) Index as printed on cover;
(c)
Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
5. All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6. The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices,
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
8: The narrative should be written up daily.
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them.
It should contain: -
(a) Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
(b)
Notes of how orders were carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them
(e)
(f)
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages
and a reference to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(g)
Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
(h) Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down polic
or other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diary
It is essential that copies of all important documents should be placed in the war diary, including
commanders' " personal" and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance.
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases where additional appendices appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with "K."
10. NOTES.
Appendix "A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
ORIGINAL
SHEET I
Army Form G. 2118.
Unit......
Green Hor ards.
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer L+ Coc R.K ExH
MC. DwR
Place
"B",
"C" "HQ" Coys - Prosont location 1830 hrs.
"A" and "D" Coys. - No. location 2100 hrs.
794673
Ref Maps
1/25000
sheet 37/36
TILLY-SUR-
SUELLES
1750000.
Sheet 7F/L
CAEN.
2000
Bn still in occupation of the area NORTH Of IA TAILLE. The
enemy continued to be active throughout the day and approx
250 shells and mortars fell within the Bn area.
2000
Little to report along the Bn Front. Small groups of, enemy
continued to harrass the fwd Coys without success. Further
shelling and mortaring of the Bn Area throughout the day.
0800
It. ol. ox commanding 7th Green Howards visited the 0/0. and
a recce
of the Bn dispositions prior to the proposed
Changeover was made.
1130
Brig F Knox visited Bn.H. Q•and discussed details of the
changeover with the 2i/c(Major C Hull) in the absence of the
1530
Relief of the Bn by 7th Green Howards vommenced
2300
Relief of the Bn by 7th G.H.almost complete and Command
to 7th G. Hat midnight.
The Bn moved into the reserve
area of LA GALETTE (7768)
Wt.47724,958 2,000,000 B/48 W. H. & S. 51/6875
ack
ik pt.
10.
FRODING.
Instructions regarding War Diaries
Summaries
Intelligence
available,
Summaries,
the cover
prepared in manuscript.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Month and Year. July 1944.
Summary of Events and Information
References [
ppendices
WAL DIARIES SECTION
45EP 1944
.ra. 2nd Echolon
P.T.o.

