Territorial Army was illusory and too many men had to be withdrawn from units
on mobilization.
In the first months after mobilization over 40,000 other ranks,
who were serving before mobilization, had to be removed from field army units
either because they were too young to be sent overseas or because they were not in
fact of the medical category of which they were assumed to be. It is unfortunately
true that in some instances the desire to show large numbers on the strength led
commanding officers to forget that quality was even more important than quantity,
while warrant officers and N.C.O.s were sometimes retained for their value to the
unit after they ceased to be capable of performing their duties on active service.
A more difficult problem was presented by the presence in the ranks of the
Territorial Army of many men who could not be spared from industry on mobiliza-
tion. In many cases large firms had, with official encouragement, raised whole
companies or platoons or similar units among their employees, and men of high
technical skill were thus enlisted into non-technical units. Furthermore, there
were very few technical units in the Territorial Army, and it often happened that
a man could find no such unit near his home.
More often still skilled men
deliberately joined non-technical units because they wanted a change from their
everyday occupation.
When a man spent all his working hours at a factory bench,
it was far more attractive at week-end or annual camps to handle a rifle or a field
gun than to go on doing in uniform what he did every other day in plain clothes.
The Territorial Army was a volunteer force and men could not be made to join
any particular unit or indeed to join at all, and up to 1939 there was no Schedule
of Reserved Occupations to give guidance as to who should or should not be
accepted. It was, therefore, quite inevitable that a number of men should in the
years of peace get into the wrong places, and the real question is whether, when
the Schedule of Reserved Occupations was issued in 1939, it should have been
applied also to govern enlistments and to comb out those already serving who
plainly could not be spared from industry on mobilization.
On this question there was an acute division of opinion.
Some urged that once
a Schedule of Reserved Occupations had been approved, it was unwise to retain
in the Territorial Army men who would inevitably be withdrawn if war came and
still more unwise to make the position worse by accepting for enlistment men who
could not be mobilized. In fact, to some it seemed that the mistakes of 1914
were being repeated and that skilled men would be lost to industry as they were
Others held that it was politically impossible at a moment when the
Government was stressing the importance of the Territorial Army to refuse to
accept any man physically fit for enlistment and still more impossible to discharge
compulsorily men who might have served for many years. It was argued that war
had not yet come and that it was not certain that it would come at all: that the
important thing both for foreign and domestic politics was to show large recruiting
returns and striking increases in strength, and that it was worth while deliberately
to accept in the ranks of the Territorial Army a proportion of men who would have
to be released on mobilization.
In the end this view prevailed and the War Office
undertook to comb the Territorial Army on mobilization.
The field army was to
be combed immediately on embodiment and the anti-aircraft units three months
later, as it was expected that these units might be heavily engaged in the first weeks
of war and that it would then be impossible to disturb their personnel. Ultimately,
some 11,500 men were withdrawn from the Territorial Army between mobilization
and the end of 1939 for return to industry. In a few cases whole sub-units almost
vanished, such as an A.A. battery composed of miners or an infantry company
recruited mainly from the employees of an important ship-building firm, and many
units suffered badly through the loss of senior N.C.O.s and specialists.
As events turned out, the decision was unfortunate, and many of the troubles
WO 277/=2
over the supply of tradesmen in 1940 and 1941 may be traced to the indiscriminate
recruitment which was permitted in 1939 and to the retention of skilled men in the
ranks, a subject which is more fully dealt with in Chapter III.
The problem will
continue as long as a voluntary Territorial Army exists, and the proper solution
must probably change with changing circumstances. In peace it is difficult to
exclude any man from enlistment since men change their occupations, and occupa-
tions themselves change in importance; but there must come moments when war
is so imminent that every step to prepare for mobilization must be taken.
Such
a moment had come in the spring of 1939, and it would probably have been wise
to have risked the loss of recruits in order to prepare the Territorial Army for
mobilization. Certainly many later troubles would have been avoided and much
effort saved.
On 26th May, 1939, the Military Training Act became law. The Act was limited
to three years, but it had in fact a very short life, being absorbed in the National
Service Act which was passed on the first day of the war. Although only one
intake of some 35,000 actually joined the Army under this Act, it is nevertheless of
outstanding importance for many reasons.
For the first time Britain imposed
compulsory military service in peace, a great departure from our traditional policy;
it provided an excellent opportunity for scientific manpower planning in the allot-
ment of intakes and brought to light many problems connected therewith; it also
brought into close contact the staffs of the War Office and the Ministry of Labour,
founding a mutual friendship and understanding which grew steadily and which
were of real value in operating the National Service Act during the war.
The terms of the Act imposed on all men attaining the age of 20 years an obliga-
tion to undertake whole time service for six months either in the Royal Navy, the
Army or the Royal Air Force, and thereafter to serve in the appropriate Reserve
for three and a half years, with a liability to be called up annually for training. The
Minister of Labour and National Service was made responsible for registration,
medical examination and the issue of enlistment notices, and for the setting up of
tribunals to deal with cases of hardship and conscientious objection.
Registration
was carried out at the established employment exchanges, and for medical examina-
tion the Ministry set up some 120 centres throughout England, Wales and Scotland.
Medical boards were appointed by the Ministry of Labour and National Service,
and a code of medical gradings was drawn up for their guidance in consultation
with the Service medical authorities. The system was in fact the foundation of
that which was used in the administration of the National Service Acts, and this
preliminary trial was of the greatest value.
When the war began, premises had
already been acquired, the medical boards were already formed and had begun to
work as teams, and the staffs of War Office and of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service were beginning to know each other and to understand each other's
language, so that the adaptation of the machinery thus established to the administra-
tion of the National Service Act was simple and rapid.
It has already been pointed out that little scientific manpower planning was
possible when all enlistment was voluntary and the recruit must be allowed his
choice of corps, but the conscript had no such right of choice and could be posted
wherever he was needed.
Thus, the Military Training Act gave a preliminary
exercise in manpower planning, and it is interesting to observe how the system
originally adopted for the sorting of intakes developed later into that finally used
The total intake from this source in any year would have been governed not by
the Army's requirements but by the numbers available for call-up to the Army
after deducting from the whole age group the unfit and the proportions allotted to
the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force.
The War Office did not therefore govern
