central authority on that valuation. But no such allotment could be satisfactory
without a scientific job analysis of the major arms. All arms tend to rate their own
requirements highest and to demand none but men of the highest grades, but since
the nation is not composed entirely of men of the highest grade everyone's demands
for the best cannot be satisfied. Every arm has of necessity some domestic duties
which can be done by men of low grade and a job analysis is essential to discover
how the high-grade men can be allotted to the best advantage.
There will never
be enough of them to satisfy everyone and it is well to know which claims are the
most urgent.
The corollary to the development of this method within the Army might have
been to apply it to the three Services and thus carry out a scientific allotment of
the different grades of men according to the needs of the individual Services.
Although the National Service Acts gave no guarantee that any man would necessarily
be called up to the Service of his choice, they did allow a man to express a choice.
If this concession was to be of any value, it must mean that when a man expressed
a choice for one particular Service, he must be offered to that Service first.
Throughout the war there were always more men who preferred the Royal Navy
and the Royal Air Force than either of those Services could absorb, with the very
natural result that those Services chose the men whom they wanted and left the
rest to be turned over to the Army. There were plenty of reasons for the Army's
lack of popularity. Up to the victory of Alamein, the Army seemed to have failed
everywhere: in Flanders, in Crete, in Greece, in Norway, in Malaya there appeared
to have been nothing but disaster: the brilliance of Lord Wavell's victories in
Africa seemed to the public to die away in the gloom of the fall of Tobruk and
Rommel's advance towards Egypt. For a long time in the estimation of the Press
and public the Army stood far below the other Services.
The triumphs of the
First and Eighth Armies in Africa and Sicily were dimmed by the long agony of
Cassino: while the final triumph in Europe came so swiftly that there was scarcely
time for the changed attitude of the public to be reflected in the choices of those
called up.
It is scarcely to be disputed that the Army never received so large a
proportion of the highest grade men in intakes as did the Royal Navy and the
Royal Air Force. The only method of correcting this would have been to have
carried out a job analysis of each Service, to have applied selection testing to intakes
before allotment to the different Services, and to have distributed the various
grades in each intake on a scientific allotment between the Services, giving to no
Service and parturity of selecting its entraual.
This would in effect have
The British people are by
tradition tenacious of individual choice and perhaps scarcely yet understand how
ruthless conscription must be to achieve the most economic results.
Perhaps it is
well that some liberty of choice should remain, but it is also well to recognize the
cost of that liberty.
It would be unreasonable to claim that the system of dealing with intakes, as
developed by the Army, was completely faultless and that no mistakes were made;
but it is certainly true that all but a very small proportion of men were placed where
they were most wanted.
That is not to say that they were placed where each
individual thought he was most required; individuals are not always the best
judges of their own capabilities and they all lacked that knowledge of future plans
by which alone the requirements of the different arms could be assessed.
But
however efficient the testing and however economically the available manpower
was distributed, there always remained the fact that many quite desirable measures
could not be taken because there was never a possibility of providing the required
manpower within the allotted maximum strength.
There were, for instance,
frequent suggestions to increase the intake of boys to train as tradesmen, a step
WO277/=2
wholly desirable as a long-term policy, but which could not be taken, since to allot
any further proportion of the intake to boys meant a corresponding reduction in the
intake of men who could take their places in the ranks immediately. In fact, from
I94I onwards there were never enough men to satisfy all demands.
The great
strides made in tactical mobility involved the provision of more men for main-
tenance. Better welfare, education and amenities of every sort took up more men
to provide them and there was a dangerous tendency for the "tail" to grow at the
expense of the "teeth".
Two wars have shown that our national resources in men and women are limited.
Nothing will serve but the strictest and most scientific control, and the inevitable
tendency seems to be for this control over the distribution of manpower to become
more and more centralized and more and more authoritative.
Two striking illustrations of this tendency were to be seen in the application of
the Schedule of Reserved Occupations to normal regular engagements and in the
compulsory transfer of men from one Service to another. Although from the very
outset voluntary enlistments on "duration" engagements had been subject to the
Schedule of Reserved Occupations, it had been held that a man who wished to make
the Service his life's career should not be debarred from enlisting on a normal
regular engagement. By this means a number of skilled men did leave industry
and the growing need for the strictest economy in the use of skilled men made it
imperative to deny them even this right of choice, so that from the middle of 1943
enlistments on normal regular engagements were governed by the same rules as
enlistments on "duration" engagements.
The National Service Act (No. 2), which was passed in December, 194I, con-
tained a clause by which the Minister of Labour and National Service could issue
to a man serving in one Service an enlistment notice directing him to present himself
for enlistment into one of the other Services on a specified date, provided that he
had before that date been discharged from his original Service. This was in effect
compulsory transfer from one Service to another, and in the later years of the war
it was used quite effectively. It was natural that changes in the strategic situation
should change the relative urgency of the manpower requirements of the individual
Services and large numbers were thus transferred both from the Royal Navy and
the Royal Air Force to the Army. This transfer was of course unpopular with the
men themselves, who disliked becoming "new boys", but the supply of manpower
became so meagre that it was impossible to build up the strength of the Army for
the final campaign in Europe by any other means.
The war of 1914-18 taught the need for manpower control, lessons which were
remembered in 1939 with such good effect. But the events of 1939-45 showed
more and more that war must be total war; that this nation's manpower resources
must be more and more strictly controlled and that more than ever must the wishes
of the individual give way to the needs of the State.
