CHAPTER IV
SUPPLY OF OFFICERS
From the beginning of the war it was the consistent policy that the supply of
officers should be drawn from the ranks and that the road to a commission should
be through an Officer Cadet Training Unit; but although this was maintained as
the basic policy it was neither desirable nor practicable that it should be rigidly
applied in all cases. It was altogether right that neither social status nor wealth
should become a substitute for training towards obtaining a commission in a
fighting arm, but it would be absurd to expect a University professor in the fifties
to go through the ordinary training in the ranks and at O.C.T.U. in order that he
might be commissioned for secret scientific work.
The broad principle evolved
was that no man who was liable to be called up for service under the National
Service Act should escape the common lot of service in the ranks, but that the man
who was beyond the operation of that Act or who would be reserved under the
Schedule of Reserved Occupations might be commissioned direct if he had had
former service as an officer or possessed some special qualification which would
make him useful to the Army as an officer.
Several different methods were used
for obtaining officers, adapted for particular purposes and to deal with special
classes, and all methods had their particular importance and deserve attention.
convenient to describe first the normal method of commissioning after
service in the ranks and training at an O.C.T.U. and then to examine the variations
Commissioning after service in the ranks and training at an O.C.T.U. always
produced the majority of officers, and it was almost the sole source for the supply
of the young regimental officer of the combatant arms. The basis of this scheme
was that the candidate should be selected before going to O.C.T.U., the intention
being that no one should reach an O.C.T.U. unless there was a reasonable expecta-
tion that he would prove fit to be an officer. In point of fact it was not until 1942
that selection was scientifically carried out, and in proper selection lay the real key
to good officer production.
At the beginning of the war the only selection was by a short personal interview
with a senior officer, such as a divisional or district commander or one of similar
status.
Many such officers were, from a life's experience of dealing with men,
shrewd judges of character, but even the shrewdest could not in one short interview
add much to the opinion of the commanding officer who had far more opportunity
of judging the candidate, and there was a tendency either to "take the commanding
officer's word for it" or to be guided by some isolated detail, such as that the
candidate had been educated at some particular school or that he was "old Joe's
son and so must be a good 'un". Although many first-rate officers were thus
produced, there was too high a percentage who failed at O.C.T.U. and were sent
back to their units, or who scraped through O.C.T.U. training only to fail the more
ignominiously when faced with the real responsibilities of commissioned rank.
By the spring of 1940 there was a temporary surplus of officers since the expected
casualties had not in fact been suffered, and opportunity was taken to let the rate
of officer production drop while experiments were made to devise a better system
of selection. In that summer the first selection boards were set up with permanent
presidents appointed by the War Office.
This was a long step in the right direction.
The presidents selected were regular officers who were known to be good judges of
WO 217/=2
men and by being permanent they became more experienced in dealing with the
many varied types of character they encountered.
But this method was still not satisfactory, and in 1941 experiments were carried
out at No. I War Office Selection Board at Edinburgh under the supervision and
with the advice of the then General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Scottish
Command, who had first-hand knowledge of the pre-war German system of officer
selection, which had depended mainly on a psychological assessment of personality.
A detailed description of the selection procedure finally adopted at War Office
Selection Boards is outside the scope of this volume. It is sufficient to say that
during 1942 all War Office Selection Boards were re-designed according to the
pattern evolved at Edinburgh, and that the methods then introduced have continued
substantially unchanged.
In August, 1942, special pre-O.C.T.U. training was
introduced for all candidates accepted by a War Office Selection Board which
completed the system as finally developed. The following figures show how greatly
this system tended to eliminate waste of training time and accommodation.
the former system, the Boards, even when sitting under a permanent president,
rejected 14 per cent of the candidates, but 25 per cent of those accepted by the
Boards were rejected from O.C.T.U. in the course of training. The average rate
of rejection by the new War Office Selection Boards was about 40 per cent: very
few of those accepted by the Boards were rejected during pre-O.C.T.U. training,
while no candidates were rejected from O.C.T.U., except for misconduct or with
the express permission of the War Office.
Selection Boards must naturally depend on the quality of the material coming
forward, but, even if their rate of rejection was high, it was better that rejection
should take place at that point before time was wasted in trying to train an unsuit-
able man and unsettling him in the process. But however good the War Office
Selection Boards might be at judging candidates, they did not themselves find the
candidates, and it was therefore of very great importance that every commander,
however small his command, should be on the watch to find the potential officer,
to encourage those who might be suitable and to point them out to their command-
After the introduction of selection procedure at Primary Training
Centres the personnel selection officers were able to indicate apparent potential
leaders, but they could not do more than indicate possibilities.
commanding officers and regimental officers in units had to find the potential
candidate and, having found him, encourage him to accept the responsibilities of
In doing so, they had to be prepared to lose a good soldier from their
unit in order that the Army might gain a good officer. At one time ten redundant
battalions of infantry were about to be disbanded: selection procedure was applied
to all other ranks to discover where they could most suitably be posted, which
revealed 178 potential officers who had never been put forward by their commanding
That these men should have been overlooked must have been due either
to negligence or selfishness, and it cannot be too strongly emphasized that the supply
of officers must depend, in the beginning, upon the units.
The length of O.C.T.U. training varied from two to eight months, according to
the requirements of the different arms.
Pre-O.C.T.U. training was designed to
make the candidate an efficient soldier of the arm for which he had been accepted
by a War Office Selection Board, to give him a good knowledge of map reading, and
to teach him to drive a motor vehicle or motor cycle and to carry out elementary
maintenance tasks. The length of training varied from six to ten weeks, but the
actual time spent at pre-O.C.T.U. depended on the candidate's state of training
Such was the normal method of producing the ordinary regimental officer.
That the system in its final development worked well is beyond question.
