Consequently, no one knew whether a telephonic demand through departmental
channels was intended to cancel or supplement an official demand submitted by
znd Echelon: either no drafts at all were sent until the discrepancy was cleared up
or drafts were despatched to meet demands which would quite easily have been
met by and Echelon from the base depots, if the demands had been sent to them
in the first place instead of directly to the War Office. When the base depots
were moved back to England in May, 1940, they were found to contain considerable
numbers of certain types of reinforcements which had been the subject of urgent
departmental demands a short time before.
The lesson was valuable and, when
a British Army again landed in France in 1944, reinforcement demands were strictly
For the four years from the withdrawal from Dunkirk in 1940 to the invasion
of Normandy in 1944, all drafting involved a long sea voyage.
of war until March, 1940, there had been a small but steady flow of drafts to Egypt
and India to complete units to war establishments and to provide additional units
To avoid the risks of the long voyage via Gibraltar,
troops were moved across France by train to Marseilles and embarked there.
April, 1940, the attitude of the Italian Government became very menacing and it
was decided that it was too risky to allow troopships to sail without convoy on a
Their open declaration of war in May, 1940, closed the
Mediterranean route, and in June, 1940, Convoy W.S.i, carrying about 4,000 all
ranks for the Middle East, sailed via Capetown by the route that was to be the normal
for the next three years.
Convoy W.S.2 sailed in August, 1940, and the regular
system may be said to have begun with Convoy W.S.3 which sailed in October,
There were 33 convoys in all by this route, Convoy W.S.33 sailing in
Convoy K.M.4 took the first drafts direct to North Africa through
the Straits of Gibraltar in November, 1942, about the same time as Convoy W.S.24
was sailing by the Cape route, and in September, 1943, Convoy K.M.F.24 sailed
through the Mediterranean in place of Convoy W.S.34 which was to have sailed
in that month via the Cape.
The forced use of this long route via the Cape for so many years entailed certain
In the first place it caused a very serious loss in man-
power since troops in transit are not available for immediate use.
there might quite easily be from 25,000 to 30,000 men on the high seas, available
neither to resist an invasion in England nor an attack on Egypt.
much shorter routes for reinforcements gave to the Axis powers a considerable
advantage in the campaigns in Cyrenaica and Libya.
Secondly, the long delay between the submission of a reinforcement demand by
an overseas command and the actual arrival of the drafts in that command led to
a radical alteration in the method of demanding and allotting reinforcements.
theory the losses in units were made good by men posted from base depots, the
base depots being in turn replenished by drafts from the United Kingdom against
With a short sea voyage this system worked satisfactorily and
a regular daily flow of drafts could be maintained as was done between England
and France throughout the war of 1914-18, but the system broke down when
eight or ten weeks elapsed before the drafts demanded from home could arrive.
It was therefore decided that an overseas command should have an authorized
reinforcement holding, which was over and above the first reinforcements of units
and which was calculated on the estimated delay between the submission of a
reinforcement demand and the actual arrival of drafts, and on the estimated average
casualties by arms during that period. In other words, the command was supposed
to hold on the spot enough men immediately to replace the estimated average
wastage between one convoy and the next.
wO 2TT/=2
This method worked well enough, but there was always the major difficulty that
it was impossible to tell until the convoy was actually loaded exactly how many
men could be embarked. Ships might be totally lost or might be damaged: a
damaged ship might be repaired more quickly than had been expected and might
just be able to catch a convoy: repairs to another, which had been scheduled for
a convoy, might be unexpectedly delayed. Not only might the actual ships avail-
able for a convoy be altered at the last moment but the allotment of the available
capacity between the three Services might have to be changed at short notice to
meet some urgent operational demand. Since the precise number of men to be
shipped in a convoy was always in doubt, it was important to know in what order
of priority the overseas commands wanted the drafts for the different arms so that
such shipping space as was available could be used to the best advantage.
reinforcement demands submitted by commands were therefore divided into two
parts, the first part setting out the total numbers by arms and trades required to
complete the authorized reinforcement holding and the second part dividing the
total into a number of blocks in order of priority.
to be embarked was known in the War Office, drafts up to that number, in the order
of priority asked for by the command, were put under orders, plus some additional
waiting drafts to ensure that, if any extra shipping space suddenly became available,
there were men immediately available at the port to fill it. Since it was obviously
undesirable that men should be kept too long away from units in transit camps,
any drafts excluded from one convoy and any unused waiting drafts were given a
Given the limitations imposed by lack of shipping, this method met the needs
of overseas commands as well as they could be met.
the overseas command never knew exactly how many reinforcements they were
going to get in response to any demand nor of what type. Not until a convoy was
finally loaded could the War Office signal the exact detail of personnel embarked,
and not until the convoy actually arrived did the overseas command know precisely
what numbers would in fact be received; but fortunately the percentage of losses
at sea was very small and the very great majority of those who left the United
Kingdom arrived safely at their destinations.
arranged their priorities judiciously, any convoy would bring a proportion of every
arm and would meet the most urgent demands in full.
Nevertheless, the limitations were very real, however great the effort to overcome
them as far as possible. Had there been in the Middle East in 1940, 1941 or 1942
a really prolonged period of serious fighting, involving casualties on the scale of
the campaign in Gallipoli, it must have become impossible adequately to maintain
there an army of any size, however many reinforcements might be available at
Much was done in the Middle East to save United Kingdom manpower
by the use of African manpower, as. was explained in an earlier chapter; but while
the supply of United Kingdom drafts depended on the long Cape route there was
constant anxiety that wastage might seriously outrun
The events of 1943 gave an entirely new turn to the problem of drafting overseas.
With the surrender of Italy attention began to be directed to the building up of a
force in the United Kingdom for the ultimate invasion of France.
East had ceased to be a theatre of active operations, and comparatively few men
could be spared for Italy or India, in both of which countries there was heavy
At the same time the reopening of the Mediterranean route led to a
much quicker turn round of ships, so that the limitation on outward drafting
became one of manpower and not of shipping.
towards accelerating the exchange of those who had served for a long time con-
