In December, 1939, a similar census was taken of units of A.D.G.B. and a
further 3,40o were released to industry and a further large number were recorded
on the card index.
Although this census and card index achieved much and although a considerable
number of men were released or transferred within the Service, they were never
wholly satisfactory.
In many cases the census did not disclose the man's real
occupation; sometimes the man himself deliberately concealed it so that he might
not be removed from his unit, sometimes he stated only the occupation he had been
following at the time of mobilization which was often some purely temporary one
to which he had been driven by unemployment in his proper trade.
The officers
of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, who made the assessments on the
census forms, were not then so familiar with Service trades as they afterwards
became.
In some cases men were assessed as suitable for some Service trade, but
when they proved not to be so were removed from the index, although they were
in fact suitable for some other trade. Finally the number of names to be dealt
with was so great that the index was never completed and was eventually abandoned.
An attempt was made to record in the index every man who was suitable for any
Army trade and much clerical labour was expended on trades for which the Army
had no immediate need.
This delayed progress on the more important trades
and it would probably have been better to have confined work from the outset to
recording only those men of trades most urgently required. There was, moreover,
no machinery for keeping the index up to date, and in the end it appeared that
40 or 50 per cent of the men recorded as suitable for posting to tradesmen's vacancies
were not in the units in which they had originally been recorded but had been posted
elsewhere or had become casualties. It is improbable that either units or record
offices could at that time have kept up regular notifications regarding these men,
even if it had been possible to have recorded such changes on the cards in the
War Office at a time when no mechanical recording machines were available.
Undoubtedly some skilled men were lost in the ranks of combatant units in France,
but the great majority were re-discovered by other means later.
By the spring of 1940 it was apparent that apart from the Territorial Army there
were other men who had been misplaced in the earlier intakes under the National
Service Act and applications by individual soldiers for transfer to technical corps
Until the suspension of transfers in July, 1940, the
census and these arrangements had resulted in some 15,000 transfers within
After the collapse of France the one urgent task was to reorganize the Army in
the United Kingdom to resist invasion.
To allow units to settle down it was
necessary to reduce the movement of personnel to the minimum, and although a
considerable number of skilled men were released to industry, as will be related in
a later chapter, the transfer of individuals within the Service was suspended.
the same time 120 new battalions were formed with such speed that there was no
time to sort intakes or to search for tradesmen.
of applications which had already been submitted, but on which all action was
suspended, and special enquiries instituted in one Command at home made it quite
clear that there were very many tradesmen or potential tradesmen. who were not
being properly used. The losses incurred at Dunkirk and the very large intake of
recruits in June, July and August of 1940 made the card index hopelessly out of
date, and it was abandoned in favour of a new procedure which was introduced in
October, 1940, on the re-opening of transfers. This procedure invited applications
from men who claimed some skill in a number of mechanical and electrical trades.
A form was provided "which every soldier, claiming any experience or aptitude
likely to fit him for classification or training in any of the Army trades named,
wO 217/=2
will be given an opportunity to complete", subject to certain restrictions which
will be discussed later.
applications were submitted.
Nineteen Army trades were named and over 30,000
Those men who from the information given appeared
to be fit for immediate trade test were detailed by the War Office to be tested by
a unit of the appropriate arm. If found suitable, they were transferred as required.
Those who appeared to need further training were sent to training courses as
vacancies could be allotted.
If they proved unsuitable for training, they were
returned to their units; if they ultimately qualified as tradesmen, they were trans-
ferred as required. Later instructions extended this procedure to all Army trades
and by the end of May, 1942, 108,842 applications had been received. Of these
II,000 were rejected as unsuitable and g8,08o were selected as suitable for training
and testing.
This same method of advertising within the Army was followed to find men
suitable for particular trades, such as Armament Artificers and Radio Mechanics,
for which special needs arose from time to time.
It is not necessary to follow
these in detail, but it is important to notice the problem created by this search for
tradesmen within the Army, in relation to the efficiency of units of the combatant
arms.
The real trouble was that in so many cases the skilled man was the senior
N.C.O. or the trained signaller or the machine-gunner or the gun-layer or the
specialist of some sort just because he was the man of superior intelligence and
character.
The same qualities which had made him successful at his work had
made him the valuable soldier in the Territorial Army, and the withdrawal of these
men from the combatant units would have been a serious blow in the dark days of
1940 and 1941. N.C.O.s were not specifically forbidden to apply for transfer, but
there was a proviso that they might have to revert to Lance-Corporal before
mustering as tradesmen and that a certificate of willingness to revert must accom-
pany the application. In the early months of the war, when the Territorial Army
Divisions were preparing to go to France, a majority of the N.C.O.s probably
preferred to conceal their skill and take their share with their comrades in action,
but in the winter of 1940 and through 1941 conditions were different. As the long
cold winter of 1940 dragged on and invasion never came it seemed to many that
they were no longer likely to see active service as a unit: guarding the coasts of
England against an enemy who never came was a dull routine and after all the
War Office must mean what they said when they called for applications for mustering
as tradesmen.
And so applications began to come in from N.C.O.s expressing
their willingness to relinquish their ranks if necessary.
In one battalion, recruited
from an industrial area, over 3o N.C.O.s applied, and when about half of these had
been transferred or allotted to training courses, the commanding officer protested
that further withdrawals must be stopped if his battalion was to remain an efficient
unit.
The same thing happened in other units and with specialists as well as
N.C.O.s: units suddenly lost signallers and others whom they had taken months
to train and many applications were of necessity rejected to prevent deterioration of
the unite
Refusals led to complaints by the men to their Trade Unions and there
gradually arose a clamour that there were in the Army thousands of valuable
tradesmen doing nothing, who would be much better employed in industry.
almost appeared that the tradesmen in the Army at home were employed exclusively
on peeling potatoes, with brief intervals of doing a guard. In August, 1941, the
Government appointed a Committee under the chairmanship of Lord-then Sir
William-Beveridge to enquire into the use of skilled men in the three Services.
The Committee reported to the effect that there was a widespread misuse of
engineering skill in the Army, and their report was published together with the
comments of the War Office thereon. By the summer of 1942, 9,80g cases of
alleged misuse of skilled men had been investigated, of which 1,31o were sub-
