fulfilled a practical purpose and on the whole worked well.
It was perhaps some-
what more liable to abuse than its counterpart in the United Kingdom, since the
check could not be so careful as it was at home.
Not all Englishmen living abroad
are there for the best reasons, and truth about the past was sometimes concealed.
Everyone in the club at "Mtapa-Mtapa" might know perfectly well why Bill Jones
was living in "Bongoland", but no one was going to tell the Commander-in-Chief;
and sometimes Bill Jones was commissioned and once more proved himself the
waster that he was at heart; but more often still Bill Jones retrieved very gallantly
his earlier mistakes.
The real failures were few and the Army did by this means
secure some valuable officers.
Closely connected with the supply of officers was the problem of finding fresh
employment for the officer who had become unemployed.
reasons why officers became unemployed, particularly in 1940 and 1941 when the
organization of the Army underwent a series of violent changes.
Formations and
units were disbanded; the role of individual units underwent drastic changes; and
appointments suddenly lapsed on a change in the command and district organiza-
tion.
All these changes tended to leave a residue of officers, usually the older and
the less fit, for whom no immediate new employment seemed available.
Some-
times an officer turned out to be unsuitable for the post he held and had to be
removed from it, a fact which not unnaturally, though sometimes unjustly, pre-
judiced his prospects and made other commanders reluctant to accept him.
Unless
there were disgraceful circumstances accompanying the failure, the Army Council
were usually reluctant to order the termination of commission but preferred to give
the officer another chance in another appointment, partly in justice to the officer
and partly because it seemed unreasonable to dispense with an officer until he had
been given a thorough trial, at a moment when the Army was in general short of
officers.
The problem was to find a point at which supply and demand could be
Personnel branches were often asking for officers to be commissioned
from the A.O.E.R. register at a time when some other branch had available
redundant officers who would quite well meet their needs.
Eventually the branch
which dealt with A.O.E.R. commissions undertook the duty of placing.
A large
number of officers were interviewed and placed in vacancies notified by personnel
branches, and much useful material was saved. Placing was not always easy:
sometimes an officer had attained à war substantive rank in which no new employ-
ment could be found for him, while the officer himself was unwilling to revert to
a lower rank, or officers well qualified for some post were of the wrong medical
category; but in spite of many difficulties much success was achieved.
There
remained always a residue for whom no possible employment could be found, and
nothing then remained but to relegate them to permanent unemployment.
Officers
relegated to unemployment retained their commissions and remained, at any rate
in theory, liable to recall to the Colours.
Some officers found employers in civil
life unwilling to accept them while this liability remained, and in such cases it
became the practice to terminate the commission.
But termination of commission
was in general felt to be somewhat of a slur and it was not commonly effected
except when there were good disciplinary reasons or at the officer's own request.
From the outbreak of war up to the end of 1945 just over 210,500 officers had
been commissioned, of whom 126,500 had been commissioned from O.C.T.U.,
39,000 from the A.O.E.R., 27,000 directly from the ranks and 18,000 directly from
civil life, these last being mainly doctors, dentists and chaplains, who did not pass
through the A.O.E.R.
Overall figures are apt to be misleading since deficiencies
of one type may be hidden by surpluses of another type, and there was throughout
the war a continual shortage of the regimental officer fit for active service in a front-
There was always a heavy demand for officers of this type for service
38
WO 277/12
with Indian and Colonial troops, which will be discussed in more detail in the next
chapter, but the real trouble was that there was never a really sufficient supply of
good material forthcoming from the ranks. Reference has already been made to
the responsibility of commanding officers for finding and putting forward suitable
candidates, but it is pertinent to refer here to the reluctance of many very suitable
men to follow their plain duty and accept commissions. Mistaken loyalties to
units or friends held back many who might have been officers, and the wider loyalty
to the cause was too often forgotten.
When the end of the war was in sight and still more so when releases had actually
begun, there was some reluctance to accept commissions through fear that officers
might be released more slowly than other ranks, and when the release of officers
was in fact retarded in November, 1945, there was an immediate drop in the
number of candidates for commissions.
The whole question of separate release
programmes is discussed in the final chapter, but it is closely related to the supply
of officers. Here it must be emphasized that any suggestion that officers will be
released more slowly than other ranks will quite certainly reduce the number of
candidates for commissions and will often deter the best type of candidate who,
when the war is over, will want to be released as soon as possible to return to training
or to a profession. It would not be surprising if in the future the best type of
candidate should demand, before he will accept a commission, a categorical
assurance that the release of officers as such will not be delayed.
Finally, there
was in some quarters a feeling that it was not worth while being an officer: there
was a lot more responsibility, hard work and trouble, and very few material
advantages.
Officers, it was said, had to pay for many amenities which other ranks
got free, while in certain sections of Press and Parliament officers were constantly
being held up to public reprobation as an idle class who took all the best accom-
modation and best food. If such was the public view of officers, why bother to
be one?
Nothing can be more important to an Army than an abundant supply of first-
class officers, and every encouragement must be given to the best candidates eager
to seek commissioned rank.
