many ways surprising that strengths remained as high as they did, and a great tribute
is due to those officers and other ranks who in discouraging circumstances and often
at much personal inconvenience kept the Territorial Army in being.
The year 1936 was one of great perplexity in this country.
The death of a much-
loved Sovereign cast a gloom over its opening month, and domestic politics were
increasingly complicated by the events which finally led to the abdication of his
successor.
There was imminent threat of war with Italy, but those who most
strongly advocated the imposition of sanctions against her, most firmly opposed any
idea of rearmament to meet the war which such action might involve.
dangers were fully realized in responsible quarters and some steps were taken, such
as the increase of air defences at home by the conversion of a number of Territorial
Army
units, but neither in manpower nor equipment were the Armed Forces
materially improved.
Revenue was showing ominous signs of shrinking and the
Government was unwilling to embark on a large programme of expenditure.
But
the international situation deteriorated further, and in 1937 it was no longer possible
to delay rearmament, which was seriously undertaken.
It is not necessary to
follow the rearmament plan stage by stage.
Various steps were taken to make the
Army more attractive by improving accommodation and service conditions gener-
ally; a Public Relations Directorate was created in the War Office; and steps were
taken to advertise the Army to the public.
These measures, combined with the
obvious and growing threat of war, materially increased the rate of recruiting in
I937, 1938 and 1939, so much so that the strength of the Regular Army, which in
April, 1937, had fallen to 193,700, had in August, 1939, risen to 224,000.
The
Munich crisis of 1938, which brought the country to the brink of war, naturally
increased the speed of rearmament, and between that event and mobilization four
very important measures were taken, one in internal War Office organization and
the other three of wider application, which materially affected manpower and man-
power planning.
It is intended to examine these and their effects in some detail
and to conclude the chapter by noticing some other measures of lesser impor-
tance and by reviewing the manpower assets with which the nation entered
the war.
An important change was effected in War Office organization in January, 1939,
by the appointment of a Director of Mobilization.
It had by that time become
quite impossible for the Director of Recruiting and Organization to deal with the
pressing problems in those two fields and adequately to supervise the planning of
mobilization.
For mobilization had come to mean much more than the filling of
certain staff appointments and the allotment of Army Reservists to complete units
to war establishment or to form new units.
It had long been recognized by the
Government that mobilization would affect the whole available manpower resources
of the country, and a Manpower Committee had for some time past been working
out plans for meeting the needs of the Services, of Civil Defence and of industry.
It was therefore urgently necessary to appoint a separate Director within the War
Office who could devote himself to the problems of mobilization in this wider sense
without having at the same time to control the day-to-day administration of the
• various corps of the Army.
The Director of Mobilization became in fact the link
between the War Office and the Ministry of Labour who were concerned with the
supply and distribution of manpower for the country as a whole.
Such an appoint-
ment would have been inevitable on mobilization, and for a senior officer to be
appointed eight months before mobilization proved of very great value.
In the same month (January, 1939), the Ministry of Labour issued the "Schedule
of Reserved Occupations".
The publication of such a document in time of peace
was a revolution in manpower planning and a clear indication that, if war did come,
the Government did not intend to allow the mistakes of I914 to be repeated, when
WO 277/22
the indiscriminate enlistment of highly skilled men seriously retarded the develop-
ment of the munitions industries.
This schedule was intended primarily as a
guide to individuals, employers and employed alike, who were trying to decide how
they could best serve the country, by indicating the ages above which men in
certain occupations should remain at their work.
The schedule issued in January,
1939, did not affect enlistments into the regular forces, nor was it in fact applied
either to those already serving in the Territorial Army or to new entrants.
it could or should have been so applied is a debatable point, to which it will be
more convenient to refer when examining the large increase in the Territorial Army
which now took place. When mobilization did come a larger and more compre-
hensive Schedule superseded this edition and was immediately effective in prevent-
ing a drift from industry into the Services of men whose retention at their work
The ages of reservation underwent many changes in the
course of the war, but the soundness of the principle was unquestionable.
In March, 1939, the Government suddenly decided to double the Territorial
Army. There were many urgent political reasons for such a step. A few weeks
earlier a handbook had been issued to every household urging men and women to
undertake some service, and great emphasis had been laid on the Territorial Army
as a force in which service might well be given, and the doubling of its establishment
was a clear call to the youth of the nation.
to all the world that Britain was seriously rearming. But from the military point
of view the step brought serious difficulties, and many of the manpower troubles of
subsequent years can be traced to it.
In the first place the whole organization of the Territorial Army was violently
disrupted a few months before war began.
Existing units were in many cases split
and the two halves each became the nucleus of a new unit. For example, often
an infantry battalion had covered a whole county; now it was split to form a complete
battalion in each half of the county, and as both units had to absorb new recruits
up to half its establishment, neither unit could at first be as efficient as the old one
had been. In many units it was difficult to find suitable officers and N.C.O.s and
a very heavy strain was thrown on the Regular Army to provide permanent staff.
Training equipment and drill hall accommodation were inadequate; many units
were allotted to new formations in which they had not had time to settle down
How great and how rapid was the expansion of the Territorial
Army may be illustrated by the fact that the strength, which had in January, 1939,
been about 204,000, had by the end of August risen to 428,000. It was impossible
that so large a percentage of recruits could be absorbed in so short a time without
This was a passing defect which time would cure and which was more rapidly
rectified when units were embodied and could be trained intensively.
were other radical defects in structure.
The balance between arms, which was
wrong before, now became worse because the administrative units required for the
new formations were not provided and there were still no corps or army troops,
although the number of divisions had been increased.
of the existing R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. units, which had hitherto been a mere cadre,
were brought up to full war establishment, which was a step in the right direction,
but the structure was unsound because it was altogether out of balance, and far too
many units were left to be provided on mobilization. The distribution of the
available manpower between arms was wrong and a better weapon might have been
forged from the same materials.
To double the Territorial Army overnight was
a magnificent gesture, but a golden opportunity was missed of providing some
important units, the lack of which was so severely felt on mobilization.
Another serious defect was that too large a proportion of the strength of the
