any one time were never great, but public criticism was so keen that it was never
possible to retain a man for more than six months beyond his due date.
The real
remedies lay in an increased production of officers and N.C.O.s, in the re-training
of men surplus in one arm to fill deficiencies in other arms, and in the allotment of
new intakes to arms in the proportions in which they will be required far ahead.
All these measures are slow in their operation and can be really successful only on
long-term planning. Up to the moment of victory the order of battle necessarily
provided the formations needed for war.
When the fighting ceased, the ideal plan
would have been to have had a long pause before releases began so that an Army
strength and an order of battle could have been worked out for, say, a year ahead.
Much later trouble would have been avoided if this had been practicable.
But
it is quite unlikely that public opinion would ever tolerate such a wait, and it seems
inevitable that releases must begin on a short-term forecast.
Even so, much might
have been achieved if a long-term forecast could have been made within three or
four months of the opening of releases. It would then have been possible to decide
early the date of which different units could be disbanded and to calculate with
some certainty the assets that would become available for re-training and when
they would be usable in their new capacity.
The corollary to this is that the rate
of intake must similarly be decided well ahead so that an ordered plan may be
drawn up for their distribution among arms.
Finally, it might have been possible
to institute earlier a short-service scheme for officers and N.C.O.s, offering some
financial inducements for them to volunteer to continue serving for a fixed period.
Voluntary deferment of release was always open, but there were no financial induce-
ments and no certainty of tenure beyond two years. The objection to early opening
of such a scheme was that future establishments were unknown and that it was
unwise to accept a number of officers and N.C.O.s who might be redundant before
the end of their period of contract. This difficulty also might have been solved
if it had been possible to produce an order of battle well ahead; but it does seem
that some risks might have been taken in order to secure the services of men who
in a short time were urgently needed.
Both the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force adopted the different method of
releasing various categories of officers and men on separate programmes.
trades in which a surplus accrued, the rate of release might be four or five groups
ahead of the general average: in those in which there were shortages, the rate might
correspondingly be retarded. It is very doubtful whether the two systems differed
so much in actual working as they appeared to do.
Public opinion would no more
have allowed the rate of release in any trade to fall seriously behind the general
average than it would have allowed wholesale compulsory retention in any arm for
an indefinite period.
In either case there was a point beyond which discipline
could not be strained, and under the "separate programme" system it was just as
necessary to carry out extensive re-training in order to prevent too wide a gap in
the rate of release as it was under the "one programme" system in order to prevent
undue compulsory retention.
It is not claimed that the "one programme" system
essentially better than the "separate programme"
system; neither will work
strictly logically and the compromises necessary in both brought them very near
together in the final result:
Under the "one programme" system, every man should
be released in his group; that was never possible and some were necessarily retained
against their will, but those retentions were kept to the lowest possible figure.
the other hand some men were kept to await the turn of their group, although the
Army had very little use for them.
Under the "separate programme" system, the
release of any trade ought to depend solely on service requirements: this was never
possible because the gap between the fastest and slowest trades could not be allowed
to become too great.
While the system avoids the retention of men who are really
76
WO 277/=2
unwanted merely in order to await their group, it might tend to retard the release
of more men in some trade than were strictly necessary because it retarded the
whole of a trade where the retention of a lower number might have sufficed. It is,
moreover, very doubtful whether in the Army the "separate programme" system
could be worked since there is no one Central Record Office. The majority of
Army trades are found in more than one arm and, without a Central Record Office,
it would have been very complicated to work out the total numbers of any one
trade required throughout the Army, the total numbers available and the effect of
the release programme on the individual arms in order to ascertain the surpluses
'and deficiencies and thus assess the general rate of release for that trade.
It would certainly have been possible to have separate programmes for officers
and other ranks, and this was in fact done from November, 1945, until May, 1946.
The immediate result was seriously to reduce the number of applicants for com-
missions, and it is doubtful whether any such programme could be worked if it
entailed a permanent retardation of officer releases compared with those of other
Separate programmes were in fact worked for medical, dental and nursing
officers which was accepted without comment.
The retention of these officers
must be in strict mathematical ratio to the strength of the Army and their release
must, quite obviously, be controlled by that ratio. If their rate of release gets
ahead of the general level, no jealousy is aroused since these officers belong to
professions apart and do not compete in the ordinary employment market with the
The plain fact is that so long as the emphasis is laid on the interest of the individual
no system of release can be wholly satisfactory from the strictly Service point of view.
There are limits beyond which public opinion will not tolerate retention, whether
by trades or individually, and once a system has ceased to appear to the men in the
Service to be working justly, it will inevitably break down.
Not only must justice
be done between individuals but it must be made clear that it is being done.
It is
fatal to lose sight of the intense and overriding desire of men to get home, and no
amount of Service reasons will convince men if they feel they are being retained
The Service must, therefore, be prepared to meet great difficulties,
especially in the technical arms. The remedies must be in a well-planned system
of re-training and allotment of new intake, which in turn requires the production
of an order of battle as far in advance as possible.
The release of the A.T.S. was carried out on the same system as that of the Army
in general, but since the age and service distribution of the women differed greatly
from that of the men they always worked to a programme of their own.
The
strength of the A.T.S. was always taken into account in calculating the total assets
and requirements of the Army, but to achieve any given reduction in the A.T.S.
in a given period it was always necessary to assess the number in the different
The monthly totals of releases in Classes "A", "B" and "C" are given in
It remains only to sketch the methods of releasing the locally enlisted personnel.
In many overseas commands, and particularly in the Middle East, there were large
numbers of men drawn from the various races of Africa and Asia who were serving
on various forms of engagement. It was patently impracticable to apply to these
the British release scheme as it stood. For example, it was absurd to attempt to
sort into "age and service" groups men whose real ages were quite unknown and
impossible to verify. The only feasible method was for commanders to draw up
their own release schemes in consultation with the local Governments, bearing
always in mind their main provisions, that whatever the scheme adopted it must
do apparent and substantial justice between man and man; that the rate of release
