individual. It was designed to effect the bulk of the releases in a series of groups,
based upon a simple combination of age and service; this came to be known as
Class "A" release.
It is important to appreciate that Class "A" release
quite
deliberately ignored the interests both of industry and of the Army.
But it was
impossible altogether to ignore these interests and it was from the start recognized
that some men must be released before their ordinary turn to re-establish the
industries of the country, and that some men must be retained beyond their due date
because they could not, at that moment, be spared without seriously impairing the
efficiency of the Army.
Moreover, provision must be made for release before a
man's normal turn for urgent compassionate reasons.
The plain "age and service"
plan was therefore modified in three ways.
Class "B" release was introduced to
provide for the early release of certain men urgently needed for reconstruction and
Class "C" release for compassionate cases, while a clause was inserted authorizing
the retention of any individual in the Army beyond his normal release date if his
services were needed for the efficiency of his unit.
The plan was applied equally to the women's services, except that a married
woman was given an overriding priority of release if she so desired.
All married
women could, if they wished, claim release in the first group, and those who did
not immediately avail themselves of this could give notice at any subsequent time
to claim release. This privilege was not limited to those married before any
particular date and a woman became eligible for it immediately on marriage.
view of the lack of any priority for the married man, many critics held that this over-
riding
priority for the married woman went too far and felt that the concession
should be limited to those married women who were genuinely about to re-establish
or begin a home.
It was generally agreed that public opinion would insist on the
release of a married woman at least simultaneously with, if not slightly before, that
of her husband, but it was argued that it was both unnecessary and unfair that
those married women who had not lived with thuir husbands for years and had no
intention of doing so again should receive any priority.
The contention was
perfectly true; some married women obtained a priority for which there was no
justification.
But in practice there were no means of discovering these undeserving
cases.
It was not practicable to expect an A.T.S. commanding officer to ask each
of the married women under her command whether she intended to live with her
husband, nor was it likely that those who did not so intend would give a truthful
reply if they wanted an early release.
In fact the concession was inevitable,
whether logical or not.
Public opinion had never tolerated the call-up of married
women, and during the war much criticism was aroused by the refusal of the
Services to grant discharge to a woman on marriage.
The married men in the
Service would certainly expect that their wives should be released at once, if they
wished, to prepare their home for their return.
Love, which proverbially laughs
at locksmiths, would doubtless have laughed at any regulation which attempted to
retain married women until their group fell due for release; and it is better that®
regulations should not be laughed at.
Simultaneously with the appointment of the original inter-Departmental Com-
mittee in January, I94I, planning began in the War Office.
A Standing Committee
on demobilization was formed under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-
Secretary, who was later succeeded by the Principal Assistant Under-Secretary.
Within the War Office the Department most concerned was naturally that of
the Adjutant General, the responsible director being the Director of Recruiting
and Mobilization, who in March, 1943, was re-designated Director of Recruiting and
Demobilization. The Departments of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff and of
the Quarter Master General were represented on the Standing Committee and a
representative of the Finance Department attended when necessary.
WO217
12
It will be realized that this early planning was done under great difficulties.
In
the first place it had to be kept profoundly secret. In 1941 any idea that Britain
was planning demobilization would certainly have had a most unfortunate eflect
throughout the world.
Friend and foe alike could scarcely have failed to mis-
understand our motives, and to the suffering conquered nations of Europe it might
well have seemed the death-knell of all their hopes and that the light was indeed
about to go out.
Secondly, it was naturally extremely difficult for those charged
with the planning to induce their colleagues in other departments in the War
Office to attend to the matter.
Staffs were overburdened by the countless pressing
problems which always called for immediate attention, demobilization seemed a
very long way off, and it was not surprising that "First things first" seemed then
to be a golden rule.
But planning went on persistently if unobtrusively, and in
April, I942, a secret pamphlet was issued setting out what it was expected would
be the main plan of demobilization.
When one recalls the military situation in
the spring of 1942, there is a courageous assurance in the production of a document
which calmly assumed that in the end British demobilization would be carried out
by the British Government in a moment of victory.
So the planning went on, in
increasing tempo as victory came more and more clearly in sight, and the final
reward was that when victory did come in the spring of 1945 releases could begin
six weeks thereafter without a hitch.
"Regulations for Release from the Army"
were issued in February, 1945, and the whole machine was completely ready to
start when it was required.
The final plan, it will be remembered, provided for
three classes of releases.
Class "A" were to form the great majority and were to
be released in a series of groups based on age and service.
Class "B" were to be
men released before their normal turn to meet the needs of reconstruction, Class
"C" were to be given priority on urgent compassionate grounds.
While it is not
intended here to give the complete details set out in Release Regulations, it will
be well to give a brief sketch of the machinery by which releases were effected,
before proceeding to enquire into the results of the scheme upon the Army in the
Class "A" releases, forming the great majority, demand attention first.
winter of 1944-45 and the early spring of 1945 all record offices calculated the
"age and service" group of each individual soldier and notified it to his unit, similar
calculations being undertaken for officers by the War Office.
The man's group
was marked on his documents and remained unchanged unless he ceased to reckon
service for any reason.
When releases began, a programme was issued from time
to time by the War Office ordering the release of some particular group or groups
within some particular period; and every possible effort was made to ensure that
all men in the group or groups specified should actually be released within the
allotted period, wherever he might be serving.
This necessarily involved issue
of instructions well in advance so that overseas commands could arrange movements.
The United Kingdom was divided into nine dispersal areas of which seven were
in England and Wales, one in Scotland and one in Northern Ireland.
The
geographical extent of each area was determined by population and each was served
by one dispersal centre, through which were released all the men who wished to
go to an address in that area.
Thus the numbers passing through each dispersal
centre were kept as nearly equal as possible.
Each dispersal centre had associated
with it a collecting unit, the duty of which was to receive the men for release from
all military units in that dispersal area, to sort them into batches according to the
dispersal areas to which the men wished to go, and to despatch them accordingly.
A dispersal unit would receive daily batches of men from all or any of the nine
collecting units.
The man's final journey home was, therefore, usually quite
short.
Women were dealt with by the same organization, except that, owing to
the difficulty and expense of providing female accommodation at collecting units,
