The peace establishment of the Regular Army bore no relation to the nation's
possible commitments as a great power.
It was in fact largely fortuitous and was
in the main governed by the defence requirements of India and the British Colonies.
The Government of India paid for the British troops in India, and, if that Govern-
ment had at any time drastically reduced their requirement in British troops, it is
very probable that any units thus made surplus would have been disbanded, since
in the United Kingdom or in the Colonies they would have become a charge on
the British Exchequer.
Under the Cardwell system, which was still in force, a
battalion of infantry was maintained at home for every battalion in India or the
Colonies, and any reduction of the infantry in India would have entailed a corre-
sponding reduction in the infantry at home.
In turn, this would have upset the
structure of the Army at home, based as it was in the main on the number of infantry
battalions available.
In 1936 the Regular Army at home was organized into five
divisions, but these were far from complete and it would have been quite impossible
to mobilize all five divisions and complete them to full war scale with full equip-
ment simultaneously.
In April, 1936, the peace establishment of the Regular Army was about 210,000,
but the actual strength was only just over 197,000.
The strength was in fact
shrinking at a disturbing speed.
In April, 1935, it had been over 200,000 and by
April, 1937, it had fallen to 193,700, despite the fact that by this latter date the
menace of war had caused the establishment to be increased to 221,000.
In fact,
recruiting was not replacing wastage, and the gap between strength and establish-
Recruiting had been poor for a number of years, and despite widespread
unemployment the Service was unattractive in the eyes of the nation's manhood.
Reasons are not far to seek: the pay was not high; the standard of accommodation
had undeniably lagged behind that of civil life; for most other ranks, service
abroad meant much discomfort in uncongenial surroundings; the married establish-
ment for the rank and file was very low; and even much of the training had lost
interest when a flag might represent almost anything. For the officer the attractions
It was scarcely possible for the junior officer to live on his pay,
especially if he were married.
There were gross inequalities in the rates of
promotion in different corps, and in some infantry regiments there were subalterns
who had 16 or 17 years' service, which meant that officers were often retired as
captains at the age of 45, with an inadequate pension, too late in life to start à
But apart from this lack of material attractions, recruiting was scarcely likely to
flourish in the pacifist atmosphere which was so widespread throughout the nation
in 1936. However much those in authority might realize the danger, the nation
was not ready to be told the truth, and Earl Baldwin himself confessed later that
in the General Election of 1935 he had deliberately concealed the issue of re-
armament since any stressing of that subject might have resulted in political defeat.
Those who clung to the hope that through the League of Nations a peaceful solution
might be found were both numerous and insistent, and the "Peace Ballot", which
was the most striking manifestation of this attitude, undoubtedly deterred many
from enlisting and led our opponents to believe that Britain would not fight.
In such circumstances scientific manpower planning was impossible. Enlistment
was purely voluntary, and there were no means of directing such flow of recruits
as there was, to where they were most needed.
Some corps were relatively popular
and had little difficulty in maintaining a reasonable strength, but too often at the
Compulsory transfer from one corps to another
was contrary to the Army Act. If a corps obtained too many recruits it was always
possible to reduce its intake by raising the medical or educational standards or even
WO277/22
by closing it altogether, but the common result was that men who were rejected
for that particular corps did not enlist at all.
men it could get and make the best use it could of them.
In fact, the Army had to take what
Recruiting was administered by the War Office through the Home Commands.
The responsible member of the Army Council was then, as now, the Adjutant
General, and under him was the Director of Recruiting and Organization. The
detailed control was exercised by a branch under this Director, and at the head-
quarters of each command a staff officer was appointed specifically for this work.
In each of the areas into which the Home Commands were then divided was a chief
recruiting officer, who in turn controlled a number of zone recruiting officers. The
size of the zones varied according to the population, and each zone recruiting officer
had under him a number of army recruiters who were ex-regular warrant and
non-commissioned officers. The London Recruiting Area was administered
directly by the War Office, and later on a Birmingham Recruiting Area was formed
and placed under direct War Office control, since this thickly populated area, then
divided between Southern and Western Command, made the administration of the
recruiting organization difficult.
In addition to those employed wholly on recruiting duties the commanding
officer of every infantry depot was ex-officio a station recruiting officer, as were a
number of the adjutants of Territorial Army units.
The permanent staff instructors
of the Territorial Army also had to undertake certain recruiting duties, until both
they and the Territorial Army adjutants were relieved of this in 1939 owing to the
growing importance of Territorial Army training.
There was no publicity or
advertising beyond a few poorly designed posters and for the most part the recruiting
offices were unattractive and badly sited in side streets.
The Director of Recruiting and Organization was, as his title implies, also
responsible for the internal organization of the several corps, including such
matters as records, promotions, establishments and drafting, and for the arrange-
ments for mobilization.
A number of branches in the War Office, known as per-
sonnel branches, administered the several corps of the Army, working in close
co-operation with the record offices and being responsible for the whole organization
and internal administration of their respective corps.
A single branch, staffed by
only three officers, dealt with the arrangements for mobilization.
The Army
Reserve, of which the Supplementary Reserve formed a part, was also administered
by this Director, but the Territorial Army was under the jurisdiction of the Director
General of the Territorial Army, who in 1936 became a member of the Army
Council
At this time the Territorial Army suffered from all the defects of the Regular Army
in an exaggerated form.
In the first place its peace establishments had even less
scientific basis than had those of the Regular Army. The establishments of the
to their war stalinier enginee was in Reserve every and in ry arion
scarcely existed at all.
A divisional R.A.S.C., for example, had a peace establish-
ment which was about one-tenth of its war establishment, and medical and ordnance
units were, if anything, worse off. The formations which did exist were altogether
unbalanced; there were no corps or army troops, and a very large number of new
units would be required before any formation could be fit to take the field. Equip-
ment was both limited and obsolete, and since the financial crisis of 1931 grants had
been reduced which greatly hindered training.
In April, 1936, the total peace establishment of the Territorial Army was about
182,000 and its total strength about 129,700.
Recruiting was poor and strengths
were falling, which is not surprising in view of the prevalent pacifism which has
already been noticed in connection with recruiting for the Regular Army.
It is in
