tinuously overseas by the introduction of the famous "Python" scheme, which
had so very marked an effect on drafting subsequently that some explanation of its
working is necessary.
When the war began about half the Regular Army was in its usual peace stations
overseas, the two largest blocks being in India and the Middle East.
course there would be a considerable number who had served overseas continuously
for five or six years without any leave to the United Kingdom, and who would
have been due to come home in the trooping season of 1939-40. When mobiliza-
tion was ordered, units had to be brought up to war establishment and homeward
movement was stopped except for a few special cases, since there was not at that
time sufficient trained men available to mobilize the B.E.F. and to provide replace-
ments for those who would in the ordinary course have been due for posting home
By the middle of 1940 the Mediterranean route was
closed and the limitations imposed by the use of the Cape route made it imperative
to reduce the demands for replacements for India and the Middle East to the
While the Mediterranean route remained closed, homeward movement, apart
from the return of invalids, was restricted to urgent compassionate cases, and
by the time of its reopening there was a large accumulation in commands abroad
of men who had served overseas continously for seven, eight or even nine years.
Those who had been abroad for these very long periods were all regular soldiers,
and it might well be argued that since soldiering was the profession of their choice,
Sound logical reasons are often not very con-
vincing to the individual who suffers from them and the natural desire to see
homes and kindred again could not be completely stifled.
thought about the regular soldier, there were by 1943 non-regulars who had been
abroad for four years and who compared their lot very unfavourably with that of
their comrades in the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force who were being kept abroad
for much shorter periods.
That the manpower circumstances in the other two
Services were very different was naturally not appreciated: much real harm was
done by this prolonged separation of husbands and wives, which often led to the
, break-up of marriages, and morale began to be greatly strained.
The changed situation in 1943 made it possible to establish a system of exchange
whereby officers and men who had served for a long time overseas could be sent
home in exchange for a similar number who had been long in the United Kingdom.
This scheme was given the code name "Python", which became well known
throughout the Army and throughout the country in general, and which stands
enshrined as an official title in many columns of Hansard.
From its inception
"Python" had a profound effect on drafting.
The aim was all the time to reduce
progressively the qualifying period, and the shorter that period the greater the
While there was still a large field army in the United
Kingdom, the system of exchange worked satisfactorily, but when the invasion of
France began it became more and more difficult to find replacements to send out
and to find employment in the United Kingdom for those who returned from
abroad. "Python", in fact, created a permanent wastage from all overseas commands
which had to be taken seriously into account in all manpower calculations.
From the invasion of France until the end of the war in Europe the bulk of the
overseas drafting was by short sea voyage.
Demands for reinforcements were
sent to the War Office fortnightly and drafts were despatched up to the limit of
the manpower available. After V.E. Day completely new problems were involved.
Releases were planned to begin within six weeks, which meant that men in the
earliest release groups must in distant theatres be withdrawn from units at once in
order to be home in time for their release dates.
"Python" exchanges had to be
WO 277/22
continued, and the qualifying period reduced as soon as possible; at the same time
the maximum possible force had to be deployed against the Japanese.
V.J. Day followed V.E. Day in little more than three
Fortunately
months and the need for
re-deployment in India and South-East Asia ceased, but in those three months
the strain of drafting was very great indeed. There were four major reasons for
the great movement of men in the months between V.E. Day and V.J. Day. Firstly,
the replacement of battle casualties suffered in Burma; secondly, the completion of
new units being formed overseas; thirdly, the replacements in commands abroad of
personnel sent home under "Python", and, fourthly, the return of men to the United
These four reasons affected different commands in varying
degrees, but broadly the problem was to withdraw men from the commands in
Europe, where the fighting had ceased, and convey them to India, S.E.A.C. and
M.E.F. to replace the losses suffered there through battle casualties, "Python"
exchanges and releases. The difficulty was not so much to provide the total
numbers required as to get the men in the right places.
The surrender of Japan happily removed the need for building up large forces
in South-East Asia, and the problem of drafting thereafter became one of dis-
tributing the available manpower assets among commands so as to allow each
command to be reduced to the limit of strength imposed by the general reduction
of the strength of the Army. Before V.J. Day the very heavy programme of move-
ment to India and South-East Asia seriously strained the shipping resources, even
though a certain amount of movement by air was effected from July, 1945, onwards.
The limitations of shipping to a large degree dictated the rate of release, since a
faster rate of release would have meant a heavier programme of replacements to the
Middle East, India and South-East Asia. After V.J. Day the movement home
became increasingly greater than the movement outwards. Drafting lost all its
original significance as replacement of casualties and became merely a distribution
to overseas commands of the only available assets, the output of the training
organization, and to commands in Europe those who had served for a period in the
United Kingdom after return on "Python" from farther abroad and who had
become eligible for posting to a command within Europe.
The opening of the
overland route to their Mediterranean theatres released much shipping for use to
the Far East and economized manpower by providing a shorter transit, but the
volume of personnel movement was in turn increased by the growing necessity for
sending overseas men with short periods of service to run before they became due
Reference has already been made to the difficulties caused by transferring men
from one arm to another as need arose, but this was rather a problem of major
Men were not transferred from one arm to another
merely for drafting purposes, since the overseas commands required men already
trained in some particular arm and not men suddenly transferred to an arm for
But compulsory transfer between infantry regiments did take place for
drafting purposes both between the United Kingdom and overseas commands and
In fact the infantry regimental system broke
By the fortunes of war one regiment might
have all its battalions regular and Territorial-overseas, and another regiment
might have them all at home, while the training centre affiliated to each was training
the same number of recruits monthly. Considerations of accommodation alone
made it necessary to standardize the size of training centres, and it was never
possible to adjust recruit intakes for the individual regiments in exact proportion
Therefore, the reinforcement requirements of some regiments
were high and of others low, and the total output of the infantry training centres
had to be used according to the needs of the moment and not according to their
