Service automatically endorsed every application and sent it on
e contrary,
they
exercised a very strict control over such applications,
often sending their
officials to investigate the firm on the spot to ensure that there was no possible
rearrangement of work or other device by which the demand could be eliminated,
and in general seeking to ensure that the applications which did reach the War
Office were fully justified.
For the most part demands for these releases reached the War Office in the form
of an application specifying some individual by name and stating the work for
which he was required, but in certain cases the Government decided that the Army
should release some specified number of men of some particular occupation,
without detailing any individuals by name.
The usual practice in these cases was
for the War Office to call for the names of men of this occupation who were willing
to be released, asking for certain information about each man, how long he had
been at this work, by whom had he been employed and so on.
The information
received was sent to the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and instructions
for release were not issued until the War Office was assured that the man would
be employed at once by a particular firm.
This method avoided the errors of the
earlier method by which men had not been employed when they were released and
had been lost.
The final decision whether a man should be released or not rested always with
the War Office. Until the opening of Class "B" releases under the Demobilization
Scheme, men were not brought home from abroad for release for work of national
importance, and from time to time the War Office suspended releases altogether in
certain arms and trades when shortages were acute in the service.
Not unnaturally,
interested Departments were often very unwilling to accept a refusal, and appeal
often followed appeal, each on a level higher than that of its forerunner.
A fruitful
source of controversy was the method pursued by some Departments in obtaining
the services of some expert in industry or commerce.
The firm would agree to lend
their expert to a Ministry on the understanding that in exchange the Ministry would
arrange for so and so to be released in order to return to the firm.
The Ministry,
having obtained the man they wanted, would apply for the release of the man the
firm required in exchange and would be horrified to meet with a refusal. Prior
consultation would have made clear what was likely to be the result of such a
request, but it was rarely undertaken.
In claiming and insisting upon the right
of final decision in release cases the War Office acted wisely.
No other authority
was responsible for the efficiency of the Army and it would plainly have been
impossible to permit any other authority to order the release of particular indi-
viduals whose loss might seriously affect the efficiency of units.
Industrial and
commercial firms, hard hit by the shortage of manpower in general and by the
shortage of skilled craftsmen in particular, were often apt to look upon the Army
as a handy and inexhaustible source of supply.
This view was too often endorsed
by some of the Ministries, beset by clamorous firms, each with a more poignant
tale of woe.
"You have the best men: we want them" may serve to epitomize an
attitude that was too common, especially towards troops in the United Kingdom.
Furthermore, release was always voluntary on the part of the individual.
If a
release was approved by the War Office, the notification always reached the man
in the form of an offer which he was free to accept or decline.
Much discussion
arose on this in regard to the position of Crown Servants, particularly in the Colonies.
In one particular instance a General Officer Commanding-in-Chief in an overseas
command ordered the release of an officer whose services were urgently needed by
a Colonial Government but who had declined to be released when the offer was
made to him. His release was therefore ordered, willy-nilly, by the G.O.C. in-C.
on the ground that since the individual was a servant of the Crown both in his
WO27
12
military and civil capacity he must serve as a soldier or as a civilian as directed,
whatever his personal wishes, thus drawing a clear distinction between a case of
this kind and one in which the man was to be released to some private firm. The
officer appealed against the decision to release him against his will and his appeal
was upheld, which secured to the individual the absolute right to refuse in all
release cases.
Like compassionate releases, these industrial releases, as they were commonly
if not very accurately described, might have created a serious drain on manpower.
As it was the system was of great use and by strict control the loss of manpower was
kept within bounds.
From 1941 onwards a continuous review of indefinite releases
went on and considerable numbers of men were recalled to the Colours, often to
their surprise, when the reason for their release had ceased. In many cases release
was directly in the Army's own interests, and the loss of manpower was often a good
investment. Two instances will illustrate this.
At one particular time there was
great difficulty over the production of a sufficient supply of ammunition belts for
Vickers guns, but the release of two or three men to a particular firm solved the
difficulty.
At another time the Army was asked to release a considerable number of
men to complete the work on the preparation of the Mulberry Harbour by the
appointed time a work most directly in the Army's interest and without which
the invasion of Normandy might not have been possible. Attempts were, of course,
made to abuse the system and, by bringing pressure to bear in certain quarters, to
obtain releases which were really in the interest of the individual and not of the
nation.
Specious cases stood little chance of escaping the vigilance of those who
dealt with these questions, but much irritation and unnecessary labour was caused
by the persistent "wire-puller", who too often succeeded in deluding some
unsuspecting person in high position to support his unworthy and selfish claim.
In actual numbers the dead loss to the Army was not at any time serious.
The
total number of individuals who were at one time or another thus released in the
whole course of the war must have been very large, but as many of the releases were
for short periods only the number on release at any one time was kept within
reasonable bounds.
The highest this ever rose to was just over 52,000, but when
once the method of systematic review had really begun, this figure dropped to
about 42,000, from which it varied little upwards or downwards until demobilization
began.
Theoretically, the Army was entitled to replacement of men released on
these grounds, and the numbers released and the numbers recalled to the Colours
were taken into account in all manpower calculations with the Ministry of Labour
and National Service.
The real difficulty was that to a large extent the men whose
releases were sought were the very men whom the Army most wanted to keep.
Broadly speaking, these requests for release related to two classes of men.
The
first included those of managerial status: the company director, the works or
departmental manager, the professional engineer, the solicitor and so on, who
were for the most part officers.
The second comprised the skilled craftsmen, the
majority of whom were other ranks. In general little difficulty arose over releases
of officers.
Some types, such as engineer officers, were always scarce, and the
Army was reluctant to part with them, but for the rest the numbers were not great
nor were the individuals hard to replace.
The stumbling-blocks, in so far as they
existed at all, were those of morale rather than of mere numbers.
Many of those
asked for to return to managerial posts were very young, and their departure to
what seemed to be lucrative appointments could hardly fail to arouse among their
colleagues in a unit a feeling that an outrageous ramp was being perpetrated.
The
release may have been wholly proper and
I any such feeling quite unjustified but,
rightly or wrongly, the departure of a very young man did cause ill feeling in a unit,
and the War Office disliked having to approve such releases. In the case of other
61
