The first major question of policy was, therefore, to decide which of these interests
should predominate in the plan. To say that one of these must predominate is not
to say that the others must thereby be completely ignored, but it was from the
outset evident that not even any two of these interests could be completely re-
conciled and that a choice must be made to give precedence to one of them, and
to found the whole plan mainly on that.
The events of 1g18 and Igig had shown
that demobilization must be fraught with many dangers.
The one urgent desire
among all men at such a moment is to get home again, and no plan is likely to find
general acceptance among all ranks which in any way savours of favouritism or
discrimination.
The attempt in 1918 to decide the order of release by availability
of employment at home led to serious mutinies and was hastily abandoned.
How-
ever desirable or however logical it may be to release men in the order in which
they are required in industry, it is quite certain that no such method is likely to
be accepted by the men themselves as fair and just, and it is equally certain that
no plan of release can be operated which is not accepted by the men at large.
precisely similar reasons it was considered impossible to plan releases according to
the needs of the Service.
To do so would be to put a premium on inefficiency,
and it was not reasonable to expect that the soldier who had taken pains to make
himself efficient in long years of service would remain willingly at his duty if he
saw priority of release given to the less efficient with shorter service, who would
thus have the first chance in what might be a precarious labour market.
The
Committee,
therefore, unanimously recommended that the whole scheme of
demobilization should be founded on the release of men in an order which would
be fair to all.
This principle was accepted by the Cabinet and remained the key
principle of demobilization.
The smoothness with which demobilization was
achieved is the measure of the wisdom of this decision.
The principle that the interests of the individual should predominate having been
accepted, the next step was to decide what factors should be taken into account in
determining the priority of individuals for release.
There are four possible methods
of assessing priorities between individuals; by length of service alone, by age alone,
by a combination of age and service, or by a "points" system in which the order
is determined by a number of factors having different values.
The simple formula
"First in, First out" has much to commend it.
It is simple; it is quite easy to
apply since the length of a man's service can readily be ascertained; it needs no
complicated explanation; and it is likely to find ready acceptance both among the
men in the Services and in the nation at large.
But it was urged that to determine
priorities by length of service alone would be seriously unjust to very many men
whose entry into the Service had been delayed, often against their will, by reason
of their importance in industry.
The Schedule of Reserved Occupations fixed the
ages above which men in the several industries should not be called up, and men
above these ages of reservation were neither called up under the National Service
Act nor permitted to enlist voluntarily.
As the war went on the growing shortage
of manpower compelled alterations in these ages of reservation and many were
called up comparatively late in the war who would most gladly have joined the
Forces earlier, had they been permitted to do so.
If priority of release were
determined solely by length of service they would be at a manifest and unjust
disadvantage.
unacceptable.
For almost the opposite reasons release solely according to age was considered
However desirable it might be that the older men, who in general
have more domestic responsibilities, should return early to civil life, it was beyond
belief that a system which altogether ignored length of service would be accepted.
It was not in the least likely that men who had served throughout the war and were
perhaps no more than 25 or 26 years of age at its finito would be content to see
5217/
12
released before them men in the middle thirties who had served perhaps for no
more than a year, and who had spent the greater part of the war in what the soldier
often looked on as a "cushy" job, however important it might be in industry.
to determine priority solely by length of service would be unjust to some, to
determine it solely by age would be unjust to many more and would be likely to
cause immediate and serious trouble
There remained, therefore, the choice between a scheme based on a combination
of age and service or on a "points" scheme based on a number of factors.
As the
former of these was the scheme finally adopted, while the latter had many advocates
and was, in fact, used in the American Army, the merits of each demand close
attention.
It must be said at the outset that an "age and service" scheme does not
necessarily mean that all service is reckoned at equal value. It was in fact so
reckoned in the British Army, and the reasons for this will be examined later; but
it would be quite possible to construct an "age and service" scheme in which
different kinds of service had different value.
The essential difference between a
purely "age and service" scheme and a "points" scheme is that the former is based
on a combination of two factors only, while the latter is based on more than two
and may be based on any number.
The "points" scheme was almost invariably
the choice of the amateur planners who so freely tendered their advice, the chief
factors advocated for reckoning being age, service, overseas service, marriage,
number of children, wounds, honours and decorations, and often less tangible
ones such as domestic responsibilities, business responsibilities, educational needs
and so on.
Even after such intangibles have been eliminated, the chief objection
to the "points" scheme is that it must rest on factors which are liable to continual
change.
The chief merit of an "age and service" scheme, and especially if all
service is of equal value, is that its basic factors are fixed and a man's priority is not
liable to change.
Age and service can be calculated from the date of birth and
date of entering the Service, both of which are fixed and unchangeable, and when
once a man has been assigned to a group he will remain in it, unless he ceases to
reckon service, as will be explained later, and is thereby relegated to a later group.
He may fall to a later group: he cannot rise to an earlier group.
In the "age and
service" scheme there are a few "snakes", which a man can always avoid, but no
"ladders".
In the "points" scheme there are "snakes" and "ladders" too.
A man may gain
points for marriage, and lose them again if the marriage is dissolved by death or
divorce.
Children are born, and die, and grow up, and any change in the man's
family will affect his priority by altering his points.
The issue of a list of honours
and awards may change the priorities of a large number and might seriously upset
some particular unit if many of its men were thus unexpectedly advanced in priority.
Provided that the factors are restricted to those which can be assessed by a purely
objective standard, a "points" scheme is quite possible; but it is beyond question
more complicated than one of "age and service", more liable to changes and,
therefore, less easy both for planning and administration.
The keenest criticism levelled at a purely "age and service" scheme was that it
omitted all notice of marriage.
The arguments in favour of giving some priority
to married men are obvious enough, but the admission of a marriage as a factor
upsets the essential simplicity of the scheme by introducing a third and variable
factor.
Nor is it by any means plain that it is on the whole just to give any priority
for marriage.
Marriage was not taken into account in call-up, and the National
Service Acts made no distinction between married and single men.
Many
bachelors have, in fact, greater responsibilities than some of their married comrades,
and the mere fact of marriage alone often gave no real claim to any priority.
Further, planning would have been made much more difficult had it been necessary
