"something to be done" and it was indeed very necessary to show the country some
visible signs of military activity.
In June, July and August of 1940 some 275,000
men were called up to the Army. It was patently beyond the capacity of the training
organization to absorb such large intakes and new units had to be formed at once
to take them.
There was more equipment available for infantry than for any
other arm, and 120 infantry battalions were therefore formed in these three months.
The provision of so large a number of officers at such short notice caused much
difficulty, which will be examined in more detail in a later chapter.
At the same time there was an urgent need to re-equip the Army and to accelerate
in every possible way the production of munitions.
In a short time over 8,000
skilled men were released for return to industry, the beginning of a long series of
releases which, for one reason or another, continued to be demanded throughout
The real difficulty in the period following the return of the B.E.F. was not the
getting of numbers but the production of a firm strategic plan for the Army's future
role on which to base the distribution of manpower between the several arms.
It was not until December, 1940, that a new Field Force Conspectus-No. 35-
was produced, which gave a firmer basis on which to plan the raising of new units
and to calculate the numbers of tradesmen required. But this Conspectus had
scarcely been issued when a radical change took place.
In the early days of 194I it was becoming increasingly apparent that the country's
manpower resources would soon be severely strained and that the allotment of
manpower to the three Services and to industry must be rationed.
expected that any of the consumers would be satisfied with their ration: in fact
rationing in itself implies that consumers are not going to get all they want, since
there is no need for rationing when the supply is plentiful.
power was inescapable and in March, 1941, the Government introduced what was
commonly known as the "ceiling" system.
A figure was laid down for each Service,
which was not to be exceeded and within which all commitments must be met.
Intakes were so to be regulated that the Service would be maintained at its allotted
The maximum allotment for the Army was at first just over 2,100,000
which was roughly equal to the actual effective strength at the moment.
was increased or decreased from time to time according to strategic needs, but
fundamentally the system remained unchanged since its first introduction in the
spring of 1941 and the Government continued to lay down from time to time a
maximum strength which must not be exceeded on an appointed date. Since this
was the system which was in operation for the greater part of the war, it merits
close attention and it will be proper to examine briefly the method by which it was
worked and then to consider the many important consequences which flowed
In theory the strength of the Army should have been precisely equal to its
allotted maximum on the first day of every month and the monthly intake should
be so calculated as to replace exactly the net wastage during that month. No one
for a moment imagined that such exactitude was possible in practice and a system
of accounting between the War Office and the Ministry of Labour and National
Service was introduced which worked with surprising accuracy. The War Office
estimated the probable net wastage over a period of three or six months and the
Ministry of Labour and National Service regulated intakes accordingly. At the
end of the period a balance was struck of actual intakes against actual wastage and
intakes in the next period were adjusted accordingly. Remarkable accuracy was
attained and the actual strength never varied much from the allotted maximum.
The successful working of the complicated system was largely due to the happy
relations which existed between the War Office and the Ministry of Labour and
WO 277/22
National Service. Differences were almost always resolved by frank discussion,
and no member of the War Office staff whose duties brought him into contact with
the Ministry of Labour and National Service will easily forget the complete con-
fidence, goodwill and comradeship which existed between the War Office and
their colleagues in that Ministry.
The Women's Services were included in the
calculation, the proportion in which women could be substituted for men being
governed by the kind of occupation.
As the war continued and the shortage of manpower became more and more
acute, the Ministry of Labour and National Service were sometimes unable to
supply enough men to fill the proper intakes.
It then became a question for
authoritative decision whether more men should be called up from industry and
whether one of the Services should have its full quota at the expense of the others;
what in fact was the best allotment of the available assets. The decision, whatever
it was, might have far-reaching consequences a cut in manpower supply to one
or all of the Services might imperil the success of some projected operations, a cut
in industry might involve some further burden on the population at large, already
grievously burdened, and might shake their confidence in the Government. Plainly
no authority but the Government could decide such a question, and a Committee
was set up under the Chairmanship of a Cabinet Minister to deal with Manpower.
Thus grew up the custom of the half-yearly manpower review. Each of the Services
submitted their requirements for the ensuing six months, having regard to the
probable operations in that period. Against these were set the requirements of
industry and the estimated supply of men available, and the Committee made their
recommendations to the Government with whom the final decision necessarily lay.
From the spring of 1941 until demobilization began, Army intakes were governed
by this system. Sometimes the Army's full requirements to maintain the allotted
maximum strength were supplied; at other times, and increasingly so as the war
went on, the supply was insufficient and the Army had perforce to be content with
a smaller proportion of really fit men. When demobilization began this system was
used to govern the rate of release rather than to govern the size of intakes.
became the declared policy of the Government to call up the whole available
numbers of those reaching the age of 18 years so that the reduction of the Army
to whatever maximum was fixed for any particular date was achieved not by
restricting intakes but by regulating the rate of release of those already serving.
In all these calculations, intakes by voluntary enlistment or by direct com-
missioning were included. Doctors, dentists, chaplains and nurses were excluded
since they were drawn solely from their own professions and not from the general
industrial field, and their numbers were strictly governed by the size of the Army.
Men recruited from outside the United Kingdom were similarly excluded, as were
aliens, whether they were recruited within or without the United Kingdom. These
two sources of recruitment will be dealt with more fully in a later chapter. Women,
other than nurses, were always dealt with on a séparate calculation, a separate
maximum strength of women being fixed, having regard to the numbers who could
The first immediate duty of the War Office on the introduction of this system
was to decide on the allotment of the total maximum between the different arms
and in what proportions those arms were to be assigned to the overseas commands
and to the United Kingdom, and Field Force Conspectus No. 36 was worked out
giving the, desired distribution of the available units according to the strategic
situation as it stood in the middle of 1941.
But strategic situations do not stand
still for long and the needs of different theatres of war were continually changing.
Furthermore, the development of the war taught new tactical lessons, and the
balance between arms had to be altered. More armour, more guns, more signals,
