Board.
The selection and military training of these engineering officers caused
some friction and comment, and it will be necessary to examine the question more
The supply of qualified engineers direct from civil life very soon produced an
acute conflict between the needs of the Services and those of industry.
original form the A.O.E.R. organization always contemplated the registration of
professionally qualified engineers in the specialist class and many were so registered.
À number of these men had formerly held commissions and their combination of
professional and military training made them the more valuable.
tion a considerable number of engineers registered in the A.O.E.R. were called up
and granted direct commissions, which in the slow expansion of industry up to the
collapse of France was scarcely felt.
But the altered tempo in the autumn of 1940
soon produced a very different situation, and arrangements were made to consult
the employer before an engineer was called up.
since in some cases the employer agreed to release a man to serve and then asked
the Ministry of Labour and National Service for a replacement.
of qualified engineers ran short the only possible course was for the distribution of
the available assets, including the output from the Universities, to be controlled by
the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and for this purpose that Minister
appointed the Technical Personnel Committee, to which reference has already been
This Committee rendered outstanding service in co-ordinating the many
demands for technical personnel, in assessing the relative priority between demands
and in allocating the available supply.
In the early months of the war members of the A.O.E.R. were called up to
commissioned rank directly, without passing through O.C.T.U. training, and they
learnt their duties as officers at regimental courses after commissioning.
a proportion of these men turned out complete failures as officers, however well
qualified they might be technically, and the development of the officer selection
procedure, coupled with the growing recognition of the importance of moral
qualities, led to a demand by the technical arms that their officers should not be
selected on technical qualifications alone but should be recommended by a
W.O.S.B. and should undergo pre-O.C.T.U. and O.C.T.U. training before com-
Basically the demand was altogether justified.
forgotten that a technical officer was first and foremost an officer, who must hold
the respect and confidence of his men just as much as an officer of any other arm.
The R.E.M.E. officer did not work only in large workshops under factory con-
ditions, careless of what became of his men when the whistle sounded: he might
find himself commanding a light aid detachment in battle where he must command
The criticism was sometimes made that the Army
took qualified engineers and wasted their time in teaching them to salute and slope
arms, or that the Army complained of a lack of engineer officers and at the same
time refused to accept thoroughly qualified men because they were alleged to lack
some mysterious attribute known as "officer qualities" or "leadership" or "person-
It is true that there was at one time a tendency to prolong unduly the
military training of the technical officer and to include items which were not strictly
necessary, but it was right beyond question to insist that the technical officer should
be in every sense fit to be an officer, that he should know how to maintain discipline
and that he should realize his responsibility as an officer towards his men in the
age-old tradition of the British Army.
WO 277/12
The production of officers for the A.T.S. followed in general the principles laid
down for training and selecting male officers. Ultimately the system of selection
by War Office Selection Boards was developed and candidates were trained at
pre-O.C.T.U. and O.C.T.U., the courses being appropriately modified. The
A.O.E.R. procedure was also extended to the A.T.S., and a limited number of
women, who had various special qualifications, were obtained in this way. In some
cases they were commissioned direct without training in the ranks, while in others
they were first enlisted and sent through pre-O.C.T.U. and O.C.T.U., with the
guarantee that they would not be held to serve in the ranks if they were not ulti-
mately commissioned.
The supply of certain special classes of officers-medical, dental, nursing,
veterinary and chaplains— present a different series of problems. Such supplies
must obviously be drawn from those already qualified in these professions, and
from the outset allocation to the Services was controlled by the several professional
bodies, such as the General Medical Council, and by the various ecclesiastical
authorities.
It was, moreover, often possible to save manpower by pooling
resources: military medical cases in the United Kingdom were, for example, often
treated in civilian emergency hospitals, and there was a greatly extended use of
clergy as officiating chaplains to troops in their neighbourhood in addition to their
own parochial duties.
In all these classes a strictly limited supply had to meet a
very greatly expanded demand.
Professional training was long and did not admit
of being compressed to produce qualified personnel more quickly; the number of
new entrants was much reduced and in the case of the clergy almost entirely
vanished, except for a few unfit for military service. This is not the place to discuss
the detailed methods by which individuals were selected for the Service, and it
suffices to observe that these classes are always likely to be in short supply in war
and that economy in their use will always be essential.
An important extension of the A.O.E.R. procedure was its application to the
commissioning of men whose services as officers were urgently needed by overseas
commands.
In India, Malaya, Egypt, the East and West African Colonies and in
many other places there were numbers of British subjects of United Kingdom
origin, employed in many varied occupations, who were very valuable as officers.
They knew the local languages and understood the manners and customs of the
inhabitants. Many were highly qualified engineers holding important posts in
railways, water works, electrical undertakings and so forth, and possessing besides
their technical knowledge an intimate knowledge of the special problems created
by the geography, the climate and other peculiar conditions of the locality. It was
obviously wise to employ as many of these men as possible, since they not only had
specialized knowledge of some country but were already there on the spot at a time
when shipping was desperately short and the supply of reinforcements from home
extremely difficult.
Authority was early given to commanders abroad to apply the
A.O.E.R. procedure within their commands.
They were made responsible for
security checking, for satisfying themselves as to the character of the applicant and
for ensuring that the applicant conformed to the rules governing registration.
Names were transmitted by signal to the War Office, where a further check was
carried out if possible.
Commanders abroad were authorized to grant com-
missions and employ men as officers within an authorized war establishment, subject
to confirmation by the War Office within three months.
In practice, therefore,
commands abroad did not
register men in the A.O.E.R. unless they actually
required their services.
The usual method was for the command to check the
suitability of the candidate, to call him up for employment at once and then to
signal to the War Office requesting his registration in A.O.E.R. and his appointment
to a commission from the date on which he began duty as an officer. The system
