the total numbers to be posted to the Army, but it did determine the allot...ut
between arms of the total numbers likely to be available.
The allotment was made
in accordance with priorities laid down by the General Staff.
So much was fairly
easy: the real difficulty was to ensure that the men were placed where they would
be most suitable.
Time was very short and there was no opportunity to set up
any elaborate system.
A retired officer was appointed to each recruiting centre
set up by the Ministry of Labour and National Service, whose duty it was to inter-
view those conscripts who were placed by the medical board in acceptable medical
categories and to decide for which arm each man was best fitted.
The interviewing
officer was instructed to enquire into the man's standard of education, his trade
or other occupation, his family connections with the Service, his own personal
wishes, and in fact into any matter which might help to make a just estimate of the
man's capabilities and inclinations. He recorded on a card a brief summary of the
man's qualifications and his own recommendation for posting.
The Ministry of
Labour and National Service, having received from their local offices the numbers
fit and available for call-up, notified to the War Office the numbers allotted by
them to be provided from each recruiting centre.
The War Office then drew up
elaborate tables showing the detailed allocation to arms and corps of each of these
quotas.
The interviewing officer then made the selection from his recommendations
on the cards, and the officer of the Ministry of Labour and National Service issued
to each individual an enlistment notice, directing him to join a specified unit on a
specified
date.
Intakes were to be at intervals of two months, the first intake
being on 15th July, 1939. That in fact proved to be the only intake under this
Act, since war had begun and the Act had been superseded by the first National
Service Act before the next intake, due on 15th September, could join.
Funda-
mentally, this system of posting was sound in that it was based on two principles
essential for the economic use of manpower-that the allocation to arms and corps
must in the last resort be governed by the needs of the Service and not by the
wishes of the individual, and that the more carefully posting is done in accordance
with the
qualifications of the individual the less waste of time and effort will there
But there were at the outset many defects.
Firstly, the interviewing officers
were hastily engaged and were not trained to the difficult work of interviewing.
Unquestionably they did their work most conscientiously, with full sense of their
responsibilities and for the most part with a long experience of the Service to guide
them, and they achieved much success, but with only a brief interview mistakes
were inevitable.
The standard improved greatly as interviewing officers grew more
experienced in their work and as the less suitable were replaced, but it is probably
true that the assessment of individual qualifications was not really satisfactory until
the introduction of the General Service Corps in July, 1942.
Secondly, in its
original form allocation by the War Office was on too narrow a basis. The War
Office knew only the number of men to be furnished by any centre and not the
details of their individual qualifications, and thei allotment of that number to the
different arms and corps was necessarily guess-work.
The final remedy lay in the
formation of the General Service Corps, but a more immediate remedy, which did
much good, was to post from the headquarters of the Ministry of Labour regions.
Arrangements for this were already in preparation when the war began.
The
methods of posting intakes during the war will be discussed in a later chapter, but
it is proper here to observe that the foundations of scientific manpower planning
were laid in these months just before the war in dealing with the one intake under
the Military Training Act.
Certain other steps were taken before the war began which deserve notice.
The allotment to arms of the conscripts called up under the Military Training
Act became the responsibility of the Director of Mobilization in the War Office
WO 217/22
and not of the Director of Recruiting and Organization. The decision was wise,
because the posting of these men to arms was closely connected with the mobiliza-
tion requirements of the different arms and would in time vitally affect the rate at
which units could be mobilized. But the executive action with the Ministry of
Labor and National Service had to be undertaken by the Recruiting Branch,
which had therefore to serve two masters, one for all voluntary recruitment and the
other for conscript intakes.
The obvious solution was to transfer the whole
responsibility for all forms of recruiting to the Director of Mobilization, but this
was not done until after the outbreak of war.
A much-needed scheme of publicity was undertaken for the Regular Army,
which, together with improvements in conditions of service and the increasing
menace of war, produced a greatly increased flow of recruits, Simultaneously steps
were taken to obtain more enlistments for the Supplementary Reserve, with con-
siderable success.
The crisis of 1938 had brought a very large number of offers of service from those
who had held commissions in the previous war, and it was decided to create an
Officers Emergency Reserve by registering those who appeared suitable. In the
main, those registered were ex-officers who had no other liability to be recalled;
but a limited number, although they had had no former military service, had
professional qualifications which were in themselves valuable to the Army.
matter is discussed at greater length in Chapter IV, which deals with the supply
of officers.
In 1938 it had been decided to revive the Women's Service which had worked
with conspicuous success in the war of 1914-18.
Under the new title of Auxiliary
Territorial Service, units were formed throughout the United Kingdom to provide
personnel to replace men in a number of occupations.
The combined effect of all these measures was to produce a marked improvement
in the manpower assets at the moment of mobilization.
"Had we but had another hundred men
And one half-hour of summer daylight more"
The wonder is that our assets were as large
as they were, and it remains in this chapter to review the numbers and assess briefly
the quality of the different parts of our military forces as they stood when the
The Regular Army had a strength of some 224,000 all ranks, actually serving
with the Colours, a compact, well-disciplined force, bound together closely by great
esprit de corps and regimental pride.
The Regular Army Reserve of Officers numbered about 9,400. The great
majority had had professional careers in the Regular Army and were quite com-
petent to resume their places with little re-training, but some of the voluntary
members of the Reserve had had no service or training for many years.
The Army Reserve numbered 102,000, of whom 3,700 were in Section A,
54,300 in Section B, 42,740 in Section D and 1,600 in Section E. All those in
Section A had left the Colours within the last year and were in every way fully
trained soldiers. Those in Section B had all completed their Colour Service,
which might have varied from three to nine years according to the arm in which
they had served, and were now completing the balance of their initial twelve years'
They might, therefore, have just left the Colours or might have been
Those in Section D had either completed
twelve years with the Colours and had then enlisted into Section D or had done so
after completing their Service in Section B. A man who, having served three
years with the Colours and nine years in Section B Reserve, then re-enlisted into
