cap badges.
When the Japanese attack on Malaya became serious, some infantry
drafts who were on their way to India were diverted to Singapore to provide
reinforcements for the regiments engaged in Malaya; scarcely a single draft belonged
to any of the regiments in Malaya at the time, but reinforcements were urgently
needed and there was no time to await drafts of the correct regiments.
The same
sudden transfers between regiments happened between the base depots and units,
and the sudden diversion of some infantry reinforcements at Salerno from their
own regiments to others led to the one serious manifestation of indiscipline in the
whole war.
The regimental system broke down in 1914-18 for precisely similar reasons and
two wars have made it plain that it cannot stand the strain when manpower in
general is scarce and when every man must be used as the urgent needs of the
moment demand. In peace the regimental system is a source of great strength
which no one would wish to destroy, but in a major war it cannot be adhered to
rigidly and transfers between regiments will be inevitable.
In war it will never
be possible to explain publicly why any particular transfers are necessary, since
such explanation must reveal information to the enemy.
There remains no
solution but the higher loyalty, which is above loyalty to regiment or friends, the
loyalty which gives willing service to the cause wherever that service is needed.
WO 217/=2
CHAPTER VII
WASTAGE
In the ordinary peace-time manpower accounting, the term "run-out" was used
to describe the loss to the Army caused by men leaving the Colours at the end of
their engagements, while all other loss was included under the heading "wastage".
The incidence of "run-out" varied in direct proportion to the rate of recruiting in
earlier years: the incidence of wastage was never very heavy and varied little over
a long term of years. The largest single cause of loss was desertion, although this
was always more or less offset by the numbers rejoining from desertion. A more
serious loss, for which there was no offset, was that caused by discharge of men very
soon after enlistment. Many gave false ages on enlistment and were later claimed
out by parents or guardians; others gave false answers to other questions, as, for
example, to those touching marital status; a number were found unsuitable for
military service on medical grounds, some defects having been overlooked in the
medical examination on enlistment or being brought to light by military training.
Deaths and invaliding claimed very few, as might be expected in a community
composed mainly of the young and healthy, particularly as modern medical science
had made the heavy losses through disease in tropical stations no more than a
memory enshrined in countless monuments in the churches and cemeteries of India
and the Colonies. A few men purchased discharge and a few more were discharged
for misconduct.
Discharge or premature transfer to the Reserve was permitted on compassionate
grounds, but comparatively few such cases arose among men who were for the most
part young and unmarried.
Enlistment was purely voluntary and men were not
likely to enlist if they were greatly needed at home for the support and care of
parents or relatives.
During the war the causes of manpower loss changed very greatly in their force.
"Run-out", in its old sense of loss by termination of engagement, ceased altogether,
since by the terms of the Military and Air Forces (Prolongation of Service) Act, 1939,
men could be held to serve whatever the terms of their engagement. Discharge by
purchase was suspended before the war began; discharge for misconduct ceased
almost entirely since it was impossible to leave open this door of escape to those
who had no wish to serve. On the other hand, losses by death naturally increased
through battle casualties, which also involved a considerable loss by invaliding of
the wounded.
The hardship of campaigns added to the number of such discharges,
and a continuous loss was also sustained through the early discharge on medical
grounds of men who had been accepted by the recruiting medical boards.
Release on compassionate grounds also assumed a new significance.
operation of the National Service Acts brought into the Army men of very varied
ages and occupations, married and single, the circumstances of whose lives were
widely different. It was inevitable that in some cases families and dependants should
suffer serious hardship unless the men were released from the Service for a long or
short period.
A wholly new cause of loss was release on grounds of national
importance, a development due entirely to the circumstances of the war. Through-
out the war there was a steady demand for the release of men of one category or
another to return to civil employment, not for their own good but for that of the
nation, because they possessed some particular skill or knowledge more urgently
needed at the moment in civil life than in the Army. In some cases such releases
