case the numbers and types required were worked out in the War Office and notified
to the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
It will be recalled that when conscripted intakes began under the Military
Training Act, the Director of Mobilization became responsible for the executive
machinery while the Director of Recruiting and Organization retained charge of
voluntary recruiting for the Regular Army. When war began, recruiting on normal
regular engagements almost ceased, and voluntary enlistments on "duration"
engagements were carefully controlled to ensure that men were not enlisted unless
they were of a class needed at the moment.
The whole voluntary intake was closely
co-ordinated with the conscript intake. As the Director of Mobilization was already
responsible for conscript intakes, there were urgent reasons for transferring to him
the whole recruiting machinery, although it was not until June, 1940, that the titles
of the two Directors were altered accordingly, the one becoming Director of
Organization and the other Director of Recruiting and Mobilization.
At the same time the recruiting organization was altered.
Control was no longer
exercised through commands, but the country was divided into recruiting divisions,
corresponding geographically to the regions of the Ministry of Labour and National
Service.
A chief recruiting officer, who was directly under control of the War
Office, was appointed to each division and stationed in the same town as the regional
headquarters of the Ministry of Labour and National Service. A recruiting officer
was appointed to each recruiting centre at which a medical board was set up. • At
the larger centres the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force were also represented, and
the closest co-operation was established between the three Services themselves,
and between the Services and the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
Volunteers and conscripts were dealt with at the same centres and examined by
the same Medical Boards and, except for the fact that as intakes diminished, a
number of centres were closed, this system continued unchanged throughout
the war.
The recruiting officer at the centre interviewed all conscripts and recorded on a
special form his remarks about each and his recommendation for posting. Posting
by individual recruiting centres had already been found unsatisfactory in dealing
with the intake under the Military Training Act and was abandoned in favour of
posting by divisions.
The cards, containing the recruiting officer's remarks on
each, were sent to the regional headquarters of the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, and there formed a register of men available for posting, tradesmen being
kept separate from non-tradesmen.
The War Office demand for each intake was
allotted by the Ministry of Labour and National Service as quotas to the several
regions, and the chief recruiting officer, in conjunction with the appropriate officer
of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, allotted the individuals to units
according to this requisition. Enlistment notices were then issued. Posting by
recruiting divisions was a great advance towards the proper allocation of man-
power, but the system had still many defects. The chief recruiting officer did not
see the men whom he was posting and had in the last resort to rely on the remarks
and recommendations of the recruiting officer.
It was impossible that every
recruiting officer should sum up every man correctly in one short interview, and in
particular gauge aright his intelligence and capacity for absorbing training.
Training
units frequently complained that they were receiving the wrong type of man, useless
to that arm.
In part this was due to the natural desire of every commanding officer
of a training unit to have none but the best, without realizing that the supply of the
best was limited and that the best was not necessarily required for every job within
that arm.
A substantial part of the complaint was, however, well grounded and
there were at first too many misfits; much labour was involved in the effort to sort
these out and post them more suitably.
WOZI
Broadly speaking, this first period lasted from the outbreak of war until May,
1940, when the debacle began in France and Flanders.
It was not a time when
manpower problems were acute. There were still plenty of men available to meet
the intake demands on the programme of expansion fixed for the Army. Indeed
there was more danger of creating a surplus of men in the Army than a deficiency.
Some arms, and in particular the Royal Armoured Corps, did not expand as rapidly
as had been planned, mainly by reason of the very poor rate of production of equip-
ment. The B.E.F. had had little fighting and had suffered few casualties.
the chief efforts in this period were directed to correcting the ill-effects of the hasty
In fact,
expansion of the Territorial Army before the war and to providing the very large
number of units required in the order of battle for which no provision whatever
was made in peace. The first of these involved the return to industry of certain
skilled tradesmen, the replacement in field army units of the immature and unfit
and the transfer to technical corps of men suitable to fill tradesmen vacancies.
All this involved much movement of men at a time when units and formations were
busy training and preparing themselves for service overseas, and the pace could
not be forced too hard.
There came a moment for each formation when it had to
be left untouched and allowed to complete its final training without the continuous
interruptions of the loss of key men and specialists.
towards sorting the Army, much was of necessity left undone.
Though much was done
In raising new units much progress was made. The main difficulty was not so
much in the supply of mere numbers as in the supply of officers and trained
N.C.O,s, and men on whom to build the units.
It had been expected that France would provide the labour required at the docks
and bases by the B.E.F. and for aerodrome construction. Since little or none was
actually forthcoming there arose an urgent and unforeseen demand for general
construction companies of the Royal Engineers to provide semi-skilled labour and
for Pioneer Corps units to work the docks and bases. The Pioneer Corps was
formed in November, 1939, and large numbers of men between 35 and 50 years of
age were quickly obtained by voluntary enlistment. Many general construction
companies and similar units were raised by large contracting firms and county
councils from among their own employees. As is commonly the case with amateur
recruiting, unauthorized promises were frequently given that men would not be
moved from their own companies, promises which it naturally proved impossible
to fulfil. The war of 1014-18 had shown quite clearly the impossibility of guaran-
teeing that any body of men would always serve together: the War Office consistently
refused to give any such promise, but enthusiastic amateur recruiters quite cheerfully
committed the War Office, and the War Office suffered the obloquy when the
promises turned out to be quite illusory. Nevertheless, the raising of these units
was a good exercise in rapid recruitment and organization; they did much good
work in France, and it is only regrettable that in the end so much of what they did
was done for the benefit of the enemy.
The debacle in France in the spring of 1940 brought the career of the B.E.F. to
an abrupt end. The whole strategical outlook changed at once.
It was no longer
a matter of building up and maintaining an expeditionary force on the Continent
but of organizing as quickly as possible an Army in the United Kingdom to meet
the imminent threat of invasion and of replacing the equipment lost in France and
Flanders.
The sorting of the B.E.F. on its return to the United Kingdom was
accomplished with surprising speed. Trainloads were sent from the ports to
reception areas, wherein men were sorted by formations and whence they were sent
on to divisional reception centres, and so to their units. But the re-formation of
the B.E.F. was not enough. For political reasons, if for no other, the largest possible
number of men must be called-up at once.
The Press began to clamour for
