became permanent, in fact if not in name, while in others men were released for quite
brief periods to meet some transient need.
It is the purpose of this chapter to
examine these main causes of wastage during the war and their effect on the Army
generally.
Releases on compassionate
grounds and on grounds of national im-
portance were to some extent controllable by the War Office and it will be convenient
to deal with them before passing to battle casualties and losses by invaliding.
At the beginning of the war applications for release on compassionate grounds
were dealt with by a number of different authorities.
Those from Army officers
were dealt with by one branch and those from Army other ranks by another branch
under the Director of Organization, and all A.T.S. cases were disposed of by
group commanders.
Unquestionably group commanders took far too lenient a
view, and by January, 1942, over 700 women were being released each month on
this ground alone, more than twenty times as many as were being released for this
reason from the W.A.A.F.
Strong representations were made by the Ministry of
Labour and National Service that it was unreasonable to expect them to call up
for the A.T.S. large numbers of women, if release on compassionate grounds was
so readily granted and the rate of wastage for this cause remained so high.
control of A. T.S. releases was therefore centralized in the War Office, but even then
the control was divided between two branches in the A.T.S. Directorate, officers
being dealt with by one branch and other ranks by another.
In May, 1943, a
long-needed step was taken in the formation of a new branch in the Directorate
of Recruiting and Demobilization to deal with all applications made on compassionate
sounds, whether for release, to posting neared hoMe or for retention in the United
The branch dealt with Army and A.T.S. officers and other ranks, a
special section staffed by A.T.S. officers being provided to take the female cases.
The branch very quickly gained experience and developed a code by which all cases
were judged and a system by which all cases were properly and carefully investigated.
Applications reached the War Office from a variety of sources sometimes from
the officer or soldier himself through his commanding officer, sometimes from the
man's family or dependants or from some other person on their behalf.
Every case
was carefully investigated, partly because some of the applications were exaggerated
or dishonest and partly because an illiterate and incoherent letter might well disclose
a very genuine case.
Many agencies were used for these investigations, by far the
best being the Police, who could always be relied on to furnish a quick, accurate
and entirely impartial report.
The Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families
Association investigated many hundreds of cases, and great help was received from
them and from other voluntary bodies and welfare officers; but the value of such
reports varied much with the individuality of the investigator, some of whom in
their anxiety to help the applicant overlooked important factors or let themselves
be deceived by the cunning and plausible.
The advantages of centralized control
by a single branch were fully demonstrated in practice.
All cases were tested by
the same standards, and while it would be impossible for all the decisions in every
case to please everyone, the number of really justified complaints which were
received was so small as to be almost negligible, a very high testimony to the
conscientious and careful manner with which cases were dealt.
Individual appli-
cants were often surprised and annoyed when their applications were rejected;
sponsors of some importance were even more surprised and annoyed when their
efforts to turn a bad case into a good one failed; and commanding officers were at
times disappointed when they failed to achieve the removal of an unsatisfactory
"compassionate grounds"
Cases in which release was not justified were
often met by a posting nearer to the individual's home or by retention in the
United Kingdom.
Release, when granted, was for a definite period, which might
be extended on expiration if the circumstances were not ameliorated.
Not
56
WOZT
7/72
until demobilization had begun was indefinite release granted on. compassionate
grounds.
Compassionate release developed into a matter of great importance. The
number of new applications monthly grew steadily throughout the war.
In
December, I940, there were 966 new cases, in December, I94I, almost 2,000,
in December, I942, 3,800, in December, 1943, almost 7,000, and in December,
1944, 8,100.
The figure rose rapidly in 1945 month by month, being almost 10,000
in March, and the peak was reached in September, 1945, with a total of 19,46g.
If the figures for A.T.S. are added, this peak total becomes over 22,000.
increase in new cases was due to four main causes. The growth in the total strength
of the Army naturally caused a proportionate rise in applications for release; but
an added cause was that as the war went on more and more men in the older age
groups were called up, who were more settled in their lives with greater domestic
commitments and responsibilities and whose departure was likely to cause more
hardship to their families.
Thirdly, as time went on the strain of daily life lived
under
the discomforts of black-out, of shopping difficulties and of bombing
undoubtedly told on many of the population- on the elderly, on wives struggling
to look after children and keep a home together in the husband's absence, on those
in poor health-which increased the number of applications for release of the
husband, the son or the brother from the Service.
Finally, as the strain of war
grew, more and more people were tempted to "try it on" and to "have a shot" at
getting home the man from the Army. The "try on" certainly accounted for much
of the very steep rise in the number of new cases in the months following V.E. Day.
They rarely succeeded, but much sympathy can be felt for the feelings which
prompted them, even if they did cause much unnecessary work to a very over-
burdened staff.
After September, 1945, the number of new cases declined, slowly
at first but with increasing rapidity as the size of the Army shrank and the older
men were released in the normal course.
Compassionate release might have become a serious drain on manpower. It never
did, and the number actually on release at any time was never dangerously high,
but this was due entirely to a unified and skilful control. Decentralization of
control would quite certainly have increased the number of those released, and any
lowering of the standard would have brought a corresponding increase in the
number of applications.
It would have been impossible to deny compassionate
release altogether since public opinion would not have tolerated such a refusal,
and even if it had, much discontent would assuredly have arisen in the Service itself.
Compassionate release worked in fact like a safety-valve.
Properly regulated, it
prevented too great a loss of manpower and prevented discontent by granting
release in genuine cases. Men and women knew that if trouble arose in their private
lives their cases would be strictly but fairly judged, and the value of that knowledge
in the Service far outweighed the actual loss of manpower involved.
Closely allied to the question of compassionate release was the question of posting
home from abroad on compassionate grounds.
At first the War Office, having
investigated a case, used to order the overseas command to send the man home,
but this was soon abandoned for several reasons. In the first place, much confusion
arose through the submission of several applications simultaneously in the same
case.
It was not uncommon for the soldier himself to make application to his
commanding
officer, for his wife in the United Kingdom to apply to the War
Office, and for some interested third party, who was trying to help, to apply to the
headquarters of the overseas command or perhaps to some welfare organization
at home.
Three separate authorities might then start enquiries, each ignorant that
the others were doing so and, worse still, different decisions might be communicated
to the parties concerned.
The overseas command, for example, might on the
57
