CHAPTER III
SUPPLY OF TRADESMEN
The Army's search for tradesmen throughout the war may be briefly described
as the insatiable in pursuit of the unobtainable.
There were never enough trades-
men to meet every
demand, and no subject was the source of more complaint,
misunderstanding and misrepresentation.
The great increase in mechanization and
the great development of radio in many directions created a service demand for
skilled men in the mechanical and electrical engineering trades heavier than had
been originally foreseen at a time when the rapid expansion of the munitions
industries made any kind of skill in these very trades of the greatest value. Industry
and the Army were each ready to believe that the other had more skilled men than
were really needed and that by economy and dilution demands could be reduced.
Understanding grew with knowledge, but much trouble might have been avoided
if both parties had appreciated more fully at the outset the other's difficulties.
Before the war the Army's establishment of tradesmen was comparatively small.
The term "tradesmen" covered a wide variety of occupations, but, apart from the
clerks, the bulk belonged to the mechanical or electrical trades. The great majority
of Army tradesmen were trained in the Service itself. For the mechanical and
electrical trades boys were enlisted as apprentices at the age of 14 or 15 years and
trained in Army schools.
The training given was altogether admirable and the
standard of craftsman turned out was very high.
Trades were divided into five
groups, A to E, according to their relative importance, and each trade was divided
into three Classes. On passing the appropriate test a soldier was mustered as a
Class III tradesman in his group and drew a special tradesman's rate of pay.
There was no limit to the proportions of men who might be rated in Class I, II
or III, and any tradesman could attain to Class I if he could pass the appropriate
test.
Tests were carried out by command testing boards with great strictness, and
to be rated as a Class I tradesman a soldier had to have reached a really high
standard, which would command good wages in civil life.
Apart from those mustered as Army tradesmen there were scattered through the
ranks of all corps a number of men who had been skilled operatives in civil life,
for the most part in occupations which had no Service counterpart, such as coal-
mining and textile working. There were never very many, since the great majority
of regular recruits enlisted at an age before they had become really skilled in any
trade.
A few of them had given up steady employment because they could no
longer bear the monotony of factory life, but for the most part they had enlisted
through lack of employment in their trades. Although their civil occupations were
recorded on their attestation papers, there was no index of them, either centrally
or in any corps record office.
The Army Reserve contained comparatively few tradesmen; and a very small
proportion of these were craftsmen who had been trained in the Service as Apprentice
Boys, since the tendency among these men was to serve at least twelve years with
the colours, many of them re-engaging to serve on for pension.
Again there was a
sprinkling of men who had not been mustered as tradesmen during their Colour
Service but had been skilled in some civilian occupation before enlistment.
The Supplementary Reserve, except for the Infantry Section, was specifically
designed to supply technical units and a reserve of skilled men whose civilian
occupations would fit them to take their places as Army tradesmen immediately on
wO 217/=2
mobilization.
The Transportation Units in Category A were recruited entirely
from big Railway Companies and were completely ready to work at once.
Category B personnel were all liable to annual training and were consequently more
or less familiar with service equipment. But those in Category C did no training
in peace nor was there any guarantee that a man continued to work at his civilian
trade during his engagement as a Supplementary Reservist. Although many of
these Reservists were excellent, a proportion had begun to lose skill through ceasing
to be employed at their trade, while others were handicapped at first by lack of
familiarity with Service equipments.
In the Territorial Army there were few tradesmen in the right places and a large
number in the wrong places.
Reference has already been made to the inherent
defects in the structure of the Territorial Army in 1939, defects aggravated by the
sudden raising of duplicate divisions in that year, and here it is only necessary to
repeat that the technical units either did not exist at all or existed on very small
establishments, while in the ranks of the fighting arms there were thousands of
men of every degree of skill in every kind of civilian occupation.
From the moment of mobilization onwards there were always present two
separate but closely related problems, the supply of tradesmen from civil life and
the supply of tradesmen from within the Army itself by placing correctly the skilled
men who were wrongly placed and by training others from the beginning.
The
great expansion of the munitions industry demanded large numbers of skilled
men, and it was unreasonable to expect the Ministry of Labour and National
Service to call-up skilled men for the Army if it could be shown that there were
already in the Army men whose skill was not being put to proper use. Conversely,
the more the Army could provide from its own resources, the less need its demand
be on industry. Rather than to pursue these two questions simultaneously, it will
probably be clearer to examine firstly the methods by which tradesmen were called
up from civil life and then to examine the much more complicated and controversial
question of the correct placing of tradesmen within the Army and the training of
new material.
As was explained in the preceding chapter, a number of training units were
established for the several arms immediately on mobilization.
For those arms
which had tradesmen of any sort in their establishments, a number of such men
were included in each intake demand, specified by Army trades. A table was drawn
up showing the equivalent Service and civilian trades and it was agreed that, if a
man was classified by the Ministry of Labour and National Service as being at
registration fully qualified in one of these civilian trades and below the age of
reservation, he should be called up only against a specific demand for the corre-
sponding Army trade. On joining he was mustered as a Class III tradesman
without further test and was paid accordingly. The Ministry of Labour and
National Service therefore developed a separate register of men classified as trades-
men, from which men were not called up unless there were vacancies for them in a
Service trade establishment.
This system had many serious defects. In the first place, classification as a
tradesman depended on the judgment of an officer of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service at the time of registration. The officers themselves were not
necessarily industrial experts; there was little opportunity of questioning the man
closely and the men very often over-rated their own skill. The man wrote down
only the occupation which he was following at the moment of registration and since
there had for some time been considerable industrial depression and unemployment,
particularly in the heavy engineering industries, many men of quite high skill were
recorded as labourers or milk roundsmen or gardeners merely because they hap-
pened to be so employed at the time of registration. Beyond question many
