evidence provided to them reject the application while at the same moment the
War Office, who might have better information, was telling the wife that orders
were being issued for her husband's return to the United Kingdom.
Furthermore, every man sent home on compassionate grounds was a loss to the
overseas command and had to be replaced.
As was explained in the preceding
chapter, the number of men who could be sent out in each convoy was strictly
limited, and it was therefore necessary to limit the number of men sent home, since
replacements could not be increased.
Overseas commands very rightly represented
that they must decide what numbers could be allowed to leave the command, over
and above the invalids who must be sent, and pointed out that since these numbers
were limited it was intolerable that two authorities should seek to nominate the
individuals.
The War Office might order the return of certain men which would
involve the exclusion of some of greater urgency, in whose cases application had
been made direct to the overseas command without reference to the War Office
at all.
The decision whether to send a man home or not was therefore committed in
all cases to the overseas command. If an application was sent to the War Office,
the case was investigated and graded according to a standard code.
A résumé of
the case and the grading was sent to the command, by signal if sufficiently urgent,
or by air mail.
Following the example set by Middle East Command, each major
command overseas appointed a Compassionate Postings Committee on which both
officers and other ranks sat, and which proved of untold value.
The Committee
dealt with all compassionate cases whether begun within the command itself or
notified from War Office.
They had full power to alter the War Office grading
either up or down in the light of any further evidence they might have in the com-
mand, and to determine how the case should be treated.
With the introduction
of "Python", pressure on homeward bound accommodation became acute so that
the qualifying period might be reduced, and still more acute with the opening of
the releases.
The Compassionate Postings Committees performed excellent service
in ensuring that urgent cases were not crowded out by other competitors and that
deserving "Pythons" were not kept back for the sake of frivolous compassionate cases.
The corollary to this arrangement was that compassionate release was not
granted to a man serving overseas.
The first step was always to put the case with
full evidence to the overseas command for reversion to the home establishment.
When the man arrived home he could apply to the War Office for release, and as the
whole investigation would already have been made and the facts known in the War
Office, this could be quickly effected.
Reversion to home establishment was at
first dealt with by a branch in the Directorate of Personal Services, but since these
cases so often became cases for compassionate release, the work was transferred to
the Directorate of Recruiting and Demobilization, and was undertaken by a new
branch, working in close conjunction with the branch controlling compassionate
release, and later absorbed by that branch as the volume of work diminished.
The decision to refrain from issuing orders from the War Office in these overseas
compassionate cases was undoubtedly wise, but it was at times difficult to explain
convincingly to the public or in Parliament.
Applicants were often surprised to
learn that the War Office would do no more than signal the case, with their grading,
to the overseas command, and that the final decision would rest there and not in
London, nor were anxious relatives likely to comprehend all the implications of
manpower and shipping even if security had allowed a full explanation.
Like
compassionate release, compassionate reversions from abroad might have caused
serious manpower complications if they had been allowed to get out of hand.
As it was they too formed an excellent safety valve, admirably regulated by the
committees in commands.
58
WORT
12
Release to take up work of national importance really began on mobilization,
when some 2,10o men holding key positions in industry were discharged from the
Territorial Army, a further 10,500 being released in the next few months as a
result of the census.
the war, the system being finally merged into Class "B" release when demobilization
began.
Thereafter, a steady flow of such releases continued throughout
In the first instance the men were actually discharged, but this quite
unnecessarily relaxed control over the individual. If a man were discharged, he
could not be recalled to the Colours by the War Office but could only be called up
under the National Service Acts, and in the earlier years of the war, this might
mean that men of some particular age would not be registered for many months
to come and would not actually be called up for service for some time after that.
A man released for some important work might abandon that work and do some-
thing much less important but not be liable to immediate recall to the Colours.
The Armed Forces (Conditions of Service) Act, 1939, gave full authority for the
relegation of such men to the Reserve and new sections, "W" and "W(TY", of the
Reserve were formed, which were unpaid, and to one or other of which were
relegated all men released on these grounds, whether they were relegated indefinitely
or for some fixed period. The difference between Class "W" and Class "W(Ty"
of the Reserve was purely technical, the former comprising men serving on Regular
or Supplementary Reserve engagements, the latter men serving on Territorial Army
engagements.
This relegation to the Reserve instead of discharge gave complete
control over the individual, since he remained a Reservist all the time while on
release and could be recalled to the Colours at any time on the instructions of the
War Office.
The heavy loss of equipment in the withdrawal of the B.E.F. from France
brought an urgent demand for release of skilled men for the munitions industries,
and instructions were issued in June and August of 1940 directing commanding
officers to send to the Ministry of Labour and National Service lists of men whi
were skilled in certain trades.
The Ministry then sent to the commanding office
the names of those selected for release and the names and addresses of the firms
by whom each was to be employed. The commanding officer was then to release
the men concerned, directing them to report to the firms specified. The method
achieved the purpose of getting a large number of men back into industry quickly
but at the cost of much waste.
A good many men were lost in the process. Some
quite deliberately went off to seek employment more congenial than that to which
they had been allotted, and the new employers were not in all cases scrupulous enough
to enquire how the man came to be there.
Sometimes firms had not received
notification that the men were coming and were unwilling to take them on at that
moment because some expected supply of material had not arrived, and the men
drifted back to their units or went off elsewhere.
One man was found helping his
brother to run a public-house and another was discovered in a small tobacconist's
and newsagent's shop in a provincial town, ably conducting the business on behalf
of the owner who had been called up.
It is easy to paint too black a picture of
waste and confusion and to exaggerate the mistakes, but it must be confessed that
this method of release was not sound; a good many men did get lost and it entailed
some trouble subsequently to check what each man was doing.
Thereafter, a better method was devised, which became the normal routine for
effecting these releases.
The firm had first to make application to the Government
Department sponsoring their gativities, who in turn submitted the case with their
recommenda sponsorine Ministry of Labour and National Service.
The latter
Ministry sation to the ves that the application was justified and thatche dendaticy
could be made good from no other source, and then forwarded their recommendation
to the War Office.
It is not to be supposed that the Ministry of Labour and National
