not the place to dispute such questions as the degree of authority accorded to the
psychologist, but there is no doubt that the whole method of selection and training
did meet the needs of the Army and did produce the regimental officers who in
the end led their men to complete victory.
It remains to consider the other methods
which were used to produce different classes of officers.
In the early days of the war a number of warrant officers and N.C.O.s were
commissioned directly from the ranks without passing through O.C.T.U.
was repeated in the autumn of 1940, when it was urgently necessary to appoint to
the new battalions then raised and to the reconstituted units of the B.E.F. a nucleus
of officers who were somewhat older than the average and who had had long
military experience.
The method was little used and the numbers thus com-
missioned were never large, the normal method of commissioning through selection
and O.C.T.U. training being altogether more desirable; but in August, 1942, one
infantry O.C.T.U. was converted into a General Purpose O.C.T.U. at which senior
warrant and non-commissioned officers could undergo a modified training for
Men who had obtained Certificate "B" since January, 1938, while serving in a
University Senior Training Corps, were entitled to direct entry to O.C.T.U. on
Very soon after the outbreak of war entry to a University was almost
wholly confined to those selected to study some technical subject, and the supply
of officers from this source was in consequence limited mainly to the technical arms.
In order to provide a limited number of young officers who had a sound education
in mathematics and physics for Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers and Royal Signals,
an examination was held twice a year, open to youths at school or soldiers in the
ranks who were between 18 and 18; years of age and who held a school certificate
or its equivalent. Successful candidates, if not already serving, were required to
serve about two months in an other ranks training unit, after which they were
relegated to the Reserve and sent to a special course at a University for six months,
at the end of which they were sent to an O.C.T.U. for final training before com-
When the method of selection by War Office Selection Boards had
been fully established, candidates who had been successful in the examination were
required to pass a W.O.S.B. as well before attending a University to ensure that
time and money was not spent on educating those who would not in the end be
the method of commissioning through the Army Officers
Emergency Reserve, which was largely used in the early days of the war and which
continued to be used for the commissioning of technical officers long after the
original purpose of the scheme had been fulfilled.
The A.O.E.R. was formed in
At the time of the Munich crisis in 1938 the War Office
received by post and by personal application a very large number of offers of
No organization existed within the War Office to
deal with such offers and the personnel branches or the Military Secretary's staff,
to whom the offers were in the main addressed, were inundated.
organization was set up to record names and addresses and a summary of the
applicant's former service or other qualifications.
The crisis passed without a
mobilization, but the experience had been most valuable and clearly showed that
there did exist a large body of willing volunteers who were anxious to serve their
country if war came again. A special organization was therefore set up in the
War Office to administer an Officers Emergency Reserve, and by the outbreak of
Registration was divided broadly into three classes those who had previously
served as officers but had no reserve liability, those
commission but had obtained Certificate "A"
who had never held a
', or "B", and those who had no
wO 277/=2
military qualifications but had some special qualifications which would be useful
This latter group was composed mainly of civil, electrical and
mechanical engineers, but also included men of other professions such as barristers,
solicitors, accountants, and surveyors. Registration in the A.O.E.R. did not involve
any statutory liability to serve, if called upon, nor did it confer any exemption from
the operation of the National Service Acts. Registrations were effected without
regard to the individual's position under the Schedule of Reserved Occupations.
In the early days of the war men were called up, if required for commissioning,
without any consultation with the Ministry of Labour and National Service; but
it later became impossible to allow men to be called up indiscriminately from what
might be key positions in industry, and it was agreed to seek the consent of that
Ministry if the individual appeared to be in a reserved occupation.
Applicants had to give the names of two persons of good standing to whom
Regrettably the referees were not always careful or
honest, and among the many thousands commissioned through the A.O.E.R. there
were some who were indeed "King's hard bargains". But although some un-
deserved discredit was thrown on the A.O.E.R. by a small proportion of failures,
it did prove a most valuable source of supply of officers.
Applications were first scrutinized to ensure that the applicant fulfilled the general
He was then offered to the personnel branch which
seemed most likely to be able to use his services, and he was eventually registered
in an appropriate category, and notified accordingly. Individuals were called up
in accordance with demands by personnel branches, who submitted to the control-
ling branch requests for the call-up, not of certain individuals by name, but of a
given number of officers of some particular type.
offering him employment in some corps and in some specified rank; he was free
to accept or reject the offer as he chose. Very few were offered a rank higher than
that of captain and the great majority were called up as subalterns. All were
gazetted as znd lieutenants and any higher rank offered was conferred under the
promotion rules in force during the war.
A large number of officers willingly
accepted employment in a rank lower than that which they already held. In the
first two years of the war up to October, 194I, about 29,500 officers were com-
missioned through the A.O.E.R., the majority of whom were regimental officers
Thereafter the rate dropped considerably, since
by that time the original pool of non-technical officers was almost exhausted, and
there remained on the register few whose services would have been at all useful.
Between October, 1941, and April, 1943, only another 6,000 were commissioned,
the majority of whom were specialists, mainly those with engineering qualifications,
and the total up to the end of 1945 was just over 39,000.
In fact the A.O.E.R.
tended more and more to change from its original function as a reserve to be drawn
upon at need to a means of commissioning those who were required for service as
officers in some special capacity. The supply of specialist officers forms a separate
subject by itself and it will be convenient, before turning to that, to consider briefly
the general value of the A.O.E.R. in its original function and particularly with
regard to the supply of non-technical officers.
The real defect was that initially there was almost no possibility of estimating
There was no trainine before the war and no
Referees were not alwavs trustworthy. and
although it was possible to examine the former record of those who had previously
served as officers, that record for the most part gave only negative information.
It could be ascertained that the applicant had nothing to his discredit, but that in
itself was little guide to his efficiency and real character; nor was there anything
beyond the referees' statements to show how he had developed in the course of
