CHAPTER V
MANPOWER FROM OUTSIDE THE
UNITED KINGDOM
Throughout the war the Army made considerable use of manpower from outside
the United Kingdom, and a great variety of races and nationalities were ultimately
The story of their recruitment is of deep interest,
revealing at different times some curious adventures, some touches of comedy and
much of the blackest tragedy.
With the exception of Eire, all the Dominion
members of the British Commonwealth declared war and their Armed Forces
played a notable part; but this volume relates only to the Army maintained by the
United Kingdom and neither the Dominion Armies nor the armies of our Allied
powers fall within its scope. Nor need any detailed reference be made to Northern
Ireland, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and Eire, and it will be convenient to
deal with these briefly before entering on the main part of the subject.
foundland also was in a peculiar position, and will be dealt with separately.
The National Service Acts passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom
were not applied to Northern Ireland, and recruitment there remained purely
voluntary throughout the war.
But apart from the fact that there was no con-
scription, recruiting was carried out in Northern Ireland exactly as in Great Britain.
There were the same kind of recruiting centres, the same standards and tests were
applied, and Northern Ireland recruits were freely enlisted into all corps of the Army.
In the Isle of Man the National Service Acts were early applied by Order in
Council and recruiting followed the same lines as in Great Britain, except that the
Schedule of Reserved Occupations was modified to suit the peculiar needs of
In the Channel Islands, the States of both Jersey and Guernsey passed enact-
ments authorizing the Lieutenant Governor to direct any man within specified age
limits to serve either in the Island Militia or in the Imperial Army.
had scarcely begun to operate before the German occupation in the summer of 1940.
After the liberation of the Islands in May, 1945, voluntary enlistment was
reopened, but no conscription was enforced.
large body of the Royal Jersey Militia succeeded in reaching England and joined
Eire having declared her neutrality, no recruiting organization of any sort could
be set up in her territory, nor did her armed forces take any part in the war.
Nevertheless, many thousands of citizens of Eire, despite their country's neutrality,
filled the ranks of the Northern Irish regiments or served in many another corps
of the Army. Most enlisted at Belfast, which was the nearest recruiting centre,
but a considerable number crossed to Great Britain and enlisted there.
In the war of 19I4-18 Newfoundland had raised a regiment, but in 1939-45
her Dominion constitution was in suspense owing to economic difficulties, and the
Newfoundland Government eventually decided that it was preferable for her
citizens to be enlisted into the British Army rather than that they should again
raise a regiment of their own. It was, therefore, agreed to form two Newfoundland
regiments within the Royal Artillery. A cadre of officers and N.C.O.s was sent
from Great Britain to St. John's where enlistments were carried out and the units
were then brought to England for training. They gave admirable service through-
out the war, a regular flow of recruits to maintain them being despatched through
WO217/=2
a recruiting organization set up in St. John's. Eventually the two regiments were
returned complete to Newfoundland and disbanded there.
The Colonial Empire made notable and important contributions of manpower,
but before surveying them it will be well to deal with the various classes of aliens
who were enlisted into the British Army. The Army Act permitted the enlistment
of aliens provided that the number in any one corps did not exceed z per cent
of the total strength of that corps. It was also provided that aliens could not hold
any rank higher than that of Warrant Officer. But although there existed this
statutory authority for the enlistment of aliens, at any rate in limited numbers, in
peace time enlistment was by regulation restricted to British subjects, the sons of
parents who were themselves British subjects by birth. The latter part of this
regulation, relating to the nationality of the parents at birth, was quite often relaxed,
but the British Nationality of the recruit himself was invariably insisted on and
aliens were not in practice enlisted. Shortly after the outbreak of war the restric-
tions imposed by the Army Act were suspended by Defence Regulations which
gave statutory authority for the unrestricted enlistment or commissioning of aliens.
At the same time the Army Council suspended the limitations imposed by Recruiting
Regulations, while another Defence Regulation permitted enlistment to be effected
without tendering the Oath of Allegiance.
The aliens who were enlisted into the British Service fall into three main classes—
the citizens of neutral states, the citizens of enemy states, who were living in British
territory, and the citizens of allied states. The first class was very small in numbers,
but the second and third classes produced considerable numbers and at the same
time presented many complicated but interesting problems.
Apart from the South American Republics and apart from Eire, which has
already been referred to, there were few neutral states and from such as there were
access to British territory was not easy. Most of the neutrals who did enlist were
already living in British territory, but a number did make their way to Great
Britain, often at great expense and at great personal risk, solely to give their services
to a cause which they felt to be right. Before the entry of the United States into
the war, a number of their citizens enlisted in the British Army, despite their
liability under United States law to lose their United States citizenship. When the
United States entered the war, they were for the most part discharged in order to
join the Army of their own country, but a few continued in British service.
who came from the South American Republics were for the most part the descendants
of British subjects who, two or three generations back, had settled in South America
and had acquired the nationality of the country of their choice. Many, though
citizens of the Argentine or Peru or Chile, and though possessing no British
nationality, bore British names and still held strongly to the ties of descent which
bound them to the country of their forebears.
neutrals who claim special notice are Spaniards, of whom there were two groups
enlisted in different circumstances. One group had belonged originally to the
Army of the Barcelona Government in the Spanish Civil War. On the fall of
Barcelona they had escaped across the Pyrennees into France, where they had
eventually been enlisted into the French Foreign Legion and sent to Morocco.
In 1940 they had formed part of the French Contingent in the campaign in Norway,
and when that came to an end they were landed at Glasgow, pending return to
France or to Africa as the French High Command might wish. But before their
onward movement could be arranged France had been overrun. Patently the
Spchy do could not be en into lemy ban in Car the, mer into the han do of the
to return to Spain, and since there was nowhere else they could go, they were
finally enlisted into the Pioneer Corps, in which they gave admirable service for
