sent to the clothing depots to get their civilian outfits and then returned to their
units, whence they were released.
Since they were released for specific reasons,
leave for re-settlement purposes was not necessary and they were, therefore,
granted z1 instead of 56 days' leave.
A cash grant took the place of additional
leave for overseas service.
The Class "B" scheme was a bold and on the whole successful experiment.
Mistakes undoubtedly occurred.
Difficulties arose over the occupational classifi-
cations in the Central Card Index, which could only record the occupational
classification assigned by the Ministry of Labour and National Service on enlist-
ment or call-up.
This classification took note only of the occupation which the
man was
actually following at that moment, which was by no means always that
at which he was most skilled, and the more so since many men had sought new
occupations in the depressed years before the war and through the disturbances of
labour caused by the war itself.
But the scheme was infinitely better and less open
to abuse than the crude method of 1918 when a man could be released on the mere
offer of employment.
The flagrant abuses of that system quickly led to its break-
down, whereas the Class "B" scheme was never seriously criticized by the men in
the Services as being unfair. Given the fact that the needs of industry were
deliberately to be subordinated to the interests of the men themselves, the Class
"B" scheme probably gave as much weight to industrial interests as was possible
in the circumstances.
Class "C" releases, which were those on compassionate grounds, call for little
comment.
In general they were dealt with in the same way as they had been
during the war, except that indefinite release was introduced and the standards by
which the cases were judged were less rigorous, particularly when they concerned
older men or those who had but one opportunity to re-establish a one-man business.
It remains only to emphasize the need for the strict scrutiny of every case, firstly,
because genuine cases might be
concealed in ill-expressed applications, and,
secondly, because every kind of dishonesty was from time to time practised and
every kind of influence used to secure an undeserved release.
Such was the plan and such the machinery for its execution.
that machine be made to work?
Once victory has been won there will inevitably be every kind of pressure to
accelerate the rate of release.
Firstly there is the natural desire of the men in the
Services themselves to get home, and the equally natural desire of their wives and
relatives to see them home again. Men calculated the months and days yet to
elapse before their release as eagerly as any schoolboy ever calculated the number
of minutes and seconds to the end of term.
Every kind of rumour about the future
programme of release was believed, and at least in the early days of demobilization
serious harm was done by the unwarranted publication in some daily newspapers
of programmes which purported to be official but which were altogether misleading.
Absurdly optimistic estimates were published and accepted as true both by serving
men and by their relatives, and there was bitter disappointment when these false
hopes were shattered by the official announcements.
Army stood the strain admirably, but this desire to get home was a very real factor
which could never be overlooked.
Secondly, any Government must wish for as rapid a rate of release as possible.
Its political reputation will be materially affected if the rate seems, in public
opinion, to be too slow.
"Bring the boys home"
can easily become a popular
political cry and in this democratic country public opinion cannot long be ignored.
It must also wish to re-establish the national finances by reducing military expendi-
ture and by returning to productive employment the men and women whom war
will have drawn away.
At the same time a Government must ensure that the fruits
WO 277/22
too rapid a reduction of the Armed Forces.
of victory are not thrown away or its weight in the council of nations impaired by
From the military standpoint, the rate of release ought to be governed by the
maintenance of the Army in a state of efficiency for the tasks assigned to it. It is
probable that in the first moments after victory military considerations must out-
weigh those of finance and industry. When the fighting ceases there will, of course,
be large surpluses, in some arms more than in others, but the initial occupation of
enemy territory and the disarmament of surrendered enemy forces will necessitate
a wide margin of safety in the strength to be maintained, provided that the resultant
rate of release does not become wholly unacceptable to public opinion. As time
goes on, commitments will become more stable; some will disappear altogether,
others can be much reduced; and it will gradually be possible to see further and
further ahead and plan more firmly the numbers to be retained. It is at this point
that financial considerations are likely to become dominant. The tendency will be
more and more for the Government to fix the maximum strength of the Services,
not solely by military considerations, but on financial grounds and set a limit on
the total military expenditure.
It appears, therefore, that the rate of release must always be somewhat of a
compromise.
Military considerations can never decide alone, but the rate will
finally be decided by the interplay of many factors, all of which are important but
which will vary in importance at different moments.
Whatever rate of reduction was decided on, it was achieved in the Army by the
release of the appropriate number of age and service groups, and the general
intention was that when a group fell due for release all men in it should be released
wherever they were serving and whatever their trade and corps. It was always
realized that the operation of release would have different effects in different arms
and in different classes of personnel. For instance, the earlier releases tended to
bear more hardly on technical arms, in which a large proportion of the other ranks
had been drawn from men who in civil life had attained a high standard of skill
and experience and were therefore older.
The officers and N.C.O.s in all arms
were on the whole older and often had longer service than the rank and file of their
corps, and disproportionate numbers occurred, therefore, in the earlier release
prouds.
Moreover, the importance of the different arms varied from time to time.
For example, from the moment Germany surrendered the whole of the Air Defences
of Great Britain became redundant; as the occupation of Germany took shape,
armoured formations were no longer needed on the scale required for serious
fighting.
On the other hand Signal units were needed more than before to maintain
communications in a devastated Germany.
Thus it happened that the balance of
the Army was upset; the operation of release by groups took away from some arms
far less than they could spare, while other arms were strained to breaking-point by
the loss of an undue proportion of specialists or officers. To remedy this, it was
possible to invoke the compulsory retention clause and to re-train men surplus in
one arm to other duties, or to adopt from the outset the wholly different method
of having separate programmes for different trades or groups of trades, which was,
in fact, the method followed by the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force. It will
be well to examine first the remedies which were available under the scheme
followed by the Army and to enquire whether those remedies were sufficient or
wisely used and then to consider whether a radical change of plan would have been
profitable from the outset.
Authority for compulsory retention was delegated by Release Regulations to
general officers commanding-in-chief of commands at home and to commanders
of commands abroad, with power of further delegation to officers not below the
rank of brigadier.
Such retention was very unpopular.
The numbers retained at
75
