many years.
The story of the other group was somewhat similar; they too had
joined the French Foreign Legion, but instead of going to Norway they had
remained in North Africa, where they had been disarmed and interned by the
authorities of the Vichy Government in the latter part of 1940.
They had been
liberated by the British troops which landed in North Africa in 1942 and were
enlisted into the Pioneer Corps.
The citizens of enemy states were almost entirely Jewish refugees who had fled
from the Nazi persecutions in Germany and Austria and who had arrived in the
United Kingdom from 1933 up to the outbreak of war. Since its formation in 1933
the Jewish Refugee Committee had done admirable work in facilitating the escape
of thousands of unhappy men and women, whose only crimes were their race and
faith, and in assisting them either to earn their living in this country or to emigrate
elsewhere.
The Committee had hired the Kitchener Camp at Richborough, which
had been untenanted for many years, and when the war began there were living
there a large number of refugees of all ages. A prominent member of the Refugee
Committee was commissioned to deal with recruiting among the refugees, he most
patriotically giving his services without remuneration.
Beginning with those in
Richborough Camp, steady progress was made with the enlistment of refugees
throughout the country and the formation of special companies of the Pioneer
Corps until May, 1940, when the threat of invasion made it necessary to suspend
recruiting and to intern almost all citizens of enemy states in the United Kingdom.
The majority were detained in the Isle of Man, but some were deported to Canada
and Australia.
Recruiting was later resumed and remained open until the end of
the war, but the numbers enlisted naturally diminished greatly, as the only source
of supply was the youths growing up to manhood.
The third class of aliens were the citizens of allied countries, whose
disposal
resented far the most difficult problems
At the outbreak of war our allies were
France, Poland and Czechoslovakia, and there were a number of their citizens
living in the United Kingdom, many of whom had been living here for many years.
The great majority of the French who had any reserve liability returned to France.
Early in 1940 negotiations were opened between the British and French Govern-
ments for a convention whereby each power agreed that their nationals living in
the territory of the other power should have the option of returning to their own
country or submitting themselves to the conscription laws of the country in which
they were residing.
The convention never came into force since France was
overrun before the negotiations were completed.
Poles and Czechs were in a somewhat different position. Both countries had
been quickly overrun, but the Governments of both had been established in France
and both had armies operating under the Allied High Command.
Every facility
was afforded to the Polish and Czech military authorities in the United Kingdom to
carry out the enlistment of their nationals residing here and to despatch them to
join their forces in France. But there were a number of both nationalities who
dissented strongly from their respective Governments and who had no wish to
serve in their own national forces: some indeed were living in Britain for that very
reason, while others had become Polish or Czech only by the accident of boundaries
as drawn in 1919 and who knew nothing of the language or manners of their new
countries
The Polish and Czech Governments were naturally anxious to obtain
the services of as many of their nationals as possible, since the maintenance of
their forces in France was becoming difficult, their main source of manpower
supply being cut off by the enemy.
Numbers of both these nationalities offered
themselves for enlistment into the British Army, but it was agreed not to accept the
nationals of allied powers unless the applicant could produce a certificate of release
from the military authorities of his own country in the United Kingdom.
WO 277/=2
The withdrawal of the allies from Western Europe in the summer of 1940
created new problems. Norway, Holland, Belgium, Poland and Czechoslovakia
were represented in the United Kingdom by legitimate sovereign governments
which could properly claim the allegiance of all their nationals in this country,
while General de Gaulle claimed the allegiance of Frenchmen as being the leader
of all who were free from enemy domination. Three separate but related questions
arose-
-how to arrange for the different governments to recruit their own nationals
in the United Kingdom, how to ensure that allied nationals in this country did not
altogether escape service, and how to dispose of those members of allied forces
who, on arrival in the United Kingdom, declined to continue to serve in their own
national forces. The Allied Governments took the view that although they and
their nationals might be exiled from their own territory, the mere fact of that exile
in no way absolved their nationals from their allegiance, and proceeded to apply
their own conscription laws as though they were in their own countries. In so far
as the allied nationals enlisted voluntarily into their national forces or obeyed the
calling up notice issued by the military authorities, no troubles arose, but refusals
to obey soon raised acute questions of jurisdiction. The matter was brought to a
head by a test case. An allied national declined to obey a calling-up notice issued
by the military authorities of his nation, whereupon the military officer concerned
sent military police to arrest the individual and convey him forcibly to a military
camp, where he was placed in close arrest as a deserter. The individual obtained
judgment against the officer on a writ of Habeas Corpus and the High Court
ordered the man's release on the grounds that the law of that country had no force
within the United Kingdom.
This meant that the conscription laws of allied
nations could not be enforced in the United Kingdom, and since the United
Kingdom National Service Acts applied only to British subjects, it appeared that
allied nationals could, if they wished, escape service altogether. The difficulty
was solved by the passage of the Allied Powers (War Service) Act, 1942, which
provided that, if an allied national did not obey within two months a calling-up
notice issued by the military authorities of his nation, he became liable to be called
up under the British National Service Acts as though he were a British subject.
The Allied Governments accepted this as the only practicable solution in the
circumstances, but they were most anxious that their nationals should be encouraged
by all possible means to join their own national forces.
Some Governments
announced that they would not look upon service in the British Forces as a sub-
stitute for service in their own forces and threatened that at the end of the war
any of their nationals who had failed to join their own forces would be treated as
deserters.
Allied nationals were not accepted as volunteers for enlistment into the
British Army and those called up were all posted in the first instance to the Pioneer
Corps.
Those eventually called up into the British Army under this Act were
chiefly Poles and Czechs, many of whom had been living in the United Kingdom
long before the war.
On arrival in the United Kingdom in 1940 a number of Polish and Czech
troops declined to continue to serve in their own armies on the grounds that they
had been deserted by their officers in France and had been left to fend for them-
selves.
After their respective Governments had failed to induce the men to
return to their allegiance they were enlisted into the Pioneer Corps in the British
Army.
None of these arrangements were applied to Frenchmen. While General de
Gaulle was recognized as the leader of those Frenchmen who were willing to follow
him, he was never acknowledged as the legitimate Government of France and no
attempt of any sort was made to compel Frenchmen to join his forces. Frenchmen
who preferred to serve in the British Army were accepted for enlistment into any
