stantiated, which would in all probability have been put right in any case by the
ordinary Service machinery then in force.
That some mistakes were made in the use of tradesmen is of course true, but
it is well to remember the circumstances in which this
Committee sat.
It is
difficult now to recall the boredom of the troops in England in 1941: the majority
lived in great discomfort, apparently for no purpose at all. Until Russia and the
United States entered the war, Britain was without allies and it seemed to most
men quite impossible that the British Army could land on the Continent of Europe
again.
The war, it seemed, was to be fought by the Royal Navy and the Royal
Air Force and the Army was superfluous.
Invasion soon ceased to the unthinking
to hold any sort of threat: the Navy would safeguard our food convoys and Bomber
Command would in the end defeat the enemy.
It is not surprising that in such
an atmosphere there should have arisen in the Army a desire for change at all costs,
and the complaints which arose about tradesmen were largely a symptom of the
The requirements for tradesmen depend on the order of battle drawn up by
the General Staff, and in the latter part of 1940 and in 1941 the Order of Battle
underwent violent fluctuations, which made accurate planning very difficult.
At times temporary surpluses were created by changes in the Order of Battle while
men were being trained.
Quite often the drafting programme was upset by loss
of or damage to ships, and drafts who could not be embarked had to be attached
to whatever units of their corps had accommodation available to await shipment,
which often meant that tradesmen had to be posted where they were not really
The limitation of the Army's maximum strength left no room for
luxuries and every technical unit had to be as self-sufficing as any other unit.
Tradesmen had to take their turn with guards and potatoes.
The report had one serious consequence.
investigation into individual cases, the Government assumed its general correctness
and stopped all intakes for the Army of tradesmen in the majority of electrical and
mechanical engineering trades.
of the results of the investigations, but the loss of these intakes over many months
was severely felt in the acute shortages which long persisted in these trades and in
particular the shortages of really skilled men.
After midsummer 1942 the finding and placing of misused skill ceased to be a
main problem. By that time resources within the Army were practically exhausted
and the formation of the General Service Corps in July, 1942, ensured the proper
scrutiny and sorting of intakes during preliminary training.
Nevertheless it was
decided to leave open a door to those who developed a wish to be trained as trades-
men; and it was arranged that in future a list would be circulated monthly of trades,
in which there were vacancies.
This list was published in Command Orders at
Home and men were permitted to apply for training in one of the trades open.
The number of applications was never great, but a steady and valuable flow of
potential tradesmen were accepted for training.
From the earliest days of the war it had been recognized that even in the most
favourable circumstances the Army could not expect to obtain all its tradesmen
from civil life, fully trained. Special technical training centres were therefore
established for the training of 10,000 men at a time up to Class III standard, a
figure which was later increased to 25,000, of which the great majority were being
trained in engineering trades. Tradesmen, like most other commodities, can be
manufactured in large numbers fairly quickly if a utility product is accepted.
The more highly finished article gives better results in use, but it takes time to
At first, numbers were needed more than high skill, and training was
deliberately aimed at producing Class III tradesmen as quickly as possible.
WO 277/22
wisdom of this decision is perhaps questionable, and by the end of 1941 the general
level of skill among Army tradesmen, and particularly in the engineering trades,
had fallen dangerously low. Partly this was due to the unsatisfactory selection of
men for training, and no exhortation could completely cure all commanding
officers of the inveterate habit of unloading "duds" whenever the opportunity of
a course offered. Towards the end of 1941 attention was directed more to improving
the skill of the Class III tradesman, and steady progress was made until, by May,
1943, the proportion of Class I and Class II tradesmen had become much more
Concurrently with this large-scale training of tradesmen there went
on more specialized training of particular types such as Armament Artificers, and
from the beginning of 1942 A.T.S. other ranks were trained in increasing numbers
and in an increasing number of trades.
The story of the supply of tradesmen is not altogether a happy one, but it does
grow happier as it proceeds. There were initial difficulties, avoidable and
unavoidable, which had long-lasting effects. In 1939, industries which were of
first importance in war had been suffering from prolonged depression.
engineering and ship-building had been shrinking and the immense expansion
called for by the war found them with a reduced labour force, which enhanced the
value of the skilled man and made it more than ever necessary to use every man to
the best advantage. The misplacement of skilled men in the Territorial Army has
already been referred to: whether it could have been avoided has been discussed
in Chapter I, but whatever opinion may be on that question, it cannot be doubted
that many difficulties did ensue from this cause.
The key must lie in planning. Scientific developments may alter the importance
of one occupation or another and it will be always of first importance to know which
trades will be important if war comes again.
knowledge of each man's capabilities gained by proper selection testing it should'
be possible to plan the intakes and training of tradesmen scientifically from
