NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors aff
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troo
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
ordinate command
c. 36), and personal
his representatives.
war diaries will be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1, to noto a te entered up nch ia the edes i gaven i vi ht be tho time they
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
) come of eat, felt etin .. s in pet: were ay cute pontine or
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
or oner pete shout he made dear, tit the ofter he is the matier is the co
entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a aTy so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Imp deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) Day otis Nose one ring the at went four hour and preen dispositions.
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See FiSA. i diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned.
SpEr NO. i Tin in toered tool o to time the formin ted reaches
Month and Year.. a me 194u
Date
ORIGINAL.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Shur i cLb
Army Form C. 211
Unit Der - l aubre Dis Ord
Commanding Officer. Mess ept.
References to Appendices
2/5
J.20 analotes in Cobes Poads on te 2100 les ober
3 le Dunlo
an els fedar at 2014 or pug ap
WAR DIARIES SECTION
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
ARCHiE a dug vo. Remand all right.
Scu helen ARCHE as energ pocket o/ raintance at
LA DELIVRANDE laR not leer clearede Due agle
my came li
1B 1R.A.0.C..
ments in your Bulk Or
you have requested,
ore of your doc
ents - Enquire a
ore documents are in use
Desk for full details
control
