pg_0003.pdf:
37 And Bde Maintenance Project
MOST SECRET
Copy No....A 0
Section 2
BEACH ORGANISATION
1.
2.
3.
POLION
101 Beach Sub Area will maintain 3 Br. Inf. Div.
over the beaches.
In the assault they will, in conjunction with 3 Div R. E. and Assault
Roto, open exits,
clear the beaches, and pass personnel and vehicles
of 3 Div. on to
the Div. fwd routes.
COND POSTS, BEACH HE QO AND REPORT CENTRE
Beach Company I, lo, at which will be located a Report Centre, will be
a rod and blue wind sock. A R.E. Report Centre will also
be established at each Beach Company H. Q
Beach Group Cond Post will
be indicated by a red,
dark bluo,
and pale blue wind sock. Beach Sub
will establish a Cond Post on the beaches on D day,
indicated by noral Franco signs. The above windsocks must NOT be
confused with those flown at beach exits.
TRANSIT AREAS
Iwo Transit Areas will be organised.
(a) Transit Aren West for passago of personnel and vehicles on D day.
West will close as soon as Transit Area East and the
AssemblyArea are open, and personnel and vehicles landing on first
and second tidos have prased.
Wheeled vehicles and Loyi. Carriers only will be de-waterproofed in
Transit Aron. No rofilling of petrol or lubricants will be done in
An area adjacent to Iransit Area will be earmarked
for filling MCs landing empty.
(0)
Transit Area East will be organised during D day for passage of
personnel and vehicles to Assembly Area.
trackod and wheoled vehicles will be de-waterproofed in this
ASSUMBLY AREAS
4. On D day Be Assembly Areas will be used.
5. On D + 1 and therenfter tys will be routed to an Assembly Area East of
ВМЛ,
Ips will move fwd from this Assembly Area on orders of 3 Br. Inf.
• Div. or 1 Corps HQs. Routos fwd and RVs will be detailed in the field.
FORWARD MATNIENANCE ARRA
6.
It is possible that a Forward Mintenance Area (FMA) will be formed
as a temporary alternative to IMA at another location.
Contents and
control of issues will be on the sume principles as for BMA.
BEACH RESUSCITATTON CENTRES
7.
A Beach Resuscitation Centre will be established near each Beach Dressing
Station,
A reserve of clothing and equipment including 48 hr rations will
be held at each Centre for the re-equipment of partially drowned men who
have been brought to
the Beach Dressing Station for treatment.
equipment reserve is NOT intended for men who do not require medical
treatment.

