pg_0020.pdf:
27 1amd Bde Maintenanco Project
MOST SECRET
Copy No. AV.
Section 18
SALVAGE
ICT.TOY.
1. Larly and accurate reports of the locations of valuable salvage are essential.
Units will collate all information and forward it to Be HQ at every
opportunity.
2. Salvage is not exclusively the responsibility of salvage units. All troops
will co-operate in recovering salvage.
Troops will take every opportunity
of collecting salvage into dumps and preventing pilfering of captured
material.
The capture of naval equipment will be reported at once to Bae HQ or to
nearest Naval IO,
who will arrange for
The capture of air
equipment will be reported at once to Ble HQ who will arrange for its
disposal.
Captured enemy aircraft in good condition will be
responsibility can be turned over to an air technical intelligence section,
NEW TYPES OF EQUIPMENT.
4.
The importance of new enemy equipment both for technical examination and
training for operational use
informed by technical intelligence staffs as to what items of captured
equipment are new items,
and will advise commanders accordingly.
will be responsible that all such equipment is adequately guarded until
technical intelligence
staffs who are responsible for its
collection, custody, examination and disposal. Enemy equipment falling into
category will not be destroyed unless there is an immediate likelihood
of its being recaptured by the enemy.
EVACUATION.
5. Impty cartridge and shell cases will be boxed wherever possible and
returned to ORD.
6. Other salvage, incl. empty jerricons not required for refilling, will
be back loaded to B.M. A.
in returning unit tpt.
RENENTION.
7. Units will not retain equipment or other stores except where deficiencies
in their authorised scale of equipment can be met from this source.
8. Captured Mr will only be used by units if deficiencies exist on WE.
details of such appropriations will be immediately reported to Bde HQ and
the vehicles will be taken on charge in the normal manner.
9.
Scrounging and pilfering will be treated as serious offences and rigorous
disciplinary action taken. It is imperative to avoid the reduction of load-
carrying capacity by piling vehicles with captured equipment.
DESTRUCTION.
10. Captured enemy equipment will not be destroyed unless there is danger of it
falling into enemy hands.
Reports of destruction of equipment will be
rendered to Bde HQ.
51/5634

