WO 171/413
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations,
nobilisation or
6), and personal
representatives.
ur diaries will be
kent by a uniti
i state (S.D.8).
115.C940
¿ to keen it. on
ve recorded when
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Chars in establishen of stre fah. or toads casuali time a ses and bra nos od.
animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come
It the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ParA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation o
1 ol mistructon issued aunny the period covered by the current
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(i chi, fetch neat to report mo relating traven up by a subordine formation.
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, iv a supplement the account of
imbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the aupper.
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(See FARA. Volume lanies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war ciates as follows —
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a mar dire for the preceding nd lich win
e being taken that all its appendices are attache
(i) The duplicate copy, clearly
iked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
GO SECRET
Army Form u.
A/d Branch 3 Br. Inf Div
Commanding Officer Maj-Gen TG Rennie, DS
Aber lour
not to cat
Month and Year. Mex/Aez/Hay 1944-
Administrative Planning Instr No. 1 issued
Administrative Plan issued
AdminiStrative Plan (Second Fattion) sesued
Appx 'B'
BIGOT
NEPTUNE
SECRET
