the required quantity in balanced tinned rations was not delivered.
packs had not yet been devised, and among the supplies which were only
Ration
with difficulty landed in ships' boats were such useless items as sacks of flour.
Clearance from the beach five miles up hill to the fighting troops had to be
done by exhausted, ill-organized men actually awaiting evacuation.
Finally, air dropping was arranged, but with little success owing pre-
sumably to the terrain, failure of recognition signals and the general lack of
technique and equipment available at the time for this type of
Force H.Q. had withdrawn from Suda Bay to some caves below the point
where the road ended abruptly on a crest overlooking Sphakia, and the rear
guards were gradually being pressed back to this crest.
The Royal Navy
made a magnificent effort on four successive nights to carry out the evacuation
of the troops, the few remaining R.A.F. and their own small naval elements
By means of ships' boats and one remaining landing craft, they
successfully cleared "walking wounded", and a motley collection of British
fighting and ancillary
troops, New Zealanders, and the remnants of the
Australian "brigade" from Suda—a total of some 14,580.
was made possible largely by the absence of tide or heavy swell and casualties
were obviated by the long,
moonless nights during which enemy aircraft
remained on the ground.
Except for a natural urge to get to Sphakia on the part of some units, who
through lack of equipment could not take part in the actual fighting, the
discipline and morale of all ranks were of the highest to the very end. The
uncontrolled marching on to Sphakia that took place was perfectly orderly.
The thousands who, in the end, rightly feared that they would fall into enemy
hands accepted the situation with patient courage and watched the more
fortunate pass right through them to embark at the beach.
In all, 10,000 troops were left and those of them who were not later
captured, killed or wounded were forced to surrender more through lack of
food than for any other reason.
Although we suffered this heavy loss, the
enemy casualties in dead alone must have totalled more than half this number,
and the operation undoubtedly cost him the cream of his existing airborne
force both in personnel and aircraft.
The fierce resistance offered by the
British and Commonwealth troops came, in fact, within an ace of success,
for the Germans were on the point of abandoning their offensive.
Even in defeat we could be consoled by the thought that the stubborn,
if unsuccessful, defence of Crete in all probability had a direct effect on the
German efforts in Syria, Iraq and perhaps, later, against Tobruk.
210
WO277
1 0
THE MIDDLE EAST 1939-1942
SECTION 10-THE BATTLE OF EGYPT
On 11th September, 1941, H.Q. Western Army was formed in Cairo and
moved forward into the Desert to
27th September, 1941, H.Q. Western Army was redesignated H.Q. Eighth
Army and H.Q. Western Desert Force then became H.Q. 13 Corps.
By the end of October, 1941, it seemed that the programme of reorganiza-
tion and re-equipment described in Section 8 had proceeded so satisfactorily
that, with the addition of reinforcements from the United Kingdom, a new
attack would be possible during the subsequent month. It is true that the
original estimate for the armoured forces necessary to conquer Cyrenaica
called for three armoured divisions, but in spite of this it was decided to
launch the offensive with one and a half armoured divisions and a brigade
A plan of the operations in the Desert between November,
1941, and June, 1942, is at Map 20.
Preparations for the Second British Advance
Although delays in arrival of both men and vehicles postponed the start
of the operation from 1st November, the attack was eventually launched on
17th/18th November, and had for its primary object the destruction of the
This task was entrusted to 30 Corps-there were now two
corps deployed in the Desert, an indication of the degree of reinforcement—
while 13 Corps (the original Western Desert Force) prevented the enemy
garrison on the frontier from moving east or south. In conjunction with the
garrison of Tobruk, which would come under command when contact was
made, 30 Corps would then sever the enemy's communications with the west.
The ultimate object was the eventual capture of Tripolitania.
plan had been considered and discarded.
the oases of Giarabub and Gialo to cut the enemy's L. of C. by the capture
of Benghazi. But apart from the enormous administrative difficulties involved,
this plan entailed splitting our resources of armour, of which we had but a
small superiority over the enemy. Materially, therefore, the first plan went
no further than the destruction of the enemy's armour and the relief of Tobruk.
Subsequent operations would depend on our success in the first stages.
Mention has already
been made (page 200) of the extension of the
railway from Matruh.
Work had started in June, 1941, and the line, having
run south above the escarpment, had now reached Bir Mischeifa 75 miles
west of Matruh. This alone meant the most enormous saving in transport
under normal working conditions. The idea of a desert railway was nothing
new, for it was always obvious that it would be difficult to maintain any
major offensive in Cyrenaica from rail-head at Matruh.
for the railway had begun as early as December, 1940, and once work was
started the railway construction groups proceeded at an average rate of a
mile a day, no mean achievement under the arduous working conditions for
there was no shade from the hot mid-summer sun. Much of the work was
carried out by New Zealand railway construction engineers.
The other major constructional project was concerned with the supply
of water which was essential, not only for maintenance but also because
there would obviously be little advantage in the extension of the railway
