increased dilution of services units with non-British personnel. It also raised
the question of whether it was necessary, or even feasible, to hold reserves
and working margins for 150 days for a force of such proportions.
Later
in 1941, it was decided to reduce the number of days' reserves of certain
commodities held, thus appreciably reducing the amount of new storage
accommodation to be built.
(In point of fact, 150 days had long become
merely a target figure because the influx of troops reinforcing the command
caused a steady
decline in the reserve position and the increase of sixty
days in the target was scarcely perceptible.)
The selection of areas for new development was undoubtedly affected
by the fact that there was no real advanced base west of the Nile and within
M.T. distance of the Western Desert Force to allow of its maintenance by
road. Such an advanced base would clearly be an advantage to relieve the
strain on the single line railway from the Delta to Matruh, and the rather
precarious sea-link to Matruh.
increased storage in Palestine to maintain troops who might at any time be
needed for the defence of the northern frontier and to deal with the mounting
threat from Vichy-German co-operation in Syria.
By the end of December, 1940, reconnaissance and initial planning were
completed and suitable sites selected in the following areas:
Western Desert-including El Hammam and excluding El Daba.
Palestine-including El Majdal-Deir El Ballah with possible extension
to El Rafah.
Plans based on these areas allowed for sufficient base expansion to the
maximum maintenance and reserve requirements of 23 divisions.
time the War Office again altered the expected strength of Middle East in
June, 1941, this time from 14 divisions to 17 divisions.
Originally it was intended to hold one-tenth of the Middle East reserves
in the advanced base to be situated in the Western Desert, but the successful
campaigns which began in December, 1940, led to the maintenance of the
force being carried out chiefly by sea from Alexandria to Sollum, Bardia,
Tobruk and Benghazi and meant that, with base installations in the El
Hammam-El Daba area, supplies and stores moved into
rail from the Delta would have to be back-loaded by the same railway to
Alexandria for shipment.
The plan to establish an advanced base in the
Western Desert was therefore abandoned and a new project adopted whereby
up to one-tenth of the reserves were to be held in the Alexandria-Amiriya
This area, although exposed to air attack,
was comparatively well
provided with A.A. defences and fishter aircraft and, furthermore, was close
to a port-the port, in fact, from which sea maintenance of the forces in
the Desert would be despatched.
It was thus suitable for an advanced base
of limited size from both the defence and movement aspects.
Opposition arose to the Deir El Ballah project in Palestine owing 10
the fact that some Australian hutted camps were already there, and the area
was therefore abandoned in favour of a far less suitable site at El Rafah.
174
WO277
Similarly
Abu Zabal was abandoned as unsuitable and Khatatba selected
instead, while Kantara East was designated as a reserve area for a future
ammunition depot.
One of the chief factors governing the final choice of
sites was the shortage of railway constructional material; it was essential
to limit construction, as far as possible, merely to the expansion of existing
services.
the base had been narrowed down to the following:
Finally, therefore, by January, 1941, the sites for expansion of
Egypt
Alexandria-Amirya (10 per cent. reserve).
Khatatba.
Geneifa-Shallufa.
Kantara East (reserve area).
Palestine
El Majdal.
El Rafah.
Beit Nabala (for engineer stores).
Of these, the project at Khatatba was abandoned in March, 1941.
The total estimated cost for covered accommodation for the extra base
installations was £2,767,500 for some 6,320,300 sq. ft.
Of this total the
R.A.O.C. required some 3,600,000 sq. ft., R.A.S.C. depots (including packed
P.O.L.) approximately 2,580,000 sq. ft., R.E. stores 40,000 sq. ft., and the
printing, stationery and publications depot 105,000 sq.
In addition,
hospital expansion up to June. 1941, called for sixteen 1.200-bed and three
600-bed hospitals together with convalescent depots containing a total of
6,000 beds.
Three base depots medical stores were also thought necessary
and brought the total cost of medical installations alone to £1,300,000.
Expansion to twenty-three divisions would entail yet another 2,400 hospital
beds and 1,000 convalescent beds being provided each month until the
requirements based on this strength were provided for.
The War Office gave general approval for work on the depots to proceed,
but queried the amount of construction required for the R.A.O.C. installa-
tions and especially the covered storage accommodation for P.O.L.
connection with the latter it was somewhat acidly pointed out that packed
P.O.L. was stored in the open in the United Kingdom.
G.H.Q. explained
in considerable detail the basis of calculation for estimates for the Ordnance
installations.
For the base ordnance workshops a planning figure of 38,000
lorry units spread over two armoured divisions, twelve infantry divisions and
three corps troops was used with an allowance of 60 sq. ft. to each lorry
unit.
This gave a total requirement of 2,280,000 sq. ft.
Of this total 1,120,000
sq. ft. already existed. leaving a balance of 1,160,000 sq. ft. which, with al
additional 90,000 sq. ft. for an Australian base workshop, gave a grand total
of 1,250,000 sq. ft. to be constructed.
The figure for B.O.Ds. for the extra
five divisions was amended to 2,060,000 sq. ft.
This was considerably larger
than the original estimate for the first nine divisions, but it was explained
that since thanal estimate for the firso the War Office, it had been proved
inadequate, based as it was boron dey on similar requirements in Europe.
difference in climatic conditions, the scales of clothing to be maintained and
175
