were it not possible to provide water for the locomotives along the line.
In the past water had come either from Matruh or from Alexandria.
had a system
of aqueducts and cisterns.
Matruh
The aqueducts brought approxi-
mately 30,000 gallons a day, which with the contributions of a distillation
plant working
from sea
water was increased to 40,000
gallons a day.
Occasionally, as necessary, a ship would bring water from Alexandria which
was pumped ashore into storage which consisted at the outbreak of war
of a number of cisterns of very ancient origin with a total capacity of
1,000,000 gallons; a further cistern was constructed shortly after the start
of the war by the Royal Engineers which increased the total shortage to
nearly 14 million gallons.
Finally water was, and always could be, sent by rail, but much of this
was required for watering the locomotives themselves, the nearest locomotive
watering place otherwise
1939 a water pipe-line had
been started from the Delta and had reached as far as Burg El Arab, and
orders were therefore given for this to be extended to Matruh and also for
water sources at Fuka and Buq-Buq to be developed.
miles of pipes were laid and filled, and ten large reservoirs and seven new
pumping stations had been built.
On 11th November, 1941, a new water
point was opened 65 miles west of Matruh. Later the pipe-line was brought
forward to the rail-head at Mischeifa.
A strict water ration of ¾ gallon
each man or vehicle daily was imposed at first in order to leave enough
to fill the pipe-line and storage tanks.
Preparations for the offensive had in the first place been put in hand
by H.Q. Western Desert Force.
As the capacity of the railway fell short
of estimated daily requirements by almost one-third and as transport was
still very limited it was considered essential to build up as much as possible
in camouflaged dumps well forward, the dumps being dispersed over a wide
During the relatively static period since our evacuation of Cyrenaica the
maintenance of the operational part of the force had in the main been from
two F.S.Ds—Nos. 29 and 30-from which formations drew in second line.
Although the exact locations varied slightly from time to time they were
usually in the general areas Alam Rabia and east thereof and between 20
and 30 kilometres east of Sidi Barrani respectively.
operation H.Q. Eighth Army intended to establish " forward bases", Roughly
synonymous with what were later generally known as road-heads, these were
to be three in number and were to be located as follows: —
No. 1 (Northern) -Sidi Barrani area (near F.S.D. No. 30).
No. 2 (Centre) —West of Mischeifa Rail-head (near F.S.D. No. 29).
No. 3 (Southern) Giarabub Area.
The stocking of No. 3 Forward Base began in September and of Nos. 1
and 2 on 6th and 3rd October, respectively.
The most careful camouflage
was adopted and great dispersion maintained in order to keep the enemy
in the dark as to our future intentions.
Initially, responsibility for these forward bases was vested in 13 Corps,
but all stocks dumped were army reserves and were sept entirely separate
212
WOLTT
from those at F.S.D. No. 29 and F.S.D. No. 30, on which 13 Corps lived
during this period.
Mohalfa and not from the forward bases.
The F.S.Ds were refilled by M.T. from rail-head at
After a number of alterations in target figures, stocks for the forward bases
No. 2-24,887 tons.
Included in these totals were tonnages for maintenance of the R.A.F.,
medical and E.F.I. stores and water.
and
No. 3 Forward Base was top priority
and within a month 85 per cent. of its total requirements had been placed
and camouflaged.
The force to be maintained from this forward base was
known as the " Oasis" group and was directly under army control.
The plan in general outline provided that maintenance of all troops
moving up were an army responsibility until they moved west of Sidi
Thereafter they became a corps responsibility. 13 Corps remained
based on F.S.Ds Nos. 29 and 30 which remained under its control until
15th November, when H.Q. 91 Sub-Area took over F.S.D. No. 30, the stocks
of which were either eaten down or transferred to No. 1 Forward Base, and
86 Sub-Area took over F.S.D. No. 29, which, now stocked from Mischeifa
Railhead instead of Mohalfa, continued for some time issuing to the R.A.F.
and to the local troops in the area.
These two sub-areas also controlled
the nearby forward bases while 86 Sub-Area was additionally responsible
for the rail-head and pipe-head at Mischeifa and for having a part of its
staff with the H.Q. of the " Oasis " group.
F.S.Ds Nos. 60 and 61 were formed by 30 Corps in the Bir Khamsa area
south of it for those of its troops in
F.S.Ds were stocked from Mohalfa Rail-head switching to No. 2 Forward
Base at the start of the operation.
Generally speaking issues from 1 and 2
Forward Bases were not to take place until the operations started.
The reserves so painstakingly built up in the forward bases represented
the difference in maintenance requirements between what could be delivered
degree of movement and ammunition expenditure they would be unlikely
to last as much as a fortnight at the most since the maintenance needs of
the forces were some 3,000 tons daily for a force of 118,000 men and 17,600
In the period of stocking up and for the actual operations Eighth
Army had some 24 general transport companies and 8 water tank companies
— the latter only containing 60 tank vehicles each.
Now that a force of considerable size was deployed in the Desert the
Shortcomings of the 4-gallon
"flimsy" petrol containers became really
For planning purposes the waste of petrol from leakage was
estimated at 15 per cent. between rail-head and forward base and 25 per
cent. from forward base to consuming vehicle, but actual loss by leakage
frequently exceeded 30 per cent. in each stage.
This was a fantastic state
of affairs due entirely to failure in the years of peace properly to appreciate
