In order that the
maximum
benefit could be obtained from the re-
organization a campaign was initiated jointly by the War Office and G.H.Q.
to make commanders and staffs at home more mechanically minded and
pay increased attention to maintenance within their formations.
Unit com-
manders were impressed with their
responsibility for vehicle maintenance,
this being reinforced by a threat of disciplinary action which, however, was
rarely put into effect.
The new organization even when modified for Home Forces provided
flexibility and a policy of progressive maintenance.
Its success was of
course dependent upon
of adequate numbers of personnel,
equipment and spare parts,
but its development continued along planned
lines with such effect that it later served as the hard core of the organization
of R.E.M.E. upon the latter's formation.
Military labour requirements in the United Kingdom were divided into
two main classes:
labour employed on construction,
labour employed in static installations and depots and
defence works, and other
term
On the return of the Pioneer Corps companies from France 100,000
pioneers were allotted to Home Forces for employment in home
defence.
These were organized into nine home defence groups and thirty-four home
vital points.
pioneer work.
During 1940/41, apart from work in depots, priority administrative
tasks consisted of clearance of bomb damage, construction of defences, and
airfield construction and repair. As the work on defences progressed there
was a gradual switch over to construction of A.A. sites and accommodation
the war.
for A.D.G.B. personnel, this commitment remaining for the
duration
By the beginning of 1941 the number of pioneer companies engaged
on labour tasks for Home Forces was 150. These were distributed to com-
mands and working on services as follows :-
Royal Engineers
Ordnance
R.A.S.C.
104
20
Airfields
Miscellaneous
14
on debris clearance but
Of the above units, 29 had been temporarily diverted to London for work
control, had been lent to commands.
an additional 69
companies,
from
War Office
been allotted to commands and there was no G.H.Q. reserve of labour.
The necessity for such a reserve was
All pioneer companies had indeed
of the lessons gleaned from exercise " Victor".
obvious and was,
To meet this deficiency, arrangements
fact, another
were made during February, 1941,
for certain pioneer smoke companies which had been retained under War
G.H.Q. reserve.
Office control to be transferred if need be to G.H.Q. for employment as
in the commands; this was aggravated by the loss of the 29
There remained, however, a serious shortage of labour
detailed for London.
companies
252
WO277
The Director of Labour thereupon suggested that as there was apparently
number of men not essentially employed, these could either be
conscripted and enlisted into pioneer companies or be employed as civilians
on debris clearance, thus releasing the companies tied up in London.
Minister of Labour would not agree at first to either of these two courses
but did subsequently consent to debris clearance being
undertaken by civilians, thus enabling the pioneer companies to be with-
This relief was, however, short-lived since within a month, as a
result of intervention by the Prime Minister, 12 companies were loaned to
certain county war agricultural executive committees for farm work.
This
meant of course that, of the 29 companies released from London, only 17
were of benefit to Home Forces.
All labour questions at home were, of course, bound up with general
economic and political considerations, particularly those relating to any aspect
of compulsory recruitment.
This made it of the utmost importance that
the very best use was made of the labour, military and civilian, that was
available to the War Office.
In every case, pioneer companies, provided
that they were properly employed, produced results far beyond what was
expected of them.
HOME MOVEMENT CONTROL
Contrary to popular belief, although the movement of personnel and
stores had long been an important duty of the Quartermaster-General (under
the Director-General of Movements and Railways during the First World
War and the Director of Movements and Quartering during
the period
1919-1939) a comprehensive movement control organization did not exist
in this country until the beginning of the war.
It is therefore proposed to
round off this section with a brief account of the development of the home
movement
control organization
as it affected
the
main
administrative
arrangements.
During the first days of September, 1939, movement control staff officers
were installed in each command and district.
From the outset, these officers
formed part of the Q.M.Gs. staff although located away from Whitehall.
They had a dual role, which although tested and found successful through
the war, led to somewhat understandable confusion in the early days.
were responsible to the Q.M.G. through the Director of Movements, War
Office, on the one hand and to their own commander through his chief
administrative officer on the other.
confusion varied according to commands and districts and the
treatment of the movement perconnel ended from attamnted aneolmant as
an integral part of the headauarters staff wing no allegiance whatsoever
to the War Office, to banishment to a dark corner of H.Q. excommunicated
from contact with either "G"
"O".
This unsatisfactory state of affairs continued for some
time and it was
not until 1941 that a clear dirt airs continued the star oice elucidating
the position.
The War Office responsibility springs from the need for
centralized control of shipment,
rail movement,
and in some degree
of road movement, ...•
This centralized control can only be effective
in view of the time factor, it based on rapid and direct communication
253
