the Kranji River and Pasir Laba. About 13,000 troops landed that night, and
further 10,000 soon after dawn the following day, so the forward defence
s heavily outnumbered, causing almost immediate withdrawals to battalion
neters.
As a result, there was much confusion and disorganization;
of men becoming detached and lost.
Some were collected, but others
heir way to Singapore town where immediate action had to be taken
1 with the situation by means of straggler's posts and officers' patrols.
Following the methods that had proved so effective in the peninsula, the
first Japanese objective was an airfield-the Tenga airport—which
was
captured on the evening of 9th February.
As will be seen from the map,
this thrust took the line of the main Bukit Timah road, and was therefore a
serious and immediate threat to our vital supply and petrol dumps in the
vicinity.
The landings near the Kranji River similarly threatened the large
ammunition magazine on the east bank of the river.
Priority was therefore
given to covering the areas in which these installations were located.
It now became necessary to formulate a plan for the eventuality that the
enemy's advance down the Bukit Timah road might force us to withdraw
our troops from the other parts of the island.
There appeared to be two
alternatives, either (a) to fall back to the east part of the island and hold the
We were
not strong enough to hold both areas.
The most important considerations were the location of the two reservoirs,
the location of our main dumps, depots and hospitals, and the fact that the
civil government and the bulk of the civil population were still in Singapore
town.
It was finally decided that, if necessary, a perimeter would be held
around the town area and the outlying islands, even though that meant the
loss of the Changi defences.
which would include-
The plan, in outline, was to hold a perimeter
Reservoirs and the Bukit Timah depot area.
-amongst other localities--the Peirce and Macritchie
The Last Days
The loss of Tenga left only one airfield serviceable, and the A.O.C.
ground, although in fact, this withdrawal resulted in no British aircraft being
seen again over Singapore.
10th February saw further heavy fighting all along the front, the enemy's
main objective continuing to be the Bukit Timah area.
Counter-attacks were
organized but, after first involving slight re-adjustments, further penetration
by the Japanese rendered them ineflectual and they had to be cancelled.
On receipt of information that the enemy were now approaching Bukit
Timah, the G.O.C. gave orders that the reserve petrol depot, situated just east
of the village, was to be destroyed, and this was done during the late afternoon.
Early the next morning the main reserve petrol depot was set on fire by enemy
action and destroyed, and thus within a matter of hours our large stocks of
stocks were lost. In fact, so little remained that of hours our large st further
stocks, whether army, air force or civil, should be destroyed without the direct
permission of the G.O.C.
300
WORT
1
11th February also saw two further blows ; the racecourse at Bukit Timah
was occupied and, with it, the supplies which had been backloaded from
The main supply depot was also captured, and the garrison
was left with only about fourteen days' military supplies in the depots
which remained under our control, mostly in the town area. On the same
day the Japanese succeeded in the face of fierce opposition- in repairing
the gap in the Johore causeway.
The next day was a day of heavy fighting on all fronts, and the enemy,
now greatly reinforced, launched strong attacks at several different points,
gaining ground in nearly all directions. It became obvious that there was
a very real danger that the enemy would break down the Bukit Timah
road into Singapore town, and the time had come to put into effect the plan
to withdraw into a close perimeter round the town.
This was done during
the night when the Changi defences were demolished together with the
dumps and other vital installations in the locality.
The Macritchie Reservoir, although still in our hands, was in danger
of being outflanked and although it was only a matter of time before it
fell the defences were stretched so that it could be held to the last.
On 12th February the administrative position began to cause great
anxiety for the first time.
As a result of the further withdrawals, the mili-
tary reserves had now dwindled to about seven days. In addition, there
were the reserves, varying in quantities, held by units, and the civil food
reserves in Singapore town.
We still had adequate ammunition reserves,
except of 25-pr.,
Bofors and mortar natures. As regards petrol, except
for the Asiatic Petroleum Company's reserves on Pulau Bukum Island, we
had one small dump and what remained in vehicle tanks.
It will be remembered that the reservoirs at Pearl's Hill and Fort
Canning were fed by pipe-line from the Johore Reservoir on the main-
land.
Since the evacuation to the island they had been emptying rapidly,
and, by now, Pearl's Hill was empty, and Fort Canning was beginning to
dry up.
In the town area, breaks in the mains from bombing and shelling began
to gain steadily over repairs, with the result that, on 12th February, pres-
sure failed seriously, and water at low pressure was only available at certain
Special water-carrying parties were organized
and R.. personnel and military trans water-carving parties were organized
sta. Fortunately, for some time transport were called in to assist the hail
been under-studying public utility services against just such contingencies
The main Japanese
offensive developed, and our exhausted troops were forced to fall back in
During the morning, the Rear-Admiral, Malaya, decided to leave Singa-
pore with all the remaining ships admi sal, malaya, dec
Before he left, he
he was responsible.
ordered the destruction of the large fuel stocks on Pulau Bukum for which
These comprised both naval fuel oil and lubricating
oils, and the Asiatic Petroleum Company's petrol reserves.
As the G.O.C.
could no longer guarantee the Curios petrol reserve svas of paramount
importance that they should be denied to the enemy.
The demolition was
only partially successfulould be denied to the emory. i the beleaguered
301
