to Hammam
would, on arrival, remain but not be unloaded.
By these
means a readily mobile reserve of ammunition and P.O.L. was created.
At
the same time corps were instructed to hold only the barest minimum forward
other than in defended positions, and even these stocks would be prepared
for destruction at the shortest notice.
It was vital to deny the enemy every
single drop of petrol because his greatest handicap to further progress was
his own enormously long L. of C.
On arrival at the Alamein line 13 Corps
took up a position to the south, or left, of the line.
sent back to command "Delta Force " now being formed by H.Q. B.T.E.,
for the defence of Alexandria and the western edge of the Delta.
Thus after five weeks' bitter fighting, and a retreat of some 350 miles, the
Eighth Army stood at bay on the Alamein line.
The following extract from a speech made by Mr. Churchill gives some
idea of the temper of the times: —
"The military misfortunes of the last fortnight in Cyrenaica and Egypt
have completely transformed the situation, not only in that theatre but
throughout the Mediterranean.
We have lost upwards of 50,000 men
by far the larger proportion of whom are prisoners, a great mass of
material and, in spite of carefully organized demolitions, large quantities
of stores have fallen in the enemy's hands.
nearly 400 miles through the Desert, and is now approaching the fertile
Delta of the Nile.
in France and French North Africa, cannot yet be measured.
We are
at this moment in the presence of a recession of our hopes and prospects
in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean unequalled since the fall
of France."
Indeed it seemed that the Allies might well lose Egypt. G.H.Q., Middle
East was organizing a possible move to Palestine and the Sudan, and members
of the Women's Services were even moved as far south as Assouan en route
The smoke of burning files and documents from the British
Embassy and G.H.Q. in Cairo rose lazily, reaching a climax on one sultry
day which was always afterward referred to as " Ash Wednesday".
Mean-
while Egyptian stock exchange prices reflected the mounting fears of the
local inhabitants.
The crisis came at the beginning of July. The Axis forces tested the
strength of the line during the first week of the month.
13 Corps wheeling
up from the south took the enemy in the flank forcing him to deploy his
forces westwards and southwards to counter the threat.
The enemy's advance
was thus brought to a halt by his having to weaken his spearhead in the
north to find forces to watch the southern flank.
During the remainder of July the Eighth Army was engaged in heavy
fighting to secure important local tactical features and to retain the initiative
it had at last regained.
There were, however, no reserves with
exploit success and by the end of the month it was apparent that the occasion
for immediate counter-attack had passed, and that with the positions stabil-
ised on a favourable line, intensive preparations should be made for a
decisive attack at a later date.
230
CHAPTER V
THE HOME THEATRE
SECTION 1-THE THREAT OF INVASION 1940-1942
This chapter records in outline the development of army maintenance
arrangements at home during the first three years of the war.
During these
three years the small static organization that existed in pre-war days under
the rigid control of the War Office expanded into the highly complex chain
of administrative command that had come into being by the end of 1942.
Throughout this period the outstanding operational requirement in the
United Kingdom was obviously that all military resources must be equal
to the demands which might have been made of them during intensive
air attack or invasion, or both.
Secondly, the possibility of future military
operations outside the United Kingdom had to be contemplated.
The rela-
tive urgency of these two major considerations varied from time to time,
and during the period covered by this chapter the invasion factor tended
to recede.
Nevertheless the United Kingdom remained the focal point of
all military administrative projects undertaken or contemplated by the
Army and it is for this reason that a study of administration in any theatre
of war during 1940 to 1942 is incomplete unless the student is conversant
with the conditions prevailing at home at the time.
Before the outbreak of war, the commitments of the Army in the United
Kingdom were confined to maintaining a small force only adequate to meet
the requirements of reliefs and draft-finding for overseas garrisons, and to
form the nucleus of an expeditionary force.
It was also responsible for
maintaining a Reserve and a Territorial Army so that in a national emer-
gency the regular units could be converted into an expeditionary force or
forces; sufficient troops could be available to form the anti-aircraft units
required for the Air Defence of Great Britain; and so that a framework
could be provided for a national mobilization involving possibly the full
manpower of the country.
The
commands (see Map 21), Aldershot, Eastern, Southern, Northern, Western
and Scottish (South-Eastern Command was formed from Aldershot Com-
mand and part of Eastern Command after the return of the B.E.F.).
There
were also two independent districts, London District and Northern Ireland
District, of which London, especially in respect of the medical and the
supply and transport services,
Eastern
Command.
The Anti-Aircraft Corps (later Anti-Aircraft Command) was super-
imposed over the whole of the country, and was under the operational com-
of the Air
Ministry through the A.O.C.-in-C., Fighter Command,
R.A.F.
The chain of command in A.A. Command passed through A.A.
divisions and A.A.
brigades to the various gun and searchlight units.
subordinate formations of A.A. Command were, however, normally adminis-
tered by the command headquarters in which they were located.
This
frequently gave rise to confusion because it was frequently the case that
231
