insufficient, and had not active operations solved the problem, a situation
that at Nantes would have developed.
All the stores in the
depot were eventually lost to the enemy.
The stores ordered to be held in the advanced ordnance depot included
Anti-Gas Equipment—50 per cent. of the War reserve.
Small Arms and Machine Guns—50 per cent. of the Base reserve of
Artillery Equipments-33} per cent. of the War reserve.
In addition, proportions of the war and base reserves of such items as
signal, wireless,
electrical, field works, M.T., and searchlight stores were
held, together with a number of armoured fighting vehicles and Bren carriers.
Two ordnance field parks with their corps troops and divisional sections
were included in the B.E.F. and worked satisfactorily ; their main drawback
was, perhaps, the difficulty in moving them when necessary.
The temptation
to treat them as a depository for excess holdings could not be resisted by
the corps and, in spite of strict General Staff control, the stocks held were
This practice might have been justifiable had
the stock position permitted, but, in view of the overall situation, it was
inexcusable to all except the corps headquarters, and also had an unfavourable
effect on their mobility.
A contract for the cleaning and repair of clothing, blankets, etc., was
entered into with a Paris firm, where a small military supervisory
and
checking staff was employed.
The results were highly satisfactory and it
may be noted in passing that-unlike other base installations—no complaints
were received regarding either the accommodation or, especially, the welfare
arrangements available for the detachment in Paris.
Laundering contracts
were also entered into from time to time at other places including Rouen,
La Baule, Le Havre and Lille.
In view of the expectation that the enemy would make use of gas warfare
on a large scale, and as no centralized decontamination service was available,
orders were issued to formations to improvize locally.
time operations began, arrangements had been put in hand for the formation
of a combined laundry and decontamination organization providing special
mobile units for allocation to divisions and for static plants capable of doing.
work for 100,000 men on a scale of one plant to every two corps.
Workshops
The simple fashion in which the workshop services of the Army were
later absorbed by the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers is apt to
make students lose sight of the fact that before 1942 the majority of elec-
trical and mechanical engineering matters affecting the Army and its equip-
ment were the responsibility of
Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
The
Opportunity taken on the formation of R.E.M.E. to adapt the new organiza-
tion to the needs of a modern mechanized army has obviated the necessity
to note in any great detail the distribution of workshops in the B.E.F. with
1 p
a view to making use of the lessons learnt during the campaign.
Neverthe-
less advantage should be taken of the opportunity to study the lay-out, which
is described briefly below.
The R.A.O.C. workshop organization sent to the B.E.F. consisted of: -
Two Base Ordnance Workshops.
One Advanced Ordnance Workshop.
One G.H.Q. Troops Workshop.
Four Port Ordnance Detachments.
Army Field Workshops on a scale of one to each division.
Four A.A. Brigade Workshops.
Light Aid Detachments according to scale.
In addition,
small workshops were formed from within the force at
various towns on the L. of C. to meet local requirements.
Port ordnance detachments were first located at Nantes, Brest, Cherbourg
and St. Nazaire, the units at Brest and St. Nazaire later moving to Rennes
The work performed by these useful units
cannot be over-estimated and greatly assisted the clearance of vehicles from
Their main function was in making good the not inconsider-
able damage suffered by vehicles during the journey to the Continent, but
later they undertook minor work for local units. A large amount of work
was originally thrown upon them by the careless unloading of vehicles but
this was later obviated by movement from ship to dock being undertaken by
the port workshop detachments themselves.
stages, and the other in April at Le Havre.
The latter unit never func-
tioned fully and the opening of the former was delayed by the accommoda-
The advanced ordnance workshop was included
in the first R.A.O.C. party to be sent overseas and was also installed at
Nantes, but only until it could be relieved by the base ordnance workshops.
At the end of October it moved to Arras, where it undertook the following
Base repairs for equipment from units in the forward areas so that
the 400 mile rail trip to the base and back could be avoided.
Repairs for local units.
Manufacture of experimental and urgently needed stores, on G.H.Q.
Instrument and wireless repairs for all units in the forward area as
far as possible.
Army field workshops, which were allotted to corps on the general scale
of one to a division, were handicapped in that they consisted largely of
untrained
supplementary
reserve personnel.
Advantage was, of course,
taken of the period of inaction to instil some measure of military knowledge
into them but a corresponding loss of working time had obviously to be
accepted.
The units themselves were unsuitable for their purpose.
They
took up a great deal of road space when on the march and their accommo-
dation
requirements could rarely be met, with the result that they were
invariably located in inconvenient sites or divided.
