4 ounces of dates
1 bar of chocolate
20 cigarettes
Milk, tea, sugar and salt
Vitamin "C" tablets.
The importance of the salt content in the ration could not be over-emphasized.
When a man's body was deficient in salt in the jungle, the result was often
fatal.
Daily
" salt parades"
were held to impress upon the men the value
of using up their rations, but after they had seen a few cases of heat exhaus.
tion there was little need for further reminder.
The reserves and equipment accompanying the force were carried by
nearly a thousand mules, supplemented by elephants each loaded with 800 lb.
of heavy equipment, including rubber boats for the river crossings.
The first supply drop took place on 15th February and lasted eight hours
under a bright moon.
Six days' paratroop rations and large supplies of
grain for the mules were dropped successfully to the force ten miles east
of the Chindwin.
The incident caused a sensation among the local Burmese,
who next morning helped to assemble the containers; they asked no questions
and seemed willing to assist. (Asked what payment they wanted, they said
they would like to have the parachutes.
The trade in cloth, they explained,
had been at a standstill since the Japanese occupation.
Today they may
still be wearing nice white shirts made out of the excellent material.)
The first few droppings proved that the technique worked out between
Wingate and the R.A.F. was completely successful.
It did not vary through-
out the expedition, although, with experience, the air crews naturally learned
to drop their loads with increasing accuracy.
The column commander would
give his R.A.F. officer about three days' notice of what he required and the
approximate location of the dropping zone.
The R.A.F. officer would then
select a suitable site and radio back all the relevant information.
The
dropping zones varied from rice-fields to dried-up river-beds and tracks of
flattened elephant grass.
In the daytime the Chindits would clear an area
of about 400 yards by 50 yards and the aircraft would come down as low
as 200 feet.
At night, the target was larger, usually 600 yards by 100 yards,
but even the Hudsons and DC-3s came down to 300 or 400 feet.
Throughout the campaign the R.A.F. never missed a single rendezvous
although, in the later stages, dropping became less certain because units
operating in the open tracts beyond the Irrawaddy were sometimes forced
to move before the aircraft could reach them.
The breakable supplies or equipment such as food, weapons, etc., were
carefully packed in canvas covered wicker containers, parachutes clipped to
the top, and bags of straw tied to the bottom to act as shock absorbers.
packing was so good that of the hundreds of bottles of rum dropped only
one broke.
In the wicker containers were five-gallon kerosene drums each
holding ten days' hard rations for a man.
Clothing, and grain for the mules
were dropped " free" in triple canvas sacks, packed two-thirds full to alloy
the load to shift without bursting the sack as it hit the ground.
338
WORT
1
In the course of the expedition India despatched to the Chindits via the
R.A.F., in addition to the normal requirements of food and ammunition.
such varied items as mortars, machine guns and other weanons • grenades
shoe-laces, safety-pins, haversacks and saddles.
gelignite and millions of rounds of S.A.A. ; boots and clothing; signal stores :
There was also a " personal
service" which periodically dropped to individuals items they had stored
at the base before leaving, handling special requests as they arose. Among
these items were spectacles and monocles, a kilt, false teeth, tobacco and
snuff and new books.
Every Chindit who had false teeth or wore glasses
had left a plate impression in records or oculist's prescription on file at the
At every dropping they received post from home, and it is a fact that
the Chindits often received their mail quicker when operating in the heart
of Burma than when they were training in India. On one occasion a column
radioed to base for 400 pounds of chocolate-a rare luxury in India at that
The message was received at 1700 hours and was immediately relayed
There the city's leading restaurant worked all night to make
the chocolate, which was then flown by special plane from Calcutta and,
by noon the next day, parachuted to the sweet-toothed Chindits deep in the
The operation proved in particular that the scale of air supply is only
limited by the availability of suitable transport aircraft. The lessons were
learnt and immediate steps were taken to develop supply dropping equip-
ment, to form a training establishment and to raise air supply units.
U.S. air forces operating in the theatre generally followed the methods in
use in India-a significant fact when one considers the large-scale combined
air transport organizations formed during the later stages of the war.
The British and Indian ranks employed were specially selected volunteers
and showed great keenness in the work, especially the Indian soldiers, who
developed a great liking for air travel.
General Wingate summed up the exploits of his troops in these words: -
. they demonstrated a new method of warfare suited
to the genius of the United Nations and corespondinely dificult for
the Axis to adopt."
His next mission was carried out not under the India Command and is
referted to in the chaptes derried out not under the India Commo wil douts
that these later Chindit operations of 1044 were made possible bu the experi
The two operations mentioned above, although of some administrative
significance, proved merely that whereas the Allied potential of recovery
effort had yet to be arnended before the miltary force necessary to ston
and the Indian potential
of support were not lacking, much labour and
and defeat the Japanese could be built up.
defensive operations.
On the Maniour front the Fastern Army now hecame engaged on purely
The Japanese had failed to break through to Calcutta
Arakan Hills and panese had attits their main effort around
Imphal, from which they hoped to conquer Assam.
