the holding of a three month anti-gas reserve accounted for the increase.
It
also included a B.O.D. planned to hold Australian items for three Australian
divisions and a proportion of corps troops.
With regard to the storage of packed P.O.L. in covered accommodation,
it was stated that, as reserves were being built up for forces much greater
than the actual strength and to enable these future forces to operate in a
highly mobile role, it was impossible to turn over the accumulating reserves
within the normal life of the 4-gallon "flimsy" tin exposed to the climatic
rigours of the Middle East.
The thin tin-plate containers
were subject to
rapid corrosion and, unless covered, tended to leak at the seams and burst
under the direct rays of the sun.
There was no parallel between the climatic
conditions in the United Kingdom and those in Middle East.
In any case
the covered storage for P.O.L. would be the cheapest possible and minimum
Whereas the original estimate for nine divisions had worked out to 7s.
a sq. ft. the new estimate for the increase of five divisions was 9s. a sq. ft.
This was due to the rise in the price of labour and materials and to the higher
cost of external services as a result of the fact that all the best sites, from the
point of view of road and rail access, had been used in the initial installations.
None the less the necessary authority was given and work was put in hand,
although estimates for the ordnance installations were somewhat altered.
The continuing shortage of materials eventually, however, led G.H.Q. to
curtail much of the original schemes.
Covered storage accommodation had
As many commodities as possible were to be
stacked in the open,
protected by corrugated iron sheets or tarpaulins.
Personnel accommodation was to be tented.
arising, the tactical situation (with its repercussions on the location of troops)
was constantly changing and directives from the War Office raised the bids.
Eventually, on 1st May, 1941, G.H.Q. issued a complete new plan for the
lay-out of bases in Egypt and Palestine for 16 divisions.
This summarized
the areas of new development as :
Alexandria-Amiriya.
Geneifa.
Palestine
Beit Nabala-Kiryat Motskin.
El Rafah,
El Majdal.
In addition, a proportionate expansion of existing installations in the
Canal Zone and in the Khayat Beach-
-Sarafand areas of Palestine
was authorized.
A very large cold storage project, mainly at Suez, was also
put in hand.
It is diescult to single out the snecific progrese of any of the main
Delay in delivery
of steel ordered from India in May,
(which was only just beginning to arrive in June, 1941) was responsible for a
hold-up in the completion of M.T. workshops, but temporary hiring of suit-
able buildings prevented the work of either RA.O. C or R.A.S.C. being held
up on this account.
176
WO277
1 P
In general the rate of progress was closely related to the rate at which
the constructional stores could be moved from quays and depots and then
distributed to the sites.
A further cause of delay in the Canal Area was in
August, 1941, when some night bombing attacks scared away much of the
Nevertheless, during the summer the base installations for 16
divisions took rapid shape, and by the end of October the following major
projects had been completed:
(a) R.E., R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. base storage depots and workshops at
Tel-El-Kebir (original plan).
(b) Original hospital programme.
(c) Personnel camps.
Of the major projects in hand to complete the base for 16 divisions, the
new base installations at Geneifa and in southern Palestine were nearing
completion and much work had been done in the development of the Tura
caves south-east of Cairo (for the storage of ammunition), and the construc-
tion of a variety of depots at Amiriya and in and around Cairo.
Reserve Holdings
During a visit by the C.I.G.S. to the Middle East in February, 1941, the
question of a possible reduction in the number of days' war reserves to be
held in the Middle East was discussed.
The War Office had just ordered a
reduction from 150 days (which included a 30 day working margin) to 90
days which more closely approximated to the reserves actually held except
in the case of foodstuffs- in fact, reserves at this time were between 60 and 90
days for most commodities.
It was felt that a reduction would not only
simplify the problem of storage accommodation but also reduce the amount
of stores, spare parts and equipment which, although not actually in the
depots of the Middle East, were
" locked up", that is, either earmarked and
specially stored in depots in the United Kingdom or elsewhere awaiting ship-
ment, in transit to the ports of loading, or in transit on a voyage which might
take anything from ten to sixteen weeks.
As a result of the discussion, however, it was decided that, except in
certain cases, war reserves could not be reduced below 150 days owing to
the possibility of interference by mines in the Suez Canal, and owing to
continuing demands from our Allies for additional maintenance.
less, in spite of this decision, the War Office laid down in April, 1941, that
reserves of all stores would be on a 90 day basis; this led G.H.Q. to instruct
all services that 90 days would be the minimum stock held at any time in any
(By this ruling stocks held in Cyprus, Crete, Tobruk and
Matruh were not included.)
In addition a working margin of 30 days was
In June, 1941, G.H.Q. decided to make use of existing accommodation
in the Sudan and Eritrea to hold a proportion of the Middle East reserves.
It was decided that in order to avoid congestion at Suez, ships might be
diverted to Port Sudan or Massawa and their cargoes be stored in the Sudan
and/or Eritrea.
H.Q. Troops, Sudan, was accordingly warned and asked for
an estimate of existing covered accommodation available for the various
commodities in Sudan and Eritrea.
In view of damage at Massawa it was
recommended that Port Sudan be used initially for discharge, and it was
177
