The immediate result of the retreat to the Gazala line was an amendment
Reserves to be held were now: -
Tobruk-Supplies: -7 days for troops based on Tobruk: P.O.L.:—
1,000,000 gallons excluding bulk.
Mischeifa-Supplies: —14 days for all troops in Eighth Army and
R.A.F.: P.O.L.: —2,000,000 gallons.
Sidi Barrani-Supplies: —7 days for troops in 30 Corps: P.O.L.: —
1,000,000 gallons.
Matruh-Supplies:—7 days for 40,000: P.O.L.: —500,000 gallons for
Also Supplies: —30 days for 18,000: P.O.L.: —80,000
The Stand on the Gazala Line
An administrative policy to meet the situation was drawn up on 7th
February. It consisted of 12 main points which are reproduced verbatim
below: —
EIGHTH ARMY ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY TO MEET THE PRESENT SITUATION
1. To maintain Tobruk up to a capacity of 1,000 t.p.d. average excluding
This tonnage to be devoted as far as possible to the
stable commodities which do not vary greatly in kind and commodity.
2. To maintain the convoys from rail-head to Tobruk up to a capacity
of 500 tons a day in such commodities as are not required to be
3. To construct Capuzzo rail-head as early as possible estimated date
of completion is 27th February, 1942.
Until this rail-head is com-
pleted, to use Mischeifa.
4. To maintain Mischeifa rail-head after completion of construction of
Capuzzo rail-head as a reserve.
5. To construct sidings as required by 30 Corps for the defence con-
struction and maintenance of the frontier line.
6. To maintain 30 Corps in the frontier area in the first instance from
Matruh and Mischeifa rail-head, and, in the second instance, by rail
when the necessary sidings, vide para. 5 have been completed.
7. To maintain troops in Giarabub from Mischeifa rail-head by weekly
convoy under control of 30 Corps.
8. To dismantle and evacuate the A.O.D. and B.O.W. from Tobruk and
to backload plant, stores and ordnance personnel-these to be re-
established in Matruh.
This is subject to G.H.Q. approval.
9. Drastically to thin out from the Tobruk area all administrative per-
sonnel not considered essential for the maintenance of 13 Corps in its
present situation; and for the efficient working of Tobruk port, vide
para. 1 above.
10. To retain 7 days' reserves in Tobruk of all commodities necessary for
all troops based on Tobruk and to adjust shipments by sea and road
convoy accordingly. To continue to backload by sea and road all
222
WO27
18
unserviceable tanks and vehicles, and salvage as rapidly as possible.
To
maintain
required.
reserves at rail-heads and Sidi Barrani F.M.C. as
11. To maintain such A.A. and fighter defence in Tobruk area as may
be necessary to ensure the protection of the port.
12. To close down the general hospital at Tobruk as far as possible, but
to maintain evacuation by sea as heretofore.
Army H.Q., which had now
moved back to Sofafi on the escarpment
south of Buq-Buq, took over responsibility for Matruh, where 91 Sub-Area
was installed.
base
With the reduction of Tobruk from a base to a forward
estimated maintenance requirements were drastically altered, and thé
decision was taken to discontinue the use of the larger of the two bulk petrol
installations in Tobruk where storage capacity was far too great in relation
to the low rate of off-take which the shortage of containers was now enforc-
ing.
Now that Tobruk was so near the front line it was unwise to stock so
much petrol.
now as follows: —
The daily tonnage bids for the period 17th-26th February were
By rail to Matruh: 350 tons.
By rail to Mischeifa: 1,460 tons.
By sea to Tobruk: 690 tons (including 500 tons cased P.O.L).
For the next period the amount of cased P.O.L. for Tobruk was to be
raised to 650 tons daily; this, however, proved impossible and the extra 150
tons required had to be despatched by road from rail-head. This entailed
the actual despatch of 200 tons to compensate for the current rate of leakage
Every effort was being made to reduce the number of mouths in Tobruk
and a drastic weeding-out of non-essentials took place until the fortress
became much reduced.
The remainder of February, March and April, were chiefly taken up
with intensive administrative planning and preparation.
bases were to be used-Tobruk, Bel Hamed (which was to be the new rail-
head) and the third at Giarabub.
Although the extension of the railway
had been expected to reach Capuzzo in February, rail-head did not in fact
open there until 13th March, but once opened, stocking of the forward bases
for the new offensive began at once.
Within a week the rail-head at Capuzzo
was handling 2,000 tons a day and on occasions even reached as much as 3,400
At the same time considerable work was in hand on improving the
escarpment at Sollum and through Halfaya Pass.
continuation of an extension and the railway to Bel Hamed was begun on
The original date set for the completion of preparations for the attack
was 15th May, and the target tonnages set for the new forward bases were
to be reached by 14th May and were as follows:
Ord.
P.O.L.
Total
Ewd. Base
& PE
Supplies
Stores
R.A.F.)
(in drums)
10.042
"T" (Tobruk)...
1.500
No. 4" (Belhamed) ...
"No. 3" (Giarabub)
621
223
