any supplies for by that time his own organization had been stretched to the
extreme.
Above all he would derive enormous benefit from the quantity of
The Retreat to the Alamein Line
Now that Tobruk was lost it was decided to fall back on Matruh in order
to gain time to build up the necessary armoured force.
to inflict maximum delay on the enemy while 30 Corps organized the Matruh
Meanwhile 10 Corps H.Q. had been ordered forward
from Syria and, on arrival, would relieve H.Q. 30 Corps of the responsibility
for Matruh in order that the latter might go back to control the completion
and occupation of the El Alamein position 120 miles further east.
Before the attack had begun administrative orders providing for a possible
withdrawal had been issued, by which the Army could be maintained succes-
sively from Tobruk or No. 4 Forward Base, Capuzzo, Mischeifa and Sidi
These orders were in the main complied with.
Stocks in No. 4 Forward Base had been eaten down as far as possible before
withdrawal and the same applied to those at the rail-head at
Arrangements were made to destroy what remained and withdrawing troops
drew as much as they could carry.
A special train programme was put in
hand to backload the reserves at Mischeifa, and a "Q" staff officer from
Eighth Army was located at Mischeifa to ensure the correct priority
Inevitably there was a period when administration was most untidy, but
eventually, when 13 Corps had organized itself into two elements a striking
and a holding force-and had taken over all the transport and water cistern
units of 30 Corps together with its formations and an F.M.C. on wheels for
7 Armoured Division, administration began to become more normal.
13 Corps ordered 50 Infantry Division to provide the rearguard on the coast
while 7 Armoured Division carried out the same task inland.
tions were instructed to destroy such stores, etc., in defended "boxes" and
positions as could not be used or carried. 30 Corps H.Q.
Matruh on 21st June but as H.Q. 10 Corps arrived on 23rd June, 30 Corps
H.Q. moved further back to El Alamein on 24th June where it came under
command of H.Q. B.T.E.
Meanwhile the enemy had been reorganizing after his capture of Tobruk,
and resumed his advance on 24th June.
By the next evening his vanguards
were being engaged by our mobile columns within 20 miles of Matruh.
Eighth Army reserves held in Matruh, were now reduced to five days addi-
tional to the fortress reserve which was now established on a basis of ten
days for the garrison (estimated at 30,000 all ranks).
The garrison was,
however, inadequate to hold Matruh and this, combined with our weakness
in armour and field artillery, led to a decision to keep Eighth Army fully
mobile and to try and halt the enemy between Matruh and the Alamein
On the evening of 26th June the enemy armour began operations
again and soon 13 Corps was ordered to withdraw towards Fuka.
Corps was hampered in its withdrawal from Matruh by shortage of transport,
and as a result was forced to fight its way out and in doing so had to
abandon much ammunition and equipment.
WO27
The clearance of stores and materials from Matruh and from depots
otherwise reasonably successful, and demolitions were
effectively carried out, in spite of heavy rail congestion at Daba.
majority of rolling stock was successfully evacuated, although a certain
amount which it was impossible to remove had to be destroyed at Daba.
(One locomotive which could not be moved was so thoroughly rendered
immobile that the Germans subsequently built a loop-line round it as an
easier alternative to its removal.)
On arrival at the Alamein line, the majority of the defences of which had
been built the previous summer by 1 (S.A.) Division on arrival from East
Africa, H.Q. 30 Corps found a considerable degree of disorganization, and
the first task was to stock up with reserves.
The force under 30 Corps
consisted of 1 (S.A.) Division holding the fortifications around Alamein
railway station and astride the main road, while a Free French brigade group
lay further to the south.
In addition various infantry units,
by the formation of "battle groups" further forward, were sent back to assist.
H.Q. 30 Corps established rail-heads at Imayid and Hammam and set
about the administrative problem which was broadly speaking divided into
maintenance of the force
now preparing the defensive
positions which was increasing daily as more troops withdrew from the
front, and the stocking of reserves in the defended areas.
as a rail-head for P.O.L. and supplies, Hammam for ammunition and supplies,
and Alamein itself for R.E.
ammunition, and supplies for daily
A detail issue depot and petrol issue point were established
at the appropriate rail-heads and, pending the extension of the water pipe-
line to El Alamein, water was drawn from Hammam.
to building up reserves represented the balance available after maintenance
needs had been met.
The ultimate intention was to establish
reserves of supplies and petrol in defended positions together with approxi-
mately 30 days of ammunition at " Eighth Army rates".
transport, except the barest minimum for daily maintenance, operated under
corps control to place the reserves.
Stocking was arranged so as to provide
at all time balanced reserves.
There was an initial target of 7 days' balanced
stocks of all types of commodities, which was succeeded on completion by a
further 7 days and so on until the target of 30 days was complete.
A major handicap was, of course, the shortage of transport (one forma-
on arrival to man the defences, had only eight lorries) and when this
had by various
means been largely overcome, other complications cropped
These included shortage of labour (local labour was being used) and,
above all, shortage of water containers which were essential for the storage
of water in the defended positions.
One by one the difficulties were sorted
out, and, by 29th June, nearly half the target of reserves had been in salled.
Much of the ammunition used for the purpose had been backloaded from
On 30th June, Rear H.Q. Eighth Army moved back to Mena (near
Cairo) and the next day an administrative instruction
was issued in which
it was laid down that from Ist July, trains forward from the base depots
would cease, corps drawing direct.
route to Hammam in a pack train, would remain but would not be unloaded,
while the remainder of the train returned intact. A petrol train en route
229
