4. Policy and priority for army kinematography.
5. Co-ordination of policy relating to depot planning, office methods and
utilization of labour.
6. Co-ordination of R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E. field organization and war
establishments in consultation with V.Q.M.G.
7. War equipment scales.
8. Q.M.G's. representative on various committees dealing with army
equipment.
9. Civil establishment questions of D.W.S., D.C.S. and D.M.E.
Thus, at the conclusion of the war, the duties of the departments of the
War Office were for the first time clearly defined in regard to the various
aspects of army equipment.
experienced
the lack of foresight in planning during
cause was almost certainly the abandonment in 1936 of the M.G.O. Planning
in regard to provision should have been based on two cardinal principles,
firstly, that the peace-time organization should at any time be capable of
immediate adjustment to war conditions, and secondly,
responsibilities of the General Staff should be limited to saying what is
required, where it is required, and how much is required.
staff must do the rest.
can only lead to confusion within, and a feeling of frustration among those
subordinate formations who look to the War Office for a clear-cut definition
of policy.
The Directorate of Supplies and Transport
The remaining directorates of the Q.M.G's. department present a picture
of straightforward progress in which war-time branches evolved logically
from peace-time origins.
The expansion of the directorates of Supplies and
Transport, of Mechanical Engineering and of Fortifications and Works was
fairly closely confined to- service functions and was generally in line with
the organization of control as exercised in the field.
As will be seen from Diagram 1, the Directorate of Supplies and Trans-
port was, in 1939, organized under the D.S.T. in three branches.
dealt with supply matters while Q.M.G.3 dealt with transport.
Q.M.G.5,
which was later transferred to the Adjutant-General's department, dealt with
questions relating to personnel.
take is moresting to note that Field Service Regulations, Vol. 1, 1930.
"In the case of a war of the first magnitude the services of supply
and transport may be separated, each service being under its own head,
the Director of Supplies and the Director of Transport respectively."
16
WORT
N
in the organization of the first B.E.F.
The successful operation of supplies,
petrol and transport under one head both at the War Office and in every
other theatre of war may be considered sufficient proof of the satisfactory
nature of the system that existed at the outbreak of the war.
of the war, the two main divisions of supplies (Q.M.G.6) and transport
(Q.M.G.3) were re-named S.T.6 and S.T.3 respectively and threw off part
of their responsibilities to newly-formed sections of the directorate, and new
activities were added, but the basis of the organization remained unchanged.
During October, 1939, an independent branch under the D.S.T. was
formed to deal with catering and was known, first as Q.M.G.16, and later
as S.T.4.
This recognized the fact that catering in the Army, hitherto left
mainly to commanding officers, had emerged as a distinct and very important
aspect of the functions of the Quarter-Master-General's Department."
Shortly afterwards a further branch known as. Q.M.G.17 (later called
S.T.2) was formed to take over petroleum products as its full charge.
divorce of petrol from the supply organization is dealt with in Chapter II
where the innovation is discussed against the background of the B.E.F.
Q.M.G.3 was, before the outbreak of war, responsible for mobilization,
planning and peace organization of that portion of the road transport of
the Army which was manned by the R.A.S.C.; for hiring of civilian trans-
port to supplement W.D. transport; and for the administrative duties involved
in the employment of W.D. and hired transport.
It was also responsible
for the water transport services of the R.A.S.C. including the water trans-
port companies, the motor boat companies and the boat stores depot.
volume of work in connection with water transport steadily increased with
the handover of the growing War Department Fleet from the Transpora-
tion service, and the assumption of new commitments such as fire boat
In consequence, the control of the water transport services of the
Army was divorced from S.T.3 in August, 1940, and a new branch, S.T.1,
During 1942 it became increasingly clear that the arrangement whereby
a large part of the barrack service was the responsibility of the Director of
Quartering was unsatisfactory.
The trouble was fundamental in that it
was a case of a service being controlled by a staff branch which was neither
adapted nor suitable for exercising such control.
Although, as we have
seen, this dual function can be accepted in exceptional circumstances, there
is little doubt that it did not lend itself to the control of barrack services.
A new branch, S.T.7, was accordingly added to the Directorate of Supplies
and Transport.
By the end of the war the Directorate of Supplies and Transport was
organized as in the following diagram, from which, incidentally, it will be
seen that the Inspector of the Royal Army Service Corps was now respon-
sible to the D.S.T. instead of, as formerly, to the Quarter-Master-General.
17
