Later, in order to allow for the opening of the rail-head at Bel Hamed,
the date for the proposed operation was switched to lst June.
The stocking of these bases proceeded fairly well, Bel Hamed was of
course the main centre of effort, for the target of No. 3 was so small as
to be soon achieved and Tobruk was rapidly stocked by sea.
Delays were,
however, caused by enemy fighter interference with the railway
west
of
Mischeifa and eventually, after several trains had been damaged, it became
necessary to restrict rail movement west of Mischeifa to nights when there
was no moon.
The work on Halfaya Pass and on the road up the escarpment at Sollum
meant heavy demands for bitumen and it was eventually arranged that the
port of Sollum, such as it was, should be opened for special shipments of
bitumen only, despatched by G.H.Q.
Water was as usual a major question.
The relatively small output from
wells and the distillation plant in Tobruk were insufficient against consumption
to fill up the water storage capacity, which was now 9,000 tons.
was therefore asked to despatch water in bulk by sea, and the same principle
was followed with bulk water shipments as with bulk P.O.L.—i.e. G.H.Q.
arranged shipments automatically against capacity available.
By the first week of May daily tonnage requirements of Eighth Army
from G.H.Q. were as follows: —
By rail to Matruh
By rail to Mischeifa
By rail to Capuzzo
By sea to Tobruk
...
Tons
130
160
1,840
1,000
Total
This programme allowed for Eighth Army ferrying, in road transport,
some 935 tons a day between Capuzzo and Tobruk.
H.Q. 91 Sub-Area was now moved from Matruh (which was handed over
to H.Q. B.T.E.) and was duly installed in charge of No. 4 Forward Base.
responsible for the rear areas.
H.Q. 88 Area remained in control of Tobruk and H.Q. 86 Sub-Area remained
By mid-May, at a time when administrative preparations should have
been complete had the original date of 15th May for the start of operations
been adhered to, the position in respect of the build-up of stocks was far
Sixty-four per cent. or 17,232 tons only had been dumped and the chief
deficiency was in petrol. Some 860 tons of petrol was the daily requirement
figure was hardly ever achieved.
It must be admitted that a
entailed a reduction to adjust the stock figures of 2,800 tons.
stocks, in view of leakage, carried out on 8th May had
being a vivid illustration of the uselessness of the " flimsy" four-gallon petrol
tin it was a serious handicap to preparations.
On 18th May it was decided
to backload some 200,000 gallons of petrol from Tobruk, where there was
now a tinning plant, to No. 4 Forward Base; this materially helped, but
1 P
even so the petrol tonnage lagged behind and on 26th May when the enemy
took the offensive No. 4 Forward Base was only 82 per cent. completed-
largely because the target figure for petrol (11,900 tons out of a total of
nearly 27,000) was only 71 per cent. completed.
Air evacuation of casualties was again available and though generally
similar to the arrangements made for the November operations, valuable
experience had been gained and the system was more efficient.
air supply in emergency was also ready on similar lines to that arranged
for the earlier operations. Again ice was to be utilized as the best means
The arrangements for the recovery, repair and delivery of tanks and
armoured cars had been completely re-organized and as has been mentioned
earlier suitable organizations were devised.
A tank delivery regiment was
organized at army level, working to corps delivery squadrons and thence
down to brigade tank delivery troops.
It was in fact virtually the system
in use in the later stages of the war with a slightly altered nomenclature.
Its value is amply demonstrated below.
The provision of a good many trans-
porters, even though many were of the light variety, considerably facilitated
The replacement of tanks, which is one of the most important adminis-
trative aspects of armoured warfare, was eased by the fact that Bel Hamed
opened as a rail-head on the day the enemy began his attack, but was limited
to being used as a rail-head for replacement A.F.Vs.
The tactical plan demanded the construction of a number of defended
positions and strong points in which reserves of petrol, ammunition, water
and supplies were established.
The number of days' reserves varied with the
Both 13 and 30 Corps had established F.M.Cs. and by the time
the enemy made his attack 13 Corps were based on F.M.C. No. 70 some
ten miles south-west of Bel Hamed, while 30 Corps were based on F.M.C.
No. 83 some 30 miles south of Bel Hamed.
Transport had been allotted by Eighth Army to the two corps on the
basis of five general transport companies and two water cistern companies
to 13 Corps and 101 general transport companies and five water cistern
companies to 30 Corps which had the more mobile rôle, situated as it was
on the open flank.
As it was, however, both corps were initially within very
easy reach of No. 4 Forward Base.
The Second Enemy Offensive
The enemy began an advance in the afternoon on 26th May, and although
it had been anticipated that he might well attack before the British attack
materialized, his initial moves caused some disorganization and loss.
usual in desert fighting a period of some confusion ensued during which
one of the main administrative
was the heavy expenditure
of ammunition.
Since 30 Corps F.M.C. No. 83 was now to a flank owing
to the direction of the enemy's advance, formations under 30 Corps began
to draw direct from No. 4 Forward Base, where there were, of course, ample
13 Corps was drawing both from
and from No. 4 Forward Base, but maintenance of formations was continuing
