(b) The function of the general division in dealing with the co-ordination
of American aid and the development of Eritrea should devolve on
the Minister of State's existing service and civilian staff.
Conclusions
So ended an experiment which, apart from the undoubted good it did,
serves to confirm basic principles.
commander-in-chief of an overseas theatre derives
his authority
directly from H.M. Government and it has always been found impracticable
to relieve him
of his administrative responsibilities,
however heavy, while
leaving him in full command.
Once this precept is admitted it becomes
clear that, however well meant the original intentions, the whole conception
of the project was fundamentally unsound.
If the authorities at home,
after appointing a commander-in-chief, do
not feel that he
is using the administrative resources of his command to
the best advantage, they have two courses open to them.
They can acquaint
the commander-in-chief of their concern and require him to take such steps
as are necessary to remedy the situation.
To assist him it might be per-
missible to appoint a senior officer to his staff for inspecting duties, report-
ing to him but in no circumstances acting independently as a superintendent.
Alternatively, they can replace the commander-in-chief.
On the other hand, the appointment of a resident Minister in the Middle
East, although appearing to complicate an already confused situation, might
well have been put to good advantage after it had been realized that the
original arrangement had failed in its object. It would of course have been
organizationally correct for the I.G., and his staff, to have been absorbed
into the Minister of State's department, retaining most of the powers originally
granted to him.
Instead, a half-hearted compromise was resorted to under
which the I.G. derived his authority from the Minister yet was shorn of
much of his responsibility.
Add to this the fact that certain quarters in Cairo
not unnaturally resented the suggestion of their inability to carry
own duties implied by the presence there of the Intendant-General, and the
ever-present danger of a clash of conflicting personalities, and it is not hard
to realize that the venture was doomed to failure from the outset.
The whole venture was a sorry story of misdirection of effort which might
have been avoided by the earlier appointment of a P.A.O. to the Middle
East.
Nevertheless, in matters of co-ordination between the three Services,
the civil authorities and the Egyptian Government,
the Intendant-General
did much and showed the way to do more.
He put in hand much which
was of permanent value and destined materially to help the Middle East's war
effort.
The results of his labours are apparent in much of the subsequent
development of the base.
192
THE MIDDLE EAST 1939-1942
SECTION 8-GERMAN INTERVENTION IN THE
MIDDLE EAST
It will be remembered, that at the conclusion of Section 2 of this Chapter
the defence of our newly conquered territory of Cyrenaica was shared by
2 Armoured Division (less one Brigade Group) and 9 Australian Division
(which was only partially trained and equipped).
The meagre resources of
armour of the armoured division had been supplemented to some extent by
the formation of an armoured unit equipped with captured Italian tanks,
chiefly the M.11, but steadily accumulating evidence of the presence of
German armoured troops in Libya during March was most alarming, for
the British force urgently required strengthening.
Unfortunately, shortage
of aircraft precluded much long range reconnaissance to confirm the enemy's
strength or intentions and so, during the early months of 1941, it could
only be hoped that the situation could be maintained until May when re-
inforcement would be possible.
Withdrawal from Benghazi
Shortly after we had entered Benghazi the Germans had begun a series
of air attacks against which our defences were largely non-existent, nearly
all available fighter aircraft and A.A. guns being required for Greece, and
it soon became extremely hazardous for ships to enter the harbour. Indeed,
by the third week in February the air attacks had become so heavy that
it was agreed that the Navy should not risk any more shipping in Benghazi
until an effective air defence could be established.
The effect of this decision
upon maintenance was considerable, for all troops in the forward areas
had been maintained from Benghazi.
Now, all supplies had to be brought
from Tobruk, a measure which
involved lengthening the land L. of C.
to the forward troops by more than 200 miles.
Transport resources were
niggardly enough when
Benghazi was in use, but now, nearly
all the
transport available had to be put to the task of transporting supplies with
the most serious result that the mobility of the forward troops was greatly
affected.
Two new F.S.Ds. were established close to the areas where troops
were operating containing small quantities of supplies, petrol, ammunition and
water for the various formations, 2 Armoured Division being based on
18 F.S.D. at Magrun and also on 19 F.S.D. at Msus (see Map 18).
This shortage of transport, which, as will be seen, caused grave results
later, was probably the greatest single obstacle hampering operations in the
Middle East during the first six months of 1941.
From January onwards
3,000 vehicles a month had been notified by the War Office as due to
arrive from U.S.A. and plans for operations were therefore based on this
information.
In fact, during the first four months deliveries were January,
2,341, February, 2,094, March, 725, and April, 705, or less than half the
quantity expected.
The resultant shortage of vehicles affected operations
throughout the Middle East and though the force sent to Greece was
equipped, with difficulty, and at the expense of other theatres, all its trans-
port amounting to some 8,000 vehicles, was later lost in the evacuation.
One most serious result of the shortage of transport was the fact that
2 Armoured Division found it impossible to maintain troops in the best
positions for the defence of the Cyrenaican frontier, i.e. west of Agheila,
193
12090
