The Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
In general terms it may be said that before the outbreak of war,
R.E., the R.A.S.C. and the R.A.O.C. were responsible for the whole of the
maintenance of their own equipment, while the equipment of all other arms
and corps in the Army was looked after by their own personnel from the
point of view of first line maintenance, and for all the more complicated
engineering processes by the R.A.O.C. engineering branch (R.A.O.C. (E)).
There was a considerable overlap and no very clear dividing line between
the work of the more highly skilled Artillery and Royal Tank Corps technical
personnel and those of the R.A.O.C. connected with the same equipment.
With regard to engineer, and mechanical transport stores, the R.E. and the
were responsible for the provision,
and issue of those
appertaining to their own equipment, while all the remainder, plus common
user items, were the responsibility of the R.A.O.C.
(In 1926 the responsi-
bility for the upkeep of the Army's vehicles had been divided between the
R.A.S.C. and the R.A.O.C.; the former, in war, would operate about 40 per
cent. of the entire mechanical transport of the Army so that this divided
responsibility for maintenance was a very big issue.)
The working of these several maintenance organizations was controlled
at the War Office by the D.F.W. in respect of the electrical and mechanical
services of the R.E. and by D.S.T. in respect of the M.T. services of the
R.A.S.C. For the R.A.O.C., control was exercised by the D.O.S. through the
Principal Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (P.O.M.E.) who, shortly after the
outbreak of war, became the D.O.S. (E) and later the Director of Mechanical
It will be noted from the paragraphs dealing with
army equipment that the D.M.M. was a director in his own right coming
under the Director General of Army Equipment.
The engineers of the
R.A.O.C., however, had no responsibility for training (other than technical
training), planning (in the administrative and operational sense) or adminis-
tration (in the military sense), these functions being looked after by officers
of the directing staff of the R.A.O.C. Indeed, all matters concerning policy,
including those relating to engineering, were largely in the hands of the
directing staff of the R.A.O.C. ; the engineering side of the corps gave only
technical advice on request.
Considerable concern had been felt for some time, both inside and outside
the Army, over the haphazard way in which the electrical and mechanical
engineering services of the Army had grown up and over the overlapping
of technical functions between the various corps.
There were many com-
mittees set up by the Army Council to investigate the possibility of unifying
provision, storekeeping and repair sides of the R.A.S.C. and
R.A.O.C., but any suggestion that a new corps be formed was so patently
doomed from the outset by financial considerations that the problem was
usually considered from the angle of the handing over of all or some by
one corps partly or completely to the other. It is not surprising that all of these
committees, up to 1939, had recommended that no change be made to the
the limelight again.
After the outbreak of war two factors combined to bring this question into
The very severe winter of 1939-40 and the issue to units
of quantities of technical equipment, in the manipulation and maintenance
WO 217
1
of which they had neither the time nor opportunity to become proficient
together produced by March, 1940, an alarming state of unreadiness for
active atrati led to a early stil units holding such equipment on charge.
This situation led to a suggestion that, at least, the larger fourth line work-
shops of the R.E., R.A.S.C., and R.A.O.C. should be more closely integrated,
but the operations in France and Belgium in the Spring of 1940, when
practically the whole of the Army's equipment was lost, had the effect of
all attention to the more pressing problem of re-equipment.
Nevertheless, the seeds for the reorientation of the policy for workshop, repair
and recovery services in the Army had definitely been sown, and during 1941
and during the darkest days of 1942, a new corps with the descriptive title
of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers was brought forth out of
the labour of a number of committees and conferences.
Briefly, the new organization involved the transfer from the R.A.S.C. to
the R.A.O.C. of the whole of the responsibility for provision, storage and
issue of M.T. vehicles and spares, and the transfer to the new corps from
the R.E., R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C., of all responsibility for the electrical and
mechanical services covering the whole of the Army's equipment together
with the personnel employed at this task, with the important proviso that the
R.A.S.C. was to retain the workshop platoons of R.A.S.C. transport and
motor boat companies.
Signals were to remain with their regiments and corps, retaining the task of
owner driver maintenance and assisting the first line artificers of the new corps
as, in effect, they were already doing vis-à-vis the light aid detachment of the
R.A.O.C. (E). This was styled Phase I of the organization of the new corps.
(Under Phase Il all technical personnel would pass from their own corps
and regiments to the new corps bringing every artificer in the Army-apart
from certain sivil ensineering personnel of the R.E.- into the R.E.M..
implementation of Phase II was not considered practicable at the time of the
formation of R.E.M.E. and has only recently been introduced.)
After the first decisions had been taken the birth of the new corps pro-
ceeded with surprising ease.
A Directorate of Mechanical Engineering was
formed on the foundations of the old Directorate of Mechanical Maintenance
at the War Office and the former M.M. branches were re-styled M.E. branches.
The new directorate came firstly under the control of the D.G.A.E. and
subsequently under the D.Q.M.G. (A.E.). It underwent the inevitable expan-
sion which was inseparable from War Office directorates during the war years
and by the end of the war was organized as follows:
D.D.M.E.
Organization
D.D. M.E.
Technical
D.D.M.E.
Waterprooing
M.E.14
Planning
M.E.4 M.E.S
M.E. 1
M.E.2
M.E.3
M.E.6
M.E.7
M.E.8
21
M.E.9
M.É.10 MÉI M.E.12
