hourly sought of Q(Ops.) on all subjects, including many that might reason-
ably have been expected to be dealt with by other departments, because it
was a branch in which detailed operational knowledge was focused.
As a postscript to this short record of the development of Q(Ops.) it
mentioned that the Army Fire Service, which later became a
directorate in its own right, originally started life under the direct control
Movements and Transportation
After the close of the First World War of 1914-18 the appointment of
Director-General of Movements and Railways lapsed and his duties were
transferred first to the Director of Movements and,
subsequently,
to the
Director of Movements and Quartering, both being
directly responsible to
The two branches concerned in the functions of the former D.G.M.R. were
Q.M.G.2, which dealt with matters regarding the movement of troops, unit
vehicles and animals, and Q.M.G. 13 which dealt with the movement of stores,
and technical matters concerning the transportation services (railways, inland
water transport and docks).
At this time Q.M.G. 13 was also responsible for
the control of the small War Department Fleet.
This organization was suffi-
cient to carry out the routine demands of peacetime in which direct contact
was not usually effected between the War Office and the maritime, etc., authori-
all business being transacted through agents, making use of normal
commercial services.
Exceptions to this procedure, however, became necessary between the
years 1935-39 when the international tension in Europe-notably in 1935
when economic sanctions were imposed on Italy, and in 1938 during the
Munich crisis-necessitated increased shipments to the Middle East.
this period a total of 36 vessels were chartered direct by the War Department
for the shipment of stores and vehicles.
This expansion in the functions of
Q.M.G. 13 was the forerunner of the immense war-time effort of an organiza-
tion which was responsible for planning the priority or controlling the move-
ment, on British account alone, of 40,000,000 tons of stores of all natures,
and despatching from the United Kingdom a total of over 13,000,000 personnel
The last days of peace saw the introduction of the Directorate of Move-
ments which was formed from Q.M.G. 2 together with certain elements of
In September, 1939, the remainder of O.M.G. 13 (enlarged to
cover railway operating, inland water transport and docks) was likewise
formed into the Directorate of Transportation
The experience of 1916, when a crisis caused by lack of co-ordination
and direction in transportation matters was only averted by the intervention
of Sir Eric Geddes as a co-ordinator, gave rise to the immediate creation
of the Director-General of Transportation and Movements (D.G.T.M.) to
co-ordinate the two directorates and liaise with the railway companies.
latter function dictated that the individual nominated for the post should be
a man known to, and possessing a comprehensive knowledge of, the major
transport undertakings of the country ; for this reason an arrangement was
concluded with the Ministry of War Transport for the an arra Manager of
the Southern Railway to assume the appointment.
1
As the duties of the Q.M.G. regarding provision and supply are so closely
linked with movement, it was decided that the control of movements should
be exercised by the Q.M.G., as shown below; (unlike the organization in
the war of 1914-18 when the Director-General of Movements and Railways
was a member of the Army Council in his own right): —
Q.M.G.
D.G.T.M.
D. Movements
Movement of
personnel and
stores by land, sea and air.
D. Transportation
Transportation questions at home
and overseas.
This organization, which remained intact throughout the winter of 1939-40.
was, after the German successes in Europe, responsible for the immense task
of arranging the movement of the returning
Continent.
soldiers evacuated from the
During the period between 19th May and 4th June alone, the
numbers handled amounted to approximately 250,000 British troops and
110,000 Allied personnel.
In addition a further 200,000 troops were evacuated
from such ports at Le Havre and St. Valery during the next two months
(see also Chapter II, Section 4).
The entire operation was a masterpiece of
organization involving the joint efforts of the directorates of Quartering,
Movements, Transportation, and Supplies and Transport, and it is doubtful
whether the easy and rapid execution of the hastily improvised plans could
have been effected had not D.G.T.M. been within the sphere of the Q.M.G's.
responsibilities.
The return of the B.E.F. to England and preparations for home defence
gave rise to new problems and a re-arrangement of the Q.M.G's. Department
so that it could best be fitted for its new function as the administrative agency
of G.H.Q. Home Forces, giving effect to the creation and working of any
administrative facilities the Commander-in-Chief considered necessary for the
The appointment of D.G.T.M. was abolished in the
summer of 1940 and the Directors of Movements and Transportation each
became directly responsible to the Q.M.G.
All parts of the United Kingdom
were covered by the movements organization through District Movement Con-
trol which was represented in the major centres of communications.
closest liaison was at all times maintained with the Railway Companies and,
in case of emergency, effective control could have been continued on a regional
basis if communication with the War Office had been interrupted.
of fact, as will be seen from Chapter V, at no time did District Movement
Control operate other than directly under the War Office.) After the danger
of invasion receded, District Movement Control was retained for the remain-
der of the war to perform an essential function in connection with the import,
distribution and export, of all military stores and vehicles and the despatch
and receipt of personnel to and from the overseas theatres of war.
The work of Movements during the planning stages of " Overlord" together
with increasing commitments in the other theatres of war necessitated a
division of duties during the summer of 1943, when the staff directorates of
Personnel Movements (D.P.Mov.) and Freight Movements (D.F.Mov.) were
