396
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
and began to fire at the infantry positions; a Sherman tried to engage it but was
knocked out?' A second Sherman was also lost to the Tiger tank, which continued
on its way northwards. Sherman tank machine guns fired until the barrels grew red
hot and had to be changed. A Squadron was ordered to move back and support the
RHQ tanks that were being attacked by waves of infantry and as the Germans had
no anti-tank weapons with them, a slaughter ensued.
Eventually the Canadians in St Lambert were pushed back from the bridge at the
southern end of the village and the Germans madly rushed forward to use it. The
ford at Moissy was also captured by the Germans, who now had two clear escape
routes at St Lambert and Moissy towards the waiting lines being held by the znd SS
Panzer Korps north of Coudehard that meant safety.
At 11oo hours, the Polish forces reported that the Germans had broken through
at St Lambert and were heading towards Ecorches and Hill 240; the Foot Guards
were asked to take action along with the Grenadier Guards. As they were still
returning from the aborted mission to Vimoutiers, the Foot Guards were unable
to immediately comply with this instruction. The Grenadier Guards' early morn-
ing advance to Vimoutiers had been cancelled in view of the impending German
breakout and the regiment had been stood down for the day until orders were
suddenly received at 1115 hours to go to Point 240 and reopen the Polish lines of
communication. No. 3 Squadron moved immediately and was followed later by
the other tanks. The Shermans destroyed many soft vehicles as they advanced and
thousands of rounds of machine-gun fire were sprayed into every hedgerow, which
more often than not contained hiding German soldiers. No. 2 Squadron moved to
Point 147, closer to Coudehard and ended up spending an anxious night with eight
tanks and seventy prisoners and subfounded by fleeing Germans. Heavy rain then
began to fall, reducing visibility and providing a welcoming cloak for the German
soldiers on their eastward migration.
That evening, Maczek met with Simonds to explain the plight of his forces.
Simonds contacted Kitching and requested that the 4th Canadian Armoured
Division mount a relief mission. Kitching's response was completely inexcusable:
To hell with them. They have run out of food and ammunition because of the inef-
ficiency of their organisation; our people have been fighting just as hard but we have
managed to keep up our supply system.'3
Simonds refused to listen and ordered Kitching to act at once. .
At 1931 hours,
the Grenadier Guards were ordered to set out immediately for Point 262 and
Coudehard to render all assistance to the cut-off Polish force. The intention was to
advance via Point 239 and meet the Poles in the vicinity of Point 147 north-west of
Coudehard. Encountering Germans hiding behind nearly every bush and hedge,
which they duly shot up with machine guns as they advanced, No. 2 Squadron
moved to Point 147.
Falaise Gap
397
By this time, it was getting dark early because of the heavy rain and low clouds,
and it was hard to identify friend or foe in the conditions. At 2154 hours, after
numerous misidentifications, claims of being fired on by friendly troops, mes-
ege asking to confirm positions and the sending up of green flares, the Grenadier
Guards reported that it was unwise to proceed as it was getting too dark.'*
Altera quiet morning, the British Columbia Regiment moved to Les Champeaux
manicipation of a rumoured German attack, which did not eventuate. The regi-
ment was directly in the path of the attack by the battle group of the 9th SS Panzer
Dvision, which only got as far as Les Cosniers, a mile from Les Champeaux.
One troop of C Squadron cleared a 'pocket of Germans just to the east of Les
Champeaux, which may have been enough to halt the German advance. Inat
night, at 2200 hours, the regiment moved back to Hill 240, east of Ecorches.
Despite occupying positions directly in the path of the German counterattack
by the and and oth SS Panzer divisions, the Canadian regiment were remarkably
native. The British Columbia Regiment was directly in the path of the oth SS
at Les Champeaux but saw no major action. The Grenadier Guards were accually
stood down for the day whilst the Foot Guards had been sent off to Vimoutiers.
Either the German attack did not advance as far as the Canadians positions or
the Germans were able to easily infiltrate past them by making skiiful use of the
terrain to avoid contact With the Canadians. The brunt of the enort of keeping
the cork in the bottle fell on the South Alberta Regiment and the besieged rollsh
units at Coudehard, which were more preoccupied with then own survival than
attacking to prevel any breakout. Chambois remained a locus or store nights
what day that involved the roth Dragoons, the 24th Uhians and Americans hom the
90th Division trying to halt the thousands of Germans flowing past.
21/22 August
Early on 21 August, A Squadron eu Sep emith Mounted Rites attempted without
success to link up with the forces on Mont Ormel, losing two tanks in the process.
the close terrain and fog meant that the German units were difficult to intercept
and many continued to slip through the loose cordon. The hillside harbour of the
Foot Guards at Point 258 was disturbed by a German mobile column proceeding
east wards:
At 081s hours, just as the first crews were dismounting to cook breakfast under their
tanks, the hill suddenly became alive with machine gun and anti-tank fire. An escap-
ing German column of tanks was attempting to pass the regiment's position. The only
route open to the enemy was the narrow road at the bottom of the hill held by the
regiment, and for once the crews and their friends the Lake Superior regiment and
the anti-tank gunners were able to enjoy the most frequently encountered German
