180
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
supported by a platoon of tank destroyers with two or three bulldozers to break
through the hedges.
CCA's objective was the high ground south and south-east of Villiers Fossard,
and it was expected to achieve this in one day before being relieved by infantry
from the 29th Division.' Villiers Fossard itself is only s miles from the regional
centre and road hub of St Lô. The weather on the morning of the attack was
bad and low cloud and a fine rain caused the planned air support to be cancelled.
The artillery bombardment began as planned 20 minutes beforehand and at 0900
hours the advance began, only for Task Force Y to immediately run into a storm
of small-arms fire and mortar fire as the German troops had apparently moved
forward of their own lines to escape the artillery bombardment.
Task Force X advanced with little resistance until it reached the high ground
near La Forge, where it was ordered to stop as Task Force Y had not been able to
advance at the same rate. Despite using a procedure developed in training a few days
previously, Task Force Y was only able to make small advances. Heavy and accurate
German machine-gun and mortar fire forced the infantry to go to ground, which
isolated the tanks from the accompanying infantry. This enabled German soldiers
to engage the tanks at close range with Panzerfäuste, resulting in nine tanks being
knocked out. German anti-tank guns also knocked out tanks as they drove into the
fields using existing gaps before the tank commanders learnt to use the bulldozers
to create new gaps. Several bulldozers broke down and engineers had to place
explosives manually to blow gaps in the hedges. The armoured infantry tended to
take cover at every opportunity and officers struggled to ensure that the infantry
even fired their weapons to provide covering fire, which then resulted in a lot of
unaimed fire and ammunition being wasted. There was a lack of aggression from
the infantry in advancing, particularly when attacking immediately after an artil-
lery barrage on the objective. This created a delay that allowed the Germans time
to recover and reoccupy their positions, inflicting more casualties on the attacking
infantry? The tanks themselves did not aggressively push forward, although this
was difficult in the hedgerows without close infantry support and seven tanks were
abandoned in the field by their crews.
The first day of fighting for the 3rd Armored Division achieved an advance of
just over I mile for the reported loss of thirty-one tanks, 400 men injured and
twenty-five men killed. The 32nd Armored Regiment had tank losses as follows:
• Mines - one light tank Ms
• Panzerfäuste - nine medium tanks M4
• Mortar fire - one medium tank M4
• Anti-tank gunfire - two medium tanks M4
• Abandoned on battlefield - seven medium tanks M4
Another four medium tanks and one light tank broke down, and of the above
casualties one light tank Ms and eight medium tanks M4 were unrepairable. 1º
181
Battle of the Hedgerows
The attack was an improper use of a tank regiment to straighten out the front-
line, the division was given a limited objective only 1 mile away and was expected
to achieve this by making a frontal attack in difficult terrain. The XIX Corps
commander, General Corlett, tried to use the armoured division in a role normally
performed by the independent tank battalions that usually supported the infantry
divisions as per the then current US doctrine. The 3rd Armoured Division had
trained for exploitation roles in the attack and not to support infantry. Villiers
roard was not an attack of exploitation but was simply an attack to hammer the
frontine into shape. However, the fighting did serve to give CCA its first combat
expenence and allowed General Corlett to tidy up the battlefield, albeit with forces
not normally part of his corps.
After its somewhat inauspicious combat debut at Villiers Fossard, CCA had time
to review its performance whilst the rest of the division assembled. The destroyed
tanks were replaced and some M4 Shermans were fitted with two large steel forks
to help batter a path through the hedgerows. The division remained attached to
XIX Corps for the next offensive, which was not long in coming.
St Lô
The principal objective of the First US Army in June was the capture of Cherbourg
by VIl Corps. While this battle was in progress, V and XIX Corps held the line
to the south with only limited operations and advances southwards to keep pace
with the operations of the British Second Army to the east and to try and prevent
verman units from being transterred from the east to aid the defence of Cherbourg.
Strong German counterattacks were anticipated to try and eliminate the American
beachheads but none eventuated, which was fortunate for the first Us Army."
The German Seventh Army, for its part, was reeves ud the americans did not
attack southwards in any force as this freed up its forces to fight the British around
Caen and detend Cherbourg until the Americans madly sealed of the coents
peninsula on 19 June.
With the capture of Cherbourg and its demolished harbour on the 26 June,
and the continued build-up of men and supplies in the beachhead, FUSA planned
a major offensive to begin on 3 July across its entire front when sufficient forces
had arrived in France. This was to be a breakout operation,
designed to achieve
one of the strategic objectives of the Operation Overlord plan, which was to seize
the ports in Brittany or, if this was not possible, construce a new furt at Quiberon
Bay. A deep-water port was regarded as essential for the bulld-up of supplies and
reinforcements for the Allied armies. Therefore the
breakout had to be made
by FUSA westwards while the British Second Army
continued to hold as many
German forces at Caen as possible. At least, this was Montgomery's stated strategy
after the failure of the British to capture Caen in Operation Epsom. Caen had still
not been taken and with the failure of the two planned armoured thrusts inland
on D-Day and Operation Epsom, the British lodgement area
was smaller than
