374
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
in, and the Canadian advance faltered and became confused in the smoke and
fading light. Infantry lost touch with tanks and both found their visibility severely
reduced by smoke shells fired by the Germans. The infantry were finally ordered
to consolidate on the start line whilst the brigade's tanks withdrew for the night,
losing other tanks in the process.4s
Counterattacking from Soulangy, three Tigers of the 2nd Company claimed to
have destroyed ten Shermans of the Fort Garry Horse at Point 184.46 The Tigers,
three Panthers and Jagdpanzers fought a successful delaying action all day, breaking
back past the Canadian tanks to new positions when surrounded.
Furious at the false report of the capture of Point 159 and the failure of repeated
attacks, Kitching ordered the British Columbia Regiment to attack that evening.
The new plan was for the regiment to advance at 2100 hours to take Point 1s9 via
Point 168 in the south-west but when the remaining tanks of the regiment (by then
nearly all replacement tanks and crews) got to Point 168, the attack was cancelled.
Here A and B squadrons were fired on by the same Tigers and anti-tank guns that
had previously destroyed the Fort Garry Horse tanks. The recce troop used the
superior speed of their Stuart tanks and advanced almost to the objective before
they were forced to withdraw.47
Aftermath
For the 4th Canadian Armoured Division, Is August was a day marked by confu-
sion and lack of coordination, as reflected in the records. Nightfall on is August
saw the division planning to resume operations next day to take the high ground
above Falaise while its infantry attacked the town. However, at 1000 hours on
I6 August, Simonds issued orders that the 2nd Division would instead clear Falaise
and the two armoured divisions would be directed eastward on Trun. The ar-
moured division now began to plan for the capture of a bridge over the River Ante
at Damblainville and this marked the end of Operation Tractable, no doubt to the
relief of the exhausted tank crews of the two brigades. The 4th Division war diary
for Is August observed:
..it appeared that the enemy had once again established an anti-tank screen on
the southern slopes of the high ground which the Armoured Brigade was unable to
penetrate.48
During Operation Tractable, the division had advanced about 6 miles but Falaise
had not been captured. Simonds later claimed that the failure to take Falaise earlier
was due to the Germans finding the Canadian plans before the operation and this
was an example of the carelessness of individuals. * Simonds could not accept that
the operation had failed because of his planning and therefore it had to be the
fault of the units involved. What looked good to Guy's precise engineering mind
Operation Tractable
375
loked good on paper but seldom worked out in practice once the human element
A and Canadian Corps report on Operation Tractable did not even mention the
ficuties crossing the river and expressed disappointment in the progress of the
in Canadian Armoured Division The division was still under interim command
and had suffered heavy tank losses!?
The Foot Guards were reduced to twenty-three Shermans and three Stuarts.
the Grenadier Guards were down to only twenty-three tanks operational. The
brigade had made little progress again on is August and was beset by poor co-
ordination and communication problems. Many of the prodiems were a resuit or
the death of Brigadier Booth the previous day, the destruction of radio command
vehicles and the temporary appointment of Scott before he had to relinquish com-
mand to Halpenny. Nevertheless, basic routine functions such as the resupply of
we doured regiments also did not work well. One least do tas do ta date see.
of Operation Tractable designated by Simonds, which dia not give the armoured
regiments the maximum number of daylight hours for operations.
The reduced
wours combined with the blunder concerning the passage of the kiver Laison
cost the advance precious hours and this meant that the armoured regiments were
tighting until darkness fell on 14 August; the supply echelons were then unable to
get forward and find their regiments. Once again, the rear areas of the Canadians
had been disrupted by the friendly fire of the air forces. I his time the second wave
of bombers had not been directed at targets along the axis of advance so the attack
would not need to be temporarily halted as during Operation totanze. I he bomb-
and did not contribute positively to the operation in any way later hindered
it with the bombing of the rear echelon areas and the disorganisation of the supply
echelons of the armoured regiments.
The bombing was primarily to eliminate
pposition in Quesnay Wood and as such was more designed to tinany achieve the
objectives of Operation Totalize. Unfortunately, the Germans had already largery
withdrawn from Quesnay Wood, so the effort was largely wasted. A report on
Operation Tractable by the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade was critical ot the
re. the 4th Armoured Brigade, and the shot space of the to plan operations,"
I he advance of the three regiments of the 4th brigade was poony co-braidied
vith the regiments trying to advance along the same route as two regiments.
To some extent, this was caused by
of the znd Canadian Armoured Brigade.
the dominating forested hills of Monts a raines to the south that allowed the
Germans to easily defend the line of advance with the tew tanks they had avalable.
Yet despite being funnelled into an attack in one direction, the Canadian tanks
could not exploit their concertain and vas corouge the verma positems.
Canadian artillery had also not come forward in any strength to support the ar-
mour and the infantry battalions were preoccupied all day with clearing Epancy.
This left the Shermans and Stuarts very much on their own and vulnerable to the
