196
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
pivoting to face east to provide a protective line behind which the Third Army was
to move south and west into Brittany. Whilst Bradley's army was doing this, the
Second British Army would continue to try and hold as many German forces as
possible on the left flank around Caen:
After a period of time for replenishment and replacements to arrive, FUSA had
resumed major offensive action on 3 July. However, in the bocage countryside
and the many low-lying flooded areas, FUSA made very slow progress, the daily
advances often being measured in hundreds of yards or the number of fields or
hedgerows gained in the face of tenacious German resistance. With the British left
flank not making progress either, Churchill, Eisenhower and General Marshall, the
US Army Chief of Staff in the United States, were concerned that a stalemate was
developing in Normandy. In response to the growing criticism, particularly from
the American quarter, Montgomery met with Dempsey and Bradley on 1o July
and asked them both to come up with plans for major operations. Montgomery's
instruction to Dempsey on 1o July was as follows:
Second Army will retain the ability to operate with a strong Armoured force east of
the River Orne in the general area between Caen and Falaise,
For this purpose, a corps of three Armoured Divisions will be held in reserve, ready
to be employed when ordered by me.
The opportunity for the employment of this corps may be sudden and fleeting.
Therefore the study of the problems arising will begin at once.'
At the same time, Bradley was ordered to maintain the FUSA offensive southwards.
On II July, Bradley began to conceive of a breakthrough operation from the high
ground of St Lô at the southern edge of the bocage into the open countryside in
what would ultimately be named Operation Cobra.
Dempsey, in particular, was mindful of recent discussions with General Adam,
the Adjutant General from the War Office, who had recently visited Normandy.
Adam had reported that, given the high casualties so far in the campaign, if casualties
continued at the same rate then there were only enough British infantry replace-
ments until the end of July. It had also come to Dempsey's attention that there was
a build-up of tanks in the beachhead. By mid-July, the British had approximately
2,250 medium tanks and 400 light tanks in three armoured divisions and five in-
dependent armoured or tank brigades within the bridgehead? Dempsey's solution
was to utilise these tanks in a major operation, thereby reducing the possibility of
further casualties and having to cannibalise one or more infantry divisions to form
replacements for other divisions. In arriving at this solution, Dempsey was clearly
not aware of the emerging replacement crisis in trained personnel for the armoured
units."
Both Dempsey and Bradley were impressed by the power and success of strategic
bombing during operations to capture northern Caen (Operation Charnwood)
so they included it in their plans. Bradley would later claim he had already been
197
Operation Goodwood
moking on the idea of using strategic air power following its limited use in cap-
turing Cherbourg? Dempsey enthusiastically laid out a plan for a concentrated
amoured attack that would break through the German lines and then use the good
tan country south of Caen to thrust deep into the German rear echelons, as far as
Flie This would also have the secondary benefit of helping the Americans with
tir pration on the western flank if the Germans could be encouraged to retain
aramoured divisions deployed around Caen - the so-called hinge, or pivotal
point in the Normandy frontline.
hier initially rejecting Dempsey's plan, the usually cautious Montgomery ac-
cope it next day and told Dempsey to develop the details. Thus both Dempsey
a Badly came up with remarkably similar plans for the breakout of their respec-
dreamies. Both would harness the power of strategic bombers and both would
be evily dependent on armour. Bradley's operation was scheduled for 18 or 19
Jay whit Dempsey's plan, codenamed Operation Goodwood, was scheduled for
te same dates. However, Bradley and Dempsey would use armour in different
Ty. Bradley would use infantry conventionally to make a breach in German
tos fre exploiting it with two armoured divisions to penetrate deep behind
the German lines, then pivoting westwards to cut oft all the enemy units in the
frontine arouno at Lo. Dempsey, on the outer nano, de yet daothes apartue toda
salished doctrine, would use the tanks to make the breach itself in the German
insate the German defences in depth had been heavily bombed.
Dempsey presented nis pian to montgomery on is july and i was rectanty
apoved. Both realised that the success of the operation depended on airpower
s0 on 12 July, Montgomery wrote to Eisenhower and Air Chiet Marshal Tedder
sking for their all-out support and promising fireworks. It Montgomery could
have the whole weight of air power, he said, his whole eastern hank would 'burst
Into fames. The results would be 'decisive? 1o
Faced with another request for heavy bomber support alter what they saw as
Por returns for the strategic air force assisting the ground forces during Operation
Charnwood, despite northern Caen having been captured,
Tedder and General
spatz of the US air force were initially not very receptive.
Having prepared the
ground with his letter to Eisenhower, Montgomery, aware of the reluctance at 2ist
rmy Group, then bypassed ledder and paatz and sent brigadier Richarason to
england on the to July to pose the question directly to Air Chief Marshal Arthur
Harris who quickly affirmed RAF support for the operation.
Dempsey's first operational order to the VIII Corps commander,
General
O'Connor, was made on 13 July. The instruction was for VIII Corps to cross the
River Orne and establish an armoured division in each of the following areas,
Bretteville sur Laize - Vimont - Argences - Falaise. A copy of this order went
to SHAEF headquarters and Eisenhower.
The inclusion of Falaise as an objec-
tive at this stage, 20 miles behind the frontline, clearly suggested a breakout was
the objective.
