16
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Bunker with 10' thick
concrete walls to seaward.
Bunker with concrete roof and wall
to seaward. Gun capable 220 deg
Laveloc.
Diagram of typical beach bunkers from DSOAG King Red Operation Neptune G-2 commanders
report (Sword sector). (Courtesy of The National Archives)
by the Germans on the principle that armour was not expected in the initial assault
and bunkers and strongpoints would only have to deal with infantry, supported by
naval gunfire.
The bunkers, pill boxes and emplacements had many different types of guns and
anti-tank guns located in them, and many were linked by tunnels or slit trenches.
The main weapons in the strongpoints were 88mm and 75mm anti-tank guns.
A variety of obsolete and captured guns were used, including somm anti-tank
guns, French howitzers and the turrets of French tanks. Each strongpoint was
surrounded by thick belts of barbed wire and mines. The beaches themselves were
also heavily mined in places, as were all the possible exit routes inland.
The second type of defence was formed by placing obstacles on the beach.
Offshore, large wooden structures were placed in deep water to block or hinder
landing craft from approaching the beach. Known as Element C or Belgian gates,
these structures were spaced between Toft and I4oft apart. The next line of defences
consisted of pointed stakes, which were simply rows of tree trunks or poles loft
high and driven into the sand 6oft apart. These were often fitted with a Teller mine
or an unexploded shell fitted with a contact fuse mounted on top. some pointed
seawards and others towards the shore so as to cause the landing craft or assault
craft to overturn. These stakes were installed in rows closer to the beach and were
designed to rip the bottom out of any landing craft, if not blow it up.
The final line of defences in the water were three lengths of in angle iron 6½ft
long, welded together at their centres to make a form of tripod, with legs sticking
up at an angle to leave sharp spikes. They were called Hedgehogs and were placed
closest to the beach, up to isft apart in rows every Goft; again, they were designed
to damage the bottom of any landing craft. 2
D-Day Tanks
17
Sword Sector
The Sword sector was the most easterly of the areas selected for the landings and as
such was expected to face the strongest German opposition. German naval attacks
on the invasion fleet were expected from E-boats based in Le Havre and the gun
battery at Merville was capable of shelling Sword beach, so the most concentrated
supporting naval gunfire and aerial bombardment programme of all the proposed
Overlord landing areas was devised for Sword. "3
The beach chosen for the landings in the Sword sector was only 1,60oyds long,
defined by the River Orne estuary at Ouistreham to the east and rocky shelves
offshore to the west near Lion sur Mer, so only a single brigade could be landed at a
time. The beach selected was codenamed Queen beach. The coastline in this sector
is generally flat, with a coastal road, lined with houses along most of its length,
linking the two towns. Halfway between the two towns was a major strongpoint,
La Brèche, WN2o, containing two 88mm anti-tank guns sighted to fire east and
west along the beaches, plus numerous other somm and 75mm guns. La Brèche
was codenamed Cod by the Allies; all coastal fortifications were named after fish,
while inland fortifications were named after motor cars. Inland of Queen beach
were several major fortifications and strongpoints. Two gun battery positions were
codenamed Daimler and Morris, and the headquarters of the 736th Regiment (part
of the static 716th Infantry Division) was Hillman. Queen beach itself was just to
the west of La Brèche, and any landing would face serious opposition from this
strongpoint. The coastal town of Lion sur Mer was also heavily fortified with
strongpoints, including WNzI, known as Trout, and many houses along the coastal
road had been prepared for defence by bricking up windows and constructing
machine gun posts in them.
As the Sword sector was closest to Caen, the assault plan was for heavy fire sup-
port and the concentration of units on a single beach to facilitate the troops once
ashore driving inland to capture Caen on D-Day, in addition to linking up with
the óth Airborne Division holding the bridges over the River Orne at Bénouville.'4
Two assault squadrons of specialist AVR Es, instead of the usual one per infantry
brigade as on the other British beaches, were detailed to support the single infantry
brigade on Sword in order to help the troops get off the beaches quickly and move
inland.'s The 3rd Division was to assault one brigade up on Queen beach, sup-
ported by a tank regiment from the 27th Armoured Brigade, the 13th/18th Royal
Hussars, with its A and B squadrons equipped with Sherman DD tanks. The Royal
Hussars were tasked with then capturing Hermanville, a quarter of a mile inland,
and clearing Ouistreham before C Squadron, arriving at H+45 minutes, was to
capture the strongpoints codenamed Morris (WN16) and Hillman (WN17).
The Germans had also studied the lessons of the Dieppe raid and considered
potential landing sites for the expected Allied invasion. Ports were considered
the most likely objectives of any landings; accordingly, the coastal ports of the
