170
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
front complete with infantry advancing in rows through fields of wheat, supported
by a huge weight of artillery.
An advance of s miles was achieved, hardly the
breakthrough operation so desired to encircle Caen.
The VIII Corps planners must take some of the blame for the slow progress of
the operation. It took the vanguard of the VIII Corps two days to advance the
ยง miles from their start lines to the River Odon, despite having a greater number
of tanks and overwhelming artillery and air support. The lith Armoured Division
had IS4 Shermans at the start of the operation and the 3Ist Tank Brigade had 120
Churchills, not including the Stuart Recce tanks of each regiment and the 40
Cromwells of the 2nd Northants Yeomanry. In comparison, the 12th SS Panzer
Division had 126 tanks operational on the 26 June.
The bocage countryside certainly favoured the defenders. However, VIII Corps
seems to have planned the operation with little regard for the countryside and the
local road network. From Cheux, only one road led south to each of Grainville and
Colleville and these were initially well defended by the Germans. Cheux itself was
on the centre line of the attack and became a bottleneck for British units trying to
get into battle and for the supply echelons bringing up the rear. This bottleneck
in turn became a target for the German Nebelwerfer brigades and artillery, which
added to the traffic problems around Cheux. The Scottish Corridor itself only used
one bridge across the River Odon at Tourmauville to supply the bridgehead over
the river and any traffic moving south from Cheux had to use the railway crossing
at Colleville as the railway line could not be crossed at any other location because of
embankments and cuttings. VIII Corps made no provisions for advancing quickly
in the bocage to the river and relied on the tremendous weight of artillery and the
determination of the Scottish infantry to get forward.
Yet it was the British who cancelled the a tack and gave the initiative back to
the Germans. Montgomery did this because of the threat of a turther armoured
attack and an intelligence appreciation that the 2nd SS Panzer Korps attack was
simply a probe, the prelude to a much larger offensive. This was perfectly correct:
the 2nd SS Panzer Korps attack was to cut off the bridgehead over the River Odon
before the planned and long-awaited panzer offensive to the coast. So Montgomery
hose to exercise extreme caution based on the intormation he had at the time. i
may be that once the panzergrenadiers of the ist and znd SS Panzer Divisions were
identified in the battle, it was presumed that their tank regiments were not far away
and another much larger attack was imminent.
However, the same British intelligence appreciation that failed to realise that the
panzer regiments had not arrived with the panzergrenadiers also overestimated the
strength of the Germans. In particular, the extent of the casualties in men and tanks
of the 12th SS were not appreciated; neither was the fact that their lines were near
breaking point. The infantry of the Isth (H) and 43rd Divisions, well equipped with
anti-tank guns (711 in VIII Corps alone by 23 June) and devastatingly powerful artil-
lery fire, had effectively contained the attack by the znd SS Panzer Korps. The Ist SS
Panzer Division was still en route and would not be fully assembled before s July!?
171
Operation Epsom
rom early on 28 June, the complete tIth Armoured Division and another tank
regment were over the River Odon and formed a powerful strike force of more
than 200 tanks, which unfortunately was not ordered to press forward with any
grat vigour. Despite overwhelming air and artillery superiority, the 29th Brigade
inks were reduced to effectively becoming target practice for the thirty remaining
canks of the 12th SS Panzer Division. Dempsey and O'Connor always knew there
ite German panzer divisions on the way to the front; the only question was the
die of their arrival. So 28 June was the golden opportunity to push on the few
miles to the bridges over the River Orne, and it was lost; the 29th Brigade tanks
spent the day either in reserve, in 'observation' or being sniped at by 88mm tank
guns General Roberts was rightly disappointed at the cancellation of the opera-
tion, and this was reflected in the division's history:
the general feling that in spite of tank losses, a further sweep southwards from
til 2 coupled with the continued repulse of enemy attacks on the flanks, was well
within its powers
Thus the mere threat of further German attacks was enough for the brilsa to call
off the offensive, despite the fact that the armoured spearhead of the lIth Armoured
3 vision was poised to break through the stretched and depleted lines of the i2th SS.
Laution had won the day, and it would be another four weeks of fighting betore
till II2 was finally in Allied hands. Operation epsom nau come nownere near to
achieving its objectives; it had not even achieved those stipulated in phase one and
No can be regarded as a failure. The offensive did force the premature commitment
of the panzer divisions slated for the plannedy sunterattack, which led to the attack
being halted. For the Germans, however, id was a pyric victory. ane zna so
Panzer Korps and the 12th SS Panzer Division lost so many men and tanks that any
future opportunity for a decisive counterattack to the coast had been lost.
Infantry/Tank Co-ordination
The lith Armoured Division had not performed well in its combat debut during
the first two days of Operation Epsom. The and Fife and Forfars had been held up
to the south-west of Cheux without any supporting intantry when ambushed and
the 23rd Hussars had made only a slow rate of advance to the River Odon, aiso
without any supporting infantry. Indeed, the tith Armoured Division tanks had
been ordered to support the intantry of the scotash onion old Jane but dad
been virtually out of touch with the infantry they were supposed to be support-
ing. Roberts commented afterwards,
'The cooperation between the Scotsmen
and the lith Armoured was not very close; they rather went their separate ways?
VIII Corps had thrown in the division's understrength reconnaissance regiment,
the and Northants Yeomanry, to try and achieve what the 29th Brigade could not,
