344
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
moving westwards towards Gaumesnil. These were the Mark IVs and Jagdpanzers
of Kampfgruppe Waldmuller, which then turned northwards, using the hedges
to cover their advance. Other Mark IV tanks used the Petit Ravine gully to get
behind the Yeomanry Shermans before climbing out of the gully to surprise them.
Tank stalked tank in the woodland around the gully. One Mark IV that was well
hidden began to pick off A Squadron's tanks one by one, knocking out six tanks
before it was finally spotted. On the basis that the enemy tank could not fire at both
of them simultaneously, the squadron leader, Major Skelton, organised another
tank to attack the Mark IV at the same time as his own but from the opposite
direction. Major Skelton won the duel: the Mark IV was brewed up at the cost of
the other Sherman, which was destroyed 38
The Jagdpanzers advanced at speed, skirting around Robertmesnil before at-
tacking St Aignan and C Squadron from the east. Other Jagdpanzers stood off on
a ridge I,oooyds away and knocked out another C Squadron tank. Concentrated
fire from the squadron made the two withdraw, but others appeared and knocked
out anotner sherman. Three jagapanzers were engaged by Sergeant Hume of
No. I Troop, and he managed to knock out two of them. Another Jagdpanzer was
destroyed by Captain Fox, even though in a hull down position.?" The deadly hunc
continued for several hours until the evening. The Ist Northants Yeomanry lost
sixteen tanks, including five fireflies, in this battle but claimed twenty Germai
tanks, including the five Tigers, four Panthers, six Mark IVs and five Jagdpanzers, to
Kampigruppe Waldmuller, despite itst leavy losses, did succeed in delaying the
Canadian advance, which gave the Germans time to reorganise their defences
and for the Panther tanks of Kampfgruppe Wunsche to return overnight from
Grimbosq in time to take part in the battle.
1st Polish Armoured Division
Beset by traftic jams and delayed by the American bombing of Cormelles as other
units sorted themselves out, the ist Polish Division slowly moved up to its position
on the start line and the leading elements were able to cross the line on schedule at
1335 hours. The division was organised on the same basis as a British division but,
owing to a shortage of men, the tank squadrons had only sixteen tanks in them,
four platoons of three tanks and four in the squadron HQ. Maczek's plan was for
the roth Cavalry Brigade (the armoured brigade) to advance to Hill 140 and the
areas around Estrées la Campagne while the 3rd Infantry Brigade would capture
Cauvicourt in the first phase; the roth Cavalry Brigade was then to advance to
Falaise in the second phase. Unlike Kitching, Maczek chose to not deploy his
field artillery prior to advancing but had it move behind the tanks and infantry
to come into action as required. Therefore the Polish attack began without any
preparatory artillery bombardment.
Operation Totalize
345
The 2nd Tank and the 24th Uhlan regiments advanced to the east of St Aignan
with their flank screened by the reconnaissance regiment, the loth Mounted Rifles
(PSK). By this time the division escort company of the 12th SS Panzer Division
and the corps escort company of the Ist SS Panzer Korps that made up the rest of
Kampfgruppe Waldmuller had occupied the wooded areas around Robertmesnil
and St Sylvain to block any advance in that direction. The two companies were
supported by the three other Tiger tanks and the company of Jagdpanzers that had
engaged the ist Northants Yeomanry. The division escort company had at least two
75mm anti-tank guns, and the corps escort company had two 75mm howitzers.
The Polish tanks advanced across the open fields and straignt towards the wait-
ing Germans, who opened fire. The 2nd Tank Regiment lost twenty-six tanks
within minutes, many of the Shermans bursting
into flames immediately. The
24th Uhlans saw what was happening to the znd Tank Regiment and stopped their
advance in a small valley out of sight of the Germans while a hasty reconnaissance
was organised. The Polish artillery then came into action at 1450 hours, but the
attack had been literally stopped in its tracks. Heavy German artillery fire was
brought down on the tanks and, in the ensuing chaos, the 24th Uhlans lost fourteen
ranks before making it back to the relative safety of the woods around St Aignan
and the Canadian lines.? The toth Mounted Rifles also lost three tanks dueling
with Jagdpanzers around St Sylvain as they attempted to outflank the 2nd Tank
Regiment. The battle was again recorded by Ken Tout:
The tanks were theoretically in open order but only a touch of the gun traverse apart
one from another. The gunners in two German Mark IVs must have been utterly
fabergasted to see the sight, but lost no time in firing shot after shot. While Tony
Faulkner watched speechless, from Sherman after Sherman there blossomed the un-
mistakable flowering of flash, smoke, and dust, marking the impact of armour-piercing
shot. Then the puff of flame and smoke out of the turret or engine. The scramble of
men, some immune, others on fire, out of the blazing vehicle. The devastating roar of
turrets being blown off and ammunition sending fireworks high into the air.
Many of the Polish tanks tried to fire their guns but without any clear sighting of
opponents. More tanks brewed. Others began to circle and dash for shelter. Machine-
gun fire plucked at survivors. Someone remarked that it was like watching a field full
of haystacks set on fire by an arsonist...
The defenders had demonstrated that by that time of day, there was no daylight
route around east of Robertmesnil on 8 August. 43
Two Jagdpanzers entered St Aignan and engaged targets in the open to the north
until 2200 hours, unsupported by infantry. The Jagdpanzer company claimed
a total of twenty-eight tanks knocked out that day, mostly Polish, for the loss of
five Jagdpanzers; the three remaining Tiger tanks claimed a further seven tanks.+
That evening the Polish regiments counted their losses. Next morning they
reported the total loss of twenty-five Shermans and six Cromwells. t The Poles
