222
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
At 1200 hours, the Ist Coldstream Guards, unable to make any further progress
south-east towards Vimont, was instructed to try and get around Cagny from the
west. This new order required the
Ist Coldstream Guards to advance along the
same route as that of the slowly arriving 7th Armoured Division. As the leading
squadrons of Guards tanks neared the Caen-Vimont railway line, they could see
the wrecked and burning tanks of 2nd Fife and Forfars on the rising ground in the
distance. The commanding officer of the Ist Coldstream Guards decided that his
regiment would not become a part of the unfolding disaster."? After skirting Cagny
westwards,
the regiment proceeded slowly and cautiously towards Frénouville,
moving between Cagny and the Caen-Vimont railway and made no attempt to
cross the railway line. Meanwhile, the znd Fife and Forfars were receiving heavy
flanking fire from the direction of Frénouville and Le Poirier, and their brigade
HQ was expecting the Guards tanks to eliminate this problem by advancing on
Frénouville.
But the Coldstreamers, not having any accompanying infantry to
winkle out any of the hidden anti-lans no so we don be roner and
Frénouville, halted. No. 2 Squadron moved back to a wood and a wall running
north-south from Cagny to the railway and spread out along the wall where they
remained in the same exposed position for the next 4 hours. Panther tanks stalked
the Shermans, taking occasional pot shots and forcing them to change positions by
moving a few yards. As the Sherman tanks moved cautiously about, they tried to
avoid falling into the large bomb craters.
The regiment's technical adjutant arrived
with three ARVs in the evening but mistakenly drove into an orchard already oc-
cupied by three Panthers. In a rapid exce nge of fire, one Any tank was knocked
out before they made a hasty escape. Later, two tanks fell into bomb craters on
their way to the harbour. 4
An attempt by the Ist COldstream Guards to capture Le Pointer Jus across the
Caen-Vimont railway using its Grenadier Guards motorised infantry aiso talled
and the unit narboured south of Cagily. Ine regiment had no tank losses i bare
for the day (one Panther was claimed hit) and the only other casualties were seven.
guardsmen wounded in the harbour that night auling a terman all lam. test day,
the regiment took up defensive positions north of Cagny.
That afternoon twenty-seven tanks were claimed as destroyed by three 88mm
anti-tank guns of the newly arrived 1039 Abtellung Docking the davance of the
Guards towards Vimont, which
weeks.os
would not taken by the British for
another six
The znd Grenadier Guards and ist Coldstream Guards saw no further action in
Operation Goodwood. An attack by the division towards Vimont was planned for
the next day but then cancelled so the regiments remained in position for a day or
so before moving back to rest around the bridgehead over the River Orne. The
znd Irish Guards had a Firefly damaged the next day in an exchange of shots with
Germans near Emieville. Frénouville and Le Poirier were occupied by infantry but
the battle was over for the Guards Armoured Division.
223
Operation Goodwood
Casualties in the Guards Division were relatively light. The 2nd Grenadier
Guaras had twelve men killed and twenty-nine men wounded or missing, and
the rish Guards had six men killed and nine wounded or missing, whilst the
Coldstream had no battle casualties.
7th Armoured Division
Led by the sth RTR, the 7th Armoured Division began to move from its starting
potion at its designated time and reached the River Orne bridges i hour later at
so o900 hours. From then on, its progress was very slow as the sth RTR had
to vat for Canadians to get across London bridge first while the 2nd Irish Guards,
bringing up the rear of the Guards Armoured Division, crossed York bridge. By
igo hours, the sth RTR was only just south of Cuverville, having only advanced
3 miles and the ist RTR was still only crossing the river.
The operations of the
ish Brigade with the 2nd Northants Yeomanry tanks clearing Démouville also
delayed the sth RTR and at about 1300 hours, the regiment lost its tirst tanks (a Vc
and a Stuart) in the vicinity of Démouville to the recovering Germans.6.
At 1340 hours, despite continued exhortations from VIII Corps to keep moving
torward, more tratic congestion was reporters by the sth kik, which had caught
up with the tails of the z9th and sth Armoured brigades.
The later movement of
•I ist Coldstream Guards westwards around Cagny also hampered the advance
of the sth RTR. The sth RTR was then ordered to push on to La Hogue but by
l6o hours was only approaching Grentheville from the north.
Two hours later,
the sth RTR was east of Grentheville after Possing the railway but the Ist RTR
was only at Demouville and the 4th county or London leoniday tales were sull
crossing the River Orne bridges.
The sth RTR was then directed to send a squadron towards four where
Panthers were reported; C squadron advanced cautiousy towarus the vage but
immediately came under accurate German fire at 1900 hours from two Panthers
and two Mark IVHs. Two of these were destroyed, as were
Cromwells.o7
Atillery was then used to force the Germans back into Four whilst the sth RTR
then claimed that they could not manoeuvre around tour because of 29th bigade
tanks in the area. A Squadron of the sth RTR was then ordered to attack Soliers
but was held up by twelve German tanks; by 2200
hours the squadron had not
gone much further southwards from Grentheville and eventually harboured there
for the night. The rest of the regiment harboured at Le Mesnil Frémentel whilst
22nd Brigade HQ did the same just south of Démouville.
The sth RTR lost a total
of six Cromwell tanks that day. I he progress of 7th Armoured Division had been
painfully slow due to the traffic congestion and a great deal of caution as it pro-
ceeded slowly southwards through the smoking, wrecked Shermans of the rith and
Guards Armoured divisions.
