296
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Irish Guards/Coldstream group made no further progress and remained on
the defensive all day opposite the Germans on the Estry ridge. Groups of tanks
and infantry of 9th SS Panzer Division continually infiltrated past their positions
from the north-east throughout the day. A battery of self-propelled field artillery
(sextons) to the rear was attacked and only rescued by the timely intervention of
some MIo tank destroyers of Q battery of the 2Ist Anti-tank Regiment. A convoy
of support echelon vehicles driving to Siernoux for supplies was forced to turm
around and return to La Marvindiere where the whole regiment eventually har-
boured to spend another night isolated.
The Guards Armoured Division was only making slow progress against the
constant infiltration and attacks by groups of oth SS troops and tanks from the
north-east and it was finally forced to halt altogether. XXX Corps received new
orders at 1900 hours to seize the plateau of Mont Pinçon and the town of Aunay.
The 3rd Division was attached to VIII Corps as reinforcements and infantry of the
185th Brigade were sent to provide much-needed support to the battle groups of
the lIth Armoured Division.
That evening,
General Erskine of the 7th Armoured Division and the
XXX Corps commander, General Bucknall, were summoned to a meeting with
General Dempsey, whose patience had finally run out. Erskine was replaced by
General Verney from the oth Guards lank brigade and backdad ly cerea
The attacks of the oth SS Panzer Division were not successful largely because
the division had not been concentrated, attempting to reach La bistiere, foin
176 and Montchamp simultaneously. Despite having made the breakthrough and
threatening to rampage about in the German rear areas, the decision by Dempsey
to stop the British advance meant that the initiative was regained by the Germans
and it was they who were marauding behind the leading British units.
By nightfall, the 9th SS Panzer Division was effectively holding a line fron
Burcy to Montchamp and only had twenty-eight Panthers, seven war us and
nine Stug Ills operational - less than a British armoured regiment - but had stopped
the advance of two British armoured divisions.
4 August
The Germans continued to occupy Chenedolle, which had become a critical point
in the new German frontline being fashioned that was intended to run through la
Bistiere-Le Dézert-Estry-Montchamp. By creating this line the Germans would
keep possession of the Vire-Vassy road but first had to deal with the two British
boxes already behind their proposed frontline.
Infantry from the 3rd Division, the 2nd Warwicks, recaptured Presles in an
attack at midnight and during the morning began to relieve the 8th Rifle Brigade
in the hamlet of Le Bas Perrier. A strong German attack was mounted just as
Operation Bluecoat
297
the handover commenced and panzergrenadiers occupied Le Bas Perrier but were
unable to make any further progress across the open ground up the ridge. Very
heavy artillery fire was called down on the Germans from all available VIII Corps
artillery with devastating effect. Heavy bombardments from both sides continued
to sweep the Perrier ridge and surrounding areas and although the oth SS Panzer
Division made several more probes, no further large-scale attacks were mounted;
the positions at the end of the day remained largely unchanged.
The 2nd Fife and Forfars with the Monmouths spent an unpleasant day under
a continuous German bombardment. The battle group had been isolated at Burcy
and La Pavée for 48 hours and all the men were tired and hungry. With the re-
capture of Presles, the supply lines were restored to the 23rd Hussars group at Le
Bas Perrier; supplies and reinforcements could be brought up and the wounded
evacuated. On the XXX Corps front there was heavy fighting throughout the day
around Hill 188 and La Bigne and little progress was made.
The other Guards units tried to move out of their positions towards Montchamp
assisted by infantry from the isth (H) Division, which cleared the spurs of high
ground at Arclais and Drouet. Shermans of the Ist Coldstream Guards occupied the
northern outskirts of Montchamp before they were immediately counterattacked
by infantry of the oth SS and six Panthers. Tanks stalked each other through the
village until heavy losses compelled the Coldstream Guards to withdraw?? The
Irish Guards group moved out towards Le Busq but again made no further progress
and in the afternoon they came under attack from Germans trying to withdraw
trom Montchamp to form the new frontline. The regiments of the Guards Division
would remain largely static for the next two days with the Grenadier Guards hold-
ing Catheolles and the Coldstream Guards clearing Point 176.
Groups of German infantry and tanks that remained behind the lines of the
Lith Armoured Division were themselves in danger of being cut off as their at-
tack failed. A German group of four Stug Ills and some captured vehicles of the
Guards Armoured Division was ambushed by 17-pounder anti-tank guns attached
to 3rd Battalion Irish Guards at Maisoncelle.8
North of Vire, constant British pressure from artillery and the arriving infantry of
the 3rd Division compelled Kampfgruppe Weiss and 9th SS Panzer Reconnaissance
Battalion to withdraw at 2230 hours from their positions at La Bistiere back to Vire.
That night, the roth SS Panzer Division broke contact with XXX Corps to move
to Vassy in preparation for the Mortain offensive as ordered by Hitler. Although
it would not arrive in time for the main attack on 7 August, the 2nd SS Panzer
Korps had been designated as the follow-up
force.
While Operation
Bluecoat
prevented the immediate transfer of the two armoured divisions, their inclusion in
the counterattack was a result of the movement of British armoured divisions away
from Caen that allowed the korps to move as well. The zist Panzer Division, the
276th Infantry Division and what was left of the 326th Division were to withdraw
to a new frontline from Thury Harcourt to Presles via Estry and Roucamps.
