200
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Bavent and Troarn. Attempts to expand it in June had been effectively resisted by
the 2Ist Panzer Division. The planning challenges facing Dempsey included:
• A shallow bridgehead on the east bank of River Orne
• How to conceal preparations from the Germans
• Sufficient crossing points over the River Orne
• Minefields
• German defences and the battlefield terrain
• The German panzer divisions in reserve
The bridgehead held east of the River Orne did not have enough area to accom-
modate the infantry, armoured divisions and artillery earmarked for the attack and
was in any case under German observation. Therefore it was proposed that the
bulk of the armour and infantry divisions would be concentrated west of the river
the night before and only cross the river after the attack had begun.
This created the second problem in that there were not enough bridges over the
River Orne to take all the vehicles moving into battle. New bridges could not be
constructed prior to the attack in daylight without alerting the Germans, so it was
decided to begin construction of new bridges capable of carrying armour only on
the night before the attack. I Corps was tasked with building three more bridges
north and south of the existing three pairs of bridges across the Caen canal and
the River Orne, whilst in the Canadian sector two more crossings would be built,
including a raft ferry suitable for tanks.
The next problem facing Dempsey was the huge numbers of Allied mines that
had been hastily laid as defences against a possible German counterattack; these
had to be lifted and cleared to create safe channels for the armoured regiments to
advance through. Again, this work could not be done in daylight without alerting
the Germans and so work did not begin until two nights before the attack.
The Allies believed that the planned aerial bombardment would shatter the
verman frontlines and then allow their tanks to crack about benind tener
lines. The aerial support would be on a scale never seen before and would consist
• 1,056 RAF bombers using HE to attack the flanks, i.e., Colombelles in southern
Caen, Cagny and the villages of Toufvreville, Sannerville and Bannville on the
eastern flank to reduce the risk of a counterattack
• 483 medium bombers from USAAF to attack the area immediately in front of
British positions along the intended centreline of advance with fragmentation
bombs so as to not crater the ground excessively
A further 539 heavy US day bombers were to attack the areas around the vil-
lages of Four, Soliers, Bras and Frénouville to neutralise identified gun positions
beyond the range of Allied artillery. Operation Goodwood would be cancelled
201
Operation Goodwood
for any reason, including bad weather, if air support was not available.' Tactical
fighter-bomber support was to come from the RAF 83 Group, which was to attack
outlying villages and provide direct air support as requested, as well as intercepting
any German reserve units observed moving up to the battle.
Atillery would be provided by the guns of three corps and would target known
German gun positions and anti-aircraft batteries as well as providing a rolling bar-
rage along the centre line of advance behind which the tanks would follow. Due
to the limited space in the bridgehead, the artillery had to be concentrated west
of the River Orne with the tanks. Once the armoured divisions had advanced
beyond a certain point, they would then be out of support range and dependent
on their own mobile artillery. Three Royal Navy ships, including the monitor
HMS Roberts, with its two Isin guns, were detailed for counter battery fire.
General Roberts of the lith Armoured Division queried the planned use of
sporting infantry with the VIII Corps commander, General O'Connor, when
battalions from his own brigade were detailed for the early capture of Cuverville
and Démouville, only 2 miles from the start line. Once these infantry were de-
tached, the tanks would then be on their own apart from a motorised company
with each regiment. Roberts objected to this plan in writing but was bluntly told
by O'Connor that if he did not like the plan then one of the other divisions could
lead; Roberts demurred despite the plan being compretely agarast current dourne.
Once over the River Orne bridges, the terrain was largely of open tields and
long gentle slopes up to the Bourguébus Ridge. To the tank commanders,
who
had been strugging in the closeness of the bocage tertain, is was da opportuniy
to give their horses their heads' once the planned intense aerial bombardment
and artillery barrages had neutralised the German defensive positions. To further
reduce the numbers of defenders, Montgonshry also ordered diversionary attacks
West of the River Orne (Operations Pomegranate and Greenline) to draw off the
panzer division reserves and make the Germans think Caen would be encircled
from the west rather than the small bridgehead to the east.
German Defences
SOld Marshal Rommel had always expected an attack from Caen as this was the
easiest route from Normandy in terms of favourable terrain and distance to the
River Seine and Paris beyond. This gene ious front aps on orandy and from
German war games that had been conducted in the area since 1940.
From observation posts in the industrial area of south Caen (Colombelle), the
relative heights of the Bourguébus Ridge and the high ground to the east,
which
almost overlooked the invasion beaches, the Germans were able to observe britis!
Preparations. Any movement of tracked vehicles brought up clouds of dust, so
much so that the attempts at deception were fruitless.
reconnaissance
aircraft dropped flares nightly and were able to see the vast quantities of tanks and
