168
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
In the attempted breakthrough, exactly 150 tanks had been knocked out or re-
quired repairs needing more than 24 hours. Given the planned build-up of armour
ashore, these losses were acceptable to the British. More armoured units, such as
the Guards Armoured Division, the 6th Guards Tank Brigade and the 34th Tank
Brigade had either not yet left England or were only just arriving in Normandy.
The Germans, on the other hand, lost an equivalent number of tanks that could
not be replaced and therefore they could ill afford to lose.
PZIVH
24
Panther
Stug Ill
Tiger
21st Pzd
2nd Pzd
12th SS Pzd
9th SS Pzd
1oth SS Pzd
101st SS Schw bn
13
26
16
14
10
60
30
17
A total of more than 120 German tanks had been destroyed or damaged in Operation
Epsom, almost the equivalent of an entire new panzer regiment. The operational
strengths of each German panzer regiment involved in Operation Epsom had been
significantly reduced in preventing the British breakthrough and the commitment
of the two divisions from the znd SS Panzer Korps had achieved nothing. With the
exception of the tank casualties in the 12th SS Panzer Division, most of the damaged
tanks were not recovered and were ultimately lost as the British were in control of
the battlefield. Such were the losses to the reconstituted Panzer Gruppe West that, as
per von Schweppenburg's report of 30 June, the planned major offensive to the coast
could no longer be carried out unless the frontline was shortened by abandoning
Caen and allowing the panzer divisions to rest and refit.
For the Germans, the orders given by Hitler and Seventh Army on 28 and 29 June
were crucial to the whole Normandy campaign. Hitler's calling of a meeting in
Germany following Dollman's death meant that the two senior commanders,
Rommel and von Rundstedt, were away; once again, Rommel was absent from
the Normandy campaign at a critical time.
There is no doubt that the attack of
the 2nd SS Panzer Korps should have been stopped or, failing that, redirected in
conjunction with attacks by the znd and 2nd SS Panzer divisions. The preparations
for the attack were rushed and further hindered by Hitler's decision to promote
the corps commander to command the entire Seventh Army. Believing he was
continually being let down by Wehrmacht generals, Hitler chose to appoint an SS
general to be the first SS commander of an army and in so doing he contributed to
the command problems instead of resolving them. The two newly arrived panzer
divisions were then frittered away in a failed counterattack straight into the part of
the British frontline where four infantry brigades with all their supporting anti-tank
169
Operation Epsom
unis and the best part of two tank brigades were expecting an attack. The op-
portunty to mount the strongest possible mass panzer attack was irretrievably lost.
The weekly Army Group B report claimed that the attack was needed to restore
the German lines in the sector held by the 12th SS Panzer Division; in reality, the
Bris discontinued the attack because of their expectation of a new offensive by
the combined panzer divisions and not just the attack by the 2nd SS Panzer Korps.
The British and German casualties from Operation Epsom were very high. For
the Bitish, 470 men were killed, 2,185 wounded and 706 were missing: a total of
neatly 3,500 men." The majority of these casualties were suffered by the Isth (H)
Division, with 2,331 casualties (288 men killed, 1,638 wounded and 794 missing)
tom 27 June to 2 July. Beginning the battle with nearly 15,000 officers and men,
the Scots had lost is per cent of their men, more if the numbers of men in the rear
echelons are taken into account. The tith Armoured Division had 257 men killed.?
The German panzer divisions also suffered similar losses of about 3,500 men.
y here were 1,145 casualties in the gth SS Panzer Division and 036 men lost from
Kampigruppe Weidinger." The 12th SS Panzer Division had 1,240 men killed
or wounded:4
Aftermath
Montgomery always knew German armour would arrive in Normandy and that
he had to attack first. In epsom, the britise gained s miles of termory but talea
to break through the German lines and certainly created no significant threat to
Vontgomery's response the day Operation Epsom was cancelled was his MsoS
trective of 30 June to Bradley and Dempsey, which indicated a change of plan.
The British army was no longer tasked with taking de but wi diders dia
nolding as many German forces arouse of pey ay as possible whilst the breakout would
now be the responsibility of Bradley's FUSA. This change was not communicated
to Eisenhower who apparently was bewildered bedhe apparent change of strates.
Before Operation Epsom, Montgomery had written to Eisenhower on 25 June
and informed him that the coming operation would be would be a blitz attack.
Un i8 June, Montgomery had asked Bradley to take Cherbourg and belpsey o
take Caen; the Americans had done as ordered, but the
British had not achieved
their objective, which was now apparently being changed. Montgomery had
quickly moved the goalposts and changed the British objective after judging the
lifficulties too great for immediate uspugition." the hallmark of a good com
mander is being flexible and being able to change a plan in response to changing
conditions. However, when changes are made, the next important step is to ensure
all stakeholders are advised and that they understand the reasons for the change.
This dearly did not happen. Instead of a blitz', Operation Epsom resulted in the
British carrying out a First World War vintage set piece attack on a narrow 4-mile
