242
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
was attained, a pause of 48 hours would be required to resupply and reposition the
artillery and divisions for the attack.
St Lô was not captured until 18 July and any further major offensive action by
FUSA was called off on 19 July so as to be able to prepare for Operation Cobra.
Since 3 July, FUSA, with twelve divisions, had advanced only 7 miles west of the
River Vire and half that distance east of the river. Casualties numbered more than
40,000 men, most of them infantrymen, although one tank battalion after a week
of action was unavailable for any action whatsoever due to the loss of so many tank
crews.' Continuous bad weather in England then kept the aircraft required for
the operation's initial bombardment grounded and conditions were not forecast to
clear until 24 July, forcing the start date to be postponed.
The employment of armour in the hedgerow battles had been a major problem
for the Americans fighting in Normandy but with the development of combined
arms teams, better communications and various techniques of making gaps in the
dense hedgerows, the Americans had overcome this. The hedgerow cutter design
of Sergeant Culin of the roznd Reconnaissance Battalion in the 2nd Armored
Division was demonstrated to Eisenhower on 14 July and put into mass produc-
tion.
After a huge effort, which involved tank transporters moving steel from
German beach defences to workshops inland, three out of every five tanks at the
start of Cobra had hedgerow cutters welded to them. Such tanks became known
as Rhinos.'
After modifications by General Collins at VII Corps, the final Operation Cobra
plan called for three infantry divisions - the oth, 4th and goth divisions - to make the
initial penetration immediately after the air bombardment and create a defended
corridor' for the exploitation forces, which were to race westward towards the sea.
The motorised ist Division, with Ca atA the 3rd Armored Division attached, was
to thrust directly toward Coutances as the main force to cut off the German units
in the Cotentin peninsula to the north. The 2nd Armored Division, with the 22nd
Infantry Regiment attached, was to establish blocking posites mom lessy-sur
Vire to the Sienne River near Cérences to prevent any German counterattack from
the cast interfering with the operation. The rest of the grd Armored Division was
to remain in reserve pending the operations of the other armoured units.
Before the start of the offensive, the 2nd and grd Armored divisions each received
fifty-two of the first M4s with the 76mm gun that had better armour-piercing
capabilities than the current 75mm gun.° These 76mm M4s had been warehoused
in England prior to D-Day as none of the generals had been keen to utilise them,
but given recent experiences against the German tanks in Normandy the 76mm.
M4 was suddenly seen as a solution to the poor armour-piercing performance
of the M2 gun equipped M4 tanks. The 76mm gun could penetrate 93mm of
homogenous armour at sooyds and 88mm at looyds compared with the 75mm
M2 performance of 6omm and ssmm at the same ranges." As well as the aerial
bombardment, for added firepower VII Corps was allocated a large part of FUSA'S
Operation Cobra
243
arillery - nine of its twenty-one heavy battalions, five of its nineteen mediums and
allseven of its non-divisional light batteries.
By the start of Operation Cobra, FUSA would have fourteen divisions com-
pared with the depleted German divisions and kampfgruppen, which amounted
to no more than nine divisions on paper, eight of which had been in combat for
more than four weeks!" It was estimated by FUSA that the men of VII and VIII
COrps assembled for the attack outnumbered the Germans by more than five to
one. Immediately in the path of the intended American attack was the Panzer
Lehr Division that had been reinforced with two battlegroups, one from the rem-
nants of the 27sth Division and the other the 14th Parachute Regiment from the
sth Parachute Division. A battlegroup of panzergrenadiers and engineers from the
and SS Panzer Division that had been supporting Panzer Lehr since 19 July was
withdrawn to Gavray on 24 July. In the Seventh Army, the Germans only had
about so tanks and assault guns operational, 100 in the znd SS Panzer Division and
fifty in the Panzer Lehr." The Americans had assembled more than 600 medium
My tanks for the attack plus scores of tank destroyers and light tanks.
H-hour for Operation Cobra was finally set for 1300 hours on 24 July but that
morning, the skies over St Lô were still covered by low cloud that obscured the
targets from the bombers. A postponement order was sent by radio to England but
INTE DE BARFLEUR
Bay
of the
Seine
VII CORPS
US formation
Canadian formation
XII CORPS
British formation
ISS CORPS
German formation
— xxx—
Corps boundary
Army boundary
Contour 50 metres
Contour 100 metres
entour 200 metres
The Normandy Battlefield, 24 July 1944. (Courtesy of The History Press)
