13
Falaise Gap
Well aware of the developing encirclement, von Kluge and Hausser conferred on
I4 August and decided that whatever happened, the shoulders of the remaining gap
in the Allied lines must be reinforced to keep the lines of communication open for
supplies and for the troops in Normandy to withdraw through when Hitler finally
gave the order. However, Hitler remained firmly in control and still retained the
idea of a new offensive against the Americans at Alençon. Begrudgingly recognis-
ing the strategic situation after a protracted debate, Hitler gave permission for the
frontline to be shortened but only to free up troops for a future attack. On this
basis, von Kluge authorised the 2nd SS Panzer Korps to move to the Argentan area
and other non-essential units to start withdrawing out of pocket!
On Is August von Kluge was on his way to the front in his tactical headquar-
ters convoy when the vehicles were shot up by Allied fighter-bombers, which
destroyed all the communications equipment. After von Kluge apparently spent
a torrid day harassed by aircraft and out of communication with Army Group B,
Hitler, suspecting correctly that von Kluge may have been trying to contact Allied
leaders, directed von Kluge to report to the Fifth Panzer Army HQ outside the
pocket? Later, von Kluge discussed the urgent need for a general withdrawal with
Jodl. The next day, Hitler finally sanctioned a general withdrawal to east of the
River Orne but had already appointed Field Marshal Model to replace von Kluge.
Summoned to see Hitler, the despairing von Kluge wrote a last letter affirming his
loyalty to Hitler and committed suicide on the journey back to Germany.
At 1s30 hours the same day, Montgomery had telephoned Crerar and told him
that a German force containing elements of five panzer divisions was reported
to be planning to counter-attack the American pincer of XV Corps stretching
north to Argentan. The German divisions identified included the remnants of the
Ist SS, 2nd SS, 12th SS, the 2nd and zist Panzer divisions whilst the roth was
occupying Trun? Montgomery believed that when the Germans discovered that
the American advance to the line between Argentan and Carrouges blocked their
potential escape route, they would try to force a way out through the gap between
Argentan and Falaise. The capture of Trun, in the middle of the gap, was thus vital
381
Falaise Gap
it is and an hour later Crerar ordered Simonds to start out immediately
or Irun.
Mangomery also ordered Bradley to start pushing his forces northwards from
agin but owing to changes in the command structure of the First and Third
Limes it would be another 36 hours before the Americans could get moving.*
The gth Armored Division had been ordered to accelerate its move and mean-
with a Division had pushed south from Point 168 and the 7th Brigade with
its of the st Hussars had occupied the high ground about Point 159.
Polish Advance
is the reserve division for Operation Tractablaethe ist Polish Armoured Division
given the task of clearing up the Quesnay Wood, Potigny and Fontaine le
on I4 August immediately after the second wave of aircraft. In the short RAF
olgs of this wave, one officer and forty-seven men were killed,
wounded and a further fitty-three men missing. Despite this episode, the objectives
were all secured by o9oo the next day as the Germans had largely withdrawn,
behind only a few stragglers. The initial objectives of Operation totalize
anally been taken. The Polish 24th Uhlan Regiment reportedly captured the
anners and a Mark IV in these mopping-up operations?
Next morning, the Ist Polish Armoured Diveion began its advance towaras
raase, which was to start from the open terrie ory on the left flank of the Canadians
l the sector of the German 8sth Division, largely destroyed by the previous days
altack. In a well-organised march beginnire at 1100 hours, the division moved
n two columns across the rear echelons of three Canadian divisions Lo its stare
le in the east. From there the division with the loth Mounted Rifes in the
vanguard advanced rapidly to seize the rir crossing at Jort, which was defended
by a battery of 88mm Flak guns, the ist Company Jagapanzers from the 12t ss
Panzer Division and a company of Pioneers of the 85th Division supported Dy artil-
ty. The Cromwells of the 2nd and ard squadrons cleared the woods of German
fantry to the northwest of Jort and occupied the high ground on Hills 74 and 76
overlooking the river and town. The and Squadron moved norwards towards
Vendeuvres but when the tanks entered the village, the Germans biew up the
bridges Per the River Dives in front of them. The ist and 3rd squadrons then
moved south and entered fort where the bridge was found to be damaged. Two
tanks from the Ist Squadron found a way down the marshy banks and managed to
cross the river using a ford but the following six tanks got bogged and had to be
dragged across using their towing cables." By this time, ist Squadron had lost three
Cromwells to anti-tank fire and two had become immobilised. Once across, the
Ist Squadron tanks set about shelling the German positions with high explosive
but advanced no further.
The infantry of the Dragoons, supported by Canadian
artillery, then crossed the river and helped establish the bridgehead over the River
