112
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
was decapitated by a shell from one of the Shermans before they were forced to
withdraw by the remaining Mark IVs. The German commanders watched the
Canadian tanks, infantry and carriers streaming back from Authie in full retreat.
Two waves of German infantry supported by tanks then attacked at 1830 hours
and Buron was reoccupied. Those Highlanders that were able to moved back to
hastily prepared positions just south of Les Buissons where the remnants of the
Sherbrooke Fusiliers (twelve tanks) moved back to support them. The defensive
position of the Highlanders just north of Buron was overrun by Germans charging
with fixed bayonets and only a counterattack by the remaining twelve tanks and
heavy artillery fire restored the situation. The panzergrenadiers retreated back to
Buron as both sides subjected each other to heavy shelling and mortar fire. The at-
tack by the 12th SS Panzer Division was then called off by the Ist SS Panzer Korps
in order to conserve forces for subsequent counterattacks. Buron was recaptured by
the Canadians but there were insufficient men left in the NNS Regiment to hold
the position overnight, so a withdrawal was made to Villons les Buissons.
The Sherbrooke Fusiliers had requested reinforcements, but Brigadier Wyman
of znd Canadian Armoured Brigade ordered the regiment to hold its positions
while putting the Fort Garry Horse on alert to move if necessary. Wyman finally
decided the situation was in hand and no reinforcements were sent; the Highlanders
were not assisted during the afternoon by the other two infantry battalions in the
9th Infantry Brigade either.
In what was the first action of both German and Canadian units, the honours
were shared as the tank losses for both were similar. The Canadians claimed thirty-
three German tanks destroyed plus five probables. In the 12th SS Panzer Division,
the 6th Company lost five Mark IVHs but destroyed more than ten Shermans."
Only five tanks from the 8th Company arrived to support the ist Battalion of
the 25th Panzergrenadier Regiment in its attack towards Cambes, but one broke
down and the other four were damaged or disabled. The 12th SS Panzer Division
reported thirteen Mark IVs lost and nearly twenty damaged. 24
For their part, Sherbrooke casualties were greater than admitted to by the war
diary for 7 June, which reported the loss of only fifteen tanks. The post-war
regimental history states that twenty-one cruisers tanks were destroyed plus seven.
others damaged? The War diary does give casualties in a later appendix as a total
more lost due to mechanical breakdowns. two Ms Stuart tanks were diso wine
off. The regiment had thirteen men killed, twenty-seven wounded and twe
one were missing.
The advance of the 9th Canadian Brigade to Carpiquet had been repulsed with
heavy losses. While not a planned ambush, the Germans had the advantage of
visibility of the battlefield from the abbey and redeployed their forces accord-
Germans for their attack to the coast to be halted. Most casualties were to the
113
Bridgehead Battles
NNS Highlanders: only thirty-five men came back from A and C companies and
eighty-four men were killed, thirty wounded and 128 taken prisoner. 26
The failure of the 2ist Panzer Division to join the assault by the half-strength
12th SS Panzer Division, in what was a significant opportunity for the Germans
was a major cause of the attack being stopped. Meyer and
Feuchtinger blamed each other in post-war accounts, and the reasons for the ap-
parent reluctance of Feuchtinger to become involved are not clear.
Given the Canadian advance straight into his positions, Meyer had no option
but to give battle. Meyer claims that he briefed Feuchtinger on the situation
before requesting support, but whether this was done by radio or dispatch rider
1s not specified by Meyer. In turn, Feuchtinger claimed that insufficient forces
from the 12th SS Panzer Division had assembled in time for the attack. Only one
panzergrenadier battalion had established contact as planned with the left wing of
the 21st Panzer Division and then only at 1600 hours, more than 2 hours after the
fighting began. Feuchtinger also claimed that when contact was made at Epron the
panzergrenadiers were too exhausted to continue the attack and that there was no
12th SS artillery in position to support the attack 28 The last is certainly not true, as
there was at least one heavy artillery battalion involved in the action, which caused
many casualties amongst the Highlanders in Authie and Buron? Meyer stated
that the attack by his forces was stopped when they ran out of fuel but Feuchtinger
refuted this, claiming he had plenty of fuel if Meyer needed it.° Meyer later stated
that the attack was halted because of the advance to Bretteville of other Canadian
unts past his left flank?'
The reality was that the zist Panzer Division was tied down in the fighting both
sides of the River Orne that day and was unable to disengage and join any coun
terattack." The elements of the division were dispersed with some units fighting
Cast of the River Orne, some blocking the path to Caen and others attached to the
almost destroyed 716th Division. The division's Kampfgruppen Rauch and Oppeln
that had counterattacked on D-Day were forced on the defensive by the continued
British armoured attacks near Lebisey." The D-Day counterattack had also given
tanange analy ropes of Ained ant tam guns, and he later Temarked that
his Mark IV tanks had been knocked out from 2,000m range and that the Mark IVs
could not get even close to the British tanks?4
German Counterattacks
the attempted counterattacks by the panzer divisions in the first week of the inva-
sion were hampered for the first time by the problems that would continue to
dog their operations throughout the Normandy campaign. These were the Allied
commance brune an, when aayou tne ant var or termerument, and the lack or
woomy or tea at may bors, when prevented tell now bring ave
