176
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
arrived without incident at the River Vire west of Isigny; the armoured infantry
immediately sent out patrols to the south to locate friendly units and make contact
with any enemy in the area. Plans were being made to clear the Germans from the
western edge of Carentan and south of the Carentan-Isigny road when orders were
received to help defend Carentan.
Earlier, at about oб3o hours, the panzergrena-
diers of the 17th SS Panzer Division and elements of the oth Parachute Division
supported by a few assault guns, had counterattacked the two parachute regiments
Just south of Carentan and pushed them back to within sooyds of the town. The
2nd Battalion tanks and armoured infantry moved to the eastern end of Carentan
and then launched their own counterattack at 1430 hours down the Carentan-La
Campagne road with the objective of seizing the road junction at La Campagne De-
fore capturing Méautis.+ D Company tanks and the battalion of armoured intantry
led off, meeting only light resistance from small-arms fire for the first gooyds while
the parachute regiments also attacked from either side of Carentan. Heavy German
artillery, mortar and anti-tank gunfire was then received and the advance slowed:
• Company attacked at 1400 hours along the route running between Carentan and La
Campagne .... It was a rainy and dismal afternoon. The terrain was evenly divided into
small squares by ditches and hedges. The Germans were well entrenched. D Company
charged the hedgerows and ditches, traversing each hedgerow with machine guns and
firing into the occasional tree top for snipers. The total results were scores of dead,
three 75mm anti-tank guns, one Mark IV tank and no prisoners. D Company reached
a line running north-south through the village of Douville where it was relieved by
F Company 66th Armoured Regiment. The company had expended 75000 rounds
of 30 calibre ammunition, 225 rounds of 75mm He explosive, 750 rounds of 0.4)
calibre and 2s hand grenades. Our losses were 1 M4 tank, one officer wounded and
one enlisted man injured. This hard hitting initial assault against an entrenched and
determined SS panzergrenadier regiment cracked their line and broke their will to
resist further in this sector?
The Germans believed they were attacking a few lightly armed paratroopers and
the appearance of the tanks came as a great shock to them. Having left their defen-
sive positions to attack, the Germans were caught in the open by the tanks and field
artillery of the CCA task force. Despite their determined attacks and the support
of the assault guns, each German attack was thrown back with heavy casualties,
totalling soo men killed and more than 1,000 wounded. CCA suffered very light
casualties in contrast, only eight men killed, including two officers.
The 2nd Battalion tanks advanced to a point east of Cantepie and as it was get-
ting dark, the battalion decided to harbour after the forward positions were secured
by the infantry. The battalion had knocked out four 75mm self-propelled Stug III
assault guns, destroyed two anti-tank guns and killed an estimated 400 Germans.
Three of the Stug IIIs were knocked out by one Sherman tank with three rounds
of armour-piercing shells.
177
Battle of the Hedgerows
GERMAN COUNTERAT TACK
ON CARENTAN
CCA of US and Armored Division and the German counterattack at Carentan, adapted from
G. Harrison, Cross-Channel Attack (USCMH)
During the day, the ist Battalion had also launched an attack from Carentan to-
Wards Auverville, which was secured at 2100 hours. The 66th Armored Regiment's
total tank casualties in this operation were three M4 Shermans and a Stuart
It had been the first action of the men of CCA and the tanks of the 66th Armored
Regiment fighting in the hedgerows and even though they had only managed to
advance 2 miles, it was successful. The men of CCA were able to adapt very
quickly to the difficult bocage countryside, with its sunken lanes, small fields
bordered by embankments and high hedges. Tanks found they could not manoeu
Vite through the hedges and were largely restricted to moving through existing
gaps in the hedges or along the roads, both of which were usually covered by
German anti-tank guns. German snipers and rifle fire trom positions that had
been dug into the hedgerows had taken a toll on the infantry accompanying the
and Battalion tanks.
The American forces had not trained to fight in the bocage and at first it was
a bewildering experience for most of them. German intantry, otten supported by
an assault gun, would open fire from defensive positions in the hedgerows at short
range, with devastating effect. The Americans learnt to spray the hedgerows in
front of them with automatic weapons fire and to make use of the liberas artery
and naval gunfire support available, although fixing their own position and that
of the enemy on a map was often difficult as each field and hedgerow looked the
same. The hedgerows were impassable to the tanks and any tank trying to push
through them either got stuck, exposing its thin belly armour, or overturned.
