56
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Although many of the LCT(A)s carrying the Centaurs did not arrive on time,
were lost en route or swamped on unloading, it can be seen from the table above
that with the Centaurs, Sherman Flails, AVREs and DD tanks, the British planned
for much more firepower to be available on their beaches in the first few minutes
of landing than the Americans did. Of the LCT(A)s due on Omaha and Utah at
H-hour, six did not arrive at H-hour on Omaha (three each carrying the tanks
of the 743rd and 74Ist Tank Battalions) and two did not arrive at all on Utah, so
the armour actually available on the American beaches was even less than the
totals shown.
Of the Centaurs on the British beaches, only twenty arrived within Is minutes
of H-hour and a further twenty-eight within the next 4 hours, the rest being
presumably lost, so the British beach totals were not quite as high as shown in the
table." Even so, the numbers indicate that the amount of armour planned to land
on the American beaches was only so-6s per cent of that of the British beaches,
so fire support from tanks on Omaha and Utah was always likely to be less effec-
tive. This reduction in available fire support was then compounded by the short
40-minute naval bombardment compared to the British area and the inaccurate
bombing of the USAAF.
On the British beaches, the Flail and Petard tanks of the AVR Es were often the
first armoured vehicles to start engaging the German bunkers and they did this
with a considerable degree of success, destroying many bunkers despite their own
tanks being knocked out. This initial engagement by the AVREs of the beach
defences then made the work of the later-arriving DD tanks that much easier, as
was seen on Gold, though this was not quite the plan.
The Omaha landings nearly talled because theyt ere not enough gun tanks of
any kind on Fox Green and Easy Red beaches to deliver the required suppressing
fire onto the bunkers. Once the five DD tanks and the ten wading M4s of the
74Ist Tank Battalion had arrived at the eastern half of Omaha, the only other
armour equipped with large calibre guns due to arrive were the M4 tank doz-
ers, which were already late. The contribution by the 743rd Tank Battalion was
significant: not only did the tanks help open the D-1 exit but they also supported
attacks on the E-I exit.
It was the extra firepower of the AVR Es that was missed on Omaha beach, not
their specialist equipment.
consequences.
As usual, the poor bloody infantry would suffer the
A final difficulty on the Omaha was the shingle beaches. That the shingle Omaha
beaches were chosen appears extraordinary after the problems encountered during
the Dieppe raid. Once a tank lost a track in the shingle, it became a stationary target
for the defenders and was also at risk of being flooded by the rising tide. Five tanks
of A Company of the 74Ist Battalion and at least one of the 743rd Battalion tanks
were immobilised on the beaches after losing a track and these tanks were subse-
quently lost. In the COSSAC plan, a detailed study (Appendix T) was made of the
proposed beaches and there is no mention of shingle being on the Omaha beaches.")
D-Day Tanks
57
Apparently neither British nor American planners heeded the warning of the shingle
at Dieppe but there was no other alternative beaches in the Omaha sector that offered
the required unloading capacity and was suitable for the Mulberry Harbour.
Gold Sector
The Gold sector was one of the original three areas of the COSSAC plan. The sec-
tor ran from the small seaside hamlet of La Rivière in the east almost to the town of
Arromanches in the west. The two beaches chosen for the landings were between
the fortified villages known as Le Hamel and La Rivière and were codenamed
Jig and King, with King beach being the easternmost. The soth (Northumbrian)
Division was to land on each beach supported by regiments of the 8th Armoured
Brigade. Bayeux was a D-Day objective of the soth Division, and if conditions
were favourable then an armoured column was to penetrate further inland and
seize Villers Bocage.
The King Red and King Green beaches west of La Rivière, where many of the
houses had been turned into strongpoints, were allocated to the 4th/7th Royal
Dragoon Guards. The Ist Nottinghamshire Sherwood Rangers were tasked with
landing on Jig beach. Jig and King beaches had gently sloping sand up to a sea wall
4-toft high, behind which there was a strip of sand dunes 3ft high. Extensive belts
of anti-tank and anti-personnel mines had been sewn along the sand dunes and in
front of the defensive strongpoints. The beach was studded with hedgehogs near
the high-water mark and anti-tank obstacles such as posts tipped with mines and
Belgian gates were in deeper water.
4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards
The 4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards had been converted from a cavalry regiment
in the i2 months immediately before the outbreak of war and saw service as part
of British Expeditionary Force in France in 1940. In 1944, the Dragoon Guards
was the senior regiment of the 8th Armoured Brigade with the mission of support-
ing the gapping teams before going into reserve in anticipation of any German
counterattack.
B and C squadrons were equipped with DD tanks on which they had trained for
several months in the lochs of Scotland. The DD tanks were loaded at Stanswood
Bay on 2 June, and A Squadron and RHQ were loaded a day later; all craft then
moored in the bay to await the order to sail for France.
B Squadron was to land on the right flank to support the oth Green Howards and
squadron, on the left to support the sth East Yorks, both battalions being part of
the both Brigade assaulting King beach.
The German defences were manned by two battalions of the 716th Division
with their headquarters at Trévières I8 In WN33 at La Rivière, there was an 88mm
gun (plus various other smaller-calibre weapons) that could fire along King beach,
