40
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The 74Ist Tank Battalion was to support the 16th RCT on the left flank. The
DD tanks of B Company were commanded by Captain Thornton, and the com-
pany was attached to the znd Battalion I6th RCT due to land on Easy Red beach.
C Company, commanded by Captain Young, was attached to the 3rd Battalion
Iốth RCT landing on Fox Green. The DD tanks of both companies were to land
§ minutes before H-hour when the naval bombardment finished.
A Company tanks were to provide support fire to the flanks on the way in from
specially modified landing craft and were to land at H-hour across all the beaches
being used by the loth RCT. The landing craft had been modified in the same way
as the British LCT(A)s to enable two Sherman M4s side by side to fire over the
ramp of the landing craft.
Each LCT(A) carried two M4s and a tank bulldozer, for a company total of i
M4s and eight tank dozers. The tanks also towed a trailer carrying supplies of
ammunition. The extra armour plating and the high centre of gravity created by
the elevated tanks on wooden platform made these LCT(A)s very unstable and they
easily rolled and shipped water in rough seas.
As well as supporting the infantry by engaging the German bunkers, the DD
tanks also had to support the specialist army and naval engineers clear eight gaps
soyds wide in the beach obstacles and the exits off the beaches. All three companies
of the 74Tst Tank Battalion were to then get off the beach by exit E-3 and support
the 3rd Battalion achieve its objectives inland. Tanks from the DD companies were
to be used to bring A Company up to strength if required to complete this mission."
B and C Companies DD Tanks
The designated transport loading area for the infantry was Il miles off shore be-
cause of a battery of guns on Pointe du Hoc at the western end of the beach that
posed a major threat to the invasion fleet. With H-hour at oб30 hours, the assault
landing craft had to be loaded and marshalled in darkness well before that time.
Rough seas and strong currents added to the considerable difficulties of the assault
units, which became scattered on their final approach to the beaches. At least ten
landing crait carrying intantry were swamped on the approach and many DUK W
carrying the guns of two field howitzer battalions also sank. The strong offshore
current pulled many craft eastwards so they landed on the wrong beaches.
The decision to launch the DD tanks was made after consultation between the
two army company commanders by radio and at approximately s,00oyds from
shore, the yellow flags for launch were raised. One by one, the ungainly tanks
of B and C squadrons trundled to the front of the LCTs and down the ramp into
the turbulent sea. One after another, tanks began to succumb to the large waves.
Some tanks sank almost immediately while the canvas screens of others collapsed
and pumps battled to keep up with the inrushing water. Some tanks, with their
crews struggling to hold up the screen, managed to stay afloat for 2 miles before
finally going under. The seas became dotted with orange life rafts and surviving
D-Day Tanks
41
All sixteen tanks of C Company were lost and all but five tanks of B Squadron
sank between 1,000 and 5,00oyds from the shore.
Three B Company tanks on LCT 600 were landed directly on the beach at about
0645 hours after the blast from a near miss of an artillery shell caused the leading
tank to roll back and damage the screens of the other tanks so they could not
launch. The first tank off then foundered and the LCT stopped to pick up the crew.
The fortunate tanks to arrive by LCT were commanded by Sergeants Maddock,
Ragan and Williams.
Only two tanks of the twenty-nine that took to the water eventually swam
in, and they were those commanded by Sergeants Geddes and Sheppard. The
74Ist Tank Battalion history described the launch:
On the order, the tanks rolled gracefully into the rough sea and many of them sank
almost immediately, carrying many men to watery graves. The most fortunate were
able to leave their sinking tanks and swim about until rescued. Soon the Channel was
a mass of bobbing heads and every available life raft was tossed into the water. Some
quick thinking tank commanders anticipated the sinking and in good time were able
to inflate the rubber dinghy each tank carried. Not a few men were forced all the way
to the bottom of the Channel before getting free and escaping to the surface. For these
men their oxygen masks were a Godsend.
Speedy LCIs (Landing Craft, Infantry) did praiseworthy work, zooming about the
hundreds of larger vessels picking up men everywhere from the water and taking
them to the hospital ships in the rear.")
Another survivor, Corporal Hopper, described his near drowning:
The Lieutenant and Merket were trying to hold the canvas out and I was trying to
steer it, which was almost an impossible job as the waves were so rough.
When I saw that we didn't have a chance to make it to the beach, I yelled to Snike
to come out and Merket yelled to Crouse. We tried unsuccessfully to hold the canvas
out when one side caved in so the Lieutenant and Merket inflated one life raft whilst
Snike and I tried to inflate the other one but the one we had had been damaged and
would not operate. As we were working on it, the tank gave a last shudder and started
for the bottom. The Lieutenant and Merket managed to get a hold on one life raft and
stayed with it but Snike, Crouse and I went to the bottom with the tank. As I felt it
settle on the bottom, I thought I was lost as my cigarettes worked out of my pocket
and floated up past my face. I gave up hope as I saw that and started to breathe water;
before much longer I opened my eyes again and saw that the water was getting lighter.
I finally did reach air and as I looked around I saw Snike about fifty feet from me and
trying to swim towards the life raft where the Lieutenant and Merket were. He finally
made it. Crouse came to the top a little later, close by me and we tried to make the
raft together but couldn't as the water was too rough. Crouse drifted away from me
until he was just a speck. One rocket boat passed me on the way to the beach and its
