The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
54
• Beach 307 - Lion sur Mer to Courseulles
• Beach 308 - Courseulles to Arromanches
• Beach 313 - Colleville to Vierville
These became Juno,
Gold and Omaha sectors. Morgan further proposed that
the British forces be supplied from the English ports closest to Normandy. The
Americans were then allocated the westernmost beach after the British allocations
had been made. Morgan elaborated by describing this selection as the Americans
being 'on the right of the line' and the 'British-Canadian forces on the left. us This
principle was to be maintained throughout the planning of operations Overlord
and Neptune and had a number of important outcomes, not the least of which
was that the routes of the assault convoys and follow-up forces would not have
to cross over each other. US Army units arriving in England would be billeted
in the south-west of England around Plymouth and their invasion convoys could
sail from there to the westernmost Normandy beaches without crossing the chan-
nels allocated for the British or Canadian vessels. Similarly, transatlantic shipping
destined for the American beaches could sail directly to the Omaha sector without
crossing British shipping lanes.
Having agreed to the allocation of beaches and the outline of Operation Overlord,
it was then up to FUSA to plan and implement the landings in its sectors. For
Omaha, FUSA planned to assault the defending strongpoints in the draws frontally
and force the exits after they had been targeted by a heavy naval and airforce
bombardment. A frontal assault across water from boats is always a risky operation
with a high probability of heavy casualties, yet the Americans were prepared to ac-
cept these. When the bombardment was not as effective as planned, the task of the
assaulting infantry was made much more difficult. No contingency plans seem to
have been made to bypass the fortifications and climb the bluffs in the event of the
original plan going awry or as part of the actual assault. The 2nd Ranger Battalion
successfully scaled the cliffs at Pointe du Hoc in order to blow up the guns of the
battery there, only to find when they got to the top that the guns had been moved.
A follow-up force, the sth Ranger Battalion, having received no word of the suc-
cess or otherwise of the 2nd Battalion, assumed that they had failed and landed on
Dog White beach near the D-1 Vierville draw. After a brief pause, the Rangers
dashed across the exposed foreshore and climbed the hills; most of the battalion
reached the top by 0830 hours. This demonstrated that the strongpoints on Omaha
were vulnerable to being out-flanked and such assaults, if planned, would have had
a greater chance of earlier success than a direct frontal attack.
Two myths have persisted in the aftermath of the debacle on Omaha beach. The
first is that the Americans refused to use the British specialised armour at all and
the second is that the Omaha landings nearly failed because British AVREs were
not used in the assault.
All of the specialised tanks were demonstrated to Eisenhower and FUSA generals
at Tidworth early in 1944 and FUSA rejected them all except the DD tank. One of
D-Day Tanks
55
the reasons given was that the US forces were developing their own M4 versions of
the British tanks and that the US Army did not want to add another type of tank,
the Churchill, to their inventory. As is Churchill flamethrower tanks had already
been ordered in February 1944, this was disingenuous. As the USA was developing
its own mine-clearing tank, the TiE, the Sherman Flail was also turned down.
However, in November 1944 the Sherman Flail was adopted by all US forces in the
ETO and the TrEz was quickly phased out. "14
Therefore the first myth is just that, a myth. FUSA was prepared to use whatever
vehicles it saw a need for and would employ British designs where necessary if
there was no duplication with the US Army's own developments. The refusal to
adopt the British Flail tanks was shortsighted, as was the late decision to rely on M4
bulldozers, of which only four were available for each unit on D-Day. It has been
argued that the shortage of LCTs prevented the Americans from using the British
AVREs, which is not true: FUSA simply did not want them.
Regarding the second myth (that US landings at Omaha nearly failed because
they did not use the specialised armour), a report of the 79th Armoured Division
claims:
There is no doubt that the troops of the Division were of inestimable value on D'
Day and thoroughly justified the time and material that had gone into their specialist
training and equipment.... It was the overwhelming mass of armour in the leading
waves of the assault, the specialist equipment coming as a complete surprise, that
overwhelmed and dismayed the defending troops and contributed a large part to the
combination of strategic and tactical surprise which resulted in the comparatively
light casualties suffered by our troops on 'D' Day."
While the specialist AVR Es had mixed success, the performance of the DD tanks
in the weather conditions of D-Day was far from successful and the DD tanks
could have been landed directly on the beaches without any significant losses of
landing craft and tanks. The DD tanks at Omaha did not contribute their ful mass
to the assault as many sank before the assault even began.
The initial landings in the Sword, Juno and Gold sectors employed many more
armoured vehicles in the initial assault than the US forces did at Omaha and Utah.
Planned
Sector
Sword
Juno
Gold
Omaha
Utah
DD tanks
40
78
76
64
32
LCT(A)s M4 and
tank dozers
Flails
AVRES
Centaurs
TOTAL
16
26
20
24
34
40
40
116
170
32
172
32
112
48
24
56
