288
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
beating off attacks by Panther tanks and infantry coming from the direction of
Vassy. At nightfall, the two squadrons were withdrawn to a harbour near a farm
called La Pavée except for a road block of one troop of tanks and fifteen men from
the 3rd Monmouthshire Regiment:
...l arranged an all-round defence of our little pocket. No smoking and anyone found
asleep would be shot. The infantry dug in with their hands, shovels too noisy. Barbed
wire and Hawkins grenade were stretched across the road. Tank guns were pointed at
possible approaches and the plan was to fire everything full blast if there was an attack.
We sat, pricking our hands with pins to keep awake, and listening to German tracked
vehicles moving somewhere to the south; and wishing we were somewhere else.
With the 29th Brigade group, the 3rd RTR occupied the hamlet of Le Grand
Bonfait after encountering a small group of German tanks and infantry threatening
the rear echelons of the division around Point 138. The infantry of the Shropshire
regiment managed to knock out one Panther tank with a PIAT, but in the fading
light C Squadron lost three tanks brewed up. The 2nd Northants Yeomanry
on the right flank were ordered to Etouvy on the extreme right and tanks from
C Squadron reached the outskirts of Vire unopposed at 2000 hours but were in-
structed not to enter the town as it was in the American sector.
At 2230 hours the
Tith Armoured Division HQ ordered the leading regiments
to hold their present positions as the division was now considerably exposed, there
being no support on the left.* The 9th SS Panzer Division was where the Guards
Armoured Division was supposed to be. Although well positioned for a further
exploitation south to Vire, once again the British commanders decided to halt the
advance in order to wait for the Guards to make progress to Estry and to await the
inevitable German counterattack. Although the defenders in that type of terrain
often had the advantage, this decision displayed the identical caution shown in
Operation Epsom when the mere threat of an attack was sufficient to halt the attack
Just as it was poised to achieve a major success. The 29th Brigade reported thirty
tanks damaged or destroyed, including six Fireflies, that evening.
The German counterattack had not been successtul. The eastern pincer of
Kampfgruppe Meyer had clashed continuously with the strung-out umits of the
lith Armoured Division and had been unable to penetrate to Le Bény Bocage.
The znd Company of the roznd SS Schwere Battalion of Tiger tanks had reached
Vire in the evening after taking a detour around the road block of the znd Fife
and Forfars on the Vire-Vassy road while the ist Company of Tigers stayed in the
vicinity of Chenedolle and Estry. The close countryside made an impression on the
battalion, as recorded by a tank commander, Unterscharfuehrer Streng:
The bocage was a cruel area. Every road, every little field and meadow was surrounded
by thick hedges two or three metres in height. It was full of frightening opportuni-
ties for tanks and anti-tank guns to hide in ambush. The fighting was confused and
289
Operation Bluecoat
dificult; each crew member had to react in a flash to any threat or danger. Tank
clashes at short range, sometimes only a few metres, were not unusual. 4s
That evening, von Kluge anxiously studied his strategic maps. The news that Vire
had not been captured was an enormous relief in view of the new orders that had
arrived from Hitler after midnight confirming Operation Luttich (the Mortain
counterattack) as Vire was a vital road junction on the route east to west to be
used by the assembling German armour. General Eberbach ordered the 12th SS
Panzer Division to supply a small battle group, Kampfgruppe Olboeter, to secure
Briquessard
Caumont
Scale 1:50000
Terrain over 200m
| Terrain over 300m
Villers Bocage
OPERATION BLUECOAT
The limit of British advances
to 6 August 1944
St Jean des Essartiers
Cahagnes
St Georges
Aunay sur
odon
La Bistere
a Graverie
ug) Vassy
Conde sur
Noireau
The limits of the advances of British armour in Operation Bluecoat, 6 August 1944
