422-
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
of the Panther tank. Eisenhower also queried the effectiveness of the proposed
90mm gun for the M4, demanding that a gun equivalent to the British 17-pounder
be developed as quickly as possible. 4 Eisenhower followed this up by dispatching
Brigadier Holly to the USA with a personal letter for General Marshall:
None of our present ammunition for the s7mm, 75mm and 76mm guns and 105mm
howitzer can penetrate the front armour of the Panther or Tiger tanks and due to
the restrictive terrain and narrow roads in which we are fighting, we are unable to
consistently attack these tanks from a favourable angle. Moreover, even from the
flanks, our present weapons and ammunition are not adequately effective. 47
For a more powerful anti-tank gun, Eisenhower was forced to wait for the arrival
of M36 tank destroyers with a 90mm gun from late August onwards; the future
supply of all Mios was cancelled altogether as these were regarded as ineffective.
However, the M3os and an improved Sherman, the Jumbo M4A3E2 with better
sloped frontal armour of 47 degrees that was half in inch thicker than the standard,
arrived too late to take part in the Normandy fighting.
While the chorus of British complaints about their tanks was loudest in the
Normandy campaign, it was not until later in the war that American complaints
reached a crescendo; negative reports from Italy had been suppressed by the War
Department. This was precipitated by tank losses during the Battle of the Bulge
and was fuelled by adverse press articles in March 1945. Eisenhower had com-
missioned the commanders of the 2nd and 3rd Armored divisions in March 1945
to write a report comparing German and American equipment and the reports
they produced were both very critical of the M4 Sherman. One tanker remarked
that the best American tank weapon was the P-47 Thunderbolt aircraft. 48 The
newspaper articles echoed these sentiments and reported that the German Tiger
and Panther tanks were far superior, with three Shermans needed to knock out
every Tiger tank.49
The difficulties of fighting in the hedgerows forced the infantry and armour to
work together, although early experiences were unsuccessful. When an advance
was going well, the average infantryman disliked having tanks nearby as they often
attracted German artillery and mortar fire. Conversely, when the advance was held
up or being threatened by German tanks, the infantryman was naturally very keen
to have the support of tanks.
The Allies quickly discovered they could not use the roads because of well-sited,
powerful anti-tank guns, so they went cross-country. This worked for a while
until the Germans dug in assault guns and tanks as strongpoints and covered any
open ground with anti-tank guns. American ingenuity and improvisation then
devised ways to improve the communications between tanks and infantry. There
was no question of whether the infantry or tanks should lead; undisputedly, the
two arms needed to advance side by side. The infantry could not get through the
Summary
423
hedges and trees without the tanks and vice versa. In the bocage, both the Allies
and the Germans found defence much easier than attack.
The American armoured divisions, like their British counterparts, had trained
for an exploitative role and found themselves unexpectedly having to work very
closely with their armoured infantry. In the advance to St Lô, the 3rd Armored
Division was employed in late June by XIX Corps to eliminate a small salient
in the frontline by a direct frontal assault, which was an inappropriate use of an
armoured division. It was the first time in combat for Combat Command A,
which found itself fighting in hedgerows unlike any terrain they had trained in.
The results were high casualties in men and tanks, and these became typical of
later operations as the advance on St Lô continued. Around St Jean de Daye the
operations of the division's CCB were hampered by congested lines of advance,
triendly-fire incidents and tanks advancing across the front of infantry regiments.
Relations with XIX Corps degenerated to such an extent that CB's reports of
having reached the objective at Les Hauts Vents were not believed and next day its
commander was replaced.
The veteran 2nd Armored Division, after its initial action at Carentan, remained
in reserve until Operation Cobra in expectation of a German attack that never
came. Despite its inexperience, the 3rd Armored Division was then given the most
important objective in Operation Cobra of charging across the Cotentin peninsula
from St Lô to Coutances and cutting the retreat of the left wing of the Seventh
Army. If ever there was to be a battle of exploitation through a gap blasted in the
German frontlines, this was it. Unfortunately, the gap proved to be too narrow with
only a single road to carry the vehicles of two armoured divisions. Traffic conges-
tion, increasing German resistance and rigid VII Corps orders that prescribed an
advance by steps, all served to impede the advance of the 3rd Division's CCB and
the Ist Division. Consequently, on 28 July the mission of capturing Coutances was
given to another corps, and the division's commander, Major-General Watson, was
relieved as a consequence of his division's poor performance.
The znd Armored Division, having previously been allocated the role of pro-
tecting the eastern flank from German counterattacks, was ordered to take over
the mission of the 3rd Armored Division. The 'heavy' structure of the division
had sufficient strength in tanks to allow its CCA to continue the flank guard by
pushing east to Tessy while CCB eventually formed the blocking force at St Denis
and Lengronne.
The stage was now set for the launching of Patton's Third Army into the gap
at Avranches created by Operation Cobra. Patton's rapid advance eastwards was
with three armoured divisions in a classical armoured division exploitation role
through the weakly defended rear areas of Seventh Army with the Germans
unsure of his intentions. It was only when the armoured divisions turned north-
wards on Io August towards Alençon that the American plan of encirclement
became obvious.
