346
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Were critical of their Sherman tanks, while Maczek blamed the losses on the Allied
artillery and airforce not having neutralised the enemy sufficiently and having
to mop up enemy left by the sist (H) Division, which for its part reported the
Polish lack of progress to Simonds.4 The operations of the AGRA supporting the
view of this, Maczek should have made sure he had his own artillery available for
Polish Division.
9 August
The two armoured divisions had not advanced far that afternoon and, to Simonds'
anger, they harboured for the night rather than pushing on. Parts of the Canadian
lines of communication were still congested, making it difficult to get troops and
supplies forward. However, the capture of Hautmesnil and Bretteville sur Laze
by the Canadians made the position of Kampfgruppe Waldmuller difficult, and it
was ordered to break contact and withdraw that night to the area around Hill 140,
northwest of Assy. The kampfgruppe, with its attached Mark IVs, Jagdpanzers and
the three surviving Tigers of Wittmann's company, had been pushed to the east
towards Soignelles by the Polish advance. Kampfgruppe Krause arrived overnight
and assembled with the bulk of the division's remaining armour in Kampfgruppe
Wunsche in the Quesnay Wood as a reserve.
Nine Panther tanks had been lost, mainly to heavy artillery fire in the fighting
around Grimbosa (in which the 107th RTR also lost twenty-eight tanks), and the
Kampfgruppe arrived in the Quesnay Wood with four tanks which, with the sole
survivor from Waldmuller's attack the previous day, gave the division five Panther
had returned from Grimbosq were also in the same location.
tanks. The ten Tiger tanks of the 2nd Company IOIst SS Schwere battalion that
The first tanks of the Panther tank Battalion promised by von Kluge on 8 August
began to take up positions in the Ouilly Woods near Potigny, but no sooner had
they arrived than they were ordered to leave by von Kluge during the afternoon
of 9 August to reinforce the attack at Mortain. The elation at having a heavy tank
force to meet the expected assault and then losing it was like a 'cold shower to the
German defenders.47
By noon on 9 August, thirteen Tigers of the ist Company of the rond Schwere
SS Battalion had also arrived from Estry and positioned themselves in Quesnay
Wood. 48 The tanks of the and Company were deployed in the sector of the
27Ist Division to provide much needed support there. The 8th Company of five
tanks that was a part of Kampfgruppe Krause involved in fighting on 8 August
against Grimbosq bridgehead also assembled in Quesnay Wood before being de-
ployed around Hill 195 on 9 August. 4 The Germans managed to collect together
Operation Totalize
347
another small but powerful force in the Quesnay Wood of twenty-five Tiger tanks
(including two 3rd Company tanks), five Panthers and five Mark IVs.
The line of hills around Potigny and to Mazières following the Laison River
was the only defendable terrain, and the decision was made to make this the new
frontline, pending the arrival of the 8sth Division as reinforcements.?°
At 1830 hours on 8 August, Simonds had ordered Kitching to continue the
advance to Point 195 through the night, but the Grenadier Guards were already
moving back to harbour. Kitching, in turn, convened his own orders group at
2000 hours with his two brigade commanders, and Booth was ordered to advance
to Point 195 and Bretteville le Rabet, the latter being a still outstanding objective.
The Grenadier Guards would advance at o3is hours to take Bretteville le Rabet
and the British Columbia Regiment with the Algonquin infantry regiment less
one company would advance just east of the Caen-Falaise road and parallel to it,
past Bretteville before crossing the road to Point 195. By the time Booth's orders
group had finished it was o10o hours, with the start time scheduled for 020o hours."
The final objective of Hill 19s was beyond the range of British artillery but three
forward observers accompanied the battle group to provide support once the field
arillery had moved up. The British Columbian Regiment was expected to hold
the hill until reinforcements arrived.
The initial advance did not begin until 0400 hours, according to the war dial y
of the British Columbia Regiment, with C Squadron leading and A Squadron
bringing up the rear. The tanks went as fast as the darkness and terrain permitted.
Arriving just north of Bretteville le Rabet, the leading tanks were fired upon by
anti-tank guns and the regiment briefly halted to consider whether to wait until the
nearby Grenadier Guards had cleared the village. The commander of the regiment,
Colonel Worthington, gave the order to Move on anyway, while we still have
surprise? Fire from the Germans intensified as they realised that enemy tanks were
passing through their positions. the regiment pushed on, shoute to mayaces
and any obvious locations where German soldiers could be hiding on the way.
Dawn brought an end to the uncertainty of navigating at night but had other
consequences. The Canadians saw some high ground in front of them and, assum-
ing it was their objective, headed for it whilst the anti-tank gunners of the German
defenders could clearly see the Sherman tanks for the first time.
The battle group shot up several half-tracks and lorries spotted in the woods
along the route of the advance, which had penetrated deep behind the German
frontline positions. Arriving at a rectangular field bounded by hedges, the battle
group arranged itself in a tight defensive position to await the arrival of reinforce-
ments. Unfortunately, the hill that the regiment occupied was Hill ill east of
Potigny and not Point 195 west of Potigny.
En route, B Squadron had become disorganised in the darkness near Cauvicourt
When the first resistance was encountered around Bretteville. After re-forming,
the squadron pushed well to the east to avoid any fire from Bretteville and, when
it neared Estrées la Campagne at dawn, a further Orders Group was held. At this
