262
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
to move the destroyed vehicles to the side of the road, one of my Panthers had broken
a sprocket wheel and had to be abandoned.
I set up a march formation. First my tank with grenadiers on the left side and about
so to 6o paratroopers on the right side as a safeguard against close combat fighters
with bazookas. Then the two assault guns, the wheeled vehicles of our task force,
various stragglers, self-propelled infantry guns and mobile flak followed. The rear
was brought up by the Panzer IV and my second Panther. The frequency of our radio
communication was set, and at 2200 hours we started. Of course, no scouts had moved
at all before this ...
... On the right side a farm was in flames. In the wavering light I thought I saw
a Sherman in the field to the left. We fired twice and hit it, but it didn't burn. Then
I drove full speed across the Hambye-Roncey Road, where I expected stiff American
resistance and, if I remember correctly, we rolled over an anti-tank gun. I shot into
the lane that led into the main road from the other side and stopped. Passing the
intersection, I saw two Shermans to my right side standing at right angles, sticking
their heads into the hedgerow. Now I realized these were the machine guns that had
fired at our paratroopers when we started and had wounded a number of them. We
had to be quick to use the surprise effect, so I ordered the assault guns to rush to the
crossing, turn right and knock out the two tanks that showed them their sides. They
hesitated and started deliberating. I was enraged. I turned my turret and told them
to start immediately or I would knock them out. They did, turned right and had no
problems destroying the American tanks. I proceeded down the lane. To my right side
there was a wider field with a hedgerow bordering it. Along this hedge a number of
armoured vehicles were parked, pointed toward the main road. I was lucky. We hit
the last one, probably an ammunition carrier, and it was like fireworks at a summer
festivity. The flare ammunition with the different colours was a fantastic sight. The
whole area was illuminated, and I could easily pick out another four to six of these
armoured halftracks. I don't remember the exact number. With all this, a great many
soldiers of the infantry units behind the north-south road were encouraged to jump
up and follow us. They did this in an unmilitary manner, with shouts and yells, firing
in the air and the like. At first I was appalled, but then I realized it was quite useful.
The Americans seemed to be completely surprised and even dumbfounded. They left
a number of cars, which were taken over by Germans, and there was practically no
further resistance. I drove on and maybe 15o meters in front of me an American tank
raced from the right toward the road. We wanted to stop it, and that thing happened
that all tank crews are most afraid of - you pull the trigger or push the button, and the
gun doesn't fire. Figuring that was the end for us, I turned my head and got an even
bigger shock. From the south, four American tanks rushed onto the road that joined
ours, which came from La Valtolaine. They turned back and disappeared at full speed.
l again looked forward. That first tank had such momentum when it hit the road that.
it couldn't stop in time and got stuck with its nose in the ditch next to the road. Only
with great trouble could it get out, turn around and get away. We were sitting there i
our Panther, not only undamaged but even unmolested and almost couldn't believe it.
Operation Cobra
263
The column we had started with comprised about 300 men. By now it was around
double that number. As we moved farther, our progress was made easier by a number
of captured [Allied] vehicles. Some stragglers joined us, while others separated and
chose different ways. We were a motley, mixed bunch. I figured that combat action
would occur in this intersection area, which appeared to be more than a mere road-
block. I ordered the other Panther to take the lead, and I brought up the rear. Radio
communication still worked, and we began our erratic wandering.
We first reached
Lengronne, continued to Cerences, crossed the Sienne River and drove on to Gavray.
When we reached the town, it was under fire. Here our column became mixed
with a number of other vehicles. Outside the town we continued without loss and
turned toward St. Denis-le-Gast, but before reaching it, we left the road and drove to
the bridge at La Baleine. As we approached, our movement nearly stopped. I climbed
out of my Panther to find out the reason. Artillery fire, which continued sporadically,
or bombing had damaged this bridge, the sides of which were partly destroyed. The
drivers were very reluctant to go on it. I then took over, organized the approach to
the bridge and directed each vehicle across. When our tank crossed, as the last vehicle,
only half the width of the tracks found footing in some places. On the south side of
the river, tactical signs of quite a number of units were installed, and the column
could dissolve. Most of them now knew where to go. My self-appointed mission was
finished. It was full daylight by now, and the first planes appeared. We drove into
a lane that led up a hill, and at the first farm with an orchard we stopped. I told the
crew we would now have a good nap after three nights of nearly no sleep at all. We
crawled under our tank and were lost to the world around us. It was high noon when
we were awake again, and we were alone. 49
Daylight revealed the results of the desperate battles during the night. Hundreds
of wrecked vehicles, dead horses and corpses littered the countryside.
and Armored Division alone had killed an estimated 1,500 Germans and taken
4,000 prisoners for the loss of nearly 100 men killed and 300 men wounded:°
Operation Cobra was over, and the German Seventh Army was in pieces with
its left wing up in the air and the US 4th Armored Division moving south past
it towards Avranches. Next day, this advance continued and the bridge over the
River Selune at Pontabault Was captured intact, opening the door to Diary for
Patton's Third Army.
Aftermath
in the first few days of Operation Cobra, 6,000 German prisoners were captured
by FUSA and by the end of the month this total had risen to 20,000 prisoners.$
However, many men of eight German infantry divisions and the 2nd and in ss
Panzer Divisions had either managed to evade the 2nd Armored Division cordon
detore it was set up or fight their way through the American lines. I hese divisions,
