352
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
under more fire, losing another two tanks. The infantry were then requested to
clear the woods, but apparently the Foot Guards tanks were unwilling to provide
support; as contact had been lost with the supporting artillery, the infantry com-
mander decided against an attack. The other two squadrons moved to the hedge
in support of No. I Squadron, but a total of fourteen tanks were lost between
them before the regiment harboured near the Algonquins. A Firefly managed to
knock out one Tiger tank, and its gunner was presented with a bottle of whisky
by the CO for bagging the regiment's first tank in battle. No. i Squadron had also
lost twelve tanks, making a total of twenty-six tank casualties in one day. The
advance to Hill 195 had been stopped dead.
If the British Columbia Regiment had not made its navigation mistake, its in-
tended route would have taken it close to the Quesnay Wood about dawn and they
would have more than likely been exposed to the same fire from Kampfgruppe
Wunsche as was the Foot Guards. Even if some tanks of the regiment had survived
and made it onto Hill 195, it may never have been relieved in view of the assembled
German firepower.
Poles versus 12th SS Divisionbeigleit Company
At 0900 hours, Maczek gave his orders for the coming day's operations. The
3rd Infantry Brigade would clear the Woods around Robertmesnil that had given
so much trouble the previous day and then advance on St Sylvain. The armoured
drive towards Hill 140 would be continued at 110o hours by the ist Tank Regiment
and the 24th Uhlans. This time the regiments advanced more cautiously and were
able to make slow progress past estrees la Campagne and Cauvicourt. Ine tive
dining Jag pancers of the previous day occupied the high ground and engageu
the advancing Polish tanks whenever they could. The 24th Uhlans advanced west
of Estrées la Campagne and also came under fire from the German positions in
Quesnay Wood, losing fourteen tanks. The ist Tank Regiment to the east had ap-
proached Hill 140, which was a specific regimental objective, before being forced to
retire by fierce German resistance that was determined to eliminate Worthington
Force on Hill III. The ist Polish Armoukst Division's operational report for the
day makes no reference to the Canadian tanks occupying the division's objective.
The roth Mounted Rifle reconnaissance regiment operated in front of the infantry
ksd tanks around St Sylvain and Cauvicourt. Nos. I and 3 squadrons attacked
the positions of the i2th SS Panzer Division escort company in the woodland on
Point 84 east of Renemesnil and virtually destroyed it, losing only one tank to
a Panzerfaust.
Other attempts to advance further south were defeated by concentrated anti-tank
fire from the Germans. The elimination of the British Columbia position and the
halting of the Polish attacks allowed the remnants of Kampfgruppe Waldmuller to
retire to the new German lines around Conde sur Ifs. While this was in progress,
Operation Totalize
353
a Polish attack on Soignelles was broken up by two Jagdpanzers, which destroyed all
the tanks except for two. The ist Company Jagdpanzers claimed to have knocked
out twenty-two tanks that day. However, the Poles were able to occupy Soignelles
later without a fight when the Germans withdrew.
In the early evening the Polish advanced past Hills I1l and 140, as far as Rouvres,
where they clashed with the newly arrived elements of the 8sth Division before
being forced to withdraw after losing twenty-two tanks." A staggering nineteen
ranks were claimed as destroyed by the same two Jagdpanzers that did so much
damage the previous day. Not surprisingly, their commanders, Rudolph Roy and
Georg Hurdelbrink, and gunners received a medal for their actions. Fritz Eckstein,
the jagdpanzer gunner in Rudolph Roy's vehicle, claimed to have destroyed eight
tanks on 8 August and thirteen the next day; Eckstein was subsequently awarded
the Iron Cross (First Class).02
10 August
Overnight the last element of the r2th SS Panzer Division, Kampfgruppe Olboeter,
returned from Vire and was ordered to defend the high ground at Hill 195 west of
fotigny. After the road trip and losses in combat, of the original thirteen Panthers
there were only four tanks operational, threeureding short-term repairs.*
Will 195 had been reported clear by the Manitoba Dragoons searching for the
missing regiment the previous day. The Dragoons had not seen any sherman tanks
on the objective or Germans either and Booth now sought to take advantage of
this. A company of the Algonquin infantry, with a squadron each of armoured
cars and tanks, were to advance atter dark to capture the St Hilare farin just north
of Point 195, which was also unoccupied. Ine armoured venicies did not dirve
at the forming-up point and so the infantry advanced unsupported to the farm,
fortunately without incident. Two more infantry battalions then followed up and
secured Point i9s before dawn, again without a shot being fired. As it grew lighter,
the German realised what had happened and mounted a heavy bombardment of
the exposed hilltop with artillery and mortars.
The Grenadier Guards Regiment
was initially ordered to just move up to Point I95 to support the infantry, but these
orders were then changed to drive on further south for Point 206 to the south-west
of Potigny. Assembling at the railway embankment north of St Hilaire at 0300
hours, the regiment had halted until dawn. The CO's tank lost a track during this
march and was immobilised. With the coming of daylight, this tank had just been
repaired when it was knocked out by what was believed to be a Tiger tank lurking
in an orchard nearby. No. I Squadron advanced towards the farm at 08is hours, and
a Sherman and a Firefly were immediately knocked out by two German tanks that
had moved up to near the farm and by fire from Quesnay Wood. No. 3 Squadron
also lost two tanks to anti-tank fire from the west. The rate of advance was too
slow for Brigadier Booth, who again urged the regiment in a series of messages
