205
204
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
British Tank Strengths 17 July 1944 (all figures from WO205/636)
Sherman
Sherman VC
Stuarts
Cromwell
Cromwell CS
11 AD (29th Bde)
2 NY
7th AD (22nd Bde)
8th Hussars
GAD (5th Bde)
2WG
2 CAB
27th Armed Bde
144 RAC
Total
153
36
35
25
11
34
55
141
55
17
162
36
55
60
49
23
33
12
35
577
175
70
306
The 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade would support the 3rd Division in clear-
ing the industrial area around Colombelle (Operation Atlantic) to complete the
capture of Caen. The 27th Armoured Brigade and a regiment from the 33rd Tank
Brigade, the 144th RAC, were to support the sist (H) Division and 3rd Division
of I Corps in securing the eastern flank. If the tank forces of the divisions assigned
to hold the flanks are excluded, the sabre strength of the three armoured divisions
of VIII Corps assigned to make the breakthrough was more than 763 tanks, which
gave a numerical superiority of 3:1.
Dempsey and the Allied planners believed they had overcome all the potential
Haws in the plan. Even when an Ultra intercept just 36 hours before the intended
attack indicated that the Germans were expecting a massive operation, the Allies
still believed they had the element of tactical surprise on their side and the opera-
tion would proceed.
So the stage was set for another Rommel versus Montgomery set-piece battle.
The Germans, for their part, were ready and waiting. The only setback to their
defensive preparations was the loss of Rommel on the eve of the battle. His staff
car was strafed by two Spitfires as it returned from a last-minute inspection of the
lefences and a visit to Dietrich at the Ist SS Panzer korps headquarters are
received severe head injuries and was evacuated from Normandy, never to return.
Ironically, Rommel had apparently been canvassing Dietrich's support in the event
of a coup against Hitler in order to bring about a negotiated settlement to the war!"
At 0200 hours on 18 July, the attack was confirmed for daybreak that day. Once
again the Allied attack had been named after an English racecourse, Goodwood,
and the coming battle or race
"meeting
would give the opportunity for the
modern-day cavalry regiments to conduct their favourite manoeuvre: the charge.
Operation Goodwood
The Battle
Montgomery cabled Churchill on 17 July saying that because of his diversionary
tat he was very optimistic about the success of Goodwood: 'Conditions for big
ta tomorrow very favourable as main enemy weight has moved to west of the
Omeas was intended to oppose my attacks in the Evrecy area ...?
Dempsey had moved his HQ to co-locate with that of VIII Corps on 17 July
o he could take over the subsequent exploitation if the attack was successful and
"favourable opportunities'
presented themselves. The tank regiments had two
seepless nights assembling for the attack:
The night moves proved to be horrendous, moving nose to tail along dusty wind-
ing tracks, tank commanders peering with bleary eyes out of their turrets trying to
mantain station on the tank in front. This first move on the night of the 16th/17th
July was accomplished without undue incident and we arrived in an area west of the
One about 1.00am in the morning. Our orders were to lie up for the day, camouflage
our tanks and get as much rest as possible. However the guns and instruments in the
tanks had to be cleaned of the appalling dust which covered everything after the night
march. We were able to cook meals on our small tank stoves although no fires were
allowed and all movement was kept to a minimum in the leaguer area ...
the Guards Division occupied a forming up place before the attace about s mues
west of the River Orne bridges and only arrived in position at about midnight on
17 July so did not get much opportunity to rest or sleep either.
Just before daylight the British vanguard, the 3rd Royal Tank Regiment (3rd R TR)
of the tich Armoured Division, moved through the newly cleared minefield chan-
nels to its starting position. At dawn, 0545 hours, the RAf aerial bombardment
using 942 aircraft made up of 667 Lancasters, 260 Halifaxes and fifteen Mosquitos
began in clear conditions.
The soldiers of both sides heard and then saw the approach of the massed forma-
tion of bombers. The Allied soldiers settled back to watch the show, secure in the
knowledge that there was a 6,0ooyd exclusion zone between them and the bomb-
ing zones. The Germans presumed that yet another city in Germany was going to
ve targeted until coloured fares talling to the ground anu the operas bomb bay
doors indicated that this time they were the targets and that they only had a few
seconds to find cover. Most of the targets were satistactorily marked by the RAf's
radio direction finding system, Oboe, and at the only target where Oboe failed,
the Master Bomber and other Pathfinder crews looked for and found themselves.
Following behind the British bombers were more than 1,000 American bombers
of the Eighth and Ninth US Airforces, which attacked their targets with fragmen-
tation bombs. Some aircraft were unable to see their targets because of the smoke
and dust raised by the previous waves of bombers and did not drop their loads. By
0830 hours, a total of 6,800 tons of bombs had been dropped of which Bomber
