The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
tanks stimulated this debate. All regiments eventually adopted a four-tank troop
model with a Firefly in each troop.
The American tank battalions were organised into three companies of seventeen
tanks in each with three platoons each of five tanks and two in company headquar-
ters. There were four tanks in the battalion headquarters. Keeping the squadrons
of the regiment or battalion fighting were the support echelons that did not ac-
company the tanks into battle but met up with the tanks either at a designated place
(the rally point) or at the squadron harbour.
The A or F fighting echelon vehicles carried the supplies needed to keep the
tanks fighting such as fuel, ammunition and water, and generally were as far for-
ward as the battle permitted. The B echelon contained the kitchen and officers
mess trucks plus various stores and maintenance personnel and remained in a rear
area behind the frontlines. Each regiment had a small workshop capable of carrying
out small or simple repairs to the tanks to keep them operational. These were
known as Light Aid Detachments (LAD) and we's the first line of worksnops with
onigade wokshops being the second line of workshops for repalls that the Lad
could not carry out.
German tank battalions were organised in a similar way to the Allied regimens,
with a battalion being made up of four or five companies, each company being of
three platoons or zugs of five tanks with another two in the company headquarters.
Replacements
The 2nd Armoured Replacement Grlyup (ARG) was set up in 1944 to organise the
movement of replacement personnel and the supply of battle-worthy operational
tanks for armoured regiments. I his unit was hurdly created just betore -way
and had a series of tank delivery squadrons attached to it operating at the brigade
and corps level. The and ARG was also tasked with organising the training of
reinforcements. The reinforcements early in the campaign trained on tanks passed
Dy RAC inspectors for issuing to the regiments, but it was quickly found that the
tanks were becoming damaged and a pool of training vehicles had to be set up for
the use of a specially created training unit.
The pool of replacements was created by new recruits and drafts of trained men
taken on by the 2nd ARG from the regiments, which took them of strength. lank
crews that were forced to bail out and men who had recovered from wounds also
entered the pool prior to joining another unit. The men were then supposed to
be taken on by whichever regiment they were sent to. As the first battle casualties
began to flow through the 2nd ARG, regiments naturally tried to procure those
men originally from their own regiments and rejected others as unsultable, which
was against orders and the practice was frowned upon. An exception to this policy
was the Guards Armoured Division, which drew on its own pool of replacements.
Fighting the Tank
97
On arrival at the Army Ordnance Depot (AOD) in Normandy, tanks were ser-
viced by a REME AFV (Armoured Fighting Vehicle) servicing detachment unit
before delivery to the znd ARG. While in the vehicle parks, tanks were exposed
to the elements, required servicing and were often damaged in minor collisions.
The vehicle parks were designed to hold only 800 vehicles but often had more
than 2,000 vehicles on site because of limited space in the small Allied lodgement
area and this increased the regular servicing workload and the amount of physical
damage to stored vehicles by other moving vehicles.
The tanks shipped from England required servicing before they could be issued
to frontline units. This involved the removal of all waterproofing and degreasing,
especially the main gun and the machine guns. Tracks had to be tightened up,
clutches adjusted where necessary, a radio installed and all communication equip-
ment checked for operation. In some instances, modifications had to be made such
as installing an insulated cover for the battery box in Sherman tanks. Additional
equipment that the crew needed to operate the tank was then issued to each tank
as a kit and included:
• First aid kits
• Binoculars, watches for the crew
• Fire extinguishers
• Spare telescopes
• Water and fuel jerricans
• Gas masks
• Signal lamps
• Verey pistol and flares
Prior to issue, the tanks were inspected by a REME inspection unit and those
found to be unfit for battle were sent back for rectification.
The tank then had
to be fuelled, water and oil checked, and fully loaded with ammunition by the
forward delivery squadrons before delivery to the units. From the end of July,
vehicles were no longer waterproofed as the beach and harbour unloading facilities
had improved. Thus an armoured fighting vehicle ought to reach its user unit fully
operational, fully equipped, fully crewed, fuelled and loaded with ammunition.
The tanks suffered mechanical or electrical breakdowns from time to time that
required repairs. If the repairs were beyond the crew, the next step was the squadron
titters, which came forward in the fighting support echelon. A recovery vehicle was
Part of this echelon. If a tank needed to be towed or transported off the battlefield,
the regimental Light Aid Detachment propat the next level of repairs. The tao
activities included frontline repairs, changing engines and gearboxes, maintall
nazal equipment and recovering vehicles under all kinds of conditions. A large
range of spares was carried and basic welding was performed.
