10
Operation Luttich -
Mortain Counterattack
There were two basic problems within the OKW, the first being Adolf Hiter
himself. After the failed attempt on his life on 20 July, in which he suffered con-
cussion and damaged eardrums, Hitler had drawn the wrong conclusions from
his seemingly miraculous survival. Like all politicians who are in power for long
periods, Hitler genuinely believed that he, and only he, knew what was best for
Germany and could lead her to ultimate fictory. The failure of the bomb plot
convinced Hitler that it was his destiny to continue to lead Germany and theretore
he would continue to involve himself in the day-to-day decisions or the can,
with disastrous results. Hitler Deleved that most of the titled gene des on the neer
as possible, to cover their own shortcomings, and that his SS divisions were the
only reliable, effective fighting force - hence the promotion of so General Mausser
to command the Seventh Army in Normandy. I his change was made di a critica.
time during
Operation epson, just before the major certal cuttama l
restore the trone, and it subsequenuy ustupted German P"-Fuss. wA
faced with an American breakout from the Cotentin peninsula along the coast at
Avranches following
Operation Cobra and Americans advancing into Britany,
revealed that the width of the corridor wrough which the American ai along wor
Howing was very narrow and hence vulncrable. If the Germans could assemble
" powaa force and arive wavagu to Avranches, at outman none woul
be restored and the American spearheads cut off, to be dealt with at the Seventh
Army's leisure. Hitler then placed on the map the unit pins for the panzer divisions
In theory, an unstoppable army of ave one ayue six panzer divisions coum quick
be assembled and drive to the coast. What Hitler failed to take into account was
the poor condition of the panzer divisions after weeks of fighting. At that moment,
Hitler became one of the despised generals from his own experiences in the Firs
World War: a chateau general, divorced from reality, who simply manoeuvred pins
Operation Luttich - Mortain Counterattack
309
The second problem within OKW was that no one was prepared to stand up to
Hitler and at least argue alternative viewpoints. The German army in Normandy
was under a cloud of suspicion, having failed to mount a major counterattack to
defeat the invasion.
On 31 July, von Kluge arrived at Seventh Army HQ to discuss plans to restore
the German frontline by reconnecting with the coast on the left flank of the
army. That day, American forces had captured the bridge at Pontaubault intact
and could now breakout from the Cotentin peninsula. All the panzer divisions
in Panzer Gruppe West from the eastern sector would be made available in a new
formation called the Fifth Panzer Army. The attack would be mounted as soon as
possible when all the panzer divisions had been assembled, which was subject to
their successful disengagement from the frontline and their replacement by new
infantry divisions as they arrived in Normandy. Hausser also wanted to evacuate
the occupation forces from the Channel Islands and Brittany but this was denied by
OKW, which hoped the Americans would expend time and resources in capturing
the fortresses of Brittany.'
That day, it was decided that the Fifth Panzer Army would attack along the
isthmus between the Rivers See and Selune with the assembly area for the attack to
be around Mortain and Sourdevalle. The planned area for the attack had a natural
anti-tank obstacle in the form of the River See to protect the northern flank of the
proposed attack whilst to the south the ridge parallel to the River Selune afforded
good observation of the intended line of attack and positions on which to deploy
heavy artillery for support. While offering some benefits, the area chosen for the
attack had the small fields, dense hedgerows and hills of the 'Suisse Normande,
similar to that found by the British in Operation Bluecoat.
By 1 August, however, both flanks of the Seventh
Army were threatened.
The Americans had captured Avranches and Pontaubault in
the west and the
326th Division in the east had all been but destroyed by the British in Operation
Bluecoat. The Seventh Army was experiencing considerable
pressure
all along
the length of its frontline. With the loss of Villedieu to the Americans, the front-
line could be shortened by a withdrawal to the Forêt St Sever that allowed the
TIóth Panzer Division to be partially disengaged for the coming attack,
elements were still caught up in defensive fighting.
The 84th Division was on the
approach march to replace the 116th Panzer Division. For a while, the British break-
through in Operation Bluecoat looked very
ominous for the Germans: not only
Were units such as the znd SS Panzer Korps destined for the planned attack fighting
there but Vire, through which the panzer divisions designated for the attack would
have to pass, was also threatened. Fortunately for the Germans, despite Vire being
relatively undefended on 2 August, the British attack had halted in response to the
counterattack by the oth SS and roth SS Panzer divisions. This allowed elements
from the 3rd Parachute Division, supported by two batteries of 88mm Flak guns in
a line from Vaudry to La Papillionaire to provide an anti-tank screen, to occupy
Vire. It was against this background that Hitler, on 2 August, ordered Operation
