292
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The shell struck the Sherman's turret and exploded, knocking Kite unconscious.
Luckily, it was a high explosive shell as the Panther tank had apparently run out of
armour-piercing shot as well. Kite survived and was awarded a bar to his Military
Medal. During this attack, heavy defensive artillery fire had been brought down
around the German tanks and eventually the attack petered out; the Germans
withdrew, leaving A Squadron to count the cost of the action. Three Shermans and
a Firefly had been lost in this battle.s°
2nd Northants Yeomanry
At 1200 hours, A Squadron was covering the Vire-Vassy road north-east of Vire.
C Squadron was in reserve around Etouvy and B Squadron was covering the
road north of Vire. At about isoo hours, the Tiger tanks advanced out of Vire
and immediately knocked out three Cromwell tanks of B Squadron. The 75mm
armour-piercing shells of the Cromwells simply bounced off the frontal armour of
the Tigers. B Squadron was ordered to form a road block but this was attacked from
the front and outflanked by Tigers; six more Cromwells were quickly knocked
out. A Squadron tried to call in corrections to an artillery shoot but priority was
given to the calls from an artillery observer plane, which was in communication
with a squadron of Typhoons on call that day. Unfortunately, this plane was then
shot down by the Germans and the Typhoons could not be given a target so the
subsequent later artillery barrage missed the advancing Tiger tanks. One Tiger
tank emerging from behind a building to get on to the main road was hit in the
side by one of the RHQ Cromwells at La Bistiere and was knocked out. A couple
of liger tanks, possibly from the Ist Company, came in from the eas so kne
and A Squadron were pulled back as they were in danger of being cut off. The
small, hedged fields meant that even when the Cromwells tanks had a flank shot ar
a Tiger, the velocity of the 75mm armour-piercing shells was sometimes reduced
by the hedges and little damage was done. The Tigers engaged C Squadron, which
had moved up in support of the other squadrons and tanks began to trade shots
with each other. A troop of Mio tank destroyers was located a mile to the north but
did not come to the aid of the Northants Yeomanry. However, the dense nedge-
rows restricted the visibility and movement of the heavy Tigers and in response to
counterattacks by British tanks and infantry armed with PlATs, the 2nd Company
Tigers eventually withdrew, leaving two tanks at the vital road junction and their
accompanying infantry to dig in. The ist Company stayed near La Graverie where
they had linked up with the 3rd Parachute Division. SS Rottenführer Trautmann
was the gunner in the company commander's tank:
The commander of the reconnaituase battalion had told us that friendly patrols wer
out in front.
We had scarcely reached the fork in the road when we were able to
identify a tank and several men in the hedge along the road about soo yards from
us. It could not be determined with certainty whether it was the enemy. Suddenly,
however a small armoured car moved up behind the tank and then took off to the
Operation Bluecoat
north. Because it could only be seen for a few seconds, it could not be knocked out.
A fire command was immediately issued - engage at will!
While the first few rounds hit the tank, there was a howling above us in the air.
The infantry jumped under cover. Our location was within enemy artillery range.
Schroif issued orders - continue to advance!
Although the tank in front of us had been hit several times, it did not fly into the
air. Closely behind it and along the side roads were four Cromwells, all of which were
knocked out. We then stopped for a short period until the infantry had closed up.
The terrain in front of us sloped downwards, only to climb up again further on.
The last three Tigers provided cover; the main body rolled down the hill and then up
the other side. The remaining tanks then followed with infantry aboard.
Our attack objective, a small village could be seen about 600-700 yards ahead. The
infantry proceeded to the left and right through the fields, the Tigers then moved out.
Soon they had reached the first buildings.
Then it got crazy! Close to the road, hidden from view by the buildings and high
hedges were enemy tanks. Shermans! But the two lead tanks, Loritz and Streng
worked in an exemplary fashion together and knocked out one tank after another.
Those of us in the remaining tanks had our hands full as well. We were getting a lot
of fire, especially from the high ground to the left which was filled with row after row
of hedges. It looked like we were dealing with tanks, nothing but tanks! We notified
each other by radio whenever we were hit, so the others could get out of the enemy's
line of fire. We were struck many times by armour-piercing shells, especially in the
running gear. Schroif gave orders again and again to fire into this or that hedge. We
slowly found our targets. In one place a shot of flames rose to the sky, then at another
place. The enemy fire became weaker. The road started to climb uphill. When we
were next to the last building, the middle of the column was heavily engaged again
while the lead elements continued to advance.
The armour-piercing shells landed
between and among us like dazzling bolts of lightning. There was another hit to the
running gear. The company commander had all tanks fire off to the left! Once again
massed fire ….. groups of bushes off to the left. Two tanks flew into the air again! It was
an engagement at point blank range, 50-100 yards.
Schroif continued to receive hits from the building he was in front of, until several
high explosive rounds put an end to this defensive effort. The advance then contin-
ued. The road climbed; the attack objective was reached. It was then imperative to
find a good defensive position in the terrain. The lead elements had reached the hill
top when new fire from the left flank was received. We were hit, the radio stopped
working. Had something bad happened? What was the matter with the radio opera-
tor? The driver? By physically grabbing hold of the gunner and shouting at him, he
was told to fire in the direction of where the enemy fire was coming from. The
first round had hardly been fired when the Tigers to the rear joined in. They knew
what was happening and immediately supported us with heavy fire. The lead platoon
continued to move briskly down the slope and climb the hill on the far side. Now, at
the most important moment, the radio had stopped working. What was to be done?
293
