MAP 9
ROUTES OF ADVANCE DURING
MORNING OF 18 JULY AND
SITUATION AT 12.00 HRS
(CONTINUED FROM MAP 8)
SCALE 1:25.000
LEGEND
213
Operation Goodwood
were not following the lith Armoured Division, ordered the 7th Armoured
Dision to move, despite the fact they were supposed to be following the Guards
Dision across the narrow start line?" The 7th Armoured Division in turn could
not cross until the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade had used the bridges first, so
an armoured traffic jam developed. At 0945 hours the leading Guards regiments
were halted near Démouville but were ordered to press on at 1000 hours. At 1045
hours, the ist Coldstream Guards was 1,00oyds west of Emieville. At the same
tume, the 2nd Irish Guards was reported to be still 7,00oyds west of the bridges
over the River Orne, which gives an indication of the traffic congestion building
up around the bridges.
The ist Coldstream Guards was in its first action of the war and were looking for-
wait to it From briefings given by General Adair and others, the Guards expected
that was the big offensive that would take them all the way to Paris. The opposi-
ton was expected to be feeble after the bombing and there were only a few German
tink to oppose 700 British tanks in wonderful tank country of flat, open cornfields
south of Caen." After being ordered to move to cross the start line at 0800 hours,
te regiment did not arrive in the vicinity of le treure und too bours because of
day caused by the fighting of the tith Armoured Division and the 2nd Grenadier
viards ahead of them. Brigade HQ had also moved up to Le Prieure when the leader
f the brigade protective troop ot tanks saw movement inside the bullaings so ne
opened fire, only for nearly 100 Germans to come out and surrender 38
• The 2nd Grenadier Guards had a tougher baptism of tire. The initial advance
southwards with No. 2 Squadron leading was uncontested until it arrived north
o Lagny at IIIs hours; here the squadron began to lse tanks to the comt guis
in Cagny, losing eight in quick succession. The CO then tried to
put No.
Squadron around to the east of Cagny whthit No. 3 squadron movea to protect
the eastern Aank.
As tanks of the Guards Division finally approached Emieville at about 1100
hours, the thin line of the 2nd Battalion 125" Panzergrenadier Regiment stretching
from Emieville to Cagny was reinforced by the tirst anti-tank guns of the arriving
Panzerjaeger Abtellung 1039 with its powertul 88mm Pas 43'4, and a few tanks."
Tiger Attack
Following the cessation of the bombing and artillery barrage Of their positions
at Manneville, the crews of the 3rd company on the susta heavy tank Datanon
struggled to make their Tigers operational, a task not helped by the destruction
of many of the workshop vehicles. Four tanks were beyond repair or had been
turned upside down, but at about 1000 hours, six hastily repaired tanks moved out
of Manneville southwards, under the command of von Rosen, to make a blocking
force between Cagny and Manneville. Two tanks quickly broke down, but the re-
maining four tanks took up defensive positions hull down below a small rise south
