62
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Nottinghamshire Yeomanry
Jig beach in the western half of the Gold sector was the designated beach for the
Nottinghamshire Yeomanry (Sherwood Rangers) Regiment to land in support of
two infantry battalions of the soth Division's 23Ist Brigade. Jig beach was domi-
nated by the German strongpoint at Le Hamel (WN37), with its casemated 75mm
gun and smaller fortifications at Asnelles sur Mer and Les Roquettes (WN40); this
made Jig beach more strongly fortified than King beach. As on King beach, many
bunkers were built without fields of fire out to sea but were sighted to fire along
the beaches. It was planned that the Le Hamel strongpoint be neutralised by the
air and sea bombardment beforehand, but unfortunately the naval bombardment
was not as effective as on King beach because the German emplacements were
well protected and the Eighth Air Force bombers largely missed their targets. o
Two control craft were also been during the Channel passage, which meant there
would be no shoot from self-propelled field artillery from their landing craft on
the run in.
The tanks were carried by LCTs of the 15th LCT Flotilla as part of the third
group of the G-1 assault force destined for Jig beach. As on other beaches, the
seas were considered too rough for the landing craft to launch the DD tanks from
7,000yds out so the LCTs were ordered to follow the LCAs in. However, the beach
at the waterline was too crowded and LCTs put out to sea again to follow those
carrying the SP (self-propelled) artillery in once they had disembarked and their
LCTs had withdrawn from the crowded beach.
B Squadron
The DD tanks of B Squadron, which were due at 0730 hours, landed on the jig
Green on the right flank very late, at 0758 hours. The landing craft carrying the
Ist Hampshire infantry were carried eastward by wind and tide and landed nearly
opposite Les Roquettes, whilst B Squadron tanks came ashore at the designated
point so the infantry were initially unsupported for 2s minutes. The infantry had
to destroy the pill boxes and machine gun posts at Les Roquettes, which were
actually the objectives of the ist Dorsetshire Battalion, before moving inland to
attack Le Hamel. The forward observation officers for both the naval bombard-
ment ships offshore and the SP field artillery were wounded, so no artillery support
could be given to the infantry. There was heavy fighting to clear Le Hamel, which
offered strong resistance. The late arrival of the DD tanks in turn made their LCIs
late picking up their next loads from the troopships waiting on shore, furtu
distorting the timetable for the rest of the day.137
There were six gapping teams of fails and AVRE tanks to clear lanes through
the minefields and beach exits and these came under accurate fire from the WN37
bunker at Le Hamel. Several Flail tanks were knocked out. Ten Centaur tanks
were supposed to land and give fire support, yet only five did so, is minutes late,
and four were quickly knocked out. Only two of the four gappin teams were
D-Day Tanks
63
successful, but a route off the beach to the lateral road behind the beach was cleared
as soon as I5 minutes after landing. 138
The intact strongpoint at Le Hamel continued to hamper the landing of the
follow-up forces, the 2nd Devonshire Battalion and the 47th Commando, which
landed right in front of the strongpoint, losing many men and much equipment
as they struggled ashore under fire. The commandos' objective was to seize the
coastal town of Port en Bessin and make contact with the Americans to the west
at Omaha.
At one stage, the beachmaster on Jig Green beach suspended any further landings
directly in front of Le Hamel as all tanks on the beach appeared to have been put
out of action.!39 Heavy fire on Jig Green from Le Hamel for most of the morning
rendered the gapping teams on Jig Green ineffective. Jig Green was unusable until
nearly 1700 hours when Le Hamel was finally taken by the infantry. The only Jig
beach exits in use were those on Jig Red, where all further landings had to be made
when Jig Green was closed. Strong northwesterly winds meant that high tide was
an hour earlier than forecast, so few obstacles could be cleared before they were
covered, which added to the problems on Jig Green. According to the Gold naval
commander:
IfDDs had been able to swim they would have provided much needed support on the
right flank to subdue the troublesome small strongpoint at Le Hamel. It is difficult
to see how some of them could have avoided becoming obstacles themselves on an
already overcrowded beach, in which case their numbers would have been reduced for
the later stages of battle in which they are reported to have done so well. 40
Three DD tanks were drowned on the short run-in to the beach and another four
tanks were knocked out on the beach by an anti-tank gun, most likely an 88mm on
the high ground overlooking the beach.** B Squadron tanks later harboured with
those of C Squadron at Buhot.
C Squadron
C Squadron launched 7ooyds out as it was considered too rough to launch from
7,000yds as planned. The LCTs carrying the AVREs then overtook them and
landed first. The Ist Dorsets infantry were carried by the current and landed fur-
ther east of Les Roquettes than the ist Hampshires. The C Squadron tanks came
ashore on Jig Red behind the infantry, slightly late. After the short swim by both
squadrons, two tanks became bogged in clay patches at the waters edge and only
thirty-six tanks began the battle to get off the beach. 42
he gapping teams for ist Dorsets were more successtul as they landed out of
sight of the Le Hamel bunker and within an hour three exits were cleared for the
infantry, which quickly moved inland, supported by the Flail and AVRE tanks
in the absence of DD tanks.13 Le Hamel was bypassed and the infantry moved
