144
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Meanwhile, General Montgomery, although relatively comfortable with the pro-
gress of Overlord, was concerned by delays to the build-up of forces ashore, which
limited his future options. In addition to this, the Allies had still not taken their
D-Day objective of Caen and the extended beachhead had been effectively roped
off by the Germans. The British and American armies were not operating jointly in
the same direction as the Americans were moving westwards on Cherbourg, while
the British were still trying to capture Caen. The attack by the 7th Armoured
Division on Villers Bocage in an attempt to penetrate the still coalescing German
lines had been a dismal failure and as a consequence, the Germans had succeeded
in roping off the bridgehead, albeit with both infantry and panzer divisions as links
in the chain. Accordingly, Montgomery issued a directive Mso2 on 18 June:
It is clear that we will now have to capture Caen and Cherbourg as the first step in our
overall plan. Caen is really the key to Cherbourg. Its capture will set free the forces
which are now tied down in securing our left flank. On 2ist June, the Second British
Army and First US Army will have new reserves available.
Montgomery concluded the directive as follows:
The enemy divisions are weak and there are no reserves. We are reinforced, have
a large number of tanks and can call on a strong air force for support. I hope to see
Caen and Cherbourg in our hands on 24 June.+
This forecast was to be slightly optimistic. On 19 June, a severe gale developed in
the English Channel that lasted for three days and made it impossible to unload any
of the men and the equipment of Montgomery's reserves waiting to come ashore.
A particular concern was a shortage of ammunition, stocks of which were aboard
the ships waiting to unload off the Normandy coastline. During the storm, about
800 small boats and landing craft were driven onto the beaches and large sections
of the artificial harbours were damaged; the American installation was so badly
aftected as to be unusable for the next ten days. With the discovery that Lo is could
be beached and unloaded as the tide went out, the disruption to the flow of supplies
was not as significant as it could have been.
Montgomery's original plan was to encircle Caen with two simultaneous attacks on
22 June from either side, the main thrust being launched from the small bridgehead
east of the River Orne. This was almost a carbon copy of the ill-fated Operation Perch
conducted two weeks earlier. The storm caused the starting date to be postponed by
four days to allow supplies and men to come ashore. When General O'Connor, the
newly arrived commander of VIII Corps, reviewed this plan he pointed out that
the bridgehead was too small to mount such an attack and the plan was changed to
develop the main thrust in the west, with a more limited attack from the east. Three
corps would attack in the west: XXX Corps and I Corps, which had been in action
since D-Day, and VIII Corps, which was untried in battle and mainly consisted of
145
Operation Epsom
grant tops that had not seen action before. These included the isth (Highland)
Scotin and 43rd (Wessex) Divisions plus the lith Armoured Division with the
chet veterans of the 3rd RTR. In total there were more than 60,000 men, 700
ailery pieces and 600 tanks. O'Connor had worked well with Montgomery in
Not Africa until his capture and VIII Corps was 'fresh from England and eager for
bie fending the Cheux region was the battle-weary 12th SS Panzer Division,
caped of a few thousand teenagers?' The strength of the division was actually
400 men and 112 tanks, as 2,550 men had become casualties since D-Day? The bad
Wether meant that the offensive, codenamed Operation Epsom after the racecourse
a glad, would now not start until 26 June, but a limited attack to the east from
te iver Orne bridgehead would start on 23 June so as to pin the German forces.
These delays gave the Germans a few valuable days free of air attacks to move up re-
aécements and supplies, and improve their defensive positions. However, OK W's
anton was fixed on the Eastern Front where the Russians, after waiting to see the
sires otherwise of Operation Overlord, had launched a massive offensive on 23
June, almost the anniversary of the German invasion in 1941.
23 June
The attack from the Orne bridgehead was carried out by the I52nd Brigade from
the gist Division (part of I Corps) and had the objective of capturing St Honorine
turther south on the east bank of the River Orne. The brigade was supported by
the 13th/ 18th Royal Hussars from the 27th Armoured Brigade. In a surprise attack
before dawn at 0300 hours, and without the usual artillery barrage to alert the de-
tenders of Kamptgruppe Luck from the 2Ist Panzer Division, the inlanuy were able
to occupy St Honorine before light with only minimal resistance. Concentrated
nortar fire from Kampgruppe Luck forced the intantry back to the northern part
of the village, leaving the tanks of the Hussars exposed for an hour. An estimated
wilty to forty tanks of the 2ist Panzer Division then assembled for a come dude
and advanced in a long column, protected by a fidge, before turning north-west
towards St Honorine. With an excellent vantage point up a tree to observe the
movements of tanks and assault guns, captain wardiaw of the mussars anected
the long-range tire of the well-positioned tanks. I he German tanks retreated and
the accompanying Infantry of the 125th Panzergrenadier Regiment were unable
to retake the village. The Hussars claimed to have destroyed thirteen tanks for no
loss of their own?
25 June
A subsidiary operation, Operation Martlet, was carried out on 25 June to capture
the elevated village of Rauray to the west. Only slightly more elevated than the
