302
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
boundaries and objectives and he did not do this until the British units had arrived
at the town. Why Montgomery chose to leave the town as an American objective
1s not clear. Perhaps Montgomery did not want to irritate the Americans further
by capturing the strategic town ahead of them. Or perhaps the rapid advances
of Bluecoat on 3I July were too much for the normally cautious Montgomery.
But there was much to gain from the capture of Vire, not least for Montgomery
to practise his avowed policy of casualty conservation and save the Americans
from having to attack the town later. If Montgomery's aim were to prevent the
movement of German reinforcements to the west then the capture of Vire would
have certainly done this and would have completely disrupted the preparations for
Mortain. The ist SS Panzer Division was able to travel on 6 August through Vire
from Caen on the Vire-Vassy road in time for the counterattack.
With the arrival of the znd SS Panzer Korps in response to Operation Bluecoal,
the British opted for caution and stopped their advance on defendable hilltop pos-
tions within range of the supporting corps artillery. Although the advanced Brtish
positions were cut off for periods of time and lacking in vital supplies, they were
able to repel repeated German attacks with the help of the considerabe artillery
and air support available. Again, British intelligence seems to have overestimated
the strength of the attacking German divisions, which had no more than iso tanks
between them, the equivalent of just three British armoured regiments. At the
start of Operation Bluecoat, the British had three entire armoured divisions and
two armoured brigades, totalling more than 700 tanks. Caution may have been
appropriate for Vill Corps With the tomaton they Dad drandore de the dide da
the tailure to seize Vire was a golden opportunity that was wasted. Mong they
had achieved a major breakthrough but once again the British talled to exploit their
own success.
As Major J. How commented, The failure to seize the town of Vire
was a tactical error of great consequence. Its seizure would have been a knock-our
blow for the German Seventh Army." Montgomery had so nearly acmeved the
boasts of his pre-battle messages but at the last minute had become teariul of ma
own success.
Casualties
After the initial breakthrough was made by VIll Corps, Operation Bluecoat es
entially became a meeting engagement betweee opposing armoured dives
with the advantage going to the force that used its reconnaissance to warn of the
approach of enemy vehicles and then used the countryside to quickly deploy into
a defensive role. When the British were advancing, their armoured spearheads
were vulnerable to the sort of action that nearly destroyed A Squadron of the
23rd Hussars on 2 August. When the Germans had to attack the British defenders,
they too had heavy casualties such as the zist Panzer Division suffered in its hasty
Operation Bluecoat
303
attacks to retake Hill 309 and the 9th SS Panzer Division suffered attacking the
positions of the Guards and the lIth Armoured Divisions.
British tank losses in Operation Bluecoat
Vc Cromwell
CS Cromwell
Stuart
Churchill
Challenger
16
Sherman
XX Corps
th AD
sth A Bde
Ill Corps*
Destroyed
Evacuated to LAUS
vacuated to CBPs
Awaiting repair
Total
12
236
42
22
20
11
62
28
143
36
*Vil Corps figures from DME 2nd Army report, 16 August 1944 WO 171/248
The cost of Operation Bluecoat was very high in terms of tanks.
Between
VIlI Corps and XXX Corps, 236 tanks became Y or Z casualties that required
repair in second or third line workshops. This excludes all X casualties repaired
by regimental LADs. By Il August, 104 of these tanks had been repaired but
fifty-eight were complete write-offs with another eight Churchills waiting to be
assessed in the field.
German tank losses in Operation Bluecoat
King Tiger
Tiger
Panther
Stug Ill
21
10
Panzer IV
23
24
21st Panzer
9th SS
10th S5
102nd SS bn
503rd bn
KG Olboeter
15
31
30
46
The Germans lost far fewer tanks than the British but they still lost more than 100
tanks and assault guns, due in part to the hastily prepared attacks they were ordered
to make on British positions and the effects of Allied air and artillery superiority.
The two panzer divisions of the znd SS Panzer Korps were reduced to just over
thirty operational tanks between them, which precluded them from taking any
Montgomery's stated intention of
effective part in the Mortain counterattack.
launching an attack where the panzer divisions were less concentrated only caused
