86
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
campaign, the Germans were largely on the defensive and their advantage of fring
the first shot was often retained by the use of such ammunition, which allowed
a second or third shot before the Allies could react.
Self-propelled Guns
Unlike the Allies, the Germans made great use of self-propelled or assault guns.
These typically had a fixed anti-tank gun (capable of up to 15 degrees lateral move-
ment) mounted on an obsolete or standard tank hull. This expedient was less costly
than a turret mounted tank and allowed the Germans to keep using the hulls of
obsolete tanks such as the Mark II, Mark III and the Czech Pz 38. The 2ist Panzer
Division had an entire battalion of 75mm anti-tank guns and howitzers moulie
on captured French tank hulls. A self-propelled gun was about two thirds the cos
of a conventional tank and took fewer man-hours to build. The principal assaur
gun was the Stumegschutz III mounted on a Mark III chassis but when the tac-
tory producing them was heavily bombed, the Mark IV chassis had to be utilise.
Originally intended as an infantry support tank with a short-barrelled 75mm
howitzer, the Stug Ills were up-gunned to carry a 75mm StuK L/48 gun after the
invasion of Russia. In defensive situations in good cover, the Stugs were formidabe
anti-tank weapons. A replacement for the Stug III, a specially designed anti-tank
assault gun, the Jagdpanzer IV, began to be issued to units from March 1944 and
saw service with the Lehr, I2th SS and gth Panzer Divisions in Normandy!*
The percormance of tanks is measured by three interdependent criteria: tire-
power, armour and mobility; the heavier the armour and the larger the gun in
a tank, the less mobile it will tend to be.
A "mparison of the armour thickness and cross-country speeds shows that all
he German tanks are as fast if not faster than the Sherman and Churchil Du
armour on the front of the turret - only somm compared with more than 75lm
not the Cromwell. The speed of the Mark IV was achieved at the expense of the
for the Allied tanks. However, When the penetration powers of the anti-tank guns
are compared with the armour thicknesses, there is an immediate contrast between
the German and Allied tanks. All the German anti-tank guns could penetrate the
frontal armour of the Sherman anth Cromwell at over 1,000m distance while the
im Allied guns could only penetrate the front of Panthers and ligers de less than
sooyds, if at all. Only the turret front of ste Mark IV can be defeated at I,fooyas
or less range. The Mark IV had frontal hull mour of 80mm, comparable to that
of the Sherman.
Therefore the Allied tanks were at a sigrificant disadvantage at the start of tic
Normandy Campaign as the German tanks could destroy them from long fang
whilst the Allied tanks needed to get to within sooyds to even have a chance or
penetrating the trontal armour of their enemy. Thethinly armoured turret and hull
sides were the Panther's weak spots, provided the Allied tanks could manoeuvre
Fighting the Tank
87
into defilade. In the bocage countryside that dominated much of the campaign,
tank duels took place at close range, so the poorer firepower of the Allies was not
such a disadvantage and some German commanders even complained that the
long overhanging barrel of the Panther restricted movement amongst the trees and
hedgerows. However, the hedgerows and small fields meant that it was difficult
for the Allies to quickly outflank a German tank once it had been located and the
Germans learned to use their tanks as mobile pill boxes with their thickest frontal
armour facing the attackers.
Anti-tank Guns
The main anti-tank guns in use by the British were the 6-pounder and the
17-pounder. The excellent performance of the 17-pounder was in stark contrast to
that of the 6-pounder and the British rushed to improve the armour penetration of
the 6-pounder by developing a new armour-piercing round, the discarding sabot
(APDS), which gave a new lease of life to these guns. The same APDS ammunition
could be used in the 6-pounder equipped Churchill tanks, markedly improving
their anti-tank performance.
The German 75mm Pak40 anti-tank gun was in widespread use and had a simi-
lar performance to the Kwk40 L/48 gun with Panzergranate-39 ammunition but
this was considerably improved with the availability of Panzergranate-40. The
88mm dual-purpose Flak guns, as used in North Africa, were a part of the panzer
divisions' anti-aircraft battalion and could act in a ground role if required. These
anti-tank guns had a high profile, so once they opened fire and their position was
revealed then they were easily knocked out by HE. Large numbers of 88mm Flak
guns were deployed in Normandy as part of the III Flak Korps of the Luftwafte,
but the use of these guns in an anti-tank role was the subject of much friction be-
tween the Heer (army) and the Luftwaffe. Often the Luftwaffe batteries withdrew
in the face of impending British attacks but a few batteries played a significant part
in some battles. Far more deadly than the Flak guns were the 88mm Pak43 and
Fak43/41, versions designed purely as anti-tank guns, with a much love promie.
The Pak43 had its own cruciform carriage like the Flak gun, whilst the Pak43/4I
was mounted on an FHi8 field howitzer chassis.
Infantry Weapons
In 1944 the German infantryman was equipped with a very erective anti-tank
weapon: the Panzerfaust. Developed from the 1942 Faustpatrone, the Panzertaust
was a low-cost, single-use recoilless weapon that fired a shaped charge that
Predated zoomm of armour up to a range o sum. ne cancerause was tie
forerunner of some modern anti-tank weapons and used the same principle as the
