190
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
in the hedgerow country even once the positions of German tanks were known.
Therefore the German tanks on the axis of most American attacks were able to
keep their thick frontal armour facing towards the Americans, which the M4 could
not penetrate and were very difficult to knock out. When the German tanks at-
tacked, they lost the benefit of the cover provided by the hedgerows and American
anti-tank guns on the flanks of the German advance were able to knock out the
tanks by hitting them on their less well-armoured sides.
The XIX Corps infantry divisions continued their slow advance, and St Lô was
finally reached on 18 July, representing an advance of less than a mile a day.
Overcoming the Hedgerows
The bocage countryside was unlike anything the US Army had operated in before
and proved to be a formidable obstacle to the separate infantry, tank and artillery
units. Not only were the hedgerows themselves obstacles but the German soldiers
effectively utilised them to form a series of strong defensive positions by burrowing
into the earthen banks at the base of the hedge to make shelters and firing slits.
These shelters were then covered with tree branches and soil so as to make them
virtually impenetrable to American artillery fire. Machine ss, some of them op-
erating remotely, were fired on fixed arcs from positions in the hedgerows to cover
the open field and flanking hedgerows. Observers for artillery and mortar batteries
climbed trees in the hedgerows behind those being attacked to call down fire
on the attackers. Where available, well-camouflaged tanks were positioned about
zoyds apart as close as possible to the hedgerows and used as armoured fortifications
with a squad of panzergrenadiers nearby for protection. Provided the Americans
could not outflank such positions, they were almost indestructible and were only
vulnerable to a direct hit by a large calibre artillery shell. Anti-tank guns were set
up to cover the only gaps in the hedgerows that allowed vehicles to enter the fields
and thus eliminate any attempts to outflank a position.
Throughout June and the first half of July, most American infantry and armoured
officers gained first-hand experience of the bocage and studied the problem of
fighting in the hedgerows. The challenge was to combine the mobility and fire-
power of the separate arms so as to create a combined team that could rapidly fight
its way through the hedges of successive fields. An example of the scale of the
problem is described in this report from the history of the 17th SS Panzer Division:
At a range of 400-500 metres, an American tank cut a hole in the wall and hedgerow
with its cutting spade. The tank commander went into a well-concealed firing posi-
tion with his tank. An American tank drove through the gap, exhibiting no apparent
concern, and out into the meadow. Three more of the same followed. As the fifth
one showed itself in the gap, the right moment had come for the tank commander.
The first round from his 75mm gun tore the turret off the American. The American
191
Battle of the Hedgerows
tank stayed there, burning, and blocked the gap. The other four then fired in every
direction, except at our panzer. Before they had figured out where their enemy was,
the tank commander had knocked them all out. 33
An obvious part of the solution was the need for infantry and tanks to work
dosely together in order to mutually support each other and harness the firepower
of the tank's machine guns and main armament. The infantry had to protect the
tanks so that the tanks could engage and neutralise enemy fire directed at them.
The tanks provided a mobile platform for both machine guns to suppress enemy
defences (thus allowing their own infantry to manoeuvre) and for the 75mm can-
nons to fire high explosive shells at enemy positions and anti-tank guns as a form
of mobile artillery.
For the tanks and infantry to work together more effectively, problems of com-
munication had to be overcome. In the din of battle and the noise of the operating
tanks themselves, it was difficult for the infantry to communicate with the tanks,
which in any case were often closed up. One infantry officer fired his pistol at
the turret of a tank in order to get its attention, and when the tank commander
opened his hatch, he was promptly shot by a sniper in a nearby tree.* Hand signals
were not very efficient and so telephone handsets were provided on the rear deck
of tanks for the infantry to talk to the crew inside via the tank's intercom system.
RolL saracenications were also improved with more radio sets being issued to
the infantry. A practice that worked well was for an infantry officer to ride in the
command tank of the supporting armoured unit while in radio contact with his
own infantry so that tanks could quickly be directed to Where they were reguired 3s
The Allied air superiority allowed the artillery units of the infantry division
to make liberal use of spotter planes above the battlefield, which quickly allowed
heavy and accurate artillery fire to be provided when required. Again, extra radios
and communication links (especially VHF raou saucween the ground and the al
facilitated this process.
improved tank/infantry cooperain sueuag however, only part of the problem.
A means of physically forcing access to the fields through the hedgerows where the
Germans were not expecting an attack was needed to outflank German positions.
The most successful way to force a gap in ise hedgerows was with bulldozers, but
as these were not plentiful or heavily armoured and were prone to breaking down,
other methods were experimented with. One of these was to use explosives buried
in the base of the hedgerow; this method, although often successful in creating
a gap when the correct amount of explosive was used, still signalled the Germans as
to the direction of the coming attack. The transport and placement of the explosives
could also be a hazardous process for those men involved if under German mortar
or artillery fire. As it was time consuming to bury sufficient charges, two steel
prongs were welded to the front of an M4 tank to make holes in the earthen bank
into which the explosive charges could be quickly inserted. It was then found by
accident that an M4 tank with these prongs could force a gap completely through
