152
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
sth and 7th companies of Mark IVs hurriedly returned from Rauray and the assault
gun battalion of the zIst Panzer Division, which had moved up from Verson."
Although the Germans had so far contained the British attack, the Seventh Army
commander, General Dollman, was sufficiently alarmed by the size of the attack
and the possibility of a breakthrough from Cheux that he requested a counterattack
by the newly arriving znd SS Panzer Korps. Unwilling to commit this forma-
tion, which was moving into an assembly area near Caumont for the planned final
counterattack to the coast, Rommel ordered a tank battalion from each of zist and
znd Panzer Divisions plus a battlegroup from the 2nd SS Panzer Division at St Lô
to move up and reinforce the defences. Two more Nebelwerfer brigades would also
be transferred to the beleaguered Ist SS Panzer Korps.22
27 June
The miserable conditions and the rain of the previous day continued. VIII Corps
was ordered to resume the attack at 044s hours with the loth Highlanders and
the znd Argylls of 227th Brigade, again supported by the tanks of the 3ist Tank
Brigade. The Highlanders were to advance through Le Haut du Bosq and the
Argylles had the mission of passing through the dispersed Gordons' position along
the route to Colleville and finally capturing the bridges over the River Odon.
The tanks of the 29th Armoured Brigade would also support this thrust by the
227th Brigade.
The four remaining Mark IVH tanks of the 8th Company of the 12th SS Panzer
Regiment had relocated the previous evening from the fighting at Fontenay and
occupied positions located just south of Le Haut du Bosq, well protected by the
embankments of a small stream. After a sleepless night in the frontline, these
tanks stopped the morning attack by the roth Highlanders with machine guns
and later repelled the attack of the supporting 7th RTR Churchills moving to-
wards Grainville. The 7th RTR claimed to have knocked out three German tanks
without loss, but the combined attack was called off before noon having barely got
beyond its start line.
The tanks of the 2nd Fife and Forfars then advanced towards Mouen and the
river crossing north of Gavrus but also ran into the same 8th Company anti-tank
screen about 1200 hours, delaying their movement southwards. Three tanks from
A Squadron were lost as soon as they crossed the ridge. Other tanks worked their
way eastwards to outflank the well-positioned German tanks, which by now had
twelve British tanks burning in front of them. Hans Siegel, commander of the
8th Company, made the following report:
At approximately 1030 hours, the fourth wave prepares for the attack. This time, it
appears there are more tanks. The same drama as before is repeated, but during the
frontal tank duels, an antitank shell coming from the right suddenly rips open the
Operation Epsom
153
foor of the chief's panzer. The lone tank mentioned before had sneaked close, and
while our turret is still moving to the 3 o'clock position, a shell hits the front right
and, like a flash, the chief's panzer is engulfed in flames. Hatch covers fly open, the
gunner bails out to the left, in flames, the loader dives out to the right. The chief
wants to get out through the top turret hatch but is caught by the throat microphone
wire. He then tries to make it through the loader's hatch to the right but bumps head
violently with the radio operator who could not open his own hatch. The barrel,
having been turned half right is blocking it. The chief has to move backward. He
pushes the radio operator through the hatch, is engulfed in flames for some seconds, in
danger of fainting. Still he manages the jump to safety. But he still has the steel boom
of the throat microphone at his neck, he cannot pull it over his steel helmet. So he is
hanging at the panzer skirt, almost strangling himself while machine gun salvos are
sapping against the panzer. With a desperate jerk, he rips loose.?3
Siegel was badly burned but survived; his gunner did not. The remaining three
tanks saw off the attack of the znd Fife and Forfars. So well hidden were the
German tanks that their positions could only be spotted by their muzzle flashes,
and these were Siegel's undoing.
After the roth Highlanders could make no progress, the commander of the
Ith Armoured Division, General Roberts ordered the 2nd Fife and Forfar, late in
the day, to advance on Grainville without any infantry support. The advance was
fortunately without any opposition until trainville itselt was reached. waurchut
tanks of A and B squadrons of the 9th RTR were also in the area and helped
fight off a German counterattack and support the intantry attempting to cuter
Granville. George Rathke of B Squadron oth RTR later wrote:
Un 27 June B Squadron was given the job of taking Grainville-sur Odon, a small
wage completely surrounded by orchards. mumber to troop went in and came
under anti-tank fire. Sgt "Cushy" Simmons' tank was hit and Simmons wounded,
and the other two tanks were pinned down and unable to move. Number 9 Troop
under Teddy Mott was then sent to try an out-flanking movement round the southern
side of the village. We moved off, myself as troop sergeant in "Immune" on the right,
Teddy in "Inspire" in the centre, and Cp| Jakeman in "Impulse" on the left. We came
to a gap in the trees and being on the right I was the first to turn into the opening.
I found myself lacing the village church some u as away, da de me of tie
Church a Honey recce tank burning fiercely - I never did find out who it belonged
to. I halted and Teddy came alongside on my left and proceeded a few yards further
forward and then halted. I had just started to talk to Teddy when there was a big flash
and "Inspire" was hit, flames belching out of the turret. I saw the wireless-op Jimmy
Deem throw himself out of the turret and then heard a shell, presumably aimed at my
tank, whistle overhead. I had by then told my wireless-op Bert Watson to send out
smoke from the 2-inch mortar; I also directed my gunner George Rawe on to the spot
Where I thought the shots were coming from, and we fired two AP rounds and began
