28
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
task force. The regiment was to support the 8th Brigade on the left flank landing
on Nan beach around Bernières and St Aubin. B and C squadrons were equipped
with DD tanks, and each squadron took in an extra tank to make twenty tanks.
Nan beach had four defensive strongpoints: WN27 at St Aubin, W N28 and 28A at
Bernières and W N29 at Courseulles.
B Squadron
The possibility of the seas being too rough for the DD tanks had been considered
by the squadron leaders and LCT flotilla officers prior to and for much of the
voyage across the English Channel. Once the launching point 7,00oyds ofishore
was reached, the DSOAG (Deputy Senior Office Assault Group) of the DD IC!
squadrons asked the senior squadron leader if he wished to launch or move in
closer. The decision was taken to move closer but at about 2,00oyds from shore,
the seas were still considered too rough so the decision was taken to take the DD
tanks nearly all the way in to the beach. The tanks were finally launched less than
sooyds from the shoreline. Paradoxically, this decision to launch the DD tanks
JUNO SECTOR D-DAY
8th Canadian Infantry Brigade
Fort Garry Horse
St. Aubin-sur-Mer
Mines
la Rive
a Bernieres-sure
NAN
WVIVINWIVINIAY
CIVIVIVIV
ViVI
RED
NAN
VIV VIV
WHITE
A Coyl
VOKTH SHORES
J10 CAR
B Sqdn
10 CAR.
Juno sector, Nan beach. The landings of Fort Garry Horse and the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade,
adapted from Maple Leaf Route: Caen. (By kind permission of T. Copp)
D-Day Tanks
29
closer actually delayed their arrival as the LCTs had to manoeuvre to avoid the
other waves of landing craft and the obstacles on the beach.
B Squadron were supporting the Queen's Own Rifles Regiment in their assault
on Bernières, and the tanks started wading ashore at 0821 hours on Nan White
beach. Unfortunately, they were late as the infantry had landed at o8is hours and
were already under heavy fire from WN28 immediately in front of them. The
infantry were faced with a series of five pill boxes and fortifications on top of the
sea wall that the aerial and naval bombardment had not damaged. The Germans
had recovered quickly from the bombardment and all the beach defences were
intact. The two leading companies of the Queen's Own infantry suffered heavy
losses in making a looyd dash across the beach to find cover behind the sea wall.
A lance corporal on the beach wrote afterwards:
Our support craft was knocked out so we had no heavy weapons. The DD tanks
had not come ashore. My platoon, approximately 36 strong, went through what we
believe was enfilade fire from machine guns. The official battalion KIA figures for
6 June 1944 numbered 63, B Company 34. I don't have the figures for the platoon but
I do know that only 9 men moved inland, 3 of whom were walking wounded. Of the
ten men in my section, seven were killed and two wounded. 39
A flak ship moved close inshore and used its guns to pour continuous fire onto
the strongpoints, almost running aground in doing so, before the tanks could land
and offer effective supporting fire. The tanks moved along the water's edge and
engaged the pill boxes and fortified houses that could be identified as holding up
the advance. The infantry risked death by staying on the beach, so one by one the
pill boxes were attacked and knocked out with the help of the tanks, which allowed
the infantry to climb the sea wall and cautiously move into Bernières.
However, as the sea wall could not be breached, B Squadron could not get off
the beach to support the infantry for over an hour. The gapping teams were not
successful until 0920 hours when two exits off the beach were finally opened.
The infantry had encountered stiff resistance in Bernières as the previously dazed
and stunned Germans recovered and returned to their posts. However, by about
0900 hours, Bernières had been almost secured without the assistance of the tanks,
which finally arrived in the town at 0930 hours. The Queen's Own Rifles and
tanks then prepared to move southwards to capture Anguerny via Bény sur Mer,
7 miles away. B Squadron was then ordered to patrol around Than and back to
Anguerny; along the way one tank was knocked out and another damaged by
artillery. The hill at Point 7o was reached at about isoo hours and from there the
tanks could see their objective, Carpiquet airfield. The concrete buster ICT(A) CB
2338 came into the beach and the two Sherman Ves were attached to B Squadron
to give it some much needed 17-pounder firepower. 40
