The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
82
(I0mm) that gave the drivers little protection from land mines compared with the
maximum 25mm belly armour of the Sherman. Like the Sherman, the Cromwell
was relatively thinly armoured and the 75mm gun had a significantly lower muzzie
velocity and hence armour-penetrating ability than German guns. A close support
version, the Cromwell VI, mounted a 95mm howitzer and these were issued to
regiments on the basis of two per squadron.
Combat experience in other theatres had demonstrated the need to up-gun the
Cromwell before it was even issued and early in 1944 a version with a 17-pounder
gun called the Challenger was developed with a new turret on a lengthened
Cromwell hull. These were introduced into the Cromwell-equipped armourc
reconnaissance regiments from August 1944, but the War Office only ordered 200
Challengers as other tanks were being developed.
By 1944 the Allied armoured units had universally adopted the light American
tank the M3 (Stuart) and later the Ms (Honey) as their reconnaissance tanks. Only
armed with a 37mm gun and a maximum of simm of amour, the Stuart was
declared obsolete in July 1943 by the US Army but still saw widespread service in
north-west Europe in British units along with the Ms, which had twin V8 engines
fitted. The Stuart and Honey were no match for German tank and anti-tank guns
and after significant losses early in the campaign, they were only deployed in te-
stricted roles. Some British regiments even removed the turret altogether to make
the tank less visible while on reconnaissance patrols.
As per their early war tank doctrine, te. British developed the Churchill tans
for infantry support. Again there were a number of different variants, mainly
based on armament. The first Churchills were equipped With the 0-pounder g
that had a poor HE shell performance, which was at odds with its purpose of sup-
porting intantry and destroying strong enemy defences. By the time of Overlor
Armour thickness of main tanks in Normandy
Turret
front
(mm)
Turret
side
Hull
front
Hull
side
Belly
Speed
on road
(mph)
Speed
Height
cross-country
(mph)
(m)
Cromwell
Sherman
Churchill
76
75
89
64
50
76
64
102
44
37
76*
10
25
19
32
21
18
12
2.49
2.74
3.25
15
Mark IV H
Panther
Tiger
50
2.68
3.1
100
30
45
80
80
80
100
35
40
80
10
30
25
16
30
22
13
19
13
" max!
Fighting the Tank
83
the main version used in Normandy was the Churchill VI, which had been modi-
fied to take the 75mm American gun with its better HE shell performance. As
the Churchill was heavily armoured, it was naturally slow on the battlefield. The
turret ring of the Churchill tank was too small to permit the 17-pounder gun to
be installed.
Having developed a potent anti-tank gun in the 17-pounder, enterprising
British officers began trying to fit the gun into the Sherman turret even though
the Americans said it could not be done. Room was found by turning the gun on
its side, cutting out the back of the turret and adding an armoured compartment
to the rear of the turret so as to accommodate the recoil of the gun and the
wireless set. This higher velocity weapon fired a larger shell and to accommodate
these, the tank crew was reduced from five to four by not using a co-driver. As
the anti-tank gun was designed to be fired in the open air, when the gun was fired
in an enclosed turret there was not quite enough oxygen inside the tank for the
propellant charge, which burned at a fractionally slower rate. The propellant was
still burning when the breech opened to eject the cartridge and a sheet of flame
would erupt from the breech, singeing the hair and skin of any of the turret crew
in the way. This was investigated by the RAC but found to be 'inconsequential'.
A large sheet of flame also came out of the muzzle of the gun when fired and
a muzzle brake installed to reduce recoil threw up a lot of dust immediately in
tront of the tank. The gunner very often could not see whether he had hit the
target, so the tank commander had to leave the tank and observe the fall of shot
trom a few yards away. This was undesirable and not always possible when in
action. The dust and flame from the muzzle blast also gave away the position
of the tank to the Germans, requiring the tank to either make sure of its first
shot or immediately move to a different firing position if possible for subsequent
shots. This up-gunned Sherman was known initially as the Ve and then later as
the Firefly. The Germans quickly realised the potency of the Firefly and learnt
to concentrate all their fire on them first. A further limitation was the gunner's
telescopic sights, which initially were the standard three power M7o telescopic
sights and only accurate to 1,0ooyds." These were later improved with the instal-
lation of Mk 43 telescopes, but some Fireflies continued to arrive in Normandy
with the standard sights.!2
The Firefly standard AP ammunition APC and APCBC could penetrate a Tiger
at 1,20oyds and the rare discarding SABOT at more than 2,00oyds, but the SABOT
ammunition introduced in August unweed in short supply and was notoriously
inaccurate over a range of sooyds. As the HE round was not as effective as the or-
dinary 75mm HE ammunition, the Firefly was used primary in an ant tans role.
On 30 Dec 1944, 2,100 Sherman Ves were ordered and enough were produced in
time for D-Day to equip one tank in every troop of three tanks with the new gun.
Thus, only by accident and not official design or policy, did the british get a tank
with a gun able to engage German tanks on anything like equal terms.
