130
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
northern exit road from the town. Wittmann returned to the command post of
the Ist Company of his own battalion and directed the action of the Tiger tanks
in entering Villers Bocage. Meanwhile, on Point 213 the Yeomanry tanks were
being stalked and knocked out one by one by the other Tigers of the battalion. The
first tanks of the squadron had been knocked out and, as Wittmann had destroyed
the rearmost tanks, the remainder were trapped on the road, apparently unable
to escape from the cutting they were in with destroyed vehicles slewed across the
road. The last wireless message was received at 1240 hours from Lord Cranley,
requesting permission to blow up his scout car before being taken prisoner."
The other Tiger tanks then entered Villers Bocage and a 'confused' battle be-
tween the Tigers and the tanks of B Squadron of the 4th CLY and the anti-tank
guns of the ist/7th Queen's infantry took place. Six Tigers and a Mark IVH were
knocked out or disabled on the streets of the town, demonstrating the vulnerability
of tanks in built-up areas. Panzergrenaders and reconnaissance elements or the
and Panor Division started to arrive in the afternoon and begall to exert furthe
pressure on the British units in Villers Bocage.
Meanwhile, the sth RTR was at Tracy Bocage, with e squadron overlooks
the battle unfolding beneath them but unable to intervene.
Tiger tanks began
to appear in the woods in front of them later in the day. Une was persuaded to
withdraw by a Firefly, but one Cromwell was damaged and another knocked out.
Four tank crews abandoned their tanks rather than duel with the Tigers. "3
in gadier Hinde decided to withdraw from the town altogether to the high
ground at Amaye sur Seulles where the remnants of the 4th CLY and the sth RTR
Plus their infantry formed a desert-style defensive box. German artillery then
shelled the position heavily while the Beau unvere supported by neighbours
US artillery, which was used effectively to break up the assemblies of German
infantry prior to their attacks. The ist RTR held another position further north di
Briquessard, protecting the division's line of communication to the rear.
14 June
Next day the German troops continued ton ut pressure on both the 7th Armoured
Division positions at Amaye and Briquessard. Again, the British were well sup
ported by American artillery and RAF Diphoons that attacked Villers Bocage and
any vehicles moving around Point 213.
However, the ongoing attack by the goth Division had made no progress south-
wards towards the positions of the 7th Armoured Division, which was now out on
a limb. It was decided by XXX Corps to withdraw as soon as possible. No thought
seemed to have been given by Bucknall to reinforcing the positions with infantry
to retain the ground captured. That night, the troops withdrew, covered by RAF
Lancasters that bombed Villers Bocage, and arrived exhausted at 0600 hours on
15 June at La Maulotiere.
131
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
Losses 13 June
• 29th Brigade
• sth RTR one Cromwell (War Diary 4)
• 4th CLY eighteen Cromwells (War Diary 20)
• Three Stuarts (recce troop)
• Four Firetlies
• Ist RB fourteen half tracks
• Eight Bren carriers
• Eight Lloyd carriers
• sth RHA two tanks
Losses 14 June
• Ist RTR three Cromwells
• 4th CLY one Stuart
A large number of the casualties on 13 June were inflicted by Wittmann's single
Tiger tank but the exact numbers may never be known. What is certain is that
a few Tiger tanks of loist SS Schwere battalion assisted by tanks and infantry from
the Panzer Lehr Division had stopped Montgomer, wester purer attack cold
and the veteran 7th Armoured Division was repelled with a bloody nose.
There were recriminations at every level. The tank crews were shocked by their
first battle in Normandy. Their fast Cromwells had been unable to manoeuvre in
the bocage and were then found to be completely useless agains the glands.
Tank commanders had been sniped at continuously as they stood in their turrets
straining for a better visibility of the countryside around them. None of the divi-
son's pre-invasion training had been conducted in terrain resembling the bocage.
tank and were awestruck: I took a good look and decided that I would examine
no more of them as it was bad for my morale to see that thick sloping front and
the length of the barrel of the gun. * The divisions senior oficers also tell nei
duty to report on the events at Villers Bocage. Brigadier Hinde wrote a report for
General Erskine and was critical of British strategy.
The idea of a massed weight of armour punching a hole in blind country in face of anti-
tank guns and tanks of superior quality is not practical. As was foreseen about a year ago,
We are at a grave disadvantage having to attack Panthers and Tigers with Cromwells and
Shermans. This disadvantage largely disappears when the enemy attacks us....
..From experience so far gained it appears that the only way to reduce the dispar-
ity between Allied and German tanks is to have more 17-pounder tanks and SABOT
for that gun.!S
To the weight of this report was added a number of reports by XXX Corps of-
ficers that eventually reached Montgomery and the War Office. These were not
