276
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
tanks shot up every hedgerow and farmhouse along the way. After halting for
an hour to wait in vain for the infantry to catch up, the two leading squadrons
then moved off to the objective. By 1530 hours, the infantry had at last arrived
Calvary
70 001
STEVENSON
LES
LOGES
до ?
Ken SEARET
мими
S SaN
HUMBLE
400
овод
1800800
LOFUMECHEN
500
1000 yds
$ mile
ast. Beesons tanK
Nas. Cuthberts tank
Farm for nuch Joge Panthers
би .
Sketch map of plan of action of ard Scots Guards on Hill 226, 30 July 1944, during Operation Bluecoat
Operation Bluecoat
277
and the village of Les Loges was secured with Hill 226 also occupied. The Scots
Guards were ready to push on with phase three but permission was refused as while
the Isth (H) Division had created a deep penetration into the German lines, the
XXX Corps advance on the left had been slower than anticipated and the division's
left fank was now exposed. The Scots Guards were told to hold the position at
all costs and wait for the anti-tank gun company of the Argyles to come up to
support them.
After repeated German artillery barrages on the exposed top of Hill 226, the
infantry retired back to the comparative shelter of the village of Les Loges leaving
the Scots Guards tanks hull down below the crest of the hill. At 180o hours, a very
heavy barrage of 1somm and 120mm artillery hit their positions and one tank was
knocked out. Ten minutes later, the easternmost troop of three tanks of S Squadron
was knocked out by fire from two Jagdpanthers located in a wood some sooyds to
the left rear of the squadron.
The two Jagdpanthers then moved out of the woods, covered by a third, and
advanced straight through S Squadron, shooting at any tanks in their path. A large
hedge separated and screened S Squadron from the left flank squadron to the west,
which did not see the German tanks. The regiment's second in command chose
that moment to return from checking on the positions of the left flank squadron
and his Churchill tank met the enemy head-on. The Churchill was penetrated
through its thick frontal armour and the tank's ammunition exploded, blowing the
turret cleanly off.
Armour-piercing shells from the Churchills struck the advancing Jagdpanthers
but simply bounced off their thick, sloped armour. The two German self-propelled
guns then veered away and disappeared over the hill in a northerly direction.?
The action was observed by § Squadron's commander, Captain Whitelaw:
The mortaring and shelling suddenly intensified. Then I saw the left hand tank of my
left forward troop go up in flames closely followed by the other two.
Immediately
I started to return to the hill. As I was driving up the field I saw all three tanks of my
left flank troop go up in flames, and as I approached the top of the hill, I saw a tank
moving from right to left in front of me. Suddenly it appeared to me (wearing a head-
set as if the turret of this tank had been quietly lifted off and put down on the ground
some yards away. It was only when I saw the flames that I realised that this tank had
in fact exploded. All six tanks in my two left hand troops together with the battalion
second in command's tank had been knocked out ... in a little over a minute."
Eleven Churchill tanks were destroyed in this brief action. A track of one of the
Jagdpanthers was damaged by a shot from a Churchill and after travelling about
a mile to the east, the crew abandoned their vehicle after setting fire to it, appar-
ently unable to make any repairs.
The German self-propelled guns had the village of Les Loges at their mercy
and could have cut the line of the British advance to Hill 309 but did not press the
