334
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Battle
The formation of the armoured columns on 7 August stirred up a lot of dust and
it was feared this would warn the Germans of the impending attack. However, no
artillery fire was received, perhaps due to ammunition shortages or the inexperi-
ence of the 89th Division.
Without
Potential to mount a counterattack. This created so much smoke and dust that only
two-thirds of the planes were able to see their targets and drop their bomb loads. At
2330 hours the armoured columns began to advance towards their start lines, and
an artillery barrage at 2345 hours preceded the advance proper.
The effect of the bombs, smoke from fires and the artillery barrage was a dense
smog in which many units lost their way. German artillery began returning fire,
and a ground mist developed in the early morning, which did not help matters.
Visibility was often only a few feet and drivers strained to follow the vehicle in
front whilst trying to avoid crashing into the back of it during the frequent stops
to check the direction or find a way around obstacles. The columns moved at
little more than walking pace. Compasses began to spin wildly in response to the
bombardment whilst the smog obscured the green tracer overhead from the Botors
guns and the searchlights. Some tank commanders were able to receive the radio
cirection signal but others had to rely on their maps and aerial photos and try to
identify a landmark in the dark to pinpoint their position. There was a tendency
for the radio signal to be lost every time the columns changed direction to avoid
a bomb crater or find a way through a hedge or across a sunken lane.
as major obstacies the orderly columns began to break up into little groups, d
desperately trying to navigate in the darkness and smog.
Navigators of the Ist Northants Yeomanry id the 33rd Armoured Brigade
columns arrived at their end point at about o23o hours, just north of St Aignan
de Cramesnil, much to the surprise of many of them. Only two tanks and three
Priests were destroyed on the way after a running fight with some self-propelled
guns and anti-tank guns. In the column led by the 144th Regiment RAC, three
Stuart tanks of the navigators fell into bomb craters and, as a result, the column
broke up into small groups. On reaching the railway line, two tanks were lost to
Panzerfauste, but the regiment regrouped and found an alternative crossing before
proceeding on to the objective of St Aignan. Just as they arrived, at 0400 hours,
a tank was hit by an anti-tank gun and knocked out." The commanding officer of
the 144th Regiment RAC, Colonel Jolly, described the night-time advance:
The air bombardment was going on while we were moving up .... So far there was no
enemy reaction, and at H-hour, half past eleven - we crossed the road which was our
start line and speeded up to s mph. This would, we estimated, bring us close to the
335
Operation Totalize
barrage when it opened fifteen minutes later about a mile ahead, just north of Tilly.
All went well until the barrage started, when the columns was immediately enveloped
in a dense cloud of dust in which it was impossible to see more than a few feet even
to see the taillight of the tank in front. Lt Osborne, leading the column, had not so
far heard a sound, either dots or dashes from the beam wireless but his compass had
been working fairly well. When the barrage started, the needle immediately swung
wildly in all directions and the compass became useless. He could see nothing in the
dense dust cloud and, before long, his light tank disappeared into a bomb crater about
ten feet deep. The two reserve navigators following behind tried to avoid this crater
and went into another ...
The columns soon disintegrated into utter chaos. The confusion was indescribable.
Everyone had been told to keep closed up and follow the tank in front, but it was
soon apparent it was the blind leading the blind. Great shapes of tanks loomed out of
the fog and asked who you were. Flails seemed to be everywhere and their enormous
gibs barging about in the dark seemed to add to the confusion. It was not until one
chanced upon the road or the railway that one had any idea of one's position. Even so,
this was no check of the distance travelled and it was possible to go over the main road
without noticing it. In fact some of the Canadians became mixed up in our column
and one Canadian tank spent the rest of the night with us .... There was very little
sign of the enemy at this stage."6
The 4th Brigade infantry in their Priests were to be escorted into battle by two
regiments from the and Canadian Armoured Brigade, the Fort Garry Horse and
the Sherbrooke Fusiliers plus the 8th Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment. These
forces formed three columns on their right axis of the advance and one column on
the left axis to act as a flank guard; each column was divided into separate gapping,
assault and fortress forces, with the assault forces to capture the objectives before
dawn and the fortress forces to deploy in expectation of a counterattack.
The gapping force at the head of the columns on the right axis consisted of
a navigator, two troops of Shermans from the Sherbrooke rustlers and other
AVRE, and Flail tanks to remove mines and mark the route. Two troops from
C Squadron of the Fort Garry Horse led the left axis column gapping force, and
the remainder of the squadron formed the fortress force.
The assault force in each column on the right axis was made of one squadron of
the Sherbrook Fusiliers less the two troops in the gapping force. The fortress force
in each column of the right axis was formed from the remaining two squadrons of
Fort Garry Horse tanks distributed across each column and was designed to meet
any German counterattack once daylight came."
The left axis column was temporarily halted by fire at a railway bridge 1,00oyds
short of its objective, a small hill west of Cramesnil, but was unable to determine
if this fire was from friend or foe. After exchanging shots in the darkness, the
incoming fire died down and the column was able to move on.
