64
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
towards Buhot. Five tanks from C Squadron drowned and two more were knocked
out on the beach. 44
C Squadron was mainly occupied with assisting the infantry in the clearing
of the Le Hamel strongpoint. The bunker containing the 75mm gun was finally
knocked out when a Petard mortar from an AVRE tank was fired at the rear door.
The main problem faced by the squadron was vehicle congestion and getting off
the beach, as the tide came in rapidly. C Squadron later rallied and harboured at
Buhot. The Sherwood Rangers' casualties were very light: one officer and eight
ORs killed. 45
A Squadron
From o&is hours the third battalion of the 23Ist Brigade, the 2nd Devonshire,
began landing on Jig Red with the tanks of A Squadron, which arrived at Htgo
minutes but could not get off the beach as planned because of the number of vehi-
cles on the beach. More vehicles of every type were arriving very tew minutes and
only adding to the congestion. With the closure of Jig Green beach, the follow-up
units in the 23Ist Brigade and the soth Independent Brigade all had to come ashore
on the same beach and the resulting traffic problems disrupted the soth Divisions
plans for the remainder of the day.
A Squadron finally got off the beach and moved to the regiment's rallying point
at Buhot via Meuvaines in the afternoon. Once clear of the beaches, the regl-
ment met little opposition. The squadron then advanced to capture Ryes with the
2nd Devonshires before retiring to support the infantry of the znd Essex Battalion
overnight. The regiment lost a total of fourteen tanks on D-Day and, after linking
up with the 2nd Essex, harboured just north of Bayeux.
The specialist AVRE tanks had saved the day and the part played by the
Sherwood Rangers Yeomanry was small. the b squadron tanks and intanu,
on Jig Green had been unable to subdue the strongpoint at Le Hamel, and as d
result, the follow up forces had to use Jig Red, adding to the congestion there and
once off the beach, the tanks of the Sherweod Rangers advanced inland as far
creating large delays in the landing timetable of the soth Division. Nevertheless,
as Ryes and caused great consternation amongst the German defenders of the
716th Regiment.
Utah Sector
The sector designated Utah was the westernmost of the Allied planned landio
and was situated at the base of the Cotentin peninsula. Utah ran from the River
Vire estuary westwards to Quinnville and was added by the CossAc panic
early in 1944 for an extra assault division with the objective of capturing the port
Cherboule the hited avalability of landing crott meant that the sea ca
Intantry Division (part of VIl orps) allocated for the assault coule only attac
D-Day Tanks
65
a single regimental combat team front and there would be only one tank battalion
in the initial assault on Utah beach to support the 8th RCT. This would be the 7oth
Tank Battalion, a veteran of the North African and Sicilian campaigns that had
been re-equipped with DD tanks. H-hour was at ooo hours, the same as at Omaha
and the naval bombardment was again restricted to only 40 minutes.
The beaches chosen for the landings were designated Tare Green and Uncle
Red. These beaches were dominated by three major strongpoints: WNs (four
somm anti-tank guns, one in a casemate sited to fire along the beach, a French
tank turret with 37mm cannon and various mortar and MG posts), WN7 (La
Madeleine, headquarters of the 3rd Company of the 9I9th Grenadier Regiment
of the 709th Division) and WN8 (three anti-tank guns and two howitzers). The
Strongpoint No. 9 had an 88mm gun that could fire along the beach in front of the
other fortifications. 46
The countryside behind the sand dunes of the beaches was low-lying and had
been flooded, leaving four built-up causeways as the only routes inland from the
beaches. In the bombing before the assault, WNs was destroyed and the three other
exits had been targeted and bombed very accurately by 277 Marauders of Ninth
Airforce, which descended below the cloud layer at their assigned bombing altitude
to better see their targets.'47
70th Tank Battalion
A and B companies were allocated the DD tanks and were organised in eight
LCTs, each carrying four DD tanks. The battalion's tanks were loaded on 2 June at
Dartmouth, England. One C Company M4 stayed in England.
The convoy containing the US 17th LCT flotilla carrying the DD tanks as part
ot assault wave 1Aa finally sailed for Normandy again on the morning of 5 June
after having spent most of the 4 June battling the high winds and rough seas. The
Force U convoys had to endure a difficult Channel crossing as it was the longest
route of all the invasion convoys and was fully exposed to the strong westerly winds.
When the convoy reached the coast in the lee of the Cotentin peninsula, the seas off
Utah were found to be not as rough as on the other Allied beaches.
The objectives of the 7oth Tank Battalion were to support the infantry in neu-
tralising the strongpoints and securing the beach before proceeding inland to seize
the beach access roads to enable follow-up forces to pass through and deploy. The
battalion's light tank company ( Company with 16 M5 Honeys) Was to land ai
1+200 minutes and link up with the paratroopers of tolst Airporte Division do
quickly as possible 148
A and B Companies
The DD tanks of A Company were to land on lare creen at oo3o nours with.
B Company bound for Uncle Red beach at the same time. After we dithall par
sage, the LCTs carrying the DDs arrived late in the Transport Area, partially due
to an inability to increase speed to make up for lost time en route. Unsnore, the
