406
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Despite some disorder and panic, the Germans managed to get a surprisingly large
number of troops to the east bank of the Seine, mostly on 26 and 27 August. To the
Germans, it seemed that the British and Canadians did not push as hard as they might
have. Neither did the Allied air forces seem as active as usual during the critical days
of the withdrawal. The Seine ferries that remained in service operated even during
daylight hours. 3
An opportunity to roll up the Seventh Army was missed. What was left of each
German division that got over the river was reinforced and re-equipped where
possible to form a single regiment but a lack of communications equipment made
command and control difficult. 4
The Germans had suffered a major defeat. Losses in vehicles, artillery and equip-
ment were particularly severe and German industry could not replace this valuable
material easily because of the effects of Allied strategic bombing. The German
lorces lost more than 458 tanks after the fall of Falaise in the last two weeks of
August 1944.
Whilst the numbers of men and tanks that escaped from the pocket or were lost
in fighting is matter of some post-war debate, a German Army Group D count of
the survivors on 22 August was as follows:
• I2th SS Panzer - ten tanks, 300 men, no artillery
• Ist SS - no tanks, few men, no artillery
• 1oth SS - no tanks, four weak ns, no artillery
• 9th SS - twenty to twenty-five tanks, 460 men, twenty guns
• 2Ist Panzer - ten tanks, four weak battalions, unknown artillery
• 2nd SS Panzer - fifteen tanks, 450 men, six guns
• 9th Panzer - not reported
• 2nd Panzer - no tanks, one battalion, no artillery
• I16th Panzer - twelve tanks, one battalion, two batteriess
Only about seventy German tanks or assault guns were operational after the fight-
ing in the Falaise Gap and many had to be abandoned because of shortages of fuel.
As the mobile panzer divisions were able to escape the pocket and several had
attacked back in to it to keep it open, it is likely the figures above represent combat
troops rather than total divisions. It is claimed, for example, that the 12th SS Panzer
Division still had 12,500 men after the Falaise Gap.® The administrative and support
troops of many divisions certainly moved out of the pocket ahead of the combat
troops once von Kluge approved the general withdrawal on 16 August. More than
50,000 prisoners of war were taken by the Allies and an estimated 200,000 men
killed, bringing total estimated German losses to 400,000 men in Normandy?
With the Normandy campaign won, Montgomery expected the war to be over
by Christmas.
407
Summary
German Losses
The British No. 2 Operational Research unit travelled extensively around the
pocket and the Falaise Gap after the battle and counted the destroyed vehicles as
well as examining selected samples in detail.
A total of 1,223 German tanks and self-propelled guns were found abandoned,
astroyed or knocked out in three areas called the 'Pocket', the 'Shambles' and the
'Chase (to the River Seine). In the 'Pocket' from Falaise and Argentan to Barenton
excluding the Mortain battlefield) through which the Seventh Army retreated,
agaty-one of a sample of 121 tanks and assault guns had been abandoned or de-
stroyed by their crews. In the area known as the "Shambles', which was the mouth of
the pocket from Argentan to Trun and Chambois, a further 187 tanks were found.
A detailed examination of eighty-two ch these vehicles found that seventy-one of
the eighty-two were destroyed or abandoned by their crews.
In the 'Chase' area to
the Seine, another 150 tanks and assault guns were found of which eighty-one of
a sample of ninety-eight had been abandoned or destroyed by their crews."
The Germans committed to Normandy a total of 2,248 tanks and assault guns, and
the total of 1,233 armoured fighting vepures tound in the retreat represents more than
half of the German tank forces that were deployed in Normandy? This underlines
the outstanding success of Operation Cobra, the encirclement to close the Falaise
Gap and Allied air superiority, which Coe aan cted German supply mnes and caused
shortages of fuel and ammunition. From the detailed samples studied in the OR
suvey, more thall 1) per cent of the German tanks and assault guns in the pocat
were abandoned or destroyed by their own crews, which is approximately as tanks.
If the number of tanks and assault guns abandoned or destroyed by their own
crews is taken into account with those that escaped the pocket (a minimum of
sixty-seven) then 1,256 tanks and assault guns were lost by the Germans in actual
combat from all causes in the Normandy campaign.
British Losses
" he zist Army Group losses for the first three months of the Normandy Campaign
were reported by the RAC in its six monthly progress report as follows:
June
July
August
Sherman
86
186
547
819
Cromwell
42
28
149.
215
Churchill
18
17
142
177
1,211
