One of the very few Tiger Is to escape destruction in Not andy. Tiger 213 - a late moder - got ar
far as the River Seine but found all the bridges bombed. Shortly after this picture was taken, the
crew destroyed the tank. (From The Tiger Tank Story, Mark Healy)
Operation Goodwood
225
guns to defend the village. In the interim, the Stug companies were gathered as
a mobile reserve behind Hubert Folie?
The commanding officer of the 3rd RTR, Colonel Silvertop, suggested that his
regiment could attack Bras (despite only having three squadrons of ten tanks in
each left) as the 3rd RTR could not complete its own mission for the day of taking
Hubert Folie without the support of the znd Northants Yeomanry. This offer was
accepted and following an artillery barrage, motorised infantry from the 8th Rifle
Brigade charged through the cornfields towards Bras whilst 3rd RTR tanks shot
them in before rampaging through the village, destroying anti-tank guns wherever
they found them. Within an hour, Bras was taken, there being only light resistance
trom a few remaining panzergrenadiers and the two Stug IIIs.
The tanks remained
in observation and finally withdrew to harbor at 2300 hours in the A echelon area.
As the grd RTR had now occupied Bras, the 2nd Northants Yeomanry was
ordered to attack Hubert Folie. As they moved into position, a report was received
that Cromwell tanks from 22nd Armoured brigade had already occupied the vil-
lage. A delay ensued while this was clarified during which the Germans opened fire
and six tanks were quickly knocked out by Tiger tanks. By about 1830 hours, the
regiment was reduced to a single squadron and could not conunue the attack. the
and Northants Yeomanry casualties for the day were another seventeen Cromwells
that included two 95mm close support tanks.
The znd Fife and Forfar were again allowed no rest and were ordered to attack
Hubert Folie, following the failure of the and Northants Yeomanry attack. After
a heavy artillery barlage at 2000 hours, the attack succeeded windue me dis
losses and Hubert Folie was handed over to a motorised company of the 8th Rifle
Brigade. The and Fife and Forfar retired back across Caen-Vimont Railway. The
23d Hussars remained in reserve all day.
7th Armoured Division
Such was the tramc congestion in the River Ome brugenedd that the tal of the
7th Armoured Division did not complete the crossing of the Orne bridges until
0430 hours on 19 July. The plan the second day was for the 7th Armoured Division
to play an active part in the battle and heip achieve the original objectives, as clearly
there was going to be no opportunity to exploit or break through to radise. the
22nd Brigade was instructed to clear Soliers,
Four and Bourguébus.
A German
reconnaissance in force from Four towards the sth RTR positions just after 0700
hours was beaten off.
The sth RTR attacked Soliers and was able to clear it by 113o hours as it was
defended by only a few panzergrenadiers but fierce fighting took place around Four
before midday. Accordingly, plans were later changed for the sth RTR to break off
trom Four and attack Bourguébus at 1700 hours whilst the ist RTR was to resume
the attack on Four? B Squadron of the ist RTR attacked Four at 1400 hours and
