298
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
5 and 6 August
The Perrier ridge was the key to the battlefield and if the British were thrown
off it then they would have to retreat back to the River Soulevre. The German
intention to mount Operation Luttich also meant that the British positions had to
be eliminated as quickly as possible in order that the timetable for the attack not be
disrupted. Von Kluge decided to not wait for the roth SS Panzer Division to get into
position to mount a joint attack but for the oth SS Panzer Division to continue its ef-
torts alone. As reinforcements, the 2nd Company of the 102nd Schwere SS Battalion
Tigers returned to Chenedolle to join the ist Company, which was already there
with the 9th SS Reconnaissance Battalion now reinforced by the Army Pioneer
Battalion 600 from korps reserve. The defence of Vire had been taken over by
the newly arrived 363rd Division and the paratroops of the 3rd Parachute Division
moved to positions south of Burcy to link up with the 2nd SS Panzer Korps.
During the day, tanks and panzergrenadiers periodically attacked the positions
of the Hussars three times but were unable to break into the British positions.
A similar attack was mounted on the 2nd Fife and Fortar positions at La f'avee. The
heaviest attack came at about 1730 hours after a relatively quiet day; Tiger tanks,
which had got into position on the high ground that overlooked La Pavée to the
west of Chenedole, supported the attack with long lange me. some many and
and Fife and Forfar tanks reoccupied Burcy and this time they were able to hold it,
allowing the supply lines to be reopened.
As suddenly as it started, the German attack stopped; me yu so ranzer Dividu
was exhausted and could no longer continue the assault; its sister division would
have to take over the mission next day.
That night, the ist Norfolks infantry battalion left La Bistere after relieving the
and Northants Yeomanry and moved to reintosk; the Fife/Monmouth position an
La Pavée. As the situation seemed quieter at Le bas Perrier, the z3ra Hussars took
the opportunity to withdraw A and B squadrons back across the valley at midnight,
leaving one troop as additional support for C Squadron.
Next mok ing a heavy mist lay over Burcy and Presles and covered the arrival of
the ist Norfolks to relieve the Monmouths at La Pavée. However, the Monmouths
were unable to withdraw as German mortar tire destroyed the more disp
of the Norfolks, which was to be used by them. The Monmouths decided to stay
and fight on with the Norfolks, which was fortunate as just as the Norfolks had
taken over the slit tranches of the Monmouths at 1500 hours, the attack by the
1oth SS Panzer Division began, preceded as always by a heavy mortar and artillery
bombardment.
Tanks, panzergrenadiers and SP guns attacked the Pavée position
from three directions and the 2nd Fife and Forfar tanks were in the thick of it:
There was much shelling which rose to a climax till suddenly, in the afternoon,
Don Bulley's and Cpl Newman's tanks burst into flames and we heard the whine
of AP shot. Tanks, SP guns and infantry came towards us from Dump wood and
Operation Bluecoat
299
C Squadron on our left reported being attacked by Tigers. Our infantry were rolling
back in confusion. Obviously a big attack was coming in. Pinkie Hutchinson got as
Mark IV, and I got an SP while we killed many of the advancing infantry. The squad-
ron, already depleted, lost four more tanks. Cpl Ives came crawling back through the
corn with three or four wounded. They sheltered under my tank and were lucky to be
unhurt when a shell hit the near-side track and bulged the armour. A shell landed on
the back of Cpl Croney's tank which disappeared in a huge cloud of feathers - he had
liberated a few civilian mattresses. We were not, however, pushed off our positions,
the attack on us had failed and my No.4 troop was still intact."
Iwo Tigers and a Mark IV tank supporting the attack were forced to withdraw by
a troop from C Squadron after two tanks from another troop had been knocked
out. Other Tigers continued to fire from long range from the high ground near
Chenedolle.
A determined German attack was also made on the positions of the Hussars.
Tiger tanks sniped at the C Squadron tanks during the morning and then at 1600
hours a major assault was launched, preceded by the usual fierce bombardment.
Other Tigers worked their way up into overlooking positions to fire as infantry
began to infiltrate and get within Panzerfaust range. Sherman tanks and artillery
used HE air bursts into the tops of trees with devastating effect on the advancing
German infantry. An infantry patrol in Le Bas Perrier village was hard pressed and
a troop of three tanks was sent to help them:
By the time we had reached the village there were only two of us (what happened
to the other tank I never knew). The leading Sherman, commanded by Sgt. Smith,
probed further into the village while we in our tank, commanded by Sgt. Jackson,
came to a halt on the outskirts. As we stood there, we looked through the periscope
and I saw a Panther tank half hidden in the trees. A long-barrelled gun was pointing
in our direction and our 17-pounder was aimed at them. It was an uncanny situation,
facing each other with no sound disturbing the scene. The ominous silence was sud-
denly broken by the sound of a rifle shot fired by a German sniper hidden in a tree.
I heard the bullet ping against the rim of the turret hatch and ricochet harmlessly in
another direction.
The order came from the hill above, 'Return to the Squadron!' Our driver tried to
start the engine, but it failed. He tried several times but without any result. Just then,
Sgt. Smith returned in his tank to find us in a hopeless predicament. With no thought
of the danger he and his crew, together with Sgt. Jackson, jumped out of their vehicles
and quickly fastened a hawser to ours and slowly began to tow us back to the hill. We
had only gone a few yards before what we had assumed was the abandoned German
tank suddenly came to life. A shell landed just a few feet from our tracks. After what
seemed an age we reached the top of the hill to rejoin the squadron, amazed and very
relieved to have made it back unscathed.6o
