220
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
1900 hours, all armoured regiments (except the 3rd RTR) had been forced to retire
back over the Caen-Vimont railway in the face of the ever-increasing numbers of
German tanks.
Thus ended the charge of the lIth Armoured Division. Initially halted by the
fierce defensive fire of the zist Panzer Division's assault guns and the anti-tank guns
of the surviving 12sth and 192nd Panzergrenadier Regiments, the arrival of the SS
Panthers and Stug Ills unhorsed so many riders that the race had to be abandoned.
Guards Afternoon
At I$27 hours, three Tiger tanks and two Mark IVHs were reported moving
northwest out of Cagny towards the British corridor?' This was possibly a late
warning of the attack earlier by the Ist Company of the SO3rd Tank Battalion but
certainly indicates that some German tanks had recovered from the bombardment.
Due to a misunderstanding between the commanders of the IIth Armoured and
Guards Armoured divisions that Cagny was heavily defended, the British delayed
attacking it until more infantry had arrived. In fact, it would have been possible
to have cleared it much earlier in the day with the motorised infantry of the ist
Grenadier Guards Battalion. As the 3and Guards Brigade of intantry Prepared to
attack Cagny at about 1600 hours, von Luck ordered the 88mm flak guns in Cagny
that had caused so much havoc to be lue areqina the village abandone
The 2nd Grenadier Guards were ordered to occupy Cagay all tas was duy
achieved in an hour at about 1800 hours with the tanks accompanying the Kings
Company of infantry from the ist Battalion of Grenadier Guards. Tank losses for
the regiment for the day were fifteen Shermans and one Stuart destroyed or disa-
bled and six other tanks damaged but repairable within 24 hours?" The squadron
leader of No. 2 Squadron, Arthur Grant, was killed, and the regiment command-
ing officer lamented his death:
(Grant) is the greatest (loss). He was quite excellent. His squadron was the first into
battle and he was exercising a most wonderful control of it. I always felt he knew far
more about this Armoured business than any of us here."9
The 2nd Irish Guards
The 2nd Battalion Irish Guards, the reserve regiment, following behind the
Grenadier and Coldstream Guards, did not cross the start line until noon and
suffered its first casualty at 1300 hours when a Sherman was hit and brewed up as
they advanced..
At about 1500 hours, other tanks were engaged from the direction of Emieville
by the newly arrived Panthers, which were well hidden in the orchards around
221
Operation Goodwood
Le Prieure. A low ridge runs southwards from Emieville and the ground between
Cagny and Emieville is open to this ridge, which is crossed by a few hedges
and roas.
The sth Brigade HQ ordered the 2nd Irish Guards at 1600 hours to push onto
Vimont, so No. 2 Squadron charged up this ridge east of Cagny with the objective
otentering rnouville to the south before moving on to Vimont. Lieutenant John
Gorman, after bogging his tank in a small stream north of Cagny, took over an-
other tank in his troop of three and moved uphill, following a line of pylons before
uming notth-east along a lane. This lane led back towards Emieville, so Gorman
was actually going in the wrong direction, away from Frénouville. In a field in
bill down positions just below the crest of a hill, a King Tiger tank, a Tiger I and
Mak IV were stationary and engaging targets as they moved southwards down
tie coridor of the advance towards Cagny. This was a mixed group of surviving
tanks from the sord Heavy Tank Battalion and the 2ist Panzer Division. The
King Tiger, number 122, had taken part in the abortive attack by the ist Company
of the sord Battalion earlier that day. Both sides were as surprised as each other at
the sudden appearance of Gorman's tank and as the King Tiger began to traverse its
sun towards the Sherman, the Sherman's 75mm gun jammed. Thinking quickly,
Gorman ordered his driver to increase speed and ram the King liger berore it could
bring its gun to bear. The Tiger, in an effort to bring its gun to bear more quickly,
began reversing and tried to turn towards Gorman's charging tank. With a crash
ot metal, the Sherman struck the liger in the lett rear nank. Dot crews quickly
abandoned their tanks and took cover. The other German tanks had turned to
counter this new threat and when the remaining tank of Gorman's troop appeared
over the hill, their concentrated close-range fire immediately destroyed it.""
Undaunted by this experience, Gorman returned to Cagny on foot and found
a Firefy that had just been hit. The German AP round had penetrated the tank
and killed the commander but otherwise left the tank relatively undamaged. After
removing the body from the tank, Gorman took command and returned up the
bill towards the Germans. This time he avoided the lane and, using the hedges
of the field in which the German tanks were positioned for cover, moved into
a firing position by nosing the Firefly into the hedge from where he could see the
mans. He first aimed at the King Tiger and after a few rounds caused it and his
previous Sherman to catch fire. Return fire from the other tanks began to come
uncomfortably close, so Gorman backed out of the hedge and moved rooft to
a new firing position and then destroyed a Tiger I with several rounds. Other tanks
from his squadron then arrived and a firefight developed, forcing the German tanks
back into Emieville.
For the rest of the day the znd Irish Guards battled tanks, self-propelled guns and
88mm Pak 43 anti-tank guns of the ist SS along the line Frénouville to Emieville,
losing at least eight tanks knocked out and two damaged in exchange for the King
Tiger no. 122, a Tiger I, two Panthers, two Stugs and two anti-tank guns. The
and Irish Guards finally harboured just north of Cagny that night.
