186
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Next day, 1o July, at odoo hours, the attack on Les Hauts Vents was resumed and
was directed in person by Colonel Roysden who ordered Task Force Y with the
Ist Battalion to take the hill. The Ist Battalion only had two light tanks and six
M4s operational at that time after two days of combat and was unable to take the
hill. The nearer Task Force Y
got to the objective, the heavier was the German
fire. The Germans had reorganised their lines of defence during the night and had
tanks and anti-tank guns covering the main axis of advance along a sunken road.
When the M4 tanks were knocked out, their hulks blocked the roads before they
could be towed away and this slowed the attack as the other tanks were unable to
manoeuvre around the obstruction. Finally, the German fire became so intense
that the task force was forced to halt altogether. Task Force Z then attempted join
the attack but was hit by anti-tank fire from Belle Lande, which was supposed to be
in the hands of the ri9th Infantry Regiment. Belle Lande, reported unoccupied the
night before by the tanks of Task Force Z before being ordered to withdraw, was
now defended in strength by enemy forces, which had brought four tanks into the
hamlet. At 2000 hours, two platoons of tanks from the ist Battalion's E Company
were ordered forward to clear Belle Lande. The Germans opened fire and knocked
out one of the accompanying tank destroyers of Task Force X, which was covering
the Pont Hébert road from a ridge. The E Company tanks returned fire, hit-
ting one enemy vehicle and advanced to the edge of the hamlet where troops of
the rigth Infantry Regiment reported three dug-in tanks. A reconnaissance was
attempted but, in the growing darkness, had to be abandoned. The infantry regi-
ment resorted to subjecting the German positions to an intense artillery barrage.
On to July CCA was attached to the oth Division, having been instructed to
attack towards Les Perry and Les Lands. These orders were changed in view of
intelligence reports about a German counterattack and instead of attacking,
the
CCA made defensive preparations. The tanks of E Company were sent to the
important road junction directly south of St Jean de Daye while St Jean de Daye
itself was reinforced by tank destroyers. These defensive moves were continued on
the morning of It July, with F Company being moved to just north of Le Dézert.
The Counterattack of Panzer Lehr
On the night of 9/1o July, the Panzer Lehr Division began to arrive in the sec-
tor, its approach march having been delayed by air attacks along its route. The
902nd Panzergrenadier Regiment assumed responsibility for the line from Belle
Lande to the River Vire. Panzer Lehr's commanding officer, General Bayerlein,
had been given the mission of destroying the American advance south of the Vire-
Taute canal with a counterattack that was to begin on I1 July. However, Panzer
Lehr had been ordered to leave a tank battalion and an artillery battery behind at
Tilly to support the newly arrived 276th Division, which had taken the division's
Place in the line. Therefore Panzer Lehr could not attack as a complete division and
187
Battle of the Hedgerows
the units assembled for the attack were already under strength as a result of four
weeks of fighting around Caen.
The available forces for the attack were assembled into three battle groups:
• ist and and battalions of the 90znd Panzergrenadier Regiment and a battalion of
twenty tanks to attack north from Pont Hébert
• st Battalion of the go1st Panzergrenadiers and two companies of assault guns
guns (twenty Stug Ills) to attack through Le Dézert
• 2nd Battalion of the golst Panzergrenadiers with eleven Panther tanks from the
Bois du Hommet, driving east and north-easta
The initial objectives of the three attacks were, respectively, Cavigny, St Jean
de Daye and Le Mesnil Véneron and the three battle groups intended to link
up around St Jean de Daye from where a further advance to the coast would be
coordinated. This would be the strongest counterattack mounted by the Germans
since the invasion.
The Panzer Lehr attack began at odoo hours on II July, with the strongest part
of theattack falling on the right flank of XIX Corps, which had been reinforced by
CCA of the 3rd Armored Division and the oth Division only the day before. The
atack struck between the 39th and 47th Infantry Regiments, which were pushed
back by the fury and intensity of the assault before the attack was met north of Le
Deze in the afternoon by the tanks of CCA (F Company of the 32nd Armored
Regiment) and the Mios of the 899th Tank Destroyer Battalion.
ETHIN OO
PZ LEHR DIV
COUNTERATTACK
8 JUL 44
JEAN DE DAYE
AMERICAN cOUNTERATTACK
HEBERT
Prepared by Genit Fritz BAYERLEIN
Plan of the attack of Panzer Lehr on 11 July, drawn by General Bayerlein. Note that Bayerlein was
apparently mistaken with the date
