44
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
about 20 yards of beachhead at low tide and had made no progress inland due to
the intense fire. All work carried on by tank dozers was performed under extremely
hazardous conditions.3
The surviving tanks set about engaging the bunkers and strongpoints of WNoo,
61 and 62 in front of them as best they could. The tanks moved slowly along the
water's edge, weaving in and out of the beach obstacles and bodies to avoid enemy
fire and locate targets. Hull down in the water with their thick frontal armour
facing the shore offered the tanks the protection. However, the rising tide meant
the tanks had to change position every few minutes, exposing them again to the
anti-tank guns firing along the length of the beach. The dozer tanks cleared beach
obstacles as best they could whilst under fire and some tanks pushed up berms of
sand and shingle to give the infantry some protection.
Several of the surviving B Company DD tanks joined in the fierce battle with the
bunkers and had some success. Sergeant Geddes claimed credit for knocking out
two French 75mm guns in WN62, and Sergeant Sheppard also hit and destroyed
a large calibre gun in a casemate. An 88mm gun in WNor was reported knocked
out by the 726th Grenadiers Regiment at 0720 hours?* Private Alfred Whitehead,
an engineer on the Easy Red beach, kept a diary:
For a long time it looked hopeless. The enemy was slaughtering our men with an 88
housed in a huge bunker. But just when things looked darkest, one of our Sherman
DD amphibious tanks managed to crawl onto the beach and not get knocked out,
probably because there were so many wrecked vehicles the enemy missed spotting it.
It moved in close to the bottom of the slope and I ran over and directed it to that 88.
The terrain was such that our tank could creep in close enough to where its gun barrel
was just barely sticking over the top of a little rise to fire. I told the tanker that hẻ d
only have a few seconds to move over the rise and shoot, then hit the reverse gears
before that 88 could return fire.
The first two rounds missed their mark, chipping
chunks of concrete outside its massive structure. On the third try the round hit home
right through the bunker's narrow gun slit?s
The numbers of A Company tanks were bolstered by the late arrival of two more
landing craft. The damaged LCT(A) 2043 made it to the beach at 0700 hours.
and a further two A Company tanks waded onto the beach. However, the tank
dozer aboard the landing crait would not start and the LCT retracted With it still
aboard. The other craft, LC(A) 2008, arrived at about 0800 hours with its ramp
shot away but was able to successfully unload its tanks. At o82o hours the battalion
commander landed but found he could not contact his tanks as the radio was mal-
functioning. Command group officers then directed tanks personally by indicating
targets and placing the tanks in more advantageous positions.
The tanks supported the infantry by destroying gun positions and machine gun
posts on the cliff tops where possible but communication with the infantry was
D-Day Tanks
45
difficult in the fire and noise of battle. Any tank commander with his head above
the turret cupola risked being killed by bullets or shrapnel. The battle on the beach
was all too much for one sergeant commanding a tank of HQ company on Fox
Green and he abandoned his tank, cowering in a fox hole for most of the day. His
tank was ably taken over by a member of the crew who was later asked by a major
at a nearby command post why he had not shot the sergeant for not coming out of
his fox hole.?
At 11oo hours, the I6th RCT decided to make an all-out attack on the E-3
Colleville draw, and Captain W. King from i6th Regiment ran along Easy Red
beach to give instructions to as many operational A Company tanks as possible.
Dodging enemy mortar bursts and machine-gun fire, Captain King made contact
with half a dozen tanks, including a DD tank from B Squadron commanded by
Sergeant Sheppard. Just as he reached the tank of Staff Sergeant Skiba, an artillery
shell landed close by and killed the sergeant. Captain King ordered a corporal to
take over the tank, which he directed towards the E-3 exit until it lost a track in
the shingle and was immobilised. King then approached another tank, also now
commanded by a corporal as its sergeant had been hit in the jaw by shrapnel, and
directed it along the water's edge towards the E-3 draw. This time Captain King
rode in the tank for cover but the tank ran over a mine, which had possibly become
dislodged from its pole, and a track with a bogey of the suspension unit was blown
off. All the crew plus Captain King abandoned the tank and ran for the cover of
Sergeant Skiba's disabled tank?
Three tanks made it to the E-3 exit and began to move along it, firing at the
German bunkers and positions with 75mm HE and machine guns whilst other
tanks that had responded to Captain King's orders provided supporting fire from
where they were on the beach. The defenders had been pounded by shellfire from
destroyers moving close in to the shore but were still offering strong resistance.
Following behind the lead tank commanded by Sergeant Ball, Sheppard's DD
tank was hit by an anti-tank gun on the road ahead and knocked out. The last
tank engaged a pill box on the western side of the exit where they thought the fire
had come from, but as the exit was too heavily defended both tanks tried to turn
around, and in doing so, one threw a track. The crew abandoned their tank and
returned to the beach on foot. The leading tank managed to reverse back to the
beach but was later swamped making its way to the E-I exit?8
The E-3 draw was the planned primary exit off the Omaha beaches. Unable to
assault the strongpoints and bunkers directly because of the devastating fire coming
from them, the infantry were initially pinned down on the beach and the only
way off was to climb the bluffs between the German fortifications. As the morning
went on, more and more infantry managed this climb and, despite heavy losses,
worked their way behind and above the defences (WN62) at the E-3 exit and, to
the surprise of the German defenders, began to knock them out from behind.
Meanwhile the remaining tanks continued to engage the strongpoints in the draw
from the beach as best they could. The engineer teams suffered high casualties
