226
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
after heavy fighting until 2200 hours, the village was cleared with assistance from
a company from the ist Rifle Brigade.
In the afternoon attack on Bourguébus, the sth RTR found that, unlike Soliers,
it was defended by three Tigers and two Panthers. A brief firefight at close range in
the village saw two Tigers and one Panther destroyed for the loss of two Cromwells
and a Firefly from B Squadron. The regiment subsequently retired to Soliers where
they spent a nervous night in unsecured positions as German infantry continued to
infiltrate Soliers and Four in the darkness.
By now, Bourguébus was almost surrounded on three sides, yet still could not be
captured and continued to be defended by German tanks. At last light, the situation
was very confused; German tanks were infiltrating between the villages into firing
positions on higher ground and conducting long-range fire whilst panzergrena-
diers tried to creep back into the villages. However, by midnight on 19 July, most
of Operation Goodwood's revised first-day objectives had been taken with the
exception of Bourguébus, Frénouville and Vimont. The last word on the day's
fighting can be left to the chief tactical planner of Operation Goodwood, General
O'Connor of VIII Corps:
Summary of Ops 19th July
Although only a short advance had been made, the ground gained was of great tactica!
importance and had considerably improved the position of the Corps compared with
the situation at the start of the day. The positions won had entailed hard fighting and
even during the morning while the "sorting out" was in progress, there was a steady
toll of casualties in personnel and tanks, but the total day's casualties were much less
than on the previous day, particularly in it ARMOUR ED DIVISION.?4
On zo July, B Squadron of the sth RTR moved back at first light into Bourguébus. Here
mey encountered a solitary liger barring their advance, which was duly outflanked
and destroyed. The regiment was then relieved and moved back to Démouville.
The reserve regiment of the 7th Armoured Division came into action for first
time on this day. The 4th County of London Yeomanry advanced to the Caen-
Falaise road between Bras and Hubert Folie, the Germans having moved back to
new defensive positions. B Squadron advanced to the Beauvoir Farm south-west of
Bras, while C Squadron shot in the Canadian infantry in their attack on Troteval
Farm before retiring.
A thunderstorm produced heavy rain later that day at about 1600 hours, halting
all further fighting and bringing time for both sides to rest and reorganise.
The
heavy rain made vehicle movement very difficult and all air support was grounded.
Having not broken through the German lines on the first day, despite their best
efforts, Operation Goodwood was brought to a close by the British. For their part,
the German lines had once again buckled under the British onslaught but had just
held. However, many irreplaceable men, tanks and self-propelled guns had been lost
and the chains containing the British beachhead were stretched to breaking point.
227
Operation Goodwood
Conclusion
At 160o hours on 18 July, Montgomery made the following report to the CIGS
Alan Brooke:
Operations this morning a complete success. The effect of the air bombing was de-
asive and the spectacle terrific. VIII Corps advanced at 0730 hours. Present situation
as follows:
Lith Armed div reached Tilly 0760 (Tilly la Campagne) -Bras 0663. 7th Armed
diva passed area Démouville 1067 and moving on La Hogue 0960. Guards Armd
divn passed Cagny and now in Vimont. 3rd infantry Division moving on Troarn.
Have ordered the armed car regiments of each div, supported by armed recce regt, to
reconnoitte towards and secure crossings over Dives between Mezidon and Falaise?
For a commander who had gone to gi sow augths to ensure his instructions for
Operation Goodwood were implemented, this report was extraordinarily inac-
curate. The lith Armoured Division had got nowhere near Tilly and had made
no further progress south since noon that day, having spent the afternoon largely
trying to find cover from the German anti-tank fire and avoid further casualties.
The Guards Armoured Division got nowhere near Vimont and had not even cap-
tured Cagny at the time of this communiqué. The 7th Armoured Division was still
4 miles away from La Hogue and only the sth RTR had crossed the Caen-Paris
railway. A solid defensive line had been created by the Ist SS Panzer Division and
it would have been impossible, if not suicidal, for the lightly armed reconnaissance
forces to venture further south than the Caen-Paris railway. Just how Montgomery
Came to this appreciation of the day's fighting is almost beyond belief; how could
the most senior British ofticer be so ignorant of the real situation on me battened:
Did O'Connor and Dempsey fail to reveal the true situation to Montgomery:
The divisional commanders of the tith and Guards Armoured divisions had not
been backward in reporting their difticulties to O connor. Were O connor and
Dempsey holding on to a faint hope of a breakthrough?
i was almost as if Montgomery had already prepared this report before the
day's battle and it was sent out accidentally. However, just to underline that the
report was intentional, a similar statement was
released soon afterwards for the
BBC evening news and the story of Montgomery's apparent "breakthrough' was
telegraphed around the world.
For a few brief hours, to the watching world, Montgomery of Alamein had again
achieved a miracle victory and the stalemate in Normandy had been broken. However,
Just as quickly as Montgomery was feted, when it became apparent that the attack had
failed to break through a storm of protest led by the Americans and the British air
chiefs descended on Montgomery. Eisenhower sent a strong letter to Montgomery
on 21 July expressing his disappointment with the outcome of the battle. 'I thought
that at last we had him and were going to roll him up. That did not come about??.
