257
Operation Cobra
256
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
following CCA to Canisy and then turning south-west. The start had been delayed
by traffic congestion and the slow progress of CCA in clearing resistance around
Canisy. Three hours later, the leading elements had reached Canisy when their
mission was changed by VII Corps to make a thrust to the coast at Brehal, Io miles
south of Coutances, in a last-ditch attempt to cut off the German forces still in the
Cotentin peninsula?" CCB was organised into two columns but as there was only
one road, the two columns were intermingled until after reaching Canisy where
the two columns were able to deploy. Led by the 82nd Reconnaissance Battalion,
the leading troops of the right column came up against a sizeable German force
defending between Quibou and Laisney. While the recce tanks, self-propelled
artillery and fighter-bombers engaged the German positions, the vanguard found
a way around and moved through Dangy at 1900 hours and then later reached Pont
Brocard. Limited resistance by anti-tank guns, armoured cars and infantry was
overcome and the town was secure at midnight. By o200 hours on 28 July, the right
column and the reconnaissance battalion were in Notre Dame de Cenilly.
After clearing Canisy, the left column used the secondary roads to reach its
objective of the high ground cast of Dangy by 2000 hours on 27 July but then
found further progress difficult in the terrain; the column was forced to move
westwards back to the main road at Pont Brocard. That night the mission of CLo
was then changed back by General Collins to its original mission of establishing
blocking positions between Lengronne and Notre Dame de Cenilly.
At 0900 hours on 28 July, Company H of the 67th Armored Regiment, less
a platoon of tanks but with a compally or armoured intantry and a company ve
engineers, moved to occupy Cambernon on the planned route of the right column.
After overcoming a force of six German tanks at the crossroads north of St Denis
le Gast, the battle group reached Lambernon at 1000 hours and is enecavery cu
the highway south from Coutances to Gavry?" Later that day, a Kubelwagon drove
into the roadblock and all the occupants were killed; amongst the dead was the
commander of the 2nd SS Panzer Division.
Before the main body of the right column could get going that day, a sal
German battle group of Panthers from 2ie SS Panzer Division and a tew units of
275th Division tried to breakthrough from the direction of Cerisy-la-Salle towards
Notre Dame
positioned.
and Pont Brocard where the 183rd Field Artillery Battalion was
The attack was broken up by the intervention of the reserve Combar
Command, including tanks of the grd Battalion of the o7th Armored Regiment."
During the day, platoons from the 82nd Reconnaissance Battalion continued to
epam far and wide as far as Cerences and Lengronne where they found the bridges
over the River Sienne still intact, while another platoon reached the crossroads
north of St Denis le Gast. Before nightfall, the re onnaissance platoons reassembled
in the vicinity of the La Panetiere crossroads. 41
The CCB left column continued to move slowly down the same road being used
by the heavily engaged right column ahead of it. Small detachments of the column
were sent ahead during the night to seize and establish roadblocks on the crossroads
OPERATION COBRA
25-30 July 1944
Operation Cobra and advances of US armoured divisions to 30 July 1944
2 miles north-west of Hambye, north of St Denis le Gast and at Lengronne.
Only sporadic resistance to these moves was put up by isolated elements of the
353rd Division and these objectives were successfully reached during the night.
With the creation of these roadblocks, the left wing of the Seventh Army was at
last cut off, although by a single over-extended combat command.
The situation
at Hausser's HQ was chaotic. Communications, and hence control, had been lost
with many units and the rapidly advancing American columns had caused total
confusion in the rear echelons of the divisions in LXXXIV Corps. Hausser himself
had almost been captured as American forces reached Gavray whilst Bayerlein's
command post near Dangy had to be evacuated the previous day when American
tanks appeared outside; Bayerlein, at least, had been finally able to report the
destruction of his division to Hausser.
The commander of the 17th SS Panzer
Division, who was now commanding what was left of both the and and 17th SS
Panzer divisions, having not heard from Hausser, assumed the Americans had cut
the Cotentin peninsula and accordingly made preparations to breakout southwards
towards Brehal. Hausser, meanwhile, managed to get in touch with von Choltitz,
the LXXXIV Corps commander, and ordered him to break out to the south-east
