244
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
many aircraft had already taken off. Some squadrons later received a recall message
but many did not, including some of the 1,600 heavy bombers. Thirty-five planes
of the second wave and 300 of the third wave dropped their bombs on the target
area, a rectangle 2,50oyds by 7,00oyds south of the St Lô-Periers road. Tragically,
twenty-five men of the goth Division were killed and 131 wounded when a plane
leading a flight of sixteen others dropped part of its load prematurely and the rest
of the flight promptly followed suit.
Before the arrival of the USAAF bombers, the soldiers in the frontline had
withdrawn for safety 1,2ooyds to the north and these men, having been bombed
by their own planes, then had to attack to reoccupy their former positions as some
Germans had moved forward to escape the bombardment. The Germans were
now thoroughly alert to the impending attack and began to use their artillery to
bombard the forward American troops, who only regained their original post-
tions after several hours of heavy fighting. General Bradley considered whether to
postpone Operation Cobra as the Germans clearly now expected an attack, but,
under pressure from Montgomery and Eisenhower, the decision was made to go
ahead the next day. A number of changes were supposedly made to the air force
plans in order to avoid any repetition of the errors of the previous day.
The following morning, on 25 July, the skies were clear and beginning at 1100
hours, more than 1,500 heavy bombers and 380 medium bombers dropped their
bomb loads on the same target area as the previous day. Incredibly, the bombs
from thirty-five heavy bombers and forty-two medium bombers again fell short
into American positions, causing 601 casualties, III of which were fatal." Human
error and dust clouds that obscured the target and target indicators were blamed
for this second friendly fire incident. Bradley had been horrified by the loss of
life the previous day and had convened a meeting between representatives of the
army and air force at which the air force was asked to approach the targe parallel
with the frontline so as
avoid flying over any American troops. The air force
had objected on the basis that this would not achieve the desired concentration
of bombs in the target area and the meeting had concluded with the army under
the misapprehension that its request would be met. After the short bombing, the
American infantry and artillery units sudiggled to deal with their casualties and
reorganise for the attack; one battalion lost its entire headquarters staff, artillery
observation posts were destroyed and telephone lines were cut. However, the ef-
fects on the Americans were slight compared with the devastation wrought on the
German defenders.
Having survived the previous day's bombing, the Germans
were confident that they could do so again and did not realise that the first bomb-
ing had been in error and that many planes had been recalled. This time, their
positions were turned into a lunar landscape of overlapping bomb craters and more
than 1,000 men were killed, tanks overturned and anti-tank positions obliterated.
Three battalion command posts were demolished and all control by Panzer Lehr
was lost. As the American infantry, supported by tanks, began to move forward,
the shattered defenders could only offer feeble resistance.
Operation Cobra
245
The initial objectives of the three infantry divisions, each supported by a tank
battalions, were the towns of Marigny and St Gilles 3 miles away; when captured,
these towns would form the corridor for the waiting two armoured divisions to
charge through. The initial American advance was slow and cautious, hindered by
mines and cratered roads and as time went by, the Germans began to recover from
the effects of the bombing. To their surprise, the Americans began to encounter
an increasing level of resistance and it soon became clear that the bombing had not
been as effective as hoped. German artillery, although short of ammunition, was
silvery active and had not been knocked out by the bombs as the locations of the
batteries were not known by the Americans. Some battalions made good progress
through areas that had been saturated by bombs, but resistance was stronger in the
areas that had not been hit heavily.
The 743rd Tank Battalion had been tasked with supporting the goth Division on
the left flank to St Gilles via the high ground at Hebecrevon and during the bomb-
ng by the medium bombers, an M4 tank and an Ms light tank were damaged and
had to be evacuated. When the planes had departed and H-hour was approaching,
some tank crew members could not be found. The battalion's tanks had formed
up in two columns with the light tanks leading as little opposition was expected.
At H-hour, the tanks slowly began to pick their way through the unnatural tog of
dust and explosives residue that cloaked the barren landscape. Mines on the road
required several halts while they were cleared, and engineers attempting to do this
came under small-arms fire, causing some delays, it one column, two platoons
of light tanks of D Company led an M4 company with a company of infantry
and progress was dificult along the mined roads; the column was soon forced to
stop at a road junction before a small stream to make a reconnaissance.
route cross-country was determined by the force commander, captain Miler, and
orders were issued, but when Miller reached the stream in his tank, he saw that
no other tanks were following. Got pallage on toot to the road junction, wier
berated the other tank crews: 'Now listen, by Christ, if i can go up there on foot
you can take your tanks, you have protection!"
Just then several German tanks opened fire trom an orchard on the crest of
a small hill on the other side of the stream,
knocking out one Sherman
damaging another when it fell into a roadside ditch while taking evasive action.
This effectively stopped the advance and with no way around and unable to find
a road leading to Hebecrevon, the tanks withdrew, leaving the infantry of the
1I9th Regiment to go on alone.
The other column of A Company tanks and a platoon of light tanks encountered
a roadblock on the road to St Gilles of three Panthers supported by a few panzer-
grenadiers. The infantry tried to work in closer under HE fire from the medium
tanks to use their bazookas while the light tanks began a flanking manoeuvre. One
of the Ms tanks saw a Panther:
