248
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
CCB 3rd Armored Division
The Ist Division, with the attached CCB of the 3rd Armored Division, had the
mission of attacking along the Coutances to Periers road via Marigny and seizing
the high ground around Coutances so as to block the retreat of German units from
the Cotentin peninsula to the north. CCB, commanded by Colonel Boudino,
was divided into three teams along with the motorised i8th Combat Team of
the ist Division for the advance to Marigny. As Marigny had not been captured
on the first day of Operation Cobra, the Ist Division would have to fight its way
to Marigny before advancing through the corridor to Coutances and the coast.
The i8th Infantry Regiment would attack either side of the Tribehou-Marigny
road to finally force a gap in the German lines but the infantry would only ad-
vance on foot as no great penetration of the enemy lines had been made. CCB
moved up to the start line during the night of 25 July and began the advance next
morning at 0704 hours, led by the reconnaissance company of the 33rd Armored
Regiment reinforced with a platoon of tanks and a tank dozer to repair the roads."
Pushing down the road to Marigny, the vang are bau to dede was me ate
road and frequent roadblocks set up by a few German tanks or self-propelled guns,
which could only be cleared with the help of artillery and attendant P-47 fighter-
bombers. The reconnaissance company ran into a roadblock near Montreuil of two
Stug IVs and two 7smm anti-tank guns, which they outflanked and destroyed,
taking twelve prisoners? At about 103o hours, the CCB bulldozer was knocked
out by artillery fire and the tanks found themselves unable to advance at a faster
rate than the intantry. By 1330 hours, Team I was just north of Marigny but was
meeting increased opposition from some Mark IV tanks of the znd SS Panzer
Division, a few anti-tank
and infantry from 353rd Division. While a tank
firefight was going on, the team attempted to outflank the town from the right but
found movement cross-country across "" nken roads and through hedges slow and
lifticult. The manoeuvre was unsuccessful and CCD harboured one me to die
west of Marigny at 1812 hours, tinding itself out in tront of the infantry. team
aad knocked out three Mark IV tanks and three 75mm anti-tank guns during the
day around Marigny? Believing that the advance of his 18th Infantry Regiment
was lagging and that Marigny had been secured by CCB, the infantry commander
ordered the regiment to keep advancing to the high ground east of Marigny where
ty arrived at about midnight. Despite facing only pockets of resistance and Ame
planes having completely neutralised the counterattack of the kampfgruppe from
the 275th Division during the day, the anticipated American armoured charge had
been reduced to less than a gentle stroll and Marigny remained in German hands.
The FUSA HQ had received reports that M4s were in the town, but these reports
proved to be false and a clear corridor still did not exist through the German lines.
Next day, CCB resumed its attack towards Coutances, leaving Marigny to be
secured by the i8th Infantry Regiment. A company of infantry entered the town
at 0640 hours only to meet fierce small-arms fire and was forced to withdraw,
Operation Cobra
249
leaving two platoons cut off. The capture of Marigny would take the i8th Infantry
Regiment most of the day. The road to Coutances ran south-west, parallel with
a ridge to the north formed from three hills along its length, which dominated the
roadand the approaches to the town. The axis of CCB's advance was the main road
to Courances itself in order to make up for lost time. The initial objective of CCB
that day was Camprond, which after being secured was to be handed over to the
in infantry Regiment following behind. CCB was also ordered to capture the
three hill along the ridge that overlooked the road. The tanks of the 4th Cavalry
Mechanised Reconnaissance Squadron moved along the northern flank while
Inantry of the roth Combat Team protected the southern flank. Later the lóth
Inantry Regiment, moving on the side roads, was given the objective of blocking
the roads north of Coutances.
Two CCB teams drove side by side rapidly down the highway towards Coutances,
preceded by the reconnaissance company, which was bolstered by a platoon of
supporting tanks and two squads of armoured engineers..
All day the American
advance ran into isolated groups of German infantry, sometimes supported by
ranks; such a typical action was reported by Ernst Barkmann of the 2nd SS Panzer
Division whose lone Panther tank apparenty ambushed the duvance or mus, caus
ing it to come to a sudden halt:
Ar davn on 27 July, Panther 424 was able to follow the company into its new combat
sector. They reached Le Lorey near the main road Coutances-St.Lo. On the curving
toad, at the exit of town, Panzergrenadiers and supply soldiers came running to the
Panzer. "US tanks are advancing on Coutances," they yelled at them. But that was
where they were going! From the distance Barkmann could hear the noise of the
battle and aircraft engines, then fire from sub-machine guns and rifles.
The Spiess
and Schirrmeister, both wounded, approached his Panther. They reported American
tanks driving on the road to Coutances, together with a long column of vehicles.
"Ready for Action!" Barkmann ordered. Panther 424 rolled ahead slowly until the
crossroads were in view. It was ideal firing position, lou m to the crossroads, covered
at the side by an earth mound with bushes.
"Tanks coming from the left, we will fire on the two point tanks." Gunner
Poggendorf had the first tank in the crosshairs, the first shell ripped the turret off the
enemy tank. Then the second tank at the point was in the cross hairs, it too was set
on fire. With this, the crossroads were blocked for the following tanks.
They turned
back, even those vehicles which had already passed the crossroads retreated.
"Open Fire!" The Panzer gun fired shell after shell into the personnel carriers,
Jeeps and ammunition trucks. Within minutes, the crossroads resembled a burning
auto graveyard. Suddenly, Barkmann spotted two Sherman tanks driving off the main
road and approaching from half left. A duel Panzer against tank began.
The first
Sherman burned brightly after the second shot. Barkmann took two hits from the
second Sherman before it, too, caught on fire after a hit to the rear. Fighter-bombers
then appeared over the Panther, the first bombs tumbled earthward but did not hit.
