400
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Montgomery also have to share some of the blame: Montgomery's constantly
changing orders put Simonds under pressure and he in turn had to make frequent
changes to his own orders for the and Canadian Corps. In his defence, Kitching
had requested Brigadier Moncel as Booth's replacement but Simonds inexplicably
delayed this appointment for several days, requiring successive commanders of the
armoured regiments to temporarily act as brigadier with subsequent reductions
in the performance of their own regiments. Scott, from the Foot Guards, took
over after Booth's death but as he had a broken ankle he had to be replaced by
Halpenny of the Grenadier Guards after 24 hours. Scott was hospitalised, so both
regiments then had temporary commanders for the closure of the Falaise Gap.
Major Smith took over the Foot Guards on is August but was relieved next day by
Major Baker who was then wounded by a sniper on 17 August when he had to bail
out of his tank after being hit by an anti-tank gun. Therefore, all three regiments
had inexperienced commanding officers, the British Columbia Regiment having
lost Colonel Worthington during Operation Totalize. As Operations Totalize and
Tractable were the first time in battle for the armoured division, this lack of experi-
ence seriously affected its performance with devastating consequences such as befell
the British Columbia Regiment during Totalize. Simonds should have recognised
this and ensured a rapid replacement for Booth.
Although the armoured regiments controlled the roads and hilltops, the regi-
ments were not very active, largely remaining stationary in their positions without
ogressive patrolling. This was a result of the inexperience of the acting regimental
commanders and the heavy tank losses already sustained by the regiments, each
being reduced to half strength by this time. It is also possible the Canadians were
not too keen to tangle with the desperate Germans scurrying through the fields
and woodlands, ideal terrain for infantry wanting to hide or ambush tanks.
The CO of the South Albertas had requested several times that more infantry
be sent forward to support his tanks and the oth Brigade from the 3rd Division
was ordered forward at noon on 19 August but did not arrive until the evening of
20 August when the crisis had passed. The rd Division was waiting to be relieved
by the 2nd Division and Simonds seemed to have shown no urgency in organising
reinforcements for the South Albertas. It was left to C Squadron and fifty men to
hold St Lambert. Had Simonds been more aggressive, then many more German
troops would have been cut off. With the standing down of the 4th Brigade regi-
ments on 19 August, Simonds may have believed that most of the Germans had left
the pocket already.
It could also be argued that the advances of the Polish Armoured Division were
foolhardy and reckless following the division's relegation to the reserves after its
inauspicious first day of fighting in Totalize; Kitching certainly thought so and
refused to go their aid when isolated. Despite the 2nd Tank Regiment being lost
to the battle for a day after taking a wrong turn and so delaying the capture of
Chambois by a day, permitting thousands of Germans to escape, it is the Polish
Falaise Gap
401
forces and the South Albertas that have been deservedly recognised for the part
they played in the closure of the Falaise Gap.
But Montgomery and Bradley made other mistakes as the Falaise Gap could have
been closed much earlier. When Bradley halted Patton's divisions on 12 August,
Argentan was defended by only a few German security detachments and it was the
opinion of Hausser that it and Chambois could have been taken on 13 August with
little effort.?"
The Gap was sealed in the end by the efforts of just three divisions: the Polish
Armoured Division, the US goth Division and the South Alberta Regiment from
the Canadian 4th Armoured Division. The French 2nd Armoured Division blocked
the easternmost part of the Gap south of Mont Ormel but seems to have seen title
action, perhaps distracted by the plans being hatched for the liberation of Paris.
While Bradley was concerned about any blocking unit being destroyed by the
Germans desperate to escape, Simonds was apparently content for a reconnaissance
regivent, the South Albertas, to occupy St Lambert as the only blocking unit.
Having missed the opportunity to close the Gap on 13 August, this mistake was
den compounded by the reorganisation Of Us commands. A reinforced nig wan
as not captured until 20 August by the 317th Regiment after stiff resistance from
the 11óth Panzer Division. The distance from Argentan to Chambois was only
10 miles, yet the Americans effectively took a week to get there.
When Montgomery ordered the capture of Trun on 16 August after the fall of
adise, the inter-army boundary was never changed, so it is almicul to see way
it was such an issue on 13 August. On ibaugust, Patton created a new provi-
sional corps containing the three divisions that had been holding the mine south
on put General Gaffey in command and ordered him to attack trun next day.
of Argentan, the 8oth and goth divisions and the French 2nd Armoured Division.
Bradley chose this moment to restructure the US inter-army boundaries and made
Argentan the responsibility of FUSA rather than Patton's Third Army. Bradley
also appointed General Gerow, previously of V Corps, to command the new corps,
much to Gaffey's disappointment. It is almost as though Bradley was determined to
delay any operation to close the Gap in the light of his views that this should have
been done by the British, so the opportunity was lost. Gerow prompy discaraed
Gaffey's plans to make his own and the attack northwards was postponed until
18 August. This meant the American advance northwards was delayed for more
than four days, during which time the Germans had ample time to bolster their
defences of the southern shoulder and for many units to safely withdraw from
the threatened encirclement. to After two days' fierce fighting, the Americans and
Polish were able to finally link up at Chambois on 20 August. But the Allies held
the towns only, the countryside between them continued to be an avenue of escape
for the Germans.
Neither did the British advance very quickly: after reaching Necy, which is
4 miles from St Lambert, on 18 August, the British took 48 hours to make con-
tact with the Canadians at Trun.4 The consequences of the Allied tardiness in
