410
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
If the number of German tanks destroyed or abandoned by their own crews 1s
excluded then the Germans lost in combat 1,256 tanks to the Allies' 2,693 tanks
written off, a ratio of more than 2:1. Given the immense resources committed to
tank production in the United States and numbers of tanks in the field, this was
a ratio the Allies apparently could afford. The 2:1 average ratio of Allied to German
tank losses supports the claims of journalists and regimental war diaries that two or
three Shermans were lost for every German tank knocked out.
Flesh and Blood
Tanks are machines crewed by flesh and blood; each time a tank was knocked
out in the Normandy campaign, there were usually men killed or wounded. The
more thinly armoured the tank, the higher the number of casualties that could be
expected.
A late-war survey in 1945 of 333 British tank casualties showed that:
• 41 per cent of tanks were knocked out by AP (tanks and anti-tank guns)
• 35 per cent of tanks were knocked out by Hollow Charge weapons (Panzerfaust)
• 20 per cent of tanks were knocked out by mines's
The figure of 35 per cent for Panzerfaust is due to this weapon being available in
large quantities in the last few months of the war during fighting in Germany and
is believed to be unrepresentative of fighting in Normandy. A more accepted figure
for tank casualties in Normandy due to Panzerfaust was 6 per cent." While 333
tanks were damaged or destroyed, 769 men became casualties (2.3 for every tank)
of which 278 officers and ORs were killed.
During the Normandy campaign to 28 August, the RAC in 2ist Army Group
including the Canadian and Polish forces, 2,038 men were killed or died of
wounds." This represents an average of t.2 men killed per tank knocked out. In
the same period, the RAC suffered a total of 7,889 battle casualties, including those
killed, which is a ratio of 4.65 casualties for every tank.
According to the same survey, so per cent of casualties to tank crews occurred
inside the tank and 40 per cent outside when hit by mortar or shell fire, a further
third of the 40 per cent outside being due to bailing out. 8 Therefore, 62 per cent of
RAC casualties, which is 4,891 casualties, were statistically due to tanks being hit
and knocked out by German tank and anti-tank weapons.
In a detailed survey sample of 214 tanks knocked out by AP or HC in 1945, there
were 325 battle casualties, of which 123 men were killed and 202 men wounded, an
average of I.s casualties per tank. Of these casualties, 84 per cent were caused by
a single penetration of the fighting compartment. On average, 0.58 men were killed
for every tank lost. Applying this factor to the number of tanks lost by 2ist Army
Group to the end of August, a total of 982 men would be expecte
have been
Summary
411
killed in action by AP or Panzerfäuste. In the late-war study, the expected numbers
killed inside the tank were 17.8 per cent of casualties (t,40s men) with a further
1025 men killed outside the tank, so the total fatal casualties in Normandy were
actually fewer than expected for the number of tanks lost.
As the total RAC casualties in Normandy per tanks lost (4.6) was double that
of the 1945 survey (2-3) but the fatalities less than expected, many more casualties
were therefore due to other causes, such as artillery, rockets and snipers, and this
is consistent with the repeated Allied attempts to break through the German lines
and the intensity of the fighting in this period.
i particular note is that the percentage of men killed did not vary much with
the type of Allied tank, i.e. Sherman, Churchill or Cromwell." The study also
highlighted the importance of thick frontal armour, as 40 per cent of tanks that
were hit on the hull were hit in a sector 22.s degrees either side of the forward axis
as were so per cent of those hit on the turret.?2
American casualties for the campaign were similar, with 1,627 men killed in the
and and grd Armored Divisions in the same period but fewer tanks being lost: total
battle casualties were 7,922 men.23 These casualty figures also include those which
expected. The 66th Armored Regiment lost IT M4s and twenty-eight Ms in the
campaign with 120 officers and men killed and for wounded or missing. These
casualties equate to one man killed per tank lost, a slightly less average rate than
that of the RAC. In a US study of FUSA tank casualties, 174 men were killed in
a sample of 274 tanks, which was 0.64 men killed per tank, a ratio very similar to
the British study.24
So great were the British losses in men and tanks that the British replacement
yoem was unavi to scop uper severe seravage de veer dive went vassane coasters.
ately following Uperation Goodwood meant that the 2nd Armoured Replacement
Group had to be 'combed-out for crew members, and the Field Delivery Squadrons
Were similarly scrutinised for every available man.?
As the planned replacement system could not cope with demand, five tank regi-
ments had to be disbanded to make replacements for other armoured regiments.
Generally, the most junior regiment in a brigade was disbanded but the reor-
ganisation saw the entire 27th Armoured Brigade broken up with the Staffordshire
Yeomanry going back to England for amphibious training, the
East Riding
Yeomanry going to the 33rd Armoured Brigade in place of the 148th RAC and
I3th/18th Royal Hussars to the 8th Armoured Brigade to replace the 24th Lancers.
The 24th Lancers were disbanded and the two County of London Yeomanry regi-
ments were merged. The 2nd Northants Yeomanry was disbanded on 15 September
and replaced by the 15th/19th Hussars in the lith Armoured Division.
One reason for the shortage of British tanks at the end of July was that the
2nd Armoured Replacement Group at that time was only delivering sixteen battle-
worthy
aks a day to front-line units. Tanks were accumulating in the Ordnance
parl
beachhead Rear Maintenance Area but not getting through to the
