286
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
VIII Corps
The Guards Armoured Division was ordered by VIII Corps to resume its advance,
this time towards Vassy. The division would advance in two columns, codenamed
HOT and COLD, and share the road to Catheolles before taking different routes
to Vassy. The left-hand column of the Grenadier Guards (HOT) was instructed
to advance via Catheolles to Montchamp but was held up by German tanks and
anti-tank guns on the high spurs south at Arclais and Drouet occupied by the gth
SS Kampgruppe Meyer. In the fighting there, the Grenadier Guards lost a total of
ten Shermans plus three damaged and three Stuarts knocked out in the course of
the next few days of Bluecoat.37
Meanwhile, the 2nd Welsh Guards reconnaissance regiment, with its Cromwells,
had probed almost to Montcharivel (modern spelling is Montchauvet) on the narrow
winding road between the two spurs of high ground when the leading tank was hit
and destroyed, blocking the road. Stug IIIs of the 7th Company of the 9th SS Panzer
Division and stragglers from the 326th Division had moved into Montcharivel and
St Charles de Percy in the early morning. As the route northwards was blocked, the
regiment moved southwards, and No. 3 Squadron lost five tanks at St Charles de
Percy before moving east towards Montchamp, losing another tank.
With orders to advance to Vassy via St Charles de Percy and Estry, the right-hand
column (COLD) of the 2nd Irish Guards was to follow the left-hand column at 071s
hours but could not move off until noon because of the traffic on the road ahead of it.
The force was then caught in another traffic jam, caused by the rear elements of the
left column that had stopped because of the fighting ahead in Catheolles. Eventually
the tanks of the Irish Guards forced their way through the vehicles lining the road
after the Coldstream infantry abandoned their lorries and mounted the tanks. As
the tanks arrived at St Charles de Percy to cut the main road from Vire to Villers
Bocage, the main gun of the second tank accidentally fired while negotiating the
crossroads, hitting the rear of the leading tank and killing three crew members. The
advance continued but was soon held up by two Jagdpanthers in Courteil that proved
particularly troublesome. The advance was held up fors hours while preparations
were made for an attack until the brigadier of the sth Brigade arrived to see what was
causing the hold-up. The regiment was ordered to immediately bypass courtell and
push on to the high ground near Estry; the commanding officer was ordered to hand
over command and rest." In rushing to carry out these orders in the growing dark-
ness, the column got separated: No. 2 and 3 squadrons harboured at La Marvindiere
and No. 1 Squadron harboured with RHQ some miles back at Sieurnoux.
11th Armoured Division
The lith Armoured Division received new orders to redirect their advance to the
east of Vire rather than continue southwards as per the previous day as it had now
been confirmed by Montgomery that Vire was an American objective. Unknown
to them, advance elements of the oth SS Panzer Division were arriving and about
to counterattack. A pincer movement was planned by the Germans with the two
Operation Bluecoat
287
pincers converging on Le Bény Bocage. Kampfgruppe Meyer, made up of the bulk
of the division, was to attack Le Bény Bocage from the east and Kampfgruppe Weiss,
composed of the 102nd SS Schwere Tank Battalion and the 9th SS Reconnaissance
Battalion, was to attack from the west via Vire. In the meantime, soldiers from the
3rd Parachute Division would occupy Vire and prepare it for defence against both
the American XIX Corps in the western outskirts or the advancing British. The
battle groups of the lith Armoured Division made slow progress along the narrow
roads of the difficult terrain and units became strung out in long columns and often
became separated. There were sporadic clashes involving German units that were
moving south-west across the lines of the British advance.
The 23rd Hussars were ordered to advance from Le Bény Bocage to Le Desert,
Presles and Chenedolle. On the Estry ridge above Presles, the leading tank of
B Squadron knocked out two armoured cars from the gth SS Reconnaissance
Battalion and fought off some Panzerfäuste wielding infantry. Descending down
into the valley and the village of Presles, two more German self-propelled guns
were knocked out from the same reconnaissance regiment. The Hussars RHQ
stopped in the middle of Presles only to see a Panther tank moving down the road
towards them from the direction of Estry. The Panther was engaged by a Firefly
whilst a troop of tanks worked their way around to fire at the Panther from the flank
and it was duly knocked out. Other Panther tanks were spotted and A Squadron was
pushed out to cover the regiment's left flank. Leaving a narrow track, the squadron
began to deploy into a field. The regimental history recorded what happened next:
At the other end of the field, playing the usual lying in wait' game which was the
delight of the German tank man, lay hidden a number of Panthers. At close range,
and with well distributed fire, they all opened up at once, with devastating effect. All
but four of A Squadron's tanks were hit and blazing within a matter of minutes, and
the remaining four fought their way back to cover, destroying three Panthers as they
did so.40
Five Sherman tanks were quickly knocked out in this ambush." Although the
history and war diary mention Panther tanks,
it is likely that the 23rd Hussars
had run into Kampfgruppe Weiss moving to Vire.
The Ist Company of Tigers
engaged the Hussars while the 2nd Company hurried on to Vire. The Hussars' B
Squadron was unable to get across the difficult countryside to assist and pushed on
into Chenedolle, only to immediately have a tank knocked out by a Tiger tank that
blocked the main street. Infantry from the Rifle Brigade stalked the Tiger only
to see the shots from their PIATs have no
effect other than causing the Tiger to
reverse out of trouble. As strong German armour was coming in on their left flank,
the regiment decided to withdraw with the infantry to a defensive box on the high
ground between Chenedolle and Presles on the ridge just south of Le Bas Perrier.
The 2nd Fife and Forfar reached the village of Burcy and pushed on to the
Vire-Vassy road where they set up a road block with two squadrons of tanks,
