280
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
advance of only a few hundred yards, finally captured Orbois. Clearly no break-
through was going to occur on the XXX Corps front.
11th Armoured Division
The tired infantry of the KSLI and A Squadron of the 2nd Fife and Forfar were
roused early in the morning and advanced in the darkness to the main road just
west of St Martin des Besaces. This force was subsequently ordered to capture the
town, which was defended by a single Mark IV tank that knocked out a Sherman
as it crossed the road. The rest of the troop returned fire along the road and the
track of the Mark IV was damaged, requiring it to be towed from St Martin by
another tank before the arrival of the British. St Martin was secured by midday but
not before a second tank was lost in this operation.? The town was then handed
over to the infantry of the Isth (H) Division so that the lIth Armoured Division
could continue its advance.
2nd Household Cavalry
C Squadron of the Household Cavalry Regiment was attached to the 15gth Brigade
group and at dawn had moved southwards in their armoured cars to probe the
German lines. Two armoured cars crossed the road west of St Martin des Besaces
before the operation had begun to clear it and proceeded south into the Fort
l'Evêque. There they carefully followed a German armoured car southward and
reached the village of La Ferrière on the other side of the forest. The two scout cars
drove on south and east along various tracksyuta they came to a small stone bridg
over the River Soulevre.
The single sentry was ruthlessly dealt with and while
the two cars were hidden in nearby bushes, the information on the capture of the
bridge was wirelessed to the Household Cavalry He, which quickly Passed it on lo
he Ith armoured Division ne. The 2nd Northants Yeomanry were teet
reintorce the position at the bridge as soon as possibie. - squadron so wo true
of Cromwells over the road and the railway west of St Martin but the remainder of
the squadron was held up by enemy fire. Atter moving somewhar more cautiously
than the armoured cars, the tanks arrived at the bridge at 1405 hours.
Elated at the news of the seizure of the bridge, at 1400 hours Vill Corps issued
new orders to the lith Armoured Division as there was now an alternate tou
for the assault on Le Bény Bocage from the west, south of the River Soulevre,
rather than the previously planned frontal assault from the north across the river.
The 23rd Hussars were ordered to reinfoy e the bridge carrying the 3rd Monmouth
infantry on their tanks, taking the supposedly faster main road around the Forêt
l'Evêque to the bridge. The rest of the brigade groups were to advance south from
St Martin as soon as possible.
The o'ers for the rest of the day were carried out with only one dithculty.
the circuitous route of the 23rd Hussars and t reminder of the 2nd Northants
Yeomanry tanks around the Forêt l'Evêque was held up by an American column
moving along the same road southwards at Petite Aunay, despite VIII Corps having
Operation Bluecoat
281
earlier requested the US V Corps to keep the road clear. B Squadron of the Hussars
took about 3 hours to reach the bridge, which they did at 1800 hours, whilst the
rest of the regiment arrived at 2100 hours. B and C squadrons made a brief recce
across the bridge to the wooded hillside opposite but, after losing one tank on
the mined road, decided to return to harbour around the bridge as darkness set
in. A brief firefight resulted in the capture of a soldier from the reconnaissance
battalion of the 21st Panzer Division.
Meanwhile, the 3rd RTR had also arrived and cleared La Ferrière of infiltrating
German paratroops of the 3rd Parachute Division. During the night, the American
troops that had been met on the road at Petite Aunay dug in between the bridge
and La Ferrière to underscore the apparent breakdown of communications between
the British and Americans.
From a later intercept of a German radio message, it was learnt that the River
Soulevre bridge and the track through the Forêt l'Evêque were not only the bound-
ary line between the Il Parachute and the LX XIV Corps but the same line was also
the boundary between the Seventh Army and Panzer Gruppe West.» As such, each
of the adjacent German units thought that the other was guarding the bridge and as
a consequence the bridge was left relatively undefended. The men of the Household
Cavalry were given no time to rest and were instructed to patrol towards Vire. As
the lith Armoured Division was making more rapid progress, the major roles in
Operation Bluecoat were then reversed by General Dempsey. The objective of Le
Beny Bocage was taken from XXX Corps and allocated to vill Corps while the
isth (H) Division would now protect the left flank of the lith Armoured Division;
XXX Corps, in turn, would protect the flank of the Scottish Division.
General Dempsey also ordered VIII Corps to
bring the Guards
Armoured
Division into the battle because of the lack of progress and the division advanced at
lózo hours from Caumont. By dusk, the Guaras had davanced to contact win the
Germans south-east of St Martin des Besaces on the hill at Point 238. The tanks of
No. 2 Squadron and Irish Guards, along with the sth Coldstream intantry, tried
to capture the hill late in the evening in a hastily planned and unreconnoitred
attack that was unsuccessful, losing the tank of the squadron's second in com-
mand, which was found next morning burnt out. Other advance elements of the
21st Panzer Division had arrived on the hill in the afternoon and the rest of the
division deployed overnight, including forty-one Mark IV tanks and the surviving
King Tiger tanks of the So3rd Schwere Battalion.
By late afternoon, the advanced elements of the 2ist Panzer Division had begun
to arrive in the area around the Bois du Homme. General Feuchtinger had arrived
the previous evening and had met with the LXXIV Korps commander, who was
adamant that a counterattack be made as soon as possible.
Feuchtinger was pes-
simistic that his weakened division could hold a frontline that ran from the Bois
du Homme to Le Bény Bocage and preferred to use his men to block the British
advance rather than frittering them away in a pointless attack.
