366
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
rapidly destroyed. Two Tiger tanks were knocked out by Fireflies of A Squadron
of the ist Hussars. The armament of Sergeant Gariepy's tank of the Hussar' B
Squadron was put out of action, but during the afternoon he collected 342 prison-
ers and led them to the rear.
When the leading tanks reached the River Laison, they received a shock as
the river was found to be impassable. Simonds and his planners had used aerial
photographs and a reconnaissance by the 6th Canadian Field Company engineers
the previous day to deduce that the river was not an obstacle to tanks.!" Although
only loft wide and a few feet deep, the muddy river bottom and steep banks meant
that any tank trying to cross got bogged. The charge of the tanks was reduced to
an armoured mass milling around at the river's edge and the hedges along its banks,
looking for a crossing. Many tanks became bogged in waterside meadows. One
bridge was found to be damaged but it was not known that there was a suitable
ford nearby.
Prior to Operation Tractable, the limited numbers of operational German tanks
were deployed in small groups along the frontline. The eight Tiger tanks of the
2nd Company of the lOTst SS Battalion were supporting 89th Division positions
along the northern ridge of River Laison between Assy and Potigny as a part of
Kampfgruppe Prinz with the majority of the Mark IVs." Also in the area were
five Jagdpanzer from the 2nd Company in the orchards from Ouilly le Tesson to
Rouvres? Three Tigers from the 2nd Company of the 1o2nd Schwere SS Battalion
were supporting the fifteen operational Panthers in the sector of 27Ist Division
around Clair Tizon and Tournebus? Kampfgruppe Olboeter, with two Mark IVs,
was supporting the 89th Division. 22
On the morning of 14 August, all German tanks came under the command of
Kampfgruppe Wunsche. The ist Company Jagdpanzers were in an ambush position
in the woods around Epancy and the Mont d'Eraines to repel any breakthrough
in that accuor. Cived the deployment of the Panther company and Lander o
artillery from the 8sth Division on the night before the attack to Clair Tizon, the
Germans may have expected the main effort to come from that direction, despite
having the captured Canadian plans. 23
Three other Tiger tanks of the 2nd Company Toist Battalion were ordered to
move in the morning from Assy to Mazières along the northern bank of the River
Laison to bolster the defences of the 85th Division. The leading Tiger suddenly
met two Shermans coming the other way shortly after the start of the operation.
The gunner in the leading Tiger, SS Rottenführer Lau, described the encounter:
After moving for about 20 minutes, Wendorff suddenly called out:
"Man ... Two Shermans, Lau -
fire!"
Then again:
"Fire! What are you waiting for, fire!"
A few things had to happen before that could be done - feet on the pedals, main
gun released, turret traversed to 2 o'clock. And then I saw the Sherman in the optics
Operation Tractable
367
of the gunsight. It was only 30 metres away from us on a bend in the road. The first
round got him. I had the impression the burst of fire was hitting us right in the fight-
ing compartment. It was my loth 'kill' with Wendorff since the middle of July 1944.
Wendorff was yelling again: "Next to it ….. on the other side of the road ….. another
one!"
I continued to traverse by hand and saw the next one. In the next moment it
happened - a truly ear deafening hit, dead silence and the smell of burning. At some
point I came back to my senses. It was as if I were paralysed. I was in shock and could
scarcely breathe, hear or see. My first movement was upwards, where you could pull
yourself up into the commander's cupola by grips above the gunner's seat. While
doing that 1 had to catch my breath. Wendorff was sitting there but he did not move.
I did not see any blood soaked clothes, I could not see his face. There must be some-
thing wrong with my eyes.
Then I hear the radio operator, Fred Zimmerman. He was screaming, I could
barely understand him. No sound came from the driver, Franz Elmer. The loader lay
dead in the fighting compartment. Zimmerman said that he was trapped and could
not fel his feet. There were flames in the engine compartment and he wanted to put
an end to it all with a pistol.
also felt the burning smoke that took away your breath and biting pain - burns.
I heard the shot of Fred Zimmerman's pistol - that also took my breath away. Probably
because of the smoke, i started to feel quite calm and peaceful. I slumped forward
with my head against the black rubber eyeguard of the optics. This was the end - or
so I thought. I was unconscious until the grd September when I woke up in the
99th British field hospital. The driver, Franz Elmer, had bailed out and probably
got help ...24
The Tiger was hit by an armour-piercing shell trom a fireny of A squadron of the
ist Hussars, which had already knocked out two Tigers that morning.?" The shell did
not penetrate the side armour of the hull but flakes of armour flew around the inside
of the tank, wounding or killing some of the crew. As the main gun had traversed to
the 2 o clock position, the barrel was over the radio operator's hatch and so he could
not get out 2 The two remaining Tiger tanks and three others from the company
then engaged the throng of tanks around Assy and Rouvres, taking a heavy toll. At
some point the Tiger tanks crossed the River Laison at a usable crossing to avoid
being cut off by the Canadian advance and to take up new defensive positions. After
knocking out three Shermans advancing to Rouvres, the 2nd Company Jagdpanzers
withdrew with the remnants of the 12th SS Panzer Regiment."
Some Canadian tanks were fortunate in quickly finding a crossing point over the
River Laison. In the east, No. 3 Squadron of the Grenadier Guards crossed an intact
bridge at Ernes and swept into the village itself, knocking out an 88mm anti-tank
gun and destroying artillery guns. The other two squadrons eventually crossed the
bridge at Rouvres, which was made passable by three bundles of fascines dropped by
the AVRE Churchills. The regiment then regrouped before pushing on a few more
