THE NORMANDY BATTLEFIELD
Road
Caen Canal
Departement boundary
Contour 100 metres
Contour 200 metres
Contour 300 metres
Kilometres
enervoure
Bay of the Seine
Valognes • Quineville
•Montabourg
UTAH
Ste. Mere Eglise
•Barneville
R. Dou
OMAHA
2 St. Laurente
Port en Bessin
Lo tune
Le Havre
carentan,
Bayeu
•Ouistrehams
Houlgate
Lessay
Periers
MANCHEZ SI. Lô
" Coutances
Lisieux
Argences
° Caumont c
Villers Bocage
Ne7001
Falaise •
Granville L
Condé/
Vire
Flers
Argentan
Avranches
Mortain
OR NE
• Domfront
rouderes
Mayenne
(Courtesy of The History Press)
Introduction
The sun did not come up on the morning of 6 June 1944 along the Normandy
coastline. Instead the darkness of the stormy night was replaced by an overcast sky
above heavy seas still streaked with the white caps of breaking waves. As the light
improved, the tense and increasingly awestruck German sentries saw that the once
empty horizon was now filled with an armada of ships of every size and shape com-
ing straight for them. The defenders manning the strongpoints of Hitler's Atlantic
Wall were tired because of the constant false alerts since oroo hours; now they
could see with their own eyes that the alerts were real. Formations of low-flying
aircraft with black and white stripes on their wings suddenly appeared out of the
low-lying clouds and made straight for the defenders who immediately took cover.
Most of the bombers missed their targets, however, as they were concerned about
hitting the ships of the invasion fleet and their bombs detonated harmlessly in the
areas behind the beaches.
Steadily the armada came closer, and the individual ships became more distinct.
The outlines of grey behemoths became battleships and appeared along with the
sleek lines of their smaller consorts such as cruisers and destroyers. In front of them
were hundreds of smaller angular landing ships, rocket ships and landing craft,
some of which were heading for the shore while others were performing a circular
dance as they waited for their turn for the run in to the beaches. Suddenly the
warships were lit up by flashes of gunfire along their lengths, and seconds later
the howl of the approaching shells caused the defenders to hug the ground in their
shelters and trenches closer. All along the Normandy coastline, giant mushrooms
of dirt and debris erupted and the ground shook with the detonations of the shells.
The air filled with smoke and dust and the strong smell of cordite. Amongst the
terrified Germans, the religious (and some not so religious) began to pray for their
salvation. Would the bombardment ever stop?
In the noisy, cramped landing craft of the initial assault wave, Allied soldiers
huddled together facing the exit ramp, their helmeted heads bowed. Spray from the
rough sea and the occasional desultory German retaliatory shell exploding nearby
soaked most men before they had even landed. Those that weren't seasick gripped
