52
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
could nearby. Another tank made it to the seawall and sought a way over onto the
promenade, only to find the way blocked by the prone bodies of dead soldiers. One
tank had a track knocked off at the water's edge and was subsequently swamped."
Of a total of sixteen dozers embarked for the Omaha sector beaches, only six ever
reached the beaches and three were disabled by artillery fire.Ios
Captain V. Phillips, the commander of A Company, became the battalion com-
mander at 1300 hours when Colonel Upham, who had been wounded by a sniper
earlier in the morning, finally left the beach.
Some A Company tanks supported the remaining 74Ist Battalion tanks in as-
saulting the E-1 and E-3 exits while the rest and several C Company tanks engaged
the D-3 defences; three tanks attacked WN66 on the western side of D-3 Les
Moulins draw and penetrated the outer defences, according to a report in the l0g
of the 352nd Division 19 A Company tank dozers cut a road on the hills west of
the St Laurent E-i draw in an effort to outflank the D-3 draw defences in WNos
but were beaten back by fierce enemy fire. This road was subsequently used by the
remaining 74Ist Battalion tanks to leave the beach later that evening. The E-I draw
was finally open for infantry to move inland during the afternoon.
During the afternoon the two straggler LCT(A)s 2273 and 2275 arrived, bringing
in four tanks and two tank dozers as badly needed reinforcements. After a false ru-
mour in the late afternoon that the D-3 Les Moulins draw was open, the tanks of the
743rd Battalion finally began to leave the congested beach at 2100 hours by the D-1
exit at Vierville. A Company did not harbour until midnight west of Vierville, and
only eight tanks were left. Eight tanks and six dozers were reported lost on D-Day!"
Tank crews on some parts of the narrowing beach or at the entrances to the
exits had no choice but to drive over the dead bodies of fellow soldiers. Many parts
of the beaches were crowded with wounded and able men seeking cover, and in
order to advance, the tanks had no choice other than to run over the bodies. An
anonymous tanker commented, 'If there was any sign of life at all, I tried to avoid
them. But buttoned up and looking through the scope, it was hard to see, you just
had to run over them?'™ Another tanker recorded his horror at finding a soldiers
underwear caught in his tracks and fervently hoped the soldier was already dead
before the tank ran over him.
Summary
The day at Omaha was won by individual soldiers climbing the bluffs and penetrat-
ing inland to attack the bunkers guarding the entrance to the draws from behind
or above. Attacking the strongpoints directly was almost suicidal for the infantry
without the support of the tanks and as the beach defences were largely intact,
the tanks themselves took heavy casualties. The 743rd Tank Battalion tanks were
instrumental in destroying key bunkers and providing much-needed fire support
for the assault infantry at the D-i Vierville draw, which was open to intantry m
the late afternoon. The battalion also played a major role in making up for the lost
74Ist Battalion tanks on Easy Red to open the B-t St Laurent draw. It may well!
D-Day Tanks
53
have been the heavy and accurate close-range naval gunfire that tipped the balance
in the favour of the Americans, but without the tanks of the 743rd Tank Battalion
the landings on Omaha might not have succeeded at all.
Once the infantry had left the beaches, the tanks could only continue to engage
the bunkers and wait for the exits to be opened. The infantry moved rapidly inland
and secured the villages of Colleville, St Laurent and Vierville behind the beaches
without the support of the tanks from either tank battalion. Omaha Beachhead on
the actions of 743rd Tank Battalion on D-Day:
Their achievement cannot be summed up in statistics; the best testimony in their
favour is the casual mention in the records of many units, from all parts of the beach,
of emplacements neutralized by the supporting fire of tanks. In an interview shortly
after the battle, the commander of the 2d Battalion, 116th Infantry, Major Bingham
who saw some of the worst fighting on the beach at Les Moulins, expressed as his
opinion that the tanks 'saved the day. They shot the hell out of the Germans, and got
the hell shot out of them.'
The 743rd Tank Battalion losses in tanks were seventeen tanks and six tank dozers
and there were thirty-eight tanks operational with one repairable in less than 24
hours at the end of D-Day.'2 Nine men (three officers and six enlisted men) were
killed and twelve wounded. The 74Sth Tank Battalion (B Company) due at Hto
hours finally landed at 1630 hours on Fox Green beach after the delays caused by
the slow progress of the assault and, after losing three tanks on mines, exited by
the newly opened F-1 exit. The 747th Tank Battalion did not arrive until next day.
With the benefit of hindsight, the choice of beaches in the Omaha sector war-
rants consideration. Putting aside the movement of the 352nd Division to the
coast to take over from the stretched 7I6th Division on this part of the Normandy
coastline, the terrain of Omaha made it the potentially the most difficult of all the
Allied sectors. The valleys or draws cut into the grass-covered steep hills behind
the beach provided the only way off the beach for vehicles and therefore were
strongly fortified by the Germans. The Omaha beaches were also not sandy but
were shingle beaches, which had caused so many problems on the Dieppe raid.
So why was Omaha selected, and why was it allocated to the Americans?
General Morgan's COSSAC plan, after proposing Normandy as the region for the
invasion, identified three sectors suitable for an assault by a division deploying two
brigades up with tidal conditions offering the highest future capacity for bringing
men, vehicles and supplies ashore. The British had designed and constructed two
artificial harbours, which would be towed in sections and assembled off the beaches
at Omaha and Arromanches. These harbours would provide facilities to unload
supplies as there was no suitable deep-water port along the chosen orandy
coastline. The rocky Normandy coastline and the offshore reefs excluded most
beaches as being suitable for landing and for bringing in supplies. The beaches that
best fitted the criteria were as follows:
