398
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
method of doing battle - that of sitting back on a good defensive position and picking
off the attackers as they advanced.
The firepower of the defensive formation was very high and a brisk fight developed
as all guns opened up. Sgt Mclean's tank destroyed a Mark IV and No. 2 troop of No.
2 Squadron caught a solid company formation of German infantry before it could
disperse. The situation was a hopeless one for the enemy and the fighting ceased as
suddenly as it had begun.
Casualties were light. The regiment lost one tank and one man L/Cpl Mullins was
seriously wounded ... the enemy column was completely smashed. Three SP 75mm
guns, one Mark IV and more than a dozen transport vehicles of various types were de-
stroyed. Fifty dead littered the fields and hedges as well as many wounded, and many
prisoners including several officers were taken. Although SS troops predominated, the
prisoners were a motley crowd from several formations. Dirty, bearded and servile,
they seemed almost pathetic as they stumbled up the slope to surrender ..."
The Foot Guards spent the reminder of the day in the same position.
The morning saw renewed German assaults on Coudehard from both along
the Chambois-Vimoutiers road and up the western slopes of Hill 262 towards the
church. Both attacks were accompanied by heavy artillery and mortar fire and
determined German infantry got into several Polish positions where hand-to-hand
fighting broke out; some Poles were even taken prisoner.
A second rescue mission was planned for the isolated Polish at Coudehard and
a supply column was assembled to follow the leading units tasked with breaking
through to the Polish line. The mission was to be led by the British Columbia
Regiment but the 4th Armoured Brigade HQ was unable to contact their com-
mander, so at 0033 hours it was delegated to the Grenadier Guards.3° At 0800
hours, the leading squadron of Grenadier Guards moved off in the pouring rain
to Point 239, which was occupied by the tanks of the Foot Guards; the squadron
lost three tanks to two concealed German Stug IIIs before even arriving at Point
239. Using a smoke screen, the battle group charged across the valley towards the
Polish positions, breaking through a line of German infantry. Captain Ghewy
in No. I Squadron knocked out a Panther, two Stug Ils and a Mark IV tank.
One more Sherman was lost on the way to Coudehard. Periodically halted by
artillery fire and the confused fighting around Point 239, No. I Squadron slowly
moved towards the Polish positions where fighting could be seen in progress on the
northern perimeter. A final halt was made to establish an identification procedure
and then at about 1200 hours, firing green flares, the Canadian Shermans met two
Polish Stuart tanks, which guided the convoy into Coudehard. The Grenadier
Guards war diary describes the advance:
Number 1 Squadron led off at o800 hours in the pouring rain. The road, as were all
the roads in the area, was lined and in places practically blocked by destroyed German
vehicles of every description. Horses and men lay rotting in every ditch and hedge and
399
Falaise Gap
the ait was rank with the odour of purification. Most of the destruction must have
been caused by the airforce but the Poles had done their share .... No.1 Squadron's
co-axes fired almost continuously from leaving Hill 239 until arriving at Point 262
and the results were devastating. All the Germans in the area were either killed or ran
away and the line of communication was opened up. The picture at Point 262 was the
grimmest the regiment had so far come up against. The Poles had had no supplies for
three days; they had several hundred wounded who had not been evacuated, about
70 prisoners of war loosely guarded in a field, the road was blocked with burned out
vehicles both our own and the enemy. Unburied dead and parts of them were strewn
about y the score. Before the last of the squadrons had arrived Captain Sherwood was
on the scene with his Al echelon, bringing in supplies and for the Poles and evacuat-
ing the wounded. To do this job he was equipped with Priests; Captain McDonald
the MO pitched in with all his resources to assist in the evacuation of the casualties.
The Poles cried with joy when we arrived and from what they said I doubt if they will
ever forget this day and the help we gave them."
Five Priests were used to bring in supples and carry the wounded to the field
spitals, each one making ten trips. Foush losses in the battle at Coudendra were
deven tanks, and 351 men killed, wounded or missing? The German attacks
lessened with the Canadian arrival but by then most of the German forces had in-
titrated through the bottleneck and were in retreat to the River Seine. Ine British
Columbia Regiment arrived in Coudehard at about 2100 hours and immediately
put in an attack on Mont Ormel across the valley, which was quickly captured by
the tanks driving through the carnage caused by the Poles, Allied artillery and
tighter-bombers.
The battle of Normandy was over. he valey noor anu load were scenes or
terrible destruction with much of the German Seventh Army lying broken on the
ground below the Polish Coudehard positions.
As the pursuit of the Germans to the River Seine got underway, there was
no celebration by the 4th Canadian Armoured Division. On 21 August, Simonds
removed Kitching from the command of the division. The advances of the division
had been slow and hesitant compared with those of ist Polish Armoured Division!
the division had played only a minor part in the closing oi te gap dau seemed
disconnected from the reality of what was transpiring in the pocket. As the bat-
te reached a climax, the Grenadier Guards were inactive or in reserve for two
Hays, the Foot Guards had gone on an excursion to Vimouters and the british
Columbia Regiment saw little action. It could be argued that the mere presence of
the armoured regiments forced the retreating Germans to detour around them but
this only put more pressure on the Polish at Coudehard. By not linking up sooner
with the Polish at Coudehard, gaps were left in the territory held by the Canadians
through which the Germans were able to make their escape. Kitching was under-
standably upset at his dismissal but with the death of Brigadier Booth, Kitching
was responsible for the poor performance of the division. However, Simonds and
