The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The other mixed group, the soth Brigade and C Squadron of the 4th CLY
Regiment, fought their way into Tilly but could not capture it and withdrew to
a position just north of the village. Two Panthers, one disabled, were encountered
blocking the road to Tilly and C Squadron knocked out one while infantry with
PATs got the other. As the infantry attacked Tilly, C Squadron moved to out-
flank the village from the right flank and were ambushed in close country, losing
a Sherman Vc and three Cromwells in quick succession to panzergrenadiers hiding
in the hedgerows. The 7th Armoured Division managed to advance just one mile
that day, considerably less than the previous day.
12 June
An XXX Corps command conference was held at noon, and because of the dificult
countryside and consequent slow progress it was decided that the 7th Armoured
Division should try to go around the flank of the Panzer Lehr Division. To the west,
the American V Corps was advancing to Caumont and it was hoped that the British
CHATEAU
TILLY-SUR-
SEULLES
U riace Jeanne d' Arc
2) Church
(3) Anti-tank ditch (incomplete)
4 Town hall
5 Post office
Railway station
7) CalvarvI
• Kue Pasteur
→ Rue Georges Clemenceau (RN 175)
OVA
AUNAY-SUR-ODON
ÉVRECY
Villers Bocage from the air. This aerial photograph was taken on the morning of 12 June. (By kind
permission of Keele University Photo Archive)
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
125
could exploit the gap created by following in the wake of the American advance and
then swinging around eastwards behind the Germans. The advance began at 1600
hours but stopped as soon as it met resistance at Livry from a single anti-tank gun and
is attendant infantry. By the evening, the 7th Armoured Division's own infantry
brigade, the izist Brigade, had finally caught up with the division from Bayeux.
Morale of the 7th Armoured Division
By the end of 1943, when Montgomery had been appointed commander-in-chief of
the invasion forces, Britain was close to exhausting its manpower resources. Therefore
Montgomery requested the return of some veteran units that had performed well in
North Africa, notably the 7th Armoured Division and the soth and sist Divisions.
Aftera few months in the Italian campaign, the 7th Armoured Division was ordered
back to England, leaving their Sherman tanks behind. The division arrived home
in England during the first week of January 1944 and after settling in at their spar-
an accommodation in Norfolk, most men were granted leave on
the basis of the
number of years of service. Those that had been away for between two to four years
got three weeks leave and those away for more than four years got four weeks. This
leave perhaps sowed some seeds of discontent amongst a few of the desert veterans
as relationships with wives and loved ones were happily renewed and some men
even took the opportunity to get married. Long-suppressed emotional bonds were
te-established as the men tried to adjust to life on the Home Front. Britain was full
of servicemen from other countries, particularly the bon, out mose de these nad
seen no combat. The prospect of being sent to night agate europe was not an
attractive one for some wed able to seded some blo de best doo
the spring of 1944. These men thought they had done their bit for King and country,
and that others should be allowed to go into battle. On their return from leave, the
men tried to settle into the routines of training, paperwork and discipline, which
were all very different to those followed by the division in the field. Some veterans
applied for postings to other units:
Several non-commissioned officers who had splendid records of gallantry and devo-
tion to duty as tank commanders, applied to transfer to units less likely to be in the
frontline again. They were undoubtedly influenced by their wives, from whom they
had been separated for several years and who resented their husbands going into the
heat of battle again, when so many others had been in Britain all that time and not
risked their lives in action?
At the request of the commander of the 7th Armoured Division, General Erskine,
Montgomery addressed the 22nd Brigade on the 17 February; many men were
unhappy and slogans such as 'No leave, no Second Front' had even appeared on the
walls of some Nissen huts. Montgomery, in his usual manner, urged the soldiers
