158
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
managed to get hold of Kit Harlow and we got together the crew and we made our
way around the back of the tanks to where the infantry were. German snipers and the
Germans and the British were all firing at us because they didn't know who we were,
they thought we were Germans and the others thought we were British and it was all
over the place. Anyway we got back to where we thought the British were and they
happened to be the s3rd Welsh Division who we were with at Charing. This Welsh
chap called out 'Hande hoch, stick yer hands up' and I said to him You get stuffed
you Welsh git, I'm English' and they said 'Oh alright boyo' and we made our way
back. Anyway we got back and we went back to forward recovery and we managed to
get a new tank and replenished and we spent the night at the back and came forward
again to the regiment. 3°
The village of Grainville was finally secured by 1500 hours. A thrust was made
by another battalion of the 46th Brigade, supported by the tanks of B Squadron
9th RTR, to seize the important crossroads at Le Valtru, which was achieved
by 1100 hours. Late in the day, at 1900 hours, two squadrons of the 7th RTR
and the 8th battalion Royal Scots infantry advanced southwards from near Le
Haut du Bosq to the railway just west of Grainville. After a brief skirmish, the
tanks returned to near their starting positions to harbour. In the meantime, further
south, patrols from the znd Argylls holding the Tourmauville bridge were able to
move along the River Odon and capture the undefended bridges at Gavrus. At this
point the British offensive had carved a narrow salient some s miles long through
the German lines; this salient became known as the Scottish corridor owing to the
fact that it had been made and was defended by infantry of the Isth (H) Division.
The corridor had several choke points: Cheux itself; the narrow bridge over the
River Odon at Tourmauville; and the Caen-Villers Bocage railway, with its deep
cuttings that could only be crossed at the level crossing in Colleville.
The Attack on Hill 112
The 2nd Argylls near Hill 112 had been relieved during the night by the 159th
Brigade from the lIth Armoured Division and occupied the village of Gavrus
further to the west. The 159th Brigade was reunited with its tanks after having
been left out of the battle for the previous two days. At 0530 hours, B Squadron
of the 23rd Hussars began their advance to Hill 112 and the northern half of it was
occupied by noon. The advance was slow and cautious, giving the Germans time
to react.
During the night, three Panther companies of 12th SS tanks had been recalled
back across the Odon to the area between Esquay and Evrecy with one company
left to guard Hill it3 west of Esquay. The sth and 8th companies of Mark IVs had
also been pulled back from south of Cheux. The division had a total of only thirty
operational Panther and Mark IV tanks, supported by two or three Tiger tanks
around Hill 112."
159
Operation Epsom
The Mark IVs of the sth Company
attacked up the southern slopes of Hill
IIz and stopped the advance of the
Hussars' B Squadron; C Squadron tanks
were directed to move up on their left.
By midday, A Squadron and HQ had
arrived along with eight replacement
tanks from the 270th Field Delivery
Squadron for B Squadron. However,
three of these tanks were immediately
knocked out as they moved into posi-
tion. The Field Delivery Squadron had
worked its way through the congested
streets of Cheux and across the River
Odon to being up twenty-three re-
A sketch looking southwards of the River Odon
Battlefield (from History of 34th Armoured Brigade,
BAOR, private, 1945)
placement tanks for the division. The
3td RTR were watching the eastern
side of Hill I2 around Baron where one tank was lost on a mine in Baron and
then blocked the road.
By too hours, the znd Fife and Forfar were also across the River Odon and
were deploying to guard the right flank and attacks from direction of Esquay. The
regiment claimed to have knocked out tanks at long range and a whole battery of
88mm anti-tank guns.
The 44th RTR from the 4th Armoured Brigade also came over the River Odon
and deployed westwards towards Esquay, so there were by then four tank regiments
across the river in the bridgehead. The planners of Operation epsom had allocated
all of the 4th Armoured Brigade to provide flank protection to the south-west for
the advance to the River Orne briages but the other two and legalents were
needed to defend the flanks of the Scottish corridor.
German anti-tank guns and
Nebelwerfers engaged the 23rd Hussars tanks and infantry on the hill, and the
regiment could make no further progress soutawards on the did to the briages of
the River Orne 5 miles away.
It noon, General O Connor ordered the tith Armoured Division to hold of
improve its positions around Hill 112 but to advance no further. The British had
received reports of the arrival of the two divisions of the
2nd SS Panzer Korps
near Villers Bocage and aerial reconnaissance photographs had revealed that all
we roads to Caen from the south and east were full of terman venues moving
towards the frontline. Despite having foul tank regents now over the River
Odon, caution set in amongst the British generals.
By the afternoon, the 23rd Hussars were running out of ammunition, so at 1530
hours they were relieved by the 3rd RTR. As there was very little cover, tanks
on the crest of the hill were exposed and therefore vulnerable to long-range fire
from Panthers, 88mm anti-tank guns and Tigers deployed around the hill. Attacks
