340
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
of the open ground to the west. When the Tiger tanks appeared in front of their
positions, they were caught in a crossfire of armour-piercing shells from the two
squadrons. A Northants Firefly hit several of the Tigers, which were peppered
by 75mm fire from the Shermans, knocking off tracks and immobilising them.
Several of the Tigers briefly returned fire at the Firefly, forcing it to move before
it was knocked out. Five Tigers were destroyed without loss in a few minutes; the
tank commanded by Wittmann caught fire and eventually exploded. The German
attack can only be described as rash and impetuous, similar to that performed
at Villers Bocage but with a very different outcome. Three of the Tigers were
knocked out by the Firefly tank (the gunner was Joe Ekins), and it is likely that
the Sherbrooke Fusilier tanks accounted for the other two Tigers nearer the Caen-
rataise road. Ken lout of the ist Northants Yeomanry was in A squadron that day
and watched the German tanks advance:
"Oboe Able to 3 Charlie. Near enough. Fire! Over."
"Charlie, OK. Gunner, fire!" In his excitement, Charlie has forgotten to switch
back to intercom back but his gunner can hear the A set clearly. "Gunner, on! Fir....
Got him, you golden boy! Got him! Charlie got him. Over."
"Able to Charlie. Get the middle one. I'm hitting the first in line to keep his head
down. And use your intercom. Off?
I see a thick sprouting of smoke over the trees beyond my range.
Oboe Able to 3 sunray. Charle's Sunray hit. Get over there and keep Charle
shooting. 3 over."
"3. On my way. Off"
I traverse gently back and forward but can see no more of the road. The growing
cloud of smoke shows where one of the Tigers is blazing, SLAM-CRASH of an
88mm! Almost simultaneous crashes. Flat trajectory. Tremendous muzzle velocity. An
anti-aircraft gun used point blank against tanks. Firing and impact explosions com-
ing almost together. No smoke in A Squad Yin's positions. SLAM-CRASH! Another
Tiger fires unseen. A Squadron's 3ed troop leader will be dodging through the orchard
trees. Lifting the commander from the turret. Giving orders. Bearing on the middle
still not sure where the pesky Shermans are. We see it clearly in our mind's eye.
liger. One Tiger blazing and the other two swinging around to look for shelter and
pounder.
BLAM CRASH - slightly different sound, equally imperious, of the seventeen
bring to bear. Over."
"Oboe Able to Oboe. Second Tiger brewing. Am keeping third busy while Charlie
"Oboe. Bloody good show. Off."
Black gush of smoke over the trees hiding road. Another Tiger burning. SLAM
-CRASH of an 88mm almost together as the BLAM-CRASH of the seventeen
pounder. One ... two ... three crashes nearby. An answering roar of sound. New
spouts of flame beyond the distant trees. I shout, "They've got him! They've hit Tiger
three!"28
Operation Totalize
341
Both General Kitching and General Maczek, the Polish commander of the Polish
Armoured Division, had expressed concerns to Simonds the day before the opera-
tron about the changes to the proposed plan, which now required both divisions
to advance on a front of less than 1,00oyds. Doubts were also expressed about
the need for the second bombing raid, but Simonds turned down all requests
for modifications.
The Polish armoured regiments crossed the start line as planned at 1355 hours
and were quickly in action against Kampfruppe Waldmuller at about I425 hours.
The Division HQ and infantry brigade were delayed coming through Caen, but
they were not required for the first part of General Maczek's plan.
The Canadian Grenadier Guards Regiment was delayed by traffic congestion
around Rocquancourt but began a slow advance at about 1200 hours. The
Canadians could not cross the bomb line, which ran north of Gaumesnil and
Robertmesnil, until the bombing finished, H-hour for phase two being 135S hours.
The phase two forces waited around the low hill at Point 122 just east of Cramesnil.
Oth the armoured divisions were reported to have crossed the start ane de s>>
nours, so the congestion and friendly fire bombing did not delay the start of the
attack as claimed by many historians.?°
What did delay the attack once it started was the omission of a plan to take
Gaumesnil, a phase two objective not far from the start line. In a considerable
oversight, the village had not been assigned as the objective of any unit. The Royal
Regiment of Canada was instructed only at 1300 hours that afternoon to clear
we area. Despite A squadron of the ear ooke Fustlers naving been an around
the chateau during its earlier engagement with the liger tanks, the squaren dad
moved back to west of highway to support an attack on Caillouet, so it was not
Known whether the village itself was occupied. An attack was nasty Planned and
mounted just as the Germans put down a fierce artillery barrage on the assembling
Canadian forces. Gaumesnil was tinally captured about 530 nours with nite r
position, and this at last freed up the tanks to advance.
With No. I Squadron leading,
the Grenadier Guards reached a point just
north of Gaumesnil at about 1400 hours. Four tanks, including three from No.
I Squadron, had been lost on mines during the early morning move to the start
line. The Shermans moved cautiously past the burning ligers, perhaps wary of any
others that might still be near, and with reason, as one tank was indeed knocked
Out by a retreating Tiger. By 1600 hours, Brigadier Booth was getting increasingly
frustrated at the slow progress and ordered the legment to push on at all costs.
The squadron tried to skirt Cintheaux to the east but was stopped by considerable
anti-tank gunfire from the woods near where the Ist Northants Yeomanry was
located. No. 3 Squadron then passed through to take up the advance, but again,
two tanks were hit and knocked out. The Grenadier Guards tanks had entered
a killing ground, which had already seen the demise of Wittmann; with a tank bat-
tle in progress to the east, their advance in their first action was naturally hesitant.32
Booth's frustration is reflected in the 4th Canadian Armoured brigade signal log:
