264
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
which had been in combat since D-Day, had virtually disintegrated into small
groups of men who had lost or discarded much of their equipment and could only
be formed into small kampfgruppes for attachment to other units in the future.
Von Kluge, preoccupied with the Operation Spring offensive around Caen, was
furious when he discovered the full extent of the American gains during Operation
Cobra. He was not slow in putting the blame on Hausser for his order for the
retirement of the left wing of Seventh Army to the south-east away from the coast.
Von Kluge was also critical of the defensive arrangements made by Hausser in
the relative calm of the few days before Operation Cobra was launched when the
Panzer Lehr had been left in the frontline and not withdrawn to form a mobile
reserve. Acutely aware that Hausser had been appointed by Hitler himself only the
previous month, von Kluge took no action against Hausser but dismissed the Chief
of Staff of the Seventh Army, Max Pemsel. The commander of LXXXIV Corps,
von Choltitz, was also relieved and von Kluge took personal control of Seventh
Army on 30 July. Von Kluge had made no effort to check the dispositions of
Seventh Army prior to Operation Cobra and therefore must bear some of the
responsibility for the collapse of the army.
For the Allies,
and FUSA in particular, Operation Cobra was an outstanding
success after a hesitant start and the first breakthrough and breakout achieved by
the Allied forces in Normandy. The route between the shattered left wing of the
Seventh Army and the western Cotentin coast was now open for the Americans
to advance through and invest the Brittany ports, which had been a key Overlord
objective. On 1
August, General Patton's Third Army was officially activated and
came under the new 12th Army Group along with FUSA.
American casualties in Operation Cobra were nevertheless quite heavy. Until
Operation Cobra, FUSA combat units had suffered 11,597 men KIA and 42,092
wounded." To 1 August, FUSA had lost I5,676 men KIA with 65,871 wounded,
and theretore the casualties trom Operation Cobra were 4,07 men killed and
23,779 men wounded:* VII Corps alone had suffered 17,627 casualties.»
A large number of tanks were also lost or damaged in the onese die
3rd Armored Division had forty tanks replaced in July!" However, most of the tanks
lost in July were during the action of CCB at Les Hauts Vents in the first offensive
of the breakout attempt.
The division's losses in Operation Cobra were very light:
CCA had ten tanks knocked out or damaged whilst CCB losses were five M4 tanks
and one Ms tank damaged, of which one M4 and one Ms required replacement:?
Another 3rd Armored Division casualty was the commanding officer, General
who was relieved of command on 30 July by General Collins. Collins
believed that Watson failed to demonstrate the leadership and control required
for the command of an armoured division's The 3rd Armored Division's per-
formance had been unspectacular earlier in July, with the coordination problems
during the fighting to reach St Lô, and then CCB had not reached its objective of
Coutances in Operation Cobra while CCA had also struck determined opposition
at Montpinchon that had delayed its advance. Aco
to some reports in the
Operation Cobra
265
divisional headquarters, very early one morning Watson had called Collins, who
was asleep, to discuss the coming day's attack. Collins was unimpressed, and before
Watson made the call he was a temporary general commanding a division and
when he had finished he was a permanent colonel without a command." However,
during Operation Cobra, CCB was under the command of the ist Division and
so cannot be held entirely responsible for its slow progress; for example, on 27 July
CCB reached its objective but then had to wait for the relief force, which had been
held up at Marigny, to arrive. General Collins changed the orders several times of
the 2nd and 3rd Armored divisions and while flexibility is a hallmark of leadership,
too many changes can lead to disorder and confusion and are an indication of a lack
of control of the situation.
The rapid commitment of the armoured divisions and the frequent changes of
orders certainly helped the Americans maintain an attacking tempo' that ena-
bled them to retain the initiative and keep the Germans, with their communi-
cations already badly disrupted by the bombing and little information coming
from the frontlines, off balance and uncertain as to the forces opposing them and
their intentions.
Collins was certainly responsible for the chaos and traffic congestion around
Marigny when both the armoured divisions were ordered to advance through the
narrow gap between Marigny and St Gilles even though Marigny had not even
been captured. Despite an overwhelming superiority in numbers of infantry, artil-
lery and complete dominance of the air, the attack by the three infantry divisions
had made very little progress by the end of the first day. The independent tank
battalions operating with the infantry divisions had been unable to keep up with
the advance of the infantry on foot and this resulted in few opportunities for the
new combined tank/infantry tactics to be practised.
The only successful tank/
infantry operation on the first day was the capture of Hebecrevon at midnight
by the tanks of the 743rd Tank Battalion and the 119th Infantry Regiment from
the goth Division; in the words of the goth Division's historian,
infantry tank
cooperation was excellent'.6
The advance of the 2nd Armored Division's CCA is also a possible excep-
tion. CCA had trained extensively with the z2nd Infantry Regiment from the
4th Division during the week before the start of Operation Cobra, practising
combined arms small unit tactics. When committed on 26 July, CCA advanced
7 miles to Canisy and St Martin de Bon Fosse, although the combat command
used roads whenever possible and the chosen route was along the poorly defended
boundary between the LXXXIV and 2nd Parachute Corps, so it is not clear how
often hedgerow tactics were required or employed. Even though the Germans
were outnumbered by more than three-to-one, enough Germans survived the
bombing and artillery bombardment to prevent the American infantry from mak-
ing a breakthrough on the first day of Operation Cobra.
One historian suggests
that, despite the American superiority in numbers, the objectives of the infantry
