336
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The left-most column of the right axis stopped 2 hours before daylight to find
itself only gooyds away from the correct objective, the same hill at Cramesnil. It
was very difficult in the darkness for the navigators to determine if they were on
high ground or not. In the centre column of the right axis most vehicles arrived at
the designated area of the quarry near Gaumesnil, but the leading tanks kept going
westwards and had to be brought back by urgent radio messages. The infantry in
the right-hand column of the right axis debussed too early in Rocquancourt whilst
the tanks went on a further 3,sooyds to the correct unloading point. Once daylight
came the infantry were able to 1 auresup to join the tanks at Caillouet.8
Despite the navigational difficulties caused by the darkness, smoke and dust, the
columns all eventually arrived on their objectives by odoo hours, and the fortress
forces were deployed to meet any German counterattack. The radio direction
equipment had not worked well and the smog was often so thick that even the
moon was periodically obscured. The most useful navigational aids were the tracer
shells from the Bofors guns, and tank commanders found that if they halted and
waited for the smog to clear then the green tracers indicating the correct direction
would eventually become visible again.
No tanks were lost in the gapping forces of any columns, but those Germans that
were not terrified by the armoured advance and were able to get over the shock
of the bombardments engaged the assault and fortress forces at close range with
anti-tank guns and Panzerfäuste. A total of nine tanks were destroyed and three
damaged in the advance of 3 miles through the German lines. Any Canadian fears
of mines that had so hindered the British advance in Operation Bluecoat were
unwarranted as no mines were encountered by the advancing columns, but one
minefield was missed by 6ft and another by 12ft. 20
Meanwhile, the tanks of the remaining regiment of the ist Hussars were sup-
porting the sth Brigade in a more conventional attack to the west. A and B squad-
rons and the infantry were a follow-up force behind the armoured columns, with
orders to clear any pockets of resistance and push on to secure Bretteville sur Laize.
A Squadron supported the Calgary Highlanders into Verrieres at 0400 hours, fol-
lowed by Kocquancourt and then on to Bretteville sur Laize. Two tanks were put
out of action by German artillery. B Squadron was also directed to Rocquancourt
and Bretteville, losing one tank to shellfire, but the tanks had a fine time shooting
up anti-tank guns and Nebelwerfers. A 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade report
concluded:
This novel use of tanks and infantry in armoured carriers at night was entirely success-
ful. The force accomplished everything it set out to do with the absolute minimum of
casualties. During the actual advance to the objective, more than five miles through
strong enemy defences, there were no vehicle casualties in the gapping force that led
the advance.
The main difficulties encountered were those of keeping direction and organisa-
tion in the dark and the most useful aid in this was found to be the Bofors guns.
337
Operation Totalize
The searchlight and moon were of limited value in illumination. The searchlights,
being off to one flank, and not remaining stationary, were of limited value in keeping
direction. One of the major factors in the success of this operation was the extremely
good marking of the routes carried out by the AVRE personnel who worked out in
the open throughout the whole operation despite enemy HE and AP fire.
An operation of this type can be of the fullest success but could equally well have
been a complete and utter failure through loss of direction or enemy counter action.
Such a force has little offensive power in the dark and this method of employing tanks
should only be used with the greatest circumspection."
German Reaction
When the heavy bombing started at 2300 hours on 7 August, the Ist SS Panzer
Korps, having been ordered 2 hours previously to move the 12th SS Panzer Division
to Mortain, requested that the division stay attached to the corps in view of the
attack developing. Somewhat ambiguously, this request was approved by the OK W
on the basis that the division take all measures for a speedy transfer to the Seventh
Army to carry out its role in the forthcoming Operation Luttich.? Meyer recalled
Kampfgruppe Krause from Grimbosq and also Kampgruppe Olboeter, which had
been sent to keep open the vital Vire-Vassy road from the British advancing in
Operation Bluecoat.
The and Battalion of tanks was also recalled from around Thury Harcourt. From
the sth and 7th Company only seventeen Mark IVs were immediately available,
and these were subordinated to Kampfgruppe Waldmuller.? As the 12th SS Panzer
Division was the only armoured unit in the whole sector, some tanks were later
sent to provide anti-tank support for the frontline infantry divisions. A zug of
Mark IVs (five tanks) was left with the 89th Division and two zugs were detached
with the 27Ist Division.24
It was planned to use the new Panther battalion, but this only had a dozen opera-
tional tanks after the long road march and the shortage of fuel. Von Kluge initially
requested that the oth SS Panzer Division send a tank battalion, but when this was
reported to be still caught up in the fighting around Estry, the znd SS Panzer Korps
dispatched instead the operational Tigers of the 102nd SS Schwere Tank Battalion.
Canadian Halt
The Canadian advance was to remain halted for the next 6 hours until the daylight
air raids had finished. The first wave of the 8th USAAF planes was due at 1226
hours to bomb the northern targets and the second wave due from 1335-135s hours
for the southernmost targets.
