42
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
commander saluted me which didn't help my feelings any. The LCT I had been on
tried to pick me up, but couldn't get close enough so I floated around; every time a
wave would raise me up I could see everything that was going on around the beach,
then the water would drop me down again till I couldn't see anything. When I saw
all the boats pass me by, I really started to get afraid and I started to yell for help.
The LCT finally managed to get close enough and threw me a line. I had to wrap it
around my arms as my hands were too cold to hold onto it. They pulled me aboard
and wrapped me in blankets and I passed out.o8
The loss of twenty-seven DD tanks meant the initial assault on the left flank of
Omaha had very little armoured support for the first quarter of an hour. Easy Red
had only five DD tanks on it, one of which was quickly disabled; these tanks were
the sole support for 100 men on Easy Red for the first half-hour. Fox Green had
no tanks at all until the arrival of the A Company tanks on both beaches after
H-hour."9
A Company
Before the landings had begun, LCT(A) 2049, destined for Easy Red, hit a mine
and sank at 0200 hours on the cross-Channel voyage so two M4 and a tank dozer
were lost to the engineers even before the landings?° On Easy Red, three landing
craft made it at H-hour or just after and unloaded six A Company tanks and three
tank dozers. Of these, one tank sank when it drove into water too deep for its wad-
ing equipment, one tank was hit and immobilised by an anti-tank gun on leaving
the landing craft opposite the E-3 exit (but continued to engage targets until the
rising tide forced the crew to abandon the tank) and another tank was destroyed
by gunfire?' By Htio minutes, the tank dozer platoon of four dozers had landed
and begun to remove obstacles, clear gaps and unload landing crait, all the while
under intense enemy fire. One tank dozer was immediately hit and destroyed by
an 88mm gun. Five A Company tanks had been lost on the voyage or soon after
beaching and the loth RCT and engineers now had less than a third of the planned
number of tanks to support them. Those that were left went into action between
the St Laurent E-1 and Colleville E-3 exits on Easy Red beach??
On Fox Green beach only two landing craft arrived at H-hour, LCT(A) 2037,
which was damaged, and LCT 210, which was an unarmoured landing craft sub-
stituted at the last minute in England when the original landing craft had broken
down. Both craft quickly unloaded their tanks and retracted off the beach.
Mines, enemy action and swamped tanks reduced the number of A Company
tanks supporting the infantry at the critical time of the initial assault from sixteen
M4 tanks and eight tank dozers to seven tanks and four dozers. The assault infantry
were consequently pinned down at the water's edge:
During the initial phases of the assault, the beach area was under heavy artillery,
mortar and machine gun fire. The assault battalions of the ioth CT were holding
16 = 16
V Corps on Omaha beach on D-Day, adapted from The War in Western Europe Vol. 1. (By kind permission of US Military Academy, West Point)
