The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
30
C Squadron
Encountering similar sea conditions to B Squadron, the decision was made to land
almost directly on Nan Red beach and the landing craft started to launch their tanks
at 0805 hours. After a short swim of sooyds or less, the tanks reached the shore, but,
because of the heavy seas and manoeuvring to avoid the Element C obstacles, not
in the planned order. Tank troops landed in the wrong location, unnoticed by the
squadron commander, making co-ordination difficult. C Squadron was supporting
the North Shore (New Brunswick) Regiment, timed by the Royal Navy as landing ar
0810 hours. Reports vary, but it is likely that C Squadron tanks landed a few minutes
after the two companies of infantry in the first wave. Again, the arriving infantry and
DD tanks found that the German defences had survived the bombardment and, after
an initial lull, quickly came to life. The somm anti-tank guns in WN27 on the sea
wall in St Aubin began to shoot at the tanks and their landing craft. The first tanks to
arrive on the beach were immediately hit, one being quickly knocked out.
Two tanks from LCT 313 were lost after launching, one fell into a shell hole after
having deflated its canvas screen and another was swamped after the tank's motors
failed.+ LCT 317 went all the way in to the beach, and two tanks drove off, but the
LCT was then hit repeatedly by shell and mortar fire and drifted back out to sea.
Three tanks were still aboard, one of which caught fire and drove into the water
(flooding the engine) to extinguish the flames. From this half-submerged position,
the tank began to fire 75mm HE (high explosive) in support of infantry until an AP
(armour piercing) round struck the barrel of the 75mm gun, putting it out of action.
The crew continued to fire their machine guns until the rising tide forced them to
abandon their tank. The crews of the remaining two tanks swam to shore from the
damaged landing craft to try and organize a tow for their tanks off the landing craft,
but this was not successful and several crew members were killed in the process.
The AVRE tanks and Flails were also late on Nan beach, so the Fort Garry Horse
tanks were the only support for the infantry in their fight to capture St Aubin.
Three more tanks were drowned reaching the shore and another tank was flooded
by the rising tide when its engine stalled while engaging targets on the shore. 43
Shell and mortar fire made the beaches a dangerous place for the infantry, so
they crossed the sea wall and entered the village of St Aubin as quickly as they
could. Meanwhile, the late-arriving AVR Es had set to work clearing lanes to the
sea wall, which they then attempted to bridge. Snipers were a particular problem,
targeting any tank commander unwisely leaning out of his turret for a better look.
Conscious of the fact that the infantry were getting off the beach and needed their
support, the tanks of C Squadron attempted to leave the beach before exit lanes
had been cleared by the AVRE Flails. Three tanks detonated mines and were
immobilised, but the rest of the squadron got off the beach to support the infantry.
St Aubin was cleared by Ills hours, with the exception of strongpoint WN28 on.
the western edge of the town. Tanks of the 3rd Troop were sent to assist with the
capture of this strongpoint, which was protected by mines and a roadblock past
which the tanks could not proceed. After a reconnaissance on foot, the tanks broke
D-Day Tanks
31
holes in the perimeter walls and nearby houses to take up firing positions from
which they could destroy the two 75mm guns and various other emplacements
inside the strongpoint. A tank commanded by Sergeant Walterson finally broke
into the strongpoint and ran up and down the trench system until all the occupants
had been killed or had surrendered. This troop finally got back to harbour at
2200 hours.+ Meanwhile, tanks from the sth Troop circled around Tailleville,
destroying various anti-tank guns and forcing German soldiers to flee southwards.
A battalion of the 736th Panzergrenadier Regiment had its command post and
ammunition dump in Tailleville at WN23, and this was well defended. C Squadron
tanks provided support for the infantry as they slowly worked their way into the
position before a Sherman got into the middle of the command post and shot up
the trenches with HE at point blank range.
A Squadron
A Squadron, equipped with deep wading tanks, was to land at H+60 minutes
and to proceed inland down the brigade's centre line of advance as far as the high
ground and objectives at Colomby sur Thaon. According to the brigade's Overlord
plans, the beachhead was supposed to be secured by H+6o minutes, before the
arrival of A Squadron. 4+5
The embarkation of the tanks of A Squadron and RHQ was a little disorganised
owing to the shortage of landing craft. Seventeen tanks were distributed amongst
four LCT Mk IVs that landed an hour later on Nan White. Two tanks were due
at H+75 minutes, and an LST carrying two RHQ Shermans and a Sherman Vc of
the sth Troop were due to land from H+4 hours.46 The final A Squadron tank to
make nineteen in total was not due until D+8 days.47
A Squadron landing craft began beaching unopposed at 0900 hours. An LCT
carrying the RHQ and A Squadron HQ tanks struck a mine and, whilst manoeu-
vring to land again, detonated a second mine. Fortunately, no casualties occurred
and the vessel eventually beached again after freeing its ramp. A Squadron formed
up with the reserve infantry battalion from the Régiment de la Chaudière to move
towards Bény sur Mer at 1030 hours, but the advance through Bernières was held
up by a single 88mm anti-tank gun near the town's cemetery. This knocked out
three Priests (25-pounder self-propelled artillery) before the infantry organised an
attack to eliminate the obstacle 48 Bernières rapidly became congested with soldiers
of the 8th Brigade plus the newly arrived reserve brigade, the 9th Brigade. This
brigade was supposed to land at both St Aubin and Bernières, but as fighting was
still going on in St Aubin, Nan Red beach had been closed by the Royal Navy
and Bernières was the only place that the brigade could land. A Squadron tanks
and infantry initially made little progress and were apparently waiting for artillery
to arrive to support their advance. The A Squadron leader finally arrived after
his LCT had beached and assessed the situation. An Orders Group was held and
forward progress was resumed with A and B squadrons advancing as planned, in-
curring some casualties in the process. A Squadron tanks finally reached Anguerny
