178
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Only a bulldozer or explosive charges could create a gap in the hedge for vehicles
to pass through.
The First US Army operational plans for Neptune had readily identified the
bocage as being not suitable for tanks, and yet the American planners seem to have
given little thought as to how they would fight in this terrain once ashore. The
report itself describes the bocage as being of "rough, hilly terrain', with no mention
of small fields and high hedgerows? Perhaps more concerned with getting ashore,
no training in similar terrain had been conducted by the invasion units stationed
in England. The American forces, largely located in Devon and Cornwall, which
in places resembles the bocage, did not take the opportunity to train, and in any
case, off-road movements and training were strictly controlled by the British. It is
ST UNITED STATES ARM'
TANK EMPLOYMENT
AREAS
ANNEX | a (3)
Map of terrain for the employment of tanks from FUSA Operation Neptune operational plans
179
Battle of the Hedgerows
do pril that the Americans did not comprehend how the bocage physically
no, stir as the first time nearly all the men of the First United States Army
altem race. The only likely source of information would have been those
a British officers of COSSAC that had travelled to France in 1940 or before
altite a parently not consulted, nor did they offer any advice.
On 14/June, the 2nd Battalion continued its attack towards La Campagne and
at the fective of the road junction there without any opposition by 0800
hur The remainder of the morning was spent in a reorganisation of the regi-
al, in a each battalion a company of light tanks and two companies of
coum tanks. This was a more balanced structure, as previously the ist battalion
sit tak ompanies and the and and 3rd battalions the medium tanks.
a ta tron the reorganised tanks of the 66th Armored Regiment drove the
aman out Matis. A reconnaissance in force was made next day (is June) by
To CA armoured task forces, but after meeting stiff resistance, the units returned
bodist is and the 2nd Armored Division, FUSA's most experienced tank
then went into reserve, attached to VII Conss, for the next four weeks until
LEGEND
Operation Cobra.
AT TERRAIN GENERALLY MOST FAVORABLE FOR EMPLOYMENT OF LARGE AND ANT.
8X8 TERRAIN GENERALY LESS FAVORABLE FOR EMPLOYMENT OF LARGE ANDERINT
POSSIBLE ANTI/TANK OBSTACLES:
I SOUP BLACK INDICATES AREAS SUBJECT TO INUNDATION. OR ALREADY WAX
2 RIVERS AND CANALS SHOWN ARE OVER 50 FEET WIDE ANO 5 FEET DEE
3td Armored Division
3 CANAL DE VIRE EL TAUTE IS A/T OBSTACLE (30 - 50FT. WIDE LES THAN S 8)
SAs build-up was disrupted by the storm in the Channel of 19-21 June. New
arrivals after the storm subsided included the infantry divisions of Vill Corps and
o support the 20th Division in its defensive role. The CCA was then ordered by
XIX Corps on 29 June to eliminate a German salient 2,000yds deep around Villiers
Fossard, from where the Germans could observe and shell Carentan and Isigny
from the high ground in the salient. Bad weather prevented any American aerial
reconnaissance from 26 June to 3 July and little was known about the German
defences. Previous attacks by the 29th Division to eliminate the salient had been
successful as they had broken down in the face of machine gun we from the
all likely avenues of attack.
difficult bocage hedgerows against largely hidden defensive positions held for sev
eral weeks by the same enemy torces. The German defenders initially were only
three companies of the 353rd Fusilier battalion trom the 353rd Infantry Division,
supported by mortars and some artillery.
Three task forces were formed for the attack, which was to start at 0900 hours
on 29 June. Task Forces X and Y each had a battalion of tanks and armoured
infantry, whilst Task Force Z was held in reserve.
The task forces were further
coken down into teams of one company of tanks and one company of infantry
