252
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
CCA 3rd Armored Division
The bulk of the 3rd Armored Division had been kept in reserve depending on
the success of the other units in the offensive and General Collins on 26 July was
sufficiently confident of the progress made by VII Corps to commit the division to
the battle. On 27 July it commenced a thrust between CCB and the 2nd Armoured
Division to secure the roads south of Coutances via Cerisy-la-Salle. Again it was
anticipated by Collins that the initial advance would be through areas already
secured and would therefore be rapid but the division had to fight south-west from
Marigny onwards. The division was split into three task forces and struck trouble
around Marigny about 1245 hours in the form of a German strongpoint, which
either had not been cleared or had been set up by forces infiltrating back. Four me-
dium M4 tanks were lost before the head of the armoured column, nearly to miles
long, could disengage and bypass the resistance. There were similar problems at
Quibou: the leading tank of C Company was hit by an anti-tank gun and blocked
the road.
As the tanks moved off the road, a second was hit and began burning.
A single anti-tank gun supported by a few infantry on an embankment along
the only good road meant the division had to destroy the roadblock before they
could advance further. Further delays ensued while the attack was organised and by
nighttall the division had still not reached cerisy-la-salle, I he cretan ressance
continued to coalesce and the commander of the 3rd Armored Division, General
Watson, was concerned about his armoured task forces receiving hanking tire trom
the developing German line as they moved southwards. Watson decided to turn
his forces westwards at the start of the next day rather than turning it ded
Cerisy-la-Salle as planned.
The next day, 28 July, was to provide no outstanding success for the grd Armored
Division either. The advances by the three task forces were slowed either by late
starts as supplies had difficulty getting tal sugh the traffic congestion in the rear of
the columns, or the difficult terrain, wich was crossed by a poor road netwols.
Pockets of German resistance were aiso a constant threat that furter delayed we
advance while they were cleared. The Germans had been expecting the Americans
to advance southwards from st to rathes than the initial movement soul-wes
towards Coutances and had reinforced the south with what reserves were avanable.
task force with the objective of advancing to Coutances via Carantilly only
got s miles to the west of Carantilly before it ran into opposition.
The other
two task forces charged with capturing Montpinchon and Cerisy-la-Salle were
prevented from doing so by elements of the 17th SS Panzer Division tenaciously
defending the high ground. In the evening, two M4 tanks and an armoured car
were destroyed west of Cerisy-la-Salle?° The Germans then withdrew overnight,
which allowed the high ground to be occupied the next day without casualties
and the task forces to continue exerting pressure on the German forces retreating
southwards. Panzer Lehr was forced to abandon its repair depot at Cerisy-la-Salle
with the loss of thirty damaged tanks."
253
Operation Cobra
On 3o July the 3rd Armored Division, now reunited, was to attack as a whole to
seize bridges over the River Sienne at Gavray. The 83rd Reconnaissance Battalion
led the attack with CCA following and found that the bridge at Gavray had been
destroyed. Opposition increased south of the river and while a small bridgehead
was held by the infantry, a bridge was constructed during the night of 30 July.
However, at midnight CCA was attached to the Ist Division and given a new mis-
sion of advancing to Brecy and the River See the next day. Despite heavy fighting
round Villedieu les Poles, both columns reached their objectives by the evening
ot 3i July and many prisoners were taken. The area was congested with American
trops trying to advance and German stragglers trying to escape?2
CCB on the left flank with its own reconnaissance company and mixed team
ofamoured infantry, engineers and F Company tanks from the 33rd Armored
Regiment leading, reached the River Sienne south of Hambye at La Sayerie where
a bridge had to be constructed by the engineers. The team then made the crossing
under heavy shell fire. Meanwhile, the reconnaissance company column was cut
in two places amid increasing German resistance and another team was forced to
come to its aid. CB eventually harboured for the night with all around defences
set up at the bridgehead and around Hambye?3
CCB was preparing next day to contin the attack to Villedieu les Poêles
when it was placed under the command of the 4th Division along with the
Brd Reconnaissance Battalion. With the slow American advance, by then most
German units had been able to fall back in front of the American attack and none
Were completely encircled as envisioned in the plans for Operation Cobra. CCA
had lost eight Mys and one tank dozer so far in the operation ?4
CCA 2nd Armored Division
As the 3rd Armored Division had done, the and Armored vision reorganised its
armoured columns for the attack as the objective of St Gilles originally assigned
to the infantry now had to be taken by the division.
The light reconnaissance
tanks originally expected to lead were replaced by heavier assault teams based on
medium tanks and armoured infantry. The task of the znd Armored Division was
essentially a protective one to the east in order to prevent German reinforcements
moving westwards and striking the American
111
Having to
secure St Gilles first, CCA tanks began thell duvance in two columns a 094s hours
on 26 July to secure the high ground at Le Mesnil Herman but immediately lost
an M4 tank as they crossed the Periers-St Lô road. Undeterred, the two armoured
columns pressed on as fast as the bomb-cratered roads permitted, meeting only
sporadic resistance and light artillery and anti-tank fire.
The advance received
significant assistance from the fighter-bombers on call constantly overhead and
from observation planes, which reported the presence
of enemy troops in front
of the advance before directing artillery fire at the same. However, the combat
