416
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
shortcomings of the British tank industry remained a passion of Stokes, who went
on to publish a small booklet after the war entitled 'Some Amazing Tank Facts'.
Just how vulnerable was the Sherman tank to German weapons? Given the
developing furore over the number of Sherman tank casualties, a battlefield survey
was conducted by the No. 2 Operational Research Unit that examined Sherman
tanks knocked out and/or destroyed in the fighting between 6 June and 1o July
1944. The hulks of forty-five Shermans were examined and forty were found to
have been penetrated by 75mm or 88mm German armour-piercing shells, of which
thirty-three tanks had subsequently caught fire and brewed up?" This was believed
to be due to fragments of metal hitting the ammunition stored in the tank, which
then caused the tank to catch fire. Out of sixty-five hits by armour-piercing shells
on these tanks, sixty-three penetrated the tank completely. This was evidence, if
not proof, that the armoured protection of the Sherman was completely inadequate.
Twenty-five tanks were knocked out by just one hit.
As in most cases the Shermans were attacking, they were often victims of con-
cealed German anti-tank weapons, which had the benefit of first fire; this was
often all that was required, as the high-velocity German tank and anti-tank guns
were able to penetrate the Sherman's frontal armour with ease.
British and Canadian Pertormance
The British and Canadian armour in the Normandy campaign did not perform
well, but this was more often due to the poor way in which it was employed by the
corps commanders. Once badly deployed, the numbers of tanks lost were exag-
gerated by losses due to the thin armour and ineffective gun of the Sherman/M4.
Operation Overlord required the seizure of Caen, Evrecy and Bayeux by ar-
moured columns advancing inland on D-Day, and none of these objectives were
achieved. These objectives proved to be too ambitious and unrealistic; Caen and
Evrecy were not taken for another six weeks. Despite overwhelming naval fire-
power and complete air superiority on 6 June, the Allies were not able to capitalise
on the success of their initial landings. There is not one particular cause of this but
rather a series of compounding factors.
The late afternoon attack by the 21st Panzer Division was enough to prevent the
capture of Caen on D-Day. The bad weather on D-Day (and the preceding days)
caused higher tides than predicted with subsequent traffic congestion and delays
for the follow-up units in getting off the beaches and moving inland. In addition
to this, the D-Day forces had been cooped up in their assault craft since 3 June.
most without proper facilities for sleeping or eating, which meant that many men
were simply exhausted by the afternoon of a june after the tumunuous evers
of the day. The Overlord plan was so detailed and intricate With landings and
operations scheduled to the nearest minute and no time allowed for unexpected
delays that the timetable was always in danger of being considerably delayed by
a single obstacle.
Summary
417
The DD tanks, while coming as a surprise to the Germans, were largely inef-
fective, failing to arrive on time to support the engineers and the first wave of
infantry, which achieved their tasks quickly and largely without support from the
DD tanks. In the Gold and Omaha sectors where the naval and air bombardments
were not as effective as in other sectors and the enemy bunkers were largely intact,
the reduced numbers of DD tanks were even less effective in the absence of any
AVRE firepower and the fighting continued all morning on these beaches.
The British tank brigades arrived in Normandy after two changes to the doctrine
for working with infantry in the previous six months. With the emergence of the
threat of the Panzerfaust, yet another recommendation was made by the War Office
on 1o June that tanks and infantry should advance together. Tank and infantry
co-operation often came down to individual squadron and battalion commanders
or tank troop leaders and company commanders working out hastily, often just
a few hours before they went into action, how they would work together. First
attempts in Normandy were not always successful, as the 4th/7th Royal Dragoon
Guards found out at Cristot in June and the 3Ist Tank Brigade during Operation
Epsom. The lack of a proper doctrine for tanks and infantry to work with Sherman
tanks has been cited as the 'greatest failure of the war in the field of doctrinal
dissemination? Another historian has suggested that the British failure to enforce
any doctrine at all was a major factor in the way tanks and infantry co-operated in
the campaign." Certainly, had the British been forced to follow a faulty doctrine,
the results would have been more catastrophic for the tanks which were required
to lead, according to de Guingand's notes of February 1944. This tactic had been
found to be faulty after two years of fighting in North Africa and yet Montgomery
and the 2tst Army Group tried to insist it be followed in Normandy."
In 1943, the War Office had actively come out against infantry being carried
on tanks because of the discomfort caused by the hot engine exhausts and the
vulnerability of the riders to small-arms fire.
However.
during the Normandy
campaign, time and time again, the only way for the armoured brigades to get
infantry forward to work alongside the tanks was for the tanks to carry the infantry
into battle. Only the armoured divisions, with their motorised battalions, were
equipped with enough suitable vehicles to keep pace with the tanks cross-country.
Ultimately it was the bocage hedgerows that determined how tanks and infantry
co-operated. Current doctrine and training went out the Window When the Allies
entered the first small field surrounded by thick, high hedges. As the 2ist Army
coup did not deliberately or otherwise enforce any doctrine at all, the tanks
and infantry were given the flexibility to develop new tactics for the hedgerow
environment as neither arm could work alone. Though this happened the hard
way, the best methods for tanks and infantry to work together eventually evolved
during the campaign.
British and American armoured divisions were not handled well during the
tirst half of the campaign by army and corps commanders. In many instances the
armoured divisions were expected to operate against established doctrine and
