12
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
helped steer the tank by using a simple detachable tiller linked to the steering
mechanism while standing outside the tank on a plate welded to the back of the
turret. The tank commander was very exposed in this position outside the tank,
and as soon as enemy fire was received, he was forced to duck back into the turret
while the driver continued to steer by means of his gyroscope. However, heavy
seas made the gyroscope very unstable and difficult to read so at the most crucial
time of the landing, when under fire and nearing the beach, the tank was virtually
blind. The limited vision of the DD tanks, particularly under fire or in heavy seas,
was recognised as a problem and during Operation Overlord a navigation boat
was to be used to guide the DD tanks to a point where they could clearly see their
intended landfall. Once launched, the raised canvas screen gave the DD tank in the
water the superficial appearance of a smaller infantry assault craft, and it was hoped
that this would disguise the tank during its approach to the shore.
Before being loaded on the landing craft, each tank had to be waterproofed by
applying a putty-like compound to all joints, access plates, hatches and bolts betore
covering the putty itself with Bostik glue. The crews undertook extensive training
in the form of practice launches, combined exercises and even practised escaping
from a tank that had sunk. Scottish lochs and various lakes around England were
used for these training exercises throughout the five months prior to Overlord. At
Fritton Park, escape training was conducted with all tank crews wearing modified
Davis Escape apparatus (as used in submarines), which provided a limited source
of air. The crew took their place in a Sherman at the bottom of a concrete tower
and water was rapidly pumped in, flooding the tank to a depth of loft. The crews
then had to get out of the tank and swim to the surface, an operation particularly
hazardous for the tank driver as he was the last of the crew to leave. A piece of
equipment added to the DD tanks at the last minute for the Normandy invasion
was an inflatable life raft of the type used by the RAF, a last-minute suggestion of
Admiral Talbot, commander of the Sword sector Royal Navy forces in the assault?
The performance of the DD Shermans in rough weather was found to be poor in
training exercises. The 13th/18th Royal Hussars lost two tanks in Operation Cupid
in March 1944 when the weather turned bad during an exercise after the tanks
had already been launched.+ In Operation Smash, April 1944, the 4th/7th Royal
Dragoons lost six tanks when they were launched in a heavy swell and then condi-
tions worsened; six men were drowned.
The DD tanks were demonstrated to General Eisenhower on 27 January 1944,
and he was enthusiastic about their potential, directing the US forces to use them
in their landings on the basis that any measures that might preserve landing craft
were worth taking. The benefits of the deployment of the DD tanks in the first
assault wave were thought to far outweigh any potential disadvantages. However,
the deployment of DID tanks by both the British and American armies meant that
there would not be enough DD conversion kits to go round, so a British expert
was flown to the USA with the design drawings and the Firestone tyre company
began the manufacture of kits with the intention of sending them to England. As
D-Day Tanks
13
the tanks had to be modified to install the screens, it was far more efficient for US
manufacturers to install the kits in America, and the first 100 DD-equipped tanks
arrived in Liverpool, England, six weeks later.®
The planned use of DD tanks was not greeted enthusiastically by all Americans,
however. General Gerow, commander of V Corps and on the COSSAC (Chief
of Staff to Supreme Allied Commander) planning staff, was not keen on the DD
tanks as he had successfully landed tanks from landing craft directly onto beaches
the previous year in the invasion of Sicily and thought the DD tanks impractical.
Ultimately, a shortage of DD kits meant that only two companies or squadrons
of each battalion or regiment earmarked for D-Day would be equipped with DD
tanks. The third company or squadron would be equipped with tanks with deep
wading vents similar to those that had been used successfully in the Sicilian land-
ings. Two trunks, or stacks, were fitted to extend the air intakes and exhausts of
the tank, which permitted fully waterproofed tanks to drive off landing craft into
water up to 6ft deep.
For the British, the shortage of DD tanks for Overlord was only overcome by tak-
ing over the training tanks of the 79th Armoured Division and by the transfer of 80
M4AI DD tanks from the Americans in March 1944. The Americans' initial order
was for 350 DD tanks, and as only ninety-six were required for the operational use of
the three tank battalions, with another ninety-six being for training, the Americans
had plenty spare. First, however, they had to be shipped to England. As a result of
this, many regiments did not receive their DD tanks until late May and there were
few opportunities for training. Time at the firing ranges was even more limited as
the DD tanks had to be transported by road which required the waterproofing to be
redone before the tank could take to the water again. Travel was also restricted as the
DD tanks were a secret weapon and any road movements risked them being seen by
enemy agents. The Americans turned down the British offer of training instructors
from the 79th Armoured Division for the DD tanks and practised at Gosport and
Torcross for their D-Day landings under their own instructors.
Each British and Canadian regiment would have two squadrons of nineteen
tanks in the assault. As each landing craft Mk III had space for five DD tanks
in its hold, there was room for an extra tank to be used. On 17 May the RAC
(Royal Armoured Corps) approved the use of forty tanks on D-Day, if there were
sufficient tanks and crews available. Eighty-five DD tanks were finally allocated
to each of the 2nd Canadian and 8th Armoured brigades and forty-two to the
27th Armoured Brigade, but some of these tanks were in the workshop for repair?
The 13th/18th Royal Hussars in the 27th Armoured Brigade actually used forty
tanks on D-Day, along with the Canadian Fort Garry Horse Regiment.
On 26 April 1944 General Hobart alerted the War Office and the ACIGS to
a potential problem with the top rail of the canvas screen on Sherman M4A4 tanks.
Owing to faulty manufacture it was very weak and liable to break, especially in
rough weather. An investigation was undertaken and rectification work consisting
of bolting a length of angle iron to the top rail was immediately carried out on 126
