The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
ground around it, Rauray nevertheless had good views and hence fields of fire
over the proposed right flank of the British attack. In its first action, XXX Corps
was detailed to capture first Fontenay and then the village of Rauray, supported
by tanks of the 8th Armoured Brigade and thirteen field and medium regiments
of artillery. The 49th West Riding Division would lead the assault against the
defensive lines of the Panzer Lehr.
At 0400 hours on the 2s June, the artillery barrage began and the infantry of the
49th (West Riding) Division, supported by the tanks, moved off downhill towards
the first objective, Fontenay. The dust and fumes of the barrage thickened the
early morning mist and co-ordination between the advancing units was often lost.
B and C squadrons of the Notts Staff Yeomanry were each supporting a brigade
of infantry but quickly lost contact with them. The British advance was initially
opposed by the ist battalion of the gorst Panzergrenadier Regiment from Panzer
Lehr, supported by other panzergrenadiers and the Mark IVs of the 8th Company
from the 12th SS Panzer Division. Coming out of their bunkers after the artil-
lery barrage had passed, the panzergrenadiers, having had time to prepare their
defences, used mortar and machine-gun fire to great effect to stop the forward
progress of the attack through the rubble of Fontenay and after a day's confused
fighting, they still held the town. One Mark IV tank was knocked out by an anti-
tank gun firing from Fontenay.
The advance to Rauray would not be completed for another three
days.
However, the pressure from XXX Corps was strong enough that day to convince
the Germans that this was the main focus of the British attack. Consequently, the
Panther tank battalion of the 12th SS was moved westwards to prevent a break-
through around Rauray, away from the section of the frontline where Operation
Epsom was to be launched.
The Panther tanks started arriving in the early afternoon, some reinforcing
the panzergrenadiers in Fontenay. The attack by the 8th Armoured Brigade was
halted after a fierce tank battle around the Tessel Wood. The ist SS Panzer Korps
ordered a further reinforced counterattack for the next day with the sth, oth and
7th Mark IV companies of the 2nd battalion less the 8th Company, which was
already engaged around Fontenay, and the oth Company, which was defending
Carpiquet airfield.
26 June
The final Operation Epsom plan was a bold one. Using VIII Corps, the Isth (H)
Division would advance two brigades up, supported by tanks of the two regiments
of the 3ist Tank Brigade, to break through the German lines. The third brigade of
the division would then move through the gap created and seize the bridges over
the River Odon. The tanks of the lith Armoured Division would pass through and
147
Operation Epsom
nice outwards to Evrecy and the bridges over the River Orne before turning
amato ard retteville to surround Caen. The Germans had not destroyed
artiste ridges over the River Odon as they were required for the movement
a pandatacks of their own forces. H-hour was at 0730 hours and the infantry
tic vision had arrived at the frontline only the day before after being
ade to dembark from their boats during the three days of gales, without any
o cr that heir own emergency rations. There was little time to plan the
at yak with the tanks of the 31st Tank Brigade, which themselves had
i aried o the 22 June. The brigade would be using its Churchill tanks in
a rational i fatty support role as per British doctrine, advancing just behind
earing ins of soldiers. Montgomery had ordered there be no delay for the
at 0 peration Epsom, as decrypted Ultra intercepts had reported the arrival
i Nomady of the and SS Panzer Korps for the planned German counterattack.
The operation would be mounted in two phases:
vase - advance to and capture of the bridges over the River Orne
* Phase 2 - occupy the ground northeast of Bretteville sur baize and be prepared
to exploit southwards to Falaise®
NATION
SOM
30 CORPS
8-CORPS
3-CDN.DIV.
I- CORPS
3-BR. DIV.
2YPANZER DIVISION
49-DIV.
v. German
dr Attack
NUNE 1944 TO TILY SUR SEULLES
KEY
DIVISION
12-5S PANZER DIVISION
FEUGUEROLLES •
2 - SS PANZER CORPS
EVRECY - 55 PANZER CORPS AVANE
Map of the progress of armour in Operation Epsom, adapted from Operations of Eighth Corps. (By
kind permission of G.S. Jackson)
