290
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the Vire-Vassy road and keep it open. This kampfgruppe, consisting of thirteen
Panther tanks of the 2nd Company plus a company of panzergrenadiers with six
self-propelled artillery guns, got underway that night.
3 August
VIII Corps - 11th Armoured Division
Having been ordered to halt in their present positions at the end of the previous
day, the two battle groups of the lIth Armoured Division occupied four defensive
positions. The 23rd Hussars and the 8th Rifle Brigade of the 29th Brigade group
occupied the ridge north of Le Bas Perrier with the rest of the brigade group
back across the valley on the ridge at Point 218 above Presles. A Squadron of the
3rd RTR was further east at Les Grands Bonfait. The Is9th Infantry Brigade box
was further west around Forgues while the 2nd Fife and Forfars group with the
3rd Monmouths were around Burcy, La Pavée and Point 224, only I,200yds west
of the position of the Hussars.
The Germans at least recognised the strategic importance of Vire and needed to
hold it at all costs. A more limited pincer attack was planned with the two pincers
to meet this time at La Bistiere on the road north of Vire. Kampfgruppe Weiss
with the 2nd Company of the 1o2nd Schwere SS Battalion (seven operational Tiger
tanks) plus the oth SS reconnaissance battalion would attack northwards from Vire
to meet the engineer battalion of the gth SS Panzer Division. The Ist Company
of Tigers would attack from Estry westwards to link up with the 2nd Company at
For most of the day, the 2nd Fife and Forfar box near La Pavée and Hill 224 was
attacked by the engineer battalion of the oth SS Panzer Division. The attack was
unsupported by artillery or tanks and eventually, after heavy fighting and consider-
able defensive artillery fire, the Germans were forced to withdraw.
On the Vire-Vassy road an early morning German attack led by the Panther
tanks from Kampfgruppe Olboeter destroyed the road block and forced the 2nd
Fife and Forfar tanks back to Burcy where they anxiously prepared for the advance
of the Germans from Presles.
Kampfgruppe Meyer of the oth SS Panzer Division continued its attack in
a south-westerly direction, parallel with the Estry and Perrier ridges, to cut the
British lines of communication to their forward boxes and construct a new front-
line. Panther and Tiger tanks accompanied by infantry advanced along the valley
between the ridges and attacked Presles at about 1000 hours. Presles was captured
in the afternoon, isolating the battle group of the 23rd Hussars and the Rifle
Brigade on the Perrier ridge. The Hussar tanks and the infantry were deployed on
the reverse slope of the Perrier ridge in anticipation of an attack from Chenedolle
and as their tanks were visible to the German tanks in the valley below, they found
themselves under long-range fire as the regiment history portrayed:
Operation Bluecoat
291
A series of resounding cracks followed by sudden puffs of dust rising round our tanks
announced that we were under fire from their guns. B Squadron and RHQ were on
the most exposed side of the hill and had to bear the brunt. RHQ had a hedge which
partially concealed them but B Squadron were unavoidably in full view. They fired
back but the range was too great for the seventy fives of the Sherman to have any
effect. Gradually these ominous puffs of dust began to creep nearer to our tanks as
the Germans found the range. The crack and whistle of enemy armour-piercing shot
grew in intensity, mingling with the roar of our seventeen pounders as they retaliated.
Inevitably there was soon a crash and spurt of flame. A cloud of black smoke rose from
a B Squadron tank which had been hit. 46
Losses continued to mount and to add to their difficulties, German mortar and ar-
tillery fire began to sweep the exposed position. The nine Firefly tanks left forced
the German tanks to keep their distance and change their firing positions regularly.
The gth SS Panzer Division claimed that eleven Shermans were knocked out that
day, although the actual total was four. 47
A small group of German tanks were spotted near the hedges close to the British
position at Les Grands Bonfait. A Squadron of the 3rd RTR had harboured as
instructed by the second in command in a tight defensive desert-style harbour
with the tanks closely grouped together in an orchard. At 093o hours there was
a sudden savage German mortar barrage that caught most of the tank crews out
of their tanks. Seven German tanks, supported by infantry, were observed around
their position. Sergeant Buck Kite saw two Panzer IVs working their way down
a hedge zooyds away, coming towards his tank. He jumped into his tank instead of
underneath it like the other tank crews and began to engage the Germans.
I managed to halt the two tanks I'd first seen - they got out of it but whether they
were hit or whether they had reversed out of the field into the road I don't know. In
any case, by this time three more had appeared and were having a go ... We fired so
many shots at these three Jerries that I ran out of armour-piercing and started to use
HE which wasn't a great deal of use against armour but was better than nothing. 48
Sergeant Kite then noticed that the troop Firefly was nearby and was not in action,
so he ran with his gunner to the Firefly and stood on the rear deck behind the
turret to direct the 17-pounder's fire. The Firefly was then hit several times, forcing
Sergeant Kite back to his own tank where he fired off the remaining HE shells.
A human chain was then formed to transfer, under fire, more armour-piercing
shells to Kite's tank until another Panther appeared:
We were concentrating on one Panther when I realised another was swinging his gun
straight at us. I said to my gunner, "Right a bit, Herbie... on" but before he could
fire, I saw the flash of the Jerry's gun. The corn bent as the shell passed over it and
I thought, "This is it. Goodbye."4)
