348
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
juncture, the squadron commander, Major Carson, believed that the squadron had
got off course and directed the tanks to move in a south-westerly direction to
Hill 195. Colonel Worthington then ordered the squadron by radio to advance to
the high ground in front', which they duly did, except for No. 2 Troop, which pro-
ceeded as arranged as far as Point IST. There they were engaged by two anti-tank
guns, which the tanks knocked out before heading back to Estrées la Campagne
where they came across several tanks of A Squadron, similarly uncertain of their
way. A Tiger tank then appeared and, in the ensuing firefight, three A Squadron
and the B Squadron tanks were knocked out.
The British Columbia position on the hilltop had thirty-one Shermans (sixteen
tanks in C Squadron, eleven in B Squadron and four in RHQ) and a Stuart recce
tank plus nearly two companies of the Algonquin infantry, and its presence was
soon revealed to the Germans as it became light. The Canadians were occupying
the proposed location o1 Kampgruppe Waldmuller after its withdrawal, and as
the kampigruppe was now only able to withdraw to the east, it was in danger of
being cut off. The five available Panthers moved to the east and started to engage
the Shermans on the hill whilst the two Tigers from the 3rd Company and three
from the and Company that had arrived from Grimbosq attacked from the wesc.
Later, the thirteen Tigers from the ist Company roand Schwere SS Battalion were
committed to the battle when they arrived. Other tanks such as Jagdpanzers and
Panzer IVs may well have joined the fray periodically.
Two Shermans from A Squadron were the last to arrive in the position, but
hese were the buy a squdaron tanks to make it, as the remainder were destroyer
en route by the thoroughly alarmed and quick-reacting Germans.
The vehicles
carrying D Company of the Algonquin infantry were also badly shot up, and the
remnants of the company made their way back to the north of Bretteville le Rabet
to find the rest of their regiment.
On the hilltop, liger and Panther tanks begas to snipe at the Sherman tanks
from long range. A pair of Typhoons appeared at about 0800 hours and, after
mistakenly attacking the Canadian positions, they spotted the yellow smoke that
identified their targets as friendly. The planes then gave valuable support by attack-
ing any observed build-up or concentration of German tanks and infantry. Other
Typhoons appeared overhead regularly during the day, and their sorties provided
a considerable boost to the morale of the isolated men." Armour-piercing are calle
in from a wood i,oooyds to the north at about 08oo hours and then from a small!
wood on higher ground to the south. One troop went to the north to try and deal
with the source, but the tanks were all knocked out. Four tanks of B Squadron then
drove forward to clear the other wood to the south but were promptly brewed up as
well by a Tiger tank. The Sherman tanks did not use flashless, smokeless ammuni-
tion like the Germans, so when a tank fired it gave away its position. The Germans
were able to pick off the Shermans at long range while the Shermans were unable
to return any effective armour-piercing fire due to the poor performance of their
Operation Totalize
349
75mm main guns. Only the Fireflies and the Typhoon sorties made the German
tanks keep their distance.
One by one the remaining Shermans were knocked out as intense German artil-
lery and mortar fire swept the exposed Canadian position. Polish tanks advancing
in the afternoon from St Sylvain mistook the Sherman tanks for Germans and
opened fire before the Canadians could let off their yellow recognition smoke.
The Germans turned their attention to the Polish tanks for a while, which
give the Canadians some respite,
but this attention was too close for comfort
and the Poles withdrew after getting within 3ooyds of the hilltop. At I$0o hours
Worthington ordered the remaining tanks that were operational to make a run for
it back to Canadian lines. Eight tanks made it; the remainder left behind began to
run out of all types of ammunition. German infantry tried to storm the position
repeatedly but were repelled by machine-gun fire from the tanks. By 1900 hours
there were no operational tanks left, and the remaining tank crewmen (fourteen)
and sixty soldiers of the Algonquin companies decided to make a run for it; most
eventually managed to make it back to the Polish lines.
The British Columbia Regiment lost 101 ORs killed, wounded or missing,
and six oficers killed, five wounded and two taken prisoner. A total of forty-
four Sherman tanks and two Stuarts were destroyed. The two companies of the
Agonquin Regiment, which began the day with 220 men, had only three officers
and seventy-nine men fit for duty next day.3
There is no doubt that Worthington's regiment committed a grave navigation
error. It is difficult to understand exactly what happened, as Worthington proceed-
ed to compound his original mistake. It is possible that worming on to aler
becoming disoriented in the darkness and confusion whilst under fire, followed
an old straight track called the Chemin Haussé, believing it was the Caen-Falaise
road:* Yet the Caen road is a sealed asphalt road, and if the Chemin Haussé could be
mistaken for a smooth road at night it certainly could not be mistaken at daybreak.
Worthington was also supposed to move south-westerly from where his intended
route crossed the Route Nationale, but the route taken was virtually a straight line
south-east to Hill Ill. Worthington cannot be held solely to blame, as others had
a hand in the planning of this operation. It was at Simonds' insistence, and in turn
Kitching's, that the division's advance should continue overnight to make up for
lost time. The British Columbia Regiment had very little time to prepare or plan
for its first action. Worthington went to brigade HQ at 2130 hours for the briefing,
which did not finish until o10o hours, leaving Worthington just an hour to issue
orders to his regiment. The Canadians had never trained or practised an advance at
night, yet Brigadier Booth ordered the regiment in its very first action to conduct
a night advance of some 10 miles behind German lines and likely to be under fire
for most of the way.
Enemy small arms and machine-gun fire cannot injure a tank crew but does
force them to 'button up' for protection by closing the hatches, so the crew must
then use their vision slits and periscopes, which give limited vision at the best of the
