284
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
One of the main difficulties we had to overcome now and later was the close country,
thick hedges and sunken lanes which prevented deployment and limited vision to
100 yds or less, with the result that 2 or 3 well hidden guns or tanks could shoot up
a whole troop before being spotted.3'
For the regiments of the Guards Armoured Division, this was their first time fight-
ing in the bocage and their experiences mirrored that of all other units. A flanking
attack was made by No. 2 Squadron around the eastern slopes of the hill only for
the Germans to promptly withdraw. That morning A Squadron lost a total of seven
tanks before the hill was taken?? The German tank knocked out was found to be
from the znd Panzer Division, which had left two companies behind to support the
326th Division when it moved towards St Lô.
The village of St Denis Maisoncelles was occupied about 1300 hours by the
Irish Guards and later in the afternoon a patrol of Stuart recce tanks and infantry
approached the bridge over the River Soulevre at Le Tourneur, only for the lead-
ing tanks to be knocked out by a Panther tank defending the bridge. No further
progress was made that day until the bridge was taken by two companies of
infantry in an attack later that night. The capture of the bridge at Le Tourneur
was important as it provided VIII Corps with a second crossing over the River
Soulevre. However, the ist Coldstream and 2nd Grenadier Guards saw little action
that day as most of it was spent in traffic jams on the dusty road from Caumont. As
the Guards Armoured Division had still not crossed the River Soulevre, the left
flank of the lith Armoured Division that had advanced further was now exposed.
In the west, FUSA had captured Avranches and thus sealed off the entire Cotentin
peninsula. American armoured divisions were now rapidly passing through the
town and fanning out west and southwards into the interior of Brittany largely
unopposed. During the day, other patrols of znd Household Cavalry reached Vire
and reported that it was undefended.
XXX Corps
The 7th Armoured Division was introduced into the battle to advance from
dumont to canagnes, breull ana Aunay, Lea by the ist kid, the diat daa
little progress against small but determined resistance, encountering equent edi
blocks and mines. Progress was also impeded by trafic jams around Caumont
caused by the tail of the soth Division. The 43rd Division, however, made better
progress and took the hill at Point 361 south of the Bois du Homme.
2 August
XXX Corps
The ist RTR led the advance for the day and met increasing resistance trom
mines and small groups of infantry with Panzerfäuste. Units of the loth SS Panzer
285
Operation Bluecoat
Division that had been committed against XXX Corps around Aunay sur Odon
had started to arrive and had taken up defensive positions. C Squadron reached the
high ground north-west of Sauques at a cost of six tanks lost to mines, Panzerfäuste
and anti-tank guns. A trooper in Ist RTR wrote in his diary:
Bloody awful bad show. Tank went over mine, blew bottom in, these Cromwells
no use on mines... Had to stop in the wood until midnight when the SPs (of Norfolk
Yeomanry took over - glad to because Tigers were milling about somewhere in
front."
The yth Armoured Division had only advanced 7 miles in two days. The reasons
for this slow advance were queried by the XXX Corps commander, Lieutenant-
General Bucknall, and General Erskine's response, at 1520 hours, was as follows:
Mist not cleared until 1200 hours. Heavy traffic on centre line. 43rd Division had
not captured Robin (the crossroads south east of Cahagnes) and finally 1/sth Queen's
were shelled from Point 238 and had to debus earlier than planned."
The ith Armoured Brigade had been slowly advancing in support of the soth and
Astd divisions since 30 July. Having captured Cahagnes the day before, the
Sherwood Rangers advanced towards Jurques and La Bigne:
We started at dawn with my tank about fourth from the front. The infantry of the 7th
Hampshire were with us, walking alongside the tank and covering the flank. Then we
ative at a junction which was mined along with the fields around it. The column
hated allow the sappers to come up and clear the mines when suddenly a Tiger tank
emerged from cover and moved to the high ground overlooking the road. It opened
Sie at about 2000 yards and hit a tank further back in the column. With both ends
ol the column now blocked, we were bottled up and the Tiger was out of our range.
I shouted, "Gunner, traverse right! Steady on Tiger. Smoke 1750 yards. Fire when
ready: Our shot landed just in front of the Tiger and the smoke soon obscured it from
New. We fired again, this time just to the left of the tank, aiming to keep plenty of
moke between us and it. Other tank commanders did the same whilst the air officer
accompanying us called up four Typhoon fighter bombers off the cab rank to fire their
kets at the liger. We tired some red smoke to identify the target and then the planes
came in, very low and with a tremendous roar. The second plane scored a direct hit and
when the smoke cleared, we could see the Tiger lying on its side minus its turret and
with no sign of any survivors. It was an awesome display of firepower and demonstrated
only too clearly how important controllid he skies was to our ultimate success.36
The tanks of the Sherwood Rangers carrying their intantry got into the village of
furques later that morning.
