260
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
about dawn.
The men of the division reserve killed 130 Germans and wounded
another 124, which were taken prisoner along with 400 others. At least twenty-five
vehicles were destroyed, of which seven were tanks. American losses were almost
100 men and twelve vehicles. 45
Eleven vehicles of the German force that got through at St Denis took a wrong
turn in the darkness and headed westwards until they reached the harbour of the
78th Field Artillery Battalion, 2 miles west of St Denis, at about o215 hours. This
was the same artillery battalion that was involved at the La Panetiere crossroads
previously. The sentries mistook them for American vehicles and allowed the
group to proceed past an Mio parked at the side of the road into the encampment.
Here the mistake was realised when an American officer challenged the occupants
of the vehicles in German.
A firefight immediately broke out at very short range
and when the leading and rearmost German vehicles were destroyed, the German
survivors were forced to flee on foot. The column, including two Stug Ill assault
guns and a iosmm self-propelled artillery gun, was completely destroyed.
Further north on the Coutances to Gavray road near Cambry, which had been
held since the afternoon of 28 July by a small isolated force of the reinforced
H Company of the 2nd Battalion of the 67th Armored Regiment, other units from
2nd Battalion finally arrived in Cambernon at 1800 hours on 29 July and linked
up with H Company. Other tanks were ordered to take up defensive positions
along the road from Cambernon to Grimesnil. At about oroo hours, more than
the 2nd SS Panzer Division,
attacked the recently arrived Americans who were
still digging-in. German soldiers who tried to infiltrate past the defences in the
darkness were followed by a column of armoured vehicles, led by a Mark I tank
and a Hummel self-propelled gun. Several M4 tanks at Cambry were knocked out,
and the German tanks threatened to overrun the entire position unus an Ma tank
destroyed the leading vehicle, which blocked the road at Grimesnil, allowing the
2nd Battalion to regroup. A furious firefight developed in the darkness. The crew
of the Hummel self-propelled gun were killed by rifle fire and their vehicle blocked
meow walt unre a ung They were free the
describes the events:
ta an infantry sergeant who under intense small arms fire, made his way to a friendly
tank, mounted its back deck and guided it to a position where it could destroy the
enemy's lead tank. The sergeant beat off enemy infantry by firing his sub machine
gun and by using hand grenades as he guided the tank forward. The destruction of the
enemy's lead vehicle blocked the road and stopped his advance. Vicious hand to hand
fighting broke out on all sides and each friendly vehicle became an island of defence
around which our troops rallied and fought off the more than five to one numerical
superiority of the enemy ..
Throughout the
Bazookas, hand grenades
entire engagement fighting was at extremely close quarters.
and bayonets were used extensively by both sides and
261
Operation Cobra
tankers fought hand to hand with German troops that attempted to mount their
tanks. Officers went from tank to tank and group to group, giving orders to each in an
attempt to maintain a semblance of organisation in the face of almost complete dark-
ness and battle confusion, which made it nearly impossible to identify friend or foe. 46
The Americans were pushed back and only after immediate artillery support was
called for, virtually on top of their own positions without waiting for targets to
be registered, did the German advance falter. The infantry of the 4ist Armored
were then able to restore the situation after a six-hour battle with the help of tanks
and close mortar and artillery support. Three hundred German infantrymen who
attempted to outflank the American positions to the east through a swamp were
caught by a platoon of tanks and more than 250 of them were killed. German
casualties were 450 men killed, 1,000 taken prisoner and about 100 vehicles of all
types destroyed. American losses were about fifty men killed and sixty wounded.
The 2nd Battalion lost seven tanks and nine half-tracks in this action.4 However,
CCB reported only one tank and one half-track destroyed for the entire operation. 48
A Panther tank commander in the znd SS Panzer Division, Fritz Langake, de-
scribed the chaos amongst the German units cut off by the American advance as he
tried to break out during 29-30 July:
I got to the bunker, snapped to attention and reported to the regimental commander
and asked for orders. He didn't have any for me, and I left the shelter. For the next two
or three hours I was quite busy. I ran back 200-300)l eters down the road looking tor
vehicles from our task force and others. Most of the men who had abandoned their
vehicles were back now. I found two operable Panthers and one Panzerkampfwagen
IV. With them I was able to move enough obstacles so that our halftrack and wheeled
vehicles could pass. We formed quite a column. I told those with me that, come
darkness, we would break out. I reported this fact to the regimental commander and
checked in another two or three times. He finally told me not to make any noise
and wait. He would, under cover of darkness, sneak stealthily through the American
blockade with his infantry and all the stragglers, without shooting...
.. Shortly after my last encounter, some seasoned parachute non-coms came and
said to me: "You poor bastard. You're the only one around here who doesn't know
what's cooking. Those guys don't plan anything. They are going to surrender? I felt
ashamed for my stupidity. I went over to the bunker and told them I would start with
my column at 2200 hours that evening and the hell with them. Then two officers
came to my tank. One, a major, was the commander of an assault gun battalion, and
the other was his adjutant. They had camouflaged their two vehicles in a sunken lane
close by. They asked me whether they could join our column. By that time I had given
up wondering why an officer of his rank would ask a platoon leader, who wasn't even
an officer, if he could join instead of taking over command. I then drove with my
tank back to the road and broke two passages through the hedgerow on the left side
in order to pass the big gun and other destroyed vehicles in front of us. In the attempt
