4
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
As the Germans were present in force along the direct route from the coast to Caen
and had successtully defeated all attacks in that direction, Montgomery decidea
on an enveloping operation around the city, using the veteran divisions that had
served under him in North Africa. The operation was to commence on 1o June
and was lenamed Operation Wild Oats. The eastern pincer would be created
by the sist Division passing through the small bridgehead over the River Orne
and striking south for Cagny. In the west, the 7th Armoured Division of AAA
cups, commanded by Lieutenant-General Bucknall, would make an armoured
thrust through Villers bocage and Noyers before crossing the River Odon and
capturing the high ground near Evrecy. The ist British Airborne Division would
then be dropped into the gap between Cagny and Y vrecy to complete the encircle-
ment of Caen.' However, Air Marshal Leigh-Mallory was not keen on this use of
airborne troops as he thought their numbers would be insufficient to hold off the
inevitable counterattack by the Germans. Montgomery was not pleased by what he
perceived as a lack of support but the plans were amended and the revised operation
named Operation Perch. Supporting attacks were to be made simultaneously by
the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade to the high ground around Cheux via Le
Mesnil Patry and by the 8th Armoured pezade to Cristot in order to keep pressure
on the Germans and protect the flank of the western pincer.
In the east, the attack by the sist Division and the supporting 4th Armoured
Brigade was delayed for two days as the infantry could not assemble in the bridge-
head on time due to the fighting in progress between the oth Airborne Division
holding the bridgehead and the German 346th Division attacking to eliminate
it. Once the paratroopers' frontline was stabilised by the capture of Bréville on
12 June, the infantry brigades of the sist Division began their attack on 13 June
only to be met and held by Kampfgruppe Luck of the zist Panzer Division near
Cuverville. As the infantry casualty rate rose, any further attempts to expand the
bridgehead in the east were discontinued.
The other arm of the pincer began its attack on 1o June with the
Division to advance through the soth Division to Hottot and Tilly
oured
•tore
123
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
expoting further southwards. The ilist Brigade of the 7th Armoured Division
had only just landed in Normandy and was unavailable, so the soth Brigade (an
nependent brigade) was attached; the soth Brigade and the ist Rifle Brigade were
the only infantry support for the tanks. The 8th Armoured Brigade was also part
of the offensive and was tasked with the capture of Lingèvres as well as supporting
the th Armoured Division. Opposing XXX Corps was the Panzer Lehr Division.
The small felds and high hedges of the bocage were unfamiliar to the men of the
nih Armoured Division who were also using their new Cromwell tanks in battle for
tie fistie. They were about as far away from the deserts of North Africa as they
cold get. The sunken roads and hedges restricted the tank commander's visibility,
and any commander with his head out of the cupola was vulnerable to sniper fire.
The initial advance was slowed by pockets of Lehr panzergrenadiers, supported
oy single tanks or anti-tank guns, which used the terrain skilfully to repeatedly
amoush the tanks as they advanced without any infantry. A troop of sth RTR
tanks stumbled into a German tank harbour and knocked out a Mark IV. The
regiment later lost two Cromwells to a Panther tank in Berniere Bocage.?
the 4th County of London Yeomanry (4th CL: lost two tanks to friendly
tie from the tanks of the 8th Armoured Brigade, but C Squadron did knock out
a Mark IV tank, losing three Cromwells and a Stuart recce tank on the first day:
The 7th Armoured Division advanced only 6 miles the whole day and lost a total
for the following day, it June, units were reorganised to create two mixed torces
of tanks and infantry to better cope with the bocage countryside but this first ex-
periment was not that successful. The 4th CLY were attached to the soth Brigade,
with which they had never worked before, and in any case, the tank regiments
vere not well trained in combined operations. Despite d need lot more drandy
in the difficult country, the tanks tended to forge on ahead unsupported. The
Sth RTR with the 2nd Essex battalion advanced to the woods north of Lingevres,
losing an Ms Honey to a self-propelled gun in Berniers-Bocaged
Panther tanks
were also present in the area, hidden in the edge of the woodland. One Panther
hit a Firefly and two more Cromwell tanks were knocked out another anther
tank using a sunken road for cover; as the wood was apparently impenetrable to
tanks, the regiment withdrew to harbour. A German counterattack that night with
Wo fame-throwing tanks that came in on the infantry in the woods was only just
contained by the and Essex battalion with artillery support.*
The Firefly lost was commanded by Corporal Bridge and the previous evening
he had approached his troop commander to say that he had lost his nerve and
wanted to be relieved. Bridge, a veteran of North Africa, had been married only
a few weeks previously. Unable to immediately do anything as the squadron was
due in action again next morning, the troop commander promised to help Bridge,
provided he manned the Firefly next day. The armour-piercing shell that had hit
the Firefly penetrated the cupola of the turret whilst Bridge was standing up and
the shell cut him in two, killing him instantly?
