70
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
nearer the shore than planned. A total of forty-seven tanks were lost on the swim
to the beach, which is 26 per cent of those that were launched; twenty-eight of
these were lost on Omaha beach alone. Therefore 133 DD tanks touched down and
another 110 tanks were carried directly to the shore, so in the prevailing weather
conditions of D-Day, it is clear that the losses of the swimming DD tanks could
have been avoided by directing the landing craft all the way to the beach.
Omaha provides an example of the consequences of the non-arrival of the DD
tanks - the assaulting infantry and engineers suffered heavy losses from the shore
defences and this was the only sector where, for a few hours, the Allied landings
were in danger of being thrown back into the sea. Only the tanks of the 743rd Tank
Battalion that landed directly on the beach (plus the five surviving DD tanks of the
74Ist Tank Battalion) provided any form of local fire support for the combat teams
of the ist and 29th Divisions.
However, the performance of the DD tanks also depended on the effectiveness
of the aerial bombing and the naval bombardment in suppressing or destroying
the beach bunkers before the DD tanks arrived. On Sword and Juno, the bombing
and bombardment had been adequate but on Gold and Omaha it had been largely
ineffective, so the defences were intact. On Gold, the DD tanks that made it ashore
had a fierce battle to overcome the beach defences and the Gold landing could not
have succeeded without some armoured support on the beach. At Omaha, the
aerial bombing had fallen well off target inland and the shortened 40-minute naval
bombardment had not been successful in knocking out many bunkers. Only the
courage and bravery of the tankers and soldiers ashore with the considerable aid of
direct fire from the warships offshore enabled the assault to succeed.
The failure of the normally remarkably well-informed Allied intelligence
(owing to its Enigma/Ultra code breaking) to detect the relocation of the German
352nd Division from St Lô to the coast also had a critical influence on the events of
the day: the soldiers of FUSA were not facing a poorly equipped static division but
a combat-ready, standard German infantry division, albeit untried in battle.
A part of the rationale behind the employment of DD tanks was to avoid any
losses of landing craft on the approach to the beaches and thereby the loss of four
or five tanks at once. D-Day saw this hypothesis tested. Once the decision to
not launch the DD tanks had been taken, a total of 110 tanks were carried by 44
landing craft through the obstacles and mines directly to the beach. Not a singe
landing craft was sunk on the run-in to the shore. LT 390 at Omaha and LCT 313
it juno were severely damaged, but both whee ultimately repaired. I herefore, cr
on Omaha where the defences were intact, the ink of landing craft being lost was
losses in landing craft, and this would have maximised the number of tanks and
unwarranted; tanks could have been landed dired y on the beaches with minimal
firepower ashore.
A major objective of the DD tanks was to provide fire support for the assault
squadrons clearing the gaps in the defeat.es, gapping teams and the first wave of
infantry ashore. To do this, the tanks were required to be ashore before the arrival
D-Day Tanks
71
of the LCTs and LCAs carrying the AVREs of the assault squadrons and infantry
to eliminate the bunkers on the beaches. Even if the DD tanks did not arrive at the
designated time, it was essential that they get to shore and begin their task before
the other units arrived.
Of the DD tanks that were launched on all the beaches, none of the DD tanks
arrived at their scheduled times. This was not serious in itself, as on most beaches
the AVR Es and LCAs carrying the assault infantry were also late, largely because
of the heavy seas. However, to be effective, the correct landing order still had to be
achieved and only one squadron in the British sector arrived before the AVR Es and
infantry and that was B Squadron of the Ist Hussars Regiment on Juno.
On Gold beach, the DD tanks of the 4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards arrived
at the same time as the landing craft carrying the AVREs or within a minute or
so; several eyewitnesses recall seeing some AVR Es being destroyed as they moved
up the beaches. The Sherwood Rangers on both Jig Red and Jig Green arrived
after the AVR Es and infantry; on Jig Green the tanks arrived 28 minutes late and
were of little assistance to the infantry, which had landed further east. On Sword
beach, the DD tanks landed just behind the AVR Es whose landing craft had passed
through the line of swimming DD tanks.
In the American sectors, only five tanks of the 74Ist Tank Battalion arrived at
Omaha, three of these in LCT 600 at just after H-hour, whilst at Utah the DD tanks
of the 70th Tank Battalion arrived Is minutes after the infantry.67 In a remarkable
image captured on D-Day by the war photographer Robert Capa, who went in
with the first wave of infantry on Easy Red beach at Omaha, two DD tanks can be
seen with their screens still raised, which suggests that they have only just arrived,
while to their left wading tanks are already on the beach with infantry huddled
behind them seeking cover. As Capa was on Easy Red, the two DD tanks were
from the five tanks of the 74Ist Tank Battalion that did not sink. As the tWo DD
tanks are next to each other, it is more than likely that these are part of the group of
three which landed directly on the beach about o64s hours and went on to perform
valiant service engaging the bunkers before being knocked out or disabled.
Those DD tanks in the British sectors that were landed directly by LCT were
invariably late, however. This at first appears a lttle odd - the DD tanks could
only make about 3 knots best speed in the conditions on D-Day whilst the Mk III
landing craft had a top speed of g knots, so in theory the landing craft would have
been able to make up any time lost. The problem was that once the decision not to
launch had been made, the LCT commander had to make sure all the LCTs in the
flotilla received the message and then the flotilla had to insert itself into a different
wave of the planned assault without disrupting it. This meant in most cases that
a delay occurred before a suitable landing opportunity could be found and as a
result the AVR Es and the assault infantry were without armoured support when
hey most needed it. The Dieppe operation, where the tanks were 1o minutes late,
demonstrated the need for the tanks to arrive before or, at the very redst, ai the
same time as the infantry before they began to sufter heavy casualties. This lesson
