384
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
two battle groups, had been refuelled and rearmed. The 2nd Tank Regiment bat-
tle group was to move directly to Chambois with the loth Mounted Rifles and
link up with the Americans whilst the Ist Tank Regiment battle group was to
occupy the imposing heights at Coudehard and Mont Ormel, which commanded
the Chambois-Vimoutiers road that ran through the valley below. On 17 August,
the US Third Army's V Corps was ordered to advance to Trun to complete the
southern pincer of the encirclement.
18 August
The znd Tank Regiment battle group started off at 0200 hours for Chambois but
wook a wrong turn in the darkness, even though they had a French guide, and
headed east towards Les Champeaux. Herman Mietek was a tank commander:
After a short, but fierce battle, we captured our objective just as darkness fell and the
night sky was illuminated by the fires of the battle. We rounded up the prisoners and
had just started to heat canned rations in billy-cans over primus stoves when the order
was received to check fuel and ammunitio, - supplies had failed to arrive and we were
low on both. Despite this, we were ordered to move out immediately, without food
or rest from the day's battles. Our plan was to get as close as possible to Chambois
under cover of darkness. Carrying the 8th Light Infantry on our tanks and vehicles,
our orders were "complete radio silence, no lights; tank column must not be broken
and no firing except on order from the CO himself". Behind enemy lines, in total
darkness and with no sleep, this was a nerve-racking journey. The Germans also had
a similar plan — to escape under cover of darkness and as we moved down a narrow
lane towards a crossroads, our scouts reported a German column approaching from
the right.
To turn 6o tanks and 20 other vehicles in such a narrow lane would have
been courting disaster, we just had to press on. Then, a stroke of the greatest good
fortune, the German traffic controller at the crossroads halted the German column
and waved us forward. We will never know if he mistook us for a fellow German
division or had recognised us and wanted to avoid a disastrous close range encounter.
That was not the only luck we had that night! Later we were fired on and took some
casualties, but we held our fire and the enemy firing ceased. Again, the Germans must
have concluded we were part of a retreating German Division.
As dawn broke on August i8th, we suddenly found ourselves looking upon an
unexpected cluster of vehicles of the 2nd SS Panzer Division. All hell broke out; our
tanks went into position and the infantrymen spread out and we opened fire with
tanks and machine guns. German cars and trucks were on fire, people were running
everywhere and the Germans seemed to be in a panic. They started to drop their
guns and equipment and surrender. We took about 80 prisoners. Suddenly there was
a roar of aircraft and we thought we were being attacked by Messerschmitts, perhaps
20 in all. Then we recognised they were Thunderbolts and we quickly lit flares to
385
Falaise Gap
alert the pilots, but too late to avert the first attack. As the lead plane came in for
the second attack, the pilot saw the signal and with a waggle of his wings quickly
dimbed, followed by the others. They circled for a while, probably making sure we
really were Allied forces, wondering how we could be so far behind enemy lines. The
narrow lanes and the dust from the dry roads had protected us and we took only a few
casualties from the planes.!?
The Polish had stumbled into the command post of the 2nd so Panzer Division
reparing to attack back towards the gap (or pocket) to keep it open. Other
German tanks were then heard close by. The German infantry regrouped and
asaulted the column but this time a platoon of tanks from the 2nd Squadron were
able to deploy and met the attack with a 'hurricane of fire' that turned it back.
German attacks came in all along the length of the Polish column with the rear
being attacked by panzergrenadiers with Panzerfäuste and grenades. The leading
ments of the column then managed to break through the roadblocks at tes
campeaux and reached the village of Desson Rousseaus. Here they were forcea
o nait que to a shortage of fuel as Alled Thunderbolts had destroyed the ruer
trucks in the column.
The grd Squadron of the 10th Mounted Rifles was directed towards Chambois,
hoping to link up with the Americans advancing from the south. The squadron
reached Hill 124, a mile north of Chambois, at i6so hours. Here it proceeded to
shell the road through St Lambert and Chambois, causing tremendous destruction
and confusion amongst the retreating Germans. A vigorous counterattack was
made by German tanks and as Chambois was obviously still held by the Germans,
e squadron withdrew to Hill 259, having to figd its way through German col-
umns to get there.
The and Tank Regiment battle group remained in the vicinity of Hill 240,
a kilometre to the east of Ecorches, as it was unable to move for a lack of supplies
While confusion over their exact position made it impossible for supply truces to
ink up will them. As the day progressed, venera waczes became mereaso
concerned at the inability to resupply or even locate the battle group and dispatched
the Ist Mountain Rifle Battalion to Les Champeaux to try and find the missing
regiment, without success.
Like the Polish 1oth Mounted Rifles, the South Albertas were also operating well
ahead of their division. B Squadron cleared the hamlet of Le Marais la Chapelle,
and A Squadron with a company of Lincs and Welland infantry occupied Trun
atter RAF Typhoons had a field day shooting up German vehicles in and around
the town. German trucks and cars continued to stream into Trun where they were
promptly taken prisoner, the Germans being under the mistaken impression that
Trun was still in their hands.
C Squadron reached the heights to the north of Chambois and spent most of the
day in observation:
