202
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
A limited counterattack was made by the LXXIV Korps reserve of the
326 Fusilerbattalion, the reconnaissance battalion of zist Panzer and a few
Jagdpanthers towards Cahagnes, but this was stopped by artillery and air attack.
Feuchtinger was later reprimanded for not committing all of the 2ist Panzer
Division to this attack and was threatened with a court martial if he did not attack
with all his forces on the next day.
1 August
All other elements of the 2ist Panzer Division had arrived overnight and were
deployed in blocking positions from Le Bény Bocage to the Bois du Homme and,
apart from the remnants of the 326th Division, were the only German force de-
fending against the British operation.
The main counterattack of the 2ist Panzer Division that day was directed at
Hill 309, east of the Bois du Homme, which was still being held by the oth Guards
Tank brigade. After heavy artillery and mortar fire, small groups of infantry, ac-
companied by tanks, began to try and infiltrate the British forward lines. The
Coldstream Churchills changed position frequently and were able to repel the
German attack with the loss of only two tanks. The Coldstream regimental history
wrote of the attack:
At a quarter to seven the enemy infantry was seen advancing from La Ferrière with
Tiger tanks in support. Tanks and small arms fe soon disposed of the many o
against the Tiger tanks they were powerless. The battalion had just been equipped
with the latest SABOT ammunition and it bounced off the enemy tanks like ping-
pong balls. It was only the medium artillery that kept the Tigers at bay - that and the
inability of the Tigers to move over ground which Churchills would have crossed with
ease. All day the attack continued and there was little intermission in the heavy shell
fire that came down on the hillside. The prolonged noise and tension and heat wore
down nerves and judgement and crews would direct their fire upon Tigers which
proved to be only bushes and huts; but Major Hambro on whose flank the bulk of the
attack had fallen, remained calm, and his control of the squadron and the supports
artillery fire was complete. At last, at four o'clock in the evening, the Germans bes
to wi*f traw across the open ground between La Ferrière and the Bois du Homme. 39
The Bois du Homme was used by the German panzergrenadiers as a forming
point for their attack and the woods were repeatedly shelled by British artillery,
which disrupted every attack, causing heavy losses. The 2Ist Panzer Division,
already weakened, was not strong enough to continue the attack
barely hold the line in the face of the British numerical and firepower superiority.
and could
Feuchtinger's pessimism proved to be correct and further reinforcements were
required to stop the British attack.
283
Operation Bluecoat
11th Armoured Division
The grd RTR took Le Bény Bocage that morning with little resistance and af-
terwards pushed eastwards towards Catheolles to seize another important bridge
over the River Soulevre and a road junction. One Sherman tank was knocked out
and another one became bogged. A road block was set up and many unsuspecting
German vehicles trying to get through Catheolles were shot up. This position was
effectively behind the zist Panzer Division, which had its headquarters at St Pierre
Tarentaine, only half a mile away. Once the news of the British road block was
received, the headquarters staff began a rapid withdrawal from the area, resulting
in the cancellation of any further attacks on Hill 309.
This advance caused further consternation in the German command as clearly
the British were poised to make a breakthrough. Many British armoured forma-
tions previously identified as being around Caen had now moved to the Caumont
sector and so it was reasoned by von Kluge that German tank units could be
moved from Caen as well. At ios hours, both the 9th and loth SS Panzer divi-
sions were ordered to disengage from around Caen and proceed to the Caumont
sector to shore up the crumbling defences of the 2ist Panzer Division and the
326th Division. A Tiger tank battalion, the roznd SS Schwere Battalion, was also
dispatched to the area.
Vire was a vital road junction and supply hub for the Seventh Army to its depots
in Paris and further east. The loth SS Panzer Division would be used to block the
advance of XXX Corps whilst the 9th SS Panzer Division was given the mission of
plugging the gap in the German lines, restoring contact between the two armies and
breaking the armoured spearheads of the lIth Armoured Division. On 1 August,
the gth SS Panzer Division had operational thirty-one Panthers, seventeen Mark
Vs and twenty-eight Stug III assault guns to carry out these tasks?°
That day, the other two regiments continued the advance: the 23rd Hussars oc-
cupied Le Bény Bocage while the 2nd Fife and Forfars crossed the River Soulevre
to Carville, east of Le Bény Bocage, without opposition.
Guards Division
The 32nd Brigade of Guards and the Shermans of No. I Squadron of and Irish
Guards resumed the attack on Point 238 south of St Martin de Besaces next morn-
ing. A sudden mortar barrage caused the infantry to go to ground and as the tanks
came up in support, they were hit by fire from several well-placed and camouflaged
Mark IVs in hull down positions in a sunken lane.
Two tanks were knocked out
and the attack was recalled in order to regroup. The German tanks also withdrew
to new positions from where they stopped a second attack, causing four more
Shermans to be lost, although this time a Mark IV was spotted and destroyed by
one of the Shermans before it was itself knocked out.
The conditions were sum-
marised in the 2nd Irish Guards war diary:
