34
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
had its ramp damaged by shell fire and was forced to beach, all tanks getting off
successfully, though one was later swamped in the surf
Therefore only ten DD tanks were launched at about 2,sooyds from the beach,
nine from the two centre LCTs and one from the port craft. Only seven of these
made it to the beach at about o80o hours, two being swamped or sunk by mortar
fire and another swamped by the wash of one of the rocket-firing LCTs moving
rapidly inshore to fire a salvo of rockets at the beach.
According to their war diary, which also noted that the DD tanks and AVREs
were late, the Royal Winnipegs infantry landed at 0749 hours. The Winnipegs
were very critical of the effectiveness of the earlier aircraft bombing and naval
bombardment, which apparently had not put a single defensive position out of
action. The Winnipegs were, however, appreciative of the support given by
A Squadron, as expressed in a letter written to the Hussars after D-Day, which is
included in their war diary.
Of the seven DD tanks launched that made it to the beach, three were quickly lost.
One tank accidentally deflated its screens too soon when its commander was shot,
a second was swamped amongst the underwater obstacles and a third was knocked
out by a 75mm anti-tank gun. On the left of Mike beach, No. 3 Troop moved up
onto the beach just west of the mouth of the River Seulles where it flows into the sea
immediately west of Courseulles. Just inland, the river bent back upon itself, creating
a narrow neck of land bordered by water on three sides on which a concrete bunker
housing a 75mm anti-tank gun had been constructed. As the tanks forded the river to-
wards this bunker, it opened fire; one Sherman was knocked out and several German
machine guns opened fire on the crew as they frantically bailed out. The bunker and
machine gun posts were quickly destroyed by the other tanks of the troop. "
The four surviving DD tanks of the squadron were joined by the six others
landed directly by the LCTs, and the ten tanks proceeded to cruise up and down
the beach, engaging any targets they could identify. One Sherman blasted the
seawall to the east of Courseulles to help the Regina Rifles infantry climb onto the
promenade and begin to clear the houses.
Much to the frustration of the infantry, plans previously made to co-ordinate
with the tanks were abandoned in the confusion of battle as the tanks milled
around, seemingly aimlessly. The squadron's tanks were actually looking for tar-
gets to engage but were also reluctant to stop and present themselves as stationary
targets to the Germans for any length of time.+ The first exit from the beach was
not completed until I112 hours owing to the engineers being under constant sniper
fire, the congestion on the beach and the high tide.'s
Only ten A Squadron tanks moved off the beach to make contact with the in-
fantry, and these tanks divided up into three groups to support the infantry as they
moved inland. The squadron's numbers were reduced even further when one tank
broke down near the beach after seawater swamped the engine electrical system
and another lost a track. The remaining tanks supported the infantry in clearing La
Rivière, and at the end of the day the squadron had nine tanks operational.
D-Day Tanks
35
B Squadron
B Squadron had a similar dialogue with the control landing craft regarding the
heavy seas as they approached Nan Green beach. However, no sooner had the
decision been made to take the DD tanks all the way in then the commanding
officer of the LCT flotilla came alongside the squadron commander when about
S,0ooyds offshore and asked if the squadron was prepared to launch after all. As the
seas appeared slightly calmer, the squadron commander agreed to launch. This
caused a certain amount of consternation amongst the tank crews as they too had
already discarded some of their DD equipment.
All nineteen DD tanks were launched successfully at about 4,00oyds from the
beach. One tank developed engine trouble and had to be abandoned before sink-
ing and two more tanks from the same troop were swamped by large waves and
sank. German mortar fire began to land amongst the tanks, and the screen of the
squadron commander's tank collapsed after a near miss. The tank quickly sank and
the crew managed to make it into the relative safety of the rescue dinghy.
B Squadron lost four tanks drowned on the run-in, and fourteen tanks (plus
a tank that arrived much later to the east) reached the beach at 0758 hours, accord-
ing to a signal from Regina Rifles, which sent the code word 'Popcorn' to confirm
that the tanks had arrived well ahead of the infantry and AVREs as planned and
were able to begin engaging the beach defences. An account of the amphibious
ordeal was given by Sergeant Gariepy:
The night of s/6 June 44 I was aboard a Landing Craft tank sailing towards France.
The night was cold and windy and not many men slept because of the great nervous
tension. No one was seasick except two sailors! The coast was sighted early at dawn;
H-hour had been changed from 063s hours to 0735 hours.
Our DD craft were ready for launching but due to a rolling swell in the Channel we
were told by Naval officers that we would be beached. That order was never confirmed
with embarrassing results. Most of us had thrown our navigation instruments overboard;
such as compasses, crew commander's standfast bar and some craft their steering bar.
The order to launch was given at approximately 7000 yards directly in front of our
appointed beach. As we became waterborne, commenced terrific rolling and pitching,
all five craft were launched but formation was impossible so I decided to make for
my designated place on the beach. There was no enemy fire for about 4,000 yards,
when we were showered with small arms fire. I then looked around to see who was
alongside of me and the only other craft who was parallel was Major Duncan's 30 yards
on my starboard side. He seemed to be in difficulties because the dinghy was being
prepared. At that point one of my port aft struts broke and the crew had to wedge a
fire extinguisher between the hull and the screen. Immediately after two pillars burst
through small arms fire, which was increasing in density. I took another look at Major
Duncan's DD craft and all I saw was four heads in the water. The other craft were
some 200 yards behind me in different positions. I then realized that it was up to me to
make for the beach, with God's help we made it. I then followed the crew inside the
