198
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Montgomery also sent a letter with marked-up maps to the British CIGS, Brooke,
on I4 July, explaining the plan of attack and stating that the objectives were to
destroy all possible enemy troops in the general area of Caen, Mézidon, Falaise
and Evrecy. Once a breach had been opened by the Guards and IIth Armoured
Divisions, the 7th Armoured Division was to surge forward as far as Falaise, push-
ing a screen of armoured cars in front." The inclusion twice by Montgomery of
Falaise as an objective confirmed the intention to breakout. Eisenhower and the
staff at SHAEF began to get excited by Montgomery's proposed operation and
gave their enthusiastic support. Eisenhower's reply to Montgomery indicates his
understanding of the intentions of both operations in that Goodwood would be
a breakout attempt:
1 am confident that it will reap a rich harvest from all of the sowing you have been
doing over the past weeks. With our whole front acting aggressively against the
enemy so that he is pinned to the ground, O'Connor's plunge into his vitals will be
decisive ...
I am viewing the prospects with the most tremendous optimism and enthusiasm.
I would not be at all surprised to see you gaining a victory that will make some of the
old classics' look like a skirmish between patrols.
Bradley] would keep his troops fighting like the very devil twenty four hours
a day if necessary to provide the opportunity your Royal Armoured Corps will need
and to make the victory complete.12
Clearly Eisenhower had either misunderstood the two operations entirely oI
expected the breakout to come from the British whilst the US troops kept the
Germans busy. If Montgomery said anything to Eisenhower apart from the in-
formation contained in the Operational Orders of the I3 July that caused him
to have this impression will never be known, but Montgomery was sufficiently
alarmed by Eisenhower's enthusiasm to take two steps to downplay the importance
of the operation. Firstly, he wrote some notes to Dempsey on IS July, modifying
the operation's objectives to liberating the rest of Caen and establishing a strong
bridgehead south of the River Orne, only being prepared to exploit turther it
casualties were light and the opportunity presented itself. Montgomery emphasised
that the advance southwards could only continue if the Canadians had secured
Caen, as he had concerns about a German armoured counterattack from the west
into the flanks of any attack southwards. Secondly, Montgomery dispatched to
London his own emissary, in the form of Lieutenant-Colonel Dawnay, to brief
Brooke personally on the operation and downplay any notions of a breakout. At the
same time Montgomery offered the tantalising possibility to Brooke of 700 tanks
loosed on the Caen-Falaise road -
- anything may happen? "3
Therefore, in the space of 24 hours, Montgomery had undergone a major change
of heart in terms of the objectives for the operation but still offered the hope of
something else happening with '700 tanks loose'. It was almost as if Montgomery
Operation Goodwood
199
had a sudden attack of nerves and sought to downplay the operation in case it did
not succeed. One historian has suggested that Montgomery's caution was due to
both the fear of failure and the fear of success!4 If the attack were unsuccessful
then the British forces holding the Germans around Caen would be weakened; if
the attack were successful then the Allies would have to plan and execute a series
ot exploitative battles in a fluid and unpredictable environment. This was a long
way from Mongomery's preferred comfortable strategy of building up superior
forces, staging a set piece battle and then 'crumbling' the enemy, as demonstrated
at El Alamein.
Itis also possible that Montgomery was alarmed by Eisenhower's reply of I3 July,
as the reply provided further evidence to support his belief (shared by Brooke) that
Eisenhower did not understand the strategy in Normandy. If this was a simple
misunderstanding then the normal procedure would have been to arrange a meet-
ing or send a letter to clear up any confusion, but Montgomery did not do this.
Not only did Eisenhower not receive the benefit of any later briefing, he did not
receive a copy of Montgomery's notes of Is July with the revised objectives either.
The stage was set for massive recriminations if the operation was unsuccessful, as
Eisenhower clearly had different expectations of Operation Goodwood.
On 16 July Dempsey issued his revised instructions to VIII Corps, which in-
corporated the revisions into the Operational Orders issued that day to the corps
units. The objectives had been changed to merely dominating the areas around
Bourguébus, Vimont and Bretteville and only being prepared to exploit south-
wards if the conditions were 'favourable'. Note that even Bretteville is still 1o miles
south of Caen. To reinforce the changes, Dempsey then issued notes of his own
on 17 July confirming the objectives as Vimont,
Hubert Folie and Verierre on
the Bourguebus rage. A copy of these notes were do apparenty sent to stree
headquarters but were never received.
* radley was forced to postpone Operation Cobra when it took russ, after
struggling for two weeks through the bocage, until i8 July to capture St Lô. St
Lô was to be the jumping-off point for Operation Cobra and time was needed to
Prepare for the attack. The decision was made by Montgomery to press on with
Operation Goodwood, however. The onset of bad weather from 20 July effectively
gtounded the required heavy bombers and caused a further delay for FUSA until
24 July.
In planning the operation, Dempsey and his staff had a number of problems
to contend with. Dempsey planned an armoured attack on a very narrow front,
thereby relegating the tanks to the role of a battering ram, rather than one
of
exploiting their mobility. The Allies had three armoured divisions to use in the
operation: the lIth Armoured Division; the veteran 7th Armoured Division; and
the recently arrived Guards Armoured Division,
which had yet to be blooded
in battle.
The bridgehead east of the Orne held since D-Day was very small, being hemmed
in by the German-held area of southern Caen and positions to the east around
