250
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
But with each dive they came closer, a violent explosion made the Panther tremble
and shake. Fragments ripped apart a portion of the tracks and explosive rounds hit
the turret and hull. A
number of Shermans closed in and opened fire. Barkmann
managed to knock out two more before his Panzer sustained heavy damage from hits.
A shell ripped apart the welded dovetailing of the Panther hull, another shell blew the
track from the teeth of the driving sprocket, and the ventilation system in the interor
failed. There were more hits to the rear as the crew tried to move the Panzer back
into cover with the track blown off and a damaged driving sprocket. This maneuver
required the highest concentration, but it was successful. Another Sherman, which
had pushed ahead the furthest, was also knocked out, before the Panther limped back
to a farm house in the village of Neufbourg where the most critical damage was
repaired. Barkmann's battle at main road to Coutances had stopped the advance of the
US troops in the rear of German units long enough to allow many units, which had
already appeared lost, to save themselves from threatened encirclement. As the last
one to break off contact with enemy, Barkmann's Panther, with two others in tow,
reached Coutances on 28 July.27
From this German account of the battle, which does not give the time of the
engagement, it is difficult to determine which units of Leb were involved in
this action.
Team I was following the reconnaissance company and neither the
CCB nor the 33rd Armored Regiment reports for 27 July mention the claimed loss
of seven tanks. The report of the 33rd Armored Kegiment does, however, sate
somewhat laconically that Team 1 reached La Chapelle and encountered armoured
resistance in the form of three Panther tanks, which were 'thrust aside?" The
3rd Armored Division G-4 report for 27 July for CCB reports three M4 tanks
damaged, only one of which required a replacement.
After the skirmish at La Chapelle, Team 1 turned northwards and seized the
bill at Camprond at 1540 hours without much difficulty and waited for the isth
Infantry to arrive to relieve the tanks as ordered before they could push on. Caugh
up at Marigny, the relieving force struck more resistance later in the day mov-
ing to La Chapelle, which required air support to be overcome. CUb was not
relieved until 2250 hours when it was far too late to continue the advance. A whole
afternoon was therefore lost while the tanks were waiting for their relief. In the
interim, Team I moved sooyds further west ath harboured on till Iss, the second
objective. Team 2 also had more difficulty keeping abreast of Team 1 as it was not
using the main road but was travelling cross-country parallel with the road." Once
again, CCB had not advanced very far and the territory captured by day's end more
resembled that gained by a walk rather than an armoured dash.
Advancing south of the Coutances road, the 16th Infantry Regiment had also
encothntered German troops that blocked their movement around Marigny and
did not reach a point south of Camprond until midnight. Although there was no
organised German defence, as with CCB, isolated pockets of infantry supported by
Operation Cobra
251
a few tanks continued to put up determined resistance before either withdrawing
or being destroyed by the advancing Americans.
By the end of the day, CCB and the Ist Division were still only halfway to
Coutances and the grand plan of slashing across the rear of the German forces and
trapping them was in danger of failing.
The left wing of the Seventh Army had begun a withdrawal in response
the slow but steady FUSA advances and units of the znd SS Panzer Division plus
a battalion of engineers from 17th SS Panzer Division tried to construct an ad hoc
defence line from Coutances via Cambernon to Savigny.
German forces north
of CCB were able to infiltrate back across the American lines of advance to the
relative safety of the south in the night. Von Kluge, still not apparently aware that
Panzer Lehr was destroyed, ordered a counterattack by Panzer Lehr and a tank
battalion of the 2nd SS Panzer Division, the latter with only fourteen tanks opera-
tional. During the night, a German horse-drawn artillery column blundered into
the harbour of Team 1 and was destroyed in a brief engagement.
CCB was ordered at o81o hours on 28 July to seize Monthuchon and after being
televed by the 26th Infantry Regiment, was to attack towards the high ground
north of Coutances. However, Bradley had become concerned at the slow progress
ot VI Corps and therefore ordered VIII Corps, advancing further west along the
cost, to put pressure on the extreme left flank of the Seventh Army and to take the
VIl Corps objectives of Coutances and Monthuchon that day.
Vil Corps was able to make good progress and quickly captured Monthuchon
before the leading elements of CCB, which did not move out of their harbour
until 1130 hours. When CCB later occupied Cambernon without difficulty and
was ready to drive on Coutances, CCB was ordered to halt by Collins as VIII
Corps troops were by then near Coutances.
The tanks of Team 1 were forced to
sop at Cambernon within sight of their objective of Coutances, only 2 miles away
below them.
Meanwhile, the roth Intantry Regiment was sun attachio de the director of
Monthuchon and ran into determined resistance, four M4 and two Ms tanks from
the 745th Tank Battalion being destroyed. CCB was ordered at 1730 hours to reverse
is course altogether and to go to the aid of the loth Regiment. This manoeuvre
caught the German defenders from behind and caused their defences to crumble.
The 26th Infantry Regiment later arrived and performed mopping-up operations,
The ist Division and CCB had largely failed in their mission, having advanced
slowly and taking only ss prisoners. Coutances had not been captured as planned
and large numbers of Germans that had not been trapped in the Cotentin peninsula
north of the St Lô-Coutances highway were continuing to withdraw southwards.
During the night of 28/29 July, Team i continued to have contact with German
forces infiltrating through their positions. Next morning, orders were received to
assemble the entire division at Cerissy-la-Salle but Colonel Boudinot requested
a few hours of rest for his men and the division did not move until the afternoon.
