92
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
or cage containing the turret crew, and the driver and co-driver lower in the hull
could only exit the tank via the turret when the turret was positioned in such
a way to allow entry to the cage. Behind the co-driver was an escape hatch in the
foor of the tank that was kept well-oiled in case of the need to bail out. The tank
crews practised this regularly, and sometimes for the driver and co-driver this belly
hatch was the only means of escape if there was no access to the turret cage and the
main gun was positioned above their own hatches, preventing them from being
opened. If the belly hatch was opened when the tank was on fire then the increased
airflow often made the fire worse, to the detriment of those crew members still
trying to get out. In a Firefly, the 17-pounder gun blocked the exit of the loader,
and for him to be able to get out, the gun had to be fully depressed. As a result of
this interdependence among the crew members, discipline in the tank was usually
quite relaxed, even if the tank was commanded by an officer rather than a sergeant
or corporal.
As the tank was the crew's home, all the essentials for living, such as beding,
cooking materials, food and water, were carried aboard. Unlike most homes, the
tank crew shared their living space with ammunition rounds, machine gun bels
and a powerful engine at the rear of the tank that required the storage of large
quantities of flammable fuel. The Sherman M4A4 used by the British actually had
live Chryster six Cyacder aircraft engines mounted radially on a condon slait,
Other versions used a Ford V8 tank engine or twin diesels. No matter the engine,
the noise was deafening and required the crew to wear earphones, both to protect
their hearing and to be able to talk to each other over an intercom system. When
the tank was moving, there would be a constant clanging of pieces of stowed
equipment banging into each other in addition to the squealing and rattling of the
tracks. In combat, these sounds would be accompanied by a cacophony of explo-
sions, orders and shouts over the intercom, the clang of the gun breech closing, the
chattering of machine guns and the riding of spent cartridges hitting the foor.
The crew would also be thrown around quite a bit when crossing uneven terrain
at speed, making it difficult at times to operate their equipment.
Contrary to popular opinion, the inside of a tank was not hot, olly or dirty. The
interior was painted with white enamel paint, which the crew kept as clean as pos-
sible so as to maximise the amount of lipt inside. When the engine was running
it drew in fresh air from outside through the turret, so the tank only became ho
when standing in the hot sun. The flow of fresh air often meant the crew wer
colds especially in winter, despite the Zip-up overalls they were issued with. inc
smells of fuel, paint and the body odour of the crew, who were often confined tor
long periods, added to the discomtort of being inside the cramped tank. When the
tank was not fighting, the crew would open hatches to get better observation of
their surroundings and to ventilate the tank.
When the tank hatches were closed the wn or 'buttoned up', the crew were forced
to rely on vision slits made of reinforced glass or periscopes to see what was nap
pening around them. As the crew's vision was thus impaired, each tank relied on
Fighting the Tank
93
accompanying tanks to identify potential threats and radio warnings to each other.
Similarly, when moving through dense terrain such as the Normandy bocage, the
tanks relied on the infantry they were supporting to keep enemy soldiers armed
with anti-tank weapons away from the tanks. When the weather was dry, the
movement of tanks often threw up clouds of dust that when combined with the
smoke of battle reduced the vision of the crew still further. Dust was a never-
ending problem for the tank crew, the tank needing regular maintenance to ensure
that the engines and armament functioned correctly.
The first tank crews to land on D-Day were issued with 24-hour ration packs
that consisted of small portions of dehydrated food such as chocolate, porridge and
tea. A particular boon on D-Day to crew members that got wet were self-heating
cans of soup. When the regiment was out of the frontline, food was provided by
mobile kitchens, which provided hot food of a reasonable quality that was eaten by
the squadrons at different sittings. However, the squadrons were often in combat
and could not avail themselves of the field kitchens and so used three-day Compo
ration packs, which contained fourteen identical meals; there were seven different
varieties of pack available. These packs contained tinned fruit and stews, rolled
bacon, spam, corned beef, cigarettes, biscuits, sugar, sweets and dehydrated soup.
There were also eighty-four sheets of toilet paper provided. Each tank crew tried
to procure its favourite Compo pack and a constant problem was how to divide
the fourteen meals amongst the five-man crew for three days. Not surprisingly, the
tank crews sought to supplement their food with fresh produce such as cheese, milk
and eggs, which fortunately were plentiful in the Normandy countryside, although
the British troops were prohibited from buying bread from the local inhabitants
because of a shortage of grain. Troops were also forbidden to take local livestock
such as cows, pigs and chickens but invariably those found their way into the diets
of the tank crews when an 'accident' presented an opportunity. Some tins of food
were stowed in the hottest parts of the engine so there was always something hot
to eat at night if there was no time to cook.? Food was supposed to be cooked on
a small primus stove, which had to be used outside. Consequently, when a tank was
closed up under fire, the trew could not prepare any hot food. Most crews used
a stove improvised by pouring petrol into a tin full of earth, which burnt suft-
ciently well to heat a pot of water. Similarly, answering calls of nature when inside
the tank could be difficult and was complicated further by the overalls the crew
wore. Empty shell cases provided some relief and, when necessary, helmets were
used. The alternative of leaving the tank was often impossible as this risked dedu
from shellfire or snipers, although most men preterred to find a convement neag
Outbreaks of stomach complaints were common and many soldiers in ormandy
were affected by a type of dysentery that was particularly difticult to cope with m
a tank. All water had to be carried on the tank and so was always in short supply;
it had to be chemically disinfected and was not pleasant to drink. A mugful was
available for personal hygiene such as shaving every two or three days. Laundry was
