9
Operation Bluecoat
Operation Cobra had been in progress for two days by 27 July. The German forces in
the St Lô area were in disarray and the FUSA had broken through the German lines
but had not yet achieved a strategic breakout or cut off the Seventh Army! Despite
the valiant efforts of the Canadian forces during Operation Spring on 25-26 July as
part of Montgomery's stated master strategy to hold the German panzer divisions
around Caen, the znd Panzer Division slipped away on 26 and 27 July, bound for
the St Lô area. The division made a forced march during daylight from the River
Orne to the River Vire, taking considerable casualties en route from the persistent
attention of the Allied fighter-bombers. The rt6th Panzer Division was also or-
dered to St Lô on the 28 July by Army Group B and this arrived on 29 July. This
was a considerable blow to Montgomery's stated strategy of pulling all the German
armour onto the Second Army's front. The Germans were so strong around Caen
that the British could not mount another attack in that area for another week after
the losses of Operations Goodwood and spring." In Operation Spring, nastily o-
ganised to support Operation Cobra, two Canadian infantry divisions had attacked
the Verriers Kiage south of Caen and had been bloodily repulsed by the combined
efforts of three panzer divisions.
Therefore Montgomery needed to mount another
operation as quickly as possible in a less well-defended area to prevent the migra-
tion of more panzer divisions from one front to the other. The key topographical
feature in the chosen area was Mont Pinçon near Caumont, which dominated the
surrounding countryside and would provide the Germans with an ideal anchor for
their right flank opposite the Americans whilst their left flank retired to absorb the
momentum of Operation Cobra. Accordingly, in his directive Msts of 27 June,
Montgomery wrote that the main blow of the whole Allied strategy had been
delivered by the FUSA as planned and that there was a need for a further British
operation west of Noyers on a relatively undefended part of the chains that the
Germans had put around the Allied beachhead? However, Montgomery was jolted
into action more quickly than he had anticipated by a letter on 28 July from the
CIGS Brooke, who noted in his diary:
Operation Bluecoat
Now, as a result of all this talking and the actual situation on your front, I feel person-
ally quite certain that Dempsey must attack at the earliest possible moment on a large
scale. We must not allow German forces to move from his front to Bradley's front or
we shall give more cause than ever for criticism.4
271
Clearly, all was not well in the Allied camp. Montgomery's failure in Operation
Goodwood had damaged his own credibility further and caused increased tension
within SHAEF; matters were not helped at all by the movement of the two panzer
divisions from Caen to the American front. Eisenhower added his own message,
complete with veiled criticisms of previous operations, requesting no further delays:
I feel very strongly that a three division attack now on the Second Army's right flank
will be worth more than a six division attack in five days time. Follow up units if
needed can reach the scene while the initial breakthrough progresses as now, as never
before, opportunity is staring us in the face. Let us go all out the line you have laid
down in your Msis and let us not, repeat not,
waste an hour in getting the whole
affair started. Never was time more vital to us and we should not, repeat not, wait on
weather or perfections in details of preparation.'
From the above message it is clear that Eisenhower was once again expecting
a breakthrough operation from the British. That same morning, Montgomery con-
veyed his intentions to Dempsey with a date for Operation Bluecoat revised from
2 August to 30 July. The sector chosen for the new offensive was around Caumont,
where there were believed to be no panzer divisions. After declaring to the CIGS
on 14 June that the British Second Army would continue to exert pressure in
this sector and then putting all efforts into the opposite end of the frontline
at
Caen, Montgomery was now turning his attention back to the right flank around
Caumont. The revised starting date immediately threw the British planners into
turmoil as, following the first planning meeting at 1645 hours in Creully, it gave
them less than 36 hours to plan the operation and move the required forces from
positions around Caen to their assembly points.
This required a march of 25 miles
for the lith Armoured Division and 45 miles for the Guards Armoured Division,
which had to move from the bridgehead east of the River Orne.
As previously, Montgomery sent that day a hugely optimistic signal to Brooke,
declaring that "it will be on the largest scale and have everything thrown in' and
that he had instructed Dempsey to throw all caution overboard and take any
risks he likes, and to accept any casualties, and to step on the gas for Vire'? Once
again, Montgomery offered a goal to his superiors that was way beyond what his
real intentions were, and, in any case, Vire was an objective of the US XIX Corps
advancing from St Lô as part of Operation Cobra.
The easternmost FUSA Corps,
V Corps, was actually going to be pinched out as a result of the south-easterly
advance of XIX Corps and ultimately had to stop just north of the town.®
