128
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
sniffing at garbage in the gutter. It was all wrong, no laughing crowds shouting and
waving tricolours - wrong and somehow eerie.
Eeriness shattered into grim reality by that crack-brrrmmph-bang that can come
only from an 88. A Honey tank ahead was transfigured into a mass of roaring red and
crimson flame, and the silence dissolved into the pandemonium of tanks at war.
Wireless silence was broken by the Colonel with urgent orders to deploy for battle.
We were near the end of town, and a small paddock bounded by thick woods was off
the road to our right. Not much space for manoeuvre, but anything to get off that
road. Even as Tom reversed 'left hand down' I saw the second Honey, immediately
ahead of us share the same fate as its leader. One moment a tank, the next something
without shape or form, belching flame and smoke from its turret, the ammunition
inside exploding and red and yellow tracers weaving fantastic patterns around it, in-
termingled with vivid red and green glows of Very light cartridges. With a glimpse of
its commander baling out of the turret and sliding forward to open the hatches above
*Es driver and bow gunner. The swirling black oily smoke obscured him - a long
burst of Spandau fire - he didn't reach those hatches.
Traverse right! RIGHT!' as I brought the turret round. Harry slammed a 75mm
armour piercing shell into the breech and the black hull of a Tiger tank appeared
across the telescope hairs. No need for Gunnery School orders. Forty yards range
and from the way it dominated the telescope, it might have been four. I aimed low,
into its engine plate and felt the kick of the Fmm almost in the same second as I saw
the tracer flatten against the Tiger's hull and the fly off at a mad tangent. Harry
deflector bag; another, and yet a fourth before we realised that there was no answering
Sheet of flame from the liger's engine. They hadn't pierced, its skin was too thick.
Ridiculous ... it was uncanny. And slowly, devilishly slowly, its turret traversed round
towards us. The black cross bordered with white, on its side came square on, then at
and be more acute unt it seemed as if the black circie of the dos muzzie Drake was
resting on the front of our tank ...
Five yedis or five seconds could have passed. There a woear roallng and crack-
ling and my eyes didn't want to open. Everything was red. Flames which wrapped
emselves around the guns, the ammunition bins, the periscopes, making them all
appear black in silhouette. And there was nothing to breathe, no air, nothing but
smoke and fire. I'd got to get out ... out of this hell. It was sheer instinct that made me
reachloape teas that redsoned that if I got leverage and foothold on
the commander's seat and then on the turret-ring behind, I should be out. It was more
as if I foated than stood up. Blessed movement. I could feel the hinges on the cupola
beneath my fingers and the commander's seat giving support to my left foot. And my
head was outside. Wonderful light ….. and air that you could suck in, down to lungs
that seemed themselves on fire inside. One more step, a push and I should be out."
Sergeant Pumphrey was badly burnt, and along with the rest of the crew, he
was taken prisoner.
The tank of the RHQ troop commander, Lieutenant John
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
129
Cloudsley-Thompson, backed off the road into a farm and tried to engage the
lieutenant's legs before striking the engine where it exploded, spraying the inside
of the tank with flaming fuel and shrapnel. The five occupants bailed out unhurt
and hid in the bushes, under machine-gun fire. The tank of the regiment's sergeant
magor was also destroyed. Lord Cranley's Cromwell was also destroyed but he had
gone ahead to A Squadron for the Orders Group on Point 213 in a scout car.
Wittmann then entered the town, which was not usual German practice as tanks
are vulnerable to hand-held anti-tank weapons in built-up areas. Wittmann must
have believed that German infantry would arrive or that if none were available,
then his tanks still had to enter the town to continue the destruction of the British
column nonetheless. The next victims of his Tiger were an OP Sherman and
Cromwell of the sth Royal Horse Artillery; the Cromwell too tried to escape by
reversing into a side street but was seen by Wittmann, who reversed his Tiger tank
sightly to fire at and destroy the tank. The Cromwell, commanded by Captain
Pat Dyas, then proceeded to follow Wittmann's tank, hoping to hit the Tiger in its
thinner armoured rear. Seeing the Tiger tank stationary ahead, Dyas claims to have
hit it with two armour-piercing shells that had no effect.
What happened next has been the subject of much debate over the years.
According to Wittmann's own simple account, he advanced to the middle of the
town where his tank was immobilised by an anti-tank gun when one of the Tiger's
tracks was hit. Wittmann then proceeded to shoot at anything in sight before
finally deciding to abandon the tank.
In British accounts, Wittmann either exchanged shots with a Firefly tank on
the main street further on in the town and turned around to withdraw the way
he had come, meeting the Cromwell of Dyas, which he destroyed before being
mobilised by the anti-tank gun, or saw wyas fonowing nut and snucked out
the Cromwell by firing his gun over the rear of the Tiger before proceeding to
the encounter with the Firefly. Eyewitness accounts differ in the confusion and
smoke of the battle, and to complicate matters Wittmann was not commanding his
own tank that day and the number of his tank has not been confirmed. This has
made piecing together the exact sequence of events from eyewitness accounts and
photographs after the battle much more difficult. To complicate any reconstruction
of events, the Germans recovered some damaged Tiger tanks before 100 RAF
Lancasters bombed the town on the night of 14 June and again on 30 June.
Significantly, Wittmann did not try to blow up his tank, believing it would be
salvaged. German infantry had indeed begun to infiltrate the town and were pro-
viding supporting machine-gun fire and sniper fire along some streets. Wittmann
then walked 10 miles to the command post of the Panzer Lehr at Orbois and
informed them of the situation at Villers Bocage. Fifteen Mark IV tanks that could
be spared from the battle with the soth Division were dispatched to block the
