388
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
The Canadian regiments continued their cautious advance. At first light, the
Grenadier Guards advanced a short distance to a point 1 mile east of Trun and pro-
ceeded to shell the town and targets to the south while waiting for the infantry to
arrive and the USAAF to bomb the town. Eventually, at about noon, the infantry
came up and a plan was devised to support them into Trun with seven tanks from
B Squadron. The advance did not start until 1423 hours and veered too far south,
running into opposition from anti-tank guns that forced the attackers to return to
their starting point." A message was then received from the Argyll and Sutherland
Highlanders to say that they had already secured Trun!® The regiment harboured
that night near Point 259 with the Polish 1oth Mounted Rifles.
Meanwhile, the Foot Guards advanced from their harbour in Moutiers en Auge
to Point II8, just north of Trun, only to find a Polish motorised battalion of infan-
try already there. The regiment shelled the road below for most of the day before
moving in the late afternoon to a harbour in an orchard 2,00oyds further east. The
operational strength of the regiment that night was only twenty-two Shermans and
three Stuarts."9
The British Columbia Regiment, after its late night journey to Les Moutiers en
Auge, resumed its advance at oбoo hours to Trun but suffered two fatal casualties
at about 0900 hours when a Thunderbolt strafed their tanks. One of the casualties
was Major Worthington, the brother of Colonel Worthington who had been killed
during Operation Totalize.
The general withdrawal by the Germans was now well underway and the re-
treating seventh Army was being hammered by the Allied airforces. Any assembly
of vehicles during daylight was quickly pounced on by the swarms of aircraft.
Although the ordinary German soldier often did not have the luxury of motorised
transport, he could at least move cross-country and take advantage of whatever
cover the countryside offered. This meant, however, that the withdrawal was being
made by thousands of men at walking pace; the problem was not if the Allies
could complete the encirclement but when. As time was running out, this created
a growing sense of panic in the infantrymen still to get out of the pocket.
19 August
The closure of the Falaise Gap as it became known was the single objective of
2nd Canadian Corps on 19 August. It was essential that Chambois and the exits east
to Mont Ormel and west to St Lambert sur Dives be captured as well as linking up
with the Americans that day.
During the night, supply trucks finally found their way through the groups of
Germans intent on leaving the pocket and were able to replenish the men and
equipment of the 2nd Tank Regiment battle group on Hill 240, which had orders
to proceed to Coudehard.
389
Falaise Gap
Al three squadrons of the 10th Mounted Rifles advanced to the south-east
tovaras Chambois, retracing their steps of the previous day.
A German column
ias bumped I,oooyds from Bourdon and the regiment was constantly engaging
Getman forces from then on. In the morning, the tanks occupied Hill 124 to
te not of Chambois and opened fire on the traffic on the road below, halting
i completely before moving closer to Chambois at Hill 113 in the afternoon. At
no hours, the regiment was ordered to support the 1oth Dragoons directly into
cambols and a tank was lost while engaging a pair nt anti-tank guns on the
arkits of the town. Finally, at 1920 hours, the Canadian First Army was able to
pot that Chambois was secured and that Polish troops had met soldiers of the Us
9oth Division in Chambois.20
The tanks and infantry of the ist Tank Regiment battle group climbed a wind-
ng arow road to Coudehard on the top of the northern Hill 262 and, after
bre fifight against the defenders, which were supported by a few Panther tanks,
10oK up positions where they could shell and call down artillery fire on German
conroys moving along the Chambois-Vimoutiers road below between the two
hills of Coudehard and Mont Ormel. This caul-'d great destruction amongst the
hides, tanks and soldiers on foot, and the Germans reacted quickly to the sudden
spearance of the Polish troops on the hill overlooking them by directing heavy
stiller and mortar fire at the hilltop. The Polish Sherman tanks from a ledge near
a 202 had a clear view of the valley below and were able to shoot at Germar
«rigets with relative impunity while their tanks were difficult for the Germans to
hit with armour-piercing fire.
During the afternoon, the ist Tank Regiment received orders to occupy the
outhern hill at Mont Ormel with the oth Rifle Battalion from the 2nd Tank
Regiment battle group when it had moved up. Units from this battle group began
to ative in the positions at Coudehard from 1700 hours, but the gth Rifle Battalion
was amongst the last troops to arrive in the evening and so the attack had to be
postponed until next day.?" However, there were now eighty Polish tanks and I,500
wen on the Coudehard position, which was effectively cut-oft from Allied lines Dy
the groups of Germans trying to leave the pocket to the west. Fuel and ammunition
were running low for the tanks, as were medical supplies and food. Finding any shel-
ter or protection for the Polish and German wounded from German artillery was
proving difficult. At 1700 hours, a message was received that the Canadians had been
stopped miles away and later that evening further bad news arrived to the effect
that the Americans had been unable to progress from Chambois. The Coudehard
position was organised so that the infantry held the lower positions while the tanks
were kept in a wood near the Boisjois manor house in a counterattack role as they
Were low on fuel. Artillery was the only form of support as Allied air support had
been called off because of the increasing number of friendly fire incidents.
German troops manoeuvred all around the Polish positions day and night, ei-
ther seeking to leave the pocket or attack from the north-east to keep the pocket
open. Maintaining supply to the Polish regiments became a major problem due to
