126
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
to break ranks and gather around him while he stood on the bonnet of a jeep to
address them. The men were told bluntly by Montgomery, to cheers from some of
the men (mainly the officers), that there would be no more leave but they would
be getting a second front.®
Montgomery's pep talk could not dispel the mood of some men, which was
further deepened by the poor standard of billeting in the Norfolk cold and damp,
and widespread discontentment with the new Cromwell tank. The Cromwell
was regarded with deep suspicion as it was British made and must therefore be
unreliable compared with the American-made Shermans that the division had used
in North Africa and Italy. Having been in action since 194T, the 7th Armoured
Division had been forced to use every type of British tank produced in the war
so tar, and the crews were far from impressed with the inferior products of the
British tank industry. The Cromwell was small, cramped and had a slab-sided
turret compared with the latest German tanks. These objections rather ignored
the reality that the Sherman also had larger slab sides and that the Cromwell was
faster and had a lower silhouette than the Sherman. Modifications did have to be
made to the escape hatches of the Cromwells for them to work properly, nowever.
Whilst being asked to use the new Cromwell, the veterans were also given the new
17-pounder Sherman, the Vc or Firefly, which seemed to contradict all that they
were being told about the Cromwell. The Firefly was slower and a larger target
than the Cromwells and as a troop of tanks could only move at the pace of the slow-
est tank, the Vc would slow the faster Cromwells down. There was much debate as
to how the Sherman Vc should be used and it was finally decided to allot them one
per troop of four tanks, the theory being that the Sherman Vc would hang back
and knock out the German tanks once they had been located by the tanks in front.
Despite their misgivings, the 7th Armoured Division still had to be prepared
for the comms anto but even the return to paperwor dad dame Was to
well received by the men, particularly when conducted by instructors who had not
seen any action. Such were the feelings of resentment that the commander of the
Sth RIR finally asked all the regiment to sign a loyalty letter, or chit, declaring
that the men were prepared to embark for France without further ado. In the
resulting furore, a sergeant who refused to sign was arrested. When word of the
trouble within the sth RTR ranks reached the echelons above, the commander
was eventually forced to leave on 4 May whilst the offending sergeant was posted
to another unit? The 7th Armoured Division history, however, recalls this period
of training as being 'agreeable'
recreation than was allowed the home army.!o
and notes that it gave more time for leave and
13 June
At os45 hours, the 7th Armoured Division resumed its advance as part of the
western pincer into the rear areas of the Panzer Lehr with the 4th CLY leading.
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
127
The town of Villers Bocage was reached at 080o hours and the inhabitants reported
that there were no Germans about. The division had recce troops out in front and
on the flanks, which reported the presence of German troops nearby but not in
any concentration. The commander of the 4th CLY requested a proper reconnais-
sance be made before a further advance, but Brigadier Hinde, who was anxious
to make up for lost time, refused. A Squadron of the Yeomanry then quickly left
the town and advanced to the top of Point 213 on the road to Caen, which was
the division's objective, so the tanks duly halted. A long column of tanks and the
carriers of the motorised infantry company ist/7th Queen's stretched almost back
to Villers Bocage.
During the night, Ist SS Panzer Korps had ordered the loist SS Schwere (heavy)
tank battalion equipped with Tiger tanks into position near Villers Bocage as
a mobile reserve behind Panzer Lehr. After a 70-mile overnight march during
which several Tigers broke down, the and and 3rd Company tanks had arrived
in position to the north-east of Villers Bocage and that morning their crews were
resting or servicing their tanks.
The commander of the 2nd Company, C-ersturmführer Michael Wittmann,
was 20oyds south of the Caen to Villers Bocage road when his crew saw the
leading elements of the 4th CLY drive by and then stop near the crest of the hill.
As an Orders Group had been called by the regiments commander, Lord craney,
many of the British crew members got out of their venices to answer calls of
nature and brew cups of tea. Without waiting to contact the rest of his company,
Wittmann drove his tank straight from cover towards the middle of the British
column. Firstly, he destroyed the two rear tanks of A Squadron, a Cromwen and
a firefly, to prevent the rest of the squadron turning around to engage him, then
he turned towards Villers Bocage and proceeded down the length of the column,
systematically destroying the 4th Cue recce troop stars abd the caters and
half-tracks of the Queen's intantry. by now the other liger tanks had heard the
noise of battle and quickly moved into action, engaging the now isolated head of
the column.
Just outside town were the Cromwell tanks of the Yeomanry RHQ, which
Wittmann destroyed one by one as they started to back away. One Cromwell,
commanded by Captain Pat Dyas, managed to back into a side street, out of the
advancing Tiger's path. Shots from the retreating Cromwells had ricocheted harm-
lessly off the advancing leviathan as it loomed out of the smoke towards them.
sergeant jack Pumparey was in the lank of the war bany tie toes second
in command:
It was deserted and quiet, unnaturally quiet; broken only by the rumble and clatter of
steel tracks on the cobblestones of the streets. You listened instinctively for the sharp
crack and answering echoes betraying the presence of snipers. There were none of
the usual signs of devastation, the houses and shops were intact, but with shutters up
and doors closed, and a complete air of desertion. The only sign of life, a mongrel dog
