The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
may well have been the speech by Churchill to the House of Commons at noon
announcing the landings?
At about 1430 hours, Hitler finally gave the order for two panzer divisions from
the reserves to be released. Even then, the Germans tried to cover the Pas de Calais
by leaving the Ist SS Panzer Division in place to support the Fifteenth Army.
However, so much time had already elapsed that the panzer divisions would not be
in position to attack before the next day at the earliest.
For the Allies, Operation Bodyguard and its associated operations had been
so successful that a determined counterattack against the small beachheads was
prevented on D-Day. But Operation Bodyguard was not over, for the deception
involving the phantom army in England continued to influence German strategy
for the next seven weeks.
The 12th SS Panzer Division had moved up to Lisieux but halted after von
Rundstedt's early morning order was countermanded. When the order finally
came to advance to the coast,
the
division was aghast at the order, which re-
quired it to use an unprepared march route when other routes had already been.
planned, losing more valuable time.
In view of the Allied air superiority over
Normandy, Panzer Lehr's commander, General Fritz Bayerlein, requested that the
march be delayed until darkness but von Rundstedt refused this request, much to
Bayerlein's disgust.*
The only panzer unit that counterattacked on D-Day was the zist Panzer
Division, commanded by General Feuchtinger. A Nazi party faithful, the zist Panzer
Division was Feuchtinger's first divisional command and he had no experience in
either tank warfare or combat. For these reasons and the fact that Feuchtinger was
in Paris on the night of the invasion, he is often blamed for the poor performance
of the panzer division on D-Day. However, this perrormance owes more to the
convoluted German chain of command lestues any of Feuchtingers personal at-
tributes or shortcomings. The weather forecast for the Channel and Dutch coastor
the night of the §/6 June had been such that an invasion was deemed improbable
and some of the commanders saw an OPFortunity to take some leave. reuchang
was away on leave on s and 6 June, but so were Rommel and the commander of
the Seventh Army, General Dollmann. Feuchtinger was contacted early in the
morning and returned to his command as quickly as possible, arriving Derore the
British landings had begun.
Parts of the 2ist Panzer Division were already in action as the oth Airborne
Division had dropped virtually on top of the millets of the 25th fate cane
Regiment east of the River Orne. At obis hours, before any Allied troops had
and given the mission of destroying the tritish paratroopers to the east of the River
Orne. This was as per standing Panzer Gruppe West instructions. On his return
from Paris, Feuchtinger protested and requested that his division advance west
Bridgehead Battles
107
A company of tanks from the ist Battalion and the reconnaissance battalion was
therefore sent towards Bénouville to support the 2sth Panzergrenadier Regiment.
As soon as landings in the British sector were confirmed after 0730 hours, the
2Tst Panzer Division's anti-tank gun battalion, already deployed on the Periers
Ridge, and an artillery battalion were subordinated to the 716th Division by
Seventh Army and LXXXIV Corps." Feuchtinger's division was therefore deprived
of a valuable part of its assets at a critical time by this detachment. General Richter
of the 716th Division immediately moved the 88mm guns of the anti-tank gun
battalion westwards in response to reports of British tanks inland, thus opening the
door for the 18sth Brigade and the tanks of the Staffs Yeomanry to penetrate inland
later that afternoon in their advance towards Caen.
As reports of the landings were received by LXXXIV Corps, General Markes
also became more and more concerned about the size and strength of the British
landings in his sector. At 0925 hours, Markes too became a convert to the Rommel
strategy and requested the immediate release of the 12th SS Panzer Division to
attack west of the River Orne. This was refused as before, so Markes ordered at
1000 hours the only panzer division available to him at that time, the 2Ist Panzer
Division, to attack west of the River Orne. This meant the division's tanks had
to turn around and drive back the way they had come through Caen, which was
under heavy bombardment. There was a delay in Feuchtinger receiving the order
and it was not till about 1300 hours that the panzer regiment's tanks were turned
around. Once again, Feuchtinger had a decision regarding his division's deploy-
ment made for him. Therefore Feuchtinger cannot be held solely responsible for
the performance of his division on D-Day. It is easy with hindsight to say that
21st Panzer Division should have attacked vigorously west of the River Orne as
a complete unit, but this would have required Feuchtinger to have the initiative to
det against orders and to have a clear picture of the Allied landings. Feuchtinger
had neither. Nevertheless, with the delays in the British landings, the attack by the
21st Panzer Division at about 1600 hours was enough to prevent the British capture
ot Caen and some units did reach the coast.
Sherbrooke Fusiliers at Buron
The Sherbrooke Fusiliers arrived on Nan White beach at Bernières at 12ts hours
on D-Day with twelve Vc tanks (Fireflies), forty Shermans and ten Ms Stuart
light tanks. Another six Shermans on two other LSTs did not land until 7 June
when they hurried to catch up with the regiment, minus a Sherman and a Stuart
that developed mechanical problems. The regiment had been using a squadron
organisation of four tanks per troop since training in March 1944. However, each
squadron was short a tank, not detailed for arrival until D+8. After many delays,
more due to trattic congestion than enemy action, the regiment arrived at its des-
ignated assembly point near Bény sur Mer. From there, the regiment advanced to
