414
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Simultaneously, reports began appearing in the British and foreign press about the
problems of British tanks:
Our Shermans, with special 17-pounder guns, are fine tanks. They can match
the Germans' best in fire power but not in thickness of armour. But our ordinary
Shermans are inferior to Tigers and Panthers. Roughly, out of every 20 German tanks
we destroy, nine are Mark IVs, eight are Panthers and three are Tigers.32
Churchill delayed making a reply to the Select Committee until after Operation
Cobra when there was better news from Normandy. On 2 August Churchill finally
made a statement to the House of Commons before sending a reply to the Select
Committee the same day:
The Prime Minister: General Montgomery has written as follows about the recent
battle: 'In the fighting to date we have defeated the Germans in battle, and we have
had no difficulty in dealing with the German army once we had grasped the problem.
In this connection British armour has played a notable part. The Panther and Tiger
tanks are unreliable mechanically and the Panther is very vulnerable from the flanks.
Our 17-pounder guns will go right through them. Provided our tactics are good we
can defeat them without difficulty? Well, they say the customer is always right.
The Cromwell, of course, possesses superior speed, which will be especially effec-
tive when, and if we come, as we may, into more open country. As to the Sherman,
I saw with my own eyes last week an example of the work of the 17-pounder. It was
on the approaches to Caen. There was an expanse of large fields of waving corn out of
which a grey stone village rose. Generals Montgomery and Dempsey brought me to
this spot and invited me to count the broken-down Panther tanks which were littered
about. I counted nine in the space of about 1,000 yards square. The generals then
told me that all these nine had been shot with a 17-pounder from one single British
Sherman tank from the side of the village wall. One cannot help being impressed by
these things when one sees them with one's own eyes. Of course, you will never get
the same armour in a 30-ton tank as you will in one of 60 tons. But mobility, speed
and manoeuvrability also count high, and when the 17-pounder gun is added to all
these qualities, no one has the right to say that these lighter tanks are not fitted in
every way for their task and are not a wise and far-seeing employment of our war
power ..
But when I last saw General Montgomery in the field he used these words which
he authorised me to repeat if I chose. He said: 'I doubt if the British War Office has
ever sent an Army overseas so well equipped as the one fighting now in Normandy?
That is what he said, and I must say I think it is a well-justified statement.
Mr. Stokes: My experience as a soldier has been that I know how good and how bad
my weapons are, and my grouse is that the House of Commons does not do more
about it. I find that to be the point of view of almost every soldier I talk to. I spoke
415
Summary
to a friend of mine, who is the commander of a squadron of a very famous regiment,
about the relative merits of the Sherman tank, of which we have heard so much
to-day, and the Tiger. He told me: 'I know what happens, because it has happened
to me twice. My squadron goes over and bumps into one of these Tigers. There are
four bangs and there are four of my tanks gone.' So far as I know, we have nothing in
production which is a complete answer to the Panther or the Tiger.
The criticisms made by the Select Committee were largely justified and questions
raised by Stokes in Parliament deserved a better response than the evasion and
obfuscation that they were met with. However, despite the problems of tank design
and production, the armoured units had to go into battle with the equipment
they had and emerge victorious. Montgomery in particular did not want there
to be a slump in morale as a result of what he perceived as alarmist reports being
generated, no matter how true they were. Morale was an important component
ot Montgomery's strategic thinking and he was determined to suppress any such
thoughts or reports. Even the RAC attracted Montgomery's ire when it published
its first Liaison Letter, which commented on tank policy and some aspects of the
performance of 2ist Army Group armour in the first few weeks of the campaign.
As well as stifling all liaison reports from Normandy, Montgomery ordered the
RAC not to include any reports in its six-monthly Progress Report to the end of
June 1944 until the 2Ist Army Group itself had reported."
Whilst Churchill was attempting to quell the negative reports on the Home
Front, those in the frontline were not deceived. The war diary of the 2nd Irish
Guards the following day recorded:
The advantage, of course, lay with the Germans as, no matter what is said in Parliament,
their guns penetrate our armour, and the 75mm does not penetrate theirs.34
The Irish Guards were not alone in their opinion: most of the men in the other
Sherman-equipped regiments had similar views.
In mid-August, Montgomery and Grigg, on a goodwill tour to Normandy, vis-
ited the Guards Armoured Division, which was resting after Operation Bluecoat.
On 16 August they saw the Irish Guards and two days later attended divisional HQ
for medal presentations at which Montgomery made a speech about the fighting
in Normandy. The regimental historian of the Irish Guards was unimpressed with
this visit and made the Guards' views on the deficiencies in their tanks known:
... the problem was that only one Sherman in every four was equipped with a 17
pounder gun and that Allies defeated the Germans in Normandy only because they
could afford to lose 6 tanks to every German tank.35
Within three more weeks the campaign in Normandy was over and the Allies
were victorious, making the Select Committee reports largely redundant. The
