246
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Sergeant Caroll Hibness, one of the tank commanders, fired two quick rounds at one
of the German tanks. The Mark V slowly began to turn its turret gun around at the
light tank and before it could fire on Hibness' tank, the latter got off another shot.
All three ricocheted off the Mark V and the 37mm shell was not effective. Colone!
Duncan remembers hearing Sergeant Hibness' doleful voice come over the radio:
"Good God, I fired three rounds and they all bounced off?"
the Panthers first shot was a direct hit and sergeant Mibness and mis crew balled
out before their tank was hit three more times and began to burn." The infantry
of the 3oth Division then tried to outflank the roadblock, only to come under fire
from German artillery and infantry in other positions, which forced them to go to
ground. Two Shermans trying a flanking manoeuvre were also lost to the Panthers,
which were finally dislodged by a combined tank/infantry assault that knocked ou
one Panther and compelled the others to withdraw. A Company of the 7A3rd Tank
Battalion also knocked out two Panthers in this action.* As the VII Corps attack
had not achieved its initial objectives, in the late afternoon the battle group was
instructed to keep going and capture Hebecrevon, which did not napped unti
midnight with the support of the C Company tanks of the 743rd Battalion working
in almost total darkness.
The
other infantry divisions also made little progress. In the centre, the
4th Division, supported by the 7oth lank battalion, attacked to tue
14th Parachute Regiment opposite.
The division was tasked with advancing to
high ground south of the St Giles-mangy road. the maiday bandon wee
beset by problems caused by the short bombings, aimicult terrain and daning pa
through friendly positions.
The depleted parachute regiment put up a determined
resistance in many instances from positions in woods and orchards and was sup
ported by accurate artillery
and mortar fire. The 7oth Tank Battalion had lost
a tank in the bombing and the supportind tanks were unable to keep up with the
infantry because of the hedgerows, streams, felled trees and cratered roads; intan-
try/tank cooperation was further hindered by a lack of radios and there were at
least tour instances of where tank/infantry cooperation tailed." In one unfortunate
ncident, a tank using its hedgecutter burst through a hedgerow only to bury
American soldier in a ditch on the oth side. The tank crew nelped ug ut the
soldier by using the tank to pull another" ree out; the soldier survived, only to be
killed by an artillery shell a few minutes later.20
The oth Division had been tasked withiS reaching both La Chapelle en Juger
and Marigny with the 746th Tank Battalion attached for armoured support. The
division had many casualties in the bombing and its attack plans were thrown into
chaos, By nightfall, the division was just west of La Chapelle en Juger but still more
than 2 miles from Marigny.
At about 1800 hours, the 4th Division was given the new objective of La Chapelle
en Juger to the west after it became clear that oth Division would not be able
to capture it that day. However, the 4th Division's commander, General Barton,
Operation Cobra
247
ordered a halt as his division had been attacking for nearly 12 hours and needed
some daylight to form firm defensive positions. Chapelle en Juger was an important
objective that had to be cleared for the armoured advance but the infantry division
halted less than a mile from the village.
That evening, in the face of the continuing German resistance, it was the opinion
of most American division commanders that their combined forces had not forced
a break in the German lines and that the Germans, having had ample warning of
the atack, had assembled reserves and were about to counterattack. At the end of
the first day of Operation Cobra, Marigny, St Gilles and Chapelle en Juger had not
been captured and VII Corps had only advanced just over one mile. Infantry/tank
coperation had been extremely difficult as the tanks had been unable to keep up
with the infantry in the deeply cratered terrain and the results of the training were
not realised.
Ceneral Collins, although acknowledging these concerns,
believed that the
Getman resistance was local and uncoordinated, which meant that their lines were
virtually destroyed. Knowing that he would have the full support of IX Tactical
hir force, Collins decided to take a gamble and that the two armoured divisions
should tack next day. Given the relative failure of the infantry to make a deep
penetration, this was the only course of action open to Collins and the armoured
divisions would first have to take the objectives orgay a ghed to the daddy.
A partial gap had been created in the German lines, but a corridor for the armoured
advance would not exist until Marigny was taken.
• de German reaction to the day's events was somewhat muted, perhaps due to
a lack of intormation from the disruption or communicates by the safenea
bombing and a failure to appreciate the size of the attackilig force. Von hinge had his
hands full dealing with the Canadian Operation spring around Laen, as intended
by Montgomery while General Hausser of the Seventh Army did not seem unduly
alarmed, despite his front having been penetrated in several places. Battlegroups
trom the 27sth and 353rd divisions were attached to von Choltitz's LXXXIV Corps
for a counterattack to seal off the front once more. I he 94ist Intantry Kegiment
after many delays caused by the persistent Alled lighter-bombers, coumerat-
tacked eastwards in the late alternoon." However, this was light deless the path
of the three advancing intantry alvisions and was wored to tature. Lue sost
Regiment from the 275th Division was ordered forward to support Panzer Lehr
but was pinned down by Allied aircraft north of Marigny where it could only
form defensive positions. The 983td Regiment was ordered to move overnight to
La Chapelle en Juger to stop the American advance there i Hausser also decided
to reinforce Marigny with what reserves he had from the 2nd SS Panzer Division,
which were only a tank company and a company of infantry?"
Had von Choltitz and Hausser known Panzer Lehr and its reinforcements had
been virtually destroyed and Hebecrevon captured with the road to St Gilles open,
their reaction may well have been stronger, although they possessed few reserves.
