274
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Opposing the forces of the two British corps was a single German division,
the 326th Division, which had been transferred to Caumont from the Fifteenth
Army in the Pas de Calais after Operation Goodwood, relieving the znd Panzer
Division on 23 July. Having been in possession of this area for nearly seven weeks,
the Germans had laid many minefields, built road blocks and carefully sited their
anti-tank guns and machine guns to take advantage of the terrain and cover likely
bottlenecks in any enemy advance. The relative weakness of the Germans in this
sector was known to Eisenhower who referred to it in his cable to Montgomery
on 28 July: On that ten mile front the enemy now has only four regiments and the
occasional dug in tank.'"7
The usefulness of the outstandingly successful Operation Fortitude was almost
at an end as the Germans no longer believed in a second landing around Calas
and had begun to transfer troops from the Fifteenth Army. Units on their way to
Normandy since Operation Goodwood included seven infantry divisions and the
9th Panzer Division from the south of France.
30 July
XXX Corps
The 43rd (Wessex) Division advanced with the tanks of the 27th Armoured
Brigade in support but made very little progress as 'the enemy had laid mines
thickly and booby traps were plentiful'" A stream running east-west through
Briquessard, with high banks that had been mined, proved impassable and the
only crossing points were strongly defended by anti-tank and machine guns. By
mid-afternoon, the advance had not even reached Cahagnes so any further attacks
that day were postponed.
15th Scottish/6th Guards Tank Brigade
H-hour for Phase I having finally been confirmed for ooss hours,
the 227th
Brigade attacked two-up with the 9th Cameronians supported by two squad-
cons of the 4th Grenadier Guards with the ks jective of Sept vents and we a
Gordons to clear the Lutaine Wood with the No. 3 Squadron. The brigade was
given 2 hours to reach the start line for phase two, which would commence at
095s hours immediately
after the bombing. There was no preparatory artillery
barrage until H-hour when smoke was put down on the distant ridge to hamper
German observation and hopefully any defensive artillery fire. Despite the smoke,
the Germans reacted swiftly to the advance with well-aimed mortar and artil-
lery barrages. Movement south on the roads was obstructed by anti-tank mines
while the thick hedgerows restricted visibility and made navigation difficult. One
company of the 9th Cameronians got lost in the difficult bocage countryside. Five
Grenadier Guards tanks went up on mines on the same road and their advance
had to be halted whilst Flail tanks were used to clear the mines. By the time the
Operation Bluecoat
275
Grenadier Guards got to Sept Vents at 0915 hours, another two tanks had been lost
to mines. Sept Vents was strongly defended by the Germans and was not captured
until 1300 hours. One squadron of Grenadier Guards used the
20mm cannon of
its anti-aircraft tanks in an infantry support role during the capture of the village.
The advance to Lutaine Wood with No. 3 Squadron was more successful and the
objective was reached by 0900 hours, the wood being cleared by noon. A single
Churchill tank managed to penetrate the wood and charged through the German
defences, creating mayhem before retiring to its own lines.
Two tank commanders,
including the squadron leader, were killed by snipers - one being shot while a group
of Germans were surrendering to him; the group was immediately 'liquidated' !9
While the mopping-up operations were in progress,
the bombers passed over-
head towards their targets. The two remaining battalions,
the 2nd
Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders and the roth Highland Light Infantry, having formed up
with their supporting tanks, crept forward towards the start lines where they could
see and hear the fighting in progress ahead of them.
The phase two start line
was 1,50oyds south of Sept Vents and as there was still fighting in Lutaine Wood,
considerable confusion developed as the infantry and tanks destined for phase two
became embroiled in the fighting of the mopping-up of phase one. No plan had
been made for any units to clear the area of the start line between the two points.?
As the phase one objectives had not been attained by 0955 hours, which was
X-hour for the start of phase two, it was decided by VIII Corps that the other two
armoured regiments and their infantry should pass through and push on ahead as
the timetable was in danger of falling behind with the second bomber raid due at
I5SS hours. The 2nd Argylls with the tanks of the 3rd Scots Guards were to take
Hill 226 near Les Loges at the same time as the roth Highlanders, supported by
the Coldstream Guards, were to advance to Hill 309. However, the infantry and
their tanks quickly got separated on the way to the start lines and as a result, the
tanks crossed the start line well ahead of the infantry. The 4th Coldstream Guards
lost two tanks on mines just before they reached the start line, which they crossed
at roo hours; the 3rd Scots Guards eventually crossed their start line at lIos hours
after also losing two tanks on mines.
An artillery barrage accompanied the start of phase two after the bombing and
was timed to give an advance rate of rooyds in 4 minutes for a total of 2,5ooyds.
However, due to the difficult country the tanks were unable to keep up with
this barrage. The objective of the Coldstream Guards in phase two was the high
ground south of Hervieux. This was reached at about 113o hours and it was secured
as far as possible by the tanks within 30 minutes. The infantry did not arrive until
1400 hours. The tanks of the Coldstream Guards were then supposed to carry
another battalion of infantry, the Glasgow Highlanders on to Point 309 but the
infantry had not arrived at rendezvous.
The 3rd Scots Guards crossed their start line without the 2nd Argylls infantry,
which had become embroiled in the fighting around Lutaine Wood and Le Bourg,
so the tanks went on alone. The advance was without much opposition and the
