78
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the production of Shermans and new tanks with the 75mm guns continued. Given
the subsequent experiences of Allied armour in the invasion of Normandy, the
remark by the ministry would prove to be very prescient.
Montgomery and Tank Doctrine
As the newly appointed commander-in-chief for Operation Overlord, Montgomery
immediately used his position to influence British tank doctrine by expounding
his own particular views on tanks. Since the start of the war, British doctrine had
been based on having two types of tanks for different roles: the close support tank
for the infantry and a faster, more manoeuvrable cruiser tank for exploitation of
the battlefield once gaps had been opened in the enemy lines or to outflank them
altogether. This had seen the creation of the independent tank brigades equipped
with Churchill tanks to support the infantry whilst the cruiser tanks were al-
located to the armoured divisions. Therefore the tank brigades trained extensively
with infantry units from the outset and close working relationships were often
developed. The armoured divisions with their faster cruiser tanks organised in
Armoured Brigades were expected to out flank the enemy or charge through a gap
already created in the defences. The 1943 War Office training pamphlet no. 4l,
'The Tactical Handling of the Armoured Division and its Components, stated
that the role of an armoured division is the complete destruction of the enemys
usually by envelopment or by deep penetration through his defences after a gap has
been made in his main position by other formations? In May 1942 the armoure
divisions were reorganised and an infantry brigade was substituted for an armoured
brigade with more artillery being brought in as well to make a more balanced,
independent formation.
Montgomery was opposed to this concept of two types of tank, believing in
early 1943 that a single 'capital' tank was needed to fulfil both roles and that the
Sherman was best suited for this, being relatively fast and equipped with a 75mm.
gun that fired both AP and an effective HE round. This meant that the Sherman
tanks of the armoured divisions were expected to attack strong enemy defence.
By mid-1943 another problem had arisen: British tank production could not pr
duce enough Churchill tanks to equip all of the tank brigades and some had to
be equipped with Shermans. This created potential diffculties in that the more
lightly armoured Shermans would be mike easily knocked out than the Churchill
tanks when attacking strong enemy positions and so depriving the infantry of
any support.
The tank veteran Brigadier Pyman recognis i this problem and wrote a paper
in November 1943 aavocating separate tactics for the Churchill and Sherman ties
whereby the Shermans would proof de support from a distance and 'shoot-in' the
advancing infantry. Montgomery was d gorously opposed to this and demanded
that all of his tank brigades be capable of carrying out any mission assigned to
Fighting the Tank
79
them. With typical vindictiveness,
Montgomery demanded the names of those
who had written the paper.4
Montgomery, although having led the Eighth Army to victory, was no expert in
the use of tanks and at the battle of El Alamein had allowed the retreating forces
of Rommel's Afrika Korps to escape when he had the opportunity to cut them
off with British armour So adamant was Montgomery in his views that he even
refused to have a Churchill-equipped tank brigade in his army in Italy. In April
1944, Montgomery then tried to have the 6th Guards Tank Brigade disbanded
to form replacements for other Guards units but was thwarted by senior Guards
officers who approached Churchill directly. In retaliation, Montgomery excluded
the brigade from Operation Overlord and put it into reserve. Its subsequent de-
ployment was then contingent on converting 75mm-equipped Churchills back
to 6-pounder guns in view of their better armour penetration suddenly seen as
essential for Normandy.
Not surprisingly, Montgomery's views held sway and in February I944
Montgomery's Chief of Staff, Francis de Guingand, an artilleryman, wrote some
notes on the employment of tanks in support of infantry for the 2Ist Army Group
wherein the support from a distance was abandoned in favour of tanks being
used to:
• Cover the infantry and engineers creating gaps in the enemy defences
• Advance through to the objective without infantry support and hold it until the
arrival of the infantry
• Support an infantry attack from positions 20oyds behind the leading company
In this latest policy, the tanks in an armour-only attack would once again advance
ahead of any infantry. This attempt at a compromise did not differentiate between
types of tanks or brigades and assumed the Sherman could withstand enemy fire
as much as a Churchill® Perhaps most significantly, this policy maintained the
separation of tanks and infantry in battle that was also part of Pyman's policy. For
infantry/tank combined operations, 2ist Army Group policy was therefore that the
infantry should now lead. This was the second change in doctrine within three
months and caused much confusion within the armoured units.
Fortunately for many units within 2Ist Army Group, this doctrine was not
rigidly enforced and tank units interpreted these notes in their own way. Units
such as the 6th Guards Tank Brigade and Isth Scottish Division that had already
started training together continued in the same way when the two formations were
finally brought together after Operation Epsom, while the war diaries or the tank
regiments of the Guards Armoured Division often describe successful squadron
or regiment 'shoots' during the Normandy campaign. How brigades combined
with intantry would have important consequences if the morandy can Sa
particularly for the armoured brigades, which, unlike the tank brigades, were not
used to working closely with infantry.
