294
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Schroif signalled Harlander to come up to him; Harlander had to pass on orders to
the rest of the company:
Stop immediately ... objectives reached! Jupiter I: take position on the line ori-
ented north with me! Jupiter 2: Screen to the right and left at the road intersection
100 yards behind us.
The Tigers rolled into their assigned positions. Rosowski was in the process of
turning when he received six direct hits from about 30 yards away. The seventh round
was from Rosowkski's tank, it was fired into the hedge from where he had taken the
hits. A long tongue of flame shot skyward and a loud bang signalled the effectiveness
of this shot - the enemy tank flew into the air!st
The 2nd Company of Tigers claimed seventeen tanks for the previous day; the
Northants Yeomanry tank state that evening recorded five Cromwell tanks
knocked out and four damaged along with two Cromwell CS tanks.
That night, A Squadron lost a further eight tanks to marauding German para-
troops armed with Panzerfäuste. Next morning, in the face of a renewed German
infantry attack, the battered regiment withdrew to Le Brien with two more tanks
being lost to marauding German soldiers on the way. At 1900 hours, a troop of
anti-tank guns was put under the regiment's command and the surviving tanks
were ordered to form a roadblock. In the previous hard-fought 24-hour period,
eighteen Cromwell tanks of the Northants Yeomanry were completely destroyed.
The movement of the toth SS Panzer Division from its position around Hill II2
near Evrecy had been delayed by the slow relief of their units and Allied air attacks
along the route of their march. Although the advance elements of the division had
set off on the afternoon of i August, the main body of the Division did not arrive
around Aunay and Ondefontaine until 3 August. In the advance elements were the
reconnaissance battalion, the second tank battalion and the zist Panzergrenadier
Regiment, which mounted an attack (supported by a battalion of Jagdpanthers)
towards Hill 188 near St Georges d'Aunay and the advancing Tth Armoured
That morning, the sth RTR ha uaarystardered to seize Point I3o, which Was
on a low ridge that overlooked Aunay in order to shell German vehicles moving
on the road below. Advancing through the morning mist to the railway bridge in
La Lande, A Squadron spotted and knocked out a Mark IV waiting to ambush the
leading troop the other side of the bridge. Point 13ò was occupied by too due
and the tanks began shelling traffic on the road below. Their position was, in turn,
overlooked by another ridge further to the south occupied by the Germans and
artillery fire began to land amongst the Cromwells. Twelve German tanks from
the roth SS Panzer Division started to infiltrate through La Lande, accompanied
by panzergrenadiers, while another company of panzergrenadiers approached from
the north supported by the Jagdpanthers. The infantry of the ist Rifle Brigade
Operation Bluecoat
295
became involved in a firefight with the panzergrenadiers, and B Squadron was sent
forward to reinforce A Squadron. A Squadron continued to duel with the advanc-
ing Mark IVs, and three Cromwells and a brand new Challenger tank, which
did not have time to align its gun sights, were knocked out in exchange for two
Mark IVs. As the day progressed, German pressure began to mount and a sudden
attack after an artillery bombardment caused the Rifle
Brigade infantry to with-
draw, leaving the tanks surrounded in the orchards around La Lande. As darkness
fell, one troop from B Squadron broke out under cover of a smoke screen, one
tank being destroyed in the process. Panzergrenadiers, armed with Panzerfäuste,
then began to stalk the isolated Cromwell tanks in the darkness; showers of sparks
marked the position of Sherman tanks periodically being hit by the Panzerfaust
projectiles. The decision was taken to attempt a mass breakout and the tanks lined
up one behind the other before charging westwards through the German positions,
taking casualties as they did so but eventually reaching the safety of the British
lines. A Firefly was abandoned by its crew who opted to try and get back to safety
on foot in the darkness rather than in their tank. Of the twelve tanks left that made
the breakout, nine reached safety!? According to the regiment's war diary, only
seven Cromwells were lost that day but an eyewitness account puts the total much
higher, with A and B squadrons losing eighteen tanks between them." The men
of the zist Panzergrenadier Regiment alone claimed fourteen tanks destroyed by
Panzerfäuste.* Owing to the heavy losses, A and B squadrons were amalgamated
next day for future operations. Over the course of the next week, the 263rd Field
Delivery Squadron sent eleven Cromwells, two Sherman Ves and a Challenger,
making fourteen replacement tanks, to the sth RTR.'
Guards Armoured Division
The squadrons of the Irish Guards reunited at dawn at La Marvindiere and moved
out to resume the advance to Estry and Vassy via the village
of Le Busq.
The
division was ordered to bypass Estry if necessary but VIII Corps was completely
unaware that the gth SS Panzer Division had arrived overnight and was now oc-
cupying positions in Estry. With No. 3 Squadron leading and covered by the other
two squadrons, a farm north of Le Busq was reached at about 1000 hours:
No. 3 Sqn with an infantry Coy, which by now
was very tired, crossed the little
stream at 732378, and worked its way up the far slope through high hedges and or-
chards. As they came to the crest by a sunken lane, enemy tanks opened fire at close
range and knocked out a tank in Lt. Liddle's troop. Reconnaissance on foot by Capt.
P. Stobart and careful observation discovered 7 or 8 Tigers and Panthers just on the
reverse slope, escorted by about one company of infantry. Our own infantry dug in
by the sunken lane, and the rest of the day was spent playing hide and seek in and out
of orchards and hedges. The advantage, of course, lay with the Germans as, no matter
what is said in Parliament, their guns penetrate our armour, and the 75mm does not
penetrate theirs.s6
