132
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
comments made by inexperienced men but by veteran tank officers who had
fought in North Africa. Dempsey, commander of the Second Army, in a letter
to 2Ist Army Group on 24 June used the comments of his commanders to call for
better armour-piercing ammunition for the Sherman, more improved i7-pounder
SABOT ammunition and for more Firefly tanks. Dempsey concluded his letter by
saying that 'our armour is fighting under a considerable handicap.
In response, the RAC's Major-General Richards dismissed the claims of the
tank commanders as 'sweeping statements' and 'misleading' while extolling the
virtues of the I7-pounder Sherman. This ignored the fact that Fireflies were in
short supply, comprising only one tank in a troop of four. Richards referred to
a report written in April 1944 and apparently issued to all formations and units in
which it was stated that the 75mm Sherman gun was no match for the Tiger or the
Panther. Richards concluded that nobody should have been surprised when they
found out what was said in theory was proved correct in practice and that faulty
tactics were 'probably' to blame.!6
While the political debate continued in England (which is covered in a later
chapter) the British and Canadian tank crews had no alternative but to continue to
do battle in the tanks they were issued with.
Le Mesnil Patry
At a Canadian 3rd Division commanding officers' meeting on 1o June, an opera-
tion was planned for the ist Hussars armoured regiment to break through the
German lines next day and seize the high ground between Cheux and Granville
sur Odon via the village of Le Mesnil Patry in a right hook. In theory, this would
isolate the panzergrenadier regiment detending that part of the frontline. On
100s ONving the plan, it was realised that there was little information known about
the enemy and the operation was postponed at 2200 hours on 10 June until 12
June to allow a proper reconnaissance to be made."? However, on II June at 0800
hours, the brigade was informed that the attack had to be made that very day.
Although not specified at the time, the reason for this was to support the advance
of the 7th Armoured Division to Villers Bocage as the attack of the eastern pincer
around Caen by the Sist Division had been held up by fierce fighting and German
counterattacks. The brigade issued verbal orders at too hours to the Hussars
and the infantry regiment the Hussars would be supporting in the attack, the
Queen's Own Rifles of Canada (QOR). The commanding officer of the Hussars,
Lieutenant-Colonel White, asked for more time to prepare for the attack but this
was refused. A further order was received at about 1100 hours from General Keller
of the 3rd Division to attack as soon as possible!" The Hussars' own orders could
not be issued until noon for an attack that was supposed to start at 1300 hours.
Fortunately, the regiment had moved up into an assembly position near Bray
the previous evening. The regiment had just received twenty replacement tanks
133
Operation Perch - Villers Bocage
trom the Field Delivery Squadron (C Squadron 2sth Elgin Regiment) complete
with crews. For many men it would be their first battle, although 'unhorsed' men
tum - Day were given priority over green crews. The replacement tanks al-
I Squadron to be reformed with a new squadron leader, Captain Harrison,
to was the second in command of C Squadron. That night, the regiment's
talk muster was fifty-nine Shermans and six Sherman Ves so the regiment was
agaly vestrength. The extra tanks were put in B Squadron, which would
are wet-one tanks instead of the usual nineteen. The war diary of the Hussars
summarised the preparations:
The plan was that "B" Squadron and one COY of INF were to seize the initial
ofective, E MESNIL-PATRY, while "C" Squadron deployed on high ground on
the ght fak to support them with covering fire. There was no time for the Diy
at pan and the shortness of time allowed for planning did not give the sub-unit
commanders the chance to brief their men of their own individual tasks.20
The original start line for the attack was the rail line south of Bretteville from
hite it was a straight run south-west to Le Mesnil Patry. At the last minute the
Sat in was changed to Norrey and the tanks quickly moved to take up their
den positions; however, the sides of the road from Bretteville to Norrey had been
mined, so the tanks could not deploy on the road. B and squadrons were forced
lo move in single tie through the narrow Suoos opt Notrey as terman mortar
tire began to hit the village. I he Shermans, with their wide turning circes, had
to jockey backwards and forwards to negotiate some corners; subsequently, the
start line was not crossed until 1420 hours, with D Company of the Queens Own
Kills riding on the back of the tanks.?' To now advance towards Le Mesnil Patry,
squadron now had to move in a westerly direcuon across the front or we Pos
tions of the 12th SS Panzer Division.
No sooner nad the Hussars cleared Norrey and begun the zooya duvance weste
wards towards Le Mesnil Patry when a heavy mortar barrage was brought down
on the tanks of B Squadron whilst machine guns fired at the exposed riflemen
mounted on the tanks. The infantry immediately leapt off the tanks and into the
Wheat fields, only to find them alive with engineers trom the Pioneer battalion of
ine I2th SS Panzer Division, which had been lying low. Furious hand-to-nand
fighting broke out, with the tanks trying to assist the intantry with their machine
guns and destroying any machine gun posts that could be located while the Pioneers
engaged the Sherman tanks with Panzerfausts and tried to attach magnetic mines
to them. B Squadron was urged on by Brigade HQ to the first objective of Le
Menil Patry and had to leave the infantry to their own battle. A smoke screen was
Put down to screen their advance and Le Mesnil Patry (codenamed Strawberry)
was reached about isoo hours by one troop with another troop reaching an orchard
Just south of the village. At rots hours, tanks were reported on the right flank and
" minutes later both B and C squadrons began to be hit by armour-piercing shells
