372
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
Tiger tanks of the two SS battalions and a few Jagdpanzers to secure a frontline
2km long without supporting infantry?
On Is August, General Crerar instructed Simonds that as soon as Falaise had
been taken and handed over to an infantry division, the advance on Trun by the
two armoured divisions should get underway as soon as possible.
Not till 103o hours did the Grenadier Guards begin the day's advance, the inter-
tion being to proceed to Point 159 (codenamed Idaho) by going around Epancy to
the north and then moving west towards Points 168 and 184. Anti-tank gunfire
was encountered from Epancy but with the aid of a smoke screen, the regiment
continued to move on. Just west of Epancy, No. I Squadron lost a tank to anti-tank
fire from the south." The regiment halted in some dead ground to plan a combined
attack with the South Albertas and the British Columbia Regiment, whose tanks
were in the vicinity. The high ground of the proposed route to the objective was
very exposed, and a number of tanks were already burning in the area. A plan
involving extensive artillery and infantry support was devised. However, there was
little artillery support available as the field regiments had not yet crossed the River
Laison and the required targets were out of range, so, unsurprisingly, the artilery
support did not come down as ordered and the attack was cancelled." An ominous
report from 4th Armoured Brigade was received at 1406 hours of ninety German
tanks assembling in the Monts d'Eraines just to the south, and this cannot have
generated much enthusiasm amongst the Canadians for a further advance.
The British Columbia Regiment rejoined thee ttack on Epancy and towards
Falaise at roo hours and experienced considerable anti-tank opposition amongs
he orchards on the ridge to the east of Epancy. C Squadron attempted a leit-
Banking manoeuvre and after crossing a road and entering a field, lost two tanks
brewed up and two damaged. A subsequent right-flanking attack around Epancy
was aise unstressial. the a echelon tinady arrived in the atternoon and each
ank got three cans of petrol at 1s00 hours but any advances to Point 159 were
continuously blocked by the German armour. German artillery and mortar fire
from Falaise was also making life exceedingly uncomfortable for the Canadians.
the four tuards, after an earner start to thealorning, left their harbour to
advance to falaise. One squadron of tanks was sent to support the Lake superior
motorised battalion to secure Epancy, Petrol and ammunition finally arrived at
1030 houlls and was carried forward by ARVs and half-track to the individual
squadrons. Several tanks were lost in armoured duels to the east of Epancy, but like
he other lesters, day advance southwards was strongly resisted by the concealed
Tigers and Jagdpanzers. When ammunition and petrol ran low, the regiment was
torced to leave the attack at 1417 hours and seek replenishment at the forward
rally point. This irritated Lieutenant-Colonel Scott, and the tanks were given only
20 minutes to refuel, rearm and get cracking towards Point 159.* Spurred on by
this, the regiment advanced towards the objective, encountering the tanks of the
South Alberta Regiment seemingly headed the same way. The Foot Guards then
reported incorrectly that they had reached Point 159 (Idaho) and this was duly
Operation Tractable
373
relayed by 4th Brigade HQ at 1713 hours to the other units, which could see that
the Foot Guards unfortunately were not on the objective but a mile short of it.
In the face of heavy, accurate anti-tank fire, the regiment retired, losing another
tank. General Kitching was elated at the news of the capture of Point 1S9 and
promptly went off to see Simonds, believing that his division had at last achieved
is objective. The subsequent report that this was a mistake was not well received
by Simonds. According to Simonds aide de camp, 'Simonds could not have been
more disappointed or exasperated over this new example of faulty communication
and misinformation. 42
A little earlier, Scott had reported that he could not continue with his bro-
Ken ankle and another temporary brigade commander would have to be found;
Kiching appointed Lieutenant-Colonel Halpenny of the Grenadier Guards as
acting commander. Epancy was finally secured at 1850 hours. t3
The 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade was not idle this day, either. An attack on
Point 168, the next hilltop south, was originally scheduled for 113o hours with one
squadron of Hussars to advance just over a mile with the Canadian Scottish Rifles
supported by artillery and tanks of Fort Garry Horse from Point 175 but this did
not get underway until 1300 hours. The advance by the infantry and composite
squadron of tanks got within a few hundred yards of the objective before a mortar
barrage descended on the infantry and heavy anti-tank fire came in from the left
flank in the direction of Epancy, temporarily halting the advance. Epancy was sup-
posed to have been cleared but some German tanks and anti-tank guns were still
in the woods and orchards to the west and south-west of the village and had a clear
line of sight up the hill to the crest. The infantry struggled on alone and secured
he hilltop at 1030 hours as the tanks of the mussars come not cape tenseves to
the withering anti-tank guntire. Six more tanks were lost that due noon a when
the squadron returned to the harbour, two Y casualties had been repaired, bringing
its strength to seven.
The attack was opposed by two Tiger tanks from the 2nd Company rost SS
Battalion and a company of intantry, which were eventually surrounded by the
Canadians. The infantry and tanks broke out under heavy artillery fire, with one
liger towial, another. The Tigers claimed twelve Canadian tanks knocked out.
With the failure of the 4th Brigade to achieve its objective in the afternoon,
the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade was ordered to make a further attack that
evening on Point 159. As the last details for the attack were being worked out at
about 1800 hours, a report was received that Point 159 was already in the hands of
the 4th Brigade and that the mission would just be to clear the ground between
the two points, which was welcome news to the exhausted crews. The plan of
attack was adjusted accordingly. As the tanks were moving to their start line, they
met tanks from the two 4th Brigade regiments that were supposed to be on the
objective.
Then before the 2nd Armoured Brigade tanks even reached the start
line, heavy anti-tank gunfire came in from directly ahead and on the left flank,
the Fort Garry Horse on the left quickly losing four tanks. German artillery joined
