218
The Armoured Campaign in Normandy, June-August 1944
the ring of flaming tanks and immediately its own tanks began to be knocked out
by a largely unseen enemy. Reaching Soliers, a firestorm of shot then descended
on B Squadron, forcing them to move back to a hedge, which afforded precious
little cover:
Every five minutes there was a crack of armour-piercing shot passing through the
air, the shattering crash as it penetrated a Sherman, the shower of sparks, the sheet
of flame and then black figures silhouetted against an orange glow as they jumped
to the ground, sometimes pausing to drag a wounded comrade after them. The slow
crackling as the tank began to burn, black smoke pouring out of the turret, and
later, at intervals, the vivid crimson flashes and violent rending as the ammunition
blew up.°
Since they were advancing along the same centre line as the 2nd Fife and Forfars,
it is not surprising that the 23rd Hussars ran into the same trouble. Smoke and dust
made visibility poor (one reason why the ist SS Panthers may have opted for the
raids on the Shermans in the valley below that resulted in the close quarter duels)
and the German positions, which were well camouflaged, were extremely difficult
to spot. The 23rd Hussars radioed Brigade HQ at 142s hours that there appeared
to be so few and Fife and Forfar tanks left that if they began the attack as ordered
then a gap would be left in the frontline."
C Squadron moved up out of sight of the rest of the regiment behind a ridge
toward Four. A sudden volley of armour-piercing shot decimated the squadron:
almost in one minute, all of the tanks of three troops and Squadron Headquarters
were hit, blazing and exploding. Everywhere wounded and burning figures ran or
struggled for cover, while a remorseless rain of armour-piercing shot riddled the al-
most helpless Shermans. Major Shebbeare's tank was one of the first to be hit. He was
never seen again. Dazed survivors ran to and fro helping the many wounded, beating
out flaming clothing with their hands until the intense heat and violent explosions
drove them back to the cover of the railway line.
The 23rd Hussars had run into Panther tanks that had reinforced rour die ha
Ath Batterie of Becker's assault guns that had relocated from Le Mesnil Frémentel.
Finally, at about isoo hours, the surviving tanks of the and Fife and Forfar
were withdrawn through the 23rd Hussars, back across the Caen-Paris railway to
a position east of Grentheville behind Hutchinson's troop, which had by then lost
two tanks. On assessing their losses, thirty-seven tanks were found to be missing.
The regiment claimed the destruction of two Panthers, two Mark IVs, five self-
propelled guns and three 88mm anti-tank guns. At dusk, six Tiger tanks attacked
in the last action of the day. Grentheville itself had still not been cleared and having
been a source of trouble for the armoured regiments for most of the afternoon, it
219
Operation Goodwood
was not secured until 1800 hours by the motorised infantry accompanying the
2td Hussars.
By 150 hours, the 23rd Hussars had lost the equivalent of a squadron of tanks and
ire continuing to lose more. Faced by this overwhelming onslaught and unable
to avance, the 23rd Hussars retired back as best they could over the Caen-Paris
railway line at about 1800 hours.
Meanwhile, the 3rd RTR was coming under increasing pressure from the
Getman tanks and at 1400 hours had to withdraw from the slope leading up to
Hubert Folie to a position next to the Chemin de Fer Minier railway embank-
ment near Soliers.' This move at least sheltered them from fire from east of the
talay but not from Hubert Folie and Bras. The regiment stayed in this exposed
postion until 1700 hours when it pulled back further to a position sooyds north-
ist of Soliers. Mixed groups of Panthers and Tigers mounted attacks during the
rest of the afternoon and evening as they tried to outflank the 3rd RTR.* One
sack from Soliers was led by a captured Sherman, but this did not fool an alert
guner in an Mio self-propelled anti-tank gun and he knocked it out along with
two Panthers.
At its hours, in a last throw of the dice, Roberts ordered the 2nd Northants
Yeomanry to the aid of the pinned-down ard RTR. Throwing the Cromwells of
the reconnaissance regiment into the fray after the decimation of the Sherman-
equipped sabre regiments was a desperate move by Roberts to get the attack moving
gan. At 1640 hours, the and Northants Yeomanry arrived in the area, but initially
one squadron could not find a way across the Caen-Vimont railway. Another
squadron found a culvert under the railway west of Grentheville and started mov-
¿ cowaras bras, only to be halted by fierce Die iooyas from e syudaron diso
incurred many casualties around Soliers. The Northants Yeomanry were then hit
by a counterattack by the Stug Ills of the ist SS assault battalion making a pincer
attack around the village of Bras about 1800 hours. A total of sixteen Cromwells
were knocked out in quick succession.
At 2230 hours, the remaining tanks of the 3rd RTR withdrew turther north
to a harbour in the lee of the Minier railway embankment; only twenty tanks
of the regiment survived the day, thirty-six having been knocked out and five
more damaged." The 23rd Hussars lost twenty-three tanks and the and Fife and
Forfar forty tanks, but this was subsequently revised to thirty-three tanks with four
breaking down!"
However, the onset of darkness gave no respite to the 2nd sue and forar. Atter
midnight, parachute flares dropped by German bombers over
the River Orne
Bridgehead revealed the masses of wheeled vehicles and soldiers drawn up in sup-
port of the attack. The subsequent bombs could not
fail to hit any targets and
unfortunately several fell close to where the 'unhorsed' Fife and Forfar crews were
recovering after their ordeals of the day; six officers and men were killed and forty-
three wounded. The next day the 2nd Fife and Forfar could only muster twenty-
five serviceable tanks, with twelve in A Squadron and eleven in C Squadron. By
