SECREE
MACT AN
moder No.5)
rative Orders or Instructions issued
H Administrative Orders of Instructions received
I Strength States, Field Returns, etc.
respondence, etc.
Z. Top Secret Supplementary War Diary ...
* at do me i e a plant eat entra
Instructions for compiling the war diary are given ins
3 Br InP DiV ADM ORDER NO. 5
SEC REI.
2. 182.
22 Jun 44•
Copy 10.29
Ref map: Sheet 40/16 NW
Local Administration
Edes, etc, will be responsible for local adm in the areas as shown in att
race
This will cover the following points;-
Supervision of hygiene and sanitation.
Attention will be paid not
only to properly constituted latrine erections but also
general
sanitary condition of the area, particularly checking failure to use
facilities provided.
Insuring the proper burial and marking of graves of all dead (Allied
German).
Prevention of isolated burials and desecration of
Burial of all dead cattle, horses, etc.
removal of garden produce) by means of patrols.
ceceiving intormation.
(e)
Maintenance of discipline and good order generally.
here are many troops in the area not under coma of this Div and sc direat
ction in such cases by Conds appointed by this order cannot be taken.
ed suon cases a report will be rendered to this Hl giving name of unit
taken bed with short particulars of complaint when appropriate action will be
taken by this HQ.
suen that soecha
no organ ation on the pa po it to the farat on of a run is
attention must be paid by
units to the preparation
Technical Stores indents. Delay may ocour where AOD has insufficient information.
Mr Spares.
The following information will be shown on indents (incl IV 6 items):-
NAKE and TYPE of vehicle for which item is required
section
posination
NOTE - A separate indent will be prepared for items of each MAKE and TYPE.
Technical Spares
The following information will be shown on indents: -
TYPE and MARK of equipment for which item is required
-S1&0101
NOTE - A separate indent will be prepared for items of each MARK and TYPE.
2/... 6.
Separate indents..
1680|
WO 171/413
