146990761
WO 171/2707
36), and personal
is representatives.
war diaries will be
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NorE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
the bar owl, London, s, trough the usual channels, to the Under Secrela be kept ( sai,
PARA, 2.-4 war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to pron de data mistratlich to base future improvements in army training, equipmen,
DION OR WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM E.S.R., YOL, 1, 174):
(iv) Detailed account of operation:
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic,
important phases,
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, ca quarters crespied,
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength,
chas and the hiber of lie take A tole and l am dear ened
In addition in the case of units on the L., of C, changes in stores, transpont, ere.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political,
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
( A cons of eror fed retion i. 80 he pete, sated ay of each votine or
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iri) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including i
oration duin a in tic he one rat the boy mont has vill be
nimbed and er to i have at crime her ging the author. Retreates
(See FASt. Vom diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
NOTE.— It should be made clear that the officer who initials the
entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para, I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA, 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(1) Ind dest osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Date tations they
on ta lein the at trenty-our hour and present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the unit concerns
SPECT NOT The the time entered should be the time the formation toot,
Leith
Donnington
WAR DIARY
XINTEEHIGENCE SUMMARY
Month and Year.Jan. 1944.
1-13
Summary of Events and Informati
Unit taking part in Exercise Roundabout 2•
Received Orders (Broadness One Secret T.P.M. G 424 11 Jan. 'W.
to move to R.1.0.C. Nob. Centre, Domington at 0922 1ith inst. rid
Unit moved complete to Donnington arriving at 2000hrs and billeted in
"PR" Camp. Ah.
Iving at "R" Camp carrying out training in Smell Arns, Gas, Grenades. rh
Received authority from R.A.0.C. Mob.
Centre to proceed with block leave
for I0 devs from Rev. January 17. AR
Carried out training programne including Upgrading and Docks Procedure
Course at R.A.0.0. Mob. Centre.
Received new W.E. IV/171/2.
I.E, now 1 Ofcicer and 28 other rants, I 0.
1 Truck 15 cut. 4 x 2, 3 Ill G's.
Sheet one limy form C.
Unit. 44 Port. Oranance. Detach
Commanding Officer Lieut. E. Remolds.
References to Appendices
Wt.84859 1676 €00,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 61-7676
