14018010
WO 171/2707
N
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and
c l it i let to du i will chor not a he dir should be bet by hi
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
Pa rovide data upon when to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organi
couraged to include in the war diaries of
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
lay of mobilisation or
subordinate command
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
intments (Sec. 36), and
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. — Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
and his representatives.
my, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume o
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference
(ili) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operations furnished in kate hes come delati
hes or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
o apered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading in above)
Appendices will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C. miming the author. References
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
inely sing any which may have been marked "personal"
(provided the writer consider
(See F..R., Voll dinies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
or older per i should be in e de hot the after who it is the eat ries is the commander
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(6) And deist os ters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(* Daly cais in the one during the at twenty four hour an
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
raid present dispositions.
the SPECiAl No The The tine entre should be the time the atomi tor ten
For et no created to canted
to date.
WAR DIARY
Army Form C. 211
Unit 44 Port Ord. Dete R.A.0.0.
Place
reelicence Sumiries,
!
Date
Peterborough 1-4
4-16
18-30.
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendice
Unit employed in No.1. Sub-Depot R.A.0.C. Walton in general Ordnance work.
Movement order (Exfor (Buco)G.14) of 041830 move by rail to R.A.0.C. Training
Est. Idecester No.2 Special P.O.D. Course (which proved of balue to the
unit.) thence to Turlington Camp, Town Green, Aughton, Idterpool for
practical experience in Liverpool Docks. W.O.l. and 10.R, remaining behina
in charge of G. 1098 stores and unit equipment.
Unit returned to Feterborough on completion of course.
Remager Personnel of unit employed in No.1. Sub-Depot Walton despatching
B.M.P, by road to dispersal points.
WV1, 84859 1676 800,000 11/t3 W. H, & S. 61-7676
тина
antoin ton
