14628076
WO 171/2707
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
und area or sub-area of the L. of C
11) Unit commanders
ill) Commanders of detachments of a unit
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
Personal stall
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A. —In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
Pat hole of important our pes, ator afeting
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1) Events should be entered up, cat in the order given boy list the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary
e order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
!
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
ord of operations
data upon which to base
future improvements in army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
operations luding any sketches or
nimped, an deal ile in het olin head Causing the author. References
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
inely singany which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer contions
(See P. Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
or other per it should be made die that the ficer who imital the entries a the commander
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
2nd Ewarded on the first day of the si
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
Preparis & chary
(i) The duplicate
) and ortant on tea, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(* alcate in rement during the at tventy our hour and present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the sAt NO The The in entered should be the time the intent to reader reach
Place
Month and Year April 1944.
Dat
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Informatior
Sheet 1 and Lastirmy Form C. 2
Unit. 44. Port Ord. Det. R.A.0.C.
Commanding Officer Lieut. E. Reynolds. R.A.0.C.
References to Appendices
Peterborough 1-30
Unit employed in Nol 1 Ordnance Sub-Depot, re-packing major assemblies,
except for 1 day weekly when Regimental Braining is carried out. hil
Colonel Arnold-Edwards, Inspector Army Ordnance Services inspected the unit
to test efficiency in Military knowledge. After the inspection the detach-
ment was exercised, including Route march, Field Cooking and minor tactice A
Unit mobilized for Overseas Service. rh
Received from 38 V.R.D. Norton m/c Solo 500 c.c. W.D. No. 4603991 to
replace Royal Enfiela m/e Solo. 350 coc. withdraw. A
4 Port Ord. Det. under command of 21 Aruy Group as and from this date. iN
WAR DIARIES SECTION
3-1944
G. HQ: 2nd Eohelon
W: 34869 1656 890,000 11/18 W.H. & S. 61-1676
