F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C
!
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit
iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff
(v) Base, auxilary and advanced depot commanders
vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NOTE A.--In the case of formations and units of the territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the hrst day of embodiment
NOTE B.— See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
or sub-uni be quest, thot out whethen an nos, to the diady stored by kept be (S..,
The War Otice, London, S.W.l
PARA, 2.—A war diary is Secret, its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ind to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
Thi to the Thung di the Can arch in he my l am i a to be or ano
on At a. dias, i be entered up taly, act tract in and eten the ofter detailed to ko, pit,
from a war diary is an offence under the Othcial Secrets Acts,
or other person mend he made deal, that the officer wid initiato the the le is the commander
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded wher
(i) Im deistons tars, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
Movese often the ot tent fou ho of asid present dispositions.
fii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the stall.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
IV) Detalled account of operations
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affectin
operations, topographical and climatic
Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
important phases
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
ficers and the number of other ranks o
As tolards casalies the names and rants of
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, eto
(vii) Meteorological notes
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether miltary or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1, OT oF to to should be entered up, eatin the order a ven abi, but ate he time they.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary
ine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer requirec
' A chit, ineluch narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operations furnished in the text of the diary ng the reto, to supplement the account of
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will hav
to pen lies will be made in the last olive head 2ling the apon Res reli e
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
(see F.s.K., Volume Il)
PARA@7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the SPECT NO. The The time entered should be the time the information or order reon
ieu of C. 2118A - indented
tor but not received to date,
ding tane in he enclosed it
Place
.P.bor.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCEX SUMMARIX
(Delete heading not required)
nary or events and intormatio
employed in No. 1 Ord. Sub-Depot (Chil) Walton, in general Ordnance
work and despatching B.M.P. by road to dispersal points.
Army Form C. 21
Unit 44. Part Card. Det:0.c.
Commanding Officer Lieut. E. Reynolds. R,4,0.0
WAR DIARIES SECTIO
G. Hid 2nd bohelo
Wt,84859 1676 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 51-767t
