pg_0056.pdf:
SUPPLIES
Casualties oscurring in the first 48 hours carry their own rations;
a mall reserve of compo rations for casualties will be landed under Div
arrangements.
223 FD AND will draw and take ashore with them sufficient tea,
sugar and milk to make 1000 pints of tea.
10.
Rations and extra tea, sugar and milk will be drawn from DID
for casualties in the normal manner from D + 1 onwards.
MEDICAL, STORES
11.
One 22 ton mainsonance blocks of medical stores will be landed
daily from D + 1 ormardo.
Initially,
these will be transported to OBD
where they will. be holt under the supervision of the Port Detachment
RAMC until transfcared to the Casualty Clearing Station; issues will be made
by the Latter G0 223 ID 43 on domand, until the arrival of Aavanced Depot
Medical Stores (after D + 7).
METHOD OF COLTECTTON AND TACUATION OF CASUAIFIES
12.
Casu226/08 22 0h508 and Craft
Casualties oscurring in ships will remain in the ships;
This is a noval responsibility.
13.
CasuaL tee on binding
Casualties On bonchos up to the thria lateral, approximately
2000 yards inland, will lo collected by stretcher bearers of Beach
Group reinforced. ky atrotchen bearers from the Pioneer Company, and
tolen to a Boach Dressing Station.
14.
Cosuelties Taterd
(a) Durian the Aavence
Rogimentel abrotcer bearers will be responsible for the
colinction of casualties on to the nearest of the following axes
(1) Tho chia 1.0. Bae HQ Axis
(11) The Batbalton In Axis
Poid. Aobiü-noe ceotions moving in rear of their respective
Battalion Foalgators will assist in the
above
task and will,
in add iion, ba responsible for the formation of casualty nests',
the marking of these nests and the notification of their
loention
so advance Dressing Station.
The collection of
casualtios from nests will be the responsibility of the idvance
Drossins Station.
Full use will be made of empty returning
PASO unmition vehiclos in evacuating lightly wounded to the
Field Drossing Station.
(7)
Arder the final obiective is raached
Normal evacuation will proceed, i.e. RAP -CCP - ADS - FDS.
After 1000 hours D + 1, casualties which have to be
retained
in the theatre will be evacuated from Advance Dressing Station
to Casually Clearing Station,
reminder will be
evacuated from Advance Dressing otation to Field Dressing
Station,

