pg_0001.pdf:
ments (Sec. 36), and
d his representatives.
y, war duties will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by
unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.1),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future imorovements in army training. eaupment
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iti) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
y of mobilisation or
Important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
abordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up,
not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to nouce.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation o
outine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above)
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.-
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
e forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.C
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon fo
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicat
spies of
he diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the office
G.H.Q.
nd Echelon to be transmitted to records
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Instructions regarding War Diaries
and Intelligen
Monthly
Diaries will be
enclosed in A.r.
this is not
dalla bie,
allel
bullrnalies,
une
cover
Will
Prevarea in manuscrioo.
Month and Year..
July 1944.
Place
Date
Hour
In the Field
1 Jul
2
3
4
SHEET. 2.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCEY SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Company Location:
Nothing to report.
Main Residues:
Convoy sailed from SOUTHEND at 1930 hrs.
Company Location: Nothing to report.
Main Residues: Convoy anchored off NORMANY Coast at 2200 hrs.
Main Residues commenced disembarkation at 0700 hrs.
43 vehicles (23
Loaded Bde 2nd Line Am and reminder other loads and domestic) and 128
personnel under command It D.Y. PICKLES ("D" Platoon) arrived Company
Location CRESSFRONS at 2200 hrs onwards.
Remaining vehicles and
personnel not yet disembarked.
As from 1500 hrs today 27 Arnd Bde ceased to be under command 3 Br Inf Div,
and came under direct control of 1 Corps.
This Company as from the same
time comes directly under DDST 1 Corps for Administration.
Army Form G. 2118
Unit....
90 Coy RASC (Arma Bde - Assault).
Commanding Officer Major J.R.Cuthbert
2 MC, RASC.
References to Appendices
"WAR DIANTES SI
•No.
- 7 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelen
*630 L. Wt.48128/1073, 3191, 2/43. Wy.L.P. Gp.856.
*6391. Wt.48123/1073, 3103, 4/70. Пут -*
0лL882

