1x4
A Great Feat of Improvisation
the wet woodland greatly reduced the opportunity for the spread of fire, " these scenarios being
reversed in dry and warm conditions. 38
The static camouflage and concealment work were remarkably effective at some sites, but the
challenge was to lower the signature of dynamic activities such as track maintenance, vehicke
movement and case stacking, all three of which were generally more difficult to reduce in
the winter.
The logisticians were certainly well aware of the problem because CO 1 POLD-
requested the RAF to conduct, in early January 1940, an aerial visual reconnaissance fro
2,000 and 500 feet of the sites at Blain, Bouvron and Notre Dame, which resulted in the
production of a concise report highlighting the key issues.4º Unsurprisingly, it was the dynami:
activities, which attracted attention, although poorly camouflaged vertical stacks on the open
sides of forestry blocks were a clear indicator of a field logistic site. The report also expost
the failure to conceal bright green and blue oil drums, which were especially obvious as were
the bright metal portable conveyers used for moving the cases and cans." On a more positive
note, appropriately camouflaged low stacks in scrubland were difficult to identify, although
the site was compromised by the soldiers working at it looking up to the aeroplan, the pht
commenting, I should like to emphasise the much published fact, that the human face is or)
noticeable from the air. If a man dressed in khaki looks down and stands quite still, it is ven
difficult to notice him. 12 In this respect, personal drills were as equally important in protecting
fuel stocks, as the use of equipment.
Bulking Out
It quickly became clear to the GHQ Petrol Supply Directorate that the pre-war plan to ni
upon cased fuel were not sufficiently robust to service the needs of the BEF 'at scal and t.
Staff drafted an ambitious scheme to create a solution to increase bulk storage capability acros
the GLOC in three phases, with a particular emphasis on ensuring access to multimoca
37 1 POLD did not receive its three fire tenders until 22 March 1940. TNA WO 167/148/ 1 POLD
RASC, WD, 22 March 1940. The threat of fire was 2veM present, with one igniting in the nubit he
in the depot railway yard on 13 May 1940, an as ever present, aidiary does not speculate upon ti
cause, discarded cigarette ends were a constant hazard.
38 On 29 March 1940, the CO ordered, as a precaution against the s
Initialy d comouflaging the sides of the streks tinA Win the pa: f POLD RASC, WVD.
spread of fire, the removal of ll he
39 Initially, 1 POLD was assigned as 5 Section, 1 BSD but was re-designated as a depot when it becam
Aner that the storage and issue of petroleum prod but was e-deo be separated from the super
function. Apart from the technical entries in throducts required ao several others of interest. d.
December 1939, it reported that Printie in the war die there are feis chateau and the goalt.
the outs disposal, whilst on 3 December, the unit Costed ha Spit College students on a cours
1 POLD received a formal visit from Prince George on 4 May 1940, whilst a sadder entry o
40, ecorded the death by drowning ince Gial of tear 1, whompany AMPC. TA™
40
167/1148: 1 POLD RASC, WD.
Haro 147/19/ 1 POLD RASC, Report on Fligh over 5 Section, Squadron Leader HANG
TWO RA 1486: POLD RASC, Report on Flight over 5 Section, p2.
TNA WO 167/1148/1:1 POLD RASC, Report on Flight over 5 Section, p.2.
Leakers and Fillers
185
transportation.* Phase 1 focused upon acquiring bulk Ocean Terminal and Inland storage.
Ocean Terminal requirements were 25,000 tons at Le Harve, of which 15,000 tons was MT
spirit and the balance aviation fuel, whilst the British sought another 15,000 - 20,000 tons at
Dunkerque and 15,000 tons at Rouen to be delivered by small coastal tankers using the River
Seine. Eventually 70,000 tons of bulk storage was identified as possibly available through a
contract at Rouen and Honfleur, a smaller port opposite Le Harve on the River Seine, although
to achieve full effect it was necessary to construct a rail siding and dredge the berth at Honfleur.
The approach to the French to use tankage at Calais was politely refused. Phase 2 identified
possible sites on the Seine near Paris for 3,000 - 5,000 tons of bulk fuel accessed by Rail Tank
Cars (RTC) and road tankers. Phase 3 sought to generate Ocean Terminal bulk storage of
6,000 - 7,000 tons at St Malo.4* Accessing storage did not of course mean the tankage was
filled but because most of the proposed bulk stocks were to be imported as refined products,
theinterface with the French commercial co-ordinating organization, Société pour l'Importation
Des Petroles and Derives being crucial in managing conflicting priorities and resolving, with the
Host Nation authorities, issues relating to customs documentation and dues. 45
Inevitably, these proposals and plans initiated a series of concomitant supporting tasks. Whilst
the dispersion mitigated the risk of loss, the challenge was in controlling and maintaining the
stocks with the personnel resources to hand and a new unit, the bulk storage petrol company,
consisting of some personnel with commercial technical expertise from the petroleum industry,
was formed to oversee the military aspects of these ocean and inland sites 4 Transportation,
especially 3zd Line rail from the MBA and ABA to the corps Petrol Railheads (PRH) was the
other key issue. Whilst sheeted open rail wagons sufficed to move canned fuel, the movement
of bulk supplies required RCs and 148 x 15 ton cars were requested from the UK.47 To reduce
reliance on rail, GH sought to use IWT for canned and bulk petrol, although it was identified
that the French rarely carried packed petrol by barge.
Le Have to Honfeur and Rouen, supported by occasional tanker movement from Donges and
Brest to ports on the Seine. The concept was expanded to include a plan to transport daily,
600 ons of bulk petrol from Dunkerque to Douai to supply the can-illing stations in the rear
of the corps, although the French, because of limited barge resources, were only able to move
mall quantities, so MG BEF requested the acquisition of 12 power and 24 dumb barges from
the UK. A week before the German ground offensive commenced, two power barges arrived
« Dunkerque and one power and one dumb at Calais but the service never commenced 18 In
adition, it as car that bulk delivery by road would be required and an order was placed
through the War Office for the acquisition of 59 x 10 ton road tankers and 140 x 2.5 ton bulk
4) TNA VO 167/1076: GH, Supply Directorate (Petrol) Petrol Supplies for the BEF' (SECRET)
A MA 10 6 17: CHO, Suppy Directora (Pera), Petrol Supplies for the BE" (SECRET)
1 a 410 671076. CHO, Supply Directorat (Pes),
i Reginental Commite, The Story of the Royal Army Service Corps, 1939-1945 (Aldershot: Institution of
dated 28 October 1939.
A WOOH, Transportation, p.46.
