504
A Great Feat of Improvisation
repair operations 56 Although intelligence gave no clue as to the possible use of Gas Warfare
(GW) agents, and the operational situation in France indicated that such weapons were unlikely
to be used, the railways were prepared for such an eventuality, being capable of deploying
reconnaissance, survey and decontamination teams, in addition to completing repairs in
Individual Protective Equipment.58
The Staff identified the need to have a rapid, robust and flexible transport plan, which
they based on rail movement, supported by road transport. To deliver effective output, close
co-ordination with the railway companies at every level was required, created by liaison with
the Railway Executive Committee and the deployment of Railway Traffic Officers to major
stations. Military and civilian vehicles were employed to provide lift at the ports to entraining
locations if trains could not reach the dockside and to disperse personnel from terminal stations
to reception camps. Road transport was also ear-marked to provide alternative lift in the event
of rail routes to the ports being interrupted by enemy action or accidents. The Ministry of War
Transport provided 200 commercial motor coaches, with their civilian drivers, all on 12 hours'
Notice To Move for use in Kent, where the Operation DYNAMO debarkation ports were
located. 59 4 Ambulance Car Company RASC was allocated to Eastern Command, to support
ambulance train operations,61 which were run from Dover Marine Platform 3, Newhaven and
Ramsgate, although some patients were transferred by road directly to local military or civilian
medical facilities.2 Fourthly, the challenges in feeding and quartering the returning soldiers
required some innovative solutions, requiring assistance from the Voluntary sector.
Last,
but not least, Staff officers were keenly aware of the importance of the clerical aspects of the
reception, especially in relation to the public interest. Field and personnel records would require
56 HQ No 4 Railway & Construction Group RE and 160 and 162 Railway Construction Companies
(RCC) were assigned to this task. No 4 Group HQ deployed to the Southern Railway HQ at Deepdene
House to the South-East of Dorking, whilst 160 RCC deployed two sections to Ashford and two to
Redhill
162 RCC remained in reserve at No 1 Railway Training Centre Longmoor Hampshire.
TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Activities of DGT in the
Evacuation from France
57 For further details of GW defence preparations on British railways during the war, see, Earnshaw,
Britain's Railways at War, pp. 88-89 and Tim Bryan, The Great Western at War, 1939-1945, Tim Bryan
(Sparkford: Patrick Stephens Limited, 1995), pp. 31 & 75
58 Flustraint Vetting selection of photographs of railvay staff training in IPE, see Britch Railways
59
imber 8, May 1997
Evacuation from France.
INA WO 197/134 Evacuation from as and Quartering of the BET - Activities of DST in the
Five ambulances were allocated to eight SPODs and two at each of the initial halt-repas, plus a reserve.
61
Tatlow, Return from Dunkirk, p.61.
Outside the scope of this chapter but nonetheless very relevant, is the immense mental and physical
trauma suffered by many of the soldiers during the evacuation, often within a very short
hich the may not have ben chasife as the crication, perich on ery shot prio comme
provides an insight into this significant personal perspective. Having worked in GHQ, he waited his
turn, under air attack, on the Dunkerque
which he sailed was attacked and sunk
Mole for a place on a ship to England. The Dutch schuyt in
water to be rescued by a Royal Navy destroyer. JYIC 241099.
The casualty list is unknown, but he and. The Dutch schuytin
For the role of the civilian hospital services
in supporting the treatment of casualties, see. C D Dunr
HMSO, 1952), pp. 100-103.
of the Second World War (MBOH) Emergency Medical Services, Vol I (London
Back in Blighty
505
instatement, partly to inform the next of kin of those who were safe and those who were
Ile, missing or POW. Additional problems emerged during the recovery, which required the
sistance of other agencies. MI5 were involved with Customs & Immigration to screen civilian
durnees to seek out spies and Fifth Columnists, 4 whilst the soldiers returned with at least
10 dogs that required quarantine for rabies. 66
Hopelessly Split Up
lar Ofice planners produced a simple but effective solution, which was conducted in three
leges. Stage 1 was the movement by rail from the Sea Port of Disembarkation (SPOD) to a
reption Area, which, with the exception of sites in South and West Wales and the South
iands," were in the South of England, with the majority in the Aldershot-Bordon and
lisbury Plain military areas.9
To reduce initial travelling distances, and thus sustain
i return of passenger rolling stock, the Northern limit for Northern Command was
wth of a line from The Wash to Derby. The plan was based on utilizing the facilities of
sing garrisons and the soldiers in them to host returning members of the BEF on
one to one basis, which dictated the numbers that each Command would be expected to
577
This is a subject that requires exploration and lucidly illustrates that not everyone evacuated wore a
military uniform. Two were Belgian waitresses, Simone Duponselle (19) and Elaine Madden (17)
whose remarkable escape, with the BEE, from the Belgian town of Poperinghe to Dunkerque would
ace the pages of any regimental history or indeed action story. See, Egbert Kieser, Hitler On The
inter, (translated by Helmutal histor Loindeed rtion story See, Feet Kieser, Hit, On The
Naden 1923-2012), Simone's niece, joined the Special Operations Executive and parachuted inte
to the Special Allied Airborne Reconnaissance Force.
She
instly observed that, 1. stering to the Special Allied Airborne Reconnaissance Force. She
an ilok in the mirror and as ping Talow, Return from Dunkirk states one soldier brought his
French wife to UK disguised in battle-dress. 157th Brigade war diary records that three British ladies
i evacuated from Cherbo in battle-dress. 157th Brigade war diary records that three British ladic
16 June 1940.
There were also many civilians aboard HMT Lancastria.
The Official History of MI5 recorded that none of the individuals evacuated from Dunkerque proved
to be of importance from the espionage perspective.
There is no mention of other evacuations. John
Curry, The Security Serica 1908-1945 TOol Histor London The Dolli Retra Office 1999)
he regimental historv of 3rd Medium Regiment RA records that amongst several dogs, the regiment
Ropin which or Poppy i ran Wol i Prove it to a Bit whing in
i fary colonel founthe a to angler do, a Run des fore ang reached lichiel ha, in
Tatlow, Return from Dunkirk n. 65, states the does had to be
tory of the 3rd Medium Artillery Regiment, p.63.
recon, Cardiff, Llantwit Major, Newport, Pembroke Dock, Porthcawl, Tenby and Usk.
Northampton, Strattord-upon- Avon and Warwick.
Sec, Talow, Return from Dunkink, pp. 168-175.
