4901
A Great Feat of Improvisation
the transit camps, had packed 1,560 tons of equipment and stores ready for entrainment but
received no orders until 15 June, which then suggested either destruction or a move by rail
and road to evacuate through La Pallice, 223
As it transpired, neither occurred, although the
weapons and ammunition were dispatched by rail to 1 BOD. As a result, most of the ordnance
stores and RASC supplies were transferred to the Host Nation, with officers from the French
Army Intendance assuming control of the Ordnance and Supply depots.224 Brigadier Hawes
summarized the challenge in a letter to the chain of command: 'There are 140,000 Italians in
Marseilles at this moment and all our revolvers have been withdrawn. Dont [sic] laugh, it might
be quite unpleasant' 225
All BEF personnel were therefore, prepared for evacuation, with the
exception of a RASC supply section, supporting 53rd HAA Regiment, which was attached to
the RAF to assist in the defence of the French airfields of Le Vallon and Salon-de-Provence
in Southern France near Marseilles, which were to host two Wellington bomber squadrons,
deployed to attack, if ordered, targets in Northern Italy under Operation HADDOCK. 226 In a
finale, which was in keeping with the almost comic affair, the RASC supply section then arrived
on the quay to embark having been informed by 53rd HAA Regiment that the RAF elements
were also leaving. The parties thus set sail for Gibraltar on four cargo vessels, the SS Alma
Dawson, the SS Coultarn, and the SS Finland, 27 with 20 WMT vehicles on a fourth ship, the
SS Toussika228 Unfortunately, in the confusion and rush, compounded by dock labour issues,
several 3-inch AA guns were left in Marseilles, a contentious issue that was still doing the
rounds' in November 1940,22 although the LAA Bofors were embarked on the Alma Dawson.
Endgame
Despite the constantly shifting sands upon which the evacuation plans were based, the
logisticians were remarkably adept in reacting to the operational requirements, although they
were sometimes unable to provide the support because of the shortage of critical assets. Whilst
stock evacuation had commenced in late May, there is little doubt that the orders to mount a scale
evacuation of stocks and equipment was left too late, an outcome which, was incontrovertibly
223 TNA WO 197/131: Evacuation of Marseilles Sub-Area, Memorandum by Colonel (Retd) H F Hawes
dated 21 November 1940, p.3.
224 TNA WO 197/131: Evacuation of Marseilles Sub-Area, Memorandum by Colonel (Retd) H F Hawes
dated 21 November 1940, p.2.
225 TNA WO 197/131: Evacuation of Marseilles Sub-Area, Personal Letter (SECRET) from Brigadier
Hawes to Commander South District, Brigadier F W Bissett DSO MC dated 17 June 1940.
226 TNA AIR 35/323: Haddock Force Operations.
227 The SS Finland of 1,333 GRT had loaded cargo at Marseilles in early June for a voyage to Italy but
had been anchored in the roads. The Finland, in contrast to many other BEF ships, had a long life at
sea, being lost as the SS Bulwark on 1 April 1963 after running aground in fog 0.4 m West of Danger
Point Cape Province in South Africa whilst on a voyage from Cape Town to Durban carrying fishmeal
228 S in Win Wion ShiT) the SS Colam of CRT 3,759 and the SS Tousika (1.828 RT),
All three ships were lost later in the war. The Darson struck a British mine in November 1940, the
Coultar was torpedoed by U-69 in March 1941 and Toussika seized by the Vichy French at Casablanca
on 30 June 1940, being scuttled as a blockship at Port Lyautey in November 1942. Lloyd's Register.
229 TNA WO 197/131: Evacuation of Marseilles Sub-Area, Memorandum by Colonel (Retd) H F Hawes
dated 21 November 1940. p.4.
Run Rabbit Run
491
fuenced by the vision of an expanding 2nd BEF to assist the French to stay in the fight.
rational awareness, or rather its absence, resulted in flawed decision-making, with rumour
ther than fact becoming the driver, adversely influencing logistic commanders' comprehension
the speed of the enemy advance, the various interpretations of impact of the Franco-German
mistice upon the status of the BEF and departure times of allocated shipping, all of which
apressed the perceived time-space continuum.
Pans to move a smaller Base to the South, whilst an understandable reaction to the German
ance not only wasted valuable Staff effort, depot time and logistic resources but also lost touch
th the ability of the Sea Line of Communication to support operations or evacuate personnel
i materiel. The decision to send significant numbers of cargo and MT ships in a last throw
he dice failed to consider the logistic realities in France of the availability of depot labour,
wagons, train paths, locomotives and declining port capacity, all of which were crucial to
bling stocks to be evacuated. In the final event however, the greatest frustration for the
ticians was to deliver materiel to the quay, for ships to leave without a full load because of a
our that the Panzers were outside the dock gates.
