290 A Great Feat of Improvisation
Decontamination was not a difficult technical challenge, but it was certainly a logistic
one. Items of clothing and equipment exposed to Mustard vapour could be decontaminated
through weathering by hanging it outside for 24 hours or until the smell had disappeared. Items
contaminated with liquid Mustard required boiling, using 1½ gallons of water for every pound
of clothing, the time depending on the materiel, with respirators and face-tubes requiring three
hours.
Web equipment, canvas, cotton and linen were decontaminated by the addition of 2
oz of washing soda for every 10 gallons of water, whilst leather items were usually soaked in
cold water for an hour and then hot water for four, although Service boots needed six. 103 The
task was however, complicated by the acquisition of clothing, known as Anti-Verm, 04 which
was temporarily resistant to Mustard gas vapour, 05 although it offered only a small additional
protection against liquid splash. 106
By 1938, after three years of research at Porton Down,
co-operation with the textile and dry cleaning trades had produced an impregnation process,
using 2.4 Dichlorphenyl benzoyl chloroimide, which was capable of being conducted in a
standard dry cleaning facility. 107 In 1939, soldiers were not issued with AV Battle-Dress (BD)
but a reserve was held for the First Contingent of the BEF consisting of four divisions plus
Corps Troops, and this stockpile was increased as production increased. Serge AVBD was
stable in storage in temperate conditions and in field conditions Impregnate E was effective
for approximately three months. In 1940 however, laundering dirty AVBD posed a problem
Standard laundering, or cleaning with solvents, destroyed the impregnate, whilst the use of a
steam disinfector set up a reaction with it, which so damaged the stitching that the garment
usually fell apart and had to be scrapped as salvage. Hot air dis-infestation was the solution,
but this was a specialist task, and contracts had to be established, through GHQ Ordnance
Services, with French companies. 108
The logistic task in managing the AGE stock was complicated by British intelligence
deductions, which were, as it transpired incorrect, concerning the German weaponization of
Arsine (SA)iº9 an agent coded 'Arthur' by the British GW Staff.10 Driven by a report from
103 Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 8, 1939, Protection Against Gas, p.20, Sect 7, Decontamination.
104 The impregnation process was known as AV as a security precaution and battle-dress so treated was
called AVBD. This subterfuge, which suggested anti-louse or insecticide properties, was successful in
preventing unwanted interest in the subject but the Germans discovered the process after capturing
stocks of AVBD in France. On first issue, AVBD was stiff, a little tacky and had a slight odour of
chlorine but these unpleasant properties disappeared after several days of wear.
105 The neutralization of the vapour though, was important because in heavy concentrations it could
permeate the BD within 30 minutes.
106 Only rubber or oilskin suits provided protection against liquid Mustard.
107 TNA WO 189/4856: Porton Report, The laboratory preparation of Impregnate E (2.4 Dichlorophenyl
benzovl chloroimide)
108 WOOH, Special Weapons and Types of Warfare, Vol 1 - Gas Warfare, p.206.
109 Chemically, Arsenic Trihydride is a lethal, non-persistent agent, with a possible smell of garlic, which
acts systemically by destroving red blood cells. Even in small amounts it can cause anaemia but unlik
other blood agents such as Hydrogen Cyanide (AC) or Cyanogen Chloride (CK) it acts very slowly,
taking hours to days to achieve its full effect; it also causes damage to the liver and the kidneys.
110 This was supported by constant reports that the Germans were experimenting with a new gas, which
was true: the nerve aœent Tabun
The deduction was reinforced when economic intelligence revealed
that the Germans had bought large quantities of arsenic on the World metal market. The reality was
that some of the arsenic was for general industrial use, whilst that allocated to the chemical weapon.
programme was intended to make Arsenol, which the Germans used as a diluent in Mustard. In the
Taken for Granted
291
a rach amy that the German FE 37 respirator filter'' offered 10 times the protection
it Bich A Mark V,? the British GW political and military fraternity went into
sie," spit the fact that both British and French GW experts were clear that its field
tron made it an unsuitable war gas. a The possibility that the Germans might have
cocts alleges however, overrode a less cautious approach. The British thus went
i cos to modify the filters in 400,000 service respirators and an even bigger
ch 00o0 lian types,15 whilst also producing a special detector paper, Type
* Asan emergency measure, the connecting tube between the Service Respirator and the
* MEN ontar was cut in half, and an additional container, the Type EA, filled with
e manate raules, inserted. Production of the replacement Type E Mark VI filter,
i do al rated charcoal to filter arsine, was rapidly commenced, and remained the
and emister, with some additional refinements to the charcoal, for the rest of the war.
sit mat on industrial production and the additional burden upon logistic capacity,
corts were concerned about soldiers' confidence in the respirator, and thus morale. The
with men caster was welcomed but in the intervening period, those who had only
it foured Type E Mk V felt vulnerable. The new Mark VI was red in colour,
i do rational and logistic identification easy, but those soldiers not issued with it,
cent merest inadequately equipped. No doubt the morale of the men of 4th
on out have taken a serious dent had they been aware that in late April 1940, the AGE
or prosad asters held by 4 DPC were standard Mark V, which provided little
torin gins A. How this situation developed is not clear but when it was discovered
cot it in at taken to resolve it, with Mark V EA filters being acquired and
hit i min the a fice made a deduction that in the event turned out to be too
his NO, pia Napons and Ypes of Warfare, Vol 1 - Gas Warfare, p. 140.
Coras sure deplyed SA and the high level of protection afforded by the FE 37 against it, was
nu ticinous it AC. WOOH, Special Weapons and Types of Warfare, Vol 1 - Gas
dia bad boto, ich ca code on contact with air and disperses in the field very
