A Great Feat of Improvisation
Factory to Fire Trench
229
not practising daily operational technical logistic tasks by delivering ammunition, and although
storage was not the unit role, there were opportunities to improve knowledge and exercise
skills.
The CAPs and DACs did not keep the all the unit WMT permanently "bombed-up'"
with munitions, ground-loading178 stocks to rest the vehicle suspensions and chassis, conduct
maintenance and undertake other transport tasks. On 13 February 1940 for example, 5 DAC
only had six lorries loaded with ammunition, all of which, with the exception of 480 rounds
of 2 pounder anti-tank rounds'79 and one vehicle loaded with demolition explosives, was either
common user SAA or infantry natures 180 These arrangements were predicated on units being
able to rapidly 're-bomb' in response to alerts. On 13 January 1940, HQ I Corps, reacting to
a threat warning issued by GHQ, ordered all 1 CAP task WMT to be loaded to war scales
from local dumps and the I Corps ARH at Ecoust-Saint-Mein, before all leave was cancelled
the next day and the CAP placed at fours Notice To Move from 0915.181 On 15 January,
some ammunition stocks collected two days before, were ground-loaded to enable assigned
WMT from 1 and 2 Ammunition Sub-Parks to be detached to the DACs from Ist and 2nd
Divisions to assist in the movement of engineer demolition explosives. 182 It is also clear from
unit war diaries that these units were conducting a number of out-of-role tasks in addition to
ammunition field storage, which whilst not always doctrinally pure 183 demonstrated flexibility
and practised skills.
On 14 February for example, 5 DAC had 30 lorries on engineer support
tasks, 184 whilst on 1 March 1940, soldiers from 1 CAP were at the Corps ARH assisting
Ordnance personnel reducing the charges on 40 mm rounds, whilst on 2 March, WMT was
deployed to lift personnel and equipment of Ist Berkshires, 85 On 20 March 1 CAP was in-role
again, dumping ammunition to a corps plan, the war diary noting that, 'As far as possible, the
sites were located outside villages, 18 which must have brought little comfort to the inhabitants
of the dumps that were not.
Conclusion
Ammunition supply to the BEF was founded upon sound principles but the delivery of the
output met several practical challenges.
The issues created by deploying recently mobilized.
ad hoc BADs was exacerbated by a shortage of field equipment and an inadequate number of
178 On field operations, ground-loading refers to temporarily un-loading stocks from combat or gitie
vehicle bichions, gonna l habetes to temporader to rest or maintain vehicles or to undertake
ther support tasks. Ground-loaded stocks do not constitute a aum
70 One vehicl
carried this ammunition. in addition
to 8,040 rounds of 0.55 Boys anti-tank rifle
ammunition TNA WO 167/050. 5 DAC RASC WI 13 February 1940.
cartridges. ½-inch mortar Ht was noticeable by its absence.
181 TNA WO 167/137: 1 CAP RASC. WD.
182 TNA WO 167/137: 1 CAP RASC, WD.
183 ESR directed that In mobile
taRs pire a that, in mobile operations however legitimate functions, except in very exception.
operations however, no lorries or other vehicles provided for the
circumstanced Army Causail ESP Vall Ornivation and Administration a 350 Whilst the BEE
was not engaged in January 1940, on mobile operations, the point is made
184 TNA WO 167/250: 5 DÁC RASC, WD.
185 TNA WO 167/137: 1 CAP RASC, WD.
186 INA WO 167/127:1 CAPRASCWDI
taly qualified personnel, although these issues were slowly rectified over time.
The
ig of munitions from the UK in separate components to save space was commendable in
kristie sace but became a liability in the operational one. Both these issues would
a ten it had the German offensive commenced during the initial BEF deployment
a. he decision to hold additional stocks of ammunition in France because of the shortage
cal rag in the UK whilst apparently a neat solution to the problem was undoubtedly
rate, hich led to unnecessary losses in June 1940.
in the ammunition packaging was not suitable for field storage and the various
dits ore ammunition on a semi-permanent basis at the ARHs and in corps and
in damp, without the requisite logistic and personnel resources, led to a deterioration
ad ality. Damp was a problem, sometimes caused by the failure to create appropriate
won on et round and compounded by packaging that was not suitable for long-term
sing, it incorrect stacking often created damage to ammunition boxes. The length
: CLOC, generated by the position of the Base in Western France resulted in a reliance on
rement that was subject to possible disruption, thus leading to mitigating solutions, many
i, imposit to resource properly. As it transpired, the risk inherent in the forward
i potame matured because of the speed and direction of the German advance and
tics re lots articularly at over-stocked regimental gun-lines. Equally, the forward
i pride a important reserve during kinetic operations in May 1940, although the level
he pay, isual confirmed that there was insufficient WMT ammunition lift for an
regging in high-intensity mobile operations.
