366
A Great Feat of Improvisation
delays which were not recorded in the war diaries. One significant amendment however, was
the decision to change the SPOD from Le Harve to Cherbourg because of German bombing
and aerial mining of the port, and an escalating perception of the threat posed by German
ground forces.8º The Ammunition Sub-Park's war diary®' certainly gives a vivid impression of
the fast pace, whilst lucidly describing the competing priorities in a logistic unit in delivering
real-time support to the division at the same time as preparing for deployment. In particular,
the war diary is replete with entries relating to the collection of 1st and 2nd Line ammunition
from depots in Southern England, issues and inspection of equipment and the return of stores
and billets. 9th Lancers were pressed to complete the departure tasks because of late arriving
equipment and had to transport some of the tank ancillaries by rail to Southampton with the
personnel party, whilst the C Squadron Leader used his private car to carry machine guns, bet
boxes and sighting telescopes.83
Table 13.7
1st Armoured Division
Logistic Support Units - Movement to France
Unit
HQ RASC
2 Armoured Brigade Company
3 Armoured Brigade Company
1 Support Group Company
Divisional Troops Company
Ammunition Sub-Park
Petrol Sub Park
Armoured Corps Ordnance Field
Mov No
BS 6
BS 6
BS 7
AS 9
BS 6
AS 8
BS 7
AS 7
Park
SPOD
Le Harve
Le Harve
Le Harve
Cherbourg
Le Harve
Le Harve
Le Harve
Cherbourg
Date
17 May 40
17 May 40
20 May 40
24 May 40
17 May 40
23 May 40
20 May 40
21 May 40
Divisional Post Unit
BS 7
Le Harve
20 May 40
Logistic Issues in France
The person responsible for directing the Staf of the A Branch in HO 1st Armoured Division,
and thus bringing coherency to the output of the A Branch in as he Assistant Adjutant &
Quartermaster-General (AA & QMC), a General State Unite was The incumbent, recently
80 TNA CAR A4/67. The BEE: Relium and Artie 10 Man - 2 Tune 1940 enter 19 Man The decision
TNA WO 167/342: 1 AD ASP RASC, WD, May 1940.
Bramley in Hampshire, Corsham in Wiltshire and Woolwich.
Bright, The Ninth Queen's Royal Lancers, p.3.
Chasing the Rhino
367
arrived in early May 1940, fresh from the Directing Staff at the Army Staff College Camberley,
was a most able cavalry officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Keightley,* and he had certainly
had plenty to occupy his attention as the division deployed to France. One of his key tasks was
to grip the supply chain from the Main Base Areas.
This was much easier said than done, not
only because of the fragility of signal, telegraph and telephone communications but also the
dynamic and often conflicting priorities. In addition to the structural and organizational issues
within the Division, which were creating logistic dilemmas that the AA & QMG could do little
to immediately resolve, there were a mounting number of problems that required the attention
of the Q Staff in the AQ Branch.
In 1940, as now, armoured operational capability relied greatly upon the ability to deliver,
Equipment Support and thereby prepare, repair, recover and recondition', to restore armoured
combat capability as quickly as possible and maximize equipment availability. A key shortage of
spares for the tanks, compounded by the different types and variants, placed the delivery of this
key output, immediately in doubt. Keightley grasped this particular nettle hard, arranging for
urgent demands to be sent by teleprinter from Assistant Director Ordnance Services (ADOS)
it Armoured Division to Ordnance Services 5 at the War Office, which then arranged for the
inst delivered by air. Priority stocks arriving by sea were collected from the dockside by
RAOC vehicles and taken to the Armoured Fighting Vehicle (AFV) Sub-Depot and field park
sections for immediate issue to the relevant workshop.85
One of many issues was a manufacturing fault in some of the track plates, causing cracks in
the metal, thus requiring the plates to be replaced. This was a general problem because of the
hone lates and an especial one with the A A10 Mark IT tanks because the coster pins
we made from high tensile steel and coul not be removed with the standars tod kit one of
nay apparently small but nonetheless important issues that so easily eroded combat capability.
On more positive note, the 1st Armoured Division's logistic load carrying vehicle fleet, unlike
most the BE, had few impressed civilian platforms and consisted mostly of 4x2 military
variants, with the 3 ton Bedford OY prominent.
Creating a relatively standardized logistic
hide et quipped with more robust platforms built to military specifications reduced the
bling of pares lines that were required, as well as decreasing the repair and driving training
bin, rely generating were required, as well as decreatin a eueuis. Whilst obviously a
gretimprovement on other formations in the BEF; the 4x2 platforms in the armoured divisions,
ipted mobility limitations, a lesson re-learned in the Western Desert, which resulted in
84 Charles Keightley (1901-1974) was commissioned into the 5th Dragoon Guards in 1901 He hel
tary Dion, before being appointed, aged 43, to command V Corps in tray. Knigheed in 1945,
6th Armoured Division and 78th
senior command appointments, including C-in-C BAOR, Far East
Si god da ante. The Mobile Workshop was supported by a static facility at Nantes and the ArV
