128
A Great Feat of Improvisation
cased petrol, personnel, stores and vehicles to Brest, Nantes and Saint Nazaire. * White
Base was established in a Northern location around Brest and a Southern one in the Nante
and Saint Nazaire area, the BEF would deploy along a 500 mile GLOC, 3 which for thos
personnel in Motor Transport (MIT) parties disembarking at Cherbourg to collect vehiclestin
Brest was effectively 650 miles.3 The plan envisaged personnel from Cherbourg travelling b
rail to the BEF Assembly Area in the areas of Le Mans-Laval to rendezvous with the Will
road convoys and the tracked vehicles on rail from Brest before moving by road" and rail" u
the Concentration Area near the Franco-Belgian border. A reconnaissance of the propo
Base and Assembly areas was completed in September 1938 by a British Military Mission
conjunction with the French authorities but because of security concerns its members didn
study the detail in sufficient depth, nor were any of the officers who conducted it posted to the
QMG's staff in GHQ BEF, flaws, which were exposed when the deployment commenced:
This frustration was cogently expressed bv
the Deputy Assistant Quartermaster-Gener
(DAQMG) of War Office General Staff (Plans):40 We had no accurate information about the
conditions in France, the port facilities and the railways......A great deal of information wasn
fact available but none of it had been obtained by an officer trained in administrative matter,
and it was all too vague to be of any use? 41
This comment is of interest because according to
the War Office history of Movements, QMG Staff officers were attached to the GS Plan
Branch and conducted several visits to France under its auspices to conduct discussions with
the Quatrieme Bureau of the Ministere de la Guerre, inspect ports and identify sites for potenti
BEF logistic facilities, 2 Perhaps the fixation in the War Office with security, " negated this
For vessel details, see Winser, BEF Ships, p.7.
Map 4: BEF - Transportation and Rail Line of Communication.
MT parties travelled by rail from Cherbourg to Brest, a distance of 150 miles.
Map 5: BEF -
Road Routes from Ports to Assembly Area.
Troops trains for the BEF were planned to lift 800 - 2000 soldiers plus stores and baggage, inhaiy
epas en-route for light refreshments. WOOH, Transportation, Brigadier R Micklem CMG CBE Ma
Offce, 1950), p.27. Whilst Plan W4 notes that trains were granted rail paths, the feeding of th to
was for some reason, not embedded in the Maintenance Proct Plan (MPP). WOOH, spice.
40
INÁ CẢB 106/211. 'Notes on the QOrganization of the BEF dated 16 January 1942, para 2,
War Office GS (Plans) formed in June 1928 misted of ta main to pane so cat the othe
DANG headed by a Royal Artillery Lieutenanticed of A lars, on 6S (Plans) was repait-
for coordinating all Army contingency planning, including that for France, the Middle East, India .
1971, pp. 445-456.
WOOH, Movements, pp. 26-27.
As be buy me dure, nearly al the documents relating to Plan WA identif the pors using and,
number but the document listing them is not in the relevant TNA file, WO
Cotrial instruction Plan W4. Other paper nov in the pocubut not the codes. Fortunate, poe
disitivein diagram dated 26 September 199) sal the ports but nuth coresing, despit it ho
sensitive information, it was not classified. The codes were: Brest (052), Cherbourg (046). Nantes (042.
Was She m Nazaire (041). Dieppe, Le Harve and Marse Breast (0st coded in the document D..
was the medical evacuation port, whilst Le Flave MarMiles ates nee no icluded in Plan WA Ki
Marrying the Driver
129
work to the point where senior logistic commanders, nor their Staffs, were permitted access
to the broader plan, which made it impossible for the specialist experts to offer professional
assessments of the logistic implications of the General Staff's directives and instructions, the
issues only becoming clearly apparent to them as the deployment started. At the very least,
coherent staffing communication appears to have evaporated and during the initial movement to
France, these dysfunctional arrangements certainly generated significant disruption to the flow
of consignments beyond the ports, with Movement Control,** Ordnance Services and the Army
Postal Service* initially in the dark as to the locations and future dispositions of units. Oddly,
the post-campaign notes from QMG BEF make no mention of security being an issue in this
respect, * although the Lessons Identified document from GHQ Transportation Services lucidly
articulates it as a feature, whilst it is evident from some of the Base installation war diaries that
it was more than a nagging irritation until it was resolved, creating consequential interruption
to outputs and considerable additional corrective work. 47 To compound this mistake, the failure
to ensure a professionally qualified Works Services officer from the Corps of Royal Engineers
was embedded in the pre-war reconnaissance team resulted in serious errors of judgement in site
selection, resource requirements and project timeline analysis.48
Plan W4
The 1939 Plan W4 prepared by the War Office GS (Plans) Branch* intended that the First
Contingent of the BEF should be deployed in three phases, shown in the table:
GLOC sites were also listed: Rennes 052), Le Mans (053) and Amiens (113). TNA WO 167/1379:
CHO BEF Assistant Director Postal Services (ADAPS), diagram dated 26 September 1939, Appx 30.
44 Whilst the Manual of Movement (War) observed that 'security is usually of paramount importance,
especially in concentrations and strategic moves, its overzealous application during the deployment of
the BEF caused more problems than it solved. An additional complication was that five letter codes
46 TNA CAB 106/211: Notes on the Q Organization of the BEF dated 16 January 1942
TNA WO 167/51: GHQ Transportation Services, DG (In) dated 11 October 1939.
from the reconnaissance party in order to reduce the numbers on the basis that the General Staff and
Tro gond recruit it it it a tar the Fien ad agre to provide all
49 See, Haves, The Story of the "W" Plan, pp. 445-456.
