64 A Great Feat of Improvisation
although the Royal Engineers had started to utilize an increasing amount of mechanical plant
for construction, and in conjunction with contractors and port authorities, for dock operations,"
Politics and Money
In December 1937, the Cabinet agreed the priorities for the re-equipment of the Armed
Services: Royal Navy, Royal Air Force, Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB) and the Army's
Field Force.® CIGs was thus channelled by the politics of the hour to place GBAD of the
United Kingdom at the top of its priorities® and a European deployment under the Western
Plan at the bottom. War Office expenditure on equipment was therefore, prioritised on Anti-
Aircraft (AA) guns and ammunition, gun tractors, searchlights and ancillary items, 6o whilst to
decrease costs, the supporting logistic vehicles were to be provided by emergency impressments
from the civil sector, which given the plan to utilize most of them in the UK Home Base
reduced the operating risks to this solution. The changing dynamics of the Army's role had
a clear influence upon logistics in terms of units, war reserves and equipment, and the ability
of industry to deliver to meet emerging and then sometimes evaporating requirements. The
agreement to form a Field Force regardless of its shape and size was logistically shaped by
its potential deployment Theatre.
The Eastern Plan, which included India and the Middle
East, and within the latter a focus upon Egypt, 2 had priority over the Continental Western
Plan, generating specific equipment needs for hot desert operations 3 but wider logistic issues
also emerged including the provision of tentage for Territorial Army Field Hospitals and the
production of petrol tins.64
The initial pre-occupation of the War Office with the Eastern Plan and especially desert
operations, affected not only the provision of nearly every type of equipment and store but also
Morling DSO OBE TD (Comp.), Sussex Sappers: A History of the Sussex Volunteer and Territorial Army
56
Royal Engineers from 1890 to 1967, (208th Field Coy RE Committee, nd but 1973), p.58.
Army Council, Military Engineering, Vol VII, Accommodation and Installations, 26/Manuals/1062, War
Const (london: HMSO: 1934), pp.263-275, Mechanical Handling otiateria anual 238-300
Constructional Plant.
57
At an ad hoe meeting of ministers on 8 November 1937, it was agreed that: The Secretary of State for
War should be authorised to instruct the War Office that the provision of anti-aircraft defences is to
have absolute priority over all other forms of war material'. Quoted in Gibbs, BOH, Grand Strategy,
Vol I, Rearmament Policy, p. 467.
58 CP 316 (37) Memorandum by Minister for Co-ordination of Defence dated 15 December 1937,
Wisequently confirmed by the Cabinet. See, WOOH, Fighting, Supten a datera 1S D Vehide and the
Var Office Organization for their Provision, Part 1, Common Problems, Major R Campagnac RASC &
Major P E C' Hayman, 15/19 KRH (Comps.), (War Office, 1951) p.11
For a summary, see, Gibbs, BOH, Grand Strategy, Vol I, Rearmament Policy, Pp. 460-464
ne frustrations within the Army were clear, General Ironside, meet Policy, pp. 460-46 Commanding-
in-Chief of Eastern Command, recording in his diary of 3 February 1938: The Air Defence of Great
Britain is absorbing all the money which was intended for the Field Force. "The Air Ministry dictate-
what it wants and the Army estimates bear the cost'; Macleod & Kelly, The Ironside Diaries, 1937-1940,
Por a description, see, Gibbs, BOH, Grand Strategy, Vol I, Rearmament Policy, P. 465-482.
See, Ibid, pp. 483-486.
WOOH, Fighting, Support and Transport Vehicles, Part I, Common Problems, p.3.
Ibid, p. 8.
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
65
P1.2 Colonial Logistics. Colonial operations often required specialist or modified equipment incurring
increased expense, whilst sometimes reducing capability for combat in Europe. An example is a Ford
B Van with SDF body fitted with headlamp sun reflectors, water condenser and additional petrol and
water can fitments for duties in the Sudan. (RLCM: RAOC/WTB1/NNA/0481/1)
the quantities and specifications The subsequent change of priority to the Western Plan
resulted in equipping an increasingly motorized and mechanized Army to Continental war
scales, a decision requiring a major uplift in industrial production. Whilst these two demands
were not mutually exclusive, they established creative tensions within the Army's organizational
and equipment programmes, which generated increasing frictions in initiating industrial
production, especially in relation to a very substantial proposed need for logistic WMT. The
maturing plan expanded exponentially between December 1938 when War Office requirements
were based upon meeting the approved five division deficiency programme, and April 1940, when
schedules for supporting a thirty-six division Army were assessed, although only thirty-two had
been authorised by this date.? The industrial base in the UK fundamentally underpinned future
military logistic resilience, a point expressed by the Secretary of State for War 68 "I recognize, no
67 In December 1939, the War Office collated the requirements for sixty principal stores to support,
by mid-1941, a fifty-five division Army. These figures were indicative and also arguably speculative,
although the Treasury and the Ministry of Supply interpreted them to mean they should plan but not
68 Few
act upon them. See, MIM Postan, BOH, British War Production (London: HIMSO, 1952), p.73, Table 8.
