Leakers and Fillers
186
A Great Feat of Improvisation
MG 97930
P6.2 Bulk Fuelling by Road. Thornyeroft Road Tanker of 1930. Whilst the "fimsy took priorityin
fuel distribution, the concept of bulk refuelling using road tankers did not evaporate and was expande
to support units in the Base Areas and airfields. (RL.CM: A1b/MT/ Tankers 5474)
fuel lorries. As a result of this decision, three Bulk Petrol Transport Companies BPTC) vec.
deployed to the BEF to move bulk petroleum products in the GLOC Area. A BPTC had
HQ a workshop section and three operating sections."" Operating sections had 15 taken.
each of which was of 800 or 1,000 gallons capacity, plus an additional five held by company He
A BPTC had therefore, a one-time lift at 100 percent availability, of 40,00 50,0 alo
depending upon the size of the tankers; at divisional and corps level however, the tin remain.
the distribution method.
Developing a close relationship with the French Army petroleum specialists was time vel
invested both operational and technically. The Petroleum truly Directorate team" bad a
most useful visit to the French Grand Quarter General on 27 October and were briefed upon.
the French Army fuel supply system, which included underground storage, pipelines, filli
For oils of equipment, vehicles, weapons and trades, see WET WE IV/191/A4C(/, c, Phan.
logistic capabilities of mechanized armies. On 11 November, a petrol supply reconnaissance
team from GHQ BEF inspected potential sites at Rouen to establish a fuel supply depot in the
ABA. A location on the Quai des Colonies, within the Standard Oil terminal, was selected,
In adition, there was sufficient space to accommodate the key processes of a can filling unit:
recipt and storage of empty cans, filling operations and storage and dispatch of full cans, with
a capacity of 11,000 x 4-gallon returnable cans per day. 53
Eburite and Explosion
The leaker problem quickly appeared and was a logistic feature of the deployment and the
subsequent campaign, which caused a reduction in operational capability, initiated a need for
aditional stocks, generated a fire safety problem, especially on ships, contaminated ground
and created accounting issues. 1 BSD staff estimated that 75 percent of the leaker tins were
in wooden cases, whilst the cardboard Eburite caseS was initially rated to be better than the
wooden case and the most robust, a three-ply one.» Practical experience however, soon proved
that the Eburite cases would not dry properly if they became wet, eventually losing their form
and the company was requested to investigate the possibility of water-proofing them because
vood and three-ply material were increasingly in short supply. This task had, according to a
GHO Petroleum meeting on 13 February 1940, been satisfactorily achieved offering, allegedly,
protection for six months of field storage. In addition, to provide can corrosion protection, a
dirtie was sue to paint all the MiT spirit cans green," which no doubt also had a positive
resultin improving tactical camouflage and concealment because once out of the case the bright
thiny in was not the most welcome item in a location, especially when the Sun was shining.
The concept of casing fragile tins in materials that whilst cheap, was relatively insubstantial and
yet intended to be stocked in field conditions, indicates that there was insufficient intellectual
tigoa, common sense and practical testing applied to the detailed application of the initial
net. The external protection of the tins was not the only problem with the flimsies. In
city may 1940, Q Corps was reporting water contamination in petrol and diesel stored in
Si Trademit was formed in the UK in 1927, introducing high-pressure lubrication systems for vehicles in
190 for expanding into amongst other automotive servicing areas, fuel pumping equipment.
52. TINA WO 167/1076: CHI, Supply Directorate (Petrol), WD, October 1939.
TNA WO 167/1076: CHO, Supply Directorate (Petrol), WD, 11 November 1939.
Se Brie was a trade name for cases manufactured by the burite Cardboard Container Company of
ST T NO 1674076 CHO Supply Directorate (Petrol, Notes of Petroleum Mecting of 13 February
