338
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Secondly, for operational reasons, there was a growing desire to place stocks on railway wheels
in order to generate a flexible and response reserve of combat supplies. Whilst entirely logical
from the military logistical and operational perspectives, in uncontrolled environments it could
easily immobilize precious lift and the issue was one of the commercial imperatives for the
railways to charge wagon demurrage to persuade customers not to use railway assets as free
storage facilities.
Thirdly, several trains dispatched to Ammunition Railheads (ARH) had
munitions insecurely loaded in open wagons without sheets, resulting in boxes being damaged
and ammunition exposed to the rain.& These trains had therefore, to be returned to the depot,
unloaded and reconstituted with box vans and new loads; hardly the model of logistic efficiency
or indeed of operational capability 87
The BEF also required additional motive power, which was provided, as in the Great War,
by the acquisition of locomotives from the UK commercial railways, although these required
several modifications® to operate on the SNCF system. The preparation and deployment of
these assets was conducted under the code-name Operation DERWENT. The original plan
was to dispatch 100 x 0-6-0 Tender locomotives for heavy shunting duties®' to arrive by the
end of January 1940 followed by 300 x 2-8-0 main line freight locomotives," with a phased
deployment commencing in February 1940 at 40 per month. In the event, the 0-6-0 delivery
schedule was delayed, with only 79 arriving by May and a decision was taken not to commence
the deployment of 2-8-0 locomotives until June 1940, so fortunately none of the latter arrived.
In addition, 16 shunting locomotives from the LMS were also dispatched to the BEF: 8 × 350
hp 0-6-0 Diesel-Electric" and 8 x steam 3F 0-6-OT Jinty." The three rail ferries operating on
88
In 1940, many ammunition boxes were made of wood.
According to a post-war report on ammunition supply in the BEE, 1 BAD RAOC was responsible
for these failures
1945.
see, TINA CAB 106/235: BEF 1939-40, Ammunition Supply, Brigadier C Gibson.
For the shunting and main line locomotives, these included the removal of the vacuum braking system,
Automatic Train Control (AC) equipment and ve included the the fil of the wasum braking stem,
and Flaman speed recorders. Some of these modifications were made in the UK, others by railvay
units in France. Spark arrestors were also fitted to locomotives operating in fuel and ammunition
depots.
he locomotives selected were from the GWR 2301 Class (Dean Goods) and all of them required
varying degrees of overhaul or repair. Despite their age (those selected had been built between 1890)
wed 199) these tender 0-6-0 locomotives spite their ale (chose selected had been it bet an 1890,
weight. In addition, the class had been widely deployed with the ROD on the Western Front during
the Great War. William AT Aves has investigated the fate of these 79 Dean Goods in Supporting the
Brin ape fiery For pat ton of Was Barmen 2-8. locomotives from the Les im
planned to dispatch 300 ex-Great Central Railway (GCR) locomotives serving with the LNER. Many
of these engines were veterans of the ROD.
No 206 insines were wetro ofthe team and DE locomotives dispatched to France. Captured by
the Germans in 1940, it is in private ownership in UK.
Five of these locomotives were recovered from France, returning via the Dunkergue-Dover ail fern
service until 1967 and nine of the type are in preservation, although the none of the BEF survivors are
amongst them.
Tracks Across France
te Havich-Calais LNER service" and the one on the Dover-Dunkerque (Southern Railway)
note we essential to the swift delivery of these assets. The early agreement with the Host
Voin to import locomotives from the UK to support BEF rail operations® led to an urgent
eat aste provision of coal from the UK, the French being unable to provide suitable
sods. By 3 October 1939, the War Office had advised the Mines Department of the monthly
quirement in the period October 1939 to September 1939. Commencing with 2,000 tons
roth in tober including a 1,000 tons initial reserve, the demand rose to 4,000 tons in
cray 1940, 14,500 in May and 30,500 tons by September.?5 Whilst the details of future rail
mans had it to be decided, it is clear that from his experience in the Great War, DGT
SE miage rail activity'at scale' and directed his Staff to plan accordingly.
Marning and Manning
- datin the specific railway units allocated to task, there were numerous supporting
is to ' railway stage. RE general construction and AMPC companies were
nect but ding and repair of the Permanent Way (PW) and a wide range of supporting
tart. AMPC companies were also deployed to supply labour at railheads and in
i po. Close liaison was maintained between the BEF and the SNCF at every level.
can Control lements were vital to the effective management of the BEF's railway system,
sing tre and fient use of the assets. A central timing office was established in Paris
coct it orations with SNCF HQ and was the rail clearing house for all BEF
i otis a hug al initial movement requests were passed through the French Army
crio animation. FRTOs were deployed at each railway HQ; central, regional and
sit cort it Host Nation civilian companies and agencies were an indispensable
c ral a matrix and involved many activities including the purchase of stone
i gry, to commodation, the negotiation of workshop services, the leasing of
tig, pio a bur and the delivery of rail services. Finance was also a key task
cold it a portation, the DGT Finance and Accounts Office being located at
can a 7. i ginally established to negotiate financial arrangements with the
(i adito her ransportation arenas, although rail was always the focus. Its
The rive to but 1917 and imaginatively named Train Ferry Nos 1-3. These ships
no 050 a Muly, For The Kings Service, Railway Ships at War (Easingwold:
num of the A rements concluded with the Delegation of the Commission Centrale de SNCF
sit t ta laN C dated 21 September 1939. TNA WO 167/51:
1 in cries a prain, a fic BA/Ta/18 dated 3 October 1939 letter to,
( am in parent hortation, Wad. Ohe coal should be good quality Welsh steam coal
