Foreword
It is strange that we have had to wait until 2020 for a detailed study of the logistics of the British
Expeditionary Force (BEF) in 1939-40 to be published. Strange, because logistics underpin
all military operations: without the ability to move and supply troops, nothing can happen -
nothing good, anyway. History is replete with examples of what happens when logistics ar
neglected or go wrong, Napoleon's retreat from Moscow in 1812 and the German Ardene
Offensive of December 1944 (the 'Battle of the Bulge') among them. It is scarcely a startin
insight for a military historian to proclaim the importance of logistics, but all too often ast
subject it is treated to lip service at best. Sometimes it is worse than this. I can think of an arice
on British operations in the First World War in which the authors state that they have ignore.
the logistic implications of their argument - yet logistics should have been central to the cs.
Logistics, in short, remains a deeply unfashionable subject to research.
Clem Maginniss, thankfully, is one of the few authors to buck this trend. As a British Army
officer and career 'loggie, who is also a skilled historian, he is admirably qualified to wit
this book. It is not going too far to say that he has cast the BEF's experience in a nev light
Even for someone like me, who thought they had a decent grasp of the subject, A Great it.
of Improvisation is a revelation. Popular authors understandably concentrate their attention o
the teeth arms, especially the infantry and tank crew. Even the best scholarly study Elva.
Smalle's The British Expeditionary Force, 1939-40 (2015) did not include logistics as on oli-
major themes. So much of what is in this book will be new to almost all readers.
The detail includes the low-level and mundane; a fire in a garage which destroyed in.
motorcycles was the BEF's first loss of logistic equipment on the day the balloon went up d
10 May 1940. This was not caused by hostile action, put as the author comments it was hatch,
an auspicious start to the campaign? Far from mundane is his account of the evacuation fine.
of communication troops from Dunkirk and other ports, and of course his detailed descriping
and analysis of how logistics actually worked - op in some cases did not work - dung th
Phoney War and the fighting in May-June 1940. One particularly obscure but fascinating son,
that is told here is this the BE's preparations for chemical warfare. We know that gas was nit
used in 1940; but given the experience of the First World War, which had a huge in un
on the inter-war Army, it is not surprising that the BEF was prepared to fight in a chernie.
environment and, indeed, use gas offensively. Perhaps the mast compelling part of th song)
the strenuous and mostly successful efforts made to prine most co of chemical weapons back i
the UK when it was dear that the campaigm was going badly. As Maginis not logisti
thus performed a role that was strategically was point, as the stock of gas weapons were
'significant military and political asset'.
XXXvi::
Foreword
xxxix
Clem Maginniss also paints on a much broader canvas. Although at first sight it might seem
that he has written a rather narrow study, in fact it fits into a much wider context and sheds
light on larger issues. David Edgerton's work, for instance, has turned conventional wisdom
about Britain in the era of the Second World War on its head. Professor Edgerton argues
persuasively that Britain was a 'warfare state', militarily strong, not weak, and the roots of this
power predated the outbreak of war in 1939, not least in British preparations for total war. The
Chamberlain government, popularly regarded as hapless because of its appeasement policy, in
reality did much to put the British economy on a sound footing for war. This book offers some
powerful support for this thesis. Take, for instance, Maginniss's discussion of the construction
of new Royal Ordnance Factories in the late 1930s. 'Each of these new facilities, titled Royal
Filling Factories (RFF) using prodigious amounts of labour and material funded entirely by the
taxpayer took three years to complete, with limited and phased production being started whilst
building continued'. This broad view of logistics, from 'Factory to Fire Trench' to quote the title
of one of the chapters, is one of the things that makes this book so valuable.
Of course, much more could have been done in the 1930s to ready the British armed forces
for war. That was particularly true of the Army, which generally stood behind the Royal Air
Force and the Royal Navy in the queue for resources. As this book shows the logistic corps
were not exempt from the shortages and problems that beset the BEF in 1939-40; the case
study of logistic support to 1st Armoured Division makes that clear. That these problems were
mostly overcome was down to the quality of the people who made the BEF's logistic system
work. It is inevitable that a book on the history of logistics offers relatively few opportunities for
individuals to emerge from the khaki mass. On occasion they do and give the story a human
face. Two stories which stuck in my mind concerned the two officers who, under enormous
pressure to evacuate chemical weapons, fell out so badly as to have a fight; and the five men
of 153 Railway Operating Company who were killed in action in the course of bringing back
trains from advanced locations. Clem Maginniss concludes that The foundations of logistic
support to the BEF were, given the circumstances, remarkably sound, although there was a high
level of improvisation required'. Fortunately for the BEF, sufficient men at a variety of levels
rose to the challenge of departing from the script, and improvised, with a great deal of success.
Clem Maginniss has carried out a formidable amount of archival work and the result, A Great
Feat of Improvisation, is an important book. It brings out into daylight much about the history
of the BEF which has hitherto been in shadow. No future historians of the BEF of 1939-40, or
indeed the British Army of the Second World War, will be able to ignore it. It sets the bar for
military logistic history very high indeed.
Gary Sheffield
Professor of War Studies, University of Wolverhampton,
and Honorary President of the Western Front Association
Wantage and Wolverhampton, July 2020
