A Great Feat of Improvisation
resources, it was impossible to deliver it, 12 whilst the crucial importance of individual technical
logistic competence was clearly highlighted.
The campaign in France rejuvenated many old logistic chestnuts, although it is unfortunate
that the formation war diaries shed such little light upon the challenges at brigade and divisional
levels 113 That there is so little comment probably indicates that logistics was perceived to have
operated remarkably well in the circumstances, but from the historical perspective it may
be deduced that fundamentally, its effective delivery was undermined by the manner of the
operational deployment, compounded by the failure to hone the relevant formation logistic
skills, although the vital issue relating to the shortage of tank spares and reserves did little to
support a positive outcome. Interestingly, the Bartholomew and Evans Reports are also mostly
silent on these issues. 14 Brigadier Crocker highlighted a series of pertinent points, not least
of which, was the importance of ensuring that the appropriate Ist and 2nd Line logistic slices
were allocated to armoured brigades, regiments and squadrons that were detached to other
formations and units. 11s
The War Office failed to grasp the importance of generating a robust solution for the forward
recovery of armour, only belatedly initiating work on an armoured recovery vehicle based on
the Churchill I tank chassis as a result of operational experience in the Western Desert. 16
The failure to procure a HET for tank deployment and recovery is more understandable given
the experience of the Great War and the expectation that tank railheads in France would be
well forward,"' but incredibly the dramatic experience in France in 1940 failed to prompt any
112 See, summary note of 79/Mob/3244 held in TML MH 5 Box 2 (355.486.4).
113 None of the files researched shed light on the combat supplies scales in France. The TMI has one
locument relating to the 1 AD in UK during September 1940, which is brief but of interest, especially
as the division is allocated to VII Corps with Ist (Canadian) Division. Rations: 3 days preserved in
all AFVs and vehicles in A Echelon and one 24 hour Iron Ration per man. Petrol: RASC 3rd Line
to refill from Corps dumps. Ist Line to refill from dumps, using 4 gallon tins, only in an emergency.
Ammunition: 2nd or 3rd Line RASC to refill from Corps dumps. Ordnance: 2nd Line through the
2 (SECRET) S/10 Home Forces dated 8 September 1940.
114 The Bartholomew Report and its su
also published in the
Brtish Army piting 129 0k held in TA WO 106/1741 404 171 vas tas
The Bartholomew
report was a considered examination of the lessons identified and the proposed remedial
measures. The committee did not examine the 1 AD campaign, the only relevant sections appertaining
to the utilization of armour being the operations of armoured car regiments and divisional cavalry
allocated to infantry and motor divisions. The Evans Report was pla med to be an integral component
115 Brigadier J Crocker,
116 The initial vehicles had no winch fitted, relying on tractive effort to effect the recovery, which user
experience had firmly identified as an issue and future production equipments had winches. Minutes
13th Meeting, AFV Recovery and Committe, 3 March ian, Suilanks 2866 cited in WOOH,
in delivering armoured capability in the BEF', Maginnis, An Unappreciated Field of Endeavour, p.294-
Chasing the Rhino
375
change and it took the fighting in North Africa compounded by the paucity of rail capacity
at hatre to ram home the lesson that the acquisition of HETs was essential to military
By definition, the demands of the situation created extemporization, and the RASC for
umple, provided lorries to lift the equipment and ammunition of the four dismounted troops
med in the 10th Hussars after they had insufficient tanks to crew. ' Such logistic flexibility
aired positive assent, reinforcing the need to ensure agility in the manoeuvre environment
it heating the debate in the RASC about whether companies should be commodity or task
wed. he most important lesson however, was importance of divisional logistic units having
dusty we-red soldiers, who were capable of fighting when necessary and implicit in this
xes was that they should be equipped with suitable weapons, be able to use them, and be led
datermined and able officers and NCOs who were prepared to seize the initiative.
iS Army, despite the British experience North Africa, failed to recognize its importance and
at lean the hard way of the critical edee that HIFTe off reten armourd combat capabilite an
did not start production of 40 ton HETs until April 1943
a dear mom our equipments. Sce, WOOH, Pating Super eng fee,
forward, later US models had armoured cabs for the crews, a feature
«a Comic, D0сm Roya272328s in the Second World War, p. 20.
