Leakers and Fillers
183
182
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Table 6.1
BEF Key Packed Fuel Storage and Filling Facilities
Depot
1 Base POLD
2 Base POLD
3 Base POLD
4 Base POLD
Base Petrol Filling
Centre.
Main Access
Location
Rail
Blain
Rail
L'Hermitage
Rail
Abancourt
Rail
Moult
Argences
Donges
Lomme
Rouen
Sub Area
Nantes
Rennes
Rouen
Cherbourg
Remarks
In-load from Caen SPOD
Rail
Road
Rail, Road
& IWT
Rail
Road
Road
Nantes
Corps
Rouen
Commercial operation
Lille (Lomme)
Section detached to
Lomme
Vertou
roret de la Traconne3
Dump
Dump
Nantes
Nantes
Rouen
To support AASF
To support Air Component
The challenges of storing larges quantities of cased fuel safely and protecting it from the attentions
of the enemy was an issue examined before the war. Concealment in buildings removed the
need for camouflage but liquid fuel, and petrol in particular, could not be stored inside closed
buldings, the hazards created by the vapour from leaking tins being all too obvious.
Open-
side barns were one solution, offering some protection from view and the weather, but groups
of them effectively generated an identifiable target. The logisticians' solution was to site most
of the depots in forests, where cased and canned fuel stacks could be hidden and camouflaged
under the tree canopies, with ever-green locations being the preferred options. This approach
however, created additional logistic burdens, including engineer works to the forest tracks to
sustain the movement of WMIT and the provision of tarpaulins, which were used to break the
harp edges of the stacks, but the canvas had to be appropriately painted to blend in with the
P6.1 Ocean Terminal. Shell-Mex bulk tanker and storage on the River Tyne at Jarrow in the late
19205. Despite the pre-war plan for fuel distribution to rely upon the disposable can, limited bulk ice.
commercial capacity was introduced to provide a reserve immediately before the BEF's deploymen,
with the concept being slowly expanded. (RLCM: POL/RASC/NOR)
establishment of the rail-served No 4 POLD 10 miles East of Moult Argences, a town 12 mile
South-East of the port.32
A POLD consisted of a plus a number of sections, each with 54 personnel established o
store 6,500 tons of packed fuel along a rail whisker in 25 x 260 ton stacks; key task equipment.
consisted of 6 x tractors and 12 x trailers. Labour was planned to be provisioned on the ba i di
one man handling eight tons of packed fuel per eight hours, or if Material Handling Equipment
Base) was not available, five tons." A POI. could be deployed in the Base, the Adranced
Base and corps areas and was thus an excellent example of a unit, which was based upon tast
organization," it size and output being based upon the require mint. The main POLD, holding.
mainly cased fuel, are shown in the table below.
32 TINA WO 167/1076: GH, Supply Directorate (Petrol), WD, entry 12 November 19, Th hing
33
Beauvais factory.
Wesestablished using a connection to the private Potto, MD, x ray lin that served the Tir te.
34
Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 1, p.158. Such MHE included portable conveyers
much the term task organization was in use by lal the 2ot able cury, the concept and acting i
much long Chitory and is focused upon ugly lans the 20r Contre, the cohe relevant Commed,
Control & Communications structure and assets to meet a particular mission or task.
5 TNA AR 35/23: Reserve stocks of aviation fuel, bombs and small arms ammunition, 1940; AASE
