xlii
A Great Feat of Improvisation
The staff of the Tank Museum at Bovington, particularly Jonathon Holt, extended every
courtesy in selecting supporting illustrations from the Collection and I am immensely grateful
for the constructive assistance of that doyen of historical tank knowledge, David Fletcher MBE.
The staff at the Defence CBRN Centre Winterbourne Gunner were most helpful in searching
for period documents relating to Gas Warfare equipment, storage and training. Major (Retired)
Jim Salisbury and Dave Hargreaves of Swynnerton Training Area were enthusiastic in their
support in enabling me to study the physical history and remains of the Royal Ordnance Factory,
which once occupied the site.
lowe a great debt to the regimental committees, authors, editors and researchers of the Second.
World War histories of the Corps of Royal Engineers, Royal Army Service Corps, Royal Army
Ordnance Corps and Royal Pioneer Corps, whose industry has enabled future authors to access
not only the professional deeds of their logisticians but also some of the colourful characters and
personal contributions to the events in France and Belgium in 1939 and 1940.
My thanks are also due to Dennis O'Callaghan, the Son of Private William O'Callaghan,
of the 2nd Norfolks, and one of only two survivors of the massacre at Le Paradis on 27 May
1940, for writing a Personal Introduction to A Great Feat of Improvisation and to Professor Gary
Sheffield for his courtesy, time and analysis in scribing the Foreword. My thanks must go to
John Head and the members of the 2nd Norfolks' Pilgrimage Group, many of whose direct
relations fought in the campaign, for the opportunity to visit some of the sites of the BEF's key
actions and to hear of their relatives' service.
I must pay special thanks to Major (Retired) Stephen Pope for not only his 43 years of Army
comradeship but also his assistance with tank material, which has been invaluable, whilst his
fascinating and comprehensive book, the The First Tank Crews,* encouraged me to write A
Great Feat of Improvisation. My grateful thanks are also due to Hollie Barrett, whose scientific
qualifications have been so well applied in the creation of the excellent maps and diagrams and
her contribution to the cover graphics. I must thank the dedicated team at Helion, especially
Duncan Rogers, the industrious members of which, have turned the script on my hard-drive
into a book on the shelf.
My greatest gratitude of debt though, is to my wife Edwina, who has, in addition to her
demanding career, acted as researcher and sounding board, which she informs me, has been a
positive experience. Although a retired officer of the Queen Alexander's Royal Army Nursing
Corps (Volunters) she has proved herself to be a true logistician, who has sustained me day
and night, morally and physically, whilst I have been head down researching and writing. She
has done so much to ensure that our A&‹ arrangements have never failed whilst I have been
writing this book, but her especial contribution has been, without doubt, the delivery, without
fail, of outstanding Food Services and she has therefore, fully met the motto of the Royal
Logistic Corps, We Sustain; thank you.
4 Stephen Pope, The First Tank Crews, The Lives of the Tankmen Who Fought at the Battle of Fler-Courte,
15 September 1916 (Solihull: Helion, 2016).
Author's Preface
A Great Feat of Improvisation refers frequently to A&Q, the period abbreviation for Adjutant &
Quartermaster-General, which in 21st Century parlance is Personnel and Logistics. Whilst the
latter term may be more familiar to the contemporary reader, I have chosen to retain the A&Q
nomenclature, not only to sustain the historical thread but also to maintain coherence with
the documents from the period. A Great Feat of Improvisation focuses upon the 'Q' capability
provided by the Royal Engineers, the Royal Army Service Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance
Corps and the Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps.
There is a dip into the 'A' arena, particularly
in the areas of leave and welfare, which required substantial resources to function effectively,
but I have not analysed the operations of the Army Medical Services,' which in 1940 were the
responsibility of the Adjutant-General, with the exception of the 'Q' interface in relation to
the evacuation of patients by ambulance train? and the supply and transportation of supporting
ordnance equipment, medical stores and consumables. Also omitted, is the work of the Provost,
except in relation to its key logistic task of road traffic control.
The headquarters and unit war diaries held in the National Archives (TNA) Kew have
been fundamental to researching the operations and performance of the British Expeditionary
Force's logisticians, but the documents have limitations. In some instances, the use of security
code-words and numbers, some of which, 80 years on, are difficult to match to specific tasks
or locations, whilst the use of 'veiled' words require some deduction to tease out the meaning.
Some records do not exist in the TNA having been destroyed during the evacuation of the
BEF, whilst others were lost or damaged in transit, and over the years, it is obvious that some
For details of the Army's
medical units, structures and capabilities of the period, see, Lieutenant-
Colonel T B Nicholls MB CHB RAMC (Retd), Organization, Strategy and Tactics of the Army Medica
Services in War, 2nd Edn (London: Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, 1941). For a description of the operation:
of the Army Medical Services in the British Expeditionary Force, see, F A E Crew FRS, History of the
Second World War (BOH) The Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1 (London: HMSO, 1956), pp. 1-
113.
Army Service Corps), also
moved patients. Whilst the deployment of the ambulance trains is examined
as a component of the BEF's railway operations, the movement of patients by road has not been
ssessed because without describing the medical evacuation chain, its
intext would be lost.
Division Ammunition Company for example, recorded on 31 May 1940 that: 'Appendix and recor
of issues and receipts of ammunition were lost in the general destruction of records on 29th May 1940*
TNA WO 167/250: 5 DAC, WD
xliti
