Marrying the Driver
137
136 A Great Feat of Improvisation
with a cargo of two batteries of AA guns and supporting specialist equipment, was sunk i
shallow water by a magnetic mine laid by U-32, 3.5 nautical miles from the Scarweather Light
Vessel in Swansea Bay on 5 October 1939?3 Whilst the local authorities pondered upon the
best salvage solution, the RE Movement Control officer engaged a Trinity House cutter and
diver to conduct the urgent recovery of the important range predictors and height finders tr
equipment could be refurbished at Woolwich. 4
The railways in the UK ran hundreds of ammunition, freight, vehicle and passenger tri-
to support the mobilization of the Armed Services and the deployment of the BEF and AA
to France.' Whilst not on the scale of 1914,% 261 trains were scheduled to arrive at tr
Southern Railway's Docks at Southampton between 9 September and 5 October 1939, hit
34 special trains were run in the period 12-19 September bringing 14,000 soldiers to Alderchi
Command. Despite this military railway activity most units considered the mundane proces
of a railway journey unworthy of comment but some regimental scribes took more inters.
1st Berkshires record of the battalion's departure from Farnborough North Station was mr.
poetic than martial noting that:
On the surface it has the appearance of a casual military move made for a prosaic
purpose; beneath, the organization ran smoothly, without fuss or bother of any sort,
just as it had been planned. The troops arrived and entrained; the whistle blew, fiers
from the Depot waved from the platform; the jolting on the points of the rail ceased;,
and the battalion settled down to its journey'??8
2nd Essex noted the circuitous journey from Brentwood and Warley Station, with the tri,
running North to Cambridge, then travelling South-West through Bedford, Berchley 2ad
Bicester before heading South to Reading and then Southampton." 2nd Cameronian ves.
fortunate to travel by a more direct route from Richmond in Yorkshire but were dared it.
several hours when the train they were in was struck in the rear between Nottingham ni
Leicester on the London & North Fastern Railvay Great Central Line by a locomotive handing.
another troop train at around 0600 on 11 September 00 Fortunately, the collision and it.
93 War difivements, p.142, records this ship as the 5S Marari. She was salvaged and write.
95
war. Admiralty, British Merchant Vessels Lost or Damaged by Enemy Action, p.63.
The SS City of Florence survived the war.
96 In 1914, there were 711 special trains accented into Southampton Docke involving 1422 t
Southampton Port export arrivals, with rail traffic in blue and listing:
Departe a Station, Army Division allocatra, inb, eard lies, Trice, Ariley pic, Sure.
Train Number, Time of Arival,
Staples Press, 1953), p.179.
100 The Ministry of Transport accident records are silent on the circumstances of this incident, which m
Martin, The Essex Regiment, p. 131; 16 September 1939.
have been the result of a mis-judged shunting move or the relatively fortunate outcome of a much mor
damage were both minor and the train arrived in Southampton 16½ hours after it left Richmond
but with the advantage that the battalion detrained in swift order, embarking on the SS City of
Paris at 1830, two hours after arrival.101
One of the key limitations to the deployment plan was separating the MT parties from the
vehicle ships because there was usually insufficient suitable accommodation on the available
vessels. Whilst bedding down on the decks' was an acceptable solution on the short sea crossing
from the South East Ports to Boulogne, Calais and Dunkerque, the War Office decided that
as ships in convoy from the Western Ports might be at sea for several days, the troops should,
for the most part, not accompany the vehicles, a decision which undoubtedly caused delays in
executing Plan W4 because the MT parties had a 30 hour rail journey to Brest and then a 250
mile plus drive to the Assembly Area centred on Le Mans to meet the unit main body groups
travelling from Cherbourg by rail. 02 Indeed, the BEF QMG Staff noted that the first problem
that had to be overcome in delivering the deployment of the BEF in France was that of 'marrying
the driver who landed in Cherbourg with the vehicle that was landed at Brest' 103 Some units
were fortunate in this respect. As examples, the 13th/18th Royal Hussars sailed complete from
Southampton to Brest, the 15th/19th Royal Hussars from Avonmouth to Saint Nazaire, the
3rd Medium Artillery Regiment from Avonmouth to Brest and 208 Field Company RE from
Southampton to Cherbourg. 2nd Cameronians were also relieved not to be split but rather less
enthused as a Line of Communication battalion to detach B Company for dock security and
labouring duties at Cherbourg and A and C Companies for the same at Brest. 104
Lost at Brest
The docks at Brest, Nantes and Saint Nazaire were a hive of activity, although not all of it was
constructive. Pilfering of stocks on the dockside and of equipment from vehicles was rife, a
problem not confined to France. The Manual of Movement summarized the challenge in securing
military equipment in a commercial environment: 'The safe custody of consignments in transit
is the responsibility of the technical transport agency, but is often difficult to effect without
considerable assistance from other authorities 105 Whilst collecting 2nd Lincolns' vehicles from
the dockside at Brest, officers and drivers discovered that all the locked car and van boots
had been rifled 16 The MIT party of Ist Berkshires was shocked and angered' by the open
serious failure of a signal passed at danger. In October 1939 there were six accidents on the National
Rail Network that were of suicient severity to require notification, although only the two involving
fatalities at Bletchley and Hindley have a published report.
101 Brigadier C N Barclay CBE DSO, The History of the Cameronians (Scottish Rifles), Vol III (London:
Sifton Praed, nd but 1947), p.30.
102 This was raised by Director
-General Transportation (DGT) BEF (Brigadier D J McMullen) in a
deployment After Action Review, in which this was a noted as a lesson identified', although the
WO 167151: GH Services, Transportation, DG (In) dated 11 October 1939, Lessons.
103 TVA CAB 106/211: Notes on the Q Organization of the BEF' dated 16 January 1942, para 3.
104 Barclay, The History of the Cameronians, Vol III, p.30.
105 Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), p.42, Sect 40.
