82
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P2.3 Empire Experience. 6x4 WMT in India. The 6x4 configuration with twin wheels was mainly
superseded for mass production with 4x2 and later 4x4, using single tyres. (RLCM: Alb/MT/
RLCA/20717)
very capable vehicles were built and the Colonies provided a sound market for small numbers
of cross-country equipments. The Indian Army operated in some especially demanding terrain
and being independent of the War Office for vehicle procurement, adopted a different approach.
By the early 1930s, American manufacturers had established a commercial market on the
Sub-Continent and GHQ India purchased Chevrolet and Ford trucks with six cylinder engines,
which were more capable of handling the steep gradients on the mountain roads 28 GH India
also sought cross-country haulage capability for artillery, a demand which, resulted in some
magnificent lorries," such as the Guy CA 8x8 of 19313' These minor order, repealed mainly
to small firms specializing in high quality equipments but they were unable to deliver mass
production to meet the demands of a Continental war.
Fletcher, British Military Transport, p.61.
For illustrations and more detail of this fine piece of or meering, see: Philin Ventham and David
1 ton or less, whilst "lorries' were load-carriers of 30-cwt or more
Load-catrying vehicles had two generic variants. The term truck described load-carrying vehicles of
1990), pp.99-100.
•letcher, Moving The Guns: The Mechanization of the Royal Artillery 1854-1939 (London: HMSO
Everybody's Trucking
The mixture of vehicles in the British Army of 1939-19403' was influenced by the Crosland
Committee," which was formed in 1934 to consider to what extent the 3-ton 6x4 lorry could be
replaced by a civilian 4x2 model. It exceeded though, its initial Terms of Reference (TOR) by
degrading the influence of the Eastern Plan and enhancing the importance of the Western Plan
for deployment to the Continent, which was to undergo many revisions before it was enacted as
W4 in the autumn of 1939, and thus unhinged the future deployable capability requirements of
the Army. In assessing the balance between Six and Four wheelers, the Committee was guided
by a set of employment principles, which were accepted by the War Office, two of which were
of particular significance. First, where cross-country capability was essential, for instance some
1st Line transport, 6x4 equipments must be retained. Secondly, RASC Divisional Ammunition
Companies (DAC) were to have a proportion of six-wheelers to support artillery units in
locations incapable of being reached by 4x2 vehicles. The Committee thus recommended that
over 50 per cent of military 6x4 vehicles should be replaced by 4x2 civilian types, on the basis
that as an expeditionary force would deploy to an operational theatre with good roads and
railways, the importance of capable military specials had declined, except for niche tasks such as
gun tractors and specialist recovery vehicles.? One key assumption the committee made, which
no doubt enhanced this perspective, was that the Army would not require to operate in terrain
which matched that of the trench areas on the Western Front, during the Great War, * thus
providing a strong argument against those proposing a requirement for tracked logistic vehicles.
Hiring and Firing
To supplement the in-service military specials, the War Office sought the assistance of the
civilian sector through four sources: the Subsidy Scheme, hiring, impressments and production.
Vehicles with a military specification usually came via the War Office Vehicle Subsidy Scheme,
through which, the War Office paid an annual sum to transport companies to purchase and
operate suitable equipments on the understanding that they would be available for military
use? There were a series of standards and specifications to which, vehicles had to conform
covering the transmission, chassis, radiator, axles, wheels, brakes, bodywork, and lubrication.
Operating criteria for a 30-cwt Subsidy 4x2 vehicle for example, included the capability to travel
with its maximum approved load at 30 mph for one mile and at 22 mph for two hours, whilst
being able to climb an average incline of 1 in 10 at 8 mph. The fuel tank had to have a minimum
capacity of 15 gallons, creating a range with its reserve supply in reusable cans of at least 200
miles with the maximum load. Of especial significance, was the requirement to quantify the
spares provision for each type of Subsidy vehicle? Managing this process in the detail was a
31 For a comprehensive review, see, Les Freathy, British Military Trucks of World War Two: Manufacturers,
Types, Variants and Service of Trucks in British Army and Royal Air Force Service, 1939-1945 (Erlangen:
32 Report of Crosland Committee in War Office file 57/Vehs/6060 quoted in WOOH, Fighting, S
d Transport Vebides, Part II, Unarmoured Vehicles, Major R Campagnac RASC and Major P E C
Hayman 15/19 KRH (Comp.), (War Office, 1951), p.8.
Ibid, p.8.
36 Tbid, pp.35-36.
The Subsidy Scheme was initiated in 1911. For enactment and operation particulars, see Ibid, pp.9-39.
