314 A Great Feat of Improvisation
whilst not the preferred GHQ solutions, were, in the circumstances, the only options, although
utilizing additional labour and time to achieve the result. Local purchase of spares to support
corps units and the OFPs was undertaken by the Advanced Ordnance Depot at Arras but
was not without considerable frustrations. As many items had no part numbers, acquisition
by ordnance and workshop personnel was undertaken by eye, whilst the complex inventory of
impressed vehicles created yet more challenges.?8 On a positive note, by the spring of 1940,
military vehicle production in the UK, especially in the 1-3 ton range, saw a step change in
holdings and activity, which enabled some of the unit deficiencies to be filled. In April, 1 OFP
received 439 WMT variants and motorcycles, mainly by road from 2 BOD,' before issuing
them 'at a furious pace day and night'. 80
By early May, there was a brief respite, the soldiers
having sufficient time to attend a concert-party and enjoy daily bathing in the Chateau lake,
which the unit had cleared of weeds, recreational activity that the German invasion brought
to an abrupt end. 81 The OFPs were also responsible for the provision of artillery and signals
equipment, which were deemed to be priority materiel and the OFPs dedicated considerable
time to ensuring that the correct quantities of these key items, each marked with a red code,
could be loaded to specified vehicles in the event of an emergency order to move location."
Technical and Tactical
In addition to 'keeping the wheel turning' logistic Staffs and units had internal business to
resolve
In the Base there was an urgent necessity to enhance productivity by revising
procedures, enhancing trade training and procuring additional equipment, whilst at the corps
level there was an imperative to generate greater tactical and technical synergy. In this respect,
there was always an underlying creative tension both in the Base and in the corps to developing
skills whether trade, tactical, logistic or military. Skill at Arms was a particular issue in many
logistic units, with HQ 5th Division upon its formation in December 1939, identifying that 690
personnel had never fired their personal weapon. These problems were never entirely resolved
whilst the BEF was in France, with much of the focus being "On-The-Job' training, the standard
and intensity of which, varied depending upon commanders, tasks and resources, although
increasing numbers of personnel from units in UK were attached to the BEF to enhance their
knowledge and experience of operational and technical tasks.84 The regular pre-war divisional
units of the RASC were the most resilient, whilst the Base units, formed upon mobilization,
78
TNA WO 167/1194: 2 OFP RAOC, WD, entries February 1940.
Given the distances, the wear on the equipment and the manpower involved, it is surprising that most
of the WMT moved by road. It is approximately 350 miles from Nantes to Arras and 145 from Le
Harve to Arras.
80
TNA WO 167/1192: 1 OFP RAOC, WD entries April 1940. Some of the convoys were of appreciably
WMT vehicles
On 1 April 1940, 100 WMT vehicles and motorcycles arme of the On and on 25 April, 87
and 30 motorcycles
TNA WO 167/1192: 1 OFP RAOC, WD entries 1-10 May 1940. 1 OP also erected ding board,
TINA WO 167/1194: 2 OF RAOC, WD, attic -10 May 1940. 10FP also reced disin mont:
after deploying to France, short of cookhouse tables. 2 OFP, WD, 25 March 1940.
576 soldiers had not fired the rifle and 114 sh ables 2 See, MD 25. Butch 1940 Gor Line, 235.
Poro ample, Captain Bridges of 43rd (Wessex Dolico See, Thurlow, Building to 2 DP for laming
petrol duties'. TNA WO 167/212: 2 DPC RASC, WD entry 18 February 1930.
Sharpening the Sword
315
with a varying mix of personnel, had the greatest challenge in 'sharpening the sword'. The
opility of the Corps Ammunition and Petrol Parks matured once the combat formations were
rated on the Franco-Belgian frontier, COs making the best of the opportunities to conduct
some ividual and technical training, whilst practising collective operating procedures.
DPCs were kept busy in their daily logistic role and had less time to allocate to military and
ta train but equally became well practised in their technical work, a process, which
got to the visional RASC units once the formations were operating in France. Whilst
Exch of the fuel distribution was routine, there were numerous special tasks to engage CPPs
ad PCs. In early March 1940, the Host Nation demanded that vehicles carrying petrol
tised cans hould not be located in villages, which meant that either woodland locations
& WWT had to be found or the stocks had to be ground loaded and camouflaged in field
is 12 March 1940, II CPPs7 opened a petrol replenishment park for 4th Division,
rich included 3,00 gallons of dieselite and 2,000 gallons of M160 lubricating oil, which was
hit troted 4 PC to support a special force formed to counter enemy parachutists.88
la tic pril 140, I CP assisted the newly formed III Corps with managing the Petrol
Richa (RH)a Houdais and the nearby field fuel site at Begin in preparation for III Corps
ting over these facilities. There were loose ends that required tying because the change of
roposity cured around the period that the first 4-gallon returnable cans were flowing
-i co, ich required close supervision of the reverse supply chain and the imperative
Dish the radia failure to camouflage the petrol-tin salvage dump at Begin."*
Via no major combat activity to support, the DACs had the least practice in their operational
ni, thin theory should have enabled these sub-units to allocate more time to training and
i met intenance but the shortage of WMT to meet numerous tasks in the corps areas
ct to corol and guard ammunition on the ground, which the DACs were not
torst undertake, eroded the slack, 5 DAC," for example, received a constant stream
t i thing movement of RE stores, 'on-call' coal duties, the collection of scrap
to n i authorities and the transport of troops." Whilst these tasks offered
i point i da voment dril and clearly demonstrated the Alexibility of
port old MI it meant that ammunition had to be ground-loaded by manual
no grate it and then be correctly stacked ready for inspection and movement.
r pin cated several issues, including site selection, camouflage, security and
i cat pid coad or other serve t Line vehicle fuel carried in the reusable
A MAN 1671095 1L0C Rulead Company RASC, WD, entries March 1940.
Te OC was aior H T Gilchrist MBE RASC
1 MAN 6 I CP RAS CB. his entry is interesting from a military perspective because
+ tric cat th a more tactically and logistically innovative than some authors
0 ON CR RASC, VD, mtie, 15-23 April 1940.
