Marrying the Driver
133
132
A Great Feat of Improvisation
inevitably reflected in the effectiveness of the Maintenance Project Plan (MPP)" and the Kn
Plans (KP).62 Four issues in particular, were to cause frustration to the logisticians. The first va
effectively a strategic one because whilst the aerial assault did not materialize in the timefra
they had expected, the mitigation of the risk, particularly through distance and disperin
created as many problems as it solved because the consequential length and fragmentation ofte
GLOC, compounded by fragile communications, generated the need for assets to be deploya
to operate the increasing number of logistic nodes, whilst an insufficiency of suitably qualifi.
and experienced personnel to execute the tasks exacerbated the problem.
The second was at an operational level, which involved a fundamental mis-appreciation ci
the importance of appropriate covered storage with supporting transportation acces for th
Base Supply and Ordnance depots.
Thirdly, were two tactical level issues.
The landing of
troops, ahead of supplies, was an issue resolved through the good services of the French Arg
Intendant-General department at Brest and Cherbourg, which placed at the BEEs dips.
sufficient reserves to cover the shortfall as well as assisting in the purchase of local prodi
including fresh vegetables, potatoes, fresh milk, eggs, coal and wood." The separation t
drivers from vehicles, which in the view of many logisticians a fundamental mistake, ro
compounded by a miscomprehension of the practical effects of French mobilization upon ti
railway timetable from Cherbourg to Brest, which was planned to take seven hours to or
150 miles but sometimes took 30, most of which was not a relaxing event. 2 Docks Gog,
summarized the experience of many soldiers, the war diary recording that its advance pary
arrived at Brest 'after passing a grim 26 hours on the train'. 64
With Untiring Energy
Logistics were fundamental to the mobilization of units in the UK, with regimer
quartermasters at the centre of activity, the QM of the 13th/18h Royal Hussars being accola
especial praise: "August was a time of feverish activity for the Regiment. Stores and equinc
came pouring in and work fell particularly hard on Lieutenant-Colonel and Quartermast
A G Ellery and his team, who worked with untiring energy. The 15th/19th Royal Hist
dispatched 21 officers chargers to the Remount Depot at Melton Mowbray but sil trainin
full complement of horsed cavalry equipment on charge a year after it had been mechanice.
61 TINh WO 1972 First Maintenance Project: Reception of Force in France and system of maintenan.
in the initial stages.
The Ps vere contained in appendices to the main document. The Ist KP showed there.
allotment of the installations and depors of the Bain do a mere. Cale Map. The 2nd KP did ,
the logistic lay-down.
requirement bu logistic Service while the 3rd KD fused upon natant dated arrangements for
WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol I, p.105.
Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), pp. 57-58, Sect 55.
The 2 Docks Group RE, WD, entry 11 September 1939.
65 Lieutenant-Colonel Ellery was 56 which preeluded him from serving in an active theatre of operatio
overseas and he handed over to a newly commissioned QM, ex-RSM Burder, the only member of the
66 Major G Courage DSO, The History of the 15/19 The Kings Round are 1939-1945 CAHoot Gial
History of the 13tb/18th Royal Hussars, p.33.
regiment who had embarked with the 13th Hussars in India for service in France in 1914. Mile
& Polden, 1949), p.4.
As Reservists and Militiamen arrived in barracks, additional accommodation and rations
were required, whilst mobilization stores were inspected for quantity and performance. Ist
Line ammunition, except smoke rounds for mortars and artillery, was drawn upon orders for
embarkation.68
An important task was the receipt of military vehicles and WMT impressed from the
commercial sector, sometimes the day before embarkation, caused much additional work,
especially as units were tasked with painting ex-commercial vehicles khaki-green. A vital issue
was the management of the AFG 1098 equipment for units forming upon mobilization, many
of which were War Establishment only' Base organizations, yet essential to the sustainment of
the deployed BEF. 76 Company RASC, assigned as No 1 Works MT Company, was informed
in mid-October that it was unlikely that all of its mobilization stores would be issued before its
deployment to France and such arrangements meant that instead of AFG 1098 stores being
received and inspected by the unit in the UK, they were dispatched to the relevant overseas
port care of the Docks Directorate, which of course did not allow for ships being diverted to an
alternative destination, or the fact that such consignments had to be held in store at the port, an
installation military doctrine assigned as a transit facility and not a depot.? To compound this
failure there were no allocated resources to manage the task, creating unnecessary congestion
and confusion. The result was chaos, with some equipment disappearing from the accounting
regime and thus resulting in a full re-issue, whilst other units received items that added little to
their operational capability, one example being the delivery of several dental chairs to a Royal
Artillery regiment.?3
In between the many military activities, a key logistic task was to store the regimental silver.
2nd Essex dispatched its precious history enshrined in metal to the local Lloyds Bank for
safekeeping escorted by six soldiers with fixed bayonets. The next day the regimental Second-in-
Command was horrified to see the boxes being transferred to other storage by an elderly driver
67 The 15th/19th Royal Hussars received over 600 reservists in the first 10 days of September 1939, but
few of them had been trained as mechanized cavalry and they were rather bizarrely equipped as horsed
cavalry, probably because this was the only clothing available before dispatch to France to serve in
red and blue. Miller, History of the 13th/18th Royal Hussars, p.34
TIT 6 or Transport Company (76 Company RASC), WD, 15 October 1939
Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), p.59, Sect 56.
T3 WOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol I, p.26
