xliv
A Great Feat of Improvisation
files have been extensively weeded. The RAF Narrative of the Campaign summarized the fate of
some of the records: The one big gap in the British records of the campaign, from the air aspect,
relates to the RAF Component....and the historian in search of fuller documentary material
in this direction is regretfully referred to an indeterminate spot at the bottom of Boulogne
harbour'. This regrettably also applies conceptually to some of the Army's logistic records.
The war diaries can pose a challenge.
Entries should have been made on the AFC 2118
but in some instances, especially in ad hoc units, blank or lined note-paper has been utilized.
Some war diaries, and those of HOs in particular, are in typescript, whilst those in manuscript
have varying levels of legibility, with pencil entries susceptible to fading, and inevitably in all
records, the content is variable. War diaries were kept in different ways by units, subject to
direction by Commanding Officers and Adjutants, or reflected the whim of their scribes and
compilers. HQs with clerical support and experienced Staff officers were much better placed to
record and analyse events, with the content and composition generally subject to over-sight and
scrutiny, although sometimes those diaries without close supervision are often most revealing
in their honesty and frustrations. In addition, some war diaries were compiled or completed
after the campaign, either from notes or memory, with all the possibilities of error, inaccuracy,
forgotten detail and added colour. Some war diaries lucidly expose controversial or unpalatable
issues, whilst others, in remaining silent on such matters, leave the researcher in the position of
never knowing, unless information comes from another reasonably reliable source, of whether a
contentious issue has been intentionally omitted
Logistic units usually had a much greater test in detailing events than infantry battalions and
artillery regiments. In some cases, the geographical spread made it difficult to receive and collate
timely information, in others the deployment of small detachments created a complex matrix
of activity, which was challenging to summarize.
Conversely, some authors were assiduous
in their work and conscientiously recorded matters of routine detail sometimes at the expense
of the wider picture.
In this respect, the orders of the Officer Commanding 5 Divisional
Ammunition Company RASC is most unusual in directing the compilation of RASC Section
(ie platoon) war diaries, which contain much interesting information on 5 DAC operations,
tasks, administration and soldiers, with detail in some cases down to individual vehicles and
drivers. Historians though, have a huge debt of gratitude to those who laboured, often under
the most trying of circumstances, to capture the events of the day and in the broader sense, there
is more than enough information across the spectrum to offer a strong flavour of their trials and
One indispensable secondary publication based upon detailed research at the TNA is
Alan Philson's, The British Army, 1939-1945, Tables of Organization and Equipment, British
Expeditionary Force, Organization and Order of Battle, 10 May 1940, referred hereon in the book
TNA AIR 41/21: The Campaign in France and the Low Countries, September 1939 - June 1940, RAF
Narrative (TOP SECRET) Air Historical Branch, 1944, Foreword.
A letter from War Office Records to OC 2 Division Petrol Company in late December 1940 took note
of the fact that the unit war diary for May 1940 was "in the course of compilation' and With regards to
the war diary for June, it will suffice if it commences on the date of the re-assembly of the unit. TNA
WO 167/212: 2 DPC, WO Records 26/Records/3804 (C7) dated 28 December 1940. In this instance
it appears that the 'compilation' probably refers to all the supporting documents because the AFC 2118,
which is mostly in pencil, has all the hall-marks of being completed contemporaneously.
TNA WO 167/250: 5 DAC RASC, WD.
Author's Preface
xlv
as BEFORBAT, Volumes 1-6 (Milton Keynes: Military Press, 2005-2007). BEFORBAT
contains all the known War Establishment Tables (WET) of every type of unit within the BEF
and is an outstanding reference. Most of the information in BEFORBAT has been carefully
mined from the myriad of relevant War Office files and can only be described as a Labour of
Love. Alan Philson is to be commended upon an exemplary piece of work, which has delivered
these most useful documents to historians in a coherent and structured manner. The other key
reference is John de S Winser, BEF Ships, Before at and after Dunkirk (Gravesend: World Ship
Society, 1999), which is the shipping equivalent BEFORBAT. BEFORBAT and BEF Ships
deserve wider exposure and accolade in the military history community because it is works such
as these that provide the fundamental foundations of comprehending the BEF's structure and
capability.
Last but not least, I have where possible, tried to bring colour to the process of military
history by introducing the names of various logisticians from Private to General. Their names
and actions have, for far too long, been consigned, for good or bad, to the memories of their
families or those who served with them and it is timely to bring them and their contribution to
the BEF and the defence of the Nation to life. Many will inevitably remain anonymous, their
names never receiving a mention in the records, but I believe that those that appear on the pages
of the book offer a fair reflection of the courage, competence, industry, initiative, innovation and
dedication of the BEF's logisticians but equally the frustrations, fears and failures of ordinary
soldiers immersed in extraordinary events.
Clem Maginniss
East Dereham
Norfolk
February 2021
