62
A Great Feat of Improvisation
(AI) capability.? His proposals, exposed in Supply in Modern War, were, in a word, radical. He
wrote.
There must be a clean sweep of all from, and including, the main base in its present
form, forwards: all the accumulated administrative ritual of all but a century; all
the fixed cumbersomeness of Regulating Stations, Railheads, and Advanced Bases;
the standardized and scheduled movement of Ammunition and Petrol Parks, and
of Divisional Ammunition and Petrol Companies; the stereotyped functioning of
Refilling Points, Rendezvous, and Delivery Points; and the holy rites of the Corps and
Divisional administrative area. 40
Given the resources and rigour that had been embedded by the RASC in particular, into
assessing how to best utilize future capabilities and match emerging threats, senior logistic
officers must have read these words with some unease and probably not a little frustration,
especially as Shaw suggested that: 'The umbilical cord of administrative movement must be
broken, to give freedom of movement to war's new mechanized offspring, which can largely carry
the substance of its lines of communication within itself'. 41 Whilst an interesting concept and
certainly one to generate lively debate in a syndicate at the Army Staff College at Camberley,
the practicalities of delivery were beyond the realms of supporting operations 'at scale with
mechanized armoured forces,t2 although by 1938 increasing use of air transport to support
forces on the North-West Frontier was embedded in a Joint-Service doctrinal publication* and
airborne and infantry forces would be supplied by air during the Second World War in Europe
and Burma, " albeit with the application of very substantial air transport resources 45 The theory
was however, supported by practice in that a division was capable of operating from its assigned
resources for a number of days, although the length of the period was dependent on the type and
intensity of the task and the reaction of the enemy but beyond those boundaries, replenishment
was an inevitable requirement if the division was to remain combat effective. Indeed, one of the
activities rarely practised on pre-war exercises was formation level refuelling either because the
Air Interdiction (Al) is an air operation conducted to destroy, neutralize or delay the enemy's military
potential, before it can be brought to bear effectively against friendly forces at such a distance from
friendly forces, that detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of friendly
40
forces is not required. Air Publication 3000, British Air Power Doctrine, 3rd Ed, p.3.13.2.
Shaw, Supply in Modern War, p.218.
In the 21st Century, even armies equipped with High Mobility Load Carriers and supported by heavy-
lift helicopters and air-drop can only support relatively small armoured formations in this manner.
See, a most interesting
publication, Government of India Defence Department, Frontier Warfare -
India (Army and Royal Air Force), MGS-M121 (N) 20000 (New Delhi: Government of India Press,
44
1939), which not ed that, I one ergency, provided suicient sui el aircraft can be made available
be possible to maintain a force wholly or largely by air'; p.143, para 9.
45
War Office, 1954), pp.75-77'
ma, see, WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol II, Colonel D W Boileau late RASC (London:
For
and p.93.
an examination
OVERLORD,
of the logistic and air transport aspects of the airborne support to Operation
sec, WOOH, Airborne Forces, Lieutenant-Colonel T B H tway DSO, The Royal
Ulster Rifles (Comp.) (London: War Office, 1951), pp. 162-167 and pp. 192-197.
lessons from other airborne operations are also discussed in the volume.
The administrative
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
63
movement during the schemes did not exceed the range of the vehicles or replenishment was
conducted outside the tactical training envelope, to a point reinforced by a War Office logistic
history, which observed: Realistic administrative exercises in the British Army are regrettably
conspicuous by their absence. 47
Shaw did however raise several very important points in relation to flexibility, dispersion,
decentralization and communications, aspects the RASC had identified as key to successfully
supporting mobile operations in a dynamic ground and air environment, whilst in stating that
'Supply... forms the basis on which rests the whole structure of war; it is the very foundation of
Tactics and Strategy, 8 he absolutely reinforced its importance to military operations. He also
made the astute observation that mechanized forces would require increased support, thereby
altering the teeth to tail' ratio in favour of the logisticians, although his view was based
upon an analysis that this would occur through default rather than need, as machines replaced
man-power in combat units and the personnel so released, effectively moved rearwards. 50
Shaw's proposal to abandon the use of rail as a 3rd Line transportation force multiplier" must
though, have exercised, if only briefly, the minds of the Transportation Staff in the Corps of
Royal Engineers, who responsible for enabling, in conjunction with commercial or nationalized
railway systems, 2 effective military movement of materiel and personnel and at a time when
plans were being developed to increase the numbers of specialist Supplementary Reserve
railvay units to meet perceived future commitments." Indeed, this work was an example of a
Lesson Learned from the Great War, when GHQ BEF realised that the deploying force had
an emerging capability gap.4 Of especial note, was Shaw's failure to explain how armour,
which moved by rail, was to be otherwise positioned in an operational Theatre. In the areas of
provisioning, supply and Material Handling Equipment (MHE) however, he was on stronger
professional ground. MHE certainly had the capability to be a logistic multiplier and given
the commercial interest in the late 1930s and the constraints on manpower during the Second
46 Brigadier John Sutton (ed.), Wait for the Waggon, The Story of the Royal Corps of Transport and its
Predecessors, 1794-1993 (Barnsley: Leo Cooper, 1998), p.103.
47 WOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol 1, Lieutenant-Colonel J A H Carter OBE KORR and Major
DN Kann MBE RASC, (War Office, 1952), p 57.
48 Shaw, Su
bid, p.32 in Moden War, p. 216.
51 Shaw, Supply in Modern War, p. 219.
52 The importance and interconnectivity of the railways for the movement of freight is lucidly illustrated
by reference to private internal company publications, such as Great Western Railway: Miscellaneous
Railway, 1930).
Instructions covering the Conveyance of Merchandise and Live Stock Traffic (Paddington: Great Western
53 Major-General R Pakenham-Walsh CB MC, The History of the Corps of The Royal Engineers, Vol VIII
(Chatham: Institution of Royal Engineers, 1958), pp.21-22.
54 Colonel A M Henniker CBE (Comp.) Official History of the Great War: Transportation on the Western
Pront, 1914-1918 (London: HMSO,1937), pp. 53-57
35 Ar the unit level, the regimental history of 208 Field Company RE TA brilliantly summarizes the
amount of muscle that was needed just to move the unit from A to B, noting that soldiers were
constanty required to handle materie and equipment, From store to vehicle, vehicle to train, train to
vehicle, vehicle to ship, ship to train, train to vehicle and vehicle to destination. Sussex Colonel L. F
