268
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P9.3 Blessed Moments. Lance-Corporal
Lionel Woodhead of the Corps of Military
Police and his wife Hilda on leave. (Courtesy
Mary Maginniss)
the rail network closed to traffic despite
the
operation
of 300 snowploughs.?8
Conditions were so bad that many Southern
Railway electric services had to be hauled
by steam locomotives because of thick ice
on the conductor rails,29 whilst surface
sections of the Underground were also
severely affected. 30
The Underground was an essential
component of the leave movement system
because troops arriving at Victoria and
Waterloo used it for dispersal to other
London railheads for onward movement.
Many soldiers lived in the Midlands,
Northern England, and Scotland and
needed to travel from Euston or Saint
Pancras on London Midland & Scottish
Railway (LMS) services, for East Coast
destinations, on LNER trains from King's
Cross, and for East Anglia, LNER from Liverpool Street, so the Northern Line was essential
in enabling a rapid transit across Central London.
Personnel taking leave in Wales or the
South West required Great Western Railway (GWR) services from Paddington travelling on
the District or Circle Lines.
Travel to Central Southern England was via Waterloo. For the
most part, the process operated effectively but air-raid alerts always caused disruption because
the floodgates, protecting the Bakerloo and Northern Line tunnels under the River Thames,
30
January 1940 and there were long periods when the temperature remained below zero during the day
as well as at night.
See, Phillip Eden, Great British Weather Disasters (London: Continum, 2018),
P03505 Britains Railuays at War 1939-1945 (London: lan Allan, 1971), p.57.
Thial
As an example, a Piccadilly Line train left Hounslow West at 1613 but did not arrive at Northfels
until 1145, a journey scheduled to take 10 minutes. Ibid, p.58.
White Cliffs
269
naded is action was deemed essential in order to prevent ingress of river water into
le ten from a tunnel breach caused by a bomb or a mine. 32
page of large numbers of soldiers, usually carrying a plethora of equipment, was an
sing problem for the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB). Most of the soldiers
a ot from London, and few had travelled on the Tube before.
There were inevitably
rosas sodies carrying their shouldered kitbags gathered to read the directional maps,
passenger tunnels, crammed escalators and stairs and sometimes lost their way in the
raan maze. Equally irritating to other passengers and the LBTB was the penchant of
airy reles or removing the rubber hand-grips which were fitted, in lieu of leather
so hi. 835-1938 built Tube stock. Whatever their capability in assisting the travelling
sainting a vertical stance, some soldiers decided that they would also make excellent
sun appropriated them? Some soldiers also opted to break their journey in London and
Let gage fies at railway termini were overwhelmed with various items of military
catend isa interesting comment upon the culture of the time that they would accept
ems but not great-coats.35
- Home Run
gie ames bet forts, travel on the war-time railway network was never particularly
ang time., eductions in speeds and train frequency, combined with black-out
acon, my action, poor weather and increasing military traffic, created overcrowding
is a sta interruptions to services. In late August 1939, as war became imminent,
tign to examine the requirement to implement the War Emergency Schedule for each
company, in order to allow for more military traffic, whilst minimizing the maintenance
a homotie, oling stock and the Permanent Way. The GWR and LMS commenced
ENS on Monday 25 September, the GWR, the LNER on Monday 2 October, and the
Tr an ober 1939. The effects of the reduction in the passenger train services
the 59, reted by the schedules were dramatic. Not only were there fewer
is it is desing between 25 and 64 percent but also scheduled journey times
i tried orchen in under the River Thames from Waterloo to Charing Cross was closed
ptember 1939 to enable flood protection works to be completed. It reopened, remarkably, and
i chi am am day that the BE's leave programme commenced, 17 December,
- Morgate section, which was not reopened until 19 May 1940.
can Con dan Jackson, Rails Through the Clay: A History of London's Tube Raitoays
London: Capil Transport, 2nd Edn, 1993), p.518.
it sodes personal life, but it also became a valuable soft seat, ready for immediate
