13
Chasing the Rhino
An analysis of logistic support for the 1st Armoured Division during 1939-1940
Chasing the Rhino
351
shed qual eten September 1939 and May 1940. In common with most of the BEF,
paro i gist units were conscripts, Territorials and Supplementary Reservists (SR),
fibm had much experience of the Army and even less supporting a mechanized force in
if manoeuve warfare," an especial problem for 1st Armoured Division?
pound these issues, the significance of delivering effective collective logistic training
rent of formation activity whilst perhaps understood, was for several reasons not
eute, which created a de-gradation in combat capability!' That the requirement
significance of, logistic integration within this new formation had been cogently
that h MG in late 1935 makes the failure all the more frustrating. Responding to
conch to ranization of the Army by the QMG wrote: 'It is equally important that
cited option of the Mobile Division is settled. Administratively it is a completely
batie and we must get the maintenance of this formation settled and put into practice
« assment which firmly contradicts the perceived wisdom that senior officers
diust the criticality of logistics in armoured operations.
Should these problems
main the War Office was constantly raiding the division for logistic units,
ime ten diached to the BE in France. This constant erosion of any capability that
xi no l a personal irritation to the GOC, Major-General Roger Evans'? but
socion, the making of a serious future military failure, which was another prescient
trin. He had no hesitation in making his professional views clear: 'Owing to the present
go intrin ronel, nits and equipment from my formation, I cannot have the
cot a - months if that policy is continued'"3 As it transpired, the Ist
The Challenge
The aim of this chapter is to analyse the concepts, organization and equipment of the units
providing logistic support' to the Ist Armoured Division? during 1939 - 1940.3 The divisional
unit allocation table, illustrating the changing ORBAT during the period is in the Appendix
to the chapter."
The chapter will not examine the limitations of the armoured doctrine,
organizational structure, the ORBAT" or the weapon systems, except where this is relevant to
logistic issues?
A key challenge in developing a coherent and capable logistic system was the
shortage of trained manpower because the logistic Corps, in line with all parts of the Army,
The logistic issues of the period in supporting mobile warfare are encapsulated and challenged in Shaw,
Supply in Modern War.
1st Armoured Division is abbreviated in the fin to 1 AD, except where documents are referenced, or a
and the Tank Museum at Bovington but there is little information regarding the logistic components.
The Royal Logistic Corps Museum
at Deepcut and the Imperial War Museum have no relevan
documents. In this respect, some of the crafting of this article relies on deductions by examining
available supporting primary and secondary information; the conclusions are therefore, inevitably not
4
all based on the former.
The allocation of units to 1 AD from its formation to its return from France is shown in Table
B.. The information contained in it has been compel if from various sources, including Philon,
BEFOREA, Vol 4, Part 1 and For the ORBAT, V 05, pile fam is A sured Division 5/520/
dated 25 April 1940, Mobilization (SECRET) held in WO 166/798: HQ1 AD, AQ Allocation does
not mean that units were at War Establishment in personnel or equipment, or that units were avalable
for operations.
For an analysis of the mechanization of the cavalry regiments, which formed 2nd Armoured Brigade,
see, Salmon, Everything Worked Like Clockwork.
For the establishment by unit, see, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 4, Part 1 and Vol 5, p.35.
Femara sessment of British inter war armoured dotine, el, Arold R Winton, To Change arity,
General Sir Jobn Buret-Stuart awar armish ed doctrine str, a 1927-1938 Kansas: University of
350
a 089, 9 , aris, Men, Ideas and Tanks, British Military Thought and Armoured Forces,
4139 Macheter: Manchester University Press, 1995).
on it: so afare that seeks to destroy an enemy's cohesion and his will to win
i rio pa, it du red tons that create a turbulent and rapidly deteriorating,
hit tic i outed Division, and stat work was progressing in June 1940, to form the
did, odo odo a fias in adition to Ist Army Tank Brigade, which
and with the BEF.
3062: TrAmy Organization - 1935, OMG Response dated 16 December 1936 to
1C pr airation - 198 ish Army dated 9 September 1935.
ch Me tition of the Bricon isioned into the Ich Hussars in 1907,
in that lore the Great War and in Mesopotamia (1917-1918). He was a student at the
on the Directing Staff (1924-1927) with contemporaries
BuT a TO D 199 193) and in the War Office As Rupury
« Minary Operations (DDMO). His eldest son died on Active Service in 1942 For further
135:8544 ding in the original.
