Cinderella and the Pumpkin
73
72 A Great Feat of Improvisation
transferred to the European Joint Service environment, 1o whilst the increasing vulnerability of
British possessions on the Chinese coast to Japanese aggression, were lucidly exposed in 1937.0
Towards France
The massive expansion of the Army and the deployment, to France, of the Field Force,
involved a extensive equipment programme that had an increasingly significant impact upon
the economy, and the automotive industry in particular because of the large demand for
WMT. The exponential growth in the requirement for WMT reinforced its significance to
continental and desert warfare and load-carrying vehicles were of especial importance although
the need for the BEF's deployment to France was moderated by the availability of the railway
as a logistic multiplier. The plan to use equipment impressed from the civil sector to fill the
capability gap,'" whilst apparently a sound one given the difficulty both from the planning
and financial perspectives to create an immediate industrial production base for military cargo
vehicles, sat uncomfortably with the suggestion that the British Army was properly prepared for
expeditionary operations 'at scale. In the longer term, this arrangement had the potential to
unbalance parts of the war economy and in 1939 introduced a series of supply, maintenance and
repair issues for the War Office.
The quest for WMT was not however the only logistic issue which was created by the
proposal to expand an Army without a resourced plan to underpin it and given the constraints,
extemporization became a key feature of logistic planning in the pre-war period. Even these
imperatives though, did not drive the process as fast as one might have expected because as late
as December 1939, arguments were put forward that suggested the BEF required less, not more
road transport. The substance of this debate was generated partly by the Maginot Complex,
which focused some military minds on the prospects of static warfare, and partially by the view
that the French Railways provided an admirable service; on both counts, those who held these
views failed to comprehend the criticality of WMT at the operational level, a lesson writ large
by the experience of the BEF in Great War. 112
The personnel component imposed equally demanding challenges upon the logistic services
because the expanding numbers of soldiers had to be equipped, clothed, fed, accommodated,
cared for, transported and trained. Most recruits had not only to grasp the realities of soldiering,
but also had to learn new trades in an alien organization and then apply them in a demanding
environment, often learning On the Job? This was especially true of the logistic services and
a factor that should be considered when assessing their performance during the deployment
in France. The military capability of Territorial officers was a contemporary concern, an issue
109 Had the doctrinal and practical Joint-co-operation between the Army and the RAF on the NW
Frontier been developed in the UK and European Theawen the Army and the capability of the
Land component in France in 1940 would undoubtedly have been the better for it. See, Governmen
of India Defence Department, Frontier Warfare - India. The logistic aspects are covered in pp. 139-154.
110 Martin H Brice, The Rayal Nay and the Sino Ja- nesa. The logistic aspects are covered inan, 1973).
111 Explored in Chapter 2, 'Everybody's Trucking
112 Clem Maginiss, 'Four Wheels on My Wagon, The influence of Wheeled Motor Transport upon
British Army operations on the Western front, The infuse of Wheeled Mor Tran intagon
Logities and the British Expeditionary Force on the Wester-19184, 191729preCar Ficki felion, 2018)
pp.267-293.
P1.4 Inter-war Logistic Recruiting. The RASC invested in recruiting for the Regular and Reserve
components of the Corps during the 1930s, publishing some wonderful period material, including this
iconic postcard. (RLCM: A1/MT/RLCA/20550)
explored by Alexander Jones,13 and although the focus is upon command and leadership in
infantry battalions, similar fragilities certainly existed in TA logistic units. General Gort, the
C-in-C BEF was exposed to the vagaries of this rapidly expanding Army when he met a captain
and a subaltern from 48th (South Midland) Division at a dump. Engaging them in conversation
neither officer recognized him or his rank, and after he moved on, the captain asked Gort's
Personal Assistant, the Earl of Munster, who the major was.14 An exposure of the differentials
and the influences of these cultural elements upon the logistic outputs is a thread within the
logistic story but the aspect is worthy of more detailed academic study. For all its limitations
however, in May 1940 the BEF was a product of remarkable improvisation, and the logistic
support, despite the many demands placed upon it, impressive. Indeed in 1939, the British
Army was the only completely motorized force to take to the field in North West Europe, 15
113 Alexander David Jones, Pinchbeck Regulars? The Role and Organisation of the Territorial Army,
1919-1940 (Balliol College University of Oxford, PhD Thesis, 2016).
114 Colville described Gort's
Valer London Colin e/2),pe pe to this incident as half amused indignation. J Cowill, Man of
115 With the exception of an Animal Transport (AT) component imported from India in late 1939
