210
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Corsham, the GWR constructed, although funded at public expense by the Air Ministry and
War Office, sidings at Thingley Junction South-West of Chippenham and restored the junction
triangle, by building the Air Ministry Loop, thus enabling more efficient train working,
especially for munitions traffic. 65
Challenges in France
The ammunition production and storage arrangements in the UK were still developing when the
BEF deployed to France in 1939 resulting in appropriate infrastructure and practised processes
to manage the supporting tasks of quality assurance, movement, receipt, accounting and
inspection.
Regrettably, the BEF was not blessed with the same capabilities, with a shortage
of trained and experienced technical personnel being exacerbated by the rigours of field storage
and the complexity of the BEF's ammunition inventory.6 In September 1939, the Royal Army
Ordnance Corps (RAOC) employed, on ammunition duties, only 16 Inspecting Ordnance
Officers and 51 Ammunition Examiners and there was no separate ordnance ammunition
branch in the War Office." To compound this fragility, GHQ BEF had no Assistant Director
Ordnance Services (Ammunition (ADOS (Ammn))68 to co-ordinate the complex technical
ind operational munitions interfaces in France, a post that despite the full support of QMC
3EF was not established until December 1939, and then because of telecommunications issue
had to be located in HQ LOC in Le Mans rather than the Ordnance Directorate at Arras.*
Qualified ammunition examiners were a precious asset and the expertise had therefore, perforce
of circumstances, to be spread between 1 and 2 Base Ammunition Depots (BAD),° with the
majority of the manpower
comprising a mix of Supplementary Reservists, Militiamen and
conscripts, leavened by Regular soldiers.?
There was no time to conduct meaningful unit
military and technical training before departure and the organizations had therefore, to learn
64 TNA WO 32/3343: Underground Storage
- Accommodation for Explosives, Letter 57/Gen/7533
QMG 3a dated 3 January 1936. The planning for the construction of the sidings was based upon an
out-load from Corsham of 2,000 tons per day.
65
R A Cooke,
Atlas
of the Great Western Railway as at 1947, Revised Edn, (Didcot: Wild Swan
Publications, 1997), Map 28. Chippenham
Map 7: BEF -
- Base Ammunition Ports & Depots.
In November 1939, a new War Office Branch was created within the Ordnance Directorate to take
the place of the Master General of Ormance (MG) Branches, which had previously dealt with
ammunition. The new branch was designated OS 2 (later WS 2) and its primary function was the
provision, distribution and issue of ammunition.
The post of ADOS (Amma proved to be of immense value, especially once combat operations began
n May 1940. TNA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p.
INA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p.8
70
For the outline DEAl and Waition Sumply (COn ReAD), which usually comprised a HOml
three ordnance ammunition companies, see, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 3, p. 118. Attached to each
BAD was an AMPC Labour Company, comprising an HQ and 15 Sections, each of 26 men.
Of the 278 the Rank mideo ising antid od 5 BAi and 8, 9 and 10 ore no.
Miami Conscies, whim it yah bolice coat Brad or Ring Nar sondiers or Regular Recrit.
Ammunition Companies, whilst it was mobilizing a Branley in November 1939, 90%6 were chart
To improve this weak position, the Officer-in-Charge RAOC Records, the Corps manning Directorate,
suggested that upon arrival in France, personnel from 3 BAD should be swapped with trained soldien
from 1 and 2 BAD. TNA WO 162/1144: 3 BAD RAOC, WD, entries November 1939.
Factory to Fire Trench
211
1 t b, oblem that continued after the First Contingent of the BEF had arrived in
a Had there been kinetic operations during the deployment, the weaknesses inherent in
« mungements would have been lucidly exposed.
A BE ammunition inventory was surprisingly complex, with artillery ammunition being
nin gist tak by bulk and weight.?? There was a range of 69 different natures
ard, infantry, artillery and supporting units,? some of which were common user
s such as Small Arms Ammunition (SAA) and grenades, to more complex munitions
-he in HAA gun and in bulk, demolition explosives for the Royal Engineers.
SAA
Hit 038-inch and 0.455-inch rounds for revolvers and 0.303-inch ammunition for the
-Negazine Lee Enfield Rifle, Bren and Lewis Light Machine Guns (LMG) which used
run und, hilt the Vickers Medium Machine Gun (MMG) also used 0.303-inch but
at matt. Some armoured vehicles were equipped with either the 7.92 mm Besa,
(ich MG or a 15 m cannon. Anti-armour weapons included the Boys anti-tank
with 05 inch armour piercing shot,* the French Hotchkiss 25 mm gun, and the 40
1. pander fited to the Cruiser and Matilda Il tanks. There were two mortars: 2-inch and
ch try High Explosive (HE) and smoke bombs, although there was no initially, HE for
Ira: There were five types of anti-aircraft weapons: Hotchkiss Machine Gun, Vickers
nah, 40 m Bofors LAA, 3-inch 2-cwt and the 3.7-inch HAA? and eight types of
in repos adition, the ground-to-ground tube systems had a bewildering array of
hip and supporting fuzes," which created additional challenges to asset tracking and
an it ifferent fuze types added yet more complexity to the duties of often
- T tilly A munition Types' in Appx to Cp 7. For details, see War Office,
Ta damin SO, HMSO, pp. pp.201-203.
Anana i read had pres since 1940 on the basis that it was incapable of stopping a,
sit it it ta be ter not to grant it the nomenclature of anti-tank, Army Council,
production and proofing issues with the 2-inch HE round, it is interesting to note
+ my cd, try stin a ding 5958, P.), Sect 19, 2 inch mortar, states, It is chiefly used
