468
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P18.1 A Forgotten Logistician.
The resting place of Major-General
Philip de Fonblanque DSO in the
Cambridge City Cemetery Grave
9586. His fate was not to be KIA
in France commanding his soldiers
but to die of a terminal illness
a fortnight after returning to
England having served his Country
to the end. He receives but one
passing period factual mention in
the History of the Corps of Royal
Engineers, Volume VII, p.13 but
Churchill remarks positively upon
his service in France in The Second
World War Volume II, p.172. His
brother Edward (1895-1981, CB
CBE DSO ADC) served with
distinction in the Royal Artillery,
competing in the 1924 Olympics
in equitation and also achieving
the rank of major-general.
Photograph taken in March 2020.
(Author)
information upon which, to construct outline denial plans.?1 The War Office solution for
retaining a force in France, an idea that had as much political imperative as military inspiration,
was to create a 2nd BEF initially consisting of a re-constituted Ist Armoured Division, 51st
(Highland) and 52nd (Lowland) Divisions and Ist (Canadian) Division," with the Force to
be supported initially through Cherbourg and Saint Malo. This directive, which included the
need to continue to support the AASE, gave the logistic planning Staff clear guidance for the
retention and location of stocks but also a series of challenges. In particular, the timescale for
31 The definition of denial is: to prevent enemy use of military equipment and supplies by means of
32 1 A WO 19789, Evacuation of the line of Communication, War Office MO4 Telegram 72409 of
28 May 1940.
33 A second ranche was to have included a reconstituted 3rd Division, recently returned from France but
it soon became clear that a complete withdrawal from the Continent was inevitable.
Run Rabbit Run
469
gilstfing was woefully inadequate and although the logisticians did their best to adjust
it posture in a dynamic operational scenario, the constant changes in emphasis from
i fre inevitably unbalanced the ability to generate efficiency and effectiveness in any
it Sustaining these units led to resources being diverted from stock evacuation tasks
sa cultural confusion as to the main effort, an issue compounded by the requirement to
coming materiel, including ammunition, vehicles?4 and technical stores, especially for
red Division.
«pedite urgent deliveries by air and sea, special arrangements were made, which of
tied recious specialist personnel to ensure efficient execution and thus dispersed
wher, widely deployed logistic capability.35
In this respect, DDST at HQ LOC was
aty atling three issues: the dispersal of RASC units, fragile communications and the
ay of the Branch to authorize the loan of small packets of WMT for specific tasks,
ire the sequestered for other duties, with the assets disappearing from the HQLOC
Such actions wasted Staff officer' time, eroded vehicle reserves, disrupted maintenance
gaded centralized control, all of which reduced the capability to support critical outputs
prational level. The provision of support to the 2nd BEF was an excellent example
calling, a problem exacerbated because there were no authorized reserves of combat
equipment or materiel for it. 3 ton lorries in particular were in demand, with only 100
in the Le Mans Vehicle Reserve Depot (VRD) on 7 June, 25 of which, were ear-marked
matests in 51st (Highland) Division" and an instruction was issued to return
(RD, 50 lories on loan to Nantes Sub-Area." The growing shortage of BEF WMT
e to meet the transport task led to requecte to the Moe Nana for the pron can of hin
•i wok at Nantes and Rennes, a solution which created much frustration when the
filedto materialize. 40
i re ised by HQ LOC to out-load stocks from logistics sites in the Le Harve and
res, the movement of which, partially depended upon the operational capability of
tough most of the materiel was shipped from the port of Le Harve. On 30 May
it were 48,000 tons of rations and stores and the intention was to back-load them to
i Sin aire. Given that Operation DYAN MO was reaching its peak, the plan was
Sand the hipsused to transfer the atires to the Western French ports would have better
i rating them to the UK, exsept for the fixation of creating a 2nd BE. That the
ty of the holdings were evacuated from the Le Harve area between 30 Mav and 11 Lu
the more remarkable because the personnel of 2 Base Ordnance Depot (BOD), 3 Base
mple, 50 cas were planned to arrive at Cherbourg on 5 June 1940 and required movement to
)L Man, TA We land to Trive DDST, WD, 3 June 1940.
00H, Ordnance Services, p. 159.
* ris From 3 and & Reserve MIT Companies RAS hamp en ispatched to a utte.
14 NO 167/1077: LOC DDST, WD, 3 June 1940.
I NO 67/1077: 1.0C DDST, WD, 7 June 1940
ANO 167/1077: LOC DDST, WD, 7 June 1940
577
