Marrying the Driver
135
134 A Great Feat of Improvisation
in a Carter Paterson van? Being displaced within or from their barracks to accommode-
other activities disrupted some units' mobilization.
The 15th/19th Royal Hussars had 1,0
Supplementary Reservists from 1 Docks Group RE arrive at the Cavalry Barracks in York al
thus decamped into tents established on the lawns, 7 whilst 2nd Essex vacated Warley Barrec
at Brentwood to enable the expansion of the regimental depot, a task which was in additin th
a deployment to assist Anti-Aircraft (AA) Command." 2nd Northumberland Fusilier hil
completed mobilization at Connaught Barracks Dover by 10 September, transferring to tente
accommodation at Dibgate Camp near Folkestone8 until the unit departed for Southampto
on 1 October," whilst on 7 September, 2nd East Yorkshires entrained at Plymouth for Bidor
in Dorset for three weeks training with 3rd Division. 80
All these battalion and regimenti
tasks and activities, which were spread across the whole of the United Kingdom, require
the appropriate level of logistic support to sustain them and is a forgotten component of th
deployment to France.
Movement to the two main Sea Ports of Embarkation (SPOE.) at Avonmouth for vehicles an
Southampton for personnel from unit lines was by rail and road, so the length of the joung
greatly depended upon the location of the unit. Most regimental histories record it of the
mobilization period and others even less in relation to movement in the UK.
A red llle
history of the 2nd Royal Fusiliers" succinctly summarized, without comment, the battalio
travels from their peace station in Dover to the SPOEs, an experience, which is typial of mary
units but regrettably does not expose the planning and industry required to enable the batain
to undertake its moves:
Our next move, on 25th September, was to Talavera Barracks, Aldershot, where we
remained until 5th October, and where officers and men were equipped with further
mobilization equipment and other requirements prior to our embarkation for France.
The Mechanical Transport and Bren Carriers under the command of Lieutenant LV
74 The road haulage company of Carter Paterson was founded in 1860 and formed into a private compen.
Carter, Paterson & Co Ltd, in 1887, expanding its business until the Big Four railvay come.
purchased control of it in equal shares in the mid-19i0s enabling Carter Paterson to operate.
countywide service from 1936. By 1946, Carter Paters was aperating a flect of over 1,00 m
vans and delivering 34 million parcels a year.
, Ownership passed upon railway nationalistin t
he British Transport Commisco and Car Daterson was cubee area fanay, mationatich Roa
75
Services. Whitaker, Whitakers Almanack (London: ). Whitaker & Sons, Ltd, 1944).
Colonel T A Martin MBE, The Dise Regiment, it 95& Sorenod: The Essex Reginat
sciation, 1952), p. 131. The battalion was perhaps fortunate that the van had not been impres
for service with the BEF, but all the silver was returned in good order after the end of the war.
Courage, The History of the 15/19 The King's Royal Hussars, pp.3-4.
Nue Camp in N of Fakerone, tained by the UK MOD a trang a .
80
(London: William Clowes, 1952), p.27.
-45 (York & London:
Fane-Gladwin embarked at Bristol on 27th September, and the Battalion embarked
at Southampton on 5th October. 83
WMT usually travelled by road and tracked vehicles whether Armoured Fighting Vehicle
(AFV) or engineer plant, moved by rail.® One flaw in this plan was that the unit MT parties
were responsible for assisting in the loading of the equipment to the ship but in some cases delays
to the arrival of the ship meant they had departed to meet the schedule of unit personnel ship,
leaving other parties to undertake the task.® Other issues included the failure to have access
to all the ships' plans resulting in vehicles being shut-out' because there was insufficient space
for the assigned loads, derricks not being rigged for embarkation thus creating delays8 and net
slings being to narrow for the vehicles. In addition, many of the ships' crews were inexperienced
in vehicle slinging which created more friction, but the significant time burglar was handling
the impressed commercial cargo vehicles. Some lorries were too long to be lowered into the
hold and were dispatched to Dover for movement by train ferry, whilst others had cabs that were
too high and these had to be removed, often resulting in a day's delay in the ship's departure. 87
Some units were fortunate in travelling with their vehicles in the same shipping convoy from
Avonmouth or Southampton, thereby retaining cohesion, but this was the exception rather than
the rule Successful vehicle loading in accordance with the schedule did not always guarantee
timely arrival in France. The SS City of Florence embarked 300 vehicles at Newport and was
proceeding to Barry Roads to meet the convoy when a shore battery, believing her to be an
enemy vessel, placed an artillery round through the bow one foot above the waterline, resulting
in several days delay whilst the cargo was transferred to another ship." Other failures were not
so rapidly resolved. The SS Nailsea Lass having loaded 7,000 tons of transportation stores,
mostly rails and bridging materiel, at Barry, suffered a catastrophic failure of her boiler plates
after the furnaces were lit under empty boilers," entailing a four week delay in the delivery of
the cargo to France, which had to be transferred to the SS Llanarth?? The SS Marwarri sailing
82 This was Avonmouth, to the North-West of Bristol.
ng, A Sort History of the 2nd Battalion Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment) during the First Year of
the War (Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1941), p.5.
84 Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), p.67, Sect 63.
85 WOOH, Movements, p.176.
86 Planing procedures directed that ships derricks should be used to embark cargo to ensure that
87 Ibid, p. 138.
whatever was loaded in a UK port could be off-loaded at the port of disembarkation. Ibid, p.138.
An atillery offcer described the unnerving experience of the soldiers being divorced from its equipment:
An artillery regiment separated from its guns is like a fond mother parted from her children. She isn't
happy till she gets them back. Gun Buster, Return via Dunkirk (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1940),
1> hi, Qua Buster was the pedonym of Captain Richard Austin.
90 The SS Nailsea Lass was sunk by a torpedo from U-48 on 24 February 1941, 60 m SW of Fastnet
arcoal, 1,031 tons of pig iron and 300 tons of iron ore; the crew
of 44 was saved. Admiralty, British Merchant Vessels Lost or Damaged by Enemy Action during the Second
91 WOOH, Movements, p.141,
92 The S lanarth, loaded with 7,980 tons of flour from Melbourne to Leith and Aberdeen, was sunk on
27 June 1940 by a torpedo from U-30; the crew of 35 was saved. Admiralty, British Merchant Vessels
Lost or Damaged by Enemy Action, p.7.
