A Great Feat of Improvisation
upon road and railway movement, whilst receiving mention, was deemed to have been of little
significance, although had the Committee interviewed those responsible for planning and
executing these logistic activities, the report would surely have highlighted the good fortune
that the BEF often had and the absolute importance of mitigation through active and passive
air defence measures,* a point reinforced by many war diaries.
Whilst not part of the Bartholomew Final Report, the QMG authored a six-page resume
entitled 'Movement and Maintenance in the BEF" covering logistic operations in the period 3
September 1939 - 31 May 1940, which of course, omitted actions South of the Somme. The
agile utilization of railheads at 'minor' stations to reduce enemy interest was however, definitively
identified as a key mitigation in ensuring these important logistic nodes operated effectively in
a hostile air environment. The establishment of wireless links for Troop Carrying Companies
with the assigned formations was another crucial lesson forged in the heat of the mobile battle,?
although the provision of effective, resilient and agile communications systems was an issue
that affected the whole of the BEF.® There was though, dissonance on logistic agility at the
corps level. The Bartholomew Report suggested that an 'expert' committee examine the issue
of the size, scope and shape of the corps' logistic capability, with a particular emphasis on the
amount of WMT and the need for a mobile workshop.' The subject of "dumping' also received
scrutiny with the report supporting the GHQ Staff contention that it should be reduced to
the minimum and the reserves held on ECM trains, ' although during the campaign it had been
the seven days of stocks dumped to the North of the River Somme that proved to be a game-
changer for the survival of the BEF." The creative tension generated by dumping programmes
was an 'Old Chestnut' driven by concerns over losing stocks in a withdrawal or having insufficient
transport to access them in an advance, the latter a particular problem during operations on the
Western Front in the Hundred Days of 1918.12 There had been concerns about the control
of ammunition dumping in particular during the campaign and lessons were obviously been
learned because a II Corps Operation Order of 23 May had specifically forbidden the practice.13
The significant impact of the flow of refugees however, upon operational, tactical and logistic movement
was incisively articulated. TNA WO 106/1775: Bartholomew Committee Report, para 27, Refugees.
TNA WO 106/1775: Bartholomew Committee Report, para 10 a &c b, Defence Against Air Attack.
TNA WO 197/112: Movement and Maintenance in the BEF' dated 22 June 1940.
TNA WO 106/1775: Bartholomew Committee Report, para 26, Railheads.
INA WO 106/1775: Bartholomew Committee Report,
para 31, Troop Carrying Companies
For a penetrating analysis of this issue, see Smalley, The British Expeditionary Force, 1939-40, pp. 84-
11VA WO 106/1775: Bartholomew Committe Report, para 29, Transport,
10 The Committee also identified that the 10 ton lorries o
The Commit as ident red tarrat - No routed by: Bario mahe Mit ce Repies
This poi. was primly made by 2 Division CRASC, Lieutenant-Colonel C MC Luff in a manuscript
POR held in TNA WO 167/210.
12
TNA WO 95/454/4: HQ Fourth Army, DDST, Notes on Conference at "Q" 6.45 pm, 28 August
13
Il Corps Operation Order 232005 May 1940, para 6, Ammunition in TNA CAB 44/67: The BEF in
Belgium and Artois, 10 May - 3 June 1940.
Reflection and Retrospect
523
I number of recommendations within the report, such as the introduction of new equipment!4
I the increase in the establishment of 3-inch mortars and carriers and the implementation
in anti-tank platoon in infantry battalions also had logistic implications, which whilst not
mediately obvious, influenced the shape and size of RASC and RAOC capability, whilst the
tition of logistic operations in the Base, the GLOC and Rear Corps Areas assumed a much
ater operational and tactical significance that brought a step change in creating a culture of
abat logistics, writ large in a plethora of revised doctrine, training directives and practical
ins. Army Training Memorandum No 34 was explicit: 'Every unit of the Army, no matter how
calized, forms an integral part of the fighting machine as a whole, and must regard itself as a
mil fighting instrument.is The RASC in particular was involved in several intense actions
int German ground forces, including armour and were quick to recognize the significance
mitalizing unit combat capability' and the critical ability to operate at night."' At a rather
rent level, the Army Council decided that all regimental and Staff officers below the rank
tigadier must be trained to ride motor-cycles and that 'Brigadiers be prepared to ride a
torcycle or be carried pillion?18
The RASC also identified the misuse of its motor-cycle
patch Riders allocated to the RA for ammunition supply duties for communication tasks
Tren batteries and regimental HOs, thereby disrupting the delivery of gun munitions!' At
mig level, the logistics piece was largely overlooked, the one focus in this arena being the
so equipment, ammunition and stores, which attracted a significant amount of attention
a both the Prime-Minister and the War Office, resulting in the formation of the Inter-
imental Howard Committee" to report on the Evacuation of the BEF from French
, which focused upon ports to the South of the Somme. Whilst chaired by a retired
(nant- General, a the composition of the Committee was recognition that the evacuations
ied not only the War Office but also the Admiralty, and equally importantly, the Ministry
ping, although the representatives of these two maritime departments did not attend
1 October 1940.22 The Terms of Reference (TOR) were very limited in time:
he key equipment not 'hastened into service was the 6 pdr anti-tank gun, which was to have
precial adverse operational and tactical impacts in future campaigns.
TNA WO 106/1775:
atholomew Committee Report, para 9d, Anti-tank weapons
a Rearward Areas.
i Coi, my Trining Memorandd Ao talk 9 (War Ofice 1940), p.5, para 2, Protection
neral Staf, Royal Army Service Corps, Training Pamphlet No 1, Training System in War, Part Il:
ining of NCOs, pp. 11-14.
,. 1. ow many aciding And injulie Woe caused by this decision would be an interesting arca
uncil, Army Training Memorandum No 34, July 1940, Appx G, Lessons from Experience for
AS is vok and output, se fin, blow.
enant-General Sir Geoffrey Weston Howard KeR CMG DSO (1976-1966) Commissioned
it is Regiment in frey, Westie Howard served in South Africa during the Se cod Baer
He commanded 145th Brigade in 1918 and was GOC 5th
Honourable C P Hermon-Heritage DSC represented the Admiralty and Wed Lunard CB CBE.
