336
A Great Feat of Improvisation
the Bordon-Longmoor-Liss military complex and the associated TSDs, with connections to the
Southern Railway at Bordon and Liss.?4"
To reinforce this capability, the War Office opened
No 2 RTC on the Melbourne Military Railway, a requisitioned section of the LMS line
between Ashby-de-la-Zouch and Melbourne Junction.? The centre also provided engineer rail
construction training and serviced the King's Newton (No 2 UK) TSD , whilst also serving
several commercial facilities including a soap works, a colliery, a lime factory and a quarry, the
latter important for stone in the Air Ministry's airfield construction programme."
To generate more lift capacity, an order was placed in December 1939 in the UK for the
manufacture of 10,000 x 12 ton tare weight box vans for use in the French wagon pool?*
Based upon a French design with centre sliding doors to accommodate 40 men & 8 horses,
these wagons had some detachable parts to enable them to run on the UK system and were
constructed for ease of repair in the field; none reached France before the evacuation of the BEF.
In the interim, 500 British freight wagons were shipped to France, although because they were
pp.355-359. The LMR was also the setting for the remarkable train chase in the film, The Great St
Trinian's Train Robbery (1965)
The connection diagrams are shown in Richard Harman and Gerry Nichols, Gerry, Atlas of the Southern
Railway (Addlestone: Ian Allan, 2016), Map 55.
See, Alan Cooper, Peter Leggott & Cyril Sprenger, The Melbourne Military Railway, A History of the
Railway Training Centre at Melbourne and King's Newton: 1939-1945 (Headington: Oakwood Press,
1990).
Chellaston East Junction to a point one mile North of Ashby-de-la-Zouch Station.
Cooper, Leggott & Sprenger,
The Melbourne Military Railway.
As a planning yardstick, the BEF used the load tables below when calculating the material and
equipment movement based on a 10 ton rail freight wagon. Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 1,
1939, Movement by Sea, Rail and Air, p.16
Table 12.2
Commodity
Ammunition
Ballast
Rail Movement Planning - Wagon Loads in Tons
Load (tons)
Remarks
Commodity Load (tons)
Remarks
Mail
For rail
construction
MFO Parcels
Canteen
Store.
Cement
Medical Stores
Metal
Clothing
Brass, copper,
iron, scrav
Coal
Coke
10
Engineer
Stores
Forage
Ordnance
Stores
Petrol
Railway
Inaterial
Supplies
Timber
In tins and cased
Excluding PW
ballast
Including rations
Scantlings & hut
sections
Tracks Across France
337
writed with air-brakes, the French placed strict operating conditions upon their use; these
agons were left in France.9
A key objective to improve the efficiency of military rail movement was undertaken by the
« Department of the French General Staff to classify every tracked and wheeled vehicle in
te B intory to match it to one or more of five classes in the SNCF wagon fleet.
The
hit forts opt was to assess the SNCF fleet capability for the French Army and the BEF,
Hich would provide the information required, to take a decision on whether additional wagons
her hite movement were required 80
To execute this work, the 4th Department required
te chide dimensions and axle weights of every vehicle type®' and DGT BEF initiated, on
helf f the War Office, the collation of this information in October 1939 but it was made
sue crous and time-consuming by the vast array of impressed WMT.82 The DGT Staff
lie ape to the French Army and SNCF rail representatives that regardless of the output
Sam tute construction of specialist flats to transport future tanks that were heavier
co la, aunder consideration. In particular, the War Office was desirous of engaging
it Railway Central Committee to design a wagon capable of moving on both
hitch inch til tworks and be incorporated to French consists.? Another specialized
nga the BE required, was an Insulated Ice Cooled Van for the movement of frozen meat, a
sit handled considerable quantities of. DGT requested 140 be provided either
a poutino from the UK railways but as a temporary measure hired 200 vans in the 6-15
ng tung th it Francis de Transport et Entrepots Frigerifiques. As plans matured,
« adored an additional 60 cool vans and hired a further 70.35
pite wagon lift remained therefore, a constant issue for the BEF and was a problem
mad by tre factors. The first was the failure to tightly control wagon loading and
sung a depots, which greatly increased turn-round times. Generated by a mixture
misly and depot layouts, infrastructure constraints and a shortage of engineer
win sources and hour, it was sometime before these matters started to be resolved.
caption, TW dated 14 October 1939, Directorate of IWT.
CHi DOT Lose Minute dated 10 November 1939, Memorandum of the Mecting held in the
cal ng the SCE, 88 Rue Saint Lazare on 27 October 1939. TNA WO 167/51:
&DGT Loossportation.
nute dated 10 November 1939, Memorandum of the Meeting held in the
ma ng i the SC, F, Rue Saint Lazare on on October October TNA WO 167/51:
in rie it he ovie, anortation, DCT R/105 dated 25 October 1939. The SNCH
hit cong on a asicatio mamber from 1-4 with number 5 being denoted by a plain
HOUT Lose Minue dared 10 November 1939, Memorandum of the Mecting held in the
- not to ted ReSt 19 azare on 27 October 1939; TNA WO 167/51:
We are are dad 10 November 1939, Menorandm of the Meeting held in the
1 men in SC. teSsit are on 7 tober 1939, TNA WO 167/51:
