352
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Chasing the Rhino
353
ince as demed by the War Office to be a dismal failure and there has been little
it BAT and Organization
tit amoured division, the 2nd Line assets were two RASC Armoured Brigade
i ABC and one RASC Support Group Company, each of which was organized
kaduates, a vorkshop section and three 'commodity' sections:" ammunition, petrol
gy tus creating the more flexible 'composite' companies required for armoured
dick. h RASC Armoured Divisional Troops Company had four 'commodity' sections:
in prol and two supply!8 To enhance its logistic capability, the division also had
coma, located 3rd Line assets. These were, the RASC Petroll and Ammunition
HEA, da i visional slices of a Reserve Supply Park (RSP) and a RAOC
sad Cops Ordance Field Park (OFP) and Workshops,2 all usually corps level
dons he allocation of 3rd Line resources as divisional assets, which thus differed to
gifty dis meant that 21 percent of the divisional manpower served in logistic
Te the elbe smarizes logistic assets:
P13.1 Logistic Challenges. The rapid deployment of Ist Armoured Division to France created a whole
series of logistic fragilities, from which, the formation never recovered during operations in France.
This photograph at Cherbourg Quay on 23 May 1940 is of a Spring peace-time scene, with the threat of
aerial attack seemingly absent but is replete with fascinating logistic detail. In the background, a sign
proclaims Movement Control' by a line of Bedford OYD trucks. In the foreground, there are two A13
Mk I Cruisers of 2 RR plus cased petrol and a cone funnel. Supporting crated stores and equipment,
together with the tanks, await rail transportation, via the ramp to the left, whilst to the right rear, a
Matilda Il awaits a 2 pdr barrel. (Tank Museum: 2447/A2)
Armoured Division" was the penultimate British formation to deploy to the Continent" and it
did so into a military scenario that was, from the Allied rapidly disintegrating. Its operational
+ da to da he ref tv works on its operations and performance, having
sit chin the as tins, stores, equipment, training and conesion.
So in doet and or is in Captain B T Liddell Hart, The Tanks: The Histor 35.
- it at mation 1 15 London: Cassell, 1959), p.18-35.
14 In 1939, the formation badge of the 1 AD was a static rhino. In September 1942, a Sapper from Ng
3Froop Troop Cheshire Field Squadron RE was tate to replino in Sep embide the Divisional H Gon
Can dominion done in any in 19 Pupil by eating demen Bit Guadin,
mation Badges of World War Two. Britain
briede group from st Canadian Divisir, /une 1940 upper cod by henis of the 2nd BE but they
were withdrawn within days of landing, Ellis, BOH, The War in Prance and Flanders, p.2%6.
1N3 1 AD Petrol Sub-Park RASC, ID, May - June 1940.
OLA 1 AD ASP RASC, WVD, 1939-1941.
alished under WE. 1/1931/10G/1 was organized, structure and equipped to carry three
. See, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 4, p.64.
