318 A Great Feat of Improvisation
some of the assets to Scandinavia and withdraw 5th Division from the BEF to the UK as a War
Office reserve.
In addition, ammunition, equipment, supplies and vehicles, which were due
to arrive in France, were held at readiness in the UK for possible deployment to Norway. The
one positive outcome GHQ obtained from this development was the retention in France of 5th
Division, albeit under War Office control, although the formation had to be transferred from its
corps area to the ABA near Le Harve, which created additional logistic complexity to Plan D.
Unsurprisingly, with changing scenarios and dynamic ORBATs, several versions of Plan
D, often described in documents and war diaries using the codeword DAVID, were produced,
and a constant stream of amendments issued. The last version, GHQ Operational Instruction
No 37, was dated 6 May 1940 and the logistic support plan, GH Administrative Instruction
No 12, was dated 7 May 1940.10 I Corps was to be on the right, II Corps on the left and III
Corps to secure the advance before occupying the line of the River Escaut. The I and II Corps
forward deployments to the River Dyle were to be supported by eight RASC Troop Carrying
Companies (TCC) with one TCC in GHQ Reserve, '"' lifting I and II Corps Troops plus 2nd,
3rd and 4th Divisions between Zero Hour on J Dayl12 and J+90 hours. 44th Division was to
be lifted between J+5 - J+7, 50th Division J+5 - J+9, 5th Division J+8 - J+10'13 and 1st Division
was to follow when the other movements were complete.l4 The only lacuna in the plan was
that whilst it relied on speed to reach the River Dyle as quickly as possible, the lead TCC
commanders did not have the opportunity to conduct as reconnaissance of the routes. GHQ
sought however, to create additional flexibility by maintaining a WMT reserve consisting of the
two LOC Railhead Companies and two General WMT companies. 15
One key task was the forward positioning of RE mines & explosives to prepare the river
defence lines of the Dendre, Dyle, Escaut and Senne. Large quantities of explosives were
stored at ARHs in order to conduct bridge demolitions and crater roads within the defence
zones in accordance with the counter-mobility plans, whilst stocks of anti-tank mines were
also positioned forward with some the balance held in readiness at BADs for loading to the
first ammunition trains.
To save the transport of engineer stores during the initial advance,
secret arrangements were made with the Belgian Army, through the British Military Attache
in Brussels, to create two dumps of defence stores, including wire, pickets, revetting, timber
110 Copy No 9 is held in TA WO 167/57: QL of C, Movements, whilst the operational documents
are mainly located in WO 167/58: Plan D - Operational Instructions. The codeword in use on 10
May 1940 to place units at a Notice To Move state was DONALD, which perhaps, as it transpired,
unfortunate.
TNA WO 167/57: HQL, of C, Q Movements, Forward Move of the BF (Plan D)-
7 Man isrative instructions and correspondence, He Administrative struct on (Al) No 12 dated
7 May 1940, para 1, Information.
111 Nos 1,2,3,4,9,11, 12 and 14, with 13 as GHQ Reserve. TNA WO 167/57: HQLofC, Movements,
112 J Dav
GHAI No 12, para 3, Road Movements.
vas the day upon which Zero Hour occurred when the first BEF troops crossed into Belgium
(NA WO 167/57: HQ L of C, OMG Movements, GHQ AI 12, para 1, Information
113 Although Sth Division was held in War Office reserve, it appears in Plan D. TA WO 167/57:HQ
L of C, Q Movements, GHQ AI No 12, para 3, Road Movements.
114 TNA WO 167/57: HQ L of C, Movements, GHOAl 12, para 3, Road Movements.
115 No 1 & 2 Railhead Companies and 8 & 9 tess one section ReserVe MIT Companies, TNA WO
167/57: HQL of C, Q Movements, GHQ AT 12, para 5, Transport.
Sharpening the Sword
319
and to, to the West of the River Dyle, each supporting one British corps; these stocks were
mily complete when Plan D was initiated. 116
Thecriticality of controlling the corps road routes is lucidly illustrated by the formation of the
Cops Road Control Centres, whilst the importance of military railway capability to the operation
is underpinned by the early forward deployment of 151 Railway Construction Company
(ROC and 153 Railway Operating Company (ROC), 17 which were to be concentrated at Lille
ad At respectively by J+2.18 The BEF rail route allocation was Lille-Baisieux-Tournai-Ath-
remont based upon a flow rate of 36 trains per 24 hours controlled by the French Rail
Zune HQ at Baisieux, which was the last station on the line in France. Given that that most of
is oute was in Belgium, there may have been some carefully controlled secret co-ordination
faring not shown in the documents, with the Belgian railway authorities. The plan to locate
SI ROC at Ath lucidly suggests however, that GHQ BEF was concerned that the Belgian
rings would need at the least, military reinforcement, which given that rail movement was
coil to the successful execution of Plan D, was a vital backstop.
Satra units including two Casualty Clearing Stations (CCS), two pioneer battalions, four
- day regiments and a tank regiment, 20 were planned to move forward by rail and there was
a comprehensive plan to deliver additional ammunition and fuel to established railheads
a fame or Corps and to allocated ones in Belgium for I and III Corps, with alternatives
tray in preluded the priority locations.21 The railheads in Belgium may have been
it covet reconnaissance, although there is no supporting evidence in contemporary
i cument tits unlikely that officers tasked with operating them would have been
ho because this work was the responsibility of the Q Staff at corps level.23 Each corps
in a RH, a PRH and SRH, an Ambulance Railhead (ATR) and one for RE
is co hich had individual two letter codes!24 Four Standard Ammunition Trains
IT tre to held to the East of the River Somme and two located to the West by J+1,
kiting to ada. s two trains per corps by J+4, with four trains per day arriving at
AN ON, MiNary Enginering (Field), .8.
IN NO 16757. HOL. of C, & Movements, GHQ Al 12, para 2, Rail Movements.
MTH NO NO HOL. of C, ® Movements, GH AT 12, para 1, Information.
1' m Geard bergen Belgium.
1 5 50. o CS rICops; Sit Heavy Arillery Regiment and 4th, 58th & 59th.
s 4th Royal Tank Regiment. TNA WO 167/57: HQL
vements, GHQ AI 12, Appx D, Railheads.
(London: William Kimber,
i cout cut on tach of che De Lie, To granie a nocy mity, they wore civilian
