A Great Feat of Improvisation
them,58 a problem which, in the sub-zero temperatures being experienced led to maintenant
issues and subsequent operational degradation, especially because the uncontaminated dice
tested was discovered to wax at -10°C.
Standard Oil offered the Petroleum Directorate a
non-waxing dieselite but after testing it, the Directorate concluded that it was 'not gas oil.
and is probably dangerous to use? "9
Of equal concern, rust was found in tins filled with the
precious 100 octane aviation spirit for Hurricane fighters, ° a problem compounded by the por
marking of aviation spirit cans, which in the dark of winter was a recipe for a drama, eitherin
the supply chain or worse in the air. 61
The shipment of canned petrol was certainly a hazardous undertaking because of the nin
of explosion and fire, and even after war was declared the Ministry of Shipping continued to
exercise caution, a policy, which as it transpired, was well founded. Flawed manufacturing
standards for the 4-gallon flimsy non-returnable tins introduced leakers' into the supply chan,
whilst the nails securing the wooden crates were apt to pierce the tins if they were subjet
to rough handling, which given the numbers of transfers from one transportation medium to
another was not an infrequent outcome, " a problem that had been incisively exposed during
pre-war exercises in Egypt. 3 In addition, at one of the filling plants, a defect in the machinery
caused the nails securing the case lids to penetrate the tins. 4 The failure to grip this proble
came close to creating a disaster at Swansea Docks when a petrol train 'literally driping
with petrol' came to a halt in the petrol berth only for the locomotive fireman to rake out the
ash-pan.65 Quality assurance for tin production was improved and timber shoring was eret
in holds to ensure that the crates and cases could be stacked vertically and securely to reduce
the chance of damage. Additional precautions were taken at ports with petrol berths, oner
being issued to restrict access to discharge quays and to rigidly enforce the ' No Smoking and
No Naked Light' rules. The use of steam and electric cranes was prohibited, whit prone.
were not permitted to wear hobnailed boots and horses had to wear rubber covers over themat
shoes. Despite these measures however, on 9 November 1939 at Brest, the MV Pacifi Can, a
Coast Lines diesel powered cargo vessel of 1,210 Gross Registered Tons, suffered a catastrophi
internal explosion, whilst discharging at No 7 Berth East Quay. Casualties were hay and
the ship severely damaged. The discharge of another vessel carrying cased tined petro, the
MV Coxwold, was immediately halted and the still burning MV Pacific Coast was oned i
mid-stream and anchored to prevent other ships and dock installations being set alight. The
64
TNA WO 167/1115: 1 BSD RASC, WD, 18 September 1939.
TYA WO 167/1076: GHQ Supply Directorate (Petrol) Notes of Petroleum Meeting of 13 Peboun
1940'.
TNA WO 167/1115: 1 BSD RASC, WD, 2 January 1939.
TNA WO 167/1115: 1 BSD RASC, WD, 7 January 1939.
By rail from the filling factories to the docks then loaded to a ship for a sea vounce unloaded and th
loaded to rail. unloaded to road and stored in a field site before mare road rail and road moves, before.
being dispensed to a vehicle.
TOOL, 0 he Spel p. 188-189.
¡bid n 1411
NOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol I, pp.41-42
INA WO 167/876: 2 Docks Group RE, WD
Leakers and Fillers
189
next day the vessel sunk leaving petrol burning on the surface of the water but it was not until
12 November that the scale of casualties was clarified: 35 dead, including the crew and 21
French civilians?° It was fortunate that a similar event did not occur at the port of Caen, a
CHO Petroleum Supply Directorate report from an inspection on 12 November describing the
operation as a shamble', with the public permitted access to the petrol berths, smoking next to
the leaker' dump, including the French sentry, one of whose tasks was to prevent such activity,
frayed electric cables on the dockside and poor safety procedures on board the cargo vessel."
Supply and Demand
Initially, the flow of petrol was so slow that effectively the BEF was being refuelled on a daily
basis with no working margin on the GLOC. By M+32, the BEF was still 4,000 tons short
dits planed allocation and daily consumption rose until in part of November it was 600 tons
per diem, which was slightly less than daily average receipts from UK. The figure of 600 tons
per day equated to 40 miles daily for every vehicle in the BEF, which clearly did not match the
operational output and QMG BEF initiated an investigation.
The move of the corps to the
Belgian frontier two weeks in advance of the planned date had eaten into fuel reserves, which
were not profiled thus but there were other influencing factors.
Formations and units were
barding rocks in excess of the authorized limits, thereby increasing forward holdings, whilst
the thre sites in advance of the initial corps PRH became partially ineffective because there was
wient od transport to move stocks to the corps areas once the divisions relocated to the
perational positions. Weak command and control and slack MT discipline both contributed to
tos ses it a kage from the disposable 4-gallon tins contributed to more loss. The OMG
ronly informed corps commanders of the grave nature of this situation and economies
we quickly instituted, which, with the static dispositions of the BEF on the Franco-Belgian
oct cared it stability and then improvements to the reserves by driving down daily force
numption to 350-400 tons and this figure included additional reinforcing units.
By M4116,2 44 days of reserves of cased MT spirit based upon a consumption rate for
the re 500 tons per day had been accumulated despite the winter weather, although in
Dotember 1939, issues exceeded imports by 984 tons and in January 1940 by a much more
in 4a51t on, recovering to surplus in February by 700 tons, despite an increase in daily
I The IV Parifi Coast was te- Alated on 1 March 1940 and a reconnaissance team was tasked to examine
he city a ging some of the cans. TNA WO 167/1076: GHQ, Supply Directorate (Petrol),
ND. On 20 March 1940, 2 POLD RASC war diary recorded that 2 Bulk Storage Company RASC
huả ben withdrawn from the depot to Brest to assist in refining the MIT and aviation spirit being
ricorted from the hulk. TNA 167/1149: 2 POLD RASC, WD, entry 20 March 1940
han Dia Coup RE was diary entry for 9 November states that a 2, ' was one of the casuatics
i be a t tomati try it and here is to turner mention the in the di ray: INA
TNA WO 167/1076. CHO, Supply Directorate (Petrol), WD.
12. 31. December 1940.
