360
A Great Feat of Improvisation
also had around 25 Heavy Equipment Transporters (HET), 1 each capable of lifting 20-40 tons,
all but two being impressed from the civil sector, the exception being the military Scammell 6x4
Pioneer Transporters.4 The operational movement and recovery of Cruiser and Infantry tanks
in the BEF and Ist Armoured Division thus relied on 25 HETs and the railway. +5
The experience in France however, lucidly indicated that whilst strategic rail movement
was an excellent force multiplier and a critical asset, tactically it could be a fragile option and
the HET offered the most effect operational link between the strategic and the tactical for
deployment and recovery of the key combat platforms; it was therefore, unfortunate that there
were so few of them.
The GOC's Post Operational Report (POR) *6 specifically identified
the hazardous nature of loading damaged vehicles to rail-flats at forward railheads during
the withdrawal in an environment in which, the Luftwaffe maintained air superiority but this
lesson, and the fragility in having the entrainments so far forward during dynamic ground
manoeuvre operations, appear to have be missed by the War Office.
The Staff of HQ 1st
Armoured Division though, clearly understood the tactical risks because the operations at the
railheads* were conducted during the hours of the short June darkness and were protected by
the guns of 44th Light Anti-Aircraft (LAA) Battery.
It is difficult, given the paucity of documentation, to define the key reason why the General
Staff failed to fully comprehend the importance of procuring suitable HETs to deliver the
deployment and recovery capabilities, especially given the experience of moving tanks in the
Mobile Brigade experiments during the 1930s.49
There are several possibilities, although
probably it was a combination of them.
The failure to craft a coherent doctrine certainly set
43 22 were left in France but at least one civilian vehicle and the two Pioneer Scammell 20 ton transporters
Were recovered, the latter by 1 AD. Figures calculated from the table, Approximate Loses of B
Vehicles by Types in the Evacuation of France in WOOH, Fighting, Support and Transport Vebiles,
Part II, Unarmoured Vehicles, p.61, Appx B (I).
44 The Scammell 6x4 HET was purchased to move the Vickers Medium Mark Il Tank of which 120 veg
built. One key asset was a powered winch to recover tanks and vehicles with no mobility, a capabiliny
essential to all military HETs. For technical decayer ta, Tank Music, Data Book of Wheed Vehidin,
Army Transport, p 210-212 and for a short history, se, Georgano, World War To Mitiay While,
45
An influencing factor upon British tank design until 1945 was the constraint of the UK rail strature
gauges. The last British in
46
The POR is entitled Report of Operati The french rail truce one war moe, 5/158/G dated 22
Vetwork was the Cruiser, A34, Comet. The French rail structure gauge was more generou
134, Ce tank able to travel with little restriction on the UK National Rai
August 1940 and is held in TNA WO 32/9392 and by the Tank Museum Library (TM/
document is known as the ' Evans Report although only Pathl exists in these archives and the covering
note of at 2. A mix of chronology at asush only Part pits in the work from divisional Sar
officers and the GOC's recollections and perspectives, and his
Office unmistakably and constantly. permeate the document. It has shaunh little relating to logistic
personal frustrations with the War
When he signed the document on 22 August the document, an has thoen told on 19 August that his
47 Whatever the technical would it ofectivement A amoured divisions, their tactical deplynant me.
removal from command would be effective on 24 August.
al vy a cause for concern because the raimaging are wed divans, refue the tracking distance:
to the battle. This solution was fraught with rid had to be well forward to nd there was more than one
ocasion when German tanks destroyed With ch kim mand eure, warfar the latter were detaining.
49 See, Winton, The Quest for a Mobile Division, To Change an Army, pp. 174-219.
Chasing the Rhino
361
the scene, compounded by a shortage of tanks in the division during 1939 upon which, to
create practical exercises that might have exposed the crucial nature of their role. No doubt
the expense and complexity of such specialist vehicles was another factor and one that certainly
atracted the attention of the Staff, who were grappling with Armoured Fighting and General
Service B vehicle design and the costs, and levels of production. In this respect, the planners
responsible for progressing the procurement of future HETs were not entirely wrong in having
reservations about potential problems in design and production.
The two military Scammell
Pioneer military transporters, whilst having that precious military capability of effective
offroad mobility, had, as a result, a high load-bed on the trailer, ° which restricted the freedom
of movement on some routes because of overhead obstructions such as bridges' thus resulting
in the need to off-load the tank to negotiate the obstacle. 2 From an engineering perspective,
the challenges of producing, in the UK, a sufficiently powerful and reliable engine to power the
HET with a weight of 15-20 tons and the tank of 25 tons and growing, were problematic and
never overcome during the war, the War Office eventually obtaining the prime-movers from
US industry, although trailers manufactured by British companies delivered sterling service.
Grasping The Nettle
Despite dear comprehension of the need for logistic integration, if not delivery, at formation
and, revere only two opportunities to practise some of the skills in the field before 1st
Armoured Division deployed to France. In October 1939, the division moved to Hertfordshire
and athen East Anglia to execute home defence duties. * Once the move was complete,
hi activity returned to routine tasks supporting widely dispersed units and assisting
i time squadrons to firing camps, all during the bitter winter in December 1939 -
January 1940.55
Whilst the weather conditions provided some much needed practical
oric in prating in a harsh environment, it did little to enhance logistic capabilities
rin he formation. In January 1940, the division redeployed from southern East Anglia
sed Herdahire to Dorset in the Wimborne, Wareham and Ringwood Triangle. This move
mind 1 trans, with the balance of the division moving by road using two Main Supply
Bones , ich were protected by to troops of 60th Light Anti-Aircraft and Anti Tank
Regiment. From the logistic perspective, it was an excellent opportunity to practica a divisiona
%, Tak. Musum, Data Book of Wheeled Vehides, Army Transport, p.211.
MOH, Fighting, Support herdans port desides, Part II, Unarmoured Vehicles, p.97.
This ta pour it a entry, ale, Patil, more usually because the ale weight of the
l Albion produced, in 1942, a 20 ton transporter to a General Staff specification but despite using th
exceeds the bridge classification.
is ritu to transporter to chaneir Sna braking issues, resulting in the load
n had thre tasks: defence of the divisional area within boundaries against airborne assault,
Ker bumed to eave baracks from 25 December 1939 diana rese tA Won/03:
