A Great Feat of Improvisation
in comparison, an infantry division of the German Army had 4,800 horses on establishment,
whilst relying on an equally complex array of WMT impressed from the civil sector. 116
Whilst the Army may have been deficient in equipment, there was no shortage of competent
planners capable of applying logistic military principles to the problem, although perforce of
circumstances, they were not always able to 'square the circle, so in examining the tasks and
outputs of the BEF's logisticians it is useful to remember, as a bench-mark, the current Principles
of Logistics, 17 which are part of the British Army's operational planning: foresight, efficiency,
simplicity, co-operation and flexibility.
Whilst not described in this manner in the period
1939-1940, their importance would have been readily understood by the logisticians of the day.
Through the application of a process of what is now called DQUAD: Destination, Demand,
Distance and Duration, 118 planners were able to quantify, within working limits, future logistic
requirements, in Time and Space, activities which are examined in the following chapters. In
delivering the outputs to support combat capability, the logisticians of the BEF faced several
substantial challenges.
A key issue was the rapid expansion of the British Army, with the
attendant issues of sustaining the growing numbers of formations, units and personnel and
doing so with competent and qualified logisticians. In this respect, the BEF faced many of the
same issues as its predecessor in 1914-1916,19 although in 1940 was blessed with senior planning
and unit logistic commanders who had learned the hard way in the Great War, especially but
not exclusively on the Western Front, and despite the down-sizing and re-shaping of the Army
during the inter war period and a focus upon colonial operations, had precious experience of
operations 'at scale. The lacuna in the skills arena was the knowledge to deliver logistic support
to a motorized and mechanized force conducting mobile operations against a peer enemy.
If there was a key flaw in the planning for the deployment of the BEF, it was the inherent
constraints in the structure, organization and manning of the Base and the GLOC. Whilst
the divisions were formed of Regular units reinforced with Regular Reservists, the Base
consisted of a mix of Regular, Territorial Army, Supplementary Reserve and Militiamen, 2 and
latterly volunteers, each group having varying levels of military life, technical knowledge and
operational experience. The Militiamen were conscripts initially aged 20-21 called up through
116 For an examination of the role of horses in the Germany Army during the Second World War, se
Dinardo, Mechanized Juggernaut or Military AnachroniSm? Horian the Serman Army of WWTI
(Mechanicsburg: Stackpole Books, 2008).
117 The Principles of Logistics are defined in Army Doctrine Publication Vol 3, Logistics (UK MOD, 196),
pp. 1-4 to 1-6, paras 0108-0113 and Army Field Manual Vol 1, The Fundamentals, Part 6, Combat Service
Support, Chp 1, pp. 1-3 to 1-5.
Doctrine (UK MOD, 1997), p.1-2 and p. 4-3
See also, The Royal Logistic Corps, Vol 1, Pamphlet 1, Logistic Support
118 For an explanation of the application of QUAD, see Army Doctrine Publication Vol 3, p. 2-3 to 2.5,
paras 0207-0211. See also
The Royal Logistic Corps, Vol 1, Pamphlet 1, pp. 3-4 to 3-5. A key point
relating to Demand is not just the quantity but the timings, with requirements for a force of fixed ine
and ging scion baring a mix of Steady State, for example a win Cuie,ents is ra foent clothing for
changing seasons and Surge, for instance, ammunition and fuel for an offensive
119 See, Maginniss, An Unappreciated Field of Endeavour, pp.46-52
120 For an analysis of the issues relating to conscription in the inter war period, see, Peter Dennis, Deist
by Default: Peacetime ons iplini and otis tom in the inter war period, see, Pott Den Kegan Paul.
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
75
the Military Training Act of May 193912 and were titled thus to distinguish them from soldiers
in the Regular Army. To emphasise this distinction, each man was issued with a civilian suit
in addition to a military uniform. The intention was for the first intake to undergo six months
of basic and trade training before being discharged into an Active Reserve, being recalled for
short training periods and annual camps, although there was considerable discussion as to how
militarily effective this solution would be. 22 The RASC was fortunate in relation to the Militia,
obtaining priority for men who were qualified drivers and tradesmen. Of the six months of
Militia service, soldiers served two in the RASC Militia Training Battalion and four months in
a field force unit. Of the 4,000 militiamen allocated to the Corps in 1939, 2,856 were WMT
drivers, 450 Supply Clerks, 348 MT Artificers, 270 MT clerks, 42 Bakers and 30 Butchers. In
the event, the RASC only received two intakes of Militiamen, one of 659 in July and another
of 586 in the middle of September, although a further 3,000 were later transferred from Royal
Artillery units in France. 12
The RAOC, in particular, relied on improvised units,24 which had to be formed upon
mobilization to deliver the Ordnance Services 25 component, an arrangement that would never
generate the critical coherency and effectiveness required to ensure support to a deploying
expeditionary force. The dispersion of logistic nodes on the 500 miles of GLOC, an outfall of
the air threat assessment, exacerbated this issue because more personnel were required, often in
small detachments, to man it, which diluted an already inexperienced, although in many cases,
able, pool of people. In these respects, not only was the Army the Cinderella of the Services
but also military logistics, a capability upon which so much was to depend, remained in many
respects a pumpkin. This situation caused many issues in France, not least of which, was that
the deployment was the first time the logisticians had supported an operational mechanized
force at a corps level, a factor complicated by the scale of deployment. The following chapters
tell the story of their challenges, strengths, limitations and achievements.
121 be at as upereded upon the outbreak of war in September 1939 by the National Service Armed
122 This discussion was not confined to the War Office. On 4 June 1939, the school Literary Society of
Ratcliffe College near Leicester, held a debate titled Britain's half-hearted attempt at conscription
will prove ineffective. The Ratlifian, Vol XIX No 162, September 1939, p.583. The author's uncle
Nicholas Maginniss contributed to the debate, whilst his brother Hugh, an Old Ratcliffian, was shortly
to become a Militiaman in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment before serving in the BEF.
123 WOOH, Supplies and Transport, VolI, Colonel D W Boileau late RASC (War Office, 1954), p.38. The
toreman trades including ammunition, armaments, small arms, MT stores, packing, traffic, rubber, gas
Ordnance Depots, Base Ordnance Workshops and laundries.
