410
A Great Feat of Improvisation
There was little interdiction along the GLOC with no marshalling yards or motive power
depots suffering appreciable damage, although in the corps areas aerial strafing of trains occurred
and there were bombing attacks on the Permanent Way. The only significant assault against the
wider French railway system was on 3 June 1940, when 200 bombers raided Paris in Operation
PAULA, 16 attacking railways, factories and aerodromes; 22 stations and various parts of the
rail infrastructure of the Paris Centure lines received damage.*7 Ironically, it was French Army
engineers, executing bridge demolitions, which caused the major harm, particularly across the
River Marne.48 A significant disruption though, to rail traffic, was not physical injury to the
network but the attempts to withdraw the maximum number of wagons and locomotives to the
South of the River Somme; the Allies were, much to German satisfaction, inflicting logistic
chaos on themselves. The post-war War Office monograph observed: 'Although the Germans
bombed stations, junctions and marshalling yards, the obstruction by evacuated rolling stock was
by far the most potent cause of delay to traffic. 4) Decisions as to the destruction or evacuation
of stocks were almost always hampered by the dislocation of communications preventing the
receipt of clear orders, or by the inability of junior officers on the ground to make balanced
judgements from often fragmentary and dated information. With timely situational awareness
a constant challenge, rumour abounded, which was usually not good for morale and certainly
not for coherent decision-making.
Ambulance Train Actions
The ambulance trains unfortunately, probably saw more action than nearly any other railvay
unit and the story is one of grit, determination and incredible heroism, under the most trying
conditions. One particular problem that became an increasingly difficult to surmount as the
campaign progressed was preventing unauthorised persons boarding the ambulance trains,
including civilian refugees and military stragglers, although wounded women and children
were often treated if there was capacity.'' Ambulance trains were, despite displaying the
Red Cross, often subjected to aerial attack by bombing and strafing, although not necessarily
deliberately, whilst the ambulance train staffs had to adapt to dynamic medical evacuation
operations, including the care of German POWs. No 3 Ambulance Train (AN) for example,
took casualties direct from field ambulance units because 6 Casualty Clearing Station (CCS)
was closing and unable to accept new patients a wee with
an ammunition train and a troop train, the former fortunately departing before an air attack
commenced, a bomb killing a medical orderly and wounding nine others wounded, whilst the
train was badly damaged, with No 5 Coach crumpled like a crushed matchbox, thus leaving 3
46 Operational intelligence and signals intercepts provided the Allies with nearly all the detals of this aid
For details of
Wo de, of the aritical arangements for the BER, sec, Crew, BOH, The Army Medial Srich.
51 TrA i80, 7211,13: -12F Ambulance Trains.
Riding the Rails
411
ATN with only three operational coaches. 2 No 4 ATN became stranded in Belgium whilst
recovering patients from Ninove West of Brussels because of railway infrastructure issues,
only being recovered to Dieppe with the patients because of the determined actions of three
RE locomotive drivers from 153 ROC," none of whom had any experience of operating on
the railways in the area. Their actions were in the highest traditions of the railway service
because in addition to the depredations of aerial attack they also had to operate points and
ignals in locations where the Belgian operatives had left their posts. Through their courage,
upported by some good luck, 4 ATN was able to keep just ahead of the German advance,
sing through a burning Tournai as I Corps units were preparing defensive positions on the
River Escaut.
Having reached Dieppe Harbour on 21 May 1940, the patients were prepared for
imbarkation to enable the train to depart on another tour to evacuate patients from 3 and 11
Base General Hospitals (BGH) but whilst it was on the quay at 1700 with over 600 patients
aboard, the train was set on fire by flames from the receiving hospital carrier HMHS Maid
i Kent, which had been hit by aerial bombs.8 The train was evacuated but some patients were
requently killed in the continuing attack and 118 patients were dispatched to 3 and 10 BGH
i cament. Six coaches and two baggage vans with a large amount of equipment were lost
but the remainder of the stock was uncoupled by a courageous and sadly unrecorded French
ira hunter and manually relocated 200 yards from the incident. With the addition of some
irch as, 4 AN moved its remaining patients to Rouen where it received further damage
mair atack before travelling to Rennes to discharge some of them to 8 BGH. It then moved
bLa Baule to transfer the balance of the casualties to 4 BGH before returning to Rennes for
pir and reconstitution with French ATN stock.5°
2 Nursing Sister Pike (QATMNSR) summarized of her shock of the action explaining that "Our
bail ambulance train was cut in on rize so his lighted the bravery of one of the orderlies
and her sadness at having to leave the body of Orderly FW Jones in the wreckage.
Information
crated from a letter by Sister Pike in TNA WO 222/2137: BEF Ambulance Trains. Research has
or ofined the identy of this soldier, but it is probably 7256004 Private John William Jones, aged
S, ó the RAC who is remembered on the Dunkirk Memorial, Column 143.
4, 53/39/459 dated 29 July 1940 in TNA WO 167/948: 153 ROC RE
BOH, Tbe Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1, p.43
Die sources suggest themies Car aigure of 25 but this may refer to stretcher cases. Ibid, states
1, Apt from leer dinical capability, hospital carriers were in all other
(gie under the finical cancion asposal caships were in eith i Maesty: Hospital Ship
respects marked, lit and
5) The Mhid of Kent of 2,693 GRT was a Southern Railway cross-Channel ferry that had been operatine
a pair on the RT we a Diphen Pasiay reprember 1939, Sec, Winser, BE Ships,
s his Maid of Kent was burned out and came t rest the on the harbour bottom next to the dock
and 15 soldiers. TNA WO 361/13:
Can D, The re or at are uriCa insigns, Va 1, p.43.
