354
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Table 13.1
1st Armoured Division - Logistic Assets?3
Unit
Corps
Personnel
Task
Vehicles
Commander RASC Staff
2 Armoured Brigade Company
3 Armoured Brigade Company
1 Support Group Company
1 Armoured Division Troops Company
1 Armoured Division Ammunition Sub-Park
1 Armoured Division Petrol Sub-Park
1 Armoured Reserve Supply Park
Armoured Ordnance Field Park (Element)
25 Mobile Bath Unit
1 Armoured Division Postal Section
Total
RASC
RASC
RASC
RASC
RASC
RASC
RASC
RASC
RAOC
RAOC
RE
360
360
303
344
383
205
183
215
20
25
2,436
All RASC units were commanded by CRASC, * from divisional headquarters, there being no
Regimental Headquarters (RHQ). The operational command of the non-RASC units within
the logistic support envelope is dificult to ascertain. Some documents indicate that CRASC
directed their operations, others, that the divisional HQ staff branches controlled their tasks. It
was probably a combination of the two depending upon the scenario and timing. Corps logistic
capability was designed to act as a buffer during operations, and, where possible, stocks were
delivered daily from the Base for direct onward movement to the divisional area. The rationale
for this was to maintain momentum by keeping, in the divisional area, stocks on wheels, whist
the corps logistic units provided materiel in reserve, either in dumps or on rail. With no British
corps upon which to base a logistic buffer, lst Armoured Division had to utilize its allocated
divisional 3rd Line slice to effect the output. In some respects, having direct control over it
generated greater divisional agility, but poor communications and the structure and resources
within divisional HQ to control it, offset this advantage.
There were two key logistic concerns about the structure and organization of Ist Armoured
Division: supporting battle-winning equipment and the integration of the logistic component
into divisional capability. These issues were overlain by two fundamental problems; evolving
armoured doctrine and the constant re-organization and removal of units. The significant
differences between the armoured and infantry division OR BATs, particularly in relation to
oFficer Mior T E Bariet, was from the Royalady lieutenaSe Colo orps (RIASC). The war diary
is held in TNA WO 167/337 but like many of the Division's records, it is a tad thin.
Chasing the Rhino
355
road operations Enabler 1. Ist Armoured Division relied greatly upon rail movement to
a rica rational mobility. On 21 June 1938, Light and Medium Armour is loaded
eating in or ard on the LMR as part of a logistic component of the Army Staff
3460 ostrin, ich also included railway operating and construction. Whilst the
hi trust sch i ation, the gentleman with the hat in civilian clothes in the left
road apars to be bicating the wagon springs. (WDLMRC: DRMC/V1/178b)
hey moved mobile fighting platforms, was a king-pin within the experiential
that to reads had three armoured regiments, totalling a divisional War
- 02 ., A moured Division had therefore, a different logistic support
Tin tina visions ich, because of the greater mobility of its manoeuvre
te ce has spot a brigade rather than divisional level. Secondly, the
courtin and ORBAT of the division were constantly changing. From the
rosie, is a shaping where necessary, logistic units, the training of which,
ed to d, aly sting in further de-gradation of capability.
i re at train by logistic units at formation level between September
- , at cat the disit sums to have had only one regular assigned
aT 0. The files of HO 1st Armoured Division As also have little
i ted its pot asks until pring 1940, which is reinforced by other unit.
megh tis relating to these activities become more numerous from April 1940,
in duo ping the division for overseas service. There were however,
Sit to din The first one move in late October/early November
i the is bury Plain area to southern East Anglia to conduct home dofence tasks. The
