xlviii
A Great Feat of Improvisation
observation that historically 'logistics is not forgotten so much as ignored' is absolutely true
in the case of the BEF because the logisticians as a group have been completely overshadowed
by the wider events in May and June 1940.
In analysing the numerous works on the BEF's
operations in France, the words of the then General Wavell, also appear particularly apposite:
In most military books strategy and tactics are emphasized at the expense of the
administrative factors....Bear in mind when you study military history or military
events the importance of the administrative factor, because it is where most critics and
many generals go wrong
Since 1939, this pertinent observation has remained a fundamental reminder to historians that
whilst logistics have a cardinal, and sometimes defining influence on the support to, and shape
of, military operations, logistics is, historically, probably the least examined and understood
element of conflict, omissions which unquestionably apply to the BEF. In a more soldierly
observation of the problem, the lack of interest in the subject has been brilliantly summarized by
a British Army regimental Quartermaster who succinctly stated, 'that nobody gives a s**t about
logistics until the toilet paper runs out'??
The logistic services were however, a fundamental
component of the BEF and their contribution is worthy of much greater exposure than they
have received hitherto, which to date in the public domain has relied almost exclusively on the
authors and editors of the Second World War Corps histories' of the Corps of Royal Engineers
(RE),° Royal Army Service Corps (RASC)," the Royal Army Ordnance Corps (RAOC)
and the Royal Pioneer Corps (RPC).13 Whilst illuminating and interesting, these histories, per
force of space, devote relatively little coverage and analysis to the BEF, whilst also inevitably by
definition, focusing upon the individual Corps' contribution to the deployment and campaign.
operational issues but is a comprehensive narrative of the subject. Its focus however, supported by a
wealth of amazing research and not a little deduction, is the operations and fates of the locomotives
deployed to France.
Frustratingly, there is no index.
The Douglas Haig Fellowship Records Issue No 2/18, p.61.
Archibald Wavell, 'Generals and Generalship': The Lees Knowles Lectures Delivered at Trinity College
Cambridge in 1939, (London: Macmillan, 1941), p.11
The late Lieutenant Colonel David Russett RIC, ROM 150 (Northumbrian) Transport Regiment,
The Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers was not formed until 1942. See, Brigadier B
B Kennedy CBE & Colonel J A Tatman (Comp.) Craftsmen of the Army, The Story of the Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers, (London: Leo Cooper, 1970).
Major-General RIP Pakenham-Walsh CB MC, The History of the Corps of The Royal Engineers, Vol VI!
1938-1948 (Chatham: The Institution of Royal Engineers, 1958).
Regimental Committee, The Story of the Royal Army Service Corps, 1939-1945 (Aldershot: Institution of
the RASC, Bell & Sons, 1955).
12
Brigadier H A Fernyhough CBE MC & Major H E D Harris, History of the Royal Army Ordnance
Corps, 1939-1945 (London & Beccles: William Clowes, nd but 1967).
Major E H Rhodes-Wood, A War History of the Royal Pioneer Corps, 1939-1945 (Aldershot: Gale &
Polden. 1960)
Introduction
xlix
The exception, although by default rather than design, is the excellent material in the War
Office histories! published in limited copy in the carly 1950s15 These historical monographs, 16
the archival basis of which are held in The National Archives (TNA) at Kew comprise the
War Official Official History (WOOH) and are often collectively known as the 'Red Book
Series' and were for internal usel by the Armed Forces, being classified as RESTRICTED,
CONFIDENTIAL or SECRET under the lead title: The Second World War, 1939-1945,
Army. These documents, have over the decades, been declassified and occasionally appear for
sale, whilst the Military Library Research Service Ltd has reprinted several logistic volumes,
including Movements and Ordnance Services. The WOOH is based upon official documents and
contains a mine of information but that on the BEF, as for other campaigns, is spread over many
volumes, which are, for the most part, difficult to acquire!' The WOOH foreword however,
not only neatly summarizes the works but also offers a taste of the fine menu: 'This book is one
of a series, compiled by the authority of the Army Council, the object of which is to preserve
the experience gained during the Second World War, in selected fields of military staff work
and administration, 20
Despite the impressive individual contributions from the logistic Corps histories and the
WOOH, none of the works offer any coherency to, or analysis of, the BEF's complex logistic
diaspora, which, apart from the paucity of academic or general publications on the subject, is
the most serious omission in the comprehension of a core capability that underpinned every
aspect of the BEF's combat effectiveness. A Great Feat of Improvisation seeks therefore, to
redress some of the lacuna in the logistic historiography of the BEF in order to demonstrate not
14 These publications are not be confused with the Official Histories which were published by the HMSO
15 Details of the definitive print run must sit in a dusty file somewhere. Maintenance in the Field, Vol 1, a
RESTRICTED document, ran to 500 copies and other volumes had similar numbers depending upon
the subject matter. CONFIDENTIAL and SECRET volumes were generally not so numerous, and
the latter were copy numbered. An undated and un-referenced War Office memorandum states in
paragraph 3: "The number of copies available for issue is restricted and the initial distribution is being
confined to Divisional Commanders and above and to schools and training establishments likely to
be concerned with the subject. Memorandum held by the author. Volumes of the WOOH were also
issued to the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force, as the library stamps of the ones in Defence and
private ownership attest.
16 Documents on the policy for the War Office histories and Historical Monographs are held in TNA
WO 366/4, whilst production costs and staffing requirements are at WO 366/3, with the series 277 and
1) No coting the dead. i alice an i anoncement of the publication of the books in
the series has been, or will be, nor will they be included in the Catalogue of War Office Publications'.
The rare volumes are being exchanged at prices in excess of £300.
for their Provision, Part II - Unar
Hayman 15/19 KH (War Office, 1951); Administrative Planning, Colonel H W Wilson OBE TD
Boilcau late RASC (War Office, 1954) and Movements, Major J B Higham RE & E A Knighton MBE
