430
A Great Feat of Improvisation
main group of French Armies to the South of the River Somme but also more significantly
for its survival, the Germans cut the GLOC." In 10 days, the German Army had not only
conquered a large area of Northern France, but they had rendered the Continental Army of
France's main ally, incapable of effectively supporting its fighting forces. Whether the layout
of the GLOC affected the German plan for their ground offensive is difficult to quantify but
given their plan to drive to the coast and split the Allied Armies in two, Oberkommando des
Heeres (OKH) must have appreciated the effect it would have on the logistic sustainability of
those forces. The German attack in March 1918 was also designed to drive a wedge to the coast
but because the British GLOC was run from the French Channel Ports there was never much
of a possibility that they could have cut it; the BEF of the day intended to fall back along its
GLOC. 1940 however, was very different and by 19 May, it was clear to General Gort that
the BEF was in a perilous situation: '.......the administrative situation made it unlikely that
sustained operations could be undertaken. Communication with the bases was on the point of
being interrupted. The mobile echelons of gun and small arms ammunition were full, but once
they were exhausted I could not safely reckon on being able to replenish them'??
The BOH
summary of the position is more succinct: "The British Expeditionary Force was outflanked
and the sensitive lines of communication on which its life depended stretched out, practically
undefended, across the path of the German armour."73
Gort was now in the unenviable position of having his ORBAT determined by the enemy,
for the BEF now consisted of two armies; one to the North of the Somme and one to the
South.
The former, with the bulk of the fighting formations, had little coherent logistic support
beyond 2nd and 3rd Line assets, whilst the latter consisted mainly of 4th Line Base and GLOC
units. The GLOC combat formations, with vary levels of capability, included the deploying
Ist Armoured Division,* less two infantry battalions and 3rd Royal Tank Regiment, sent
to defend Calais,?' and 51st (Highland) Division re-deploying on a 400 mile journey by rail
and road from the Saar, having undertaken fortress duties in the Maginot Line, with 52nd
(Lowland) Division" and a brigade group of the Ist Canadian Division arriving from the UK
in carly June. In addition, there were the poorly equipped and trained 12th (Eastern) and 46th
(North Midland)" Divisions, plus three un-brigaded infantry battalions and manpower from
reinforcement depots providing assets to create the ad hoc Beauman Division. 30
The reorganization of these forces is a remarkable story. When the GIOC was cut there
were approximately 229,300 troops in the Northern element and 113,000 in the area South of
action and tank formations...' David Portway, Science and Mechanisation in Land Warfare (Cambridge:
W Heffer & Sons Ltd, 1938), p.51.
Map 13: BEF: Break in the Ground Line of Communication.
WOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol, I, p.53.
Ellis, BOH, The War in France and Flanders, p.74.
TNA WO 167/327: 52nd Division AQ, WD,June 1940.
TNA WO 167/259: 12 (Eastern) Division, CRASC, WD, May - June 1940.
INA WO 167/286 46th (North Midland & West Riding) Division, GS, WD, May - June 1940.
TNA WO 167/1413: Beauman Division, Q, WD, June 1940.
Still Obscure
4371
* Somme," although this increased to 180,000 by 30 May as other formations were taken on
ength for support but not necessarily under command for operations, reducing to 125,000
she withdrawal commenced. Once it became clear that the GLOC had been irretrievably
commanders and Staff at the highest level reacted quickly to the situation. The War Office
i over responsibility for supporting the BEF in North-East France and Belgium, whilst the
ris deployed to the South of the Somme were initially placed under Commander L of C
heat 3 May, when a newly appointed GOC, Lieutenant-General Karslake, arrived in
tro CHO BEF then ceased to control the GLOC, although for various reasons Karslake's
mand status was never ratified and most of the formations were under French command at
New Line of Communication?
wugh on 19 May, road and rail communications to Abbeville were intact, Gort's appreciation
+ hat German forces would cut the GLOC within 24 hours leaving one of three options:
cre the GLOC, create a new GLOC or evacuate the force.
The experience of 1914-1918
cinda powerful influence upon British military thinking, the first instinct of the Chief of
Imperial General Staff, General Ironside, being to direct Gort to immediately withdraw
iNest through the Arras-Bethune area in order to restore the GLOC and thus continue
ions in conformity with the French. 84 This intent was, remarkably, clearly expressed to
giticians on the GLOC, the war diary of LOC DDST, noting that all RASC transport
aped essential services was to be collected in the vicinity of Rouen to be available
it otice to carry ammunition, supplies and petrol to Corps as soon as breakthrough
ined By 25 May the size of the transport requirement had matured to 800 x 3 ton
sit diver one day's maintenance to the three corps of the BEF,$ a figure highlighting
erd of the railway to military logistics. The operational realities however, dictated an
caine curse and the QMG to the BEF, Lieutenant-General Lindsell was effectively faced
making the same decision as the OMG to the BEF in 1914, Wully Robertson, in creating
-19 ay, he therefore requested the War Office to open an emergeney base served by
mach Northern Channel Ports (NCP) of Boulogne, Calais and Dunkerque, the decision
i a crite entry Karstake (1879 192) KCB KCST CB ONC DSO was commisime
•de opal Arily in Ka serke (157 042 Arica during the Second Boer War and being
mated he DISCO. He served on the Stal in franced linea during the Second Bording most othe
My at he BE in diuth and Arol, 10 May 3 June 1940, onty22 My 2940.
i, OH, t War in France and Flanders, p. p.84.
N. NO 167/1077: LOC DDST, WD, 24 May 1940.
M NO 167/107: LOC DDST, WD, 25 May 1940.
Criticality of ensuring the BEF retained the ability to fall back alone ta CLOC had been teste
11914 when the BEF's QMG Wully Robertson faced with the force being divorced from it whilst
