498
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P19.1 Port Clearance. Rail was critical to delivering the swift movement of the BEF's soldiers from the
UK SPODs. (Author).
mostly forgotten activity but occupied the time and talent of logisticians from April to July!
Mostly opaque but important from an Imperial perspective, was the reception, support and
integration of Australian and New Zealand Forces to the UK ORBAT, tasking that required
logistic planning, resources and delivery. The deployment to Iceland of some units from 49th
(West Riding) Division," elements of which had recently returned from Norway?' was another
logistic task overshadowed by the deployment, support to and subsequent evacuation of, the
2nd BEF in Normandy. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given the rapidly developing scope and scale
of many of the tasks, the War Office looked to the commercial and voluntary sector to assist in
providing the Army with the critical logistic capability it required. 22
WOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol I, pp. 62-86.
WOOH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol I, pp. 86-91.
21 I am indebted to the then 2555235 Lance-Corporal Lionel Woodhead (1903-1984) of No 6 (L of
C) Provost Company, for his personal experiences of the deployment, operations and recovery of the
18 years before being mobilized in 1939.
o service in Harstad. Lionel Woodhead, a bus driver, operations and recon reeds for
TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation and Quartering of the BEF, 'A Short Account', para 3.
Back in Blighty
499
Burning the Midnight Oil
le speed and direction of the German advance rapidly rang alarm bells in Whitehall. On
0 May 1940, a Tri-Service body, the Home Defence Executive 23 was formed, with C-in-C
me Forces24 in the chair, which was tasked with executing a drastic overhaul of home
fence organizations in the light of new German dispositions, tactics and weapons. In the
ar Office, the Military Operations Directorate monitored the land battle in Belgium and
rance with growing concern. By 18 May, the War Office Staff began to seriously examine
le possibility that a withdrawal of the BEF, or at least elements of it, might be necessary,
adit was considered wise to prepare contingency plans for that eve, m
A contemporary
port summarized the challenge: "The problem confronting the Quartermaster-General's
partment, and in particular the Quartering Directorate, was a formidable one, and on a scale
nihout precedent in the history of war? With that as the starting point, a conference was
wened in the War Office on 19 May 1940,26 attended by representatives from the QMG's
partment, in particular Movements, the Directorate of Army Quartering and the Home
nands, to discuss the arrangements that would have to be enacted to rehabilitate? the
Apa by receiving, transporting, distributing, accommodating, reorganizing and re-equipping
nunknown number of units.?9
In order to progress the planning process, the Staff made a number of assumptions, which,
rough a careful appreciation of a dynamic operational situation, generated a number
deductions, most of which proved to omic operation situation, generate hi ch mere
depined by the application of the 'Principles of Logistics: foresight, efficiency, simplicity,
operation and flexibility. The planners were able to quantify, within working limits, the
gic requirement, by utilizing the prosse of what is now called DOUAD: Destination,
mand, Distance and Duration." The importance of their sound and balanced appreciation
at become clear within a very short space of time. As the Staff started to burn the midnight
• Fora Tri- Service perspective on the challenges of Home Defence in the period May to August 1940,
ke Collier, BOH, The Defence of the United Kingdom, pp. 119-146.
General Sir Edmund Ironside between May and July 1940.
NA WO 197/134. Evacuation and Quartering of the BE para 2:
TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation and Quartering of the BEE, para 2.
Rehabilitation encompascation activities in the British Army: Reconstitution and Re fentarion.
The former restores combat power to a
specific level and the latter to the original level. For further
explanation, see, Army Fielt power to a specific level and the latter tombat Service Support, Glossary,
Do the most part, the BEF was reconstituted, that is rehabilitated to a specific level, in this case well
hadow that of the his if was measurated that i ariable red to as, ratie leva, the antipared
The process of rehabitation is laroely lovictin in nature although subsequent training will be of
importance in restoring comon is larely logistic in nature, alth approach, and the fundamentals were
very similar in 1940, see Army Down. Fordeals the resents PP4-8 to 4-10, paras 0420-0422.
aunty, unlike Doctor W Dorine Pubia Caval to ght se tot 800 timid in drawing their
Sec, Arthur Conan Dovie, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes: The Blue Carbundle (Oxford
Oxford University Press 1993), p.152. "On the contrary Watson, you can see everything. You fail
however, to reason from what vou see. You are too timid in drawing vour inferences."
Poran expanation from what you see. You A stAD, Vals L guin 2-3 to 2-5, paras 0207-
0201 So lo Too be i Subort Doctrine Do 3-4 to 3-5
