Marrying the Driver
127
126 A Great Feat of Improvisation
A Degree of Mobility
The planning and execution of the operation though, followed, for the most part, the logi
guidelines in the 1933 Manual of Movement (War): mobilization, formation of a field fore.
organization of a Base, dispatch of units to UK ports, sea voyage, dis-embarkation, move to
concentration area, provision of maintenance and subsequent movement, the importance of the
last task to operational capability being firmly reinforced:
The degree of mobility possessed by a force in the field is governed by the facilities for
adequate maintenance of personnel and material, which cannot be effected without
ample facilities for movement ... A study of the resources available for movement in a
theatre of war is therefore a primary consideration when a plan of campaign is being
formulated and remains the first importance in every phase of subsequent operations
The BEF was to occupy a defence line of 55 miles along the Franco-Belgian frontier ale te
Secteur Defensive De Lille' from Maulde in the East, to Halluin in the North and thence Soutr-
West to Armentieres, later extended to Bailleul, 24 The shortest and fastest deployment rout,
using the least shipping, would have been to use the South East Ports (SEP), Dover, Folkestone:
and Ramsgate, for embarkation, to the French North Channel Ports (NCP) of Boulogne, Cali:
and Dunkerque, a distance of approximately 70 miles by road to the BEF Concentration Are.
which would have been the most efficient use of logistic resources but required the concept,
acceptance that the BEF's Base would be in the UK. The perceived threat of air attack however;
an outcome which almost became obsession in the minds of some of the operational and logs.
planners, " precluded this solution, although given the political imperatives to enter the line
quickly as possible to demonstrate solidarity with the French, which emerged whilst the BR
was deploying, the SEP-NCP solution would have been less disruptive and considerably more.
effective and efficient.
The concern about the effect of air attack upon the Base and the GLOC, especialy duris
the deployment phase had been raised by the QMG to the Forces in September 1935, via
he wrote to CIGS, I am quite convinced that two Air Defence Brigades are inadequat i.
protect ports of disembarkation, the re-mobilizing area and the concentration area in Franci
although in 1939, only one brigade was assigned to this task As it transpired, it was tik.
Admiralty, reinforced by Merchant Marine logistics that i fuenced the War Office to chag.
BOH, Statistical Digest of the War (London: HMSO, 1951), p. 139, Table 117, Munitions. Index of
21
Ministry of Supply Munitions Production.
Ibid, p.1.
Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), pp.5-9, Sects 4-12.
Fora detailed analysis of the BE's defence plans, see the comprehensive thurlon, Buildn t Cr.
/got is BOH, The Wari France and Fland, 1939-1940, (London: IS 35 at.
26
MA CB 106/211: Notes on the Q Organization of the BEF dated 16 January 1942, par 3.
WOOH, Ordnance Services, Officers of the Ordance Directorate (War Office, 1950), p.134.
TNA WO 32/4612: Future Army Organization - 1935. MC Response dated 16 Deem ber 1936.
CIGS SECRET Paper, Future Reorganization 193 B. ARmy dase da September 1935.
it stance and eventually nearly all the French ports from Saint Nazaire to Dunkerque were
being utilized in some capacity? Lieutenant-General Lindsell, QMG to the BEF recorded:
It soon became apparent that the shipping of stores to the western ports of France threw a
heavy strain upon shipping and the convoy escorts.
For this reason the Admiralty pressed
for an early transfer of the Base to Northern France?? Whilst the War Office accepted the
argument about transferring some port operations to the Channel, GHQ would not agree
to transferring the Base en-masse because of the continuing concern about the air threat but
it did create, after protracted discussions with the Host Nation, an Advanced Base located
in the area between the Rivers Somme and Seine, in order to reduce the need for merchant
shipping and railway rolling stock by making greater use of Cherbourg, Fecamp, Le Harve and
Saint Malo, 30
The outline plan drafted in 1938, utilized ports in South Wales and South-Western England
to load for sailings to French ports shown in the table below, with Cherbourg being the main
Sea Port of Disembarkation (SPOD) for personnel and no BEF port being further East than Le
Harve," with the exception of Dieppe, which was used for medication evacuation to Newhaven.
Table 4.1
BEF - Initial Deployment Ports?3
Brest
AFV & WMT
Ammunition
Canned Petrol
Stores
Supplies
Cherbourg
Personnel
Unit WMT
Le Harve
Personnel
Unit WMT
Nantes
AFVs & WMT
Canned Petrol
Stores
Supplies
St Nazaire
AFVs & WMT
Ammunition
Stores
The initial deployment involved several shipping convoys departing over three days 9-11
September. The first convoy consisted of four personnel ships departing from Southampton for
Cherbourg, then on 10 September, a mixed convoy of six personnel, two MT and one stores
ships on the same route. On 11 September, the sea movement was in full swing, with 33 ships
departing from Avonmouth, Barry, Newport and Southampton embarked with ammunition,
28 Captain S W Roskill DSC RN, BOH, The War at Sea, 1939-1945, Vol I, The Defensive (London:
HM5O, 1954), 0.54.
29 TNA WO 197/112: Movement and Maintenance in the BEF.
TNA WO 197/112: Movement and Maintenance in the BEF.
31 TNA CAB 106/218: Plan W4: Notes on the preparation of the plan for the First Contingent of the
British Field Force.
32 One important series of moves through Le Harve was the deployment of the ten TA Engineer Field
Belisha. See, Thurlow, Building the Gort Line, p.19.
a solely military concept because the idea was driven by the Secretary of State for War, Leslie Hore-
33 Information from TNA CAB 106/218: Plan W4 and WOOH, Movements, Major J B Higham RE &
E A Knighton BE (Comp.) (War Office, 1955).
