A Great Feat of Improvisation
Warfare (CW) Group'2 composed of three CW Companies, 1 was responsible for the Livens
Projectors, chemical mines and the Bulk Contamination Vehicles (BCV).4 The RAF provided
specialists at the ports and 21 BAD for the handling, movement and storage of RAF SW, and
also had facilities constructed to support the AASF.!
Ground Delivered Offensive Special Weapons
The main land force GW offensive capability was to be delivered by artillery. Initially, the BEF's
punch was restricted to 6 and 4.5-inch howitzer shells designed to contaminate ground, and to
a lesser extent personnel and equipment. These munitions had a bursting charge, activated by
a percussion fuse, which broke the casing, thereby releasing the agent. In September 1939,
the shells were held as empty cases from ammunition produced during the Great War but
filling of both types with a blister agent, HS Mustard, ' commenced in October 1939. 28,000
rounds of 6-inch were ready by the end of November and 18,000 rounds of 4.5-inch by the end
of December. GHQ BEF had a plan to fill 50 percent of the 4.5-inch ammunition with the
lachrymatory agent Bromobenzyl Cyanide (BBC)' but this was never enacted.
The GHQOperations and GW Staffs eagerly awaited the arrival of Base Ejection (BE) air-burst
chemical ammunition for the 25 pounder. The Mark I (Y) shell weighed 20 lb, contained 2 lb
of Mustard, and was designed as an anti-personnel weapon to support defensive operations. For
offensive operations, the shell had a 'B' fill of BBC, which although relatively persistent created,
in comparison to Mustard, a very small contact hazard.18 Design and production difficulties,
however, interrupted the planned issue programme and GHQ calculated that there would be
no deliveries of any 25 pounder gas ammunition until mid-September 1940. In the event, the
prediction was accurate; on 1 October 1940 there were 200 rounds of HS Mustard charged
shells and 2,000 awaiting filling!' Gas rounds for this system were planned to be 10 percent
12 For the War Establishment (WE) of the HQ CW Group (WE III/1931/14B/1) and the CU
13
Company (WE/1931/15/3), see, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 1, pp. 131-133.
58, 61 & 62 Companies RE. WOOH, Gas Warfare, p.273, Appx XIII, Order of Battle - Chemical
14
Warfare Troops. A fourth company, No 63, remained at Bulford on Salisbury Plain.
Perforce of operational circ
umstances, with no chemical mines or BCs to deploy, the campaign lucidly
lemonstrating the tactical limitations of the Livens Projectors, and that GW seemed increasingly
were stored in the brickworks next to the
AASF's ARH at Germaine, located 12 miles
South of Rheims and at a Forward Air Ammunition Park at Nogent l'Abbesse, 5 miles East of Reims.
Coded a 'Y' fill.
BBC, first produced in 1881, was introduced into French Army service in July 1918 and was part of the
British inventory in 1940. Artillery shells filled with BBC had to have a minimal bursting charge to
prevent the decomposition of the chemical, a constraint that reduced its dispersal area. WOOH, Gas
Warfare, p. 131.
An agent with an odour of soured fruit, BBC had several advantages and disadvantages. It was in
1940, the only tear gas, which required decontamination with strong alkali, for example, slaked lime
or organic solvents,
, so it had much merit for defensive operations but in the offence, careful judgement
was required, as it had considerable persistency. In the open, i can last three days, in woods seven, and
19 list 224,01, So Ara Amy a Veron an a a prem 1959)
Operation FLANNELFOOT
381
dira holdings, with 50 percent being charged with Mustard and 50 percent BBC. GHQ
do loked into the future by planning GW operations for the 5.5-inch gun, proposing that all
i ammunition for this weapon system should contain blister agent. The RASC Divisional
munition Companies (DAC) distributed GW artillery rounds, 'Grey Shell' in the colloquial
the day, in the same manner as conventional munitions, though subject to special control and
andling measures; specific training for the task appears to have been very limited.
In 1940, the other offensive gas weapon held by the BEF was the Livens Projector operated
-RE CW Companies. Developed during the Great War, it consisted of a cast iron tube 3
it in ength and 8 inches in diameter, which fired a large cylindrical drum2 by means of a
arge box placed in the bottom of the projector," giving a maximum range of 1,800 yards with
•No 9 Projector using a No 30 charge23 By design, a weapon of static warfare, with the
it and dum weighing in at 220 pounds, some of the tubes were mounted on dedicated
IT* vehicles to make them more tactically responsive, but they still had to be dug in for
in The Livens drums in April 1940 were filled with HS Mustard in order to contaminate
andand personnel, although GHQ also planned to fill some Livens drums with a 'G' fill of
gone, a potent lethal agent for its day, and one that could have given the Livens Projector
ire of ensive edge." By 19 April 1940, stocks stood at 4,700 drums, which was sufficient
enteen company shoots. This level of capability would have had little adverse effect on
mans at the operational level, although given the right scenario, the tactical impact
i ta ben considerably greater but until stocks were increased, the BEF was restricted
all hots or very local contamination operations. Nearly all of the Livens Projectors
a l in the evacuation from France but emergency production in the summer and
mmon term for a Livens eylinder was a drum', although it was cylindrical in shape.
Tie i cric Defence CERN Clintre at Winterbourne Gunner has an example of the projector and
ire we te ifrent projectors: Nos 3, 4, 7, 9 and 10; General Staff, The Tastical and Tecbmical
Moment hemical apons, Military Training Pamphlet (MP) No 32, Part I - The Projector, 26/
hi in ng ich a a 90) of 1,800 yards, was a problem. Not only did it give friendly
S Pubns/363 (War Office, July 1940), p.5.
it t to rope on time vapour hacard it the wind changed direction but also the.
an in preta great reded maless meticulous security precautions we araken.
e waisted by altering the quay ity of the charge. See, General Staff, MITP No 32, Part II -
ative 4, hereby restricting tactical deployment.
a CW company into action vical dhploapon was a ponderous activity and the section vene
ality ural to into an it this repon as the projectors. A fill alvo of 270 drums
i the one shot tubes could though, produce a cristratioor. a man savo of weapon it
da sat but poverful punch, which was the key capability of the system, with the porenrial in
SO east on a fe my roonnel had time to adopt protective cquipment.
why ordinario the L did not commence until August 1940, 9,000 filled drums were in
e, pp.247-248
the round though, its short range and immobility, made it unsuitable for offensive operations, se
st high to botani and defensive rathere in an outfensive system, and it is surfecting
hut it wa assed as the latter. Given its interesting variation of shot both in range, and deflection
as probably best suited to the one task it was never given bu CHO BET. area contamination of
and ding an out of contact withdrawal.
