264
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P9.1 A Wonderful Sight. The White Cliffs of Dover. (Author)
for the carriage of firearms was by exception and soldiers were required to provide proof as
to why they were not in possession of a weapon.
Soldiers in France moved by unit transport
to the nearest railhead to meet a train to the corps or area railhead, or if they were fortunate,
they drove to it a short distance by road. The corps or area leave train would then steam to the
appropriate port. Soldiers working near to the Sea Port of Embarkation (SPOE) would travel
on local rail services or be taken by road to the quay. Initially, there were five railheads, one cach.
serving GHO and Corps Troops, I Corps, II Corps, the Air Component and the AAS but as.
the BEF expanded, so did the organization supporting leave movement.
In particular, the deployment of a brigade to serve with the Third French Army in the Saar
created a need for additional movements resources and once 51st (Highland) Division was
created a need for addition movement resources and week Each had aparty 0 50
men child to in travel need and space for personnel on courses. To
maximize the utilization of resources, at least one ambulance coach was attached to each train
to evacuate patients to a general hospital in Dieppe, or to the UK. Of great import to the soldier
to bacuate patients to a gen aral espite cortepper to sail on the steamer to the UK on ting
and for the most part, this process operated efficiently. There were though problems on the
return journey, with personnel arriving at the incorrect reception railheads and thereby, creating
much unwanted not for the MC teams and parent units While seeminaly a matter of detail,
it created enough irritation for it to be raised at the AGiS Leave Meeting on 16 February 194019
TNA WO 167/1: Minutes of Meetine in AC& Office 3 Apr 40 A/2971/PS dated 10 April 40,
Minutes of Leave Meeting held in AG OMice Of 166 3chruaty 1940. GHO (A) A2971/465 (PS)
dated 18 February 1940 paragraph 5a, in TNA WO 167/11 refers.
White Cliffs
Let Bightry
oncerns was the security of the shipping routes.l6
+, le and Neutral ships in the period December 1939 and April 1940.7 The Defence
are re however determined to ensure such events did not take place in the English
c. ships escorted convoys and RAF Coastal and Fighter Commands patrolled
ipe, it the posibility of torpedo attack and mining from U-Boats, and bombing,
tring and torpedo attacks from the Luftwaffe, generated the need for additional
sir sues board merchant ships carrying BEF personnel, the co-ordination of
g MC responsibility. These arrangements included Passive Air Defence (PAD),
sion against Gas Warfare, surface and aerial action plans, and the implementation of the
wed emergence ration policy which required each leave steamer to carry two days dry
in case of diversion or delay.
boug sailings, controlled by the Portsmouth Naval Command, were usually late
iz, ich the return steamer departing on the nightly convoy from Southampton.
an i imBulogne, escorted where necessary by naval forces from the Nore Command
g" i fible programme was the cause of several robust discussions with SNCE
- CHO, withing to prevent large numbers of soldiers waiting for the steamer, would
a freda daly ail schedule which reflected the sailing times. SNCF was however,
+ t oration of special paths that changed each day, was not conducive to the
te to a la twork, which was not only supporting the deployment of British
+ chic in ot astern France but also the civil sector. MC was though, cognizant
a polis, ich would arise if there were interruptions to the flow of traffic and there
a pois dision to shipping and rail: accidents, mechanical failure,
a chand my operations, so to mitigate the effects of such incidents, two transit
so dated, do a over or 3,000 personnel and other at Boulogne for 2,000.
sicil tin e) No 1 in INA WO 167/11: GHAG contains the details of the
TRA NO 167/205. HO 2nd Division A8:, Appx A to 2nd Divicion Admin Order. December 1939
Se is ember 1959 to 18 January 1940.
19 18 anary 1940.
hit 0. 0 ribe and Sunder ember 1939, Sailing Times - 18 December
