112
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Grenades48
1,620
Very, Signal49
300
1,800
3 × 30 cwt
3 x 3 ton
Explosives50*
5 tons
*Mainly RE
A/T Mines
1,000
2 x 3 ton
A/T Mines, Dummy
1,000
A complication for the DAC was preparing to support offensive Gas Warfare (GW). The key
issue at divisional level was the distribution of gas artillery rounds, 'Grey Shell' in the colloquial
of the day, for 4.5-inch howitzers. Whilst never deployed from 21 Base Ammunition Depor
(ha D) at fiecamp to field units, 18,000 were held in-Theatre in mid-April 1940' and DAc
that supported field regiments of the Royal Artillery holding the 4.5-inch piece were expeti
to handle the gas munitions, which were all filled with Mustard, coded Y.52 'Grey Shell' was
distributed in the same manner as conventional munitions, although subject to special contro
and handling measures. Whilst the supply of other gas munitions was conducted througt
GHO 5 the system for chemical mines and contamination bombs had by April 1940, not been
refined and the War Office guidance expected the Q Staff within a divisional HQ to resolve the
problem on the ground, the directive stating: 'Special provision, must therefore be made?" To
date, no documentary evidence has been identified from the BEF's files, which would indicate
how these munitions were to be distributed but it is probable that the DAC would have been.
tasked, although these weapons were never deployed to France, for which, the Q Staff were no
doubt grateful.
"he DAC provided 2nd Line road transport for the supply of ammunition within the
division, with reserve munitions being held for the division within the corps area in the
divisional ammunition sub-park (DAP) of the 3rd Line CAP. Vehicles of the CAP ran stodk
forward, via a Rendezvous Point (RVP) to an Ammunition Refilling Point (ARP). The DAC
was responsible for covering the gap between the ARP and the unit echelons, which doctrinaly
was expected to be 10-12 miles but operationally was usually longer. When corps unit vet
attached to a division. sections or sub-sections of the corns troops ammunition company would
be detached to the DAC to deliver the necessary level of support; this type of flexible Tak
Organization was a common feature of logistic operations of the period. HQ DAC wis
For details, see, War Office, Text Book of Ammunition, Chp X.
Pyrotechnics. For details, see, Ibid, Cho Amm
For details, see, Ibid, Chp XI.
The25 pdr also had a gas shel but production problems delayed the issue to the Army until Septembe
1940. WOOH, Special Weapons and Types of Warfal, Void, las d theis ear hi, 195), (SECRET.
53
Corps Troops Ammunition Company (CTAC) was responsible for the delivery of the 6 inch ng
When a CW Company RE was detached from GHQ Troops, an element of the GHO RASC Compan
vas attached to the relevant formation RASC Company, which at divisional level would have ben t
DAC. General Staff, The Tactical and Technical Employment of Chemical Weapons, Military Traine:
55 Tbidi
Office, April 1940), p.3.
Patch + (MT) No 32, Part 1, Chemical Warfar Unilsy Dresand Cion, tEa Voyment and Tang Wr
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
113
normally located mid-way between the ARP and the unit ammunition echelon. At the ARP,
which was an exchange point (XP) where ammunition was transferred, by hand, to vehicles of
the DAC, which then moved forward, sometimes via the HQ DAC location, to Ammunition
Points (AP)5 Motorcycle Despatch Riders were used to maintain communications, bring
ammunition demands from the unit to HQ DAC, control packet movement and guide the
DAC lorries from the AP to unit locations.
The threat from enemy ground and air forces, combined with the German GW capability,
created an imperative for dispersion, and the DAC rarely operated from a company hide; the
devastation created by the sympathetic detonation of a full company load of explosives would
have been catastrophic. The section AP could either move forward, or unit transport could
move back and collect stocks from the delivery point, which was the ammunition interface with
the combat unit. The system was however, flexible and RASC vehicles often went forward to
replenish unit reserves, or deliver artillery ammunition to the gun lines. This procedure had
though, disadvantages because the RASC drivers were usually less familiar with the tactical
situation, some of the DAC lorries were larger, and command and control was more difficult, but
its major advantage was the consequential reduction in manual stock handling thus decreasing
delivery time.
Dumping" was widely used, particularly to support artillery fire plans. In May 1940, 3
DAC" was tasked, for example, with executing, in 24 hours, a divisional dumping programme
of 200 rounds per gun, as part of the BEF's advance to contact onto the River Dyle." This was
a major task for 3 DAC because the 3rd Division's artillery consisted of three field regiments
(Tth, 33rd and 76th) with a mixed gun inventory, making a total of 72 guns.60 The DAC had
therefore, to dump 14,400 rounds, which were soon in demand, 7th Field Regiment firing 700
rounds on 14 May in support of operations in defence of the River Dyle around Louvain."1
Divisional Petrol Company
The nomenclature of the Divisional Petrol Company (DPC) was perhaps inappropriate because
Petroleum, Oils and Lubricants (POL) were not the only materials conveyed by the sub-unit,
although it described the key task. Organized into a HQ a workshop, 2 and three transport
sections, the latter with a mixture of equipment and tasks, each transport section had two
56 In 1940, the term ' Ammunition Point, was a forward detachment of the DAC. Army Council, Field
Service Pocket Book (FSPB), Pamphlet No 1, Glossary of Military Terms and Organization in the Field,
1940 (London: HMSO, 1940), p.1
57 Army Field Manual (AFM) Vol 1, Combined Arms Operations, Part 6, Combat Service Support, defines a
dump'as a temporary storage area, usually in the open, for bombs, ammunition, equipment or supplies.
58 TNA WO 167/224: 3 DAC RASC, WD, April 1940.
imp has minimal C', security and bulk handling resources; it requires activation before use.
59 Known as Plan D. There was also a Plan E, which referred to a move to the River Escaut. GHOS
Operational Instruction No
ocuments
36 and Administrative Instruction No 10 were the base planning
See, WO 197/57: Forward Move of the BEF (Plan D) - Administrative instructions and
6o Tina ta Field Repinens were equiped with 24 x25 pdrs each, while 76th Fid Regimentiod.
12x 18/25 pdrs and 12 x 4.5 inch howitzers. Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.14, 3rd Infantry Division.
TNA WO 167/468: 7th Field Regiment RA, WD, May 1940.
62 Shown in the WET as D Section. Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.119, WE II/1931/13A/2.
