3921
A Great Feat of Improvisation
average daily availability was only two aircraft, whilst loading the SCIs into the aircraft by hand
was by no means an easy task.83 Indeed, one of the first problems was to ensure the SCIs had
been correctly decontaminated, which was a particular difficulty because there was no suitable
field equipment in service, trained teams or any field drills, to support the operation, whilst the
Royal Engineers threw in another problem: shortage of water at most of the airfields, with only
Berry-au-Bac having sufficient. The planners thus turned to another solution: refilling in the
field. Porton Down, the RAF Suppliers and the Armaments Staff were aghast at the idea, but
it appeared to be the only workable concept. At first, the Armaments Staff demurred, stating
it was impossible to fill in the field; their argument though, was demolished after someone had
read the Algerian Technical Field Trials Report, which clearly indicated that the trials team
had conducted field filling. An important task was equipping and training the ground crews
but such was the pressure of the moment, the view from HQ BAFF, was that not only must
risks be taken but also that these risks were manageable; Porton Down, in the belief of the
planners, had overstated the risks involved. HQ BAFF estimated that they would require 200
SCls refilled per day, although how they calculated this figure is now difficult to confirm, but
the Air Ministry issued instructions for the training of the first 20 of over 200 personnel who
were to form the initial SCI refilling team in France; the selected candidates must have been
delighted when they found out what their task was to be. Production orders were also issued,
for the thousands of 5-gallon cans, which would be needed for the field filling; each 500 lb SCI
required six, and a 250 lb SCI, three.
The logistic challenges however, remained, the key issue becoming whether it was worth the
effort to train and equip teams for decontamination" and field filling, when by July or early
August, SCI stocks would have risen to the point that the argument became academic.
subject inevitably generated an appreciable raft of correspondence but before a decision could
be taken, the German assault began. The policy of jettison thus continued as the most likely
83 There was no Material Handling Equipment (ME to lift the crates to the doors, and even had there
been some, handling inside the aircraft had to be done manually.
84 The first Air Ministry instructions relating to field decontamination do not appear to have been issued
until 4 June 1940. S.49832/03 dated 4 June 1940 in TNA AIR 14/419: Smoke Curtain Installation,
Technical Trials.
The instruction had a diagram of a decontamination area and stated that the team
should consist of an officer or NCO plus five airmen.
85 Most of the airfields could have been provided with water from artesian wells because the RE had
several well-drilling companies.
They were though, deployed on other important tasks such as
6 TA his chemical Waitre Rid he red ined mende Riports on Gas Spraying Trials
87 ReAR 2517 Chena (VERy E-Cr Sit Policy, Air Ministry Loose Minute of 13 May 1940,
which expressed clear urgency in its
88 Live trials were conducted at RA West Raynham andiRA for forthem St Baith in Norfolk during the
cone, there is no time for further diccuccion,
period 29-31 October 1940, a Blenheim dispensing HITV from an SCl and although the location is
was not a difficult task, but it did require properly equipped trained teams conducting
not noted in the file was probably over the North Sea. The trials concluded that SCI decontamination
slick drills. In
a sustained effort, experiments revealed throa team i could decontaminate 5-6 x 500 1b SCs pet
hour. Anti-Gas IPE if correctly utilized offered 100% protection to ontaminalet the trial hichlichted
the care required to prevent cross-contamination and protection to persp changing the location of th
decontamination area if the wind changed.
Chemical Warfare.
TNA AIR 2/5200: Air Ministry Bacteriological and
Operation FLANNELFOOT
393
arional solution, but this created two complications. If the SCI equipment was to be kept
-r, he crit taff argued that the SCIs should not be dropped on territory controlled by
-tem and defacto, this meant releasing them on territory controlled by the Allies, which
ativital mean contaminating parts of it as the weapon struck the ground. One option
posed by HQ BAFF was to establish a dirty airfield, where SCIs could be removed and
ged. Before this proposal could be progressed, the war had moved on, but it was an idea,
rich was revived in UK during the anti-invasion preparations.
The plan to decontaminate
neith SC was, in the circumstances, a sound one but no thought had been given to
resure implications. Militarily, it was far more effective to jettison the SCls than to
it substantial field organization to decontaminate and refill them, although imperatives
asmr 1940 generated this solution for operations flown from the UK. Essentially
at, by adopting this process, the SCI programme, instead of creating a force multiplier,
ire logist burden involving more personnel, equipment and training:
we rials of 21 BAD
sch a fire files are replete with policy, the war diary of 21 BAD," the unit holding
tothe SW stocks, highlights the constant round of inspections, concerns over security and
e daily grind of operating with a shortage of experienced trained personnel. This aspect is of
nar devance because it is remarkable, given the military significance, political sensitivity
icia haling o f the tasks, that the War Ofice and GHIQ BEF, failed to grasp the
Vitance of ensuring 21 BAD was properly resourced to execute its work.
Despite much
Sig ding from the unit, propely he chain of command, the War Office insisted
«21 BAD was an ARH and refused to reconnize neither ite SW entic or its Port Ordnance
sis coseuently, it was never granted a Special Establishhment.?
Jesite its operational end lost in
Kind he Quartermaster found it dificulato acquire them, the war diary noting a shortage
Labour, WMT and stationery and the requirement for a bile crane to handle the sele
1250b LC bombs.? The fact that the unit diarist had to write on blank paper because the
c on C 18, ahao the wilt de until mid- February 1940, is perhaps a clear
ample of the many frustrations the personnel of 21 BAD faced. Whether the War Office
Kin was nart of a security cloak. or an immraceive picke of incomnetence, is impossible to
INA AIR 2/5200. Air Ministry Bacteriolorical and hominal Warfare. Air Ministry. Director of
he draft drill for SCI decontamination was issued as SD 129 Leaflet B11. See TNA AIR 14/273
mical Warfare Decontamination of SCIs. The equipment requirement involved 30 different items
incoding SC crates, trestles, drip trays, pails, bleaching powder, rope, canvas screens cotton waste,
TA NO 167/179/1: 21 BAD RAOC, WD
are rous, revd rivers, piers, tommy bars, tongs pons, knives, , Cannied as, petrol, arth,
a11 May 1940, with the German attack in full swing, the war diary noted that ADOS (Ammunition)
had advised that the establishment would be that of an ARH, whilst also reporting the possible presence
pted further discussion on
