Operation FLANNELFOOT
Supporting the Gas Warfare capability of the BEF
A Hidden Inventory
Amongst the thousands of soldiers and airmen that formed the BEF and the British Air Forces
France (BAFF) was a group of specialists, supported by other Arms and Services, whose task
was to conduct, in support of the BEF, offensive and defensive operations using chemical
weapons or 'Gas Warfare' (GW) in the parlance of the day. Training and deployment were
conducted in great secrecy and perhaps not surprisingly, little has been written on the BEF'S
GW capability in 1939-1940,' the Official History of the campaign, The War in France and
Flanders 1939-1940, not mentioning it? The specialist history of British GW preparations
during the Second World War, Special Weapons and Types of Warfare, Volume I, Gas Warfare
was, until 1984, graded SECRET, when it was downgraded to UNCLASSIFIED.* A rare
but fascinating document, discussion on the logistic aspects of preparations for BEF GW is,
perforce of coverage, zero and it is the aim of this chapter to fill this lacuna in this important but
nonetheless little known, historical dimension of the BEF.
In 1939, Chemical Warfare (CW) was defined as those aspects concerned with the offensive
and defensive use of gas, incendiary and smoke munitions, and those defence measures required
to protect British Forces. GW related specifically to the employment, in military operations,
by any nation of any chemical substance, solid, liquid or gas, designed to have a poisonous or
Operation FLANNELFOOT
379
ritant affect, upon the human body, and this included tear gases. Consequently, gas was
demed to be a 'Special Weapon' (SW) and one that required different controls to incendiary
andsmoke munitions? Strategically, the use of gas in retaliation was considered to be a defensive
at, whilst at the operational and tactical levels, the BEF General Staff planned to use GW'
a sport offensive and defensive ground operations with land based and air delivered gas
suitions. The Army had, or planned to have, SW for offence and defence, whilst the RAF
rentory was entirely offensive; some Army systems could be utilized for both, whilst others
ire designed for a specific type of operation.
The British Army had several Arms and Services involved in storing, securing, moving,
aping and employing its offensive and defensive SW. The Army was also responsible for
ting the RAF in deploying its SW to and from the Continent, and in an early successful
rid of Jointery, the two Services worked closely to achieve these tasks.
The RAOC was
ponsible for storing SW in Base Ammunition Depots (BAD), controlling a designated field
* 21 BAD, near Fecamp'° in Northern France, specifically for storing SW, which it was
ried, ensured not only greater secrecy, although there was debate on this point but also the
gobli to wil evacuate the stocks to UK, which as it transpired proved to be the case."
* Cop Royal Engineers (RE) was responsible for constructing the depot, and the Corps
coll movement by rail and ship, although most of the assets were civilian. The AMPC
id abour for building and handling tasks in the depot, and at the ports. The RASC took
- a de in deploying SW by road at the corps and divisional level, also providing vehicles
, ront internal depot tasks, the loop between 21 BADD and the port, and the depot
rahad The Royal Artillery (RA) handled SW 'Grey Shell' as conventional rounds,
sogh here were special controls over issue and employment, whilst the RE No 1 Chemical
Hine OfFice, Air Raid Precautions, Handbook No 1, Personal Protection Against Gas (London: HMSO,
al doerent relating to the period held in the TNA, gas weapons are almost invariably described
a denial capons, which is no incorrect, but this descriptor also included smoke and incendiary
Niật th War Ofice and GH BEF were developing GW plans, the
cogn dead a wee delorea lin, the i bet proposins the
it is spons held achority to Cined to the War Cabinet for approval. WOOH, Gas
hithe Moanes (AM) now termed Chemical Dofence, were an ineral part of the planing,
operations, and the Staff carefully studied the impact of the enemy's capability on
bit ra, orin 1 71f cale olly audia to which British Expeditio Ca Cares
go ford. aunty of 7: SeA of ne A- war trials and development, se, Gic, Cate,
always possible to clarify from the documents the specific weapon systems.
This document was downgraded to UNCLASSIFIED by MOD D/OR13 (NBC) 22/1 dated 28
September 1984.
46 chemical agents are listed in Lieutenant-Colonel Augustin M Prentiss PhD and Major George I
B Fisher, Chemicals In War: A Treatise on Chemical Warfare New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
1937), pp.6-7.
378
After due consideration, an Air Ministry letter S.2187/WO2
hit th day hich will ensue in getting stocke
- in D 10 35/30. 1d in Air Forces in France - Gas
