Glossary
Adjutant & Quartermaster-General. The overarching term, usually abbreviated to Al
AQ used by the British Army in the Second World War, to define those activities, r
provided support to combat forces in the fields of administration and logistics.
Ammunition Point. A forward detachment of an ammunition company to facilit
replacement of ammunition expended.
Air Interdiction.
Air Interdiction (Al) is an air operation conducted to destroy, neu
or delay the enemy's military potential, before it can be brought to bear effectively e.
friendly forces at such a distance from friendly forces, that detailed integration of ex.
mission with the fire and movement of friendly forces is not required.!'
Base. A place where the Line of Communication originates, Theatre materielis held and
the principal business of supplying the forces in the field is located.
Battlehield Air Interdiction. Battlefield Air Interdiction (BAI) is an air operation condi.
to destroy, neutralize or delay the enemy's military potential, which is in a positio
directly affit friendly forces such that detailed integration of air missions with their.
movement of friendly forces is required.?
Canned Fuel. Liquid fuel in a returnable and reusable container. In the BEF this was us
a 2 or A-gallon can, although French 5 litre cans, 50 litre drums and 200 litre barres
also used.
Cased Fuel. Liquid fuel in a 4 gallon non-returnable tin, colloquially known as a Aims)
Chemical Warfare.
two tins 'cased' in a wooden, cardboard or three-ply box for protection.
Chemical Warfare (CW) was defined as those aspects concerned y
the offensive and defensive use of gas, incendiary and smoke munitions, and those ca
measures required to protect British Forces.
Close Air Support. Close Air Support (CAS) is air action against hostile targets, which,
in close proximity to friendly forces, and which, require detailed integration of each,
Combat Supplies. Combat Supplies are ammunition, POL, and rations. Although the c.
mission with the fire and movement of those forces.
combat supplies was not current in the British Army during 1940, it neatly summan
Air Publication 3000, British Air Pover Dotrine, 3rd Edn, Directorate of Air Staf (UK MD 19)
Ai Publication 300 Brib Air Pour Dotine 2nd Fan, Directorate of Air Star (UK MD, 1N)
Pit Publication 3000, Brtish it Pour Doctrine, 3rd Fan, p.3.1.1.
XxXx
Glossary
XXX1
the items that were the most important in delivering direct military effect in the front-line.
Ammunition included, in the BEF context, small arms and artillery ammunition, special-
ized infantry natures, Gas Warfare munitions and explosives.
POL covered all liquids
fuels, lubricants (oils and greases) and antifreeze. Rations included food for personnel and
forage for animals, plus disinfectants and water purification chemicals.
Consist. The composition of a train, by wagon or coach, with the designation starting at the
locomotive and ending at the brake van.
Cross-load. To transfer a consignment of materiel or material from one asset to another, within
the same transportation mode.
Delivery Point. The place where 2nd Line RASC transport hands over loads to 1st Line trans-
port of the unit.
Dump. A temporary storage area, usually in the open, for munitions, equipment, or supplies. A
dump had minimal security assets and possibly no dedicated technical manpower presence.
En-Cas Mobile (movable if necessary). A group of railway wagons, a barge, or other convey-
ance, kept permanently under load ready for immediate despatch on an emergency.
Equipment Support.
Equipment Support (ES) includes the preparation and repair of equip-
ment for battle and the repair and recovery of equipment battle casualties and failures. The
ES staffs have a vital role in monitoring the serviceability of critical equipments in a forma-
tion to ensure that combat power is maintained.
Equipment Support Management.
A key component of ES is Equipment Support
Management (ESM) which is the process of controlling the allocation, repair policy, refur-
bishment, redesign and replacement of, and re-supply of material for, equipment throughout
its service life.
Gas Warfare. Gas Warfare (GW) related specifically to the employment, in military opera-
tions, by any nation of any chemical substance, solid, liquid or gas, designed to have a
poisonous or irritant affect, upon the human body, and this included tear gases.
Ground Lines of Communication.
The system of communication on land by rail, road
and navigable waterways between the army and its base or bases, including the district
through, which they pass, within allocated boundaries. There were also Air and Sea Lines
of Communication from the Home Bases of the United Kingdom and the Empire to the
Theatres of Operations.
Ground-Loading. On field operations, ground-loading refers to temporarily un-loading stocks
from combat or logistic vehicles, which would normally be held on them, in order to rest
or maintain vehicles or to undertake other support tasks. Ground-loaded stocks do not
constitute a dump.
Lines of Support. Lines of Support are used to describe the boundaries of specific elements of
logistic functions. Lines of Support was not a term that was in use during 1940 appearing in
various publications and is a simple method of assigning capability to units and formations.
1st Line - organic to a unit.
18/3 Fid, A May Code No 21344 (UK MOD, 1998), p/18:
Field Manual Vol 1, Combined Arms Operations, Part 6, Combat Service Support, DGD&D
Army Doctrine Publication Vol 3, Logistics, DGD&D/18/34/63, Army Code No 71566 (UK MOD,
1996), p. xili.
