A Great Feat of Improvisation
concealment, camouflage, sentries and AA weapons.
The Petrol Sub-Park has less luck; four
soldiers were seriously injured in motor-cycle accidentsl01 and two taken ill requiring them to be
admitted to hospital. One interesting event on 5 June 1940 was the capture, near Roncherolles,
to the East of Rouen, of four Luftwaffe personnel from a crashed Heinkel 111,102 by four RASC
officers from the Sub-Park attired in dressing gowns, pyjamas and steel helmets; sadly, the
unit war diary is silent on the names of these nocturnally tailored logistic adventurers,.103 The
unit was though, to engage in plenty of tasking until 16 June, when, five miles from Brest, it
received the order to withdraw via the port 104 The unit denial party destroyed or neutralized its
80 vehicleslos and drained, through puncturing the tins, 16,000 gallons of cased petrol. On 17
June, the 205 personnel marched five miles to Brest docks with personal kit, rifles, Bren LMGs,
Boys anti-tank rifles and the company records in tin boxes. 106
101 Motor-cycles were essential to logistic C', reconnaissance and convoy control. Then, as now, they were
not the safest method of wheeled transport. Trooper Ernest Ronald Whitworth, a Despatch Rider
in 10th Hussars, was a fatal casualty of a motor-cycle accident when at around 0230 on 15 June, he
collided in the dark near Le Mans with a 10th Husars tank travelling in the opposite direction. He
lies At Rest in Guipavas Communal Cemetery 5 miles NE of Brest, the sole British serviceman to so
do. Regimental Committee, 10th Royal Hussars, p.26
102 The Luftwaffe mounted a raid on Rouen at 0615 and lost three aircraft near the target. This aircraft is
either He 111P 1G+AH from 1/KG27 shot down by French Blochs of GC II/10 or a HE 111H of 3/
KG27, shot down by Hurricanes of 1 Squadron RAF. See, Cornwell, The Battle of France, pp. 428-429,
which also lists the names of the German air crews
103 TNA WO 167/343: 1 AD Petrol Sub-Park RASC, WD, June 1940.
104 TNA WO 167/343: 1 AD Petrol Sub-Park RASC, WD, June 1940.
105 The table below is based upon WE 1/1931/10F/1 in Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 4, p.63 and the unit
war diary in TNA WO 167/343: 1 AD Petrol Sub-Park RASC. The Sub-Park must have been one of
the few units in the BEF to have a task vehicle strength in excess of the WET:
Table 13.8
1st Armoured Division Petrol Sub-Park - Vehicle Establishment & Strength
Type
Estab
Strength
Remarks
3-ton, Bedford OY
3-cwt, Thornycroft
Battle Winning Equipment (BWE)
1-ton, Fordson, LMG
Mobile AA capability
Lorry, Technical
Car, 4 Seats
Car, 2 Seats
Motor-Cycle
Trailer, Water
4 damaged in RTAs
Total
106 The unit war diary, which is neatly typed, gives an excellent insight into matters of company detail but
unfortunately little on
its contribution to
cor Service had. They were, to quote the Director of Staff Duties at the War Office as
(War Office, 1954), p.127.
Chasing the Rhino
373
Inaddition, there was a myriad of logistic failures and irritations, many of which were created
y the friction of war and remind logistic planners that 'Le Diable dans les Detail' 107
the 1st
Lie HE and smoke rounds were initially left on the docks at Southampton, some tanks were
ficient wireless sets, sighting telescopes and gunners' shoulder pieces. There was insufficient
act in the GLOC supply chain, track pins were prone to failure and tanks sailed with
air anons still boxed and packed with grease. Had the division not deployed into battle,
eises would have been grist to the Staff mill but the enemy ensured such matters became
git crisis. It was of course, not planned to be like this. The original concept was for
i Amoured Division to deploy to France, and conduct regimental and brigade training,
thing ring camps and logistic integration within the AFV Advanced Base Area (ABẢ)
and ay, approximately 35 miles South-South-East of Rouen. Two key logistic components
(te. BA were the Base Ordnance Depot (BOD) and Base Ordnance Workshops (BOW)
nial created to support the initial three armoured divisions, with an expansion capability
ith and then twelve.108
Whilst these vast facilities were being constructed, No 1 BOD
iN 2 BOW, located at Nantes were designated to operate as the AFV Base with a small
cosed depot at Bonnieries-sur-Seine in the ABA.109
The German attack unbalanced this
i dicing is important logistic capability from the sole deployed armoured division.
-COC summarized his frustrations of the outcome in his POR, noting that the severe
age of mechanical spare parts for the repair of the fighting vehicles and the absence of
some fighting vehicles with which to replace casualties' were key logistic failings that
mited to the disastrous outcome in France."
sured ison's logistic units, although not always to establishment in manpower and
it does fring from an initial lack of individual technical and tactical skills upon
in l had ate aily evolving scenarios sufficiently competently to sustain the
Tron and acquit themselves well in battle. The Petroleum Sub-Park and 10 Company were
* rid a their at because their services were required daily, whilst the Ammunition
i dream pressive performance given the change of role two months before. The
sir, potion and role of the logistic divisional units were not always in accordance
his i a da here vas much frustration relating to training and tasking but in the
sit ts real to deliver sufficient capability to support operations.
The GOC
air gid the sificance of formation logistic training in 1940 but without the
K t hed to Colonel Dan Duffau of the Sorvice des Essenes des Ares
a Miary Tul Service) for this most pertinent logistic quote.
red, e, VO. dance Services, p.155.
got to are eries rosied divisions, the RAOC
sent selected officers and
we met ask why he had been removed from the Armour Division This resulted in an unpleasant
TEN: acher & Todman, War Diaries, p.101.
NO 329392: Evans Report, pp. 18-19.
