BEF Logistics Notes
BEF Logistics Notes
xxix
General: GHQ Postal Unit, Advanced Stationery Depot, Printing Press, Graves Registration
& Enquiry, AMPC Group Headquarters, AMPC Company HQ, Labour Section, GHQ
Section Salvage Corps and Mobile Bath Unit.
Base:
RE: Railway Construction Company, Railway Operating Company, Railway Survey
Company, Railway Workshops, Port Postal Regulation Centre, Base Postal Office, Line
of Communication Postal Unit, Advanced Air Striking Force Postal Unit.
RASC: Supply Depot, Field Bakery, Field Butchery, Petrol Filling Centre, Bulk Petrol
Company, Bulk Petrol Storage Company, Heavy Repair Shop, Vehicle Reception Depot,
Motor Transport Stores Depot, Ambulance Car Company, and Line of Communication
MT Company.
RAOC: Advanced Base Ordnance Depot, Base Ordnance Depot, Ordnance Stores
Company,
Advanced Ordnance Workshop, Base Ordnance Workshop, Ordnance
Workshop Company, Port Workshop Detachment, Base Ammunition Depot, Ordnance
Ammunition Company, Armoured Corps Ordnance Field Park and Armoured Corps
Workshop.
General: Foreign Labour Training Centre, "Prestataire Labour Company, Palestinian
Company AMPC and Palestinian Section AMPC.
To set the scene for logistics in 1939, it is useful to briefly describe how the key fun
were enacted. Combat Supplies (ammunition, petrol and rations) were a Royal Army o
Corps (RASC) responsibility, as was the Expeditionary Forces Institute (ED, whilstei
and Motor Transport (MIT) spares were the prerogative of the Royal Army Ordance t
(RAOC).
The Corps of Royal Engineers (RE) were responsible for the constructi
maintenance of logistic infrastructure and the Postal Services, and the Auxiliary Mi
Pioneer Corps (AMPC) provided Pioneer and Labour capability.
Transportation, conducted by the Royal Engineers, included rail operation, constructe
maintenance, plus Ports and Docks, Inland Water Transport (IWT) and Movemen. Ch
(MC), Road transport at 2nd and 3rd Line was, for the most part, the responsibiliy
RASC. The RE, RASC and RAOC deployed a wide variety of units to France in the
1939-1940 and their scope and scale gives a clear impression of the complexity and de,
logistic operations. Equipment Support was the least coherent capability within log
matrix because the responsibility for it was split between the RE, RASC, RAOC:
specific instances, regimental specialists. As the motorization and mechanization of the i
progressed, the centralization of the vehicle repair and stores systems was a natural comi
but the concept was overrun by the complexities and dynamics of the rearmament and pi.
programmes, thus delaying the formation of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engr
(REME) until 1942. Corps, GHQ and Base units included:
Corps:
RASC: Ammunition Company, Ammunition Park, Petrol Park, Supply Column and h
Transport Company.
RAOC: Army Field Workshop and Ordnance Field Park.
General: Corps Postal Unit and Corps Salvage Unit.
CHO:
RASC: Army Tank Brigade Company, Artillry Company, Bridging Company, A
Aircraft Company, Arillery Regiment Section, H COaT Bops RASC, CHin
Company, Supply Personnel Company, Supply Personnel Section, Line of Communiti
Railead Company, Troop Carrying Company, SMiTel Sortion, ines Company, Peri
Depot and Ambulance Car Company.
RAOC: AA Brigade Workshop and AA Regiment Section.
xXvii
