Docks and Stocks
163
162
A Great Feat of Improvisation
for the movement of bulk petrol by barge and coastal tanker.?3 DGT recognized that rainy
capacity was at a premium and sought to find alternatives and IWT was certainly well surd
to the carriage of aggregate, ammunition, bulk petrol, construction materials, cased supplies
coal, crated items and defence stores. DIWT thus drafted a circular for distribution by the BER
QMG Staff, which highlighted the new procedures for bidding for IWT, with a specifi ne
that all consignments were to be a minimum of 80 tons. Medical evacuation and the carriage
frozen meat were two other IWT tasks under consideration by May 1940.
Supply Services
The RASC was responsible for Supply and the following units were a component of the Fir
Contingent deployment: two Base Supply Depots (BSD), each having a petrol sub-dept, to
field butchery and Cold Storage Depots (CSD) and two field bakeries.? Initially Petroleur
Oils and Lubricants (POL) and rations were, in accordance with the contemporary dotin
treated as parallel items of Supply to be handled by the same unit, a fallacy, which was quick.
exposed by the realities of the deployment," with the petrol sub-depots being broken out ofte
BSD structure as independent units?" One supply personnel company with a Handit
sections holding an initial 200,000 field rations was also deployed, establishing, then operan,
Detail Issue Depots (DID)," which were located at the ports and along the GLOC, including
the Assembly, Staging and AAS areas and providing the railhead supply detachments. The
DIDs held small working stocks of rations and POL and were a small but essential giante
effective operation of the GLOC. Some of them did an outstanding job in the circumstance
the DID at Le Mans for example, issuing 40,000 rations in one day in addition to thousan
sf petrol tins," but fundamentally the BIDs and DIDs were not properly, trained, mand o
sufficiently experienced to execute the work with which they were tasked, and it took imend
the strong hand of the Supply Investigation Department (SID to bring professional order"
74
WOOH, Transportation, p.45.
New contracts were not to be initiated by Services, but existing ones were to run to expiration. bid.
For details, see, Army Council, Mititary Engives, but disting ones were to un tosalin, p 3
133, Cold Storage Installations.
Oh OR was equipped with hand operated field bakeries but the RE were capable of import
Bakery for 100,000-125,000 lb Bread Daily.
Ba constructing power bakery facilities See, Ibid, buEtheries butteries and Plate Lanvo Laurie.
WOOH, Transportation, p.40.
The supply of petroleum products is examined in Chp 6, Leakers and Fillers.
Deputy Director
and grip to ensure receipts, issues and storage at War experience, who had these officers were in mut
dempled alsewhere, whit others were deemed te coverty condupera ion hervice abroad. WOOt
Supplies and Transport, Vol I, p.108.
WOOH, Vol I, p.38.
WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol I, p. 108.
The Da, as very efective organization Within CHO BEF during the Great Wand ought ang
on the Base areas, the work of the SID extended to Armies.
down loss, theft, fraud and waste but is now forgotten even by logisticiane Whilet initially foc
One of the key tasks was to ensure the
eligion of distribution, one sucestful amded to l mie. one of the key a ot 19 bond ing
wagons that had disappeared from the tracking in us hi, en trasteve, Colone Boat.
P5.4 Logistic Lesson Learnt. One of the post campaign 'logistic lessons learnt', was the provision of
integrated mobile field bakeries. (RICM: B3/SRB/RLCAB/000853)
The original plan to ship from UK daily pack train loads so they were ready to store and then
issue in France was thwarted by the rations being loaded to ships as mixed cargoes, priority
of unloading being given to ammunition, insufficient trained Supply staff, and inappropriate
buildings for the BSDs. The ration supply system thus quickly crumbled, only being saved
completely dependent upon this system during the initial deployment period. Tea, sugar and
jam were purchased in Paris but the quantities were so significant that they generated concerns
AAS had received so few rations that supplies were being dispatched by air, prompting an
pp. 101-102 and Issac F Marcosson, The Busines
Na London oh Lan, The Body rie 1939, 1011 The ad tie Marlosion, The Biesio
in delivering logistic capability in the BEF in the Great War is worthy of academic study.
80 WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol I, p.105.
84 Ibid, p11"
