Glossary
XXX111
XXX11
A Great Feat of Improvisation
2nd Line - organic to a brigade or division.
3rd Line - allocated to a Corps or Army.
4th Line - provided by the Base. For the BEF, 4th Line was delivered in-Thet
and from the United Kingdom, although some supplies for Force K6 were deliver.
from India.
Maintain.
To take supply and repair action, in order to keep a force in a condition to u
its mission.
Manoeuvre. The British Army describes 'Manoeuvre' as the employment of forces i
battlefield (using movement) in combination with fire or fire potential, to achieve ap
of advantage in respect to the opposition in order to accomplish the mission.
Material. Raw or semi-finished products required by the military forces in the field ou
Materiel. From the French, materiel is a generic term applied to finished military produ
as ammunition, equipment, stores, supplies and vehicles, although sometimes used re
materials.
Mechanical Transport. Wheeled, tracked, or semi-tracked land vehicle utilised in al
context to move men and material to, on or from the battlefield and powered by the los.
Combustion Engine (ICE) either Spark Ignition or Compression Ignition fuck.
petroleum spirit or diesel oil respectively. Often abbreviated to MT, it does norin.
combat vehicles, such as tanks, Armoured Personnel Carriers or Self-Propelled G
Motor Transport (MT) included Wheeled or tracked or semi-tracked land logistic ro
powered by the ICE but to provide specific clarification for wheeled vehics, the i
Wheeled Motor Transport (WMT) is employed.
Permanent Way. Permanent Way (PW) is a 19th Century term, often abbreviated Pl
which encapsulates all the guidance and support systems for the railway. This inched
rails, sleepers, ballast, blanketing and drainage.
Petrol Point. A forward detachment of a Petrol Company or Park to facilitate the reple
Railhead.
ment of POL to units and to which, demands are sent.
A place on a railway, where transhipment to another mode of transport, lu.
WMIT, takes place. In 1940, a railhead was defined as a point on the railway along
line of advance or withdrawal that was deemed to be the terminus for rail operations 0)
which transhipment to another mode of transportation was enacted. By doctrinal de,
tion therefore, points along the railway at which units drew personnel, material, sug
and ammunition were not railheads.
Rail Regulating Station. A place on the Rail Line of Communication at which the fo
dispatch of trains is regulated to ensure their arrival at the correct railheads at conve
times. The composition of trains may al the ariad at the Rail Regulating Station i
is required and such action is usually the result of changes in demand by corpso divis
Rake. A group of coupled wagons, not necessarilv of the same type, deemed either to be r
for movement or for future tasking.
1mm), Dotine Pubiation, Vol 1, Operation, HODT/18/34/46, Army Code No 71565 (UK M
HMSO, 1929), p.97.
092), Mitary Engineering, Vol VII, Railways, 26/Manuals/103, War Ofic (ond
Re-clothing Point. A forward detachment of a Petrol Company, consisting of one or more
WMT vehicles from which units may draw reserve clothing to replace items contaminated
by chemical agents.
Refilling Point. The point where ammunition or petrol loads are transferred from 3rd to 2nd
Line transport.
Rendezvous. A place where supply columns or ammunition columns are met by representatives
of the headquarters concerned and directed to Refilling Points.
Reverse Logistics. Operations related to the reuse of products and materials, by moving them
from their typical final destination of use for the purpose of capturing value or proper
disposal.
Set. Usually a complete train, including locomotive and wagons or coaching stock, or a mix of
both, assembled to undertake a rail movement task. A 'Set' was usually associated with a
recurring task
Standard Gauge Railway (SGR). A railway which, had a track gauge of 4 feet 8½ inches
(1435mm). In 2018, Standard Gauge is rated between 1432 mm and 1435mm to account
for those SGRs, which have been reduced in gauge by 3 mm, to improve the ride of high-
speed trains.
Supplies.
Rations, forage, liquid fuels, solid fuels, lubricants, disinfectants and medical
consumables. Whilst not a Supply item, mail was normally delivered through the Supply
system.
Sustain. Maintain the necessary levels of combat power for the duration required to achieve
assigned objectives.
Theatre of Operations. The whole area of land or sea in which, fighting may be expected, or
in which, the movements of troops and materiel are liable to interruption or interference by
the enemy.
Tranship. To transfer a consignment of materiel from one mode of transportation to another.
Transportation. In the context of the BEF, transport by SGR rail, Inland Water Transport
(IWT) docks and the supporting movement control organizations.
