116 A Great Feat of Improvisation
the front of the GLOC area or the rear of the corps areas, on a scale of one train per day pe
two divisions.
The DSC could support a gap of 80 miles for short periods, but such activity levels son
impinged upon efficiency because vehicle maintenance was curtailed, and driver fatigue
mounted. The operation of the system was simple but effective because the two-echelon syster.
enabled one echelon to work the railhead, whilst the other was delivering supplies. On Dy
One, bulk supplies were loaded to echelon vehicles at the SRH and then moved to a 'break bulk
area, where the materiel was redistributed in accordance with the requirements of units, usual
utilizing, in a wooded area, a 'Horse-Shoe' circuit. Vehicles would enter an outer circuit and
dump their bulk loads, before proceeding to an inner one and collecting their unit loads thi
had been built from stocks held in the dumps that had been created on the outer circuit. On the
second day, the WMT would move forward into the divisional area and one of two methods o
re-supply would be enacted.
The first system involved the vehicles moving, via Meeting Points to Delivery Points. Brigi
HO selected the Meeting Points where the DSC echelon met unit guides who took them fonvi
to Delivery Points where the supplies would be transferred to unit vehicles. To create flexibin
during mobile operations, the divisional headquarters sometimes allocated a RV. This st
hide to which an echelon could be directed, and if necessary, supplies re-organized, white
Meeting and Delivery Points were confirmed. The second system required the seletion, or
the divisional staff, of Supply Points where unit vehicles would collect stocks. This system hal
several advantages. It kept the DSC WMT out of unit lines, afforded an echelon greater contro
of its assets, generated flexibility for collecting units and left the option of the RASC echelo
going forward to unit B echelons.
Reserve MT Companies
The organic RASC 2nd Line resources in the BEF were reinforced, by what were in efer thi
Line Reserve MT Companies (RMTC),* which were planned for an expeditionary force on
scale of one per division though because of the need to delore commanies onl
seVen Were sent to France?" These units were a significant size, comprising 482 person land H
× 3 ton lorries capable of moving in a one-time lift either 2,480 soldiers equating to the marching
strength of four rifle battalions, or 396 tons of stores, ammunition or fuel, or 66,000 gallons c
canned water 0 The creation of the RMTC was essentially a product of the restructuring ofte
infantry battalions and Liddell-Hart argued that had the truck" establishments of the infinin
battalions been increased, the RMTC would not have been required in the troop tranger.
role 81 Thor is little argument about this but than were incufficient vehicles auntin
for it to be enacted. As it transpired, the formation of the R generated much great
operational capability than retaining all the WMIT at battalion level, although the bates di
For details of the WET, see, WE IV/1931/44/2 in Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 3, p.99.
The initial allocation of the RMTC to the First Contingent of the BEF was as follows: 1st Division (19
(51 Company) and 4th Division (50 Company
Thi, Bai Tide-rit, Th fence of Britain (London: Faber & Faber 1939), p.373-374.
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
117
May and June 1940 lucidly exposed that the tactical penalties were far higher than had been
initially assumed. Infantry battalion establishments were reviewed and WMT lift increased but
the debate concerning the balance of transport allocation had a long history and was to surface
again during operations in France during 1944.
Conclusion
Divisional logistic support to the BEF of 1939-1940 is a fascinating period of military history.
For the first time in warfare, motorized logistic corps took to the field to support a mechanized
force, and did so against a backdrop of rapid expansion and improvisation. Divisional logistic
units, although not always to establishment in manpower and equipment, and often suffering
from an initial lack of individual technical and tactical skills on which to build, were, for the
most part, combat ready by May 1940, and generally acquitted themselves well in battle. The
two most serious limitations in the structures were enabling support to independent brigade
operations and the fragility created by the RASC 'commodity' sub-units being divorced from
the division
The DSCs were usually the most practised at their art because their services were required
on a daily basis, whilst the DPCs also had an opportunity to hone their field skills. The DACs
achieved the least live practice, although the drivers became familiar in identifying their loads
and dumping programmes were exercised in some divisions.
The shape, size, composition
and role of the logistic divisional units were not always in accordance with doctrine and
establishments and there was much frustration relating to training and tasking, but most units
were able to deliver sufficient capability to support operations. The RMTC, whilst not allocated
to every division, provided a very significant increase in road transport capability and played a
key logistic role throughout the BEF's operations in France.
the integral components from the RE that provided the DPU, and the RAOC, which sponsored
the MBU, both played important supplementary supporting roles. The effective operation of
the DPU, especially in its interface with the DSC, was essential to ensuring the swift arrival
of the mail, a process that certainly under-pinned morale. Equally, a fully functioning MBU
was welcomed on an individual basis from everyone from the divisional commander to the
most junior soldier, whilst it served a key military purpose in sustaining hygiene and preventing
the spread of disease and infection. The least co-ordinated and coherent component of the
divisional logistic matrix was Equipment Support. Whilst a RAOC officer acted as the Senior
Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (SOME) in the HQ, most of the activity was executed at unit
level through RAOC LADs, which were not directly controlled by the SOME and the RASC
workshops were out with his responsibilities. 2
82 The logistic and operational impact of these arrangements during the campaign are worthy of
further study although the outcomes were an imperative to the formation of the Royal Electrical
Mechanical Engineers (REME) in 1942. See, WOOH, Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, Vol
1, Organization and Operations.
