246
A Great Feat of Improvisation
the intervention of the BEF's QMG, Lieutenant-General Lindsell who wrote to the Under
Secretary of State for War:
I have to recommend that a drinking mug may be supplied to each man. At present,
the men only have a mess tin, which serves both as a dinner plate and drinking vessel,
besides being put to other uses e.g., boiling pan, frying pan, container for shaving
water, and the issue of a mug would add greatly to their amenities. 60
The failure to issue a drinking vessel to the soldiers however, hid a much greater problem
which was observed by Gort when he visited 42nd (East Lancashire) Division, when he saw
men without knives and forks and eating their meat with their fingers from a corrugated iron
table, commenting to Ironside the CIGS that it was 'a lamentably low standard in elementary
administration' 6
Post and Parcels
One of the first communications processes for the welfare of soldiers that the PSS enacted was
the introduction of a private telegraphic service 2 between France and the Empire, which started
at 0001 on 9 February 1940, although initially, the Dominion of Canada was not included in
the scheme.63 Military telegraph forms were issued to Army Post Offices (APO), although
signal message forms«* were also acceptable, and in an emergency, plain paper. The service
was designed to allow soldiers with urgent personal messages to respond to problems at home,
although they were also entitled to telegraph their leave arrival details, provided they did not
mention the location of the debarkation port or the sailing time of the ship, the security of cross-
Channel shipping being a constant concern. With an eye to the fact that many Reservists,
TA personnel and Militiamen were serving in France, and in some instances, not averse to
conducting their previous business, messages of a commercial nature were not permitted. * The
59
Whilst stationed in 2 Infantry Base Depot in the Rouen Sub-Base Area, Private Fired Gilber noted.
the pausay of even this basic facility: " they have to give us hot water from the cookhouse to have in,
the paucity of even this basic facility: they have to give the food comes in and fruit tins have to ser
as shaving mugs." Gilbert, letter dated 20 March 1940. His five years as a Prisoner of War (POW)
would make these items seem like luxuries
60 Would make these items em like luxuries. State for War: GHO(0) 0/2024 (b) dated Orbe 19)
i thee intere .. The letter has no date the documention
the file is a typed copy of the original signed by the OMG.
Colville, Man
of Valour, p. 178.
NA NO 570 1: ChOC, promised ponde Pat thirder did not though an unhan,
the hard work of the PSS. For example, Part I Departmental Orders of 22 BAD, did not cary the
diar TNA WO 167/1191/9.29 RAD WI refers.
until 11 March 1940; it is possible though, that earlier orders are missing from the war
The suggested GHQ method directed the soldier to give his or her Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA
at an inland railway station.
A survey of the service conducted shortly after it started recorded that 21% of the message related no
illness, 18% to births, 17% deaths, 17% greetings, 16% could not be classified, 7% related to personal
Mightier than the Sword
247
AGEIVE
No. 164.4
lope must not be wen tor
1 Copyrigat Ke
SERVICE
c to examination at the
Icate must be
ur that the con
vet.
case to the Base Censor.]
23 врн.
Address: -
Min K. E. Hind
green tame.
oventur
Warwickshire
P84 The Letter Home. AFA 3078 - Green Envelope. (Courtesy Elaine Schafer)
i however fre. Charges to the UK were 2½d per word for the text and signature,
i crim are of 1s 3d. Other destinations were charged at 5d per word, and a
cum fe of 286. Payment was in French currency.
Ti chino road mail was the responsibility of the Royal Engineers, but the
i met asia matter for the PSS. In September 1939, mail was sent from
cop herburg on personnel ships, with mail then being dispatched from the Base
tri py tina it ail services or WMI, depending upon location! Mail for I
it reat located cops alhead and, with the exception of registered mail,
to da hat my ot Serie, as dispatched through the RASC Divisional
gin a of an unauthorized commercial nature. TNA WO 167/1719: ADAPS
han un on P, he equivalent cost in 2018 is respectively 63.84, 61.28 and £7.68.
a in 20, is cal lut the massive reduction in the cost of telecommunications to
in at ao he potal ystem, see Diagram 6 - BEF Postal Distribution
