Marrying the Driver
147
146 A Great Feat of Improvisation
in his Despatches that the move reflected, great credit on the drivers, who were unaccustore
to long hours at the wheel and to driving on the right-hand side of the road.'177
As the GLOC was not in full operation by the time of the move from the Assen
Area to the Concentration Area, ammunition, fuel and rations were sent by rail to establis
Advanced Dumps based on railheads, which was in theory a neat solution but some of the
available railheads were not suitable for the task, 178 whilst command and control was not a
tight as it should have been and in a classic display of regimental logistic culture the units
I Corps took full advantage of the opportunity.
As an official report wryly observed, Th
was an example of the foresight of a Commander being thwarted by the acquisitive instit
of the old Regular Army Quartermaster' !79 Such frustrations were equalled in irritation o
not scale, by the attitude of a Staff officer at Orchies Railway Station who ordered 208 Fil
Company RE to abandon the unit stores on the platform if they could not be cleared by WIT
in time for the arrival of the next train.
The unit history recorded: "What was surprising to
Territorial unit was the inefficiency of the organization, where it would have been expected it
find a Regular Staff Officer handling everything with calmness and efficiency! Commonit
Il Corps, Lieutenant-General Brooke inspected his railheads on 16 October, and was it
impressed by the logistic arrangements, noting, Visited Supply and Ammunition til head the
morning. These not running properly yet. Rations coming up anyhow and proper pack tis.
not yet organized, 181 This observation from a most capable soldier confirms that the BEF fror
the logistic perspective was not in fighting order but it was certainly not caused by alack t
enthusiasm or dedication by the logisticians.
Conclusion
The BEF's move to France was, given the circumstances, a successful oneration hut unlike to
predecessor in 1914 it had the good fortune not be involved in a meeting engagemen dung
the deployment. Conceptually and doctrinally, Plan W4 was sound and in accordance with c.
Manual of Movements (War) but the practical application was more of a challenge. The kyis.
was influence of the perceived threat of air attack, which vre mo an unnecessarily long GLOC,
Which then by default was under resourced, thereby diluting command, control and chern.
The reliance upon the Supplementary Reserve to deliver the Docks oneration within the SPOI
was inevitable given the force structure but the use of units that had to form upon mobilizati
so early in the deployment was mistake. Many of the specialist Supplementary Reserve ut.-
were technically competent but outputs were advert the speciali fragile command, or ling
The Staff mis appreciation of the storage requirements for the Base Ordnance ai.
Supply Depots was a fundamental error that caused considereme issues during the developai
phase and not a little friction with the Host Nation although the alone its that wer
177 TNA CAB 120/247: British Expeditionary Force: Lord Gort's First Despatch, para 10.
178 Because of this is tim the Ammunity Porce. LolA PiEs Filestespatch, para do.
Sud explosives until improved arrangin Rache ada (tH A CAB 10d 1235: BEF Ammunio
179 plY: AB 106/211. "Notes on the QOrganization of the BEF" dated 16 January 1942, para bi.
180 Morling, Sussex Sappers, p.59.
181 Danchev & Todman, War Diaries, 1939-1945, p.7.
assigned to the billeting of French government, defence, industrial tasks lucidly indicates
that the planning was not as detailed or as clear as has been suggested by some contemporary
observers and later historians.
Whilst motorization, with its fragility in training and experience, was fundamental to the
mobility of the BEF, it remained, within the constraints of Plan W4, reliant upon the French
railway for its 3rd Line transportation.
That the corps railheads were still not effectively
functioning in mid-October 1939 clearly indicates the limitations of the BEF's logistic outputs
at this juncture. The challenges inherent in the operation of the commercial WMT fleet were
such that they were not resolved until the vehicles were left in France as a result of the evacuation
in mid-1940. The critical issue however, was the supply of canned fuel, which at points during
the deployment, threatened to bring the road movement along the GLOC to a halt.
That it
did not, was a combination of swift action by the logistic Staff, resulting in the delivery of
sufficient stocks to units and effective economies of consumption being introduced. Whilst
General Lindsell's observation that the movement plans worked 'most successfully'182 might
hide a multitude of logistic sins, including Gort's limited interest or understanding of logistics,
the BEF did arrive in its allotted sector in the Line and to this extent the logistic planners and
operators achieved the Mission.
182 TNA WO 197/12: Movement and Maintenance in the BEF.
