Leakers and Fillers
A Great Feat of Improvisation
of petrol per day and a cavalry division, 7,900 gallons. By 1936, with the mechanization wit
motorization of the Army in full swing, these quantities had risen to nearly 21,000 for tr
former and 26,000 for the latter.
In 1928, a logistic Staff exercise was held at the RASC Training College, which examine
many of the potential problems inherent in distributing fuel for a future motorized an
mechanized Army, and this in turn led to a debate between two schools of thought: Ca
and Bulk. The former won the day, on four premises, First, that he Arm of the herite.
the impressment of civilian vehicles to support expeditionary operations "at scale'", and the
although the commercial sector was moving towards distribution in bulk, civilian tanker wil
be unsuitable for field service, particularly regarding mobility and the purchase of a mitr
"special' would be necessary.
Secondly, 3rd Line transport of fuel relied, for the mats at, o
Rail Tank Cars (RTC) and it was foreseen that these might be in short supply in an operatical
theatre, thereby reducing the effectiveness of bulk distribution at 2nd Line. Thirdly, the cu
provided a method of field storage, which, if the transport of bulk fuel was not to be disrupton.
the road tanker could not. Fourthly, the tactical re-fuelling of vehicles was assessed to enor.
Aexible, quieter and often quicker with cans.
Given these strong arguments, it is not surprising that the "Can' school won the day but ti
important to recognize that the decision was made at a period when it was perceived that.
most likely deployments would be to demanding oct a per wit relati was or infrastructe
in support of Imperial defence or trade protection, such as China, Egypt or India, and it:
instructive that in early 1927 a three brigade force had to deployed to Shanghai after the Bit.
concession in Hankou was invaded by Chinese Nationalist forces." The logistic emphasis .
these environments focused upon the simple rather than the complex, but the deployne
to France was of a different order and the humble can became a serious loise te.
broader implications of the distribution requirements for a thirty-two division motorized bal
mechanized force became fully apparent.
A Flimsy Solution?
"The decision to focus upon packed' fuel initially relied upon 'canned fuel using the nhi
in-service 2-gallon steel can, which was effectively the same as the civilian one, an item that
was in quantity production and circulation during tha 1920c Ae roadide fuel-filling statio
became more common and cars began to be fitted with internal reserve tanks, the imperati.
to carry spare canned fuel to reach a filling point declined and the numbers of commercial cans
with it. From the Defence perspective, the 2 int on cined and heme more expensivet podie.
and of course, required an in-Theatre filling plant and a Reverse Logistics chain to super
TNA WO 32/4612: Future Army Organization 1025 OMe Reconce datal 16 December 19360.
CIGS SECRET P.
TNA FO 371/63436: Dispatch of Shanghai Defence Force to Shanghai, 1927.
ontinent. 27th Infantry Brigade was also dispatched from the UK but held in reserve in Hong Kong.
Liquid fuel in either a returnable and reusable can or in a non-returnable tin.
Liquid fuel in a returnable and reusable container.
in the returnables usually a glock.
although French 5 litre cans, 50 litre drums and 200 litre barrels were also used.
was 'cased' at two tins per wooden, cardboard or three-ply box? and filled at a factory thereby
introducing the economies of scale to drive down cost." In conjunction with the Anglo-Iranian
Oil Company and Shell, two filling factories were established for the War Officel? at the oil
pots of Avonmouth and Llandarcy, and for the RAF, at Ardrossan and Stanlow.!3 At this
point however, parsimony intervened because insufficient tin-plate and paint were purchased,
corps areas but enabled the RASC to experiment with bulk refuelling by hiring civilian tankers
that provided the key evidence in late 1939 to adopt a different approach to fuel distribution in
France, which, whilst requiring greater capital investment in expeditionary logistics, reduced
not only the fragility in fuel distribution, but also the size of the expanding demand for manual
handling of fuel cans and tins in the supply chain.
9 The fin' is certainly an early example of a recyclable but non-reusable container, and this at a time,
when most glas bottles had a deposit on them. It was, however, a costly failure and was replaced
party by the reusable 2-gallon can, then a 4- gallon can and finally by a copy of the jerrycan, the RASC
spelling of which, was jerrican. Interestingly, the first batch brought back from North Africa for
sessment was probably Italian.
10 The finy was notorious for leaking, creating unnecessary fuel loss and a major fire hazard, especially
11 WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol 1, p.43.
12 The OC lomaly expander this Copept in 1935. TVA WO 32/4612: Future Army Organivation
- 195, OUG Response dated 16 December 1936 to CIGS SECRET Paper, Future Reorganization
of the British Army dated 9 September 1935.
Quantity of liquid fuels.
nts, primary and secondary, use both Imperial tons and gallons for the Definition of
Bulk petrol, although the Specific Gravity varies slightly depending upon
petrol in a returnable container
martial is equated to 24 gallons per ton to account for the weight of the tins and the case.
1 gut of say 100 ong may therefore, unles specifically noted, refer to gross tonnage including the
containers or just the fuel weight.
