308
A Great Feat of Improvisation
the requirement for distributing new equipment and spares.4 The records of Ist Royal Welch
Fusiliers noted, 'When the winter set in with heavy rain, the whole area became a morass of
thick mud, making all road movement difficult'42 Snow blocked roads requiring labour and
improvised four snow-ploughs to clear them, 13 whilst ice reduced road movement transit times,
resulted in more RTAs or caused the chain of command to cease or curtail traffic operations.
The 'Freeze-Thaw' cycle was particularly aggressive to pave laid on earth, with many of these
routes closed until repairs could be affected, whilst on another roads transit was restricted to light
WMT of 15 cwt or less with a 12 mph speed limit. This level of damage came as little surprise
to the Royal Engineers, Commander RE I Corps identifying the need to ensure improvements
to the road network in the I Corps area in mid-October 1939,4 whilst the relevant technical
RE document reminded users that high speed and axle loads were the greatest enemy of the
road'. Military Engineering, Volume V, Roads, 45 suggested from an engineering perspective,
the following speed limits for long-term use: Tanks, 3 ton lorries and tractors, 15 mph; 30 cwt
load-carriers, 25 mph and cars: 35-40 mph, which was in stark contrast to the advice given
in other official military publications.46
These suggested the cruising speed of the Car,
Light Armoured Reconnaissance was 50 mph, and Cruiser tanks and 3 ton lorries, 25 mph.
Professional intervention and experience adjusted this guidance to 30 mph for the armoured car
and 20 mph for the Cruisers, in addition to a number of other amendments. 47
Inland Water Transport (IWT), which the BEF increasingly utilized to transport sand and
aggregate for construction was also affected, with barge traffic on rising river levels caused by
heavy rain and snow melt, unable to make headway upstream because of the current, whilst
there was insufficient headroom, especially for vessels in ballast, under bridges because of the
height of the water. Railways were also affected, with snow and ice blocking tracks and clogging
switches, whilst cargo such as sand became so frozen that air hammers had to be used to break it
out of the wagons, 48 which not only caused disruption to the flow of material but also congestion
in the rail yards.
These demanding conditions, particularly during 'thaw' periods generated a
raft of new arrangements to ensure units were supplied, whilst constraining the movement of
heavy WMT and thus the consumption of petrol and diesel. When the weather improved, the
41 Entries by OC 4 DSC RASC in 4 Division CRASC WD, January - February 1940. TNA WO
167/235.
The OC was Major E D G Galley RASC, an officer awarded the MC and the AFC for
his service in the RFC and the RAF.
Deptford.
Before the war, he was serving at the Supply Reserve Depot
Lieutenant General Jonathon Riley CB DSO, Lieutenant Colonel Peter Crocker & the late Lieutenant
Colonel Richard Sinnett, Regimental Records of the Royal Welch Fusiliers, Vol IV, 1918-1945, Part One
43
November 1918 - May 1940 (Warwick: Helion, 2019), p.442.
44
TNA WO 167/916: 23 Field Company RE, WD, entries, February 1940.
TNA WO 167/129: CRE 1 Corps, CE F2 dated 15 October 1939, Road Improvements - 1 Corps
Area.
45
Army Council, Military Engineering, Vol V, Roads, p.27. With the improvements in tyres and
suspensions before 1940, the speeds of modern 3 ton lorries became less restrictive.
47
Including Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet 6, 1939, Mechanized Movement by Road, Appx 1.
Army Council, Army Training Memorandum No 28, January 1940 (War Office, 1940), .27, Appa D.
General Staff Publications, Revision of Cruising Speeds.
Thurlow, Building the Gort Line, p.276.
Sharpening the Sword
309
Cops Petrol Parks (CPP) and DPCs were heavily tasked to deliver sufficient fuel to enable units
to build a' Thaw Reserve. 49
The por weather also coincided with the arrival of the first elements of the Territorial divisions
dite Second Contingent," thereby placing additional stress on logistic planning and personnel.
Nonetheles, the BEF pressed on with training, individual and collective, culminating in live-
ting ors and divisional tactical and movement exercises, supported by the preparation of
sit desire positions and the construction of fortifications along the Gort Line. The logistic
pati and experience obtained during these exercises varied considerably. 3rd Division held
a divisional tactical exercises, each of which lasted for several days, whilst 2nd Division
ny conducted two short movement schemes.2 The four day 5th Division exercise 24-28
lunch 1940 along the River Authie, included a night move, occupying a defensive position,
rita tak and infantry-tank assault co-operation. This exercise was certainly worthwhile
those identified a number of deficiencies, especially in relation to junior leadership, which
it dial gist cobat environment in May 1940, proved crucials Supporting these
paris was a weath of developing logistic activity, most of which, has never received any
pace or analysis and yet it was a crucial period in the expansion of the BEF's capability.
i cocain and integration of the many facets of the logistic diamond was vital to the
Eati and fient utilization of the allocated resources but the dispersion of the assets across
0 mili hi LOC created a consequential challenge in delivering the output, a problem
pounded, initialy at least, by unreliable communications, a frustration exacerbated by the
terme winter weather.
A Quit Day in the Office
Li g any 1940, GHIQ RASC recorded: Great difficulty experienced in inter-
comicion tenths: Hand RASC units as telephones are scarce, lines always engaged
«a DRa made to operate'" The overload on the cable infrastructure was such that GHO
road orels days, which whilst an interesting solution did little to assist the BEF
i ring cant it quiet day in the office may have suited some Staff officers,
heir it calis imported from industry were much less impressed. Used to quickly
A NA NO 1671212.22 DPC RASC, WD, 22 December 1939.
had Pit anahir), 4th (Home Counties), 48th (South Midland), 50th (Northumbrian) and
1 ta man along, a less extent medium artillery regiments equipped with field guns,
n i do it rost to potive tring for the heavy guns was more complex.
i my rint to an it up inch gun from the line at a time in order to fire on
NerVie Odord University Press, 200),.179.
TAN 4121 CHOS rs: 0o 079alk by Commander 5 Div on the Divisional exercises
chi t rom 24-28 March 40.
Vargil Depuch Riders DR) were a key Command, Control & Communications (C") asset
hi in cn t til i a dian. The winter weather sometimes mide it
and COs of.
ithdrew them from the roads, despite the
SC, WD, 17 February 1940.
