Author's Note
In the course of research for this book, it has been a privilege to discover a direct military
BEF connection which joined my paternal and maternal families nearly 10 years before my
Mother and Father met.
Fred Gilbert, a commercial artist and one of my Mother's cousins
and Hugh Maginniss, an insurance agent and one of my Father's brothers, both joined the
Royal Warwickshire Regiment at Budbrooke Barracks as 'Citizen Soldiers' on 16 October 1939,
subsequently serving in France with the BEF, although their wartime experiences were very
different. Fred was wounded three times before being captured, spending five hard years as a
POW, whilst Hugh was evacuated under Operation CYCLE, being transferred to 2nd Norfolk
Regiment and serving in India, before being Killed in Action in Burma in February 1945. That
he was a combat logistician in the battalion quartermaster platoon and distributing rations when
he was killed by enemy fire, is a timely, although sad reminder that whilst being a 'loggie' is a not
a glamourous or safe military occupation, it was and remains, an important one.
Reviews of An Unappreciated Field of Endeavour,' highlighted an issue with the over-use of
abbreviations, a problem compounded by the arrangement of the book, which was structured
so chapters did not have to be read sequentially. A Great Feat of Improvisation is similar in this
respect and although I have sought to adjust the use of abbreviations, inevitably in a book of this
scope on military logistics, which assesses a wide range of complex and inter-locking operations,
tasks, capabilities, units and installations, abbreviations are arguably all but inescapable.
Indeed, research of contemporary documents reveals long lists of military abbreviations, which
far exceed those in the book and in this respect the reader has been sheltered from the onslaught
experienced by those serving in the BEF. The use for example, of POL rather than Petroleum,
Oils and Lubricants, or WMT in lieu of Wheeled Motor Transport to take two of many, I trust
creates clarity and fluency than confusion and distraction. I apologize if the arrangement does
otherwise.
Finally, the Royal Logistic Corps Museum has kindly provided a number of photographs,
many of which have not been published before, to illustrate A Great Feat of Improvisation.
Regrettably, some of those depicting officers and men do not record their names, so the
Museum and the author would be grateful to receive, through the Publisher, any information
appertaining to them.
Clem Maginniss, An Unappreciated Field of Endeavour, Logistics and the British Expeditionary Force on
the Western Front 1914-1918 (Warwick: Helion, 2018).
Introduction
In the 1971 film 'Dad's Army', those two astute observers of military strategy, Captain
Mainwaring and Sergeant Wilson are conversing in Mainwaring's bank office about the war
news in June 1940.
Captain Mainwaring: "Bringing our lads back to Blighty like that was a glorious
achievement; it was a great example of British improvisation getting them out of
France."
Sergeant Wilson: "Pity they couldn't have improvised some way of keeping them
there!"
Mainwaring's observation has stood the test of time, whilst Wilson's comment was embedded
in the concept of the 2nd British Expeditionary Force (BEF), which too had to be recovered
in short order. Rather less obviously but equally true, the logistic organization of the BEF
was a great feat of improvisation and the light, which illuminates the story has, for far too
long, been held behind a bushel, although not so the operational aspects, which received a
public airing in the Journal of the Royal United Service Institution not two months after the BEF
had departed from France? Clearly seeking to put a positive tactical spin on an otherwise
unmitigated strategic disaster, the author, in the only association with logistics in the article,
boldly suggested that the BEF could have continued to offer prolonged resistance on its own
front, which from a logistic perspective was probably a fair assessment. Whilst the exploits of
the combat elements of the BEF in 1940 have been analysed in depth, the contribution of the
logisticians who kept the BEF in the fight has marched, or perhaps rather driven, into the mists
of time. Much has been written on the BEF's strategic, operational and tactical activities but
almost nothing, with the exception of the medical aspects* and one book on the critical railway
support, has been publicly published upon its logistics. In this respect, Dr Rob Thompson's
Dad's Army - The Film, Columbia (British) Productions, 1971.
na, The Operations of the British Expeditionary Force in Belgium and Northern France', The Journal
of the Royal United Service Institution, Vol LXXXV, August 1940, No 539, p.393.
The Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1.
William AT Aves, Supporting the British Expeditionary Force, The Royal Engineer Railway Units in
France, 1939-1940, (Donington: Shaun Tyas, 2012). This book, written by a retired naval officer,
examines in detail, the technical aspects of the units and their railway tasks rather than the wider
