262 A Great Feat of Improvisation
of the leave programme had been lost.* In these circumstances, it is remarkable that in January
that 48,629 personnel travelled on leave plus another 3,070 on duty.
Last but not least, the increasing daily personnel traffic between France and the UK was a
most useful exposure to handling mass movement. This activity, whilst on occasions causing
many frustrations, enabled the MC staff to gain obtain valuable experience in preparation for
the momentous events during the evacuation from France in May and June 1940. The MC staff
were though, planning for much greater daily activity because in accordance with War Office
direction, capability was being organized and resourced to enable, by late 1941, a potential force
of 2.25 million personnel Army, RN, RAF and civilian personnel to be sustained in France.
From the leave perspective, this would have meant 12,500 people crossing the English Channel
in each direction every day, a significant task, which was the equivalent of the personnel of nearly
two infantry divisions". In addition, MC had to manage the movement of reinforcements, duty
personnel, visitors, casualties and families.
Applying the average ratio of non-leave to leave
personnel, in the period January to April 1940, which was 14.0 percent, to the 12,500, this
would equate to 1,757, thereby creating a daily total of 14,257.
Command & Control
The Directorate of Movements at the War Office was responsible, through the Quartermaster-
General 2 (OMG 2) Branch, for co-ordinating leave movement policy for the BEF. QNG
2 (Personnel) (a) controlled Short-sea voyages, whilst 2 (b) exercised direction over military
rail movement in the UK? In France, two Movement Districts controlled leave movement.
Q (MC) North District, with Headquarters in Rouen, was operated by No 4 MC Group.
and controlled activity in areas of Boulogne, Calais, Dieppe, Dunkerque, Fecamp, Le Harve
and Rouen. Q (MC) South had its Headquarters in Vitre and had No 1 and 2 MC Groups
controlling operations in the ports of Brest, Caen, Cherbourg, Marseilles, Nantes, Rennes,
Saint Malo and Saint Nazaire.
In the UK, MC personnel in the Home Commands were
responsible for co-ordinating leave movement, with an essential component of the proces being
the Railway Traffic Officers (RTOs) and their supporting teams, A RTO was located atevery,
thajor main line station and critical railway-operating centre, yet despite their importance, they
often lived in inadequate quarters ort that one TO section was accommodated and rationed
often lived in inadequate quarters with few of the requisite facilities for operating effectively.
bree, the don & North osy ren Kailway (LNER) for two weeks before the local garion.
agreed to accent adminictrative responsibility for it 9 PTO sections had a spectrum of tasks
one of which was controlling leave movement. Many RTOs and their staff were Supplementary
TNA WO 167/137: 1 CAP RASC, WD, entries 14-17 January 1940.
WOOH, Movements, p. 199.
Dotails of the establishments, scaling and equipment of divisional units are in Philson, BEFORBAT,
Vol 2. A Regular infantry division is shown as 14,737 at p.124.
In February 1940 there
was a re-organization within the Directorate of Movements, resulting Hi
NG 2 being re-titled Ml) 2 and the re-allocation of responsicilries vithin the Branch. WOOH,
Vlovements, Chp 2, Appx /
In the Great War, the abbreviation RTO described Railway Transport Officer. See, WOOH,
Movements, p.XV.
Ibid. p.199
White litte
rena tinsmith, a train-driver and a painter - not a semblance of clerical experience among
a, which says little positive about the personnel selection process.
Tiltin September 1939 MC had tackled mobilization and then deployment to France,
« TOs were constantly in demand to solve a myriad of problems. Fortunately, the
a rely rated much disruption but the severe winter of 1939-1940 and the difficulties
marting in the blackout, generated a raft of interruptions to rail movement.
Thousands of
ren were delayed, sometimes for periods of up to 48 hours and whilst all of them required
met to over control of most of the railway companies in the UK. 12
tral Movements in France
nice th Great War indicated that the control of leave from France required careful
i artilar, the issue of suitable travel documentation was deemed essential to the
it operation of the leave system which was administered through the AFW 3145 and
DiA, day units taf. The W3145 books contained the unit counterfoil, an outbound
thin chi ch as removed at the port of embarkation, a Southern Railway warrant
a capito odo Victoria, railway warrants for the final destination and return
c tin kit for the return sea ferry. 13
into movement documentation, there were several issues pertinent to the command
aced front poeding on leave. Every soldier was supposed to take his weapon on
so, i most at meant the 0.303-inch Lee Enfield rifle, although some soldiers
ci ta do ost ofters. Personnel issued with a rifle had to carry five rounds of
cut. it ars vere not issued with ammunition, but stocks were held at the
at to is i do man, if required, on re-entry to Theatre. Documentation
HQ REC was located underground at Down Street tube station, which had been closed in 1932.
i gust 1939, but the work was not comnlete when war was declared Access to HO REC S
no ch en PaiN net and Green Park. Conversion of the site began
, ither from the surface, or by
-an it it a hater London: The Railway Gazette, 1944).
s work and a description of its HQ, see, na, The Railway
