A Great Feat of Improvisation
Table 14.4
Ground Delivered Gas Munitions - Stock in the United Kingdom
1 October 1940
Munition
4.5-inch Howitzer
6-inch Howitzer
25 pdr Base Ejection
Livens Drums (Y)
Livens Drums (G)
Bombs, Ground, 6 lb
Mines, Chemical
Filling
Mustard
Mustard
Mustard
Mustard
Phosgene
Mustard
Mustard
Charged
17,436
25,070
200
16,000
9,000
73,000
4,500
Empty
Nil
Nil
2,000
5,000
Remarks
92,000
525
Bulk Contamination Vehicle
Mustard
Conclusion
Production reduced
by bombing
65
109
Preparations for gas warfare by the Army and the RAF is a little-known aspect of the 1939-
1940 campaign in France. There has been a perception over the last 80 years that the British
GW capability was purely designed for deterrence and if necessary, retaliation and whilst there
is no suggestion in the files to request use in a 'first strike' scenario, 20 the documents do clearly
indicate that there was a concerted effort to increase the British assets as quickly as possible,
and to employ them to military effect if they were required. The logistic Corps were, despite
limitations in training and resources, fundamental to the GW capability and they enacted their
hazardous duties in rigorous and demanding conditions with industry and dedication.
RAOC had the greatest exposure to SW through the storage at 21 BAD and to a lesser extent,
at other depots. Reference to 'Grey Shell' in RASC documents at corps and divisional level
is very rare and the deduction must be that except for ammunition movement by 50 Divisional
Ammunition Sub-Park between depots and ports, practice in handling and distributing SW
within the RASC in the BEF was probably zero, with the existence of SW being opaque to the
units
Of especial significance though was the logistic Corps' performance, in conjunction with
the Merchant Marine, in recovering nearly all the SW to the UK. That they arrived in, and
departed from, France in non-descript small coasters that belied the sensitivity and importance
of their cargoes, certainly reinforced decision to adopt a low-key security approach during
transportation, whilst the commercial railways contribution to swiftly moving the SW in
UK must be highlighted. The succes in evacuating a substantial component of Britains GW
munitions not only prevented the stocks being captured by the Germans but it also ensured
120 Indeed, the reverse is true, with most documents being specific that it would only be used in response
S6 dated 29 April 1940 is an example.
to a German gas attack. TNA AIR 35/131: Holding of as Weapons (Policy), Air Ministry S.4392/
Operation FLANNELFOOT
399
it K rained its GW capability during the period that the Germans were preparing to
it peration SEALION. Indeed, it is clear that Winston Churchill was prepared, as the
reministr, and against great opposition from various departments, to sanction its use as a
it' weapon, if there was a chance of changing the military balance during an invasion. 121
stop, the logisticians played a fundamental part in ensuring that the United Kingdom
mined, what was perceived at the time, a significant military and political asset.
view there would be no need to wait for the enemy to adopt such methods. He will certainly
in he rime-minister to General Ismay in TNA WO 193/732: Policy - Use of Gas in Home
or them if he think be no. Everwhing must be broo aaopt such methoutch of readiness. but
hin ta plyment must be settled by the Cabinet:
MOST SECRET Memorandum
