226 A Great Feat of Improvisation
Trains (SAT), although they were re-titled to Ammunition Section En-Cas Mobile (ASE),
which were loaded with a standard pack of natures.
In theory, this was a sound concept,
but operational experience proved that in practice, natures were not always consumed at the
planning rates, resulting in surplus of some ammunition and shortages of others, a problem
complicated by the different weapon populations within divisions. Q (Maintenance) assessed
that the time from a corps HQ making an ammunition demand to the train arriving at an ARH
would be 5½ days, and thus 9 x DAER were required to be held on rail or at the ARH. For I
Corps, 2 x DAER were to be held on rail within 12 hours travel of the ARH, with another 2x
DAER within 36 hours and II Corps, 2 x DAER also within 36 hours.163
At an ARH, ammunition would be transhipped to the WMT of the Corps Ammunition
Park (CAP) for future cross-loading to the vehicles of the Divisional Ammunition Company
(DAC).
Growing concerns about potential disruption to the rail GLOC generated several
plans in mitigation. ARHs were to hold stocks at, or in the vicinity of the railhead, 64 whilst
the CAPs and DACs were to be responsible for the ammunition dumps at corps and divisional
level respectively.
Whilst this arrangement was doctrinally pure, Field Service Regulations
gave specific direction as to its management, 'The formation of ammunition dumps and the
quantities dumped will be carefully controlled by headquarters of formations. 65 lessons in
relation to storagel6 and transport, 16 which were learned the hard way during the Great War.
It was at this point that what appeared to be a logical solution to a pressing problem parted
company with reality.
Doctrinally, dumps should have been authorized for a specific time
to meet a specific mission to obviate the need for the full governance process to be enacted.
The deposition of munitions to field sites on a semi-permanent basis generated that need, but
because of the shortage of technically trained ammunition personnel the outcome was a failure
to execute the appropriate levels of inspection and accounting, neither of which did anything
positive for the quality or quantity of the stocks 168 III Corps, recently formed, was by late April
163 TNA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p.6.
164 I Corps ARH was to hold 5 x DAER and II Corps, 7 x DAER. TNA CAB 106/235: BEEF Ammunition
sunnly ribson Kenort). n.6
165 Army Council, FSR, Vol I, Organization and Administration, pp.252-253
166 On the Western Front, in late 1918, the fourth Army DIDST war diary contains a fair share fissue
described by the DDST as 'unsatisfactory, with the Canadian Corps dump being especially bad, an
HQ Fourth Ármy, DDST, WD, 17 August 1918.
ka 1 l Nates on Conference at "0 6,45 pm, 28 August.
1938 Statise with regard to lories very serious in ries tave tete: This proble as i cat
1918: Situation with regard to lorries very serious in view Boche retreat behind Somme ...It is not
po October, sange quantities oy boxed ammunition are lying about the area in various dumps.
knows of this but state that the neces
ssity of economy in lorries makes it compulsory for ammunition
to be dra th from Kate that the need of economy in lo eo make my, DDOS, WD, 19 Otober
Emerience, noted the importance of exchance hotten tha BA Doood APle to highlight
the dissonance and resolve it.
Factory to Fire Trench
aito train from the Base with the relevant munition natures. 169
a pamphlet on the subject, which was evidently studied' 171
a polem especially prevalent at ARHs, and guarding difficulties.
in our darkness, a figure, which was assessed to be 500.777
40, Co to as and Divisional Petrol Companies, the CAPs and DACs were
AND 67180-I Cops DDST, WD, entry 25 April 1940.
i. a unitin imps as the length of time they were expected to be' temporary.
X CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p. 10
Th a cly in that the chin of command failed to ensure that appropriate
i can i out our eats of both the CRand the ped, Ch eport not ng,
required'. Given the shortage of tarpaulins, the failure in protection may not have
i hi hu tut ding sue was a combination of weak command, poor training
- hi An in in 2. 1940. Ay B, Dumping of Field Arilery
