pg_0026.pdf:
'It will revert
to Corps control on D + 1 when HQ Division will
cease to have any direct dealings with HQ Sub Area.
Transfer of control
will be notified in the field.
9.
101 Beach Sub Area will establish a Beach Maintenance Area,
area shown on the First Key Plan attached at
Appendix 'n'.
It will first establish Sector Stores Dumps for essential
stores until Beach Maintenance Area can
A Beach Maintenance Area.
known as STAR is being established by 102 Beach Sub Area to the WEST of
the Divisional boundary.
MOON will provide maintenance for 185 Inf Bde Group and for all
troops for whose maintenance the Division
is responsible.
STAR will provide maintenance for all other troops in the bridgehead
and under command 1 Corps.
In emergency dumps in either Beach Maintenance Area will issue to
any unit or formation on demand, subject to any control which may be neces sary
in respect of items in short supply.
11.
6 Beach Group, whose task is to develop MOON, will be tactically loaded
for second tide D day.
If conditions so demand 6 Beach Group may land on
MIKE/NAN Sectors instead of on QUEEN Sector.
temporary expedient for the mintenance of the Division.
It this occurs
then availability of commodities for replenishmaht may be deiayed for gix
or seven hours.
SUBSEQUHNT MAINTENANCE
12.
Units of 185 Inf Bde Group will continue to draw from Beach Maintenance
Area until
the administrative
units of the Division are landed,
when a Divisional
Administrative Area,
in accordance with Standing Orders, will be formed.
Its
location must depend on circumstances but it will probably be just SOUTH of MOON.
The switch from mintenance direct from Beach Maintenance Area to
normal
maintenance through the Divisional idministrative Area will be notified in
the field.
'B'
1.
GINERAL SYSTEM OF MAINTENANCE
(a) Sector Stores Bumps
Four Sector Stores Dumps will be formed (Sce 1st Key Plan.
One dump will be allotted to 185 Inf Bde Gp
and will contain
ammunition and RE Stores for use of the Bde Group.
(b) Sectors Stores Dumps will oparate under the control of 101 Beach
BRASCO 185 Inf Bde will establish himself at the dump
allotted to this Bde and will maintain liaison between HQ 185 Inf
Bde and HQ Sector Stores Dumps.
(o) When the Beach Maintonance Area holds
sufficient stocks of all
commodities the Sector Stores Dumps will be closed and all first
and second line
transport will be directed to the Beach Maintenance
Area.
The changeover will be effected under the orders of Coma
101 Beach Sub Area who will make necessary adjustments to signs.
(a) Ammunition Point
(i) An Ammunition Point consisting of six pre-loaded 4 x 4 3-ton lorries
will land at H + 285. For composition see Section 7.
..d(ii)

