pg_0052.pdf:
185 Inf Bde Adm Instr
OVERLORD
TOP SECRET
Copy No
SECT ION 1.4
POSTAL
POSTAL FACILITIES
1. From D + 1 onwards there will be a daily service of surface letter mail
to and from the UK.
2. On D + 6 parcel and packet mail will be delivered and despatched.
3. Air nail and telegraph facilities to the UK will be introduced as soon as
possible.
There will he no airgraph service to the UK.
Airgraph and air letters will
be accepted for countries to which services exist from the UK.
These will
sent back to UK for onward transmission by the fastest method available.
5. Postal Orders will be cashed and sold from D + 1.
FIELD POST OFFICE
6. Postal Detachment of 101 Beach Sub Area will form a Field Post Office at
DID on D + 1.
7. Divisional Postal Officer and personnel from postal unit will be attached
to this Field Post Office.
8. Field Post Office will carry sufficient stocks for the initial phase.
DISTRIBUTION OF INWARD MAILS
9. Mails for units will be collected from the Field Post Office by
units in
first line transport when sent to draw supplies.
Whenever possible unit
post orderlies will accompany vehicles drawing mails.
OUT GOING MAILS
After unit censorship, all mails will be taken by unit post orderlies and
handed over to the Field Post Office.
MAIL FOR RESIDUES
11. (a) Residues due to land before D + 7 - Main body will retain until these
residues join them in the theatre.
12.
(b) Residues due to land D + 7 onwards - Main body will extract mail for
these residues,
tie it in a bundle labelled "Name of unit - Residues"
and hand it back to the Army Post Office.
Registered letters will be
endorsed "residue" and reposted in the Army Post Office individually
against receipt.
This process will be discontinued 5 days before the residue is due
to join the main
body
Regular service of nails is a vital factor in morale. Cormander 101 Beach
Sub Area will be responsible for
ensuring that the minimum transport
requirements for the collection and distribution of mails are met.
Units
must help the postal service with infornation if they expect to get good

