WO 171/2381
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
of mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
ordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers
and the number of other ranks
or followers and of animals should be noted
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
nents (Sec. 36), and
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
his representatives.
PARA. 5. —Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
and of each operation o
ot to anons ana ants or the Teronal Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary
will be referred, t
the war oil, Code,, rough the usual channels, to the indy, should by ost by a it
PARA. 2.
-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
organis pion de data unitatich to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
endations, based on factual experience
and inter-service co-operation which
on AT C. sia. "i bented up that each tracy in anded in the off detailed to keep it,
on 8. a diary I is to be noted that he it stire nd retention of appendices, maps, étc.,
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4
In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
ieparing a diar
1) Importion ere, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
) Day cates in the see a sate unit of at torenty four hour and present dispositions,
the war diary.
i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference
(ili) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketche
or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text
• of the diary nara. 4. lv above
Appendices will b
umbered, and eaca will have c
rief descriptive heading naming the author. Reference
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies o1 important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
including any which maj
have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included)
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month w
irect to the officer i/c G.H.
rded on the first day of the succeeding mont.
1 for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
i) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher i
iod of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
forwarded within a pedic octetary of state, The War Ofice
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home
the EAt No The The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
Place
File
Ye harie
not traitover
Month and Year-eR ur.
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete heading not requred)
Commanding Oficer /ajItSamustima RAsE
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
/ Sbo0 Sea raugh 20 Dukes working
bratuater
age Deather improsed o
cocking
WAR DIARIES SECTION
1600 1u
2000T 1011
G. H.Q. 2nd Echolo
180 au Duties adore
2200 Resuned wort wed
tide
enterove
No.
Appedia A AFs.V. 3008 + 3069.
8000 bud acreasua
Das weader expecte
5 breath
Pander
ocation
W1,81869,1676 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 61-7676
Heavy rams
V1.84859, 1678 800,000 11/13 W. H. & 5. 51-767
MARKS.
• Atla.
0900 Worm
n Part A.
39.
9 F (R,A.S.C.)
