World War 2 Diary and Memoirs
Fred Hanson (14629012)
RASC GTCo.711
World War 2 Diary and Memoirs
In Phase Il, which was postponed until conditions were more suitable for a further major change,
it was agreed that REME should take over all unit repairs and, in the case of the RASC, field
repair as well.
In 1942 the Mechanical Engineering Directorate at the War Office was established under the
Director of Mechanical Engineering (DME), Major-General E B Rowcroft (later Sir Bertram
Roweroft). A plan for the subsequent development of the Corps was drawn up in three stages of
nine months each, and in almost every detail planned target dates were achieved. In India the
IEME was formed; separate from REME since at this time the Indian Army was a separate
organisation although many officers and technical personnel were British. HQ REME Training
Establishment was formed at Arborfield to control REME technical training. The repair system in
the field was reorganised so that repair could be carried out as far forward as possible. The
takeover from RAOC of responsibility for scaling of spares was completed. Long term plans for a
REME Benevolent Fund, REME Association, REME Band, Officers' Club (later the REME
Institution) the 'Craftsman' Magazine and Sports Association were made. DMEs and deputies
were appointed to all major headquarters of the field army and deputy directors were appointed to
all static command headquarters. Commanders REME were appointed to divisions and Brigade
EMEs to brigades.
Almost at once the new organisation was tried out and proved successful at the Battle of Alamein,
the first maior operation after the Coros was formed. The re-oraanised recovery and repair
system was thoroughly tested during the remainder of the war, during which REME grew to be
the largest technical corps, extending its activities to include the manufacture of spare parts and
special equipments on a large scale. In addition to its uniformed tradesmen the Corps employed
thousands of civilian tradesmen of many different nationalities in its static workshops throughout
the world.
REME reached its maximum strength in May 1945, approximately 8000 officers and 152,000
other ranks. The Indian EME, East and West African EME Royal Canadian, Australian, New
Zealand EME, and South African Technical Service Corps (TSC) totalled another 185,000. Some
130,000 civilians were employed in EME Services in all parts of the world.
138 of 194
