Fred Hanson (14629012)
RASC GTCO. 711
World War 2 Diary and Memoirs
With the jaaps and banks and truoks also came the bulldozzis,
carth movers, and huge crawler cranes for making thehighways ready.
•As thaforcas battled ast of NoRmandy and pushed the Germans
back through FRancE, highway vehides furnished the necesary
support -ammunition, gasoline, und rations were the essentials.
The amphibious trucks brought large portíons of the ships ashore.
Transfer points of crawler cranes, quickly placet the strugs of cargo into trueles unich
ran shuttles to suvounding dumps.. Motor conveys quickly picked up the cargo
no comthere, From the base dumps all the way to the rear of the thrusting
armoured spearheads of tanks. The truck conveys rallet day and night.
Exen after months when railway service began ta assist in this hunculainium tark, the
trucks continuedto share themoin burden, Unlike the railroad track, and other
railway facilities, the highways were little damaged by bombing, andwhen dampe
didacture, thay roads could be quickly repaired.
ASat NAPLES, SO aLCHERGOURO and MARSELLES ard ANTWER? truces proven
th sty indispensability inthe dearance of ports and beaches.
Among the accomplishments fent motor transport service on the continent, several
standout as especializis indicative of the portentialities of highway trensportation.
Following the breakShrough at SAnT Lo, and therapiel sweep of the lst & 3rd armies in
Ene divaction of PARis, the systemknown as the RED BALh expras was instited in 19w.
By this siolar one way traffic route was established across FRANcE, from the beacheads to the
Sighting on one to an agay of us, debased from sing the Reone wighey,
andalong it the sonveys sweptday and night in en unendina Stream.
ants scares
Over distances entendina ever 700 miles anch in less inan 3 weeks the REo BALL
delivered more than 400,060 long tons of freight to the forward areas.
The BEn BaLhmichpublicized das tha forarenner of anumber of ather express
routes with assigned missions and targettonnages. Under such namesas GREENDIAMoND
and WWITE BALL,
ABC, and XY Z, many of thase later operations improved u pan
CarliRi methods.
192 of 194
