Fred Hanson (14629012)
RASC GTCo. 711
World War 2 Diary and Memoirs
http://www.rememuseum.org.uk/
The Formation of REME
Rearmament and the mechanisation of the Army followed by the outbreak of the Second World
War led to further considerable increases in the quantity and complexity of technical equipment.
The consequent heavy repair load revealed the weakness of the existing organisation, while the
shortage of qualified tradesmen in the Services soon dictated a need for a system which would
use the available men more effectively.
In 1941, a Cabinet committee, under the chairmanship of Sir William Beveridge, was set up to
investigate the use of manpower in the three services. As a result of one of its recommendations -
that the repair services in the army should be rationalised - the Corps Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers came into being on the first of October 1942. The Corps had the rare, if not
unique, distinction of being honoured with the designation "Royal" from the day of its formation.
Such a major re-organisation was too complex, however, to be carried out quickly and completely
in the middle of a world war. It was decided therefore that the changeover should be undertaken
in two phases.
In Phase I, which was implemented immediately, REME was formed on the existing framework of
the RAOC (Engineering Branch), strengthened by the transfer of certain technical units and
tradesmen from the RE and RASC. At the same time a number of individual tradesmen were
transferred into REME from other Corps. The new Corps was made responsible for repairing the
technical equipment of all arms with certain major exceptions. REME did not yet undertake:
• Those repairs which were carried out by unit tradesmen who were driver/mechanics or
fitters in regiments and belonged to the unit rather than being attached to it.
• Repairs of RASC-operated vehicles, which remained the responsibility of the RASC; thus
each RASC Transport Company had its own workshop.
• Repairs of RE specialist equipment, which remained the responsibility of the RE.
137 of 194
