Fred Hanson (14629012)
RASC GTCo.711
World War 2 Diary and Memoirs
An early problem when towing vehicles with one end suspended from the crane jib was that the
casualty was free to bounce into the back of the recovery vehicle causing damage to both
vehicles. This problem was resolved with the design of an 'A' frame, its base secured to the
casualty and the apex to the towing hook of the tractor. These and other items of recovery
equipment were stowed wherever possible on the vehicle. In order to counter the weight of a
suspended casualty the Scammell Pioneer breakdown tractors were fitted with ballast weights on
a frame at the front of the vehicle's radiator.
Many of the Scammells built in 1939 and early 1940 were shipped to France with the RAOC(E)
units of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF). Several were left behind on the evacuation of the
BEF in June 1940. These were either destroyed or in some cases captured intact by the
Germans. Some of these early models did remain in the UK. One at least was shipped out to the
Far East after World War 2 and was in action during the Korean War, where it sustained mine
damage but was later repaired. One SV1S became the unit recovery vehicle of 13 Command
Workshop REME at Aldershot and was subsequently presented to the Museum.
This vehicle had undergone a modification in service. The main frame of the crane was locked
into position and the horizontal jib and stays removed. A larger pulley was fitted in the fork of the
main frame and this could take the cable of the hand winch. This winch provided the lifting force
for the crane, or it could take the main chassis winch cable. To use this to lift a vehicle casualty
placed a great strain on the cable, forcing it to bend in a sharp curve under the rear winch rope
upper guide roller. It is intended to restore the Museum's Scammell SV1S to its original
specification.
Length
Width
Height
Wheelbase
Winch
Crane lift
6.09 m (20 ft 3 in)
2.66 m (8 ft 9 in)
2.87 m (9 ft 5 in)
3.70 m (12 ft 2 in)
8 tons capacity
2½ tons (max)
141 of 194
