pg_0170.pdf:
V07794 (169) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 70.]
141
a pate to a on a very hat ng
immediate counter-attack must be delivered without delay
on the initiative of the local commander. It will have only
the fire support instantly available-pre-arranged, if possible
—will have only a limited objective (to drive the enemy from
some tactical feature which he has captured) and will, when-
ever possible, have been reconnoitred and planned beforehand.
In these conditions, if boldly and rapidly made from an
unexpected direction, if possible it will often have an easy
success and will re-establish the local situation. Troops in
reserve should study carefully any ground over which they
may be ordered to counter-attack.
position to defend the ground which he has gained, the moment
for the immediate counter-attack has passed. To attack now
without preparation and without adequate fire support is
wasteful and ineffective.
The counter-stroke must now be
deliberate, that is to say, it must be carefully planned and
supported by adequate fire power. The actual time taken
to prepare it must depend on circumstances; it may be an
hour or two or a day or two; it will usually be advisable, if
possible, first to check the enemy and stabilize the situation,
so as to have a firm base from which to launch the counter-
attack. But the quicker it can be organized, the less time
the enemy is given, the greater the chances of success; to
wait for a more favourable moment may spell the loss of
opportunity altogether. The considerations are in fact much
the same as in making an attack (Secs. 55, 6, and 56) ; and,
as in attack, surprise (i.e. variation in method, in time, in
procedure) will be a principal factor. An attack launched
from the shoulders of the salient formed by the enemy
penetration will often be most effective.
4. Whether or not a counter-attack is to be made, the
success of an enemy who has succeeded in penetrating the
position should be as far as possible confined by holding the
flanks on each side of the gap, and thus forcing the enemy
into as narrow a salient as possible.
5. Considerations regarding the counter-offensive, i.c. a
change from defence to attack on the part of the higher
commander, will be found in Field Service Regulations,
Volume III, 1935, Chapter VI.
V07794 (169) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

