pg_0071.pdf:
V07794 (70) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
42
[Chap. III. Sec. 21.
CHAPTER III
MOVEMENTS BY LAND AND AIR, AND QUARTERS
21. Marches general
1. The strategical or tactical considerations which govern
the movement of armies in a theatre of war, e.g. the front
on which a force may move, the order of march and the
extent to which use can be made of mechanization, are dis-
cussed in Field Service Regulations, Volume III. Protection
on the march is dealt with in Chapter V of the present volume
and night marches in Chapter VIII.
2. The length of marches will obviously be governed mainly
by the strategical or tactical situation; but the physical and
moral state of the troops, as well as conditions of weather
and of road, must be taken into consideration.
As a general
guide, a column of all arms of the size of a division will not,
even in favourable conditions, average more than 15 miles a
day, with one day's rest at least once a week, without some
loss of efficiency.
Small columns of seasoned troops can be
expected to maintain a higher average: and any body of
well-disciplined troops will, when circumstances demand a
special and continuous effort, cover greater distances; but
the risk of casualties and loss of efficiency must be weighed
against the advantage sought by forced marches.*
Troops
will respond better to the demand for a special effort if the
reasons for it can be made known to them.
Infantry should
rarely be called upon to exceed the regulation rate of march-
ing; such efforts usually exhaust the men and fail in their
object; a forced march is made by extending the number of
hours during which the troops are marching without long
halts rather than by increasing the pace of marching
* In the fortnight between August 23, 1914 (Battle of MoNs) and Septem-
ber 5 (the last day of the retreat) the British Expeditionary Force covered
200 miles in difficult conditions, in very hot weather and with considerable
fighting. The force was still capable of a further week's continuous marching.
to the AIse-and of fighting three actions (on the PETIT MORIN, the MARNE
and the AIsNE).
1222223
V07794 (70) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

