pg_0062.pdf:
V07794 (61) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Secs. 15 and 16.]
33
map or tracing as an appendix. It is not necessary for every
recipient of an order to be provided with all the appendices;
on the other hand, it may be desirable to issue appendices
to subordinates to whom copies of the order have not been
issued (see para. 5, above).
16. Means of intercommunication
1. Efficient means of intercommunication, both from
front to rear and laterally, are essential to the success of
military operations. Effective signal arrangements can be
made only when the signal officer at a headquarters is given
the earliest possible information of projected operations and
movements.
The responsibility for this rests with the
general staff; but the signal officer must at all times use his
initiative in suggesting and organizing the signal communica-
tions likely to be required.
2. The following general principles govern responsibility
for intercommunication in the field :-
i. The higher formation is responsible for the provision
and maintenance of communications to the next
lower formation or unit.
ii. Responsibility for lateral communication is from right
to left unless otherwise ordered, i.e., each formation
or unit is responsible for communication with the
formation or unit next to its left. Where the higher
formation wishes subordinate headquarters to be in
wireless communication with each other, it will
normally provide the necessary wireless sets and
detachments.
iii. Fighting units are responsible for their own internal
communications.
iv. A formation or unit is responsible for the provision and
maintenance of communication with its supporting
artillery.
The above principles, however, do not absolve any com-
mander from the duty to take all steps in his power to provide
the communications required by the tactical situation, when for
any reason it has not been possible for communications to be
provided in accordance with those principles.
V07794 (61) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

