pg_0065.pdf:
V07794 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
36
[Chap. I1. Secs. 17 and 18.
17. Signal offices and signal centres
1. In order to co-ordinate the various means of communi-
cation, other than the postal service, and to ensure that
messages are dealt with systematically, a signal office is
established at the headquarters of every formation and at
the headquarters of such units as carry signallers on their
establishment or are provided with a signal section. The
duties of the personnel of signal offices are to receive, record,
despatch and deliver messages. It is the duty of the
originator, not of the signal personnel, to keep any copies
required of messages sent.
special is so times convenient chis art to establish a
but at which means of communication with two or more
headquarters may be concentrated. Such an office, which
may be established by a higher formation in the vicinity of
the headquarters of lower formations or units, is called a
signal centre. After deployment, communication with the
headquarters of subordinate formations and units can often
most conveniently be arranged by means of signal centres.
When a headquarters halts beside a signal centre, its signal
office will continue to act as such for the headquarters, but
will, if it is convenient and economical, use the means pro-
vided by the signal centre to dispose of its messages. Signa
centres, if properly used, should effect economy in signal
personnel and material. A formation may establish a signal
centre at a site to which its headquarters will move later.
When the move takes place, the signal centre becomes the
signal office of that headquarters.
18. Rules for signal traffic
1. All messages will be prepared in accordance with the
rules laid down in Appendix IV. The signal service is
responsible, subject to any special instruction from the staff,
for selecting the method or methods of despatch. Important
messages may be sent by more than one route or method.
2. Any officer may originate a message for transmission
by signals, which will be accepted by a signal office provided
that it is legible and signed by the originator, who is respon-
sible that it is sufficiently urgent to justify its being sent by
signals and not by post.
V07794 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

