pg_0168.pdf:
V07794 (167) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Secs. 69 and 70.]
139
time available permits. Details of the construction
of
defences will be found in the Manual of Field Engineering,
Vol. I (All Arms). Concealment from the air is of importance
and use should be made, when time permits, of camouflage
devices; dummy trenches may usefully be constructed. A
programme of work should always be drawn up, showing the
sequence in which work will be carried out as time permits
(Manual of Field Engineering, Volume I (All Arms), 1933,
Chapter V).
8. The reconnaissance and occupation of a defensive
position will be carried out on similar lines to preparation for
attack (Sec. 56). There will be times when a force or part of
it is thrown on the defensive unexpectedly with little or no
opportunity to select or prepare a position beforehand; it
must then occupy the best position it can in accordance with
the principles laid down in this chapter. It may sometimes
be advisable to carry out a withdrawal, in order to obtain a
more favourable position for defence.
9. Outposts are always required to cover the occupation
and preparation of a defensive position. Their strength and
the degree of resistance to be offered by them will vary in
accordance with the plan of the commander and the distance
apart of the opposing forces.
They may have to resist and
break up the enemy's attack to the limit of their power, or
may be withdrawn as soon as it seems probable that an attack
is imminent. Definite orders as to their role must be issued
by the commander concerned. The use of outposts to delay
and break up an attack is further discussed in Field Service
Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter VI.
70. Conduct of the defence
1. The defender must endeavour by all available means
to discover the enemy's intentions and the time and place of
his attack.
Active and constant patrolling should be carried
out, and the indications of attack- such as the appearance
of reconnaissance parties, movements of troops, registration
by artillery-should be carefully watched for and reported.
If the enemy's intentions can be discovered or deduced,
effective counter-preparation by the artillery (Sec. 5, 6) and
machine guns may be carried out.
with The fe plain detente has generally to concern ite
V07794 (167) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

