pg_0136.pdf:
V07794 (135) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 53.]
107
53. Rules for outpost duty
1. Shortly before or after dawn or at dusk are times which are
frequently chosen for an attack on an outpost position; an
attack at dusk may be made to secure the ground which the
outposts hold with a view to entrenching it during the night;
or troops may be brought up under cover of darkness to rush
the outpost position at dawn. Outposts, like other troops in
defence, will therefore stand to arms one hour before dark
and one hour before it begins to get light and will send out
patrols; they will remain under arms till the patrols report
2. The commanders of forward detachments in close
proximity to the enemy will avoid useless collisions with the
enemy; attempts to carry off posts or sentries, unless ordered
for the purpose of obtaining identification or for some good
reason, should be avoided, since they give rise to reprisals and
tend to disturb the rest of the outposts and of the main body.
3. Troops on outpost duty will always be ready for action
and will not remove their equipment without special orders
from the commander of the outposts.
By day, not more
than one or two men should be allowed to leave a detach-
ment at any one time; by night, all men other than patrols
will be with the detachment, and not less than one-third
of each detachment will be awake manning its fire positions.
4. Outpost positions will invariably be strengthened so
far as time permits; it is particularly important to place
an obstacle, when possible, before the positions of the forward
defended localities.
Communications should be improved
and tracks marked where necessary. Intercommunication
should always be arranged between the various portions of
the outposts and between the outposts and the main body.
5. Detached posts may occasionally be necessary in front
of or on the flank of an outpost position, in order to guard
some locality which cannot be included in the general line
of defence, where the enemy might collect preparatory to an
attack or which he might occupy for purposes of observation.
Such detached posts have the disadvantage of isolation, and
the outpost commander must decide whether the value of a
detached post is sufficient to justify the risk of its being cut off.
6. No one other than troops on duty, prisoners, deserters
from the enemy and flags of truce will be allowed to pass
V07794 (135) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

