pg_0043.pdf:
V07794 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
14
[Chap. I. Sec. 6.
competence of other arms, the use of the engineers should
be confined to advice, to minor assistance in technical
detalls and to the provision of materials when necessary;
unless, in the opinion of the commander concerned, the
urgency of the situation necessitates their employment on
the simpler engineering work, which other arms normally do
themselves.
The proper sphere of engineers is in technical work, for
which they alone have the proper training and the necessary
equipment and tools. In the forward areas this may include
bridging; demolitions; anti-tank obstacles; preparation
of buildings for defence; the construction of heavily-protected
or mined emplacements and shelters or of special defensive
works; the development of water supplies; the construction,
improvement and maintenance of
roads or tracks; the
construction and working of light railways; and survey
work.
Engineers in the forward area have a special scale
of anti-gas equipment, to enable them to work on demolitions-
or areas contaminated with gas.
In the rear areas, engineers may be called on to undertake
work such as the preparation of defences using civilian labour;
the construction of buildings; the organization of workshops ;
electrical work; the operation of inland waterways; and the
maintenance and operation of railways and docks.
3. The rapid and efficient solution of engineer problems
demands foresight in reconnaissance and in the provision of
transport, materials and labour, both skilled and
unskilled. It is necessary for commanders to keep their
senior engineer officers in close touch with the anticipated
development of future events, in order that advice in engi-
neering matters may be given and preliminary arrangements
be made in good time.
Engineer reconnaissance parties usually accompany the
forward troops. It is also the duty of the other arms to
provide early information and details of engineer tasks to
the engineers, so that they may be enabled to start on their
task with the least delay.
4. Engineer units allotted to fighting formations consist
of field squadrons (allotted to cavalry divisions) and field
companies and field park companies (allotted to divisions).
Searchlights in air defence formations are operated by engi-
neer units.
Field squadrons are organized into troops, all personnel
V07794 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

