pg_0203.pdf:
V07794 (202) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
174
[Chap. IX. Secs. 91 and 92.
cloud attack from cylinders installed in his front line. The
last method requires a favourable wind for its use.
In addition to the methods of protection outlined in
Sec. 40, it may be necessary to render shelters and dug-outs
proof against gas by means of curtains or other special
contrivances, which will be usually constructed by the
engineers.
92. Reliefs in position warfare
1. Orders for a relief must lay down the time at which the
officer commanding the relieving unit or formation will
assume command, and the hour by which the relief will be
completed. It will usually be necessary to lay down the
routes to be foliowed by the incoming and outgoing troops ;
also the point at which relieving units come under the com-
mand of the commander of the formation in the line.
2. The commander of the relieving unit, together with
such officers as he considers necessary, will visit the position
to be taken over—by daylight, if possible will obtain from
the unit to be relieved information on all points which could
assist the incoming unit and will settle the details of the
relief. The information to be obtained will include the
following :-
i. The defence scheme and maps; aeroplane photographs,
if available.
ii. Information as to the enemy, his habits, snipers,
machine-gun and mortar positions, his wire and
other obstacles, normal artillery shelling, etc.
iti. Numbers of men and weapons (guns, machine guns,
anti-tank guns, mortars, light machine guns) in the
sector and their distribution; arrangements for
artillery support.
iv. The position of listening posts, artillery and infantry
observation posts.
v. The general condition of the defences and of wire
and other obstacles; work in hand and proposed ;
mining operations, if any.
vi. Dug-out and shelter accommodation; positions of
aid-posts or dressing stations.
vil. Points specially liable to attack; areas in sector under
direct observation of enemy and danger points
where fire is likely to cause casualties.
V07794 (202) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

