pg_0120.pdf:
V07794 (119) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 42 and 43.J
91
endeavour to ascertain the strength of the enemy and the
extent of front which he holds, preparatory to support by the
remainder of the advanced guard. (Sec. 43, 2.)
The advanced guard mobile troops may also on occasions
be used to seize and hold important tactical features until
the arrival of the slower moving troops of the advanced
guard; or for some special reconnaissance or other mission,
though this latter task will more usually be performed under
the orders of the commander of the force (see para. 2,
above). Any mobile troops used for either of these tasks
cannot be held also responsible for the protection of the
column, except in so far as the nature of the task itself
affords protection.
The commander of the advanced guard mobile troops must
be given a clear picture of what is known and of what is
expected; of what the intentions of the advanced guard
commander are; and of what the successive objectives of
the advanced guard are. (Sec. 43, 1.) He must be told
what is expected of his mobile troops; with what flank
formations, if with any, he is to keep touch and where;
what is to be his action if the enemy is met; and, if
necessary, by what time reports on particular subjects are
required.
4. The advanced guard mobile troops, in covering the
advance, normally move from one tactical feature to the
next by "bounds"; that is to say, having gained one
feature (e.g. a line of high ground, a wood, a village, a water
obstacle) they halt and push forward patrols to report the
next feature clear or otherwise; if it is reported clear, they
move rapidly to it and again push patrols forward towards
the next feature. Cavalry moving in this way can usually
maintain an average pace of three to four miles an hour,
i.e. sufficient to keep ahead of an infantry column and afford
it protection; light tanks covering a mechanized column
may be expected to maintain an average of about ten miles
an hour.
The leading cavalry patrols should, in open coun
try, be about four to five miles ahead of the nearest infantry;
light tanks should be about the same distance ahead of the
leading vehicles of the column which they are covering.
43. Action of an advanced guard
1. An advanced guard must be in a position to protect
the main body by the time the latter begins its march;
V07794 (119) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

