pg_0033.pdf:
V07794 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
4
[Chap. I. Sec. 2.
are normally used in co-operation with mixed tank battalions,
when their principal role is to reconnoitre the enemy and to
neutralize his anti-tank weapons in preparation for the action
of the mixed battalions.
Mixed and light tank battalions can cover fifty miles a
day without undue fatigue, at an average pace of seven to
eight miles an hour.
4. Mixed and light tank battalions are normally organized
into tank brigades.
A tank brigade will usually be included
with other mechanized formations in a mobile division, of
which it will form the main striking portion for decisive
action, while the principal roles of the remainder of the divi-
sion will be reconnaisance, protection, the passage of obstacles,
the support by fire of the attack of the tank brigade and
action in terrain unsuited for tanks. The wide range of
action and the mobility of tank brigades, greater than any
troops have ever before possessed, give them frequent oppor-
tunities for surprise, and enable them to strike a blow not
only at the flanks of an enemy but also at his headquarters
and rear services.
Even the mere threat of their attack
may paralyse or hamper enemy movement by compelling
him to employ an undue proportion of his force in the
protection of his flanks and rear.
Their range and mobility
is, however, limited by the endurance of the crews and of
the machines, as well as by the supply of petrol and
oil. Armoured troops cannot move at all when their supplies
of petrol fail, whereas horses can continue to move for a
time on short rations or even without food. Armoured
units alone, owing to the small man power available, cannot
hold ground, but they can by manœuvre deny to the enemy
an area of ground for a short period; they are thus of great
value for delaying action in a withdrawal. They normally
require protection by other troops when at rest.
5. Army tank battalions are equipped with heavily armoured
tanks, which are somewhat slower than medium tanks;
they are also provided with a small number of light tanks for
purposes of control and intercommunication within the
battalion. Army tank battalions are intended for close
co-operation with infantry in the attack and counter-attack.
They are required to break down wire entanglements and to
destroy or neutralize machine guns. They are a valuable
aid to gaining the advantages of surprise and initial success
in the attack and to maintaining its momentum. They also
V07794 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

