pg_0037.pdf:
V07794 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
8
[Chap. I. Sec. 4.
machine guns and mortars, and may also include anti-tank
weapons, if armoured fighting vehicles are likely to be
met. These supporting weapons are carried in unarmoured
vehicles, which may be horsed or mechanically drawn. The
range and characteristics of infantry weapons are given in
Appendix II.
4. On the battlefield, the volume of fire that its weapons
can develop, and the ease with which it finds cover and con-
calment, make infantry very strong in defence, especially
if the infantryman is well trained in the use of ground and
entrenching tools and in the erection of barbed wire obstacles.
On the other hand, against the fire of modern weapons and
the hindrance of barbed wire entanglements infantry is
relatively weak in the attack; since it is very vulnerable
without cover and during movement and has no weapons
of its own to break down wire obstacles. For success in the
attack it depends on the skilful use of ground to secure
surprise, or the cloak of darkness or smoke to conceal its
advance, and on artillery fire or the aid of tanks to break a
passage through wire, if necessary, and to reduce the fire
power and morale of the enemy. In favourable conditions,
e.g. against an enemy of poor morale or with a low standard
of armament, when the opposition is unorganized and the
ground offers a concealed approach, or when the enemy has
been induced to exhaust his strength by attack on selected
and prepared positions, a skilful and enterprising infantry
may advance under cover of its own weapons. At the other
extreme, in position warfare, infantry may be powerless to
make ground without a very heavy concentration of artillery
fire, or the co-operation of large numbers of tanks; its action
may in fact be confined mainly to occupying areas in which
other arms have pulverized enemy resistance. Between
these two extremes there will be many degrees. Much will
depend on the training of the infantryman and on his leaders;
to take advantage of ground and opportunity in the attack
requires a very high standard of training and resourcefulness
and a mobility which only physical fitness and a light equip-
ment can give.
5. So many factors may affect the frontages allotted to
infantry units that they cannot be made the subject of rules.
As a very rough general guide a battalion in the attack or
defence may be taken to occupy about 1,000 yards of front
and approximately the same in depth.
V07794 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

