pg_0080.pdf:
V07794 (79) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 25 and 26.]
51
maintenance of distances and to report break-downs or
transport.
3. A man should always ride in the back of the last lorry
of a block, to keep a look-out to the rear and to warn the
driver if overtaking traffic desires to pass; if possible, there
should be a man at the back of every lorry. One man in
every lorry should know the destination in case of delay by
break-down.
sentry a lot cotento an irad to halt nesto a castrid
a cross-roads, a distance of 15 yards will be left clear on each
sie of the dossi am On to account must venicles be
5. A lorry column should not normally be turned about
on a road less than 25 feet wide, and then only if there is little
traffic. It is nearly always better for the column to make a
complete circuit by road, and suitable turning circuits should
always be taken into consideration in ordering the move of
lorry columns.
26. Movement of troops by rail
(See also Manual of Movement (War))
1. Movement of troops by rail in the theatre of war may be
classified either as strategical or tactical.
The former is
applicable mainly to the concentration in a theatre of war or
to the strategical move from one theatre to another of large
bodies, such as one or more divisions. Formations and units
move complete with animals and transport.
In tactical moves, only the dismounted personnel, with a
minimum of animals and transport, go by rail; the remainder
(e.g. cavalry, artillery and the greater part of the transport)
march by road. Tracked machines, such as tanks, are sent
by rail when possible, owing to the wear which long marches
by road cause to the tracks.
2. Owing to the time required for marshalling and shunting
trains and for entraining and detraining, the strategical move
of large formations (a division or more) by rail instead of by
road saves time only when the distance is sufficiently long.
In highly developed countries, such as those of Western
V07794 (79) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

