pg_0247.pdf:
V07794 (246) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
218
[Appendix IX.
Landing ground-see Aerodrome.
Observation post-Nature (hill, tower, tree,
haystack,
building, etc.), extent of view (a panorama sketch may be
useful), cover available, nature of approaches (i.e. road, path,
etc.), and whether concealed or not.
Railway. Gauge, number of lines, weight of rail, sleepers
(wood or iron), nature of ballast; embankments, cuttings,
tunnels, bridges, steep gradients; description of station;
approaches and forming-up places (area,
water supply,
latrines and urinals, etc.), passenger and goods sidings
(number, length, and road access), platforms (number, length,
breadth,
and height), number of end-loading and other
ramps, facilities and area available for extension of station
yard, goods sheds, engine sheds, locomotive turning arrange-
ments; water supply; lighting arrangements; office accommo-
dation, etc.
River- Depth, width, current, nature of banks, nature of
bottom, bridges, fords, ferries, facilities to swim horses,
watering places, boats, material for rafts, liability to flood,
Road-Nature,
condition of surface, width, metalling,
steep gradients; bridges (load carried), suitability for M.T.;
fenced or unfenced, nature of ground on either side; defiles ;
points of tactical importance; liability to traffic congestion,
points where traffic control required, turning places or
circuits for M.T.; exposure to air observation; places for
watering men and animals; telegraph and telephone lines;
proximity of materials for repair.
Station-see Railway.
habitants; materia De oth, with, scape, om billet in-
facilities for billeting;
defensibility; water supply; means of lighting (electricity, gas,
lamps); supplies of food, forage, oil, petrol; parking places,
traffic control arrangements; local administration (names and
addresses of chief civil functionaries, etc.
Water supplies-From stream, pond, or well; flowing or
stagnant; yield in gallons an hour; number of animals that
can drink at one time; fitness for men's drinking.
V07794 (246) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org

