pg_0174.pdf:
V07794 (173) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Secs. 73 and 74.]
145
7. Infantry patrolling in the defence should be constant
and should be directed especially towards detecting any
movements or indications of impending attack.
By night,
patrolling in the gaps between the defended localities will be
important (Sec. 69, 4). Details of infantry patrol work will
be found in Infantry Training.
74. Artillery in the defence
1. The tasks of artillery in the defence have been outlined
in Sec. 5, 6. Its chief business is to cause the greatest
possible loss and disorganization to the enemy before they
reach the front defences.
Batteries will be disposed primarily
with a view to producing the maximum fire for counter-
preparation and for the defence of the foremost defended
localities. This fire should be co-ordinated with the fire of
the infantry; special arrangements may be made, for
example, to search ground which is dead to the machine guns
and rifles of the defence; or to fire so heavily on certain lines
of approach as to induce the enemy to take others which, in
combination with skilfully placed obstacles, will lead them
into zones where the machine-gun fire of the defence has been
specially planned to deal with them.
2. The artillery should be distributed in depth, in order to
minimize the effect of the enemy's counter-battery fire and
to ensure that the mass of the artillery will not be overrun by
the first rush of an attack. Except for guns placed forward
for harassing fire and counter-battery work, the most advanced
field batteries should be far enough back to enable them to
cover a wide arc and to support counter-attacks without
change of position. If the enemy possesses armoured fighting
vehicles, the requirements of anti-tank defence will usually
be a primary consideration. In addition to the normal
procedure of artillery providing for their own mutual support
against tank attack in their ordinary positions, it may be
necessary to site a proportion of field guns for the defence of
the forward troops against tanks (Sec. 08, 5).
Concealment is of importance, in order to secure surprise
and to avoid the counter-battery fire of the attacker. Since
with existing means of locating batteries an active battery
cannot escape detection for long, as many batteries as possible
should occupy silent positions, from which they will fire only
in counter-preparation and in repulsing an attack. Alterna-
tive positions should be chosen for guns which are active
V07794 (173) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

