pg_0118.pdf:
V07794 (117) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 41.J
89
3. When a force is advancing in more than one column,
it will be usual for each column to detail its own advanced
guard, but there may be occasions, in open country, when the
commander of the whole force may find it more convenient to
detail a single advanced guard to cover the whole front of
the force.
When there are separate advanced guards, the
mobile troops will usually be divided between the advanced
guards of the various columns. The advanced guards will
maintain touch (usually by means of liaison personnel or
wireless), and the commander of the whole force may regulate
the movement by laying down the hour at which leading
units or formations will pass a starting line, and by pre-
scribing that columns shall establish communication on certain
lines.
4. An advanced guard commander, who will be named
in operation orders (Sec. 14, 4), will be given all available
information, both of the enemy and of the movements and
objectives of our own troops, so far as they affect the per-
formance of his task. He must be fully acquainted with
the intentions of the commander of the force which he is to
cover, and may, if necessary, be given some indication of
the distance ahead of the main body at which he is to move
(Sec. 43, 1).
The headquarters of an advanced guard commander will
usually be at the head of the main guard, but he himself
may often be further forward to observe the situation and to
get early information.
If a close reconnaissance aeroplane
is working on the front on which the column is advancing,
arrangements should be made by which the advanced guard
commander will be enabled to receive at once the informa-
top statin by to a plane i digue a pio graphs of
great value to an advanced guard commander. The order
for such photographs must be sent in good time, since it will
require some hours for the results to reach the advanced
guard commander.
5. The task of an advanced guard commander is an
important and difficult one. He must act quickly and boldly
if he is to prevent the main body being continually delayed
by minor opposition; but he must be careful not to hamper
the plans of bis superior commander by action which may
cause the force to become committed to a general engagement
in conditions or on ground unfavourable to the superior
V07794 (117) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

