pg_0109.pdf:
V07794 (108) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
80
[Chap. V. Sec. 38.
material are available (Manual of Field Engineering, Vol. I
(All Arms), 1933, Chapter VI).
Tracks are especially visible from the air, and should
therefore be continued past the position to which they lead ;
foot and wheeled traffic should follow routes which will
disclose as little information as possible. Air photographs of
our own positions may be taken to show how far concealment
has been effective, or of woods to show what cover they offer.
Weather forecasts may be of importance when it is desired
to conceal a movement from the air; a ground mist is the
most effective cloak, and low clouds make air reconnaissance
more difficult and dangerous.
3. Anti-aircraft artillery at the base and on the lines of
communication is employed to defend important depots,
railway centres, ports, etc., which are likely to be the targets
of hostile air attack.
In the forward area it protects the
main concentrations of troops; covers the passage of vulner-
able points, such as bridges and defiles or open stretches of
road; and limits or hampers hostile air reconnaissance.
will also protect its own close reconnaissance and artillery
observation aeroplanes as far as possible.
The anti-aircraft
machine-gun batteries, which are used for the protection
against low-flying attack of important and vulnerable points,
such as bridges or defiles, come under the air defence
formations.
Anti-aircraft artillery units are not distributed to forma-
tions, but are allotted and sited on an area basis.
Guns are
normally sited by sections in positions about 4,500 yards
apart; this enables a battery to cover a circular area with
a radius of about 44 miles to a height of 18,000 feet. A
battery protecting a march can cover about 12 miles of
road at a time to a height of 18,000 feet or 17 miles of
road to a height of 12,000 feet.
When protecting moving
columns, anti-aircraft artillery will frequently have to pass
up the column to take up a new position. If suitable side
roads exist, they should be used, provided that they are not
unduly exposed to hostile attacks, particularly by armoured
cars. If only one road is available, anti-aircraft artillery will
take advantage, if the road is narrow, of the hourly ten
minutes' halt, during which guns can cover about three
miles.
Priority should always be given by other troops to
anti-aircraft guns moving to take up positions.
At the base and in rear areas, anti-aircraft guns, will have
the assistance of searchlight units to combat air attack at
V07794 (108) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

