pg_0152.pdf:
V07794 (151) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs, 60 and 61.]
123
The matters which should be settled beforehand
between the units concerned should include the
length of the bounds, which in close country may
be from hedge to hedge or from trench to trench,
the approximate timing and the means of main-
taining liaison during the attack.
7. Whenever tanks are allotted to co-operate with an
infantry formation or unit, it must be clearly stated in the
order which so allots them whether they are "
in support of "
the formation or unit concerned, command being retained
by the higher formation, or " under the command of" the
formation or unit to which they are allotted. An officer of
each army tank unit allotted to a formation should remain
at the formation headquarters, and should be in W/T com-
munication with his unit.
61. Mounted troops in the attack
1. The tasks given to mounted troops in the attack should
be such as to make use of their mobility and fire power
without exposing them to the risks. of close fighting. They
may be employed to reconnoitre; to protect the flanks; to
operate against those of the enemy; to assist in enveloping
movements; to delay the approach of hostile reinforcements;
to hold ground taken by armoured units; to act as a mobile
reserve; and to take part in the pursuit.
2. In the opening stages of the attack, when the fighting
is close, unless they are required for protection of the flanks,
for reconnaissance or for the delay of hostile reinforcements,
they are best kept in reserve for opportunities which may arise
later in the battle or for pursuit. They should be kept in
hand as far as possible, and employed only on such detach-
ments, reconnaissances and minor operations as are really
essential; they cannot be expected to exert their full power
in the later stages or in pursuit if they are exhausted or
scattered beforehand.
3. Mounted troops are of such value for reconnaissance and
protective duties before and after a battle, and for pursuit
or covering a withdiawal, that they should only be employed
in the actual battle when it is considered that the chance of
obtaining a decisive success justifies their exposure to the
risk of heavy casualties. To judge of the right moment for
the entry of mounted troops into the battle is extremely
V07794 (151) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

