pg_0034.pdf:
V07794 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 2 and 3.]
provide a most efficient means of countering hostile tanks.
Their success will depend on the choice of suitable ground,
on the concealment of their assembly and approach, and on the
co-operation of other arms in giving early warning of the
existence of tank obstacles and in neutralizing the fire of
hostile anti-tank weapons.
ARMOURED CARS
6. Armoured cars have a greater speed on the road or over
level ground than have tanks, and are as silent in movement
as an ordinary motor car.
Their cross-country capacity is
considerable over open country, but they have only a limited
ability to surmount obstacles and are therefore mainly of
use in areas well provided with roads, or in open plains or
deserts with a hard surface. They are organized into
regiments or independent companies. Their principal role
is long-distance reconnaissance, in which they frequently
work in conjunction with cavalry. They are also valuable
for escorting convoys and for similar protective work; but
as the demand for these latter tasks will be heavy in war,
and the supply of armoured cars limited, it is likely to be met
in part at least by armoured cars improvised from commercial
vehicles.
3. Cavalry and mounted rifles
1. The principal attribute of the horse-soldier is bis
mobility. But mobility is a relative quality only. Thus
with forces and columns moving at the marching soldier's
mace the bite i cavalry gives it eat wise i econ
mechanized forces (e.g. armoured forces and infantry in
motor transport) where the ground is favourable to mechanical
movement cavalry is likely to be outpaced.
Cavalry, though less mobile than armoured troops in areas
favourable to the movement of mechanical vehicles, is
much less sensitive to ground and can go practically any-
where; it can thus work in many regions (e.g. mountainous
country, thickly wooded areas, ground intersected with
water obstacles) in which armoured forces would be useless.
It has a greater power of dispersion, and therefore of detailed
reconnaissance, than armoured troops.
It is of course more vulnerable than armoured troops to
V07794 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

