pg_0226.pdf:
V07794 (225) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix IV.)
197
hour will be timed as " zero minus (so many minutes) " ;
action after zero hour will be timed as " zero plus (so many
minutes)."
3. In communicating with any authority in a different
country, the local time of the place of origin will normally
be used, followed by the letters LT. If it is probable that
the recipient will not know the local time at the place of
origin, Greenwich mean time will be used followed by the
letters G.M.T.
IV. Place
1. The name of a place at which a headquarters is situated
or from or to which a message is despatched will never be
given unless it is essential to ensure correct transmission or
delivery, or to make the sense plain.
2. Names of places will be written in block capitals, thus—
LONDON, exactly as spelt on the maps in use. If more than
i placet the the avoid is meet state as te
3. If a map is referred to, the one used must be specified
unless, in the knowledge of the sender, no confusion can arise
by the omission of the information. When a map is specified,
its description will be given under the heading of an order,
instruction or report, and at the beginning oi a
message,
e.g. " Reference I-inch O.S. Sheet 114 (WINDSOR)."
4. Points will be described either by co-ordinates (if a
squared or gridded map is avallable); or by giving the
distance and direction from some easily found reterence
point, e.g. :
" Cross roads ) mile SW of HASELEY."
" Cross roads
CHURCH." true bearing 225°
from HASELEY
" Cross roads t
mie SW of second E in (NOT "of"
HASELEY " (the letter referred to being underline
except in messages to be transmitted by signal in
which the underlining of individual letters of a word
cannot be transmitted).
The use of co-ordinates enables a point to be described
with great exactitude, but takes up time both in writing and
reading, and introduces a considerable possibility of error;
description by means of a reference point, as above, is often
to be preferred.
V07794 (225) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

