pg_0202.pdf:
V07794 (201) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Secs. 90 and 91.]
173
them proof against traffic and splinters and should be
duplicated on all main routes.
The making of a buried cable system entails a great deal
of work and time: large working parties will be necessary
for digging the cable trenches, since the personnel of signal
units are sufficient only to provide the skilled technical
labour. Such a system must be conceived and laid out to meet
the probable permanent requirements of the area, as it cannot
subsequently be altered without much labour. Headquarters
must be sited so as to conform to the cable system once it is
installed.
2. Even a buried system will not be proof against very
heavy shelling, and alternative means of communication by
W/T and V/T will be established and protected. In the
attack, and often in the defence, liaison personnel, cyclists,
runners and special message-carrying agencies, such as
pigeons, dogs and even rockets, will be required.
3. In the circumstances of position warfare, it may be
assumed that the enemy will be equipped with means to over-
hear telegraph and telephone traffic on forward lines. Special
apparatus can be installed to protect telegraph traffic and
precautionary measures must be taken to restrict the use of
both telegraph and telephone on similar lines to the rules for
the use of wireless telegraphy (Sec. 19); these measures will
include notification of the extent of the danger zone.
91. Gas in position warfare
1. If the enemy decides to use gas, the conditions of
position warfare make it necessary to meet the possibilty of
its use in all forms-spraying or bombing from the air, shelling
by artillery or mortars, discharge from projectors or cylinders.
Large areas may also be contaminated by persistent gas,
thus forming a
gas inundation" in the same way that a
water inundation might be used as an obstacle.
2. Owing to the close contact between the two forces, the
enemy is unlikely to employ gas spraying in the forward area
where it may affect his own troops, but may use it extensively
in attack on troops, camps, depots, etc., lu rear areas and on
the lines of communication, where adequate precautions
must, therefore, be taken against this form of attack.
3. In the forward area, the enemy may attack by shelling
from artillery and mortars or from projectors, or may make a
V07794 (201) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

