pg_0045.pdf:
V07794 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
16
[Chap. I. Sec. 8.
8. Aircraft
(See also The Employment of Air Forces with the Army
in the Field)
1. The air force contingent with an army in the field will
normally include fighter, bomber and army co-operation
squadrons, and may also include bomber-transport aeroplanes
(for troop carrying), intercommunication aircraft and kite
balloons.
The first duty of the contingent is to create and
maintain an air situation which will enable the army and air
force to work with the minimum of interference from enemy
• air action.
Fighter squadrons are equipped and trained primarily for
the destruction of enemy aircraft in the air. In exceptional
circumstances they can be employed for the attack of ground
targets.
Bomber squadrons are employed both for bombing and for
reconnaissance. Heavy and accurate air bombardment by
day and night of vital centres in the system of command and
maintenance may cause the most serious dislocation to the
enemy's plan, and may also compel him to divert his fighter
aircraft for their protection. The offensive action of bomber
squadrons may thus combine direct support of the military
operations with assistance in the maintenance of a favourable
air situation. An immediate but temporary advantage in the
struggle for air superiority may in certain conditions be
obtained by an attack on enemy aerodromes. Columns of
troops and transport, especially if concentrated in defiles,
may also form important targets for air attack. Long-
range strategical reconnaissance using the camera will
generally be the responsibility of day bomber squadrons.
Army co-operation squadrons are trained specially for work
with the army; their principal tasks are reconnaissance,
including photography, and artillery observation. In excep-
tional circumstances they may also be used for the attack of
ground targets. They are equipped for flying at night.
Both army co-operation and bomber squadrons may some-
times be used to drop small quantities of ammunition or other
supplies on
a detached force or for intercommunication
between widely separated forces.
2. The number of army co-operation squadrons with a
force is usually calculated on the basis of one for each division
and one for each corps headquarters. They are not divisional
V07794 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

