pg_0122.pdf:
V07794 (121) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 43 and 44.]
93
ment on a wide front, with a view to locating the enemy's
flanks, is justified; and endeavour will be made to secure
such tactical features as will best further the action of the
main body (e.g. good observation posts, ground covering the
passage of defiles, anti-tank obstacles).
As the advanced guard action develops, its commander
will receive orders from the commander of the force as to the
part it is to play in the forthcoming battle. It may be
required to hold the enemy on its front, while the main
body attacks from a flank; or to cover the occupation of a
position by the main body; or to act in any other way that
the situation requires. When the main body begins to deploy
on its battle frontage, its leading troops must provide for
their own protection, if not covered by the dispositions of the
advanced guard. Once the main body is deployed, the
advanced guard will form part of the battle front and its
special role as a protective force will end.
44. Action of an advanced guard following up
a withdrawal
1. When two forces are in close contact during battle,
the forward troops are responsible for their own protection.
If the enemy withdraws, the forward troops will be responsible
for maintaining contact during the initial stages of the
advance, and special advanced guards will not be formed until
it is clear that the enemy has shaken himself clear and is
moving back a considerable distance.
2. Advanced guards following up a withdrawal should
be relatively strong, with a large proportion of mobile troops
(unless the mobile troops have been sent to intercept the
enemy) and of artillery. They should act with boldness and
should endeavour to drive in the enemy rear guards and to
reach positions from which they can attack his main columns
and prevent an orderly withdrawal. As the enemy will be
likely to cover his withdrawal by demolitions and other
expedients (Sec. 49), the advanced guards should be strong
in engineers.
3. Should the enemy be using gas, he may endeavour to
delay the advance by contaminating with blister gas areas
over which the advance must pass, such as defies or cross-
roads. In a deliberate withdrawal, considerable areas may
be thus contaminated by the enemy. A passage over such
V07794 (121) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

