pg_0081.pdf:
V07794 (80) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
52
[Chap. III. Sec. 26.
Europe, the minimum distance over which movement by
rail saves time is approximately 60 miles for a division or
90 miles for a cavalry division. In less highly developed
countries, where railway capacity is more limited, the
distances would be much greater.
The rate of troop movement by rail depends on the
capacity of the railway system, e.g. whether the line is single
or double, the gradients on it, the number of entraining
and detraining points available, and so forth.
Even on a
highly developed system, a rate of 24 troop trains in 24 hours
can rarely be exceeded; and since over a long programme
an average of 3 hours between trains may be required at
each entraining and detraining point, it is necessary to use
at least three separate entraining and detraining points in
order to reach this maximum. A division on a broad gauge
with normal gradients requires about 40 trains. The average
running speed of a troop train is from 17 to 20 miles an hour.
3. Tactical movements by rail are made to secure surprise,
to transfer troops rapidly to a threatened point or to save
them from fatigue when roads are congested or the weather
bad. Their use is limited by the fact that formations are
separated for a time from their artillery and a large part of
their transport.
4. Trains employed in moving troops are of two distinct
types :-
i. The taid is catte, up to suit the composition of each
ii. A standard type of train is used for all units, except
units such as tanks or heavy artillery which require
special types of trucks.
The first method, which is the normal British practice,
gives greater comfort to the troops and enables units to be
kept together better; but the second method, which is
largely used on the Continent, is more economical of rolling
stock and enables moves to be initiated with the minimum
of notice, since trains of standard type can be made up and
kept ready in sidings.
5. The general procedure for all movements by rail is that
the general staff issue the executive orders for the move, the
detailed arrangements being made by the Q.M.G.'s branch
of the staff. Movement control officers are appointed at
entraining and detraining stations as representatives of the
V07794 (80) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org

