pg_0047.pdf:
V07794 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
18
[Chap. I. Sec. 9.
troops, is one of the principal aids to reducing casualties and
to overcoming hostile resistance. It is a weapon of value
principally to the attacker, since it is the attacker who has
movements and intentions to conceal; it is of particular
importance when the location of enemy automatic weapons
is unknown. It may be employed to blind observation, to .
protect a flank, to distract the enemy's attention from the
real point of attack, to disperse his fire (since the tendency
is to pour heavy fire into a smoke cloud in the belief that the
attacker's troops are behind it), to cause him to disclose
details of his defensive fire, and to keep him in a state of
uncertainty. A few rounds of smoke may also be used as a
signal to attacking infantry, to mark objectives or boundaries,
or to notify the time for a fresh phase of the plan. There is
much scope for imagination and variety in the use of smoke.
The defender must always be prepared for the use of smoke
by the attacker, and must as far as possible so distribute
his observation areas that his artillery have alternative means
if one area is blinded by smoke; he must also make arrange-
ments and lay down signals for defensive fire similar to those
used by night. The defender may on occasions himself use
smoke to hamper or confuse the attacker.
2. Smoke can be discharged by tanks (from the mortar
bombs of support tanks, the exhaust pipes of tanks specially
fitted, or by the dropping of smoke candles or generators) ;
by infantry (from mortar bombs, rifle or hand grenades, or
smoke candles laid by hand); or by artillery (by smoke
shells fired by all natures of horse, mountain and field artillery).
lanks use smoke especially with the object of neutralizing
anti-tank weapons, and of concealing the direction of their
attack; infantry in order to blind enemy machine guns, so
that they may rush or stalk them; artillery for any of the
objects given in para. 1, above.
3. Smoke is a two-edged weapon; its indiscriminate use
may cause one's own troops to lose direction, may dis-
organize the plans of units or formations on the flanks and
will interfere seriously with artillery and air observation and
with visual signalling. Its use, therefore, always requires
careful consideration and control. The effectiveness of a
smoke screen is largely dependent on climates and weather
conditions, particularly on the strength and direction of the
wind; a light wind (about ten miles an hour), a moist atmos-
phere and absence of sun are the most favourable. For a
V07794 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

