pg_0193.pdf:
V07794 (192) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
164
[Chap. IX. Secs. 83 and 84.
knowledge of the conditions in the forward defences is just as
necessary as in mobile warfare.
7. Position warfare is trying to the health, the morale and
the discipline of troops. Sanitation requires special atten-
tion, and troops must be relieved, rested and trained under
favourable conditions as frequently as possible.
84. The defence in position warfare
1. The principles laid down in Chapter VII are equally
applicable to a protracted defence. The essential require-
ments are depth and elasticity. The original temporary
defences will be gradually elaborated and improved, the
obstacles in front of the position will be strengthened and
extended, the defended localities will be connected up, com-
munication trenches will be dug. As the defences are im-
proved, and as the enemy's artillery concentration becomes
more powerful, the dispositions of the defending troops will
be altered; the forward localities will be held more lightly,
so as to reduce losses and to enable the position to be organized
in greater depth.
The reasons given in Sec. 67, 6, for defence
in depth, ie. that the attacker by concentrated artillery fre
can usually shatter a selected portion of the forward defences,
applies with greater force to position warfare. The defensive
system must be organized so that the first shock is absorbed
and the enemy's initial onrush checked, at as small a cost to
the defender as possible, before it can penetrate to the main
system.
2. Hence the eventual organization to be aimed at will be
a main system, where the natural advantages of the ground
have been strengthened by the best and most carefully
concealed obstacles and defensive works that can be con-
structed in the time available; and an outpost system to act
Both main system
and outpost system will be organized in depth. Behind
these again, at some distance in rear, if time and labour
permit and there is a possibility of having to withstand very
heavy attacks, reay systems may be constructed, or at all
events reconnoitred and planned.
3. When an elaborate defensive system is laid out de-
liberately (as, for instance, rear systems), the location of the
main system will be determined chiefly by the features of the
ground, ie. so as to make the best use of the observation,
V07794 (192) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

