pg_0208.pdf:
V07794 (207) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. X. Secs. 94 and 95.]
179
defeat and to follow him up till his resistance is at an end.
Should the enemy refuse to make any organized resistance,
it may be necessary to occupy his country, to seize his flocks
or destroy his crops and villages to secure submission.
Blockade may sometimes be an effective weapon.
4. Whether or not to undertake operations by night against
an uncivilized enemy cannot be made a matter of rule. On
the one hand, savage enemies see better than civilized troops
at night, move more silently and are better accustomed to
the ground; on the other hand, many tribesmen dislike fight-
ing at night especially in cold weather-are apt to relax all
precautions alter darkness and may easily be surprised.
Tanta site taint night on tation in thia vala de
for reconnaissance and preparation; but a well-planned night
operation will often effect surprise and may save many
casualties.
95. Air force co-operation in uncivilized warfare
1. The difficulties of communications that hamper the
action of troops in mountains, bush and desert have com-
paratively little effect on air forces, though aerodromes and
landing grounds may be difficult to find in mountains or bush.
The air force can sometimes bring an uncivilized enemy to
terms by air action alone or by the threat of air action. On
the other hand, a well-planned combination of air action and
ground action will sometimes be preferable. The general
system of co-operation will be in accordance with the
principles already laid down (Secs. 8, 29, 32), but there will be
certain differences of method occasioned by the nature of the
enemy. For instance, since the enemy will not usually have
any aircraft or anti-aircraft artillery, there need be no
diversion of effort to secure air superiority, and the work of
the aeroplanes will be unhampered by enemy interference
except by rifle fire from the ground. On the other hand,
reconnaissance of the enemy's dispositions is hampered by the
fact that he will have
neither organized base
nor line of
supply, may not move in formed bodies nor collect in large
numbers, and will find easy means of concealment in bush or
in mountains. The location of the enemy under such con-
ditions is often a most difficult task, but a closely pressed
search by aircraft, even if unsuccessful, will greatly restrict
hostile movements. This is often of great value in piqueting
V07794 (207) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
- www.vickersmg.org

