pg_0064.pdf:
V07794 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Sec. 16.]
35
require less training. It is therefore of value for tactical
use by units of all arms in the forward area. Its great
disadvantage is that the stations must see each other: this
by the enemy. The most generally useful instrument is the
electric lamp, which can be used by day or night up to an
average range of two miles by day and six miles by night.
7. Messages may be carried by orderlies on foot, by horse-
men, by cyclists, by motor cyclists, by motor-cars or by
aircraft; or in certain circumstances by carrier pigeons,
messenger dogs, or even rockets. Message carrying is the
simplest of all methods and often the only method available
in battle: for long messages it is often quicker than tele-
graphy, and enables maps, sketches or other documents to
be sent. It is secret, unless the bearer is captured. The
personnel are comparatively easy to train. A special
despatch rider (S.D.R.) often provides the most rapid means
of sending an important message. (See Sec. 19, 6.)
The main disadvantage is that the bearers of messages may
go astray or become casualties, laving the originator of a
message uncertain whether it has been delivered or not, and
whether it may have fallen into the enemy's hands.
Also
the method is uneconomical, in that the available messengers
may quickly get used up or exhausted. When possible, to
effect economy, a despatch rider letter service (D.R.L.S.)
is organized, running periodically between headquarters on
a pre-arranged time table. The D.R.L.S. should be used as
much as possible, in order to reserve the other means of
communication for more urgent messages.
8. Liaison personnel, officers or N.C.Os., are one of the most
useful means of intercommunication, especially in the forward
area. They are not merely bearers of messages; they should
be acquainted with the plans and intentions of the commander
whom they serve, and thus be able to amplify and explain any
orders they bring to subordinate commanders. It is also their
duty, on their return from subordinate units, to be able to
give the superior commander a clear picture of the situation
there. Thus they must be specially trained men, on whose
judgment and knowledge a commander can rely.
9. The army postal service is used for the less urgent official
messages. Details of its working will be found in Field
Service Regulations, Volume I.
V07794 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

