pg_0156.pdf:
V07794 (155) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 62 and 63.]
127
especially against machine guns, for the leading rifle com-
panies during the progress of the attack.
For this task the
mortar is fitted by its high trajectory, which allows it to be
brought into action almost anywhere, its small size and
the powerful searching effect of its high explosive bombs or
screening effect of its smoke bombs. Mortars may also be
used in the initial fire plan, subject to their limitations of
range, the requirements of safety for our own troops and the
problem of ammunition supply. If mortars are so used and
may be required to give support during the later stages of the
attack, additional ammunition should be brought up from
the rear and dumped. Mortar detachments will usually go
forward close behind the attacking troops so as to ascertain
rapidly the location of any resistance holding up the advance
and to engage it with the minimum of delay.
5. For the co-operation of infantry with tanks in the attack,
see Sec. 60.
63. Artillery in the attack
1. Artillery when deploying to cover an attack should be
disposed with a view to concentrating the maximum fire
on the targets considered the most important, and to support-
ing the main attack to as great a depth as possible. This
last requirement means that the bulk of the artillery must
be sited well forward so as to reduce subsequent movement.
The requirements of surprise will necessitate that the
artillery supporting an attack should, as far as possible, be
a shooting
airmen, it will usually be necessary to effect large movements
of artillery by night into positions carefully chosen by day
with a view to concealment. To obtain absolute surprise
by predicted shooting without any registration requires a
detailed survey of targets which will not usually be possible
in mobile operations; it should, however, be possible to
achieve partial surprise by placing reinforcing batteries on
the same survey grid as batteries already in action (e.g.
advanced guard batteries) and carrying out all necessary
registration by those batteries which have already been
disclosed.
V07794 (155) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

