pg_0056.pdf:
V07794 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Secs. 13 and 14.]
-27
3. The object of operation orders is to bring about a course
of action in accordance with the intentions of the commander
and with full co-operation between all arms and services.
Further rules for their issue are given in Sec. 15.
4. Operation instructions are used instead of, or to supple-
ment, operation orders when it is necessary to place a subordi-
nate commander in a position in which he must act on his
own judgment. These instructions will give the subordinate
commander all available information likely to affect the
performance of his task, and will state clearly the object to
be attained, but will leave the methods to his discretion.
They should include a brief statement of the courses open to
the enemy, and of his probable action, as well as a forecast
of the action of the commander issuing the instruction.
Orders to reconnoitring elements (armoured cars, cavalry,
air units) will always be in the form of instructions rather
than orders, otherwise operation instructions should be
sparingly used. They will usually be couched in less formal
terms than orders. When special considerations of secrecy
demand it, such instructions may be addressed to a commander
personally. If it is essential that a commander should be
informed of the scope of an operation instruction issued to
another commander a copy of the instruction may be issued
to him for information.
5. The matters on which administrative orders may be
necessary are given in Appendix V. The staff is responsible
that heads of services and their representatives are kept
informed of so much of the intentions of the commander as
it may be necessary for them to know in order that they
may carry out their work efficiently.
14. Orders- general principles
1. An order must contain only what the recipient requires
to know, in order to carry out his task. Any attempt to
prescribe to a subordinate commander at a distance anything
that he, with a fuller knowledge of local conditions, should
be able to decide on the spot will be avoided.
2. In framing orders for operations, the general principle
is that the object to be attained, with such information as
affects its attainment, will be briefly but clearly stated: the
actual method of attaining the object will be given in sufficient
detail to ensure co-ordination of effort, but so as not to
V07794 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

