pg_0114.pdf:
V07794 (113) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 40.l
85
2. Effective defence against gas depends firstly on efficient
equipment and stores, which can only be produced as a
result of constant and careful research; secondly, on the
training and discipline of all ranks (individual protection) ;
and thirdly, on good organization by commanders of all
precautionary measures and means available to protect
groups of men, animals, equipment, stores, and food (col-
lective protection).
Details of the equipment and stores used in combating
gas (anti-gas respirator, goggles, cape, protective clothing,
bleaching powder, etc.) will be found in the Manual of Detence
against Gas.
3. A high standard of individual training is essential to
ensure that equipment is used correctly and in time; good
gas discipline, based on confidence in the equipment and skill
in its use, is essential if casualties are to be prevented and
the danger of panic lessened. All ranks should know the
types and characteristics of war gases and should be able
to recognize them; and should be able to carry out normal
work while wearing a respirator for a period of two consecu-
tive hours.
4. The first essential in collective protection is a good
system of alarm signals to warn troops that gas is being
used by the enemy. Gas alarms are of the following types:—
i. Sound alarms will be given on a special type of rattle
in the forward troops (i.e. companies of infantry
and equivalent units) as a warning against any type
of gas attack; this local alarm will be supplemented
in the event of a gas cloud attack by a special code
sounded on sirens, which will be held at the head-
quarters of infantry battalions and equivalent
units and at headquarters further in rear; warning
of a gas cloud will also be distributed by telephone,
wireless, etc.
The siren code for a gas cloud attack
will not be used as a warning of other forms of gas
attack owing to the risk of unnecessarily alarming
troops outside the affected zone.
ii. Detectors, spray, consist of detector discs (luminous at
night) placed on the ground or on the tops of vehicles,
to indicate the arrival of gas spray in billeting and
bivouac areas and on the march.
iii. Detectors, ground, to detect liquid blister gas in contami-
nated areas.
4 - (1811)
V07794 (113) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

