pg_0229.pdf:
V07794 (228) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
200
[Appendix IV.
one addressee, one copy of the message should normally be
addressees must appear on each copy.
tost appear on each copyaultiple addresses to be
arranged in lists, e.g. " List A," " List B," etc., all concerned
being informed of the composition of such lists.
8. The text will begin with the originator's distinguishing
letters and number in the appropriate space.
For the
appropriate distinguishing letters, see Field Service Pocket
Book.
Originators for whom no distinguishing letters are allotted
in the Field Service Pocket Book may employ any combina-
tion of letters up to three in number, provided that they have
not already been allotted and do not give any indication of
the identity of the sender or bis unit or formation.
9. The distinguishing letters will be followed by a number
which will be the serial number of outgoing messages from
the office or appointment held by the originator. A series
will be repeated on reaching the figures 9999.
10. In the text, roman numerals and mathematical signs
(e.g. those for yards, feet, inches, degrees, percentages, plus,
and minus) cannot be telegraphed and must be replaced by
words or recognized abbreviations (e.g. yds., it., per cent.).
A full stop will be indicated by O. No stop is required at
the end of the text. Other punctuation signs are not trans-
mitted in signal messages; care must therefore be taken that
their omission will not alter the sense of the message.
Letters, ciphers and important words (see Sec I, 3, above)
will be written in block letters, letter ciphers being arranged
in groups of five letters.
Underlining and the use of dashes or oblique strokes should
be resorted to only when absolutely necessary, e.g.:
" W/T," " Night 2/3 Sep."
Only one word, or abbreviated word, or combination of
letters undoubtedly meaning one thing, or the sign indicating
a full stop will be written in each space of the message form,
e.g. :
"KOYLI," " LINCOLNS," "arty," "CRA," will each
occupy one space.
" When this is not necessary, the signal officer will inform the originator
concerned.
V07794 (228) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

