pg_0052.pdf:
V07794 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. Il. Sec. 11.]
23
harder to get and less reliable, and the psychological factors of
fear and exhaustion are often present.
Thus it is not that the
commonsense qualities required in war are different from those
required in peace, but that the conditions of war are so
utterly unfamiliar to the ordinary civilized man; and the
more civilized life becomes and the more complex the
methods of war, the greater is the tendency of the average
man to find difficulty in applying to battle the ordinary
dictates of commonsense.
3. The first and most constant difficulty of the com-
mander in war apart from the inherent elements of danger
and fatigue is the continual succession of unforeseen
incidents and obstacles which tend to impede him in accom-
plishing what he has set out to do. Such obstacles may
occur even though the greatest forethought has been exer-
cised : the enemy does something unexpected; an important
message goes astray or is delayed; some turn of the weather
such as fog or heavy rain upsets calculations; a subordinate
leader becomes a casualty at the critical moment, and so
forth. In any tactical operation, great or small, it is the
duty of every commander, whatever the size of his command,
to define clearly to himself the object which he seeks to
attain and thereafter to allow nothing to distract him from it.
which he duty is to applete his task the caries dense rules
which the boxer, for example, learns and follows instinctively
in the ring. The most important of these is always to en-
deavour to surprise and distract the enemy, since an enemy
thrown off his guard by an unexpected blow or a skilful feint
is at a serious moral and physical disadvantage.
Again,
speed in action must be cultivated; the power to think
quickly in an emergency is one of the greatest assets both
of the boxer and of the commander; and the power to
move quickly often gives to a body of troops, as to a boxer,
the advantage of surprise.
Next, it is obvious commonsense
to concentrate all available means, physical, moral and
material, on the task in hand; and consequently to reduce
to a minimum the forces necessary for other purposes, e.g.,
for distracting the enemy's attention, for parrying his blows,
and so forth.
To be always alert and to keep his guard up
is instinctive to every boxer; so must constant watchfulness
and protection be instinctive to every commander of troops.
As hand and foot and eye have to work together in the boxer,
so can the power of a military force be exercised fully, only
V07794 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

