pg_0044.pdf:
• V07794 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 6 and 7.]
15
being carried in mechanical transport, except for small
mounted parties for reconnaissance duties. Field companies
and field park companies are organized into sections; their
first-line transport is mechanized-and some mechanical
enables a proportion of the personnel of these companies to
be moved rapidly with their first-line transport.
out by army troops companies, electrical and mechanical
companies and various workshop and other units. Such
companies, particularly army troops companies, though less
mobile than field units, may, if the situation requires, be
allotted work in the forward area of a similar nature to that *
undertaken by field units.
7. Signals
1. It is the duty of the signals to provide means of inter-
communication, other than postal, for an army in the field
down to the
headquarters of regiments,
batteries and
battalions. Within the units intercommunication is carried
out by unit signallers and orderlies; but, where wireless com-
munication is employed by the unit, the sets are maintained,
and in some units are operated, by signal personnel.
2. Signal units are allotted to divisions,
tank brigades,
air defence brigades, and to all higher formations, and to the
lines of
communication area.
The principles of inter-
communication and the means used are given in Chapter II.
The supervision and direction of the means of intercommuni-
cation provided by the signals is the duty of the general
staff. The division of responsibility between the general
staff and the signal organization is analogous to that between
the staff and a service (Field Service Regulations, Volume I,
1930, Chapter III).
3. Signal personnel wear a distinctive blue and white arm
band, and should be given priority on the roads by other
arms, since their work is usually urgent.
Except in an
mer should natter reference to a responsible signal officer,
4. The signal service is responsible for the correct official
time; watches will be synchronized through the signal
service before all operations.
V07794 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

