pg_0066.pdf:
V07794 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Sec. 18.]
37
Messages are sent in the order in which they are handed
in unless a special degree of priority is indicated by the
originator.
They will be classified in the following categories in
accordance with their relative urgency.—
i. (a) Most immediate. (b) Emergency operations.
ii.
Immediate.
iii. Important.
iv. Other official messages.
v. Private messages, when they are accepted.
Precedence of despatch for messages franked in the same
way will be according to the time of their receipt by signals.
Lists of officers authorized to frank
- " emergency opera-
tions," " immediate" and " important " messages will be
prepared by the general staff and published in routine orders.
Only officers authorized to send " most immediate" or
"emergency operation" messages will be permitted to use
R/T in rear of divisional headquanediate" messages may
Officers entitled to send
demand a special despatch rider, and may also make priority
telephone calls. Such calls take precedence over all other
waiting calls, but a conversation in progress will not be
interrupted for them.
Only a commander-in-chief or his chief general staff officer
will frank messages " most immediate." This indication will
be reserved for messages of vital urgency; it not only gives
absolute priority of dispatch on army signal systems but on
those of the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force, and on those
controlled by civil administrations.
The indication " emergency operations" will be used only
for messages of the utmost importance having a direct
bearing on operations.
The use of " immediate" will be limited to messages the
speed of which is of special importance, as otherwise its
purpose will be defeated. In urgent cases any officer may
frank a message as " immediate,
" but, if unauthorized to do
so, he will be held responsible that the urgency is sufficient
to justify his action.
The indication " important" will be used for those
messages which require priority above the ordinary service
message, such as signal service messages dealing with the
working of the signal system. Signal officers are authorized
to frank messages in this way.
V07794 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

