pg_0097.pdf:
V07794 (96) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
68
[Chap. IV. Secs. 32 and 33.
or units concerned. (See Employment of Air Forces with the
Army in the Field, 1932, Sec. 32.)
Air observers are trained to report only what they see,
never to make deductions. The air liaison officers may be able
to make deductions of the enemy's movements from the
observations reported by successive pilots.
33. Reconnaissance from the ground
1. Reconnaissance from the ground may be classified as
strategical or tactical according to whether the opposing
forces are within striking distance or not. In countries
suitable for the free movement of mechanical vehicles,
strategical reconnaissance is likely to be entrusted to
them; armoured cars will be particularly valuable, since
their mobility and range of action enable them to penetrate
rapidly into distant areas where information is to be sought.
Cavalry may also be used for strategical reconnaissance,
particularly in areas unsuited for mechanical movement, but
will more usually be reserved for tactical reconnaissance,
since their greater power of dispersion and concealment
makes them more suitable than mechanized troops for
obtaining the detailed information required for tactical
plans.
When the opposing forces are close together or in
actual contact, the duties of tactical reconnaissance will fall
mainly on the infantry and artillery. Skill in reconnaissance
is important for dismounted as well as for mounted troops.
2. Reconnaissance for the purpose of protection, i.e. to
guard against surprise, is the duty of every commander at
all times (see Sec. 37). Between special reconnaissance for
information and reconnaissance for protection only there Is
this difference, that the reconnoitring detachment sent out
for the special purpose of gaining information must base
its movements and actions on the movements of the enemy
force of which it seeks information, and need keep touch with
its own main body only so far as is necessary to communicate
the information obtained; whereas the detachment recon-
noitring for protective purposes must always keep touch
with the body from which it is sent out.
The first duty
of the former, in fact, is to make and maintain contact
with the enemy; of the latter, with its own main body:
the one may be likened to a detective, the other to a police-
man. It is an axiom that a body of troops must never be
V07794 (96) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

