pg_0214.pdf:
V07794 (213) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. X. Secs. 98 and 99.]
185
(Sec. 94), the main characteristics of fighting in the bush may
be summarized as follows : reconnaissance and the acquisition
of information present special difficulties owing to the thick
country, as does also the keeping of direction: measures of
protection demand constant care; flank protection is
assured by flankers a short distance out-from 20 yards
to several hundred according to the thickness of the bush—
either moving or stationary; the distance between the parts
of a force on the move should be much less than in open
country; camps and bivouacs are usually enclosed by a
perimeter, as in mountain warfare, with a field of fire cleared
where necessary; in attack, a chief problem is to locate the
enemy's flanks; visual signalling is usually of little value,
and reliance is placed mainly on W/T and telephones.
4. In bush, as in mountain warfare, conditions are changing,
and the number of roads already constructed and the facilities
for making fresh roads with speed are increasing. Where
motor transport can replace carriers, the task of the trained
troops is simplified, since greater use can be inade of the
resources of civilization.
99. Desert warfare
1. The special characteristic of desert warfare is the
dependence of movement and strategy on the location and
quantity of the water supplies. Deserts may consist of
heavy sand, difficult for wheels and for marching men and
for animals other than camels; or may have a hard surface
which permits of the movement of mechanical transport.
There are seldom any well-defined roads, but tracks known
to the local inhabitants usually exist between wells; and
hard desert is often passable anywhere by mechanical trans-
port at considerable speed. Stretches of heavy sand may be
made more passable for wheels by the expedient of pegging
down wire-netting on it; sand tyres and ped-rails are other
devices which will enable wheels to cross heavy sand.
There
are few land marks in the desert and maintenance of direction
is often difficult; mirage may be a frequent source of error.
Operations usually hinge on the attack and protection of the
main water supplies. If mechanized troops can be used, the
water problem is very much simplified, since mechanical
units can without difficulty carry with them their own water
requirements for 48 hours.
RSMC
V07794 (213) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

