pg_0039.pdf:
V07794 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
10
[Chap. I. Sec. 5.
the fire required by the formation or unit which it is detailed
to support so long as it is not called upon by the higher
commander for other tasks; in the latter, it is controlled
entirely by the commander under whom it is placed.
3. The development of the full powers of the artillery may
be subject to the following limitations :—
i. Difficulties of observation and of communicating fire
expen close cominition faster than it
can be replaced.
iii. Physical exhaustion of artillery personnel caused by
constant firing and by man-handling ammunition.
iv. Overheating of guns during rapid firing.
v. Exhaustion of horseflesh and the possibility of mechani-
cal break-down, particularly in difficult country.
vi. The time required to obtain data for predicted shooting
(see para. 7, below).
4. Artillery weapons are guns or howitzers. Guns have a
high muzzle velocity which gives them a long range but
involves a comparatively flat trajectory; howitzers have a
comparatively low muzzle velocity and a high trajectory.
The respective advantages and disadvantages of guns and
howitzers are similar to those of the infantry support weapons
-machine guns and mortars. The gun has a longer range
and a more rapid rate of fire than a howitzer of corresponding
classification; the howitzer has a greater shell power and the
ability to search ground behind cover, which guns, owing
to their flat trajectory, cannot reach. Howitzers can be
brought into action almost anywhere, e.g. directly behind
steep ground, buildings, or woods: positions for guns are
much harder to find, since it is necessary to ensure that their
flat trajectory will clear the crest of any high ground or
obstacle between gun and target (this factor is known as
" crest clearance ").
Details of guns and howitzers are given in Appendix III.
5. The types of shell used are H.E.,
"carrier" (which
may contain smoke, incendiary or other material), and
shrapnel. H.E. shell is fired by all natures of artillery, with
instantaneous or graze fuze, with delay fuze (heavy howit-
zers only) or with time fuze (anti-aircraft guns only). It is
the most generally useful shell for the destruction of per-
sonnel, entrenchments, buildings or cover of any description.
Smoke shell is fired by horse, mountain and field artillery, to
V07794 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

