pg_0083.pdf:
V07794 (82) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
54
[Chap. III. Sec. 27.
are separated from their artillery and transport, the distance
of the move should not exceed two days' march for the
transport.
As compared with a train, a bus column is less
economical, congests the roads, has a much smaller carrying
capacity and provides less comfort. It has, however, the
great advantage of flexibility, as it can go wherever a suitable
road exists.
The advantages and disadvantages are in fact
similar to those of the railway and motor transport in civil
life.
When sufficient mechanical transport is not available to
carry all the troops to be moved, a combination of marching
and carriage by mechanical transport may be arranged.
A troop move by mechanical transport requires careful
preparation and staff work in the same way as a move by
railway train. The arrangements required are dealt with in
paras. 5 to 9, below.
3. Moves by mechanical transport in the forward zone,
when the location of the hostile force is unknown and the
troops carried may be required at any time to debus and
engage the enemy, require special arrangements for recon-
naissance and protection, without which a long column of
mechanical transport is very defenceless to attack from the
ground or from the air. An advanced guard of armoured
fighting vehicles is usually required, as well as special measures
to safeguard the route along which the column is moving
against attack from the flanks (see Sec. 39).
Further, since
it will usually be necessary when the enemy is met to debus
the troops and to move the vehicles to some area of conceal-
ment in rear, and since it is seldom possible to reverse the
vehicles on the road, the mechanical transport column should
move by bounds between road circuits where the direction
of movement can easily be reversed; not passing beyond
one circuit until the next circuit is reported clear by the
advanced guard.
4. The vehicles used may be passenger-carrying coaches or
omnibuses, requisitioned from civilian use, with a capacity
of up to 30 or more men, or lorries. A 5-ton lorry will nor-
mally carry 20 fully-equipped men, besides the driver: a
lorries should accompany the column for this purpose, if
available.
V07794 (82) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

