pg_0035.pdf:
V07794 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
6
[Chap. I. Sec. 3.
The concealment ard protection of the horsed to gas aboack-
of cavalry from air attack is of great importance and presents
serious difficulties.
The average length of march for bodies of cavalry may be
taken as twenty-five to thirty miles a day, and the rate of
movement as five to six miles an hour.
2. The armament of the individual cavalryman is the rifle
for use dismounted and the sword for mounted attack. To
support either form of action cavalry units are equipped
with light machine guns; and a proportion of artillery
normally accompanies all cavalry formations of a brigade or
higher.
The only distinction between cavalry and mounted rifles
is that the latter carry no sword, and are thus not equipped
for shock tactics. There are, however, instances in recent
wars of mounted rifles using their mobility to make suc-
cessful mounted attacks.
3. Owing to the necessity of leaving men with the led
horses (normally, one to four horses) cavalry can only employ
a limited proportion of its strength in dismounted action.
Thus a regiment dismounted is equivalent in fire power to
about two companies of infantry. A force of cavalry in dis-
mounted action can often compensate for its comparative
weakness in numbers by surprise and by the power which
its mobility gives to change ground rapidly or to withdraw.
Since it is not usually required to push home an attack or to
make a protracted resistance, it can be disposed on a wider
front and in less depth than an infantry force of the same
4. Cavalry is provided, in country suitable for their use,
with a number of light motor cars or motor cycles for inter-
communication and to enable it to send back rapidly the
information it secures by reconnaissance, which is normally
its principal role. Armoured cars often work closely in
co-operation with cavalry in the service of reconnaissance.
5. To sum up, the main duties of cavalry are reconnais-
sance and protection; in battle they may be used to delay
the enemy, to safeguard a flank, to form a mobile reserve, to
carry out a pursuit, or to cover a withdrawal; they may also
be despatched on a special mission, such as a raid.
V07794 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

