pg_0068.pdf:
V07794 (67) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Sec. 19.]
39
ciphering messages. The use of unauthorized ciphers and
codes is forbidden.
2. Although wireless messages may be intercepted, a cer-
tain interval must always elapse before the enemy can act
on the information received.
sen the information received The as is of wieles just tec
when the message is urgent and it is considered that the
situation will have changed sufficiently by the time the
enemy can act on the information for it to be of little value
to him. The possibility of a message containing information
which is of value to the enemy for the future, even though
he has not time to take action on it for the present, must,
however, be considered. Apparently harmless administrative
messages sent in clear may enable the enemy to deduce the
presence of fresh troops in an area or the nature of future
plans.
3. The following rules are given for guidance in the use of
wireless :—
i. Messages by wireless will normally be sent in cipher.
ii. In rear of brigade headquarters, messages may
sent in clear on the authority of officers authorized
to frank " emergency operations" messages, when
speed is vital and it is considered that the enemy
cannot take effective action on the message if
intercepted.
iii. In front of brigade headquarters, messages dealing
with operations in progress, when contact with the
enemy has been made, may be sent in clear. Code
names will, however, be used and other precautions
taken to prevent the enemy obtaining information
(see para. 4, below).
4. The use of radio-telephony for conversations requires
considerable attention and practice, to avoid giving away
valuable information by the careless mention of
times,
places, and names of units. The danger can be largely
overcome by thinking out the wording of the message before
starting a conversation and making notes of it. References
to the paragraphs of orders and instructions, and pre-
arranged code words and phrases to describe positions and
actions should be used as far as possible.
5. Appendix IV gives rules for the use of code-names in
messages; and Sec. 90 the precautions necessary in the use
V07794 (67) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

