pg_0198.pdf:
V07794 (197) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 86.]
169
brought into action, either to destroy the enemy defences or
to break up the assault. Methods of locating the hostle
artillery, by sound-ranging, flash-spotting or other means,
will be much developed; as a corollary, the concealment of
batteries and the protection of material and personnel by
defensive works will assume great importance. Survey
methods will be highly developed so that predicted shooting
can be undertaken with a high degree of accuracy. Artillery
fire of considerable intensity will be normal, both in attack
and defence.
2. In the defence, the bulk of the artillery will be sited so
as to bring the full weight of its fire on an enemy attacking
the main system. Support must also be given to the troops
holding the outpost system to the extent required by the
commander's plan; and a sufficient quantity of heavy and
medium artillery must be far enough forward to harass the
enemy's preparations and to undertake counter-battery
tasks. It may sometimes be possible to carry out all these
tasks from positions in the main system; but when the
defensive system is very deep, it will be necessary to locate
some guns in the outpost system. Artillery sited in an out-
post system should have prepared positions in the main
system to which to fall back in the event of loss or evacuation
of the outpost system. Batteries in the main system should
also have alternative positions to occupy if subjected to heavy
artillery fire. The principles laid down in Sec. 74 will apply
generally to artillery in the defence in position warfare.
3. The tasks of the artillery in the attack in position
warfare will be similar to those outlined in Sec. 63. The
extent of artillery preparation will depend on the strength
of the enemy defences and obstacles and on the arrangements
for securing surprise. The shorter and more intense the
the prore
preparation, the more likely is surprise to be achieved, but
time is required if gaps have to be cut through a wire obstacle;
heavy mortars are of value for this purpose. A barrage,
organized in several belts, will be the normal form of covering
fite.
The bulk of the field guns will form the belt nearest the
attacking troops: this belt will be continuous and will move
forward by regular lifts on a definite time-table. The fire of
other belts will be directed on specially selected areas and
communications behind. The barrage may be deepened in
parts by machine-gun fire.
The attacking troops must
follow as closely as possible behind the barrage so as to reach
V07794 (197) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

