pg_0144.pdf:
V07794 (143) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 56 and 57.]
115
Objectives will be selected for their tactical importance and
should be easily recognizable on the ground. A formation or
unit which is allotted an objective may lay down an inter-
mediate objective to be captured first by a part of its troops.
4. It will usually be convenient to lay down a dividing line
between adjacent formations in the attack (see Appendix tv,
Sec. IV, 8). The respective tasks and responsibility of
adjacent units or sub-units will often be sufficiently clearly
defined by the allotment of objectives, and a dividing line
may be unnecessary, unless it is desirable for some special
reason to define exactly the area within which each is
responsible. Dividing lines must be marked by features
easily distinguishable on the ground. It must be clearly
understood by all that the naming of a dividing line never
absolves a commander from the duty of assisting by all
means in his power the progress of the units to his right and
left; nor does it prevent him from organizing covering fire
from positions outside the avenue allotted to him, nor from
moving his troops into another area whenever the situation
requires it.
5. It is important that a commander, who has artillery
under his command, should realize his responsibilities. It
is his duty to decide where he wishes the shells to fall, also
when and for how long the different targets should be
engaged. It is then the duty of the artillery commander to
decide on the methods to be employed to carry out the
orders he has received.
57. General conduct of the attack
1. Whatever the form of the attack, it will usually fall
into two separate stages; the initial stage, which has been
planned, prepared and probably timed; and a subsequent
stage when the fighting is looser and less organized and
depends more on improvisation. This latter stage demands a
much higher degree of skill, endurance and determination
from all ranks, especially from subordinate commanders.
2. In the initial stage, if the preparations have been well
made, the attacker has the advantage of surprise, superior
fire power and a considered plan. This stage should there-
fore result in penetration of the enemy's front by the forward
troops at one or more points. The attacker's object will now
be to enlarge his gains while he still holds the advantages of
V07794 (143) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

