pg_0184.pdf:
V07794 (183) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VIII. Sec. 80.J
155
2. When a night advance follows a night march, the
choice of a suitable assembly position (Sec. 77, 4) is of great
importance. It must be clearly recognizable (Sec. 78, 5),
should, if possible, afford cover to the troops and should
enable deployment into open formation to be made quietly
and without confusion; points such as important cross-roads,
which are likely to be registered by the hostile artillery,
should be avoided. The deployment must always be made
under cover of protective detachments.
The distance of the assembly position from the objective
will depend mainly on the nature of the country and on the
size and composition of the force; other factors such as the
vigilance of the enemy and the state of the moon or of the
weather (for instance, a hard frost making movement audible
at a greater distance than usual) will also have to be taken into
account.
Very generally, it will not usually be safe to
continue in march formation within about 2,000 yards of a
vigilant enemy.
Any mounted troops, artillery or transport that have
accompanied the column up to the assembly position will
usually be left there, the further advance being made by
infantry alone, the troops most capable of movement and
action at night in the presence of the enemy.
3. As thorough a reconnaissance as possible will be made
of the ground over which the advance is to take place; in
particular, note should be taken of the existence of any
obstacles (such as a wire fence) for the removal or passage
of which special measures may be required. Aeroplane
photographs, verticals or obliques, will often be of great
value. Compass bearings should be taken and notified to
all concerned.
The instructions laid down in Sec. 78, 6,
regarding the loading of rifles, smoking, silence, showing
lights, etc., apply equally to night advances.
4. The formations suitable for night advances are dealt
with in Infantry Training. The advance should be preceded
by strong protective patrols under officers whose duties will be
ground reconnaissance, local protection and action against
enemy patrols or outlying piquets; these should be rushed
in silence with the bayonet without hesitation.
The forward troops of the main body will be in the forma-
tion which allows of the maximum control combined with
rapidity of deployment; a line or lines of small columns will
usually be suitable. It is advisable that there should be
V07794 (183) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

