pg_0154.pdf:
V07794 (163) Digitized by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association. www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 62.]
125
definite objective. To assist in maintaining direction,
which is one of the chief difficulties, the objectives
should be easily recognizable;
in addition note
should be taken of prominent landmarks, and the
compass bearing of the direction of advance should
be given in orders. Attacking troops should start
square to their objective from a starting line well
defined, if possible, by some natural feature such as
a road, path, or ditch.
The plan should not involve
intricate changes of direction, which are dangerous.
Infantry always tends to face towards the quarter
from which it meets
opposition and may lose
direction from this cause.
ill. Every body is responsible for its own protection, to
the front and to the flanks.
iv. A body of infantry should not deploy into extended
formation until obliged to do so; extension increases
the difficulties of control and lessens the opportunities
for taking advantage of cover.
Extensions should
not be wider than five paces between men, or control
will be lessened.
If a wide front has to be covered,
the interval between sub-units should be increased,
and not between individual men.
v. Infantry should not open fire as long as it can get
forward without it:
a fire fight must be to the
advantage of the defender, who knows the range and
can more easily replenish his ammunition supply.
Also a steady advance without pause has a con-
siderable moral effect on the enemy, while the
continual change of range will reduce the efficiency
of his fire.
vi. Men held up should not be reinforced with additional
vii. The duty of a body of troops which is held up is to
continue to engage the enemy and to fix him, so as to
give units to the right and left the opportunity to
get on; and to push forward itself as soon as their
action or the weakening of the enemy makes it
possible.
viii. It is the duty of the advanced troops to keep com-
manders behind informed of the situation by
V07794 (153) Digitised by
eramg.org

