pg_0177.pdf:
V07794 (176) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
148
[Chap. VII. Secs. 75 and 76.
2. The following are types of work on which engineers may
be employed :
i. Obstacles or clearances, requiring the use of explosives
or special engineer tools; anti-tank obstacles.
ii. The construction of observation posts or machine-gun
emplacements requiring technical skill.
iii. Shelters or dug-outs for headquarters.
iv. The improvement of communications.
v. Water supply.
3. When working with other arms, engineers are responsible
for the technical correctness of the design, for the supply of
material, stores and additional tools and for giving an
estimate of the time required to complete the task. When
working parties of other arms are detailed to assist engineers,
the senior officer on the spot will be responsible for the
execution of the work in accordance with the orders and the
design for it; and will decide, if the working parties seem
likely to incur heavy casualties, whether they are to be with-
drawn or whether the work is to be carried out at all costs.
If it is obvious beforehand that the nature of the work is such
that casualties are likely to be incurred, the commander who
orders the working party should give an indication of the
importance which he attaches to the completion of the work.
4. Engineer units may be regarded as a reserve of fighting
men, but will be used to fight only in an emergency, as a last
resource. If employed to fight, an engineer unit should be
kept intact as far as possible and allotted a definite task, such
as the defence of a certain locality, the protection of a flank
or, in very exceptional circumstances, the delivery of a
counter-attack. Engineers so used should be relieved by
other troops as soon as possible, so that they may resume
their normal work.
76. Signals in the defence
1. Intercommunication is a factor in which the defence,
being stationary, should have an advantage over the attack,
if good use is made of the time available for preparation.
After providing for the general system of command, an early
and important care of the signals should be to arrange for
artillery requirements, so that the fire of the artillery can be
controlled and concentrated with the greatest possible
flexibility. The sooner, therefore, that the lay-out of the
V07794 (176) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

