116
Soldiers as Workers
by loyal artillery and infantry and ended with three executions. According
to one of the participants, the artificers even built the gallows. By cleve
negotiation (probably learnt in civilian trade societies), the artificers had
achieved complete victory:
Discipline was almost entirely relinquished and drill was an unfashionable
exercise. The former was relaxed on account of the men being regarded in
the light of civilians than soldiers ... [they] evince a spirit of disaffection
when anything occurred to infringe upon the liberties or privileges
that the usages of the corps had given them a right to enjoy ... dirty in
appearance and slovenly in attire ... Yet with all this misconduct and want
of training in soldier like principle and bearing they always exhibited an
active pride in their fair name as mechanics.105
Their skills were in such demand that these traits were necessarily tolerated
and rewarded by huge recruitment bounties, which rose from 5 guineas in the
c79os to i2 guineas, as the renewed war in 1803 resulted in an increase to 12
companies each of 126 tradesmen. Though they suffered heavy casualties in
the sieges of the French Wars, they were rewarded by generous prize money,
especially in the Caribbean campaigns. Sappers and Miners served in isolated
sieges, often with one skilled man advising generals. Private Georoe Mitchell
(a mason) was promoted to Sergeant for bravery at the Siege of Frederici in
Surinam in 1804. Artificers also provided skilled advice to exotic allies, like
the y6 tradesmen sent to aid the Turks in Napolcon's Egyptian campaign, or
the 15 sent to the Neapolitan army in 1806, or Corporal Borthwick serving
alone with the Russian army in the Baltic in 1812.106
By 1812, the recruiting bounty for artificers was raised to €14 3s. 6d., but
only s3 new recruits responded (such was the demand for civilian workers),
until volunteering was allowed from the militia and then the line. The last
resulted in 134 volunteers from 46th Foot alone; nominally from South
Devon, one of the old mining areas. With growing economic depression
after the end of the war, the higher pay and responsibility of the Sappers
and Miners could be attractive to civilian artisans in need of steady work.
Trials were given
to all recruits to check they were qualified for their
several trades and occupations. Senior carpenters, masons and smiths were
promoted as 'master' Sergeants, whilst the heads of lesser trades - bricklayers
and wheelers - were merely Corporals. The miners may have 'elected' their
foremen. Such assumed rank based on skill would have been very familiar
to civilian artisans, and wisely the military authorities adopted it for the
105 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 97, 138 and 139 and Haley, Soldier
in Chapter 4, below.
Who Walked Away, 47. For more details of the Gibraltar protest, see 'Strikes and Mutinies,
106 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 66, 99, 103, 121, 152, 157 and 185.
Soldiers as Workers
117
new corps. Though long-serving and non-tradesmen artillery Captains were
promoted as Majors to command these companies, their touch was light
and they did not attempt to impose discipline. One, Major Todd, said that
he found the soldiers with minds quickened by the wider range and variety
of knowledge attendant on their service, were more ready of resource and
their efforts. Their pride and independence were demonstrated in one of the
last sieges of the war at Antwerp in f When asked to hold a horse for
a member of the entourage of the Prince of Orange, Private Brennan, who
"was busy with his shovel at the time, turned his face towards the staff and
feeling that as a sapper he was z or 3 removes above a groom, replied, "Egad
Sir, I'd sooner be shot layin' sandbags", 107
By 8t5, the Sappers and Miners companies in the major naval ports of
southern England had posted detachments of highly skilled and well-paid
miners and artificers (many unsupervised by officers) to most significant
imperial outposts. These were mainly retained into the peace despite the
army cuts. In 1819, there were i2 companies, which had increased to over
2,000 men with an excellent system of practical instruction' by 1850.103
During the French Wars the traditional rivalry between the Board of
Ordnance and Horse Guards had resulted in the creation in 1804 of the
Royal Staff Corps. This was seen as the solution to the chronic indiscipline
of the artificers. The Dant Staff Corns wac a more militarised body of civi
and combat engineers, under the direct control of Horse Guards. Volunteers
were sought from the Guards and infantry: They must be strong active Men
.. having regularly served an Apprenticeship and possessing a complete
knowledge of one of the following trades; Viz, Carpenters, Wheelers,
Sawyers, Shipwrights or Boat Builders, Masons, Bricklayers, Miners (not
mere colliers or quarrymen)? The Royal Staff Corps also took on some
promising unapprenticed men, not tainted with the tradesmen's culture,
claiming it could quarter the recruit with really good soldiers who can give
them every instruction. Their dress was also prescribed as regimentals and
not coloured cloaths, the working dress which typified the sloppy artificers.
In the peacetime reductions, though, it was the Royal Staff Corps which
was disbanded. 109
To complicate matters further, a more immobile Barrack Artificer Corps
was formed by the Board of Ordnance in 1805 to service the increasing real
estate. This also recruited: 'Carpenters and Joiners, Sawyers, Bricklayers,
107 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 64, 66, 68, 150, 216 and 218.
108 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 65 and 253 and Strachan, From
Waterloo to Balaclava, 134-
109 Quoted in Glover, Peninsular Preparation, 1o5 and NAM 1989-08-110, Standing Orders
Royal Staff Corps, 1807.
