114
Soldiers as Workers
Artificers and sappers
Labouring work by combed-out rankers was meant to be supervised by
the Royal Engineers, a tiny corps which consisted only of commissione
officers. More productivity was anticipated from supervision by a specialised
tradesmen's corps of Sappers and Miners.
First raised in the siege of
Gibraltar in the 177os, it was officially established in 1787 with six companies
of t0o men. With NOs from the Royal Artillery, each company contained
i2 carpenters, to masons, to bricklayers, & miners, 5 smiths, 5 wheelers, 4
sayers, 2 collar makers, 2 coopers, 2 painters and 3o labourers. Recruits had
to be strong able bodied men ... duly qualified for their several trades and
occupations', and an enhanced bounty of 3 guineas was necessary to attract
civilian tradesmen plus a working pay of up to rs. 442d. a day. But enlistment
of labourers ... was! not in any sense welcomed by the old artificers, who
conceived they were losing caste and position by association. So already the
Sappers and Miners were demonstrating a control over their son which
was to endure; labourers were soon deleted from their establishments and
provided when needed by seconded infantrymen. 102
More complicated wartime military engineering demands meant that
by 1806 these artificer companies had up to 3o carpenters, 20 masons
and 18 bricklayers, to miners, and 10 smiths. and later an minera (enecif
ically for the Peninsular campaigns). The wartime expansion of the corps
was achieved through recruitment from militia regiments in mining arcas
like Denbighshire, Glamorgan and Somerset. In t798, and again in 1802,
Cornwall and Devon also raised a new supplementary miners' militia,
known as the Stannaries Regiment, which was balloted specifically from tin
miners, who spent the war mainly working on the defences of Chatham and
Dover. On the latter job, their labourers were supplied by 300 men from the
East Suffolk and Montgomery Militias. The Sappers and Miners were again
expanded in i8tt, doubling the numbers of tradesmen. They were supple-
mented by a wide range of new trades recruited from time-served civilians:
bricklayers, braziers, file cutters, gardeners, limeburners, modellers, nailers,
slaters and tilers. By 1813 (when renamed the Corps of Royal Sappers and
Miners), they were nearly 3,000 strong. 103
The corps retained the artisan's reputation for resourcefulness and
102 Porter, History of the Corps of Royal Engineers, vol. 1, 135, 136 and 139; Glenn A. Steppler,
'British Military Artificers in Canada, 1760-1815, JSAHR, 60 (1982), 154; T.W.J. Connolly,
The History of the Royal Sappers and Miners (London: Longman's, 1857), 45; and MacArthur,
'British Army Establishments', 350.
103 MacArthur, 'British Army Establishments', 349 and 35t; Sleigh, Militia and Yeomanry,
15; Knight, Britain against Napoleon, 28r; and Porter, Corps of Royal Engineers, 140 and 141.
115
Soldiers as Workers
independence, but combined lack of discipline and ill-kempt appearance
with non-regimental working dress. The company on Gibraltar in particular
enjoyed a relaxed discipline: 'none were punished if found drunk, and
foreigners' or private work was tolerated. The Plymouth company, known
for drunkenness and irregularity rioted in 1795 and several members
"deserted when discipline [was) repossessed'. But the Artificers were not
all drinkers and contained such strong-minded individuals as Henry Ince,
who pioneered Methodism on Gibraltar.
The Plymouth company signed
the loyalist response to the handbills inciting troops to subversion, which
were widely distributed in 1797. Likewise, the Woolwich company refused
to join striking artillerymen who paraded under the slogan 'More pay; less
drill' in the Chatham depot disturbance of the same vear. At a time when
artisans were the core of the new popular radicalism, the artificers might be
thourht particularly vulnerable to subversion, so the authorities were quick
to reward their loyalism. Their working pay was increased from ninepence
to Is. 2½d. as an 'opportunity of expressing the good conduct of the corps ...
[the CO] believes it is not in the power of the most artful traitor to seduce
the soldiers of the Roval Military Artificers and labourers from their loyalty
and attachment to King and Country. In gratitude, the Woolwich company
gave three days' a to support the war effort Artificers often delighted
in spending their hich wares, like manv civilian artisans. Those building
the barracks at Lewes in Sussex in 1803 commissioned a performance of
Richard III from the local theatre. When they tried to take the best box seats,
usually occupied by the officers of the garrison, a class-based riot ensued
with' the whole house ... thrown into an uproar? 104
A major problem arose when in 1802 the martinet Duke of Kent became
Governor of Gibraltar, with a mission to reduce drinking and with drill
and discipline vigorously enforced. The artificers were deprived of the
privilege of working privately in the town, and were once a week taken
from the command of their own officers and drilled and disciplined by
the Town Major. They initially joined a demonstration by the protesting
rank and file of the and and 25th Foot. But meeting separately with their
Engineering officers, the artificers successfully negotiated more working pay,
the removal of canteen restrictions, and 'stated their wish to be drilled by
their own officers'. They stood aside from the rest of the disturbances which
rumbled on through the Christmas of 1802. The insurgency was put down
104 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 5t, 6r, 74, 95, I, 112, 113, 117; Snape,
Redcoat and Religion, 61; Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 6r; and Gillian
Russell, The Theatres of War: Performance, Politics and Society, 793-1815 (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1995), 113. For more details of the 1797 protest, see 'Strikes and Mutinies', in Chapter
4, below.
