102
Soldiers as Workers
For the long Indian postings, a new category of teacher appeared after
the Mutiny: "The Interpreter ... holds classes of instruction in the native
languages for NCOs and men. But there was still suspicion of the reformed
service. As one commentator wrote in 1864: 'Many Commanding Officers
have a deep rooted objection to Normal Schoolmasters, for being ... in a
kind of indefinite position; they are neither officers nor sergeants, but a
mixture of the two; disliked, and termed upstarts by one party and while
looked down upon and snubbed by the other? By 1870, there were a5o trained
army schoolmasters across the Empire. Women were first appointed as
schoolteachers in 1840. Initially they were used for the instruction of female
regimental children in washing, sewing and nursing. From 185o, they also
staffed mixed infant schools. By 1865, there were 443 of them, mainly wives
and daughters of NCOs [who] found employment as schoolmistresses,..
in charge of the infant school and instructed the girls in inductior 74
ex-servicemen also provided homes for significant numbers of NCOs in
quasi-military administrative roles. An anonymous Irish sergeant, on retiring
in 1823, became a superintendent of children or 'Colour Sergeant of the
Royal Military Asylum in Chelsea, largely as a result of glowing references
from senior officers of the 43rd Light Infantry?5
British printing trades were amongst the best paid and most respected crafts,
with the compositors, who did the actual printing, at the very ton Some of
these "labour aristocrats' also found their way into the armv. Cose's surve
of 7,300 Napoleonic recruits identifies 20 printers. plus it from associate
trades like the eight bookbinders and three engravers. In t8rt, during the
long Peninsular War, the inability to get administrative forms printed locall
in English led general staff to set up a printing office. A comb-out call was
sent to regiments: any men who understood printing and the arrangemen
of type are to be forwarded by the first opportunity to headquarters and
report to this office. The Adjutant General also emploved his own printer:
a Corporal Buchan recruited from the 3rd Foot Guards?6
Standing Orders of the zard Regiment (Cape Town, 1850): F. A Smith «E durating the Soldies
in the Nineteenth Century, JSAHR, 66 (1987), 202; and Holmes, Soldiers, 570.
74 LIM. Standing Orders of to To me are 886),
18, quoted in Stelley, Victorian Armat Home to Rope doe We end
Trustram, Women of the Regiment, 185.
75 Anon., Memoirs of a Sergeant (Stroud: Nonsuch, 2005 (1835)), 210-11.
(2002), 177; and Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 35.
76 Coss, All for the King's Shilling, 347, table 72; Alistair I. Noble, 'Note 1660'. ISAHR, 80.
Soldiers as Workers
103
Overseas military adventurers in Bolivar's army also recognised the
importance of the press in publicising the patriots' aims. Reacting to the
Liberator's plea: 'Please send the printing press ... it will be at least as useful
as gunshot', Andrew Roderick, a printer within their ranks, came out with
his own press and in August 1818 set up the first newspaper in Venezuela,
the multilingual El Correo del Orinoco. In Spain in 1836, three soldiers of the
6th Regiment of the British Auxiliary Legion remained attached as Printers
to Headquarters'. In smaller imperial garrisons the government printing
offices were staffed by combed-out printers. The Corfu office typeset one of
the most important rankers' memoirs of the early nineteenth century, The
Letters of Private Wheeler?7
a never-implemented plan for economic warfare.
Such 'skills' had already
been employed on the home front. Only the year before, Private Andrew
Shaw of the yist Foot was caught, having forged go billeting orders for
troops without barracks to be lodged in inns or private houses. Shaw had
tried to extort money by selling these fake orders to worried householders,
imprisonment?8
so that they could avoid taking in soldiers. He was sentenced to six months'
Traditionally, the Drum Major handled post in return for the perks of
his position, which was subscribed to by the regiment's officers. It would,
however, be wrong to infer that letters were entirely the province of officers
and beyond illiterate rankers. During his army service in the 1780s, William
Cobbett recalled: our Regiment, which was the West Norfolk, when an
old soldier was going home discharred he took with lim hic knapsack
full of letters into the count and thourh he micht not fulfil all his
promises in delivering the message of those who could not write he would
naturally fulfil many of them. An act of Parliament in 1795 tried to improve
these potentially haphazard arrangements bu introducing cheap postage foe
soldiers and sailors. This enabled literate rankers to keep in touch with home
during the French Wars. Four vears later, free postage for relatives seeking
information about the deaths of caldiere on campaion was enacted. with
postage for all except officers reduced to one pennu 79
77 Hushes, Conquer or Diel. us NAM 68oz-108 Regimental Order teh Reciment fRAL
25 Feb. 1836; and Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 8.
28 Charles Oman, A History of the Peninsular War. vol - (London: Macmillan, 1930), 289
and Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 60.
79 Cobbett's Weeklv Political Pamphlet 20(27). 1a Dec 1817. Tuk and Peter R Bovden, "The
