36
Soldiers as Workers
1813, men of the g5th Rifles made a hut for their officer, Lieutenant Harry
Smith and his wife. This leaked in a sudden downpour: 'we were drenched
to the skin and as black as chimney-sweepers. The buoyant spirits of my wife
and the ridiculous position we were in, made her laugh herself warm. We
turned the servants out of our tent, and never enjoyed the late comforts of
our castle again? In addition, officers brought comforts into the field, with
large amounts of baggage, and most officers employed servants as well as
batmen. In contrast, the rank and file had to carry all their belongings on
their backs and lived rough. In the late-Victorian army, ex-Sergeant Arthur
Palmer of the 79th Highlanders poured scorn on Lord Wolseley's cleaning
suggestion that the men's shirts on campaign should be hung up in the sun
and brushed: "I wonder if many officers would like to wear shirts "cleaned"
in this novel fashion? On campaign and when moving quarters most officers
had more room than what we had. 17
Sick and wounded
Though exposed to the same dangers, officers and men had different
experiences when ill or injured. If sick, officers would be cared for by their
servants in their private rooms in quarters, whilst men would be shunted into
insanitary and often improvised barrack hospitals. Here, minimal medical
attention and dubious nursing regimes caused much higher mortality rates
than civilian establishments. The Caribbean in the 179os was the nadir of
such systems, where the appalling living and campaigning environment
made discase endemic. The crowded living conditions compounded by
extremes of weather, unimaginable to most British recruits, were breeding
grounds for epidemics which even in wartime killed far more soldiers than
died in battle. Here, half of the 89,000 men sent to seize French sugar and
slave islands died, only a tiny portion in battle.18
In battle, wounded officers were treated before men already waiting to
see the regimental surgeons. John Green's memoir details his experiences
1 Philip Haythornthwaite (ed.), The Autobiography of Sir Harry Smith, 1787-1819 (London:
Naval and Military Press: 2003 [1936]), 279.
in the West Indies, 87.
18 Mansfield, 'Exploited Workers or Agents of Imperialism?, 14 and Buckley, British Army
Class Structure and the British Army
37
at the battle of San Marcial in Spain, in 1813: 'At length a surgeon began
to examine me: he took off my shirt and ran his probe into the wound. In
the meantime, the colonel of the Chasseurs Britanniques was brought to
the spot, wounded in the head, and the surgeon left me in my naked state
to attend to him. In combat it was the officers who were allocated limited
cover from the enemy's fire. At the defence of Cadiz, in 1810: 'the bomb
proofs [shelters] were nearly all destroyed. In what remained there was not
shelter for half the men; and by a rule of division often practised in the
army, that little was made less by the officers appropriating the half of it to
themselves'19
If there was limited transport during a retreat, it would be the rank-and-
file wounded that would be left behind. Wellington left all his wounded
to be cared for by the French after the battle of Talavera in 1809. Losing
a savage fight against the Kandyans in Sri Lanka in 1803, all rank-and-
file wounded were abandoned, to be slaughtered by the enemy, whilst
wounded officers were carried with the retreating column. To avoid being
cut off, Captain Madge evacuated the isolated Fort Macdowall at night,
'unfortunately leaving nineteen sick men of his regiment behind him, for
want of transport, but bringing off three officers'. All nineteen were killed.
Whilst Captain Johnston, the CO, was exonerated at a court of inquiry,
bizarrely, Sergeant Henry Craven of the igth Foot, in command of a small
column, was court-martialled for leaving four of his wounded comrades, and
sentenced to transportation for life. He avoided this fate by dying of fever
before being shipped out. But at least these hapless rankers had their names
recorded. Until 1799, the dead rank and file on campaign were just reported
as their regimental numbers, not their names: a situation which led to pitiful
and often fruitless enquires from worried families to the military authorities
(see the section 'Printing trades', in Chapter 3, below).20
Leave
With the exception of the county militias, who were often given furloughs to
return home and help with harvests (see the section 'General labouring, in
Chapter 3, below), leave was not granted regularly to rank-and-file soldiers,
even in peacetime. By the 18gos, rankers could only take furlough between
I November and 1o March. They were not allowed to take their greatcoats
with them, in the coolest part of the year, as these had been bought with
public money. In contrast, officers enjoyed almost total freedom in taking
19 Quoted in Esdaile, Peninsular Eyewitnesses, 270 and Joseph Donaldson, Recollections of
the Eventful Life of a Soldier (Uckfield: Naval and Military Press, 2009 [18381), 62.
20 Tan Hernon, Britain's Forgotten Wars (Stroud: Sutton, 2003), 33-44 and Fortescue,
History of the British Army, vol. 5, 156 and vol. 4, 929.
