58
Soldiers as Workers
Class nuances in the militia,
the East India Company and overseas military adventurers
The categories of non-regular soldiering outlined in the section Types of
military service, in Chapter 1, above, saw class play quite different and
nuanced roles which will be examined here.
Militia
The county militia establishment saw itself as an idealised English rural
society in arms. Its officers were from the county gentry, with often a
resident aristocrat as the Lieutenant Colonel, with another landed magnate,
usually the Lord Lieutenant - the sovereign's local representative - as titular
Colonel. Property qualifications were insisted on for commissioned ranks,
ranging from income worth ego a year for Ensigns to £200 for Captains.
These scales operated for over a century until abolition in 186g. Until then,
militia regiments were more socially exclusive than the regular army and
ex-ranker officers were rare, aside from the Adjutants and Quartermasters.
They were often promoted NCOs and veterans of the French Wars, who
ran the cadres in county town barracks after the militia was stepped down
in 1815.?2
The idealised rank and file of the county militias were seen as poor but
loyal agricultural labourers, estate workers and cottagers of rural England.
Indeed, the militia was regarded as an offshoot of the economy of the
countryside, with poor militiamen given an opportunity to supplement
their meagre incomes with government money from soldiering militiamen's
families were paid separation allowances from the parish poor rates (unlike
those of the regulars), to supplement the established system of outdoor
poor relief. Even during the period of invasion threats half the embodied
regiment could be given furlough to help in their home counties harvests.
The transformation of the Volunteer movement into the more-discinlined
and paid local militia in 180g, in particular, was a godsend. It provided vital
earnings to the poor whose lives were being threatened by the Industrial
Revolution, changes in agriculture and by the economic dislocation thrown
up by Napoleon's Continental System.
The compulsory ballot to serve might have been expected to bring in a
wide social cross section of militiamen in the French Wars. In practice, these
rank and file were nearly all rural or urban poor The Volunteer regiment
of the 1790s and 18oos were exempt from the militia and other ballots and
composed of men from 'a higher class of life, of such description of men as it
and Administrators') for the 'trade' of the militia cadres.
72 Owen, History of the Welsh Militia, 13, 71, 94-95. See chap. 3 (Pensioners, Instructors
Class Structure and the British Army
59
would not be proper to mix with soldiers of the Line, and whom no one would
wish to see obliged to serve in the condition of a common soldier in a regular
regiment'. As personal service was not compulsory and the better off could
insure themselves against a bad number in the ballot, so many militiamen
were substitute volunteers, attracted by the large bounties on offer.?3
This link with the economy of the rural
poor was continued after
1815, with the 28 days a year paid training that disembodied militiamen
undertook. Throughout the nineteenth century, militiamen, whether part
time or embodied, continued to be drawn from the poor, particularly the
rural poor. In Buckinghamshire in the 1852 militia revival, over 9o per
cent of rank and file were agricultural labourers. The establishment of the
part-time Rifle Volunteer movement from 1859 included a sharp social
apartheid in the backgrounds of their respective rank and file, illustrated in
these observations from both officers and men:
The Militiaman is a man of casual employment, and the Volunteer is a
man of regular employment.
In Yorkshire the men of the Militia come from a lower stratum of the
working class than those of the Volunteers. The Militiaman in Yorkshire is
usually a workman in intermittent employment. The Volunteer is far more
intelligent and better educated.74
Even with the decline of the old landed establishment influence and their
incorporation into the Cardwell county regiments,
militiamen continued
to be largely recruited from the unskilled working class. Their traditionally
high desertion rate also continued until late in the century, reaching a figure
of 25 per cent a year between 1894 and 1899. In isolated counties the ancient
paternalistic privilege of the county elites could still be maintained over the
militia. In Northumberland, the Percys continued to command the militia
battalion after it was incorporated into the Northumberland Fusiliers, as
well as their own volunteer artillery, which had evolved from the Duke's
own Household Artillery?5
East India Company
As outlined in section Types of military service, in Chapter 1, above, the
private army of the EIC existed from the early seventeenth century until
73 Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition, 88 and 128-29 and quoted in Glenn A. Steppler,
Britons to Arms! (Stroud: Sutton, 1997), 21.
2* Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition, 15o and L.F.W. Becket, The Local Community
and the Amateur Military Tradition', ISAHR, 59 (1978), 94.
78 John K. Dunlop, The Development of the British Army, 1899-1914 (London: Methuen,
1938), 46-48 and Hewitson, Weekend Warriors from Tyne to Tweed, 37 and 107.
