Soldiers as Workers
Medical historian, Jacalyn Duffin, in a Canadian context, also queried why:
Military personnel of the early nineteenth century do not have a prominent
place in labour history ... yet during the period up to and including the
18405, British soldiers and militiamen were occupied with civilian public
works, such as road and canal building - works that by the effect on
economic activities contributed to the later emergence of class distinctions
and the resulting labour movement.
Also from a North American perspective, Peter Way asked:
While one can excuse military historians for not casting the soldiers as
workers, labor historians cannot so easily be let off the hook ... virtually
no work has been done on the subject of military labor ... Yet warfare
comprised the most heavily capitalised human enterprise at the time.
Way's accounts of common soldiers' 'proto class-consciousness' amongst
soldiers in mid-eighteenth-century North America, have been joined by
other scholars focusing on the cultural life of the rank and file. These
include Buckley's study of ethnicity and class in the Caribbean garrisons of
the Napoleonic Wars and Peter Stanley's narrative of the White Mutiny'
of 1858-59 - the general strike of the European troops of the East India
Company. Jennine Hurl-Eamon's recent work emphasises that Georgian
soldiers often had working lives separate from soldiering. She argues that
soldiers' marriages kept them part of their communities, rather than fostering
a separate existence in barracks that many historians suppose. Recent
publications around the Soldiers and Soldiering in Britain, 1750-1815 project
have raised the importance of the cultural history of soldiering?
In other areas of employment, labour historians have gradually been
extending their analysis to the unorganised, non-political, powerless and
often female, nineteenth-century poor.
Farmworkers
- a particularly
vulnerable occupational
group, with their homes linked to their work -
feature prominently in this, with attention given to their resistance. Examples
include Alun Howkins's notion of 'structural conflict' being resolved by
s Jacalyn Duffin, 'Soldiers' Work; Soldiers' Health: Morbidity, Mortality, and their
Causes in an 1840s British Garrison in Canada, Labour/Le Travail, 37 (1996), 37.
6 Peter Way 'Memoirs of an Invalid', in Donna T. Haverty-Stacke and Daniel
J. Walkowitz, Rethinking US Labor History (New York and London: Continuum, 2010), 27.
7 Roger Norman Buckley, The British Army in the West Indies: Society and the Military
in the Age of Revolution (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1998); Peter Stanley,
White Mutiny: British Military Culture in India, 1825-1875 (London: Hurst, 1998); Jennine
Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in the British Army in the Long Eighteenth Century: "The Girl I Left
Bebind Me (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014); and Nick Mansfield, Military Radicals
and the Making of Class, 1790-1860', in Catriona Kennedy and Matthew McCormack (eds),
Soldiering in Britain and Ireland, 1750-1850 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
Introduction
unofficial organisation and Keith Snell's proposal of 'deferential bitterness'
as applying to the rural poor over two centuries an 'Expression of class
hostility ... that combined elements of both conservative deference and
radical resistance.' Both may be transferable to class and common soldiers, as
also may be my own work on 'local patriotism' diffusing class consciousness
amongst early twentieth-century farmworkers.®
In a similar way to soldiers, domestic servants have largely been ignored by
labour (though not gender) historians, despite their undoubted importance
in the nineteenth-century workforce.
There have, however, been signs of
some interest in this field, with John Benson's review of the literature and
suggestions on how they could be incorporated into the labour historian's
world, and my own work on Cambridge college servants. This methodo-
logical approach can also be applied to soldiers?
This book focuses on class. It does not address race, gender, feminism
and masculinities, or the current interest in cultural history, unless it is
linked to class. Class is defined broadly as behaviours and attitudes based on
social and economic positions, and is influenced by Richard Hoggart, whose
conclusions rang true with my own experiences, rather than Karl Marx and
his successors. Since Thompson's The Making of the English Working Class,
there has been much debate about class amongst British historians. The
'linguistic turn' of the 198os, with its emphasis on culture, has been supple-
mented by historians concerned with its 'objective' and 'subjective' aspects.
Readers are referred elsewhere for this discussion, some of which is absorbed
The book uses official and published sources, both military and labour
histories, as well as the many rank-and-file memoirs that came out of the
Peninsular War and continued in the wars of Empire. As a casual visit to
any branch of a high street bookshop will reveal, military history literature is
8 Alun Howkins, Poor Labouring Men: Rural Radicalism in Norfolk, 1870-1923 (London:
Routledge, 1985), 15-30; K.D.M. Snell, 'Deferential Bitterness: The Social Outlook of the
Rural Proletariat in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century England and Wales', in M.L. Bush
(ed.), Social Orders and Social Classes in Europe Since 1500: Studies in Social Stratification
(London: Longman, 1992), 16s; and Mansfield, English Farmworkers and Local Patriotism,
chap. 6.
° For the discussion on the literature on servants from labour historians, see John Benson,
'One Man and his Women: Domestic Service in Edwardian England', Labour History
Review, 72(3) (2007), 204-14 and Mansfield, 'Grads and Snobs', 184-98.
10 Thompson and his critics (especially Gareth Stedman Jones, Patrick Joyce and James
Vernon), are summarised in Charles Tilly, Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758-1834
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), chap. I. For a recent summary of these
debates, see Geoff Eley and Keith Nield, The Future of Class in History (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2007).
