134
Soldiers as Workers
Nets for the General and his son besides numbers of Military officers and
Merchants. We used to get from 5 to 6 Dollars for each net the material
costing from 1½ to 2 Dollars.149
Particularly in the imperial postings, which became the norm, and especially
in isolated garrisons, where cheap indigenous labour did not exist, regiments
became self-contained and self-sufficient communities. They fulfilled their
own European standard of consumer demands and the more sophisticated
needs of modern civilisation that could be supplied from the pre-enlistment
skills of talented traders and artisan rankers, operating in their spare time.
Even in India, despite competition from cheaper local labour, post-Mutiny
racism and general lack of fatigue duties resulted in the CO of the 14th Light
Dragoons reporting that some men do work as tinmen, curriers, carpenters
and turner'. Private Michael Fennerty of the t6th Lancers was a monumental
mason, who in 1828 inscribed the tomb of a Greck merchant in Delhi. In
the same decade, Sergeant George Carter of the EIC Europeans carried on
his trade as a bookbinder. In 1878, the new regimental iournal of the goth
Foot, published in India, carried advertisements from artisans soliciting
work from fellow rankers, like F. Wilton, Clockmaker and Thomas Wardall,
Regimental Printer. Presumably, tradesmen like these had established quite
sizeable premises. Other examples are 'Special artist Photographer Colour
Sergeant I. Hull of the Northamptonshire Regiment at Secunderabad in
1896, and Corporal James Hutchinson of the ist Inniskilling Fusiliers, a
self-taught photographer, who mastered complicated processes to develop
and hand colour photographs, specialising in Edwardian exotic photographs
of China. 150
Sometimes craftsmen concentrated on an export market. Many soldiers
of the and in the Punjab caught butter fies and moths, or purchased them
from local inhabitants, and made them up into decorative cases. which could
be sold for as much as e5 or 610 in England! Sergeant Gould of the z6th
Lancers also made up cases of exotic butterflies and beetles and O' Neill of
the EIC dealt in matchlocks, jassails, ancient Greek coins procured at Cabul!
and other trifles' 151
This handicraft culture was still evident in the Edwardian period. Frank
Richards of the Royal Welch Fusiliers described:
149 Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire, 69.
150 Quoted in Anglesey, History of the British Cavalry, vol. 2, 359; Rumsby, The Sixtenth
Lancers, 176; Peers, Between Mars and Mammon, 82-83; LIM, The Sentinel 4 Feb. 1878); and
Arthur S. White, A Bibliography of Regimental Histories of the British Army (London: Society
for Army Historical Research, 1965), 297. Hutchinson's photographs are recorded in Bill
Jackson (ed.), The Corporal and the Celestials (Belfast: Ulster Historical Foundation, 2008).
151 Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 176.
Soldiers as Workers
Two men whom I knew very well. even denied themselves a smoke in their
endeavour to save as much money as they possibly could before returning
to civilian life. These two were expert knitters: they bought wool from the
Bazaar with which they knitted jerseys with fancy designs, and blow belts,
for keeping money in, which a large number of men wore around their
waists. They made a handsome profit out of their work 152
135
Adventurers and settlers
Many rankers, especially NCOs, relished onnortunities to chow initiative
and shoulder responsibilities. Some NCOs were trusted to undertake exotic
and isolated missions. Examples include the few 'NCOs, together with arms
and ammunition to the Indians [Creek and Choctawl' sent to aid them
against Andrew Jackson in August 1814, Or the corporal and four privates
of the igth Light Dragoons that accompanied radical General Sir Robert
Wilson, the British envoy to Russia, during the 1812 and 1813 campaigns. 153
The growth of the British Empire, both in the 1815 peace settlement and
thereafter through wars of conquest, opened up amazing chances for rankers
smitten with wanderlust. Skilled or trusted soldiers, especially from the
Sappers and Miners, were often used in Victorian exploration. As early as
18t6, ten men of the Guards and Royal Staff Corps joined a disastrous search
for the source of the Niger, in which most died of disease In Australia
in 18r7, Thomas Thacker, a literate ranker of the 18th Foot, accompanied
surveying expeditions as a clerk and walked 25o miles back to Botany Bay
with a message, despite an injured arm,
earning NCO's stripes. Eight
Sappers - attracted by double pay - joined the Niger expedition of 1847 ta
blast the rocks hampering the passage. Corporal Edwards accompanied a
later Niger expedition, had a dalliance with an Ibo Princess, and ended his
working life as Foreman of Works at Portland Prison. Sergeant Thomas
Sim and two artificers opened up the Euphrates steam navigation route
an astronomic observation to Lake Chad in 1853, tasked with care of its
scientific equipment. Macquire was murdered by locals but Church managed
to return to Britain after two years in the bush. A Wiltshire mason by trade,
then trained by the Royal Engineers as a photographer, he was discharged
with a pension in 186g, after 22 years' service as a Quartermaster Sergeant
Instructor. 154
152 Richards, Old Soldier Sahib, 129 and 164.
153 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 10, 150 and Antony Brett James (ed.), General
Wilson's Journal (London: William Kimber, 1964), 87.
154 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 35; 'Note 1325, JSAHR, 69 (1991), 263-64; 'Note 1325,
JSAHR, 70 (1992), 134; and Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 354 and 385.
