92
Soldiers as Workers
workers who produced it. By 190o, the typical cantonment of the Indian
Raj, which most late-Victorian soldiers would have encountered during their
careers, contained a regimental dairy and bakery, plus a regimental bazaar,
supervised if not staffed by cooks and their teams. In addition, as discussed
later, rankers were sometimes allowed to set up their own supplementary
catering businesses.50
Gardening was a constant activity in remote postings where regular fresh
food supply was doubtful. As early as the 175os, detachments in Canada were
designating a soldier as gardener, who was then Excused from all other
duty and expected 'Constantly to Attend on yt business? The 48th Foot,
the garrison of New South Wales in the early 1820s, ran a market garden
and a windmill for grain to supplement their rations, under the supervision
of a Sergeant Whelan. As late as 191t, the East Lancashires officer' mess
employed a kitchen gardener: 'A soldier to be employed as gardener at tos
Napoleon's armies had detachments of masons in their vanguards to
build bread ovens for the advancing columns. Though this was not th
British practice, masons in the ranks were useful in the Peninsular War in
improving home comforts includino catering. In the sprino of thra afte
inspecting snow on the foor of a field hospital for the Highlanders of the
42nd Foot, General Edward Pakenham acted: "His lordship enquired of the
colonel if he had not some masons or bricklayers in the regiment, if so to
in preparing winter quarters in Portuguese villara te burn 11 the
skill our masons possessed to the construction of firenlaces that would no
smoke, and it required all their knowledge ... to succeed even in nart' 52
Hospitals, military police and transport
In the nineteenth century, hospitals were run by individual unite under the
supervision of regimental surgeons. These were established in barracks of
so See my unpublished paper. 'Class, Food and the Nineteenth-Century Birich Arm
given at the conference 'Food and Drink. Their Social Palitical and Culenral Histories, X6
June 2011 at University of Central Lanca hire Holmee Soldiers, 520-3 and Richards, Old
Soldier Sahib, 84.
51 George Yagi Ir., 'Surviving the Wilderness: The Diet of the British Army and the
Struggle for Canada, 1754-1760', JSAHR. 8a (2011), 77: Sergeant. Colonial Carrison. 27 and
121-22; and LIM, Mess Rules goth Regiment Isid our the regiment had heen renamed the ist
East Lancashire Regiment thirty years before).
Life in Wellington's Army, 49-51.
32 R.H. Rov led). The Memoirs of Private lames Cunn IS AR do from corand Tames,
Soldiers as Workers
93
colonial garrisons or improvised on campaigns. Under a Hospital Sergeant,
soldiers - often convalescents - were seconded as hospital orderlies and were
paid an extra 4d. per day. The orderlies were generally despised by fighting
soldiers for offering minimal care. Sergeant Cooper of the 7th Fusiliers
reported of his stay in a Peninsular military hospital: 'Shirt unchanged and
sticking to my sore back; ears running stinking matter; a man lying close on
my right hand with both of his legs mortified nearly to the knees, and dying.
A little sympathy would have soothed, but sympathy there was none.
The
orderlies were brutes? Sometimes such work was related to pre-enlistment
experience. Thomas Morgan, Hospital Sergeant of the r6th Lancers, for
example, was a druggist. Hospital staff were notorious for claiming perks,
and worse, potentially robbing their comrades: "The post can be a powerful
and a profitable one, involving procurement of drugs, and other supplies for
the regimental hospital? Hospital Sergeant George Calladine of the i6th
Lancers, made &s to e6 per month in the UK, on washing alone. In India,
the EIC paid an extra retainer of to rupees to hospital staff. Though they
became more professionalised in the post-Crimea reforms with the formation
of the Army Hospital Corps, its unsavoury reputation was maintained. The
Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) was formed in 1898, but the rest of
the army claimed this stood for 'Rob all my Comrades'53
The office of Provost Marshal was an early modern creation, tasked
with policing the potentially troublesome army and punishing criminals.
Punishments were harsh and the Provost Marshal could administer summary
justice in the field. He needed staff to carry out his commands. In the
Peninsular War, the Provost Marshal had the support of another (junior)
officer and 3o cavalry troopers, plus a clerk and an executioner. (There were
40 hangings in the course of the war, plus many judicial shootings.) Each
division of around ten regiments appointed attached Sergeants as Assistant
Provost Marshals, amounting to 24 in total. They enioved the temporary pay
and allowances - but not the status - of an Ensign, the lowest commissioned
rank. From 1813, these police were backed up by a small Cavalry Staff Corps,
an offshoot of the Horse Guards' own engineers.54
In the post-1815 Army of Occupation in France, rumbling discipline
problems, such as when 'soldiers of 43rd broke into a store in Bapaume and
drank +hemselves into a stupor' led to the appointment of Assistant Provost
Marshals in each regiment. Steady Colour Sergeants, like John Ward of
the 3oth Foot, employed small squads of trusted seconded rankers to act as
regimental military policemen. Thomas Morris of the 73rd, also serving in
53 Cooper, Rough Notes of Seven Campaigns, 150; Rumsby, "The Sixteenth Lancers', 43 and
270; Dival, Inside the Regiment, 190; and Roper, Records of the War Office, 2a7.
54 Divall, Inside the Regiment, 142-43 and Holmes, Soldiers, 543-44
