32
Soldiers as Workers
by Robert Edmondson, a Squadron Sergeant Major in the Boer War: quite
eighty per cent of our soldiers are the victims of "Hobson's choice". It is the
Army or starvation with them. And empty pockets and hungry stomachs are
the most eloquent and persuasive of recruiting sergeants.'8
Comparative treatment of the rank and file and officers
Throughout the century, rank-and-file soldiers consistently received much
worse treatment than officers in every single aspect of their military lives:
pay, dress, accommodation, leave, discipline and justice.
Pay
Pay for private soldiers remained at e18 5s. od. per year, between 1792 and
1866. This worked out at the famous shilling a day' (i.e., Sp), before the
numerous stoppages - for clothing supplied extra to regular issues, minor
equipment and consumables. Cavalry troopers were paid a little more: IS.
3d. a day after 1797, rising to is. Ird. in the more socially elite Household
Cavalry. NCOs were also paid more, with Corporals at is. 2¼d. and
Sergeants on is. 6%d. a day. In 1806, extra pay was introduced for length of
service, with one penny per day extra after seven years in the infantry or ten
years in the cavalry and twopence per day after 14 and I7 years. In addition,
the French Wars recognised the responsibilities of NCOs with, in 1813, a rise
for Corporals to is. 4d. and Sergeants to is. Iod., and for the new senior rank
of Colour Sergeant in every infantry company, 2s. 4d. a day.
The most junior commissioned officers (Ensigns) were paid more than the
most experienced senior NCOs, with the RSMs at the top on 2s. Ild. a day.
Ensigns, from 1806, were paid 8 shillings a day. Senior regimental officers
earned much more, with Lieutenant Colonels in charge of a regiment on €310
ss. od. a year. Even with this payment, many officers could not afford to live
in the UK without a significant private income, especially in elite regiments
like the Guards and the cavalry, where officers were expected themselves to
maintain two horses.10
There were wide differences in how officers and rankers could determine
and spend their wages. Though officers had to buy their own uniforms
* Cobbets Weekly Political Pampblet, 32(37, 13 Dec. 1817, II46, quoted in Floud et al.,
Height, Health and History, III; Grey, 'Soldiering in Victorian Days', 54, and quoted in
Holmes, Soldiers, xxv and xxvi.
› Carole Divall, Inside the Regiment: The Officers and Men of the goth Regiment during the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (Barnsley: Pen & Sword, 201t), 59-60; Divall, Redcoats
against Napoleon, 109; and Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 60.
10 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 60 and French, Military Identities, 52.
Class Structure and the British Army
33
and were charged for their food through mess fees, they could use their
higher pay, and any private income, to plan their expenditure. Soldiers by
contrast were subject to compulsory 'stoppages' for any clothing and kit
above their regular issue and any alterations that had to be made to these
'necessaries. They also had to pay for cleaning equipment, underwear, food
outside regular rations, laundering, cleaning materials, haircuts and barrack
room damages.
Colonels,
Captains in charge
in companies,
Ouarter-
masters,
Paymasters and the regimental tradesmen (tailors, shoemakers
and armourers) could all make a charge for their compulsory services and
supply of equipment. With each layer potentially taking a cut, net income
for rankers was confusing even to experienced soldiers. This system endured
for most of the nineteenth century. Despite low inflation, the privates®
shilling a day was an even lower wage than every other working-class
occupation, including unskilled day labourers, though, with subsidised basic
clothing, food and accommodation, these differences were lessened. It was
the decrease in deductions after the Crimea War that raised rankers' real
incomes, together with the ruling of a minimum one penny a day after
deductions. Not until after the Boer War was the average basic private's
wage raised to IIs. 4½d. a week.11
For most of the nineteenth century, with the exception of the fortunate
'seven-year men' (soldiers who had enlisted under the 1806 legislation),
pensions were only given in the case of severe disability. Some places for the
infirm were also available at the Chelsea or Kilmainham Military Hospitals.
Many ex-servicemen, unable to earn a living, were forced onto the Poor
Law. By contrast, officers could mostly live in reasonable comfort on their
half-pay, obtained when they resigned and sold their commissions. Many
senior officers and some juniors who had done well from trade, prize money
or loot, could lead wealthy and comfortable retirements.
Dress
Officers and men wore different uniforms. Officers' dress, which they had
to purchase themselves, was more elaborate, of a fine-quality cloth and
handmade to measure, usually by civilian tailors. NCOs' and privates'
clothing was mass-produced by War Office contractors or government-
owned factories after the Crimean War. They were often ill-fitting, despite
the alterations to standard sizes, which had to be made by regimental tailors,
paid for by the soldiers themselves. Even the traditional red coat - worn
since the time of Cromwell, was of a different colour, with officers sporting
" Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 6o; Michael Roper, Records of the War Office and Related
Departments, 1660-1914 (London: Public Records Office, 1998), 67; and Spiers, Army and
Society, 14, 53, 54 and 55-
