136
Soldiers as Workers
Some soldiers went on to achieve extraordinary careers in the Empire.
Charles Fraser (1788-1831), a Scottish gardener who enlisted in 1815, was
part of the garrison of New South Wales with the 48th Foot. He joined the
Swan River and other expeditions collecting fora, was appointed colonial
botanist in 1827, at s shillings a day, and went on to found the Sydney
Botanic Gardens. He rates an entry in the Dictionary of Australian Biography.
Another Scotsman, William Glass, had worked as a groom for the Duke of
Roxburgh's estate before enlisting as a driver in the Royal Artillery in the
French Wars. Promoted Corporal, he was part of a small British garrison on
the remote South Atlantic island of Tristan Da Cunha, established to keep
watch on Napoleon in exile on St Helena. When the troops withdrew, he
elected to stay with his family and established a paternalistic Utopia on th
colony until his death in 1853. He may have been in fuenced by the ideas of
Thomas Spence (1750-1814), the radical theorist, since Glass's constitution
declares: the stock and stores of every description... shall be considered
as belonging equally to each' and that in oraption ensure the harmony of
the Firm no member shall assume any superiority whatsoever but all to be
considered as equal in every respect. Private Charles Masson (alias James
Lewis) of the EIC's Bengal Horse Artillery, 'deserted after the siege of
Bhurtpore and went on to become a celebrated explorer of central Asia. He
was also a pioneer archaeologist and a semi-legendary early participant in
the 'Great Game' 155
In various parts of the Empire, offers of 'virgin' land were often made to
soldiers nearing the end of their contracts as a means of populoting imperial
frontiers with suitable martially inclined settlers. This process started after
she American Revolution when soldiers, especially American loyalists, were
settled in Canada, but it scems to have stalled after 1815. Cookson's recent
detailed work on Scottish potential settlers after the French Wars argues
that few military pensioners wanted to settle in the Empire and emphasises
the ease with which they got back into civil society. Indeed, 9o per cent
of ex-servicemen returned to Scotland, with 75 per cent returning to their
native parishes.156
After 1815, settlement schemes had varied outcomes. On the borders of
155 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 35, Frazer, Charles (1788-1831) (http:/adb.anu.edu.au/
biography/frazer-charles- 2068); William Glass (www.kelso.bordernet.co.k/people/william-
glass.html); 'At the Edge of the World, Independent, 9 Aug- 2005, 13. For Spence, see
Malcolm Chase, The People's Farm: English Radical Agrarianism, 1775-1840 (Oxford: Clarendon
iranicaonline.org/articles/masson-charles).
Press, 1988); Stanley, ""Highly Infammatory Writings"', 232; and Masson, Charles' (www.
156 Maya Jasanofi, Libertys Exiles: The Loss of America and the Remaking of the British Empire
Homecoming Soldiers', 326.
(London: Harper, 201), 87 and Cookson, 'Early Nineteenth Century Military Pensioners as
Soldiers as Workers
137
the Cape Colony, grants given by Sir Harry Smith in 1819 to disbanded
men of the Royal African Corps (a penal corps; see the section "Deliberate
crime and penal corps, in Chapter 4, below) seem to have been remarkably
successful in providing a cheap defence against the Kaffirs. Thirty years later,
they were still thought to be effective against raiders. In Canada, partly as
reaction to high desertion rates to the USA, the settlement programme
was extended, as Canadian self-government developed. However, in 1830,
an ambitious scheme by Lord Grey for 3,000 ex-soldiers to forego their
pensions in lieu of grants of land in Canada was an appalling failure, with
most participants reduced to penury. A Royal Canadian Rifle Regiment was
specially formed in 1839. A higher percentage than line regiments of wives
on the strength' was allowed, to encourage reliable married soldiers, who
were then offered land grants after their retirements In New Zeland, after
the First Maori War in 1846, 500 ex-servicemen located at Auckland 'proved
to be idle, intemperate recruits with little taste for farming' 157
Small-scale, organic settlement seems to have worked better than these
grand schemes. Fifty-seven members of the 48th Foot settled in New South
Wales after the end of their seven-year tour in 1824, most buying or marrying
into land. Typical was Quartermaster Sergeant George MacDonald, who
came to the colony as a First Fleet marine and bought or inherited i3o acres.
Some land grants were also made available bu the Governor but were often
unsuccessful: 'The Military habits of these people, render them the worst
and discontented. 158
description of Settlers, being almost universally lazy, dissipated, turbulent
Pensioners, instructors and administrators
Army pensions, administered by Chelsea Hospital, were generally hard to
get. Only awarded for serious wounds, injury or debility through service,
they were variable throughout the century The pressing manpower needs of
the French Wars briefly led to the establishment of short-term enlistments
and offers of pensions, but fraud and escalating costs resulted in widespread
tightening up. Nonetheless, the an assalating costs resuitment liabilities,
which reached a peak of 86,000 pensioners in 1828 and continued at this level
until the mid-century. Later those pensioners who were deemed fit had to earn
their money by compulsory enrolmens in a special force to be used against
the Chartists. Disinclination to serve or voicing radical opinions resulted in
its withdrawal, with 8,720 mustered by 1847-48. Volunteer pensioners also
157 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. I1, 396, vol. 12, 520 and vol. II, 440; Burroughs,
'A Unreformed Army?, 167; and Burroughs, Tackling Army Desertion', 66.
158 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 106 and 131.
