64
Soldiers as Workers
Sergeant Donaldson, a middle-class Scottish
ranker, who served
throughout the Peninsular War and eventually trained as a doctor, was
equally critical of most of his officers throughout his memoir: 'supercilious
overbearing tyrants who think their fellow-men [were] created to be their
slaves, and ignorant swaggering coxcombs, whose puppyism must disgust
all under their command'. Some evidence exists to show that officers from
humble backgrounds were admired by soldiers and enjoyed a friendlier
relationship with their men. An example is Major Peter O Hare of the 5th
Rifles, killed during the assault of Badajoz in 1812, who was often called
by his first name by his men, though this was in an informal regiment,
nearly always in skirmishing order, where more mutual dependence was
necessary.85
Private criticisms of officers' behaviour and the subservient position of
soldiers continued in the post war period. An unknown grenadier in 18405
complained:
In India the men of the army are generally looked upon as so many pieces
of one great machine that is passive in the hands of the engineer: and as
to the sense of feeling, that is not thought of, the private soldier is looked
upon as the lowest class of animals, and only fit to be ruled with the cat
o'nine tails and the Provost Sergeant.
In the same period, Private Waterfield of the and Foot, described one of his
officers as conceited a little fop as ever carried one of Her Majesty's sword'
and a poor vain weak man'. He also compared the punishments given for
similar antics: many other officers) pranks would be played with impunity
and be the common topic of conversation in the mess room the next day.
Whilst a poor private for staying out till to or it o'clock at night would be
punished more severely than what a common thief would be in any gaol?
Unsurprisingly, radical Sergeant Pearman of the 3rd Light Dragoons, also
in India in the 1840s, contrasted the punishment of officers' bad behaviour
with that of his comrades: Many an officer as taken more in other ways
and not got flogged', and especially their complicity in looting: our own
Commander in Chief had many things given to him'?86
Gunner Love of the Royal Artillery ruefully compared at length his
treatment after the Crimea War to that meted out by Russian officers to
their rankers:
Lord Raglan the Commander in Chief rode past ….. and he said go on men
with what you are doing and keep up your hearts, it will soon be over and
» Donaldson, Recollections, 354 (see also criticisms on 45, 64 and 133) and Urban, Rifles, 46.
a Quoted in Colley, Captives, 314; Arthur Swinson (ed.), The Memoirs of Private Waterfeld
(London: Cassell, 1968), 16 and 145; and Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 178.
Class Structure and the British Army
your country will reward you when you get home. But I am sorry to say,
that it was a long time before it was over: and as for our countrys reward
.. what did the British Soldier get for his hardships they had to endure,
during that memorable siege ... Nothing but after we came home we were
served out with new clothes, and had to go on short pay to pay for them,
and the men that were not fit to serve after they got home were discharged
with perhaps 6 pence or 8 pence per day for 6 or 8 months and he must
have been a very good charseter to get that, and if not able to work go into
the workhouse or starve, that was the reward the common herd got, now
how were the men that we were contending against get treated, for their
service in Sebastopol and they were not exposed to the weather as we were,
but here is the diferance they were well fed well clothed and beds to lay
on, and stone walls to keep them from the weather.
People may call emperor Alexander of Russia a despot or by whatever
name they think proper to call him; but he had respect for his men and
every man that stood the siege was given i2 months' service for every
month they served during the time the siege lasted, and all honour be to
his name for that alone.87
The thread continues into the 188os,
this time with a more political
edge, from 'soldier-socialists', who will be explored elsewhere. According to
Ex-Sergeant Horace Wyndham, who joined the Marxist Social Democratic
Federation after discharge: When he is facing the enemy the average private
would much rather follow an intelligent lance corporal than somebody who
is all blue blood and no brains! His fellow socialist, Robert Blatchford,
ex-Sergeant of the lord Foot, who became a popular journalist and founder
of the Clarion movement, opined: 'An excellent thing for the Army would
be promotion from the ranks. Get a few good sergeants made officers, and
the "gentlemen" will have to wake up, or be left?»
Men who preferred to be led by gentlemen
In contrast to the criticisms above and linked perhaps to the ruffians-
led-by-gentlemen theory discussed earlier, a number of memoirs claimed
that rankers preferred being officered by real gentlemen.
The majority of
these views are from officers inferring the opinions of their men, but some
assenting conclusions do appear in rank-and-file memoirs.
The most often
quoted is from Benjamin Harris, a Dorset shepherd and shoemaker, who
87 S.W. Jackman (ed) Crimean Experiences by William Love, JSHR, 60(1982), i and
88 Quoted in Skeley, Victorian Army at Home, 202 and also quoted in Anglesey, 4 History
of the British Cavalry, vol. 2, 381.
65
