124
Soldiers as Workers
was twenty, that of the line eighteen, and that of the Cavalry was eleven
in the thousand? This was compared with an average civilian rate of 3,5 per
thousand. 125
The Guards' minimum height requirement of s foot g inches (175 cm)
made it more difficult to recruit in the late-Victorian period. Not only did
they have to compete with the civilian labour market, but the militarycould
offer better paid opportunities for big men as artillerymen These were
needed especially to manoeuvre large equipment in the recently formed,
and generally home-based, Royal Garrison Artillery. With a more profes
sionalised service, the earlier outside employment possibilities in the Guards
declined. After the Cardwell reforms introduced short-term rank-and-fle
enlistment, recruitment improved slightly. There is evidence that young men
from respectable working-class families joined the Guards as a deliberate
career move. After only three years in the ranks, they would be better placed
to join the Metropolitan police. 126
General labouring
Though difficult to gauge in scale, casual outside employment of soldiers
appears to have been widespread when stationed in Britain. Sometimes this
had official sanction: From Iyy the gist Regiment kept a book for recording
the names and behaviour of all given permission to work'. This is confirmed
by the recent work of Jennine Hurl-Eamon. Such traditional practices wer
more problematic in key overseas garrisons, with soldiers on eighteenth-
century Gibraltar being prosecuted for working as porters.!27
Given the paucity of available manpower during the mass motification
of the French Wars, men stationed in Britain were often given time off
to help with harvesting, for which they were paid by farmers. This was
especially so in the militia, with its high percentage of agricultural workers
and paternalistic relations with its officers. In the Cambridgeshire Militia,
furloughs were given to men to journey to their home areas. In good years
half the regiment would be off harvesting in August and September. By the
harvest of t8or, with the lessening of the threat of invasion, only one tenth
of the regiment was retained in its barracks at Colchester.128
125 May, Military Barracks, 19 and at and Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 13, 538.
126 Spiers, Late Victorian Army, 124 and French, Military Identities, 35-
127 G.A. Steppler, 'Regimental Records in the Late Eighteenth Century and the Social
History of the British Soldier, Archivaria (summer 1988), 13; Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in
the British Army, chap. 6; and Tatum, The Soldiers Murmured Much', 99, in Linch and
McCormack, Britain's Soldiers.
Book, 180r-03, L 79-4.
128 Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition, 68 and CRO, Cambridgeshire Militia Order
Soldiers as Workers
125
Other, less-vital work was tolerated even during the wars, though it could
be hazardous. In 1814, after recruiting duties,
Sergeant Benjamin Miller
returned to the artillery depot in Woolwich: 'On settling my account, I
was 40 pounds in the agent's debt and got leave to work until I was clear?'
Whilst working for a local builder Miller fell from a ladder. was seriousl
injured and subsequently discharged. That same year, two privates of the grd
Dragoons doing some freelance well sinking at Canterbury were poisoned
when descending a foul well and labourer Private Potter of the North York
Militia had his head fatally crushed loading timber onto a cart. Such odd
jobs for locals sometimes took place when billeted overseas.
Somerset man
Thomas Knight of the gsth Rifes, when stationed in Belgium prior to
the Waterloo campaign, was befriended by a farmer and assisted him at
ploughing, and men of the rath Foot were recorded working for peasants,
weeding fax and corn and planting potatoes.129
With the peace, outside work continued under supervision and was
acknowledged in some standing orders: 'No soldier is ever to be suffered
to Work without the anorobation of the for commanding his company.'
Such toleration even extended to notential aids to decertion: any man
that has leave to work must never appear in his uniform but must provide
himself with clothes for the purpose.
In theory, NCOs were excluded
from this private world of work bu their superior position in the military
class structure. 'No ACO is ever tn be emnloved personally on anv dutv
of fatigue, nor is ever to be seen holding or leading a horse on the street,
carrying a bundle, basket etc, etc, or in any way to appear below the dignity
of an NCO: 130
The Guards, especially the better-paid Household Cavalry,
took
advantage of longer postings around London and Windsor, to work and
then buv houses of land Trooners of the Roval Horse Guarde are recorded
farming their own plots around Windsor Castle along with even better paid
specialists like Armourer Sergeant Sam Morton who joined the and Life
Guards in 1812 and retired in t8e7. This trend increased in distant colonint
stations unlikely to be disturbed by war. Private
Robert Reid of the 48th
Foot, stationed in New South Wales, signed an indenture to work for a rich
settler in 1820. Shortage of labour in Canada gave plentiful opportunities for
outside work, but such was the danger of desertion in this posting that the
military authorities were reluctant to sanction it. This did not stop employers
from offering jobs and shelter to soldiers on the run. The farmers of Prince
Edward Island and lumbermen of New Brunswick were particularly known
129 Adventures of Serjeant Benjamin Miller, 43; Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 72; Knight,
British Battalion at Oporto, 14; and James, Life in Wellington's Army, 219.
130 LIM, 8and Regiment Standing Orders (Dublin, 1844), 13 and 17.
