50
Soldiers as Workers
Sergeants running things
Most regimental management fell to the NCOs, who were responsible for:
(The discipline of the corps ... For it is more immediately their business,
than that of the commissioned-officers, to instruct and form the soldiers;
and from continual intercourse with them they have it in their power
to attend to matters which cannot so well come under the notice of the
others.
According to Sergeant Tale of i5th Hussars: Whether in barracks, quarters,
or on the line of march, the sergeant held his own Squad, and was more or
less held accountable for their conduct?50
The pinnacle of this structure was the RSM, who, according to a
leading military manual: 'must be thoroughly acquainted with all the
details which regard the interior management and discipline of a regiment?
William Cobbett later recalled his service as RSM of the 54th Foot in
Nova Scotia in 1784 in his typically cocksure style: 'In my regiment I was
everything; the whole corps was under my control? He also made a case
for the unfairness of the system, lumping in effete officers with his enemy
'Old Corruption:
We had a corps of Serjeants infinitely more able to command than our
corps of commissioned officers were; and if the due merit was given, it
would be seen upon all occasions, that to the serjeants and the corporals,
nine tenths of the skill of a campaign fairly belong.
There was one of our sergeants whose name was Smaller ... he was
promoted as soon as he could write and read; and he well deserved it, for
he was more fit to command a regiment than any Colonel or Major that
Persons who have no experience ... think that the tyranny he suffers
is from his officers, the truth being that a soldier comes very little in
contact with his officers. [apart from] The drill sergeant, rough-riders,
riding master, regimental sergeant-major ... if a soldier keeps out of the
guard-house ... he may be a soldier for years without an officer speaking
to him personally. To dare approach an officer was unthinkable.
50 John Williamson, The Elements of Military Arrangement (t79), quoted in Haythorn-
thwaite, Redcoats, 96; also quoted in Mollo, Prince's Dolls, 60.
» Quoted in Divall, Inside the Regiment, 8o; also quoted in Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, 75;
also quoted in David A. Wilson, Paine and Cobbett (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University
Press, 1988), 10r; and Cobbett's Weekly Political Pamphlet, 32(37), 13 Dec. 1817, 1146.
Class Structure and the British Army
51
Even in the supposedly more paternalistic militia, Private Mayett claimed
'No Soldier dared go to an Officer unless a Sergeant or Corporal went with
him? Many accounts also emphasise that sergeants were capable of cruelty
and bullying towards their charges, especially in helping the newly enlisted
to spend their bounty money.52 In the artillery, whose more technical officers
were the least affected by class, few took part in management:
INJot being permanently attached to specific companies, [officers] took
little interest in the battery instruction and instead left it to the NCOs.
Of the four batteries at Woolwich in January 1849, it was claimed that 'not
By the time of the Crimean War, Sergeant Timothy Gowing of the 7th
Fusiliers concluded: '[It] was an army of lions led by donkeys. More than
half the officers did not know how to manoeuvre a company - all, or nearly
so, had to be left to non-commissioned officers - but it would be impossible
to dispute their bravery for they were brave unto madness.'54
Compared to that of officers, however, NCO promotion was a meritocracy.
Even though all NCOs operated solely within the regiment or corps in
which they had enlisted, by the late-Victorian period, and especially after the
introduction of Warrant officers in 1879, an elaborate structure existed just
below commissioned rank. French records: 'By 1892 there were no fewer than
twenty grades of Warrant Officer, ninety-eight different grades of sergeant,
and sixteen different grades of corporal and lance corporal?55
Ex-ranker officers
tish NCOs promoted to oficers rank were fev compared with those
other armies in post-revolutionary Europe:
Napoleon's troops fought in bright fields where every helmet caught some
beams of glory, but the British soldier conquered under the cold shade of
aristocracy; no honours awaited his daring; no dispatch gave his name
to the applauses of his countrymen, his life of danger and hardship was
uncheered by hope, his death unnoticed.
Napier's rhetoric is confirmed by subsequent research. In France, 77 per cent
of Napoleon's junior officers began as simple soldiers, and this tradition
52 Alexander Somerville, The Autobiography of a Working Man (London: Turnstile Press,
195t [18481), 134-35 and Kussmaul, Autobiography of Joseph Mayett, 34.
53 Quoted in Hew Strachan, From Waterloo to Balaclava: Tactics, Technology and the British
Army, 1815-1854 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 107.
54 Quoted in Holmes, Redcoat, 123.
55 French, Military Identities, 171.
