38
Soldiers as Workers
leave. Even during the Peninsular War many senior officers were allowed to
return to the UK when the army was in winter quarters.21
After the first fall of Napoleon in 1814, the cavalry of Wellingtons
victorious Peninsular army returned to Britain, riding from the south of
France. Officers of the Hussar brigade were given a week's leave to visit
Paris. By the 187os, officers stationed at home were entitled to two and a half
months a year hunting leave. British officers also took the fox hunting craze
overseas. The army of occupation in France after Waterloo occupied their
time with hunting and the select Royal Calpe Hunt enlivened the dismal
posting of Gibraltar for officers. Packs of hounds even accompanied armies
in the field, from the Peninsular War, via the disastrous Afghan campaign
of t842, through to the Great War in France and the Middle East, right up
to Lebanon in 1942. Hunting leave was still being granted to British cavalry
officers in the i97os. The social apartheid between ranks was seen in other
sporting fields, though by the 1840s there were regimental sports teams
that contained officers, NCOs and men. In the Montreal garrison, the ist
Highland Light Infantry had mixed ericket and curling teams. But when the
latter played civilian clubs, separate dinners had to be arranged for officers
and other ranks.22
Troops taking the long voyage to India in the t8gos were not allowed to
disembark when at Cape Town for fear of desertion, whilst their officers
were allowed ten days' shore leave. Once there, the rank and file were given
no home leave in a posting which averaged at t3 years, whilst officers enjoyed
long absences back to the UK.23
Military justice
Nineteenth-century officers enjoyed many varied privileges of their rank
which would be considered unjust in a modern age. Soldiers were bound to a
fiercely rigid legal code in which their crimes were judged by a court martial
consisting entirely of officers, with harsh punishments, often corporal, for
any infringements. Though military law also held good for officers, barring
exceptional treasonable crimes, which in practice were almost unknown,
their most severe punishment was to be 'cashiered. With this, officers
were discharged with ignominy and lost the total value of their purchased
21 H. Moyse-Bartlett, Military Historiography, 1850-1860', JSAHR, 45 (1967), 211.
23 John Mollo, The Princes Dolls (London: Leo Co-pet, 1997); Anglesey, History of the
British Cavalry, vol. 3, 99; Nick Mansfield, 'Foxhunting and the Yeomanry: County Identity
and Military Culture, in R.W. Hoyle, Our Hunting Fathers: Field Sports in England after 1850
Lancaster: Carnegie, 2007), 24t-56; and Elinor Kyte Senior, British Regulars in Montreal: An
Imperial Garrison, 1832-1854 (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1981), 177.
23 Holmes, Sahib, 104 and Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 169.
Class Structure and the British Army
39
commission. Though rare, such penalties were sometimes used, particularly
when the hard drinking culture spilled over into alcoholism in hot colonial
postings. Even here, with total incompetence and debility demonstrated,
it could take several courts martial of the unfortunate officer for him to
be dismissed. This is demonstrated by the series of trials of Ensign John
Herring of the 3oth Foot in Trichinopoly, India in 1810 and 18I1, which led
to his dismissal. Occasionally, too, officers found guilty of cowardice could
be cashiered, whilst rankers guilty of the same crime would face hanging or
at least the lash. Officers' courts martial were amongst those rare situations
when the separate worlds of the ranker and his officer could collide, and
soldiers were understandably nervous when they had to give evidence against
their social betters, who could make their lives very unpleasant. Buckley
reminds us that while the harsh military codes were leniently applied to
officers, their often raucous behaviour and touchy honour, did lead to many
prosecutions: 'officers - particularly the junior ranks of ensign and lieutenant
- were an ill disciplined lot. Over 16 per cent of all courts martial in the
French Wars were held on officers, a much higher percentage than those
held on the rank and file.24
Supine rankers
The nineteenth-century military regarded soldiers as of inferior capability
- like children, with no views of their own, who needed officers to order
them about because they would be unable to exercise initiative. This was
linked to the widespread view that docile rural recruits made the best
soldiers. Officers used to dealing with their servants in the countryside in a
paternalistic way could feel comfortable exercising authority over rank and
file of this type. Examples of supine behaviour were given ranging from
the widespread dysfunctional binge drinking, when opportunity allowed
during the Peninsular War, to incidents like the Vellore Mutiny in Madras,
India, in 1806. Here rioting sepoys (in a dry run of the 1857 Mutiny) killed
European officers at night and pinned down the white soldiers of garrison in
their quarters: 'the mutineers... [were] pouring volleys of musketry ... upon
the barracks of the Sixty-ninth. Surprised in their sleep and with no officers
to direct them, the men made little resistance beyond holding the ingress of
their barracks'. The mutiny was only put down when a senior officer arrived
from a neighbouring garrison with British cavalry support, rescued the timid
rankers and slaughtered the mutineers.
24 LIM, Personal Records, East Lanes (3oth and s9th), Court Martial of Ensign John
Herring; Divall, Inside the Regiment, 150-57; and Buckley, British Army in the West Indies,
207-08, 237 and 242.
25 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 6, 43.
