86
Soldiers as Workers
In the Spanish campaign, when the rank of colour sergeant was introduced
without the issuing of official badges, Costello of the 95th Rifles describes
the "Master tailor (with mates] who worked on an imitation with coloured
silks, worked on the arms of the men appointed? The regimental colour of
the 2/6gth Foot was captured at the battle at Quatre Bras in the Waterloo
campaign and later the regiment became part of the post-war Paris occupying
garrison. To ask the new Royalist regime for its return would have irritate
the still largely Bonapartist French army, so, unsportingly, the 69th set their
tailors to work and manufactured a new colour and they contradicted the
statement of their having lost one? 36
Every soldier carried a spare pair of shoes in their knapsacks on campaign,
but shoemakers also had to carry their tools and undertake ad hoc work.
Benjamin Harris of the gsth Rifles brought a haversack of leather pieces
to Spain but "The lapstone I took the liberty of throwing to the devil?
Before the retreat to Corunna in 1808: 'At Salamanca we stayed seven of
eight days, and during this time the shoemakers were again wanted, and i
worked with my men incessantly during their short halt? Harris made £200
in total during his army career before being discharged through Walcheren
fever, which enabled him to set up his own shop in Soho. On campaign,
regimental shoemakers were often sent far and wide to locate suitable leather
supplies, with opportunities for underhand money-making deals with local
suppliers and potential escapades. Memoirist Thomas Morris of the 73rd
describes just before Waterloo accompanying his friend, shoemaker Sergeant
Burton, on a drunken ramble near their billets through Flanders which
ended in them getting lost, involved in fights and sleening under a hedge. In
contrast, it was the regimental shoemakers buving leather that brought the
first news of the surprise French attack at Villa Muriel in 1812.37
Such ad hoc campaign work continued into the nineteenth century;
An anonymous new recruit, a tailor bu trade. enlisted in the eat BAL
intervention in the First Carlist War. Possibly a political radical, he
complained about having to undertake his trade rather than drilling:
I got on well on as well as most of my sort for the time being, after which
I was ordered into the tailors' shop to assist the clothing ... From these
[drill lessons I was absent; the shop, sore correctly the floor, having
stronger claim was unwillingly compelled to acknowledge. I did not come
to Spain to tailor, I could have done that in L.ondon... it was taken against
36 Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, 248 and Selby, Thomas Morris, go. The regiment
had lost their other colour to the French in the disastrous assault on Bergen Oo Zoom the
previous year. It still hangs in Les Invalides, Paris.
27 Hibbert. Recollections of Rifleman Harris. 28- Hauthornthuaite. Radante area. Selbs
Thomas Morris, 64-65; and Divall, Redcoats against Napoleon, I12.
Soldiers as Workers
87
the wishes of the sergeant tailor, who I looked upon as my natural enemy
.... Some few days before we marched I got released from the tailors' shop
... and my labours ... gave me a fair allowance of pocket-money,38
With the larger Imperial armies from the mid-nineteenth century onwards,
uniforms and boots were mass-produced from 1859 by a government-owned
clothing factory at Pimlico, as well as by civilian contractors. Production of
boots was concentrated in Northamptonshire and shirt-making by women
in villages around large garrison towns like Colchester or Aldershot. There
were also specialist civilian military tailors for officers' uniforms, often
staffed by former regimental tailors, which could be very important to local
economies. Even so, the regimental teams continued, working mainly on
repairs until after the Great War.39
Cavalry and artillery trades
Many recruits were attracted to the cavalry from previous experience of
working with horses. One example is the long-serving radical activist Allen
Davenport (4775-1846). As a poor country boy he went to work as groom for a
gentleman farmer and learnt in a considerable degree the art of horsemanship
.. land] sometimes rode with master after the squire's hounds. Davenport
then worked for a veterinary surgeon as a horse-breaker and enlisted in the
Windsor Foresters (a light dragoon fencible regiment) in 1794. He served his
whole seven years as an ordinary trooper, indicating that equine skills were
probably widespread in the early nineteenth and that a man had to have
exceptional talents to be taken on as a tradesman. Nonetheless, in cavalry
regiments and in the artillery corps,
from the French Wars onwards, the
number of skilled tradesmen increased to include blacksmiths, carters, collar
makers, farriers, harness makers, saddlers and wheelwrights, all of whom
seemed to enjoy some degree of control over their work. Rumsby's research
indicates that cavalry tradesmen were overwhelmingly employed in their
pre-enlistment trades.40
Regimental farriers provided both smithing skills and basic horse medicine.
After battle, the master farrier (often called a Farrier Major) dispatched
Wounded Marces with a nole are and hacked of the hanue fram the dand
Each horse was individually tattooed with a unique army number and this
mutilation proved that the beastood died and not been surreptitiously sold.
38 Anon., 'Autobiography of a Soldier, 280-81.
39 Roper, Records of the War Office, r and Bowman and Connellv. Edwardian Army, 169.
Scholars Precs. 1001). -y. Fartace History of the Priti don vol 1. 008-00: and Ruma
'The Sixteenth Lancers', 77.
