160
Soldiers as Workers
barrack-room, and told what each might expect to receive the men were
not sparing in their remarks about the meanness of this fugitive king. I
was told that I was not to accept any portion of the prize money, as not a
man in the company would take it.
With other Sergeants taking a lead from Pearson, the Paymaster reported
him to the Colonel and he was imprisoned as' the chief offender', but released
after 48 hours and told 'I should hear nothing about it? Such give and take
was a regular feature of the working lives of nineteenth-century soldiers.
Similar interactions have also been reported in other areas of civilian labour
relations, where trade unions were absent or weak - for example, amongst
Delegations to complain about problems seemed to have been quite
common, but could be fraught with difficulty for ringleaders, especilly in
the politically explosive atmosphere of the French Wars. The Scots Greys,
stationed in Manchester in 1792, found that their committee was dispersed.
Future radical Allen Davenport, whilst serving as a young man as a fencible
light dragoon, took part in one delegation at Dunbar, Scotland in 1796:
At that time the soldier's pay was so low, that we were literally starving
... I and another comrade, went on a deputation to the Colonel' marquee
to complain, but we could get no redress; starvation seemed our portion.
Guess our joy on receiving the information that our pay was increased
three pence halfpenny per day?
Davenport was lucky that his delegation coincided with the governments
general pay rise, so he was not singled out for punishment. To avoid this,
anonymous complaining letters were sometimes sent to officers. In 1795, the
commander of the Cambridgeshire Militia at Landguard Fort on the east
coast received an anonymous letter concerning poor meat rations. Enquiries
from the RSM failed to identify the writer from the close world of the
rankers, despite a 5 guinea reward. Contract disputes were typical amongst
the tradesmen described in Chapter 3. Waggoners of the Royal Irish Wagon
Train clung to their Treland only' contracts when Wellington attempted to
draft them for the Peninsular War. Regimental musicians, steeped in artisan
culture, were particularly vigilant about their terms and conditions of work.
In 1802, the bandsmen of the Donegal Militia petitioned their Colonel for
increasing their expenses, claiming that excessive wear on uniforms because
of parade duties ate up 612 of their 618 yearly allowance. They also demanded
the right to undertake more outside engagements to earn a living wage10
• Haley, Soldier Who Walked Away, 47. See Howkins, Poor Labouring Men, chap. 2.
9 Chase, Life and Literary Pursuits of Allen Davenport, 8-9
10 J.R. Western, The English Militia in the Eighteenth Century (London: Routledge &
Class Conflict in the Army
161
The more paternalistic outlook amongst militia officers could also
encourage the contract culture. In the Cambridgeshire Militia, a complaint
about the quality of shirts in 1812 brought an apology and a 'Board of Survey
trom the Colonel, which put matters right. An inspection in 1813 coul
therefore report of the regiment: there has been no corporal punishment i
the last six months."1
Thoughtless operational decisions which caused rankers' resentment were
common in the Guards, who were expected to dress smartly for their
extensive ceremonial duties:
Some dissatisfaction prevails among the Life Guards, now stationed in
Windsor, in consequence of the men being compelled to wear their [white]
summer trousers during the present inclement season, while the clothing
proper for the season lies useless in store. The men endure a great deal of
extra labour in keeping these garments clear from mud ... being often
obliged to put them on wet, many of the men are afflicted with severe
Soldiers could even try to enforce contract culture on campaign. Wi
Lawrence of the 4oth Foot found himself a spokesman in a dispute of
a rum ration, after the successful but bloody storm of Badajoz in Spa.
Much to everyone's discontent, the officer in charge of us - who nobody
in the regiment liked - served out only half. I spoke up and said that we
ought to have it all, that we had fought hard for it and the colonel meant
us to have it. The sergeant then went to the officer to ask ….. [with the
conclusion] Let the rascals have the lot.
New recruit Thomas Morris had not been paid all his enlistment bounty
before he found himself on a transport to the Low Countries in 1813:
I made application for it to the officer who had charge of the company,
and he rather unceremoniously ordered me to go about my business.. this
repulse did not deter me from reporting the circumstance to the colonel
[who] ….. asked if he had the books on board?.. the colonel found there
was a balance due to me, of one pound eighteen shillings ... The necessary
sum was produced and l was settled with ... in pressing the claim, I had
made an inveterate enemy of the officer, who was after on the watch to
Kegan Paul, 1965), 419; Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 4, 188-89; and Herbert and
Barlow, Music and the British Military, 79.
11 CRO, Cambridgeshire Militia Order Book, 1812-13, L79-5.
12 The Political Soldier, 28 Dec. 1833-
13 Hathaway, Dorset Soldier, 128 and Selby, Thomas Morris.
