126
Soldiers as Workers
for employing deserters, and local magistrates turned a blind eye to the
practice, to keep on good terms with their settler neighbours.131
'Penny capitalists'
Common soldiers were also found working part-time in those nehin
trades, dubbed as penny capitalist' by John Benson, providing food, drink,
various services, goods or favours to their comrades. Officers generally
tolerated penny capitalists and the handicraft producers, discussed later, as
a way of diverting soldiers from drink into wholesome spare-time activities.
Especially again in colonial stations, where the benefits of European civili-
sation may have been lacking, officers were keen consumers of their products
and services and even commissioned some on occasion. 132
Early-nineteenth-century
sometimes
encountered
penny
capitalism when enlisting, as recruiting Sergeants often ran shops selling
kit at inflated prices to gullible newcomers, which enabled them to recoup
the bounty money. Despite being banned in the Duke of York's reforms,
similar scams went on throughout the century. Few missed encountering
it in their service, as described by John Shipp: The post of pay sergeant is
certainly one of consequence ... He feeds and clothes the men, lends them
money and sells them watches and seals, on credit ... I never served in a
company in which every individual could not buy, sell, exchange, lend or
borrow on terms peculiar to themselves? Shing himalf one money at a
moderate rate and on good security. Such dealing could easily spill over
into the illegal sale of necessarie' or issued kit to civilians by soldiers which
so bedevilled the late-eighteenth- and carly-nineteenth-century military.
Soldiers sometimes charged for their literacy skills, to read letters or write
home, for less-educated comrades, though this could be done as a kindness,
or in exchange for another service. As late as the Zulu War, Frank Bourne
of the 24th Foot, who had been one of the defenders of Rorke's Drift, wrote:
"I found myself "unpaid secretary" to several men who could barely read and
write, and I deciphered and answered their letters home, feeling quite happy
in our relations?133
131 B. Granville Baker, Old Cavalry Stations (London: Heath Cranton, 1934), 147;
Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 139; and Burroughs, Tackling Army Desertion in British North
America, 43-
132 John Benson, The Penny Capitalists (Dublin: Gillan Macmillan, 1983). On its operation,
View of Empire, 69 and 158.
see, for instance, the experiences of the enterprising Sergeant Bodell in Sinclair, A Soldier's
133 Linch, Britain and Wellington's Army, 86; Stranks, Jobn Shipp,
Lieven, The Soldiery and the Ideology of Empire: Letters from Zululand', ISAHR, 80
(2002), 131.
41, quoted in Michael
Soldiers as Workers
127
Evidence of penny capitalism is hard to locate, but recent studies of
barracks show temporary food stalls run by 'sutlers. Soldiers only got
two meals a day until the Cardwell reforms and regimental canteens
were rudimentary, so there was ready demand. Most sutlers seem to have
been ex-soldiers or the wives or widows of soldiers, until the regimental
canteens were established after the Crimean War. It is claimed that in
barracks 134
the 184os the War Office was making £65,000 a year from sutler' rents at
In overscas stations, controls were more lax. Some soldiers are recorded
making and supplying illicit liquor or trading rations for more congenial
local food. Technically, both activities were illegal and were sometimes
prosecuted. On Barbados in 1842, Lance Corporal James Horton of the
17th Foot sold solb (23 kilos) of company ration meat: 'hawked on a public
highway ….. giving the money received for the Ment to the Men of the
company ... that something salt fishl might be purchased for the Men's
Dinners. The luckless Horton received 28 days' hard labour and demotion
to the ranks for providing fish for his probably Roman Catholic comrades
on a Good Friday, in an example of the cultural insensitivity of officers. Of
Guardsmen stationed in London barracks in 1800. it was also recorded: 'it is
usual for them to sell off their beef. A Quebec-based soldier sold a cow for
s6, a high price for a cow but she bears the character of the best cow in the
place - before embarking for home in 1807135
Drink, though legal, was a more serious problem for the imperial army.
In Halifax Nova Scotia, the premier North American station until 1867,
Bonnie Huskins has calculated that the garrison of up to 4,000 supported
nearly 300 drinking premises. Sergeant Thomas Maguire ran the spirit shop
in Hobart, Tasmanpr mr which he paid the 48th Regimental Fund 61 a
week. He allegedly made €2,00o, before succumbing to cholera in India in
1824. In Victorian India, regimental canteens were meant to function with
less corruption. The cant, ren of the t6th Lancers was overseen by a quarterly
committee of the CO and two subalterns,
who managed a Canteen
The overall inability of
Sergeant, European assistant and native servant.
officers to penetrate the working world of their rankers is illustrated by
their ineffectual attempts not to deprive the soldier of his comforts while
realising a fortune in two or three years for the canteen sergeant'. Canteen
134 Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, 66. See also Pete Arrowsmith, 'Hulme Barracks, Hulme,
unpublished report, Greater Manchester Archacological Unit, University of Manchester,
200g.
135 LIM, 47th Foot Order Book, 1830-1853; Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in the British Army, 99;
and Carol M. Whitfield, Tommy Atkins: The British Soldier in Canada, 1759-1870 (Ottawa:
National Historic Parks Canada, 1981), 47.
