84
Soldiers as Workers
of Linlithgow in 1812, for their outside working. As honourably discharged
soldiers could traditionally freely follow any trade without hindrance, the
sergeants won their case. The following year, in 1813, the government repeal
of the 1563 Statute of Artificers to remove limits to the free market, made
similar prosecutions academic. Whilst Cookson may be reading too much
into the evidence, the widespread involvement of ex-service tradesmen in
post-1815 radicalism and trade unionism, does give his view credence as it
demonstrates that the soldiers' world was often not so far removed from
the rest of society. The career of John Brown (1795-1861) is a good example
of this. He enlisted in the army whilst on 'tramp' from the bitter and
unsuccessful London shoemakers strike of 1812, was radicalised through
involvement in the Cato Street conspiracy of 1820 and by the 185os was a
Liberal town councillor. The unexplained use of the union flag on many
post-18i5 trade society and radical banners, in an identical way to those on
regimental colours, may also relate to this conundrum.30
The army remained one of the bastions of the artisan handicraft trades
and its culture, when it was declining elsewhere under the imnact o
mechanisation. By the late century, learning a trade in the army was part
of the patter of the recruiting sergeant. A former sergeant of the roth
Highlanders recalled bitterly that plying a trade was, nevertheless, still the
monopoly of the time-served man:
What trade can you learn when soldiering save the trade of ward of
course, if you have been a tailor or shoemaker before you join the Army,
the Government, with selfish consideration, profits by your knowledge;
but I cannot now call to mind a single example of a man who learned a
trade during the time he was serving he Majesty.31
Tailors and shoemakers
Smart uniforms were essential to military discinline and pride so tailoring
became the archetypal military trade. The pre-revolutionary British army in
North America had an enormous problem in importing ready-made military
clothing, and the efforts of regimental tailors, even assisted by women
camp followers and indigenous workers, was inadequate to the task. In such
situations, 'volunteers' with experience of the trade were comhad mit of the
ranks to supplement the official tradesmen. James Aytoun was one of seven
30 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 71-72; Prothero, Artisans and Politics, 5x-61; Mansfield, "Tohn
Brown' (oro): and Nick Mansfield Radical Banners as Sites of man national
Banner Survey', in Paul A. Pickering and Alex Turell lot Coutd Sites Commemoration,
Memorial and Popular Politics in Nineteenth Conturo Poten LAlate Mahaate don
31 Palmer, 'A Private Soldier', 334.
Soldiers as Workers
85
extra tailors combed out in the oth Foot in Dominica in the 1790s. He was
even working on Sundays, 'employed making watch coats for the different
guards. On leaving the island for the UK he entrusted the £3o he had earned
to his lieutenant, who walked off with it during the confusion of the siege
of Toulon in 1793.32
With the mobilisation at the start of the French Wars, the Devon Militia
were ordered 'to set the Taylors about fitting the new waistcoats and breeches
as fast as possible. They are likewise to Divide the different Sises and fit them
to the men of each Company as far as they will go. Two months later, The
taylors Order'd to worke at new Cloathing by candle Light every evening
till to oclock? When new greatcoats failed to reach the 4ist Regiment in
Canada in 1809, the supplemented regimental tailors quickly ran up 200
from locally supplied cloth and repaired others using the old supply, to
survive the ferocious winter.33
Even in the middle of campaigning, combed-out tailors finished new
issues of rough-and-ready uniforms. In the winter of 1812, this happened in
the goth Foot in Spain and hot-weather campaign clothing was issued to
Abercromby's army in Egypt in 18ot. During the long years of the Peninsular
War, soldiers regularly bought coarse brown cloth at local markets which the
regimental tailors made up into replacement issue trousers.34
Though the Guards were invariably better dressed, those battalions which
went through the Peninsular campaigns were resupplied with coats shipped
from the UK in April 1814, in southern France. But most of these: were too
small to be fitted to any of the men and many of the Serjeants coats were
not suficient for them ... we were obliged to cut up two Serjeants Coats to
alter the others which by joining both Cloth and Lace which makes those
Coats so altered look so bad'. Moreover, the tailors had "left Ido coats all
Sit fins small, not a man in the Battn as they will fit. The Quartermaster
wrote: I suppose you thought that our Men must be greatly fell way or half
starved, but I can assure you that is not the case.' Before going off to the
Waterloo campaign the suppliers realised that the tall Guardsmen needed
larger clothing. However the Coldstreams' work was only completed by the
Grenadier Guards lending to of their tailors to aid the tasl- 35-
32 Frey, British Soldier in America, 36 and Aytoun, Redcoats in the Caribbean, 26-27, 31 and
33 G.H. Hennessy, 'Order Books of the ist Devon Regiment in t7oz, (SAHR, 47 (196g),
215-21, 216-17 and Robert He desks of the Me Devon Article of Clothing, /SAHR, 75 (197),
34 Divall, Redcoats against Natoleon, 7I and to6-98 and lames, Life in Wellinaton's Army, 75
G.A. Steppler, "The Coldstream Guards at Waterloo: A Quartermasters Tale, ISAHR,
67 (1989), 67.
