172
Soldiers as Workers
claimed that the success of the dispute was due to secret organisation, which
deliberately excluded NCOs, though many were sympathetic: Immediately
a regimental union was formed and a regular system of delegates from the
different companies established. They met, and made arrangements for
carrying out the strike.'39
This sympathy was shared by Edward Costello, once a sergeant in the gith
Rifles and now Captain and Adjutant of the BAL Rifle Battalion:
Disgusted with the privations they had endured ... they refused to mount
guard, much less meet the enemy, unless their demands were satisfied
...A great number of the men had enlisted only for a twelve month ...
Their time of service was now up and whole companies of the 6th and
8th Scotch gave notice to their officers and the next day followed it up.
I was present when they piled arms, and hung their accoutrements upon
them. The whole Legion, however, was in such a state of insubordination,
that it was with much ado they could muster enough men to march the
delinquents to the castle. 40
In the UK, Irish troops continued to be at the forefront of protests. In 83o,
its band was forbidden to play traditional Trish airs on their way to Roman
Catholic church services, and fought with local Orangemen.
after the Crimean War. When ordered to return their uniforms, militiamen
complained of unpaid bounties, rioted (along with their band. plaving Irish
music) and refused to return their trousers. Becoming known as "The Battl
of the Breeches, after a few days of skirmishes with loyal troops, in which
a militiaman and a private of the 4ist Foot were killed, the bounty money
was paid, though nine 'ringleaders' were imprisoned. Later, in the 186os, the
Fenian movement attempted to subvert Irish troops and may have sworn in
up to 7,000, culminating in an abortive rising in 1867. There is also evidence
that Fenians deliberated enlisted to obtain military training and main access
to barracks.41
Large-scale mutinies could still happen in the more regulated late-Victorian
in the 188os:
army. Charles Grey gives a hearsay account he heard serving in the Buffs
39 Somerville, History of the British, 1ada and a mann Autobiography of a Soldier.
500; and Brett, British Auxiliary Legion, 96-99.
40 Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, 392-93.
11 Spiers, Army and Society, 78 and Karsten, Trish Soldiers in the British Army, 45-46,
For Fenian subversion, see R.V. Comerford, The Fenians in Context (Dublin: Wolfhound
Press, 1985) and Brian Jenkins, The Ferian Problem: Insurgency and terrorism in a Liberal State,
1858-1874 (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2008).
173
Class Conflict in the Army
In 1887 the Army Service Corps at Portbello [Dublin] provoked by a
tyrannical major stormed his house brought out all his furniture and
efiects and set fire to them on the barrack square, after which they all
marched down to the Royal Barracks and gave themselves up. Most got
heavy sentences but the major was quietly retired after a decent interval 42
In the same year, at Curragh Camp, troopers of the loth Hussars refused to
go on Saturday afternoon parade after exercises all morning. At a local pub,
inquiry in order to have Lt Col Craigie [their CO] shifted? But following
of their junior officers: "They were over paraded and all they wanted was an
bg of them engaged in a stand-off with military police, and declared to two
the officers back to barracks (including the future Lord French commander
of the British Expeditionary Force in 1914), all were arrested and seven were
imprisoned for up to eight years. As late as 1800, a company of the and
Grenadier Guards in London refused to parade after what the regarded as
excessive night duty. They were punished by six courts martial and a posting
to what was then regarded as an outlandish station: Bermuda. The Grenadier
Guards apparently retained the nickname. 'Bermuda Guards as late as the
inter-war period.43
Occasionally, protests took place on active service.
British troops were
ordered to make a fifth assault pache Mahratta fortress of Bhurtpore, India
in February 1805 after earlier attacks had caused nearly 2.000 British and
Indian casualties: 'But the men, though they were from the remnant of
the Seventy-fifth, Seventy-sixth and Hundred-and-first regiments, which
had covered themselves with glory during the past weeks, refused to move
out. The "y6th Foot to whom [General] Lake had turned again and again
in the campaign, refused, as they said "to go out there to be slaughtered"
After a suitable rest, the troops resumed their duties. None was punished
but the mutiny influenced Lake to sue for peace. A similar strike in India
also occurred during the war against Nepal eight years later. Herc, soldiers
of the 53rd Foot refused to obey their officers' orders to mount an assault
against the strong Gurkha fortres of Raghur, after the failure of initial
attacks. Again, no retribution took place and the British were forced merely
to blockade the fort.44
Battlefield strikes were not unknown in the subsequent wars of Empire.
42 Grey, 'Soldiering in Victorian Days', 325-
43 Anglesey, History of the British Cavalry, vol. 3, 77-79; Beckett, Victorians at War: New
Perspectives, 155; and Messenger, History of British Infantry, 2, 226.
44 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. S, 125; Á.S. Bennell, 'The Anglo-Maratha
War of 1803-5', JSAHR, 63 (1985), 160; and Lieutenant Colonel Newham-David, The Gurkha
War, 1814-16', in anon., Battles of the Nineteenth Century, vol. 3 (London: Cassell, 1897-1900),
206.
