60
Soldiers as Workers
1858, stationed entirely in India and campaigning only in the East, where
the Company was extending its territory and influence. EIC officers, both
of white regiments and black sepoy units, had a lower status and rank than
the regular British army and there was little interchange between them.
FIC commissions were not purchased and were open to all, though family
influence with the Company counted heavily in appointments.
Despite
slow promotion, through seniority rather than by purchase, officers could
live off their pay in the cheaper Indian economy, engage in trade and
often undertake other jobs for the Company. Originally, Irish and Scots
predominated in the officer corps, typically younger sons of impoverished
gentry. These stood on their contractual rights with a long tradition of
contentious protest, a trait shared with the rank and file, as we shall see the
section 'Contract culture, in Chapter 4, below. In the nineteenth century, a
more middle-class infuence developed: between 18o5 and 1834 76% of BIC
officers were being described as middle class as opposed to 47% of king's
officers: Conversely, promotion from the ranks was less than in HIM forces,
with the first ex-rankers coming as a necessity after critical battle losses in
1842 and 185776
Officers and men of the EIC had a much less disciplined relationship
than existed in HM forces, with its social apartheid. In the eighteenth
century, EIC men had roughly the same background as British recruits, and,
as with officers, Irish rankers predominated. The EIC offered higher basic
pay and pensions (only generally available to troops with disabilities), and
good opportunities for trade, loot, seconded promotion to sepoy regiments
and post-army employment in the sub-continent. Particularly after 1815, the
EIC army could be more selective, recruiting mainly in their London office
from Londoners and provincials, and attracting better-educated and more
literate recruits.
Soldiers in India could live cheaply - lived the lives of gentlemen - and
could save and send money home. Especially if participating in the EIC's
carly-ninetenth-century wars of expansion, with its batta and plunder,
many made small fortunes. By 185o, Peter Stanley argues, within the EIC
soldiery, a 'respectable working class' predominated,
with men who had
made a conscious career decision, with a high number of clerks, and other
lower middle class: "none is willing to admit that he is a labourer. After the
Indian Mutiny and the dissolution of the EIC army, its white troops by
now over 10,000 strong) were transferred to British service, which resulted
in the largest military strike of the nineteenth century (see the section Strike
and mutinies, in Chapter 4, below). This White Mutiny' of 1858-59 was
largely successful, with the strikers achieving lucrative discharge or more
76 Stanley, White Mutiny, 23-27 and 49-50 and Strachan, Politics of the British Army, 79-
Class Structure and the British Army
61
advantageous contracts than those who agreed to transfer. These became
new southern Irish
provincial regiments and, as soldier-socialist Robert
Blatchford indicates in his memoir, they continued to enjoy the more relaxed
culture of India for the rest of the century."
Overseas military adventurers
Through the early nineteenth century, overseas military adventurers in
South America, Greece, Portugal and Spain were fighting for nationalist,
liberal or even radical causes. However, the structure of these private armed
forces owed much to that of the British army and was based largely on
class rather than any revolutionary military theory. Class divisions became
particularly apparent when things went wrong, a perennial problem with
the various expeditions to support South American liberation movements.
When Hippisley's English Hussars were stranded on the Caribbean island
of Grenada in 1818, after initially failing to connect with Bolivar's armies,
whilst officers were granted a free passage home, NCOs were told to seek
work on the island - a difficult task, given the slave economy?8
Alexander Somerville, formerly of the Royal Scots Greys, the flogged
radical military martyr of the Reform Crisis turned journalist, was recruited
for the BAL in Spain, intervening on the liberal side. Many of the BAL
officers took leave of absence from the British or EIC armies to gain
experience but some at least shared the same political sympathies. Another
anonymous BAL recruit, a tailor, considered his officers were quite varied:
Our officers, as I soon found out were of the like heterogeneous description:
bankrupts, horse-dealers, and seedy gentlemen of all sorts, with some good
soldiers and gallant gentlemen, in whom a love of adventure overcame
their aversion to the company they were obliged to keep, and, who, if
afterwards they saw a man do his work gallantly, was for the time oblivious
to his antecedents.?9
But Somerville stressed the importance of promoted rankers in the BAL:
As a fair example we may consider Mr Sked. He had been twenty-eight
years in the Royal British Artillery, as known to be one of the best practical
and most scientific gunners of the service, yet had never risen higher than
a sergeant, and would never have risen higher had he continued twenty
" Stanley, Wbite Mutiny, 12-13, 2t, 29, 38, 42, 43, 76, 83, 87, 92 and 118; Mokyr and O Grada,
"The Height of Trishmen and Englishmen in he 17705, 83-92; and Robert Blatchford, My
Life in the Army (London: Clarion Press, 1915).
78 Ben Hughes, Conquer or Diel Wellington's Veterans and the Liberation of the New World
(London: Osprey, 2010), 5T.
" Somerville, History of the British Legion, 109-10 and anon., Autobiography of a Soldier,
The British Army and Navy Review, 4 (1866), 275.
