42
Soldiers as Workers
like the West Indies Regiments, in which 85 out of II4 commissions were not
purchased. In Britain, threats to abolish purchase were seen as unjustified
modernity or even downright revolution, with Wellington himself defending
'Men of fortune and character, men who have some connection with the
interests and fortunes of the country
... It is this circumstance which
exempts the British Army from the character of being a mercenary army?
These interests were maintained, with, overall, two-thirds of commissions
purchased, in the whole period of its operation, from 1660 to 1871.30
Such conservatism was opposed by prevailing Victorian liberalism,
hoping to throw onen all careers to merit. the large and indee ales
of well educated young men, who depend for their advancement in life
upon their own exertions, and not upon already accumulated means, and
who constitute the path of the law, the church and other active professions
are ordinarily excluded from the army? But the eventual abolition of
purchase of commissions in 1871 actually resulted in a more aristocratic
British officer corps, especially at the highest levels. Thereafter, over 40
per cent of Generals came from a landed background, usually after service
in the fashionable regiments of Guards, cavalry and rifles, and there was
increasing public school domination of the Sandhurst and Woolwich
military colleges.31
Colonel proprietors
Colonels were the proprictors of their regiments, and they were responsible
for the recruitment, clothing, pay and feeding of their men.
regarded the Colonel as any other contractor, and awarded a standard lump
sum for these tasks, from which he could legitimately make money and
charge soldiers stoppages from their wages for the services and goods he
provided. Captains were responsible in a similar way for their individual
companies. The Colonel appointed a Lieutenant Colonel to lead and manage
the regiment, and the Quartermaster and Paymaster to carry out the often
intricate calculations involved in running what was essentially a business.
Such systems were common in Europe in the early modern period but were
modified when absolutist states centralised in the eighteenth century and in
the subsequent imposition of the Napoleonic system. In Britain, as late as the
French Wars, it was claimed that Colonels were making profits of between
£400 and s800 a year from their regiment's clothing alone. Middlemen also
made money from the state: During the long war in the West Indies, from
10 Glover, "British Ordnance Department', 242, quoted in R.E. Scouller, 'Purchase of
Commissions and Promotions', JSAHR, 62 (1984), 221 and Holmes, Soldiers, 138.
Sir Charles Trevelyan, Assistant Secretary to the Treasury, 1857, quoted in Anglesey,
History of the British Cavalry, vol. 7, 369 and Holmes, Soldiers, 156.
Class Structure and the British Army
43
1794 to 1798, many of the Commissaries by shameless fraud had made large
fortunes.'32
Some claim that the army reforms of the Duke of York during the French
Wars took away much of the Colonels' power of patronage, proprietorship
and ability to make profit out of public money. But some elements clearly
remained: 'Colonels still controlled the supply of clothing, and this was a
major source of their expected profit from running a regiment. Not until
after the mess of the Crimea was the responsibility for clothing infantry and
cavalry taken from Colonels dealing with private contractors and given to
government-run uniform factories.33
Officer trading
For all their appearance of aristocratic languor, many officers were keenly
interested in making money. They were poorly paid compared with many
other professions and had high expenses. Officers also espoused the opinion
that it was satisfactory to profit from a crown office. From the early eighteenth
century, British officers governing isolated colonial garrisons were allowed
and indeed expected to trade, often taking advantage of local shortages of
consumer goods. The wealth of the East raised these expectations to a higher
level. In late-eighteenth-century India,
Officers ... shared a personal ambition to make their fortunes as quickly
as possible in order to escape the unwholesome climate of India and get
back to Britain. Private trade was the
conventional, approved way of
making money ... soldiers also engaged in a number of corrupt practices
as a short-cut to wealth - fraudulent book-keeping, accepting or extorting
presents or bribes from Indian princes and officials or loaning money at
exorbitant rates to the peasants who fell under their power.
This culture saved the EIC money, with '[thel Directors' policy of paying
low salaries to their civil and military servants alike, on the principle that
they would make a good living out of their many opportunities, honest or
otherwise, of profiting from their service in India.34
This situation grew more prevalent in the nineteenth century as British-
controlled India expanded. Officers expected Quickened promotion, [and]
lucrative transfers into civil positions - particularly diplomatic postings to
32 H. de Watteville, The British Soldier (London: Dent, 1954), 6 and 54; Fortescue, History
of the British Army, vol. 10, 188 and 192; and Holmes, Redcoat, 109.
33 Knight, Britain against Napoleon, chap. 11; Myerly, British Military Spectacle, s; and
Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 10, 552.
34 Glanville J. Davies, Military Leadership at Newfoundland before 1729, JSAHR, 59
(1981), 195; G.J. Bryant, 'Civil-Military Relations in Early British India, 1750-1785, JSAHR,
83 (2005), 137; and Heathcote, The Military in British India, 54.
