110
Soldiers as Workers
recognised the danger immediately and regarded military bandsmen as the
main challenge to the battle for fair wages for civilian musicians, because
they had their "daily bread"
paid for them and were able to undercut
civilians. In 1894, the AMU wrote, prior to a planned strike, to the CO di
the Salford Barracks complaining that four bandsmen playing with the Cal
Rosa Opera Company were being paid less than a quarter of the civilians'
fee. But by the late-Victorian era weak organised labour had linte effect on
the full and complex career structure that existed for army musicians. First
Class Bandmaster Sergeants received a salary of £1oo a year from 1874 and
with private engagements 'best men commanded and obtained something
like £360 a year'. All this made bandsmen the premier success story of the
world of military tradesmen.'3
Miners and diggers
From early times, civilian miners were readily transnosed into siege
operations. The free miners of the Forest of Dean earned their privileges
as a reward from Edward I for service besieging Berwick During siege of
Gloucester, in the English Civil War. in t6u2, the Parliamentarian garrison
enlisted 'professional miners from the [nearby] Forest of Dean, who were
employed to counter Rovalist minino To the scene the demo 1a fending the
beleaguered outpost of Tangier requested Cornish or Derbushire miners to
counteract Cretan miners used by the Moors?4
At the failed siege of Burgos in Spain in 1812, 'miners of a sort were
found by calling upon men who had been coal miners in civil life to
volunteer from the ranks'. As late as the Indian Mutinu in 18ez, the garrison.
of the Lucknow Residency was the zand Foot. in theorv Cornwall's own
regiment: 'They [Mutineers) were foiled, however, by the activity of the
chief engineer, Captain Fulton, who, choosing a select body of oid Cornish
miners from the Thirty-second, brought ail hostile projects to naught
by ingenious counter-mining! British miners, in the complex nineteenth
century economic diaspora. could sad a placa fond on alallo in militar
situations as well as industrial. Cornish miner William Bevan served the
patriotic forces in South America, under radical British General William
Miller. Welsh miners in Scranton. Pennsulvania were drafted ne ancinee
into the Union army in the American Civil War?5
93 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 80, 112 and 203-04
94 David Clark, Battlefield Walks: The South (Stroud: Surton, 1996), 8o and P.M.C. Routh,
Tangier: England's Lost Atlantic Outpost, 1661-x684 (London: T. Murray, 1012), 320.
Glover, Peninsular Prebaration too Fortess Pot good to 281
John Miller (ed.), The Memoirs of General Miller in the Service of the Republic of Dorn Vol. 2
Soldiers as Workers
In wartime sieges, or in improving imperial defences, all infantry rank
and file could be pressed into manual labour. This work, though sometimes
attracting more pay, was universally disliked. Military tradesmen especially
were key to the economic viability of colonies, given the huge skills shortages
in many areas. Peter Way argues that the army was essential to developing
the eighteenth century American frontier:
Soldiers performed many mundane duties - digging, hauling, building,
crafting goods - in common with civilian workers. Nevertheless, they
were a peculiar type of paid worker subjected to a more restrictive labor
contract and discipline, making them less than free. Hardly a unique
situation, unfree labor was the norm in the Anglo American world ... Men
built roads, chopped wood for fires and construction purposes, cut fascines
for defenses, harvested hay for forage, made baskets for shifting dirt, built
dams and millraces, or loaded bateaux around waterfalls?6
Soldiers' contributions to North American frontier society continued in the
Victorian period. It was noted: Notwithstanding the lodging with wages
of is id a day, soldiers may have been among the least remunerated of all
labourers in early nineteenth century Canada?' In addition, poor barrack
housing, the Canadian winter, and a culture of drinking,
whoring caused high mortality rates. In her study of Fort Wellington on the
St Laurence River, Duffin identified the probability of any one man being
admitted to hospital in a given year was close to being 100%. Despite all
this, the influence over time of troops in the development of colonies was
the 15,000 to 20,000 troops in Canada during the early 184os were active
participants in the social and economic life of their communities and had
a direct impact on the development of the country ... The men worked
in the kitchens and garden, and were required to make repairs to the
buildings and their uniforms. The garrison could service a police function
... soldiers could also work as firefighters. Occasionally military men were
sent to work on construction projects and road maintenance."
The largest project was the construction of the Rideau Canal between 1826
and 1832, designed by Colonel John By of the Royal Engineers, with skilled
(London: Longman, Rees, Orme Brown, and Creen, 1829), 1a3: and William D. Tones, Wales
in America: Scranton and the Welsh, rown, and (Cardift: University of Wales, 193), 5t
96 Peter Way, 'Rebellion of the Regulars. Working Soldiers and the Mutiny of 1763-64
William and Mary Quarterly, 57(4) (2000), 76s and 770. See also Frey. The British Soldier in
97 Jacalyn Duffin, 'Soldiers' Work: Soldiers' Health: Morbiditv. Mortality, and theis
Causes in an 1840s British Garrison in Canada Inhour/Le Travail. 27 (1996), 37, 38, 45 and 48
