200
Soldiers as Workers
"Suicide of the Soldier, c. 1840.
A lurid woodcut of the traditional military suicide method, from The Memoirs
of Serjeant Paul Swanston. Though sometimes taken as a genuine ranker's
memoir of the French Wars, it was the creation of radical hack writer,
Alexander Somerville (1811-85). Somerville had served in the Scots Greys
and was a Sergeant in the British Auxiliary Legion in Spain in 1835.
cutting their throats... a serjeant whose wife had lately died ... sat down on
her grave, and blew out his brains with a pistol. Even in the drama of the
Peninsular War in the 43rd Light Infantry, one of our men who had been
a good soldier, after a sad debauch, relapsed into a fit of despondency ... he
then deserted; and when taken, seized an opportunity of placing a muzzle of
a musket to his mouth, and setting his foot upon the trigger, blew his head
to atoms. In the same regiment there were two suicides during a successful
but incredibly hot march to Talavera in 1809. Other long Spanish marches
which overtaxed young or sickly soldiers also resulted in suicides: When he
was left behind he crawled off the road into a field, and, tired of a world in
which he had met with such cruel treatment, loaded his musket, and taking
off his stocking, put his toe on the trigger, and blew out his brains? After
appalling battle experiences some soldiers killed themselves, like the two
men of the g5th Rifles after the bloody storm of Badajoz.120
120 Adventures of Serjeant Benjamin Miller, 6, 13, and 30; anon., Memoirs of a Sergeant, 103;
Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, 30; Donaldson, Recollections, 256; and Urban, Rifles, 184.
Class Conflict in the Army
201
Well-behaved soldiers could commit suicide through fear of corporal
punishment. Thomas Morris of the 73rd Foot described the actions of a
smart comrade, already singled out for promotion in 1814:
For some slight crime, he was confined and tried by court martial, and
sentenced to receive three hundred lashes. When the morning of the
punishment came, he contrived, unseen by the guard, to take one of the
firelocks, from the rack (they were all loaded) and placing the muzzle to
his head, and putting his toe in the loop of a string, which was fastened
to the trigger, he blew his brains out. Poor fellow! He was much esteemed
by his comrades.121
Some hapless soldiers were flogged for attempted suicide: Privates Jeremiah
Cox and John Sharpe of the zoth Foot. receiving 500 and 300 lashes; the
latter for unsoldierlike conduct in trving to hand himself Funn in the TIK
ennui could result in unexplained suicides. like Sergeant Walsh of the 77th
who paid his company at Winchester in 18og and then shot himself through
the head in his office. 122
In nineteenth-century wars appalling living conditions,
remorselecely savace Carlito who rafaced to tales animaare caused many
suicides in the BAL in Northern Spain in 1836 and 1837. In the miserable
trenches before Sebastopol, British soldiers are recorded holding their left
hands above the parapets in the hope of attracting a 'Blicht one', whilst
some employed the time-honoured suicide technique with a toe against the
musket trigger, as the ultimate act of resistance 123
Drink
Always available to relieve the stress which could lead to suicide was alcohol,
reinforced by a dominant British army culture of hard drinking. Though an
official blind eye was often turned to binge drinking, alcohol consumption
encouraged crime and especially desertion, the perennial problems of army
life. Miserable lifestyles, fuelled by alcohol, fostered conflict of all sorts
in which pre-enlistment working alcohol, faste
were displayed. Drink
was even part of the basic soldiers' rations along with a daily allowance of
bread and meat. In Britain this would mostly be two pints of beer, which
might be safer than available water. But the appalling living and working
conditions of soldiers, with few pleasures, led to a common culture of heavy
drinking, supplied by more canteen beer and illicit local spirits from outside.
121 Selbv. Thomas Morris. 28
122 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 66 and Divall, Inside the Regiment, 137.
123 Brett.
The British Auxiliary Legion, 66 and Edgerton, Death or Glory, 107 and 214.
