100
Soldiers as Workers
Schoolmasters
Before they had become officially organised, in the Victorian period, a
few regimental schoolmasters existed in the late Georgian army through
appointments made by some progressive colonels. Regimental schools were
particularly encouraged by Whig General Sir John Moore during the training
of his famous Light Brigade at Shorncliffe at the turn of the century. In 8ul,
the Commander in Chief, the Duke of York, introduced an initiative to
teach basic literacy and numeracy to the rank and file in a bid to improve the
skills of the larger numbers of NCOs needed in the expanded forces. By the
end of the war, difficulty in recruiting led to many very young soldiers in the
ranks, including specifically formed boy battalions. The Adjutant General
encouraged the creation of regimental schools in these, to create: Abilities
in the necessary Qualifications of reading and writing, with the view of ...
(boy soldiers) becoming hereafter useful and valuable NCOs?69
The appointment of schoolmasters - usually as Sergeants - was still up
to individual Colonels and could lead to difficulties. When the reforming
Colonel of the Bedford Militia ordered NCOs to attend the new regimental
school and to pay for their instruction, a groun of old soldiers protested
When the Sergeant Maior was then imprisoned they challenged a tomlity
of this order via the courts. (This is a good examnle of the widespread
contract culture discussed in the next chanter) The case. Warden v Railed.
went to appeal, where the judge concluded: It is no part of the military
duty to attend a school and learn to read and write. If writing is necessary
to corporals and sergeants, the suberior officers must celest men who ca
read and write' Schoolmasters also taught mature students - usually thos
seeking promotion - who were expected to naw for tuition somatimes on a
sliding scale according to rank (up to threepence a week for sergeants). They
also taught the children of the regiment, though their fees were sometime
covered by regimental charitable funds?°
Like other regimental tradesmen, schoolmasters were often appointed
on the basis of pre-enlistment skills, but others were able to capitalise on
general literacy skills. Schoolmaster Sergeants could charge foes for private
students, could expect perks, and usually sold eauipment at a deft.
They also kept the regiment's Registet of Baptisms and in tire were paid
a shilling fee for giving a copy to the narent Tile other tradesmen. they
69 T.A. Bowyer-Bower. 'Some Farly Educational InBuences in the D to A Aul, Ta ATTR
Britain and the French Revolution, 1780-1815 (London: Macmillan, 1980), 220; and Buckle
The British Army in the West Indies, 125.
70 Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, 72 and Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 72.
Soldiers as Workers
101
were excused most duties. In the British base on Corfu in 1824, Wheeler
of the gist Foot celebrated his appointment as Regimental Schoolmaster:
I have nothing to do with parades or drill, when the school is over my
time is my own ... besides Colonel Rice allows me to take as many Greek
scholars as I can get. I go in plain clothes except to church on Sunday
mornings and to muster on the 26th of each month. Private tuition was
also provided by other literate rankers. When stationed on Mauritius in
1832, Colour Sergeant John Allez of the 87th Foot, though not a school-
master, earned 25 dollars a month in 1832 teaching English to local families.
Even some British prisoners of war in Russia in 1855 were allowed to give
English lessons.™1
By the mid-Victorian period, the army schoolmaster had become an
accepted part of the regimental workforce, serving both adults and children:
The CO recommends that all NCOs and Lance Corporals take advantage
of the Regimental school and endeavour to improve themselves in Reading,
Writing and Arithmetic ... as selections for promotion in future will be
made in a great measure with reference to the proficiency in them of the
persons to be promoted ... All Married soldiers will send their children
to the School of the Regiment on pain of being liable to be deprived of
... residence of their wives in Barracks?2
With varied quality of instruction, the army began to systematise training
for schoolmasters, but not until 184g did the first graduates emerge from
the Model School, associated with the Royal Military Asylum, which was
established in Chelsea. Candidates had to re-enlist, thereby loosing existing
service for pension purposes, so the first generation were mainly civilians,
usually from middle-class families. Supervision of the new Corps of Army
Schoolmasters, formed in t846, was provided by the Chaplain General and
schoolmaster' duties were later extended to running barrack libraries. The
old ranker schoolmasters remained as well and until 1857 they were paid
through deductions like the other regimental tradamen: "The amount of the
charges so authorised will be paid over to the Schoolmaster Sergeant as a
remuneration and cottones of anne intend ta dead during school
hours ... Adults attending School will be charged monthly as follows, viz
Sergeants 8d, Corporals 6d, privates 4d?"3
7 MCd ife of Licht Cavalry Regiment de Hart Lettereof Pront Who ler, 229; The
Political Soldier ne Dee. 102a: David Inolesant The Dinners of Voronas COld Woking: Unwin
72 LIM. z0th Foot Regimental Ordere r8A6-188o Mar Our and Standing Orders zoth Foo
(Chatham: Burrill, 1850), 47-
73 Hew Strachan, The Reform of the British Army, 1820-54 (Manchester: Manchester
University Press), 1984, 95-07: Roner, Records nf the War Office, 228: NAM 2008-04-62-15
