40
Soldiers as Workers
Though progressive officers from the time of Whiggish Sir John Moore
tried to encourage soldiers away from well-drilled automata into using their
initiative, the stereotype of the unthinking. dorile but brave ranker still
prevailed in most officer' minds, with its conservative connotations. This
was probably reinforced by the rankers themselves, who wished to keep
their private world away from of the scrutiny of their superiors and their
unpredictable and potentially savage punishments, by acting dull. Though
the rural recruit was preferred, in reality the loyal quiet ranker from the
countryside was increasingly replaced by those perceived as unhealthy urban
specimens. Fortescue observed the:
Physical deterioration of the men bred in towns and the steady fall in
rustic recruits. Throughout this history ... all officers without exception
as a rule, so keen-witted as those drawn from the towns, but they were,
generally speaking, strong, healthy, docile, steady, stable and trustworthy,
and blessed moreover with good eyesight and alert observation.
Such opinions underpinned military policy as late as the introduction of
recruiting grounds were to be found in the industrial cities. The view that
In dangerous situations, as we shall see, such acts were sometimes rewarded
with battlefield commissions for deserving NCOs.26
Class and officers
The popular image of mainly aristocratic officers in the army needs nuancing,
if only because there were not enough aristocrats to staff the growing
British armed forces. The literature on this subiect. though quite extensive,
is inconclusive. There was an influx of middle-class officers during the
French Wars, with a swollen officer corps of 15,000 by 1815, five times that
of 1793. Richard Holmes claims that: We can identify a general trend for
the proportion of aristocratic officers to decline and that of middle class
officers to grow, reflecting changes in society at large? However, this may be
wishful thinking. In the post-war peace, the aristocracy tended to reassert
itself, particularly in its domination of the socially superior regiments of the
cavalry and Guards, as well as the General staff.27
26 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 13, 8 and French, Military Identities, 35-
27 The pioneering work of sociologists C. B. Otley and P.. Razzell, is neatly summarised
Class Structure and the British Army
A much higher percentage of Indian army officers - up to 77 per cent
compared with only 47 per cent in the British army - came from middle-
class or professional backgrounds. This applied to officers in both white
and black regiments employed by the East India Company before 1858 and
by the British Raj in India thereafter, as well as HM service officers from
modest backgrounds who sought regimental postings in India to eke out
their money. It has been argued that "The army was acquiring features of
a hereditary class' and, less debatably, that, by the Crimea: 'British officers
were almost all "gentleman" ... One third came from titled or landed
families, and the rest from gentleman's professions - the clergy, the bar, and,
most often, military service families'28
Purchase
In a hangover from the military enterprises of the early modern period,
where Colonels owned their regiments, with certain exceptions (mainly
in the artillery and engineers), officers bought their first commissions and
subsequent steps in rank up to Lieutenant Colonel. Reform was resisted for
a long time, by forces of conservatism, reinforced by the need otherwise to
provide pensions for officers, with the result that overall very few officers
were promoted from the ranks. In the Commonwealth, Cromwell did away
with buying commissions but they were reintroduced by Charles II as a way
of sorting out his considerable debts, and this was maintained thereafter.
All over Europe, the convulsions of the Revolutionary period had resulted
in more socially diverse officer corps, even in the autocracies. Britain may
have briefly complied with this trend as the French Wars resulted in a
fivefold increase in its officer corps. During this period, it is argued, only 20
per cent of commissions were bought and with constant campaigning more
promotions were made from the ranks.29
However, with the peace in 1815, purchase by the richest reasserted itself
and freeve, missions were largely confined to unfashionable or colonial units
in Spiers, Army and Society, chap. 1. J.E. Cookson, 'Regimental Worlds: Interpreting the
Experience of British Soldiers of the Napoleonic Wars', in Alan Forrest, Karen Hageman and
Jane Rendell (eds), Soldiers, Citizens and Civilians: Experiences and Perceptions of the Revolu-
tionary and Napoleonic Wars, 1790-1820 (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2008), 27; Holmes, Soldiers,
I6i and 167 and Moyse-Bartlett, 'British Army in 1850', 231.
28 P.E. Razell, 'Social Origins of Officers in the Indian and British Home Army, British
Journal of Sociology, 14(3) (1963), 249; Hew Strachan, The Politics of the British Army (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1997), 15; and Robert B. Edgerton, Death or Glory: The Legacy of the Crimean
War (Oxford: Westview Press, 1999), 49.
29 Anthony Bruce, The Purchase System in the British Army, 1660-187r (London: Royal
Historical Society, 1980), 74-75 and Michael Glover, 'The British Ordnance Department
1815-1855', JSAHR, 57 (1979), 242.
