140
Soldiers as Workers
could expect to serve in the sub-continent, with an average length of
service for an infantry battalion of 14 years. After the abolition of the
East India Company, the army and the expanding government became
intertwined in India, creating the British Raj', and forging potential
new career paths for white soldiers, which became standardised into a
Town Major's List for each cantonment. As time elapsed, soldiers were
prevented from settling as civilians, so quasi-military and government jobs
were essential for those with Indian families, and eventually absorbed up
to to per cent of British military manpower. These posts encompassed
military secondments as instructors, Regimental Sergeant Majors and
Quartermaster Sergeants to sepoy regiments and to military (particularly
Ordnance or Commissariat, Barracks Departments), technical and medical
establishments. There were also postings for soldiers with some education
to junior government service of all types and jobs in newly established
public utilities such as railways, libraries, museums, engineering, telegraph
and postal services. These all brought status, more interesting employment,
pensions and the opportunity to stay on in India for those who had
married locally. 164
One private of the roth Hussars recalled the Town Major's lists of the
horse keepers, servants, warrant officers, apothecaries, commissariat,
conductors, auctioneers, tailors and saddlers ... assistant apothecaries,
sub-conductors ... bazar sergeants, provost ditto, ditto on the road and
rank department, with a sprinkling of clerks belonging to the adjutant and
quarter master's departments.165
Government job opportunities were also available mid-career as well as
in retirement from the army proper. Irishman John Lyons joined the BIC
infantry in Bombay in 1854, was promoted to Sergeant after four years and
joined the Barrack Department as a sub-conductor after nine years, reaching
the rank of honorary Captain, Staff Sergeant N.W. Bancroft joined the ElC
Bengal Horse Artillery as a nine-year-old band boy in 1833, was seconded for
two years to the native 7th Light Cavalry, retired on a pension in 1866 and
was for z2 years in charge of Calcutta Lunatic Asylum. Adventurous NCOs
might seek wider opportunities. George Stent, an NCO of the 14th Light
Dragoons, became the officer in charge of the Chinese Imperial Customs
Service. By 1900, most Town Major's posts had been made conditional on
passing certificates in Hindustani or Persian. Instruction was given by native
teachers under the supervision of regimental schoolmasters. Large employers
164 Stanley, White Mutiny, chap, 12 and Holmes, Soldier Sahib, 149-50 and 237-39.
165 Douglas, Soldiering in Sunshine and Storm, 2.
Soldiers as Workers
141
like the Indian railway companies also proanised six-month sunervisors'
courses for discharged soldiers.166
In the UK, long-serving NCOs found jobs as instructors in volunteer
or yeomanry regiments, or in the peacetime permanent staff of the county
militias. The vast army of part-time volunteers in the French Wars (nearly
350,000 in total) were entitled to one paid Sergeant Major per 300 men and
sometimes had other paid specialists like drill Sergeants and musicians.
These were the only part of the volunteer movement subject to military law
and corporal punishment.) As discussed earlier, the numbers of musicians
were maintained throughout the century by the gentry, as a contribution to
the cultural life of the shires. In 18r8 the éa1-time Shronchira Malicia staft
consisted of a Sergeant Major, 33 Sergeants, 33 Corporals, a Drum Major
and 14 drummers. Though reduced to 48 COs in 1819, they could still
expand to full establishment size through part-timers when the regiment
was embodied for annual training in 1820.
Some of these NCOs were
also tradesmen. A corporal tailor with & vears' service, was reported on
The militia staffs were sometimes used for the support of the civil power
in the disturbances of the early nineteenth century. But as the political
importance of the county militias declined so did the numbers of full-time
workers employed in their establishments. In 1839, the militias, though, still
employed 1, 141 full-time permanent staff. At an average of e 8 men for the 130
county regiments, these cadres were typically made up of Adjutant (usually
a half-pay regular and sometimes an ex ranker), Paymaster, Quartermaster
(sometimes these roles combined, occasionally all three in one person), plus
staff Sergeants and musicians.
Their pay remained unaltered for much of
the nineteenth century, with sergeants drawing is. 6d. and drummers one
shilling a day. But it was regular and they did little more to justify their
existence than parade for church on a Sunday and occasionally supervise
the training of a few Enrolled Pensioners, thus leaving time for other
activities. 168
The Cardwell and Childers army reforms of the late-Victorian period
gave a specific role to militias as part of the depot for the new county
regiments, thereby reviving them as institutions. This also opened up job
166 Holmes, Sabib 233 and 240; Rumsby, "The Sixteenth Lancers', 43; and Richards, Old
Soldier Sahib, 137 and 216.
167 Philip J. Haythornthwaite, 'The Volunteer Force, 1803-04, JSAHR, 64 (1986), 193, 194
and 204 and McGuffie, 'The Lord Bradford Militia Documents', 137.
168 F.C. Mather, Public Order in the Age of the Chartists (Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 1959), 141; Sleigh, Militia and Yeomanry List, 47; and Owen, History of the
Welsh Militia, 13 and 95.
