24
Soldiers as Workers
but disliking London and quarrelling with his supervisor, he enlisted in the
3rd Light Dragoons in 1843. Typically for a new recruit, Pearman deserted
after three months, spent eight months on the run and after a court martial
was imprisoned. Posted to India, he served in both Sikh Wars and was
promoted to sergeant, but after seven years he returned to Britain and trained
recruits for the Crimea as a Sergeant and acting Riding Master. Buying his
discharge after another dispute with his superiors in 1857, he joined the newly
formed Buckinghamshire Constabulary as a police constable. He worked his
way up to Inspector and after 25 years' service took his pension, which he
continued to enjoy until 1908. Pearman was not an exceptional figure, either
in his working life or in his political life, and we shall meet many men like
him in the following chapters.42
This book is arranged in three further long chapters. While it can be read
on its own, it will be enhanced by the companion volume, on popular
politics, Popular Politics, Class and the Nineteenth-Century Military. Each
chapter is subdivided into topics. Chapter 2 covers the class structure of
the British army. It investigates the backgrounds of common soldiers and
describes how their treatment was consistently worse than that of officers. It
examines class and officers, including trading, the aristocracy, paternalism
and the prevailing amateur officer tradition. Non-commissioned officers and
the progress of a few them into the officer class are studied, along with the
particular class nuances of the troops of the militia, East India Company
and overseas military adventurers. It concludes with the debate over whether
men preferred to be led by gentlemen or if rank and file were critical of
officers.
Chapter 3 provides an account of common soldiers
at work.
After
surveying the use of the free time available to most soldiers, it looks at the
regimental tradesmen who were recruited to carry out official duties, such
as shoemakers, musicians, armourers, blacksmiths, tailors, clerks, school-
masters, butchers and cooks, and finds evidence of civilian trades culture,
with negotiations, and go-slows. In technical arms - like artillery, cavalry or
engineers, skilled tradesmen included wheelwrights, harness makers, farriers
and skilled artificers of all sorts. Large numbers of rankers were allocated as
officers' servants, and, like the tradesmen, were excused many routine duties
and benefited from tips and perks. Other soldiers used various handicraft
or 'penny capitalist' skills to undertake paid tasks for their comrades: as
victuallers, letter writers or souvenir makers, catering for the needs of
modern civilisation. Empire also later provided a large number of responsible
42 Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 32, 209.
Introduction
25
administrative postings in public service or utilities for steady ex-servicemen
as well as opportunities in the new uniformed working class in the UK. This
chapter also surveys the special position of the Guards, mainly stationed in
London, as well as post demobilisation working lives.
Chapter 4 explores the mainly low-level class conflict. Held in a fiercely
rigid legal code, with harsh punishments for any infringement, it is no
surprise that most soldiers' resistance was covert. Nonetheless, mutinies and
strikes were found within an overarching contract culture. Passive resistance
was always present, with looting, drinking,
deliberate crime, desertion,
feigned illness, self-harm and even, in extreme cases, suicide. All three
chapters seek to uncover the hidden world of the nineteenth-century soldier
and (to paraphrase Edward Thompson) to rescue him from the enormous
condescension of most military and labour history. Politics and the military
is generally disregarded here. The companion volume will seek to uncover
the forgotten world of the political soldier.
