198
Soldiers as Workers
The 28th had been the heroes of the Egyptian campaign of 1801, earning
their unique "back badge', for fighting on though surrounded and they were
to soldier on throughout the Peninsular and Waterloo campaigns.!15
Some of the elite soldiers of the gsth Rifles tried to avoid the Walcheren
expedition in 1809 by rubbing snuff into their eyes. Private Reginauld of
the 7th Fusiliers remained undetected applying corrosive substances to a
persistent ulcerated leg for over three years, until a wily surgeon locked
the limb into an iron box. On healing, he received soo lashes. In the same
regiment on campaign in Portugal in 1810, "Two Irishmen of our company
went a short distance into a wood and fired balls or slugs through their
hands ... stating that they had been attacked by peasants. The Colonel...
saw though their deceit? Other maiming in 1813, included cutting tendons
(undertaken by Private Thomas Beckwith of the 45th Foot) and chopping of
a finger (achieved by Private Gilbert Kane of the 3rd Foot) for which both
men got a flogging rather than the expected discharge. As Wellington's
Peninsular army became established in its seven-year campaign, its base
hospital near Lisbon spawned a long-term group of the sick and injured.
These 'Belem Rangers' were treated with a mixture of scorn and envy and
feature in many memoirs of the war.116
Feigned illness continued into the Victorian army. Rigidity of the knee
was an occasional dodge, as tried by a private of the sth Fusiliers at
Colchester in 1863, where chloroform administered by a doctor unbent the
joint. Flogging was by then reserved for more serious crimes, so the soldier
was imprisoned for six months and then drummed out of the army. Another
Victorian trick was counteracted by the Medical Corps with the home made
coin catcher from the Boer War used to extract halfpenny coins from the
gullets of soldiers who had swallowed them in an attempt to avoid the firing
line'. Pretended madness was another long-running ruse. This occurred in
the French Wars, with a corporal of the sist Foot acting the old soldier, and
in 1863, with a man being drummed out of the >6th Foot at Aldershot when
unmasked. In Edwardian India, a comrade of Frank Richards in the Royal
Welch Fusiliers paraded naked, claiming to be a general in the Emperor of
Abyssinia's army, and was actually sent to an asylum in the UK. He later
wrote to Richards revealing the ruse.117
11S Norfolk Museums Service, Gressenhall, undated newspaper cutting (but c.803) in
Common Place Book, G.27.977.4.
116 Christopher Hibbert (ed.), The Recollections of Rifleman Harris (London: Leo Cooper,
1970), 64; Cooper, Rough Notes, I5; Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 65; and James, Life in
Wellington's Army, 8.
117 Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, s6; Twaites, Presenting Arms, 128 (The RAMC Museum
has a collection of these implements); Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 18; and Richards, Old
Soldier Sahib, 155-60.
199
Class Conflict in the Army
Suicide
Poor diet, crowded barracks, constant threat of discase, brutal discipline, hard
liquor, homesickness, miserable pay and boredom caused mental instability
and illness in many nineteenth-century soldiers, especially those posted in
unfamiliar foreign outposts. One outcome, made easier by the availabilitu of
firearms, was suicide. In the 186os and 1870s. soldiers had treble the suicide
tate of UK civilians, the highest of any occupational group.
This does not
include the large numbers of ex-soldiers who today might be diagnosed
with post traumatic stress. Less-extreme options might involve self-harm
to obtain discharge, or deliberate crime (including attempting suicide) to
obtain transportation to Australia as a preferred location.
Guns were used in
over half of army suicides, but not until 188- was ammunition held centrally
and not by soldiers themselves. Though this led to a decrease, the incidence
of suicide still remained three times that of civilians in 1904.18
Rumsby suggests that suicide was highest amongst skilled working-class
recruits, especially in the cavalry. whose aspirations were thwarted by the
realities of the military system and lack of promotion, and especially by good
soldiers pulled up for minor offences. He gives the example of a private of
the gist Foot who on a hot dav blew his brains out after his Colonel had
told him to put on a leather neck stock. Joseph Sloane of the gth Lancers,
when punished for missing a cuff button, killed himself with a pistol loaded
with his buttons. Soldier suicide rate in India and other hot stations was
even higher, prompted by climate, dust, boredom and home-sickness. This
was later diagnosed by French colonial army doctors as Soudanism: An
example of a suicide was given by Richards of the Royal Welch Fusiliers.
He described a melanchaly corporal in India, whose time was nearly expired,
who killed himself by diving head first into a well late at night. The classic
military suicide method was the firearm shot in the mouth. This became
easier with the introduction of modern rifles, which were shorter in length.
Prior to that, longer muskets had to be fired with a bayonet or - for the more
agile - a soldier's toes (se Illustration 6) 119
Gibraltar was a dismal postingo
especially under Spanish blockade.
Benjamin Miller records deserters there being shot whilst trying to escape
and numerous suicides. In 1802, 'a man of the Artillery drowned himself...
a number of soldiers made away with themselves, by shooting, hanging and
118 Colley, Captives, 332-3 and John H. Rumsby, 'Suicide in the British Army, c.1815 to
c.1860, ISAHR, & Sixte), t5i Lades, and French, Military Identities, 16 and 195.
119 Rumsby,
"The Sixteenth Lancers', 280, 349 and 353-55; John H. Rumsby (ed.), The Life
of a Lancer in the Wars of the Punjaub (Solihull: Helion, 2014 [185s)), 62; Mansfield, 'Exploited
Workers or Agents of Imperialism?', is; and Richards, Old Soldier Sabib, 227.
