Soldiers as Workers
Regulars
The British regular army consisted of units of guards and 'the line' (infantry
and cavalry), plus the Ordnance troops of the artillery, and engineers. For
the duration of the French Wars, the regulars also included 'fencibles'
(raised for home service only until 1803), six garrison battalions for Army of
Reserve conscripts who refused to volunteer for the line, and thirteen veteran
regiments for soldiers too old for active service, which could be posted to
imperial stations. Some Britons also served in various colonial units, some
of which became de facto penal battalions.
The regiment was the building block of the British army and generated
intense loyalty, often over centuries. This regimental pride and a pronounced
pecking order of social and political importance - itself sometimes with
class connotations - will be explored elsewhere. The nineteenth-century
army was a collection of autonomous regiments, still regarded as the
Colonel's property, which often made it dysfunctional on campaign:
In contrast [to other aspects of Victorian society], the Queen's army was a
heterogeneous collection of regiments and corps, each of which sought to
maintain its own identity. They were not linked by any universally accepted
code of military values, but by the civilian interests of their members.13
Infantry regiments at full strength could be over I,000 strong, though
they were
frequently
much
weaker, especially on campaign; cavalry
regiments had roughly half this number. Especially in wartime, regiments
could be divided into two or more battalions. At the top of the pecking
order were the tall and better-paid men of the Guards, who were based
mainly in London and whose regiments had a more direct relationship with
the crown. They were divided into the Household Cavalry, two regiments
of Life Guards and the Royal Horse Guards, and three regiments of Foot
Guards (more after 1900). Each of the last had a number of battalions and
formed a wartime strategic reserve. As will be discussed in the section
'Guards', in Chapter 3, below, they also had a particular role, not just
ceremonial, in the working life of the capital. The Guards also seemed to
have fewer offenders in their ranks and flogged very few of their soldiers
compared with
other regiments, especially after 1815. Guards officers®
commissions were the most expensive, and though paid more than line
officers, they all needed private incomes to cover their expenses, attracting
the highest concentration of aristocrats.14
Paul, 1977).
1) Gwyn Harries-Jenkins, The Army in Victorian Society (London: Routledge & Kegan
* For a recent account of these complex nuances, see Richard Holmes, Redcoat: The British
Soldier in the Age of Horse and Musket (London: HarperCollins, 2001), chap. 4.
Introduction
Below the Guards in social status came around 30 mounted cavalry
regiments, divided into heavy (Dragoons and Dragoon Guards - separate
from the Guards) and light (Light Dragoons, Hussars and Lancers). The
Prince Regent took a direct interest in the elaborate uniforms of the Hussars,
giving these regiments a greater cachet and ensuring that only the rich could
afford the more expensive officers' commissions.
The largest number of soldiers served in regiments of foot of the line.
The number, roughly 100, remained remarkably consistent throughout the
century, though they sometimes divided into extra battalions, especially
in wartime. While
each was given a title in 1782, mainly based on
counties, regiments had little to do with their localities until at least
after the late-Victorian Cardwell reforms.
They preferred to be known by
their numbers (ist Foot, etc.) and their particular recruits were drawn at
random from across the UK, though Irish and Scottish regiments tended
to attract these nationalities. Line regiments had the same training, with
regiments enjoying names like fusiliers or highlanders merely having
distinctive or exotic uniforms.
The exceptions to this
were the light
infantry and green-clad rifle regiments, trained in skirmishing under the
influence of Sir John Moore, which assumed an elite status during the
French Wars. Infantry regiments had varying social status for officers, with
light infantry at the top and Irish units at the bottom of the hierarchy.
Soldiers of the artillery and the engineers were employed by the Board
of Ordnance.
They were generally paid more than infantry or cavalry and
attracted a more educated and skilled rank and file. As will be discussed
in the section 'Artificers and sappers', in Chapter 3, below, they often
shared in a civilian trades culture.
Their officers did not purchase their
commissions and tended to be more middle class. They were educated at
the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, when other officers mainly learnt
on the job. Excluded from this study are the Royal Marines - soldiers
employed by Admiralty to staff the fleet. Their officers did not have to
purchase their commissions, and that fact, together with high prize money
during the
French Wars, were major incentives to join. Their numbers
were substantial, reaching 31,000 in the year of Trafalgar and still 9,000
in 1827.
Some mention is made of 'fencibles', who were regulars contracted for
home service only and originally formed in Scotland, as the Militia Act of
1757 did not apply there. During the 1790s, several dozen fencible horse and
foot regiments - often raised locally by landed magnates - became part of
the huge mobilisation of manpower, as increasing numbers were sucked into
the West Indian campaigns.
As will be discussed in the section 'Contract
culture', in Chapter 4, below, fencibles were keen to uphold their distinctive
contracts, and resisted drafting abroad. They were given more privileges
