156
Soldiers as Workers
workers, were often able to control their pace and output (the 'stint), in a
surreptitious way, as described by an officer in 1885:
Tommy Atkins was busy cutting down trees in the methodical manner
peculiar to him when on fatigue duties ... An English soldier hardly ever
labours alone; if a bucket has to be carried twenty yards, two men go and
march it off solemnly, one on each side, as if it was a prisoner of war. So, in
cutting down mimosa trees, one man throws a rope over a tree and bends
its head on one side, another takes an axe and gives it two or three chops
at the stem; two more stand on the right and left waiting till the tree is
down, and then all four set to work to haul it to its place?
The army contract culture was embraced by all rankers when faced
with official demands deemed unacceptable to customary practice, in a
combination of Thompsonian 'moral economy' and modern class confict.
This included unskilled and ill-paid privates, as well as artisans. The results
then could be spectacular, as demands for popular rights overcame fear of
fierce retributive punishment. Large-scale strikes could then erupt, such as
the widespread mutinies over peacetime pay reductions in North America in
the late 176os and perennial conflicts over batta, traditionally given to troops
in India over many decades.
The citizen soldiers of the county militia were also liable to take mass
action. There was widespread conflict all over southern England in 1795,
linked to bread riots and disputes over contract changes and clothing
allowances with the local militia in 1810. Regulars were not immune, as
instanced by the Gibraltar Mutiny of 1802, triggered by harsh treatment and
contract disputes with the peace. Both officers and men of the East India
Company were renowned for militancy over their contracts. This culminated
in the White Mutiny' of 1858-59, when thousands of soldiers struck work
and occupied their barracks over enforced transfer to Crown service, with its
reduced terms and conditions of service and pension provision.
Go-slows or local strikes also took place when keen officers expected tog
long a 'stint' from the labour of their men. Unpopular officers, who persisted
in what were seen as unreasonable demands, could find it impossible to
enforce discipline and even risked shooting in the back during the heat of
battle. Despite the harsh discipline, the nineteenth-century army worked
mainly through consensus, informal contracts and collusion. Wise officers
would often listen to the views of experienced NCOs in getting tasks
completed. Protests often arose when consensus through these natural
systems broke down. Then trouble could occur. Even battlefield tasks,
• Quoted by Charles Lowe in "The Battles around Suakim' (in anon., Battles of the
Nineteenth Century, vol. 4 (London: Cassell, 1897-1900), 640).
Class Conflict in the Army
157
when deemed impossible or suicidal, could be the subject of strikes. The
troops who had already made unsuccessful assaults on the impregnable
Indian fortress of Bhurtpore, in 1805, refused to undertake another.
Although such actions would normally attract appalling punishments, if
timed correctly, wise commanding officers would accent that soldiers had
been pushed too far and sometimes tacitly condoned or even colluded in
these proceedings.
Desertion was a derennial problem both at bama lin 1822. one in
five soldiers in the UK had been imprisoned most for desprtion) and
in imperial postings, where goldfields or virgin land offered tempting
prospects. Although little is found in regimental histories
low-level class conflict, some soldiers' memoirs contain accounts of an
underground of backchat, undermining of unpopular officers and offcially
sanctioned binge drinking. Sergeants were sometimes deniated acting as
a combination of foremen and shop stewards in a world which officers
could not penetrate.
Other low-level conflict clearly had a class cement Wall ta fercely
rigid legal code with harsh punishments for any infringemente
surprise that most soldiers' resistance was covert.
This could be seen in
the passive resistance of dodges. looting. fraternisation with the enemy, or
service with a foreign, or even an enemy power. Though the last problem
declined throughout the centurv. others were enhanced through long
imperial postings after 1815, especially in India.
Extreme boredom caused
mental health problems, resulting in feigning illness to avoid duty or actual
sol harm, with the availability of firearms contributing to an army suicide
rate three times that for civilians. Others deliberately committed crimes to
gain transportation to Australia, dishonourable discharge or even prison. All
these forms of popular rank-and-file resistance could be construed as class
conflict and will now be explored in detail.
Contract culture
Other historians have recognised prevalent conflict in the British military
over contracts of work. It is most fully covered by Peter Way in his work on
British soldiers in pre-revolutionary North America. Here he found in 1763
an officer of the 45th Foot complaining that his men: 'behaved in a Most
Seditious Manner, would Scarce hear me and explain the order; one and all
declaring that they had inlisted for pay and & Provisions, and that if their
Contract was broken with them, they would no longer Serve, and insisted
upon my discharging them to a Man: Way concluded: 'Soldiers shared a
collective culture that understood their rights ... Army recruits, coming
from labouring and craft backgrounds, brought with them common notions
