48
Soldiers as Workers
learn their duties as leaders and having nothing to do with their spare
time, naturally went racing and enjoying themselves; the older officers
never having learned their work, were afraid of introducing change; and
the adjutants, riding masters and sergeant-majors settled down into the
groove of routine 44
NCOs and class
Management of each regiment was directed, with reference to the CO, by
a tiny group of technically skilled officers: Adjutant, Quartermaster and
Paymaster, who sometimes were ex-rankers themselves. Also of critical
importance, and part of this management team, was the RSM, the senior
NCO. He was responsible for managing the NCOs and seeing that orders
were transmitted. The NCOs, numbering about thirty-five Sergeants and
forty Corporals for an average infantry regiment, formed a curiously opaque
body: "Too little is known about these men, but there is good evidence
that the army paid them increasing respect? During the French Wars this
'foremen' group of NCOs, were seen to be vital to the life or death struggle.
They were given pay increases in 1797 and 18o6, with larger proportional
increases than privates, with Sergeants enjoying nearly double the wages
of rankers. Pensions were offered and also promotion opportunities to
administrative positions like RSM, Quarter Master Sergeant, Paymaster
Sergeant and Colour Sergeant. Basic education was the key to these new
senior positions, which required literacy and numeracy, though Corporals
could still do without these skills. In the 28th Foot in 1815, only 32 per cent
of rank and file have been found to be literate, but this rose to 63 per cent
of Corporals, and 96 per cent of Sergeants.45
NCOs found that junior management responsibility came at a price: once
wearing the chevrons, a distinct cleavage took place, and the sergeants
messed together and held themselves in every way apart from the ranks?
Strict segregation was dictated by standing orders:
NcOs are never to suffer themselves to ho tronted hu privates or ever drink
with them ... [or] will be immediately reduced to the ranks.
" Quoted in Nick Evans, "Sport and Hard Work", Tactics, Reform and Equestrianism
in the British Cavalry, 1900-1914, JSAHR, 89 (2004), 140.
* Cookson, 'Regimental World, 32-33 and John D. Ellis, ' Promotion within the Ranks
of the British Army: A Study of the Non-Commisioned Officers of the 8th Regiment of
Foot at Waterloo', JSAHR, 81 (2003), 219.
Class Structure and the British Army
49
An NCO is never to permit a reply from a Soldier whom he reprimands.
From the moment a Private Soldier is promoted to the rank of Corporal
all intimacy between him and the men should cease, and he is not, on any
occasion, to drink with, or suffer himself to be treated by them.46
Soon after the French Wars, separate catering arrangements were
instituted for NCOs and men to reinforce the division and prevent mingling
of classes: 'unmarried [NCOs] will breakfast together and dine together,
half an hour after the men? Separate Sergeants' messes were formed in
each regiment between 1815 and 1840 which aped the social manners of
the officers' mess.47
John Shipp recorded the separation after his promotion to RSM of the
22nd Foot in India in 1803: 'T established a proper distance between my rank
and that of all the other NCOs; giving them all the respect due to them, but
emphasising that they must keep a proper distance between themselves and
the private soldiers ... I made good NCOs and they made good privates?
Through extraordinary bravery at the Siege of Bhurtpore, Shipp earned an
ensign's commission in the 8-th Foot (a feat he repeated an unprecedented
second time later in the French Wars). He had been courting the daughter
of a retired NCO who now had a job with the EIC. Such was the gulf
between NCOs and officers that the retired NCO mistakenly assumed that
the marriage would not go ahead: 'I suppose you will break off your match
with my poor Ann. You will look much higher now? 48
The gulf between NCOs and rankers continued throughout the century:
The sergeant is a soldier and the private is a soldier; but there is a difference
between them beyond the difference of pay, position, responsibility and
dress. The sergeant might belong to a different race.
In my Pre-War soldiering days an NCO was not allowed to walk out with
a private and even if a young lance-corporal was caught walking out with
one he was brought in front of the Colonel, who would ask him to explain
why he had committed so deadly a crime.49
46 T.H. McGuffie, Recruiting the Ranks of the Regular British Army during the French
Wars, JSAHR, 34 (1956), 127; NAM 1989-08-1ro MISS, Standing Orders, Royal Staff Corps,
1807; and Standing Orders of the goth Regiment (Devonport: Pyke, 1867), 23.
* LIM, sand Regiment standing Orders (Dublin, 1844) i1 and 7 and French, Military
Identities, 126.
43 C.J. Stranks (ed.), John Shipp, The Path of Glory (London: Chatto & Windus, 1969), 95
and 100.
" Robert Blatchford, My Life in the Army (London: Clarion Press, 19g5), 76 and Frank
Richards, Old Soldiers Never Die (Uckfield: Naval and Military Press, n.d. 1933)), 345.
