138
Soldiers as Workers
formed a temporary Ambulance Corps for the Crimean War of 348 men,
though this initiative was not regarded as a success.159
Pensions based on rank, long service and good conduct (as well as
disability) were established in 1836. They were relatively modest for the
rest of the century, with NCOs receiving about 5 shillings a week. and
privates cightpence (raised to I shilling after the Boer War), Only in rural
Ireland would a retired senior NO have enough to keep him in comfort.
Poverty and the workhouse were the lot of soldiers who failed to rejoin the
labour market, with nearly 9,000 ex servicemen in receipt of poor relief
by 1897.160
NCOs nearing the end of their careers and worried for their future in
the outside world sought pre-retirement jobs to tide them over. Fortunately,
the growing Empire and interest in part-time or volunteer soldiering
at home and abroad provided a range of one ta
mundane jobs as instructors in locally raised colonial units. If reasonably
literate, there were openings for administrators to imperial barracks,
fortifications and other quasi-governmental or voluntary positions. In the
UK, long-serving NCOs also found jobs attached to regimental depots,
training recruits for drafring to antive hattalions as inctenators to saluntee
or yeomanry regiments, or in the peacetime permanent staff of the county
This process started early in recently conquered and uncertain frontier areas.
Grenadier Sergeant James Thompson, of Frasers Highlanders, disbanded in
Canada in 1763, stayed behind and was 'appointed overseer of the works
with the Quebee garrison's engineering appariment, which he held until
a few years before his death': Established Mediterranean stations rapidly
developed infrastructures for such staffing. By 1817, the Malta garrison had
the following staffing:
Deputy Paymaster General, Assistant Deputy Paymaster General, Barrack
Master General, Assistant Barrack Master General, Town and Fort Majors,
Provost Martial (sic and Assistant, Deputy Commissioner of Prisoners of
War, Purveyor to the Forces and Deputy, Hospital Mate, Clerks in several
Departments, Commissary and Paymaster to the Ordnance Department
and Deputies, Captain of the Keys ... Deputy Store Keeper General,
Clerks in the Commissariat, Commissary of Prisoners and Musters
[and deputies], Chief Commissionaries of the Field Train Department
159 Spiers, Army and Society, 1815-1914, 84-85 and Glenn Fisher, The Failure of the
Ambulance Corps in the Crimean War', JSAHR, 90 (2013), 161-81.
160 Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 339; Cookson, 'Early Nineteenth-Century Military
Pensioners as Homecoming Soldiers', 320; Karsten, Trish Soldiers in the British Army,
1792-1922', 52; and Spiers, Late Victorian Army, 147.
Soldiers as Workers
139
with Deputy and Assistant Commissary, Dispensers of Medicines and
Surgeon's Mate.
Other local appointments found included the 'Clerk of the Works, Bridge
Master and Garrison Quartermaster. Many of these posts had lucrative
perks and dodges. Barrack masters were notorious for demanding expenses
for damages from all ranks. According to the young Garnet Wolseley in
1832: A cracked pane of glass was a silver mine to these men. Fifty ensigns
may have occupied the quarter with this cracked pane in it, and all had to
pay for a new one?161
In sparsely populated colonies, soldiers
were natural recruits to
government jobs. In remote New South Wales, local officials employed
ex-soldiers as carpenters and builders to erect convict huts and sheep yards,
under an ex-Sergeant John Evans of the 46th Foot, who was Superin-
tendent of Government Works. His comrade, Sergeant George Waddy,
a steady soldier who had founded the first Wesleyan Methodist Chapel
in Tasmania, became storekeener and second in command of the Sarah
Island Penal Settlement where he set un Bible lasses for convicts. Also
in Australia, Sergeant Hudson became keeper of the Commissariat Store
House at 2 shillings a dav. and Private Stenhen Partridoe worked his
way up to become by 1818, Superintendent of Convict and Public Labour.
Large numbers of soldiers and ex-soldiers were involved in the adminis-
tration of the convict system. When the convict system was extended to
Western Australia, over 1,000 ex-NCOs were recruited. Between 1850 and
1880, they acted as guards on convict shins and cattlements as part of the
Enrolled Pensioner Force, who were also offered land grants after seven
years' service.162
In India, post-army employment became highly sophisticated. As the
Regimental Sergeant Major of the 22nd Foot in 1813, John Shipp was also
the local Gaol Keeper, wior of the zand Fodering and log-culing:
perquisites of all these posts brought me in a good income? Shipp also
courted and married the daughter of a stores conductor, a fellow post holder,
typical of the growing family networks in the expatriate community 163
161 Earl John Chapman ""Ordered Home to be Broke": The Disbandment of Fraser's
Highlanders', JSAHR, 88 (201o), 292; NAM 7310-72, Standing Orders 8th Foot, quoted in
Holmes, Sabib, 94.
162 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 47, 49, 78, 83, 106 and Ill and Frank Broomhall, The Veterans:
A History of the Enrolled Pensioners Force (Perth: Hesperian Press, 1985).
163 Stranks, John Shipp, 96.
