SOLDIERS AS WORKERS
Class, employment, conflict and the nineteenth-century military
The book outlines how class is the single most important factor in
understanding the British army in the period of industrialisation. It challenges
the 'ruffians officered by gentlemen' theory of most military histories and
demonstrates how service in the ranks was not confined to 'the scum of the
earth' but included a cross section of 'respectable working-class men.
Common soldiers represent a huge unstudied occupational group. They
worked as artisans, servants and dealers, displaying pre-enlistment working-
class attitudes and evidencing low-level class conflict in numerous ways.
Soldiers continued as members of the working class after discharge, with
military service forming one phase of their careers and overall life experience.
After training, most common soldiers had time on their hands and were
allowed to work at a wide variety of jobs, analysed here for the first time.
Many serving soldiers continued to work as regimental tradesmen or skilled
artificers. Others worked as officers' servants or were allowed to run small
businesses, providing goods and services to their comrades. Some, especially the
non-commissioned officers who actually ran the army, forged extraordinary
careers that surpassed any opportunities in civilian life.
All the soldiers studied retained much of their working-class way of life.
This was evidenced in a contract culture similar to that of the civilian trade
unions. Within disciplined boundaries, army life resulted in all sorts of low-
level class conflict. The book explores these by covering drinking, desertion,
feigned illness, self-harm, strikes and go-slows. It further describes mutinies,
backchat, looting, fraternisation, foreign service, suicide and even the shooting
of unpopular officers.
Nick Mansfield is Senior Research Fellow in History at the
University of Central Lancashire.
STUDIES IN LABOUR HISTORY
Series Editor: Professor Neville Kirk, Manchester Metropolitan University
LIVERPOOL
www.liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk
Cover image: Portrait of Private Henry Watts, 4th
Foot. Sent to his parents by Watts, bound for
Australia and painted by Charles Dean late
15th Foot) in Chatham, Spring, 1831.
ISBN 978-1-78138-278-3
9 781781 382783>
