162
Soldiers as Workers
The seven-year contract signed by Sergeant Cooper of the 7th Fusiliers
had expired just before the Battle of New Orleans in 1815:
The same evening, hearing that we were to storm the enemies works in the
morning, several of us went to the Colonel's tent and reminded him that
we should have been discharged at Portsmouth and sent home, according
to the orders from the Duke of York, then Commander in Chief. He said
that it could not be helped. This did not satisfy us, so we hurried to the
headquarters, to speak to Sir Edward Pakenham, but he was out viewing
the enemy's defences. 14
Cooper was lucky not to be amongst the casualties of the heavy British
defeat, especially as peace terms had already been signed across the Atlantic,
unknown to the two armies. That same year, Thomas Knight of the gsth
Rifles, stationed at Ypres in the brief peace before Waterloo, described the
views of a comrade, also on a seven-year contract. This Corporal got drunk
on guard duty and was: tried by court martial, and sentenced to receive three
hundred flashes) ... tied to a tree on one of the public walks. The corporal
being tied up first told Colonel Ross that he was a seven year' man, and in
six months would not care for him or any other officer. 15
Though soldiers could make complaints to their officers, the prevailing
culture in the ranks was to keep silent and not be singled out as a troublemaker.
In the peacetime army, soldiers could take grievances to Generals undertaking
the twice-yearly inspections, but it took a very determined man to display
such 'civilian attitudes of natural justice and self-help:
Private James Bell [i6th Lancers] showed himself amazingly persistent
in the pursuit of his perceived rights. He protested to the inspecting
general in December 1834 that his regimental commander had unfaily
taken away the horse that he himself had broken. Despite the general's
verdict that the complaint was ... too frivolous to require any Remark,
Bell repeated his claim in May 1835 ... General Stevenson ... ordered that
Bell be severely reprimanded. Even then Bell did not give up, and when
he complained again in December he was brought before a district court
martial, found guilty and punished. Bell must have been a stubborn man,
because he renewed his compliant yet again in May 1836, earning him
another warning in front of the regiment.16
Sergeant James Bodell, formerly of the soth and now serving with the
New Zealand Militia, led a protest in the field in 1864 against unreasonable
work levels:
Cooper, Rough Notes, 149.
15 Knight, British Battalion at Oporto, 8.
16 French, Military Identities, 194-95 and Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 254.
Class Conflict in the Army
After being at the Work... a few weeks we had been working on Sundays
also At last 26 of us would not work on Sundays. Captain Breaton wanted
us to go up the River on Sunday again and we went to our Captain and
told him we must have one day in each Week to do our mending and
washing. Captain Hill said quite right my men ... I hope you won't be
made more slavey by Captain Breaton. [Bodell was arrested by Breaton
but ... Next day an Order came from General Callaway for us to be
released and to have half Saturday and all Sundays to our selves, when our
Services were not specially required for Urgent Service."
Whilst serving in Glasgow in 1866 against potential Fenian subversion,
Private Edwin Mole of the isth Hussars was part of a strike which took
place in a pub, against an arbitrary change to weekly wage payments made
In those days it was the regulation to pay soldiers daily and the men
resented the infringement of their rights and in a rather arrogant way
demanded their money ... This was respectfully pointed out to him by
three troop Sergeant Majors, but he did not give way and it came to this,
that a serious outbreak threatened on the part of the men actually there
for the purpose of quelling disorder in others ... the major was driven aut
by beer bottles and oaths. Make him give us our pay, We mean to have
it'.. The sergeants. in a few minutes returned with the three days pay.
Although i2 ringleaders were later arrested and one imprisoned, the change
was reversed and the Major, having lost the confidence of fellow officers and
men, resigned his commision. In the Crimean War, British rank-and-file
prisoners of war, being escorted into the Russian interior, even negotiated
with their captors over food, allowances and billets, as well as forming courts
martial of the oldest soldiers to punish minor crime. 18
The citizen soldiers of the militia were particularly contract culture
conscious. In 1855, radical shoemaker and poacher Corporal James Hawker
described how his comrades in the Leicestershire Militia - mobilised for the
Crimean War - collectively defeated the threatened compulsion contained in
the new Panmure Act that would extend their voluntary service:
The men Lay Down there Arms in the Barrack Square and refused to
Drill. Lord Burleigh Begged of the men to take up there arms, saying This
is Mutiny? At 9.30 p.m. the bugle Sounded again and the Orderly Sergeant
announced the Order sending Home all Men who enlisted under the Act.
Hawker later decided to re-engage in the
militia but was mistakenly
arrested for desertion after his original enlistment was not cancelled in the
17 Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire, 147-48.
18 Mole, King's Hussar, 78-80 and Inglesant, Prisoners of Voronesh, 72 and 167.
