90
Soldiers as Workers
made to seduce the military Depot at Weedon which had been visited by
the radical brother to the armourer there' (Weedon on the Grand National
Union Canal in Northamptonshire was strategically important and intended
as the refuge of the Royal family in the event of Napoleonic invasion) 15
Though there was little promotion for Armourers beyond the regiment,
the Board of Ordnance did have a few semi-civilian proof-master' and
storekeepers until after its abolition post-Crimea. One of these, William
Parry, took a team of eight artificers to join Lord Byron's adventurers in
Greece in 1823, where they set up an Ordnance depot for the independence
army. Thereafter, the RSA training course gave some opportunities a5
instructors for verv skilled men On leaving the army armourare conta
expect secure and lucrative jobs in the burgeoning arms trade in private
firms, mainly based in Birmingham. Dissatisfaction with private-sector
profiteering led to the expansion of government factories, based in Enfield
from 1816, in which many ex-army armourers also found employment 46
By 1900, the army employed over soo Armourer Sergeants, whose high pay
was further supplemented by perks; when soldiers' firearms were adiudged
dirty by inspecting officers or NCOs, hapless rankers were fined a shilling
to cover the cost of specialist cleaning, which went to the Armourer New
recruit Frank Richards, angered by this injustice in 1900, and protesting,
found himself confined to barracks for eight dous The introduction of the
rifled musket in place of the old smooth hore Brown Race created a need fo
accurate shooting. The army's School of Musketry opened in Hythe in 1853
training Sergeant Musketry Instructors. This was another new tradesman's
post, which was rapidly adopted by all regiments.47
Butchers, food and drink
Alongside the regimental tradesmen, other long-term, but non-establishment
jobs were needed by the army, especially in wartime. largely sunplied by
recruits with pre-enlistment skills. In the UK, soldiers traditionally cooked
their own food in small informal messes and poor ration food could bo
enhanced at a better price if pre-enlistment dills of a mess menher could
4s Cameron Pulsifer, 'Bevond the Oueen's Shilling Reflections on the Ba. of Orho
Ranks in the Victorian British Army, ISAR, 80 (200), 33-32 and Michael Miller,
Ultimate Engine": The British Army and Popular Radicalism', MPhil. thesis, University of
Southampton (Chichester), 1996, 19.
46 Roper, Records of the War Office. 16. Moises Enriane Rodrican Tam sh Finos of
Freedom: British Mercenaries in the War of the Two Brothers, the First Carlist War and the Greek
War of Independence (Falls Village, CT: Hamilton Books, 2009), 334-35 T.W. Fortescue, The
Last Post (London: Macmillan, 1934), 67; and Strachan, 20m ater 0 to Balaclava, 40.
* Strachan, From Watertoo to Balalava sahaR, hard or Soldier Sabib, s8-60.
Soldiers as Workers
91
be harnessed. James Aytoun, serving with the goth Foot in Ireland at the
end of the eighteenth century, asserted: We had a butcher in the mess and
he and some more of the men used to go a mile or so into the country
and buy a sheep which, when killed and all counted, cost us about is ½d
per pound'.48
With no regimental cooks employed in the early nineteenth century, such
skills were at a premium on campaign. In the Peninsular War, the largest
number of combed-out men were butchers who processed meat carried 'on
the hoof' with the armies, but cooking was still shared out by the messes
of the rank and file. In the words of a Corporal of the 42nd Highlanders:
Beef ... we scarcely ever stood in want of, but it was marched alive with
the army, and whenever we halted a certain number of bullocks were killed
for the brigade by the butchers of the different regiments? "The butchers
as a sort of perquisite were entitled to the bullocks' heels which they
sometimes sold', alongside offal, heads and even blood: 'bullock's tail could
fetch sixpence or a shilling and the liver five shillings. In the inevitable
plundering by hungry soldiers on campaign, other pre-war skills could also
be useful, as reported from Spain in 1810 by a sergeant of the jth Royal
Fusiliers: We found a box in which was a bag of Indian corn.
taken by one of our men who had been a miller to a windmill at some
distance. He set it going and ground the corn, of which we made several
messes of passable porridge?49
With the end of the French Wars, the widespread availability of recently
constructed barrack accommodation and the new army role of imperial
gendarmerie, cooking for troops began a slow process of professionalisation.
The old small self-caterine mess system was renlaced bu regimental cooks
in barrack kitchens, though separate dining rooms were a late nineteenth-
century development. Cooks began to be appointed, again largely on
pre-enlistment skills, with a Sergeant supervising a group of about ten, one
for each infantry company in a regiment, Food preparation (spud bashing)
became a regular activity for unwilling rankers in fatigue parties or as minor
punishment for defaulters.
The many strains on the army caused by the
crisis of the Crimea and Indian Mutiny led to some food reform in which
the celebrated chef Alexis Sover plaved a part by designing a camp cooker
with appropriate menus No specialist trainine courses existed until 187
leading to perennial ranker complaints about army food and especially the
48 Aytoun, Redcoats in the Caribbean, 2.
49 Outed in Esdaila Poniacular Fragnitnescar date Fileen Hathaway fed) A Dorset Soldier,
Autobiography of Sergeant William Lawrence, 1790-1869 (Staplehurst: Spelmont Press, 1995
(t8861). 88: Coss, All for the Kind's Shilling, 92: lames. Life in Wellington's Army, 116: and loh
Spencer Cooper, Rough Notes of Seen Cambaions (Staplehurst: Spellmount, 1996 [18601). co
