66
Soldiers as Workers
was balloted into the Army of Reserve in 1803, before volunteering for the
95th Rifles:
In our army the men best like to be officered by gentlemen, men
whose education has rendered them more kind on manners than your
coarse officer, sprung from obscure origin, and whose style is brutal and
overbearing.
I am convinced that the English soldier is even better pleased to be
commanded by some man of rank in his own country, than by one who
has risen from his own station.89
patronage of an ex-officer. It is also worth remembering that he never say
active service after contracting Walkheren fever in 180g and his experience
was relatively limited compared with other ranker memoirists of the period.
So, arguably, he did not experience the intense camaraderie within the
25th Rifies that developed with officers like Peter O'Hare, as discussed
Sergeant Joseph Donaldson of the gath Foot was also disparaging of one
working-class officer who was his temporary CO in Spain and contemptuous
of his knowledge of soldiers' dodges:
Having neither the education nor breeding of a gentleman, he] felt jealous
in the company of officers, and lived in a sullen manner. He generally
passed his time in gossiping with his barber and mooner indeed any of
the men, with an affection of entering into their concerns. By this and
eavesdropping he became acquainted
with little circumstances which
another commanding officer would have distained to listen to, and which
he made bad use of. The full extent of his malevolent disposition was
not known, however, until he got command of the regiment, when he
introduced flogging for every trivial offence?°
The rank and file were said to be especially contemntuous of lohn
Whitlocke, who surrendered an entire British army to Argentinean militia
during a disastrous assault on Buenos Aires in 1807. Whitlocke's background
was relatively humble - his father was steward to the Earl of Aylesbury -
and, according to Fortescue:
His most objectionable characteristic seems to have been arrogant but
spasmodic self confidence, with an affectation of coarse speech and
* Christopher Flibbert (ed.), The Recolletions of Rife Harris (London: Leo Cooper, 1970),
28 and 67, For a discussion of Harris and other memoris are oRamsay, ™A Real English
Soldier, Suffering, Manliness and Class in the Miritinee Neil anury Soldiers Tale, in
Kennedy and McCormack, Soldiering in Britain and Ireland, 1750-1850, 136-53.
90 Donaldson, Recollections, 145.
Class Structure and the British Army
67
manners which he conceived to soldier-like bluntness, but which often
degenerated into rudeness towards some of his inferiors and familiar
obscenity of language towards others. He stooped to court the favour of
the rank and file by affected use of their phrases, with the inevitable result
that he earned only their thorough contempt.?1
Soldiers' protests against Whitlocke took the form of graffiti, both in Buenos
Aires and in London, where he was court martialled and dismissed (see the
section 'Passive resistance, in Chapter 4, below). Peter Stanley's recent study
of soldiers' graffiti in the Indian Mutiny cites examples which criticise the
social origins of some officers. His conclusion is: 'soldiers ... were more acute
judges of the nuances of class than we will ever be ….. they regarded [officers)
as falling short of the gentlemanly qualities which soldiers apparently sought
in their superiors'. This ties in with studies of other groups of unorganised
workers, like agricultural workers or institutional servants.?2
The favourable view by soldiers of officers and gentlemen might have been
linked to the exercise of paternalism. Direct references to paternalism on
the part of officers are comparatively rare in nineteenth-century rankers'
memoirs, even though there was widespread debate on its retention or
decline during the period. Inevitably, ex-RSM turned journalist William
Cobbett had something to say about it, claiming that the paternalism he
sometimes encountered in his army service in the 178os was disappearing
under the regime of barracks, shifting regiments and repression, whe
grand object is totally to efface from the mind of the soldiers all recolle
of paternal and filial affection; to make him as insensible as the musket
wields? Curiously, radical trooper John Pearman's account of the Battle o
Gurjat against the Sikhs displays affection for his CO:
Jest at that moment a 9 Pound shot struck the ground at the Colonels
horse heels but Coln White did not - move or Look round his Brave old
Face never moved with his White hair round it he only said stiddy men,
make much of your horses men. I think there was not a man or an officer
who knew Colonel White that did not Love him such a happy Face and
so kind to all.93
91 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 5, 388-89.
"2 Peter Stanley, "Highly Initammay Writings" Soldiers Graffiti and the Indian
Rebellion, JASHR, 74 (1996), 239. See, in particular, Mansfield, Grads and Snobs, 184-98,
"3 Cobbett's Weekly Political Pamphlet, 32(37), 13 Dec. 1817, 146. Steedman, Radical Soldiers
Tale, 46-47. (Steedman also crediply outlines the tensions in the attempted paternalism by
Pearman's officers.)
