Soldiers as Workers
vast. This is one reason why no systematic historiography is attempted here,
especially as very little of it narrates stories of proletarians, slackers, deserters
or rebels. Most of these books assume that soldiers were loyal, or heroes, a
line also pursued by regimental histories and military museums, but some
useful material can slip out between the cracks.
A few well-researched substantial volumes, which contain material on
the social history of soldiers, have been of great use to this study, despite
the prevailing conservatism of most military history and its lack of interest
in covering rankers who did not live up to the loyalist stereotype.
The
magisterial thirteen volumes, by J.W. Fortescue, A History of the British
Army, is the starting point. Other more modern works are listed as they
are quoted. The academic journals for learned societies in both labour and
military history have added to the mix, despite the total lack of overlap, the
tangential treatment of class by military historians and the general hostility
of labour historians to the subject.
A few soldiers' memoirs survive from the eighteenth century, but the
end of the French Wars saw an 'avalanche of personal memoirs, diaries
and
printed correspondence. [with al concern for realism and their
frankly personal style. Though still outnumbered by officers' accounts, they
also included a large number written by the rank and file. The context is
significant. First, they were written for upper- and middle-class audiences
and often sponsored by ex-officers, gentry, clergy and journalists, with the
last sometimes rewriting or perhaps ghost-writing the narrative. David
Vincent, the historian of nineteenth-century working-class autobiographies,
argues that the upheavals of industrial change and the political threat
of popular radicalism were main drivers of this market, which provided
reassurance to polite readers about the loyalism, deference and piety of the
working class (which in the early nineteenth century had the potential to
be otherwise). Secondly, these accounts concentrate on the successful battles
which polite society wanted to celebrate after 1815, so the Peninsular War
tends to dominate, with far fewer accounts of the many abject failures of
the British military from the 1790s right up to 1814. Long-serving regular
career soldiers, likely to have served in many campaigns, predominate, rather
than the citizen soldiers swept into the enlarged forces. The conscripted
militiamen's voice in garrisoning a volatile country facing industrial change
and political conflict is largely unheard, although some useful accounts from
these auxiliaries who volunteered for the line do exist.
Despite all this, contemporary accounts can often be interrogated to give
clues about working life, with material on enlistment, billeting and discharge,
though the soldier's inner world is nearly always opaque and notably reveals
few opinions on the changing society outside the barracks. The appetite for
rankers' memoirs - now by long-service professionals - continued after 1830
Introduction
with wars of imperial conquest. Indeed, it is claimed that: 'The military
autobiography was the only consistently produced working-class account of
the early and mid Victorian years.' But the same problems outlined above
still exist, and aside from a superficial patriotism these voices are generally
silent on the great unmilitary events through which they lived.
Types of military service
The overall size of the British army varied during the nineteenth century.
The mass mobilisations of the French Wars climaxed with 300,000 regulars
in 1814, a figure which with the navy, militias and (unpaid) volunteers may
have been doubled, involving between in per cent to 14 per cent of the adult
male population and three times the 'military participation ratio' of imperial
France. In 1814, the armed forces absorbed 68 per cent of total government
expenditure. The peacetime army slimmed down to below 100,000 but the
contingencies of the Crimea and the Indian Mutiny raised this to nearly
250,000. Though numbers declined again in the subsequent decades, given
the needs of garrisoning a vast Empire (particularly in India after the events
of 1857), despite the widespread use of colonial troops and self-defence
by 'white dominions', this size was substantially the same by the time of
Victoria's jubilee and increased again under the impact of the Boer War.
As well as the regular army, as will be discussed shortly, other auxiliary
troops were also paid to soldier, especially in wartime. In addition, the East
India Company ran its own army recruited from Britons and many served
in private expeditionary forces recruited by overseas military adventurers
between 1815 and 1840. Though this study excludes part-time (usually
unpaid), volunteer soldiers, with the exception of paid instructors, it is clear
that common soldiers formed one of the largest occupational groups during
this period.12
11 David A. Bell, The First Total War: Napoleon's Europe and the Birth of Modern Warfare
(London: Bloomsbury, 2007), 312 and David Vincent, Bread, Knowledge and Freedom: A Study
of Nineteenth-Century Working Class Autobiography (London: Methuen, 1981), 26-27. For a
recent analysis of memoirs, see Neil Ramsay, "A Real English Soldier": Suffering, Manliness
and Class in the Mid-Nineteenth-Century Soldiers' Tales', in Kennedy and McCormack,
Soldiering in Britain and Ireland, 1750-1850, 136-53.
12 Roderick Floud, Kenneth Wachter and Annabel Gregory, Height, Health and History:
Nutritional Status in the United Kingdom, 1750-1980 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990), 46-48. These figures vary slightly, though with the main trends confirmed in
Peter Burroughs, 'An Unreformed Army? 1815-1868', in David Chandler and I.F.W. Beckett,
The Oxford Illustrated History of the British Army (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994),
164; Roger Knight, Britain against Napoleon: The Organization of Victory, 1793-1815 (London:
Penguin, 2014), 260 and chap. 13; and Philip J. Haythornthwaite, Redcoats: The British Soldier
of the Napoleonic Wars (Barnsley: Pen & Sword, 2012), 6.
