122
Soldiers as Workers
to wear uniform outside barracks whilst undertaking a second civilian
job' Whilst this was unlikely to have applied to the dirty inhe discussed
above, in their bright uniforms (of scarlet rather than the dirty brick red
of the line on campaign) they were in demand for staffing society events
or as extras in theatrical performances, particularly in patriotic popular
productions: 'Sometimes theatre managers enhanced the visual impact
by hiring soldiers in uniform to perform. Though this was opposed by
some Colonels: 'It appears that these performances were useful as wartime
propaganda, however, and guardsmen "were allowed by the authorities" to
take part in a London production which stared the Bottle of Inkermann in
August 1855'. Their size also supported casual employment as scene shifters in
theatres, and their black musicians - usually percussionists - were especially
in demand. 120
Guardsmen were counted amongst the noted professional pugilists of
the period, one example being the celebrated Corporal John Shaw of the
znd Life Guards who ran amok and lost his life at Waterloo. Shaw had
deliberately enlisted in that regiment from remote Nottinghamshire to
further his boxing career. With their well-developed physiques, Guardsmen
were also in demand as artists' models. Shaw had been used by Benjamin
Haydon and William Etty (a nude Ettv sketch of the hover forms the
centre of a display on the subject at the Household Cavalry Museum, along
with a coor of his ll bo a Tif Guarde was
later used by John Everett Millais in his painting "The Black Brunswicker
Some Guardsmen were active in the sex industry in the capital over three
centuries, particularly as male prostitutes. Known as a 'Bit of Scarlet, this
was centred upon the royal parks convenient for their barracks in St Jamess.
Daniel Houlbrook's claim that homosexuality was part of mainstream
Guards life in the twentieth century may also be arup of the nineteenth.
Despite its being severely censured, male prostitution went on, only revealed
by legal action. In 1806, Guardsman Greenhough was pilloried at Charing
Cross and pelted by women, 'highly exasperated at the enormity of his
offence, land] "attempts to commit unnatural offences". After this, he
and a colleague were imprisoned for 12 months. The popular press - and
especially the radical section - was keen to publish exposés like that of
the Bishop of Clogher in 1822. Here, Private John Moverley of the ist Foot
Guards was accused with the Bishop of a sexual act in front of witnesses
Spectacle, 144. See also Russell, Theatres of War.
120 Ellis, '"Left to the Streets and the Workhouse", 206 and Myerly, British Military
121 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 27 and Lady Lever Art Gallery (www. liverpoolmuseums.
org.uk/ladylever/collections/paintings/galleryz/blackbrunswicker.aspx).
Soldiers as Workers
123
in the backroom of a Haymarket pub. The incident attracted the attention
of William Cobbett, who raised the case of an unfortunate Irishman who
had accused the Bishop of importuning him in i8u and had been flogged
and imprisoned for his pains. Both Clogher and Moverley skipped bail and
disappeared from history. In 1833, James Flowers, another Guards private,
was prosecuted at the King's Bench, 'accused of an attempt to commit
an unnatural act' along with W.J. Bankes,
Tory MP for
defendants drew on character witnesses including the Duke of Wellington
and the future Lord Raglan for Bankes, and fellow soldiers for Flowers,
and both were acquitted, though Bankes went to live abroad in 1847 after
a further scandal.122
Guardsmen's involvement in homosexual prostitution continued in a
more discrete way into the mid-Victorian period. Edward Leeves's diary
from 1849 to 1850 highlights his obsession with privates of the Roval Horse
Guards (particularly a trooper named lack Brand who died of cholera) and
his romance with the gallant Blues' who were 'all that I love'. He gave them
money and collected their regimental canes and buttons? 123
Such risky trade gave opportunities for further profit through extortion
and blackmail, often with soldiers wives as accomplices. In 1794, the wife of
Private Paul Hill, an std Shares Wues of an affair with her husband, with
a mob at her back, shouting that Butts was a 'b-gg-t and a sodomite' and
demanding silence with half a guinea Wealthy clients were more typical,
leading to considerable earnings, up to £5o a week by the 193os, when a
police inspector could report: I am afraid that ... there is an atmosphere of
this kind permeating a section of the Guards? 124
The living conditions of guardsmen in unsanitary barracks in St James's
and Portman Street were a disgrace to the Victorian army, with Portman
Street's 22-man rooms described thus: 'it requires a strong nerve on the part
of one who would put his nose into it. Overcrowding, damp uniforms and
the emphasis in London on sentry duty, also contributed to a high level of
disease, particularly consumption. By the 18gos, "The general result was that,
whereas the general rate of mortality among the population of military age
varied between seven and a half and nine in a thousand, that of the Guards
122 Matt Houlbrook, 'Soldier Heroes and Rent Boys: Homosexuality, Masculinities, and
Britishness in the Brigade of Guards, circa 1900-1960', Journal of British Studies, 42 (2003),
35k-88; Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 72; lain McCalman, Radical Underworld (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1993), 206-07; Penny Young, Two Cocks on the Dunghill (South Lopham:
Twopenny Press, 2009), 242-43; Annual Register, 1833, 164-69; and The Political Soldier, 7
Dec. 1833-
123 Edward Leeves, Leaves from a Victorian Diary (London: Secker & Warburg, 1985), u12.
124 Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in the British Army, 205 and Houlbrook, 'Soldier Heroes and
Rent Boys', 361, 363 and 372.
