16
Soldiers as Workers
Quasi-conscription
That the British army was recruited by voluntary enlistment until 1916 is
undoubtedly correct. However, compulsion of various sorts was employed
both in the eighteenth century and during the early nineteenth century
via impressment, crimping, Highland levies and balloting for the Militia,
Supplementary Militia and Army of Reserve. Many troops, particularly
those of the militia, were deliberately given a hard time to induce them
to volunteer for the regular forces. These stratagems are reviewed below to
argue that this amounted to a quasi-conscription during the French Wars.
Impressment
The eighteenth-century British army used impressment to fill its ranks
via local authorities, as late as the American War of Independence. These
'vestry men' generally included the feckless of the parish, especially debtors
and men deserting families, and may have contributed to the unsavoury
reputation of rankers in the nineteenth century27
Crimps
Recruitment reached crisis point in the 1790s, as Britain mass mobilised for
the French Wars. As bounty payments increased, London criminals seized
the opportunity of supplying recruits to order, especially for new officers
raising soldiers for their commissions. These 'crimps' obtained, or forged,
'beating orders' which gave them legal authority to hold recent unemployed
migrants to London at inns, and then trick, intoxicate or force them into
the army. Crimps would also instruct the petty criminals in their gangs into
the techniques of desertion and 'bounty jumping, with the profits being
jointly shared: 'the most depraved and criminal part of the community are
at present in possession of beating orders, who being restrained by no rules
of moral rectitude, are constantly bringing odium on government. Popular
protests erupted in London in 1794, in which several public houses were
burnt and the protests were only put down by troops. In April 1795, one boy
servant was targeted:
(The crimp followed him, and desired he would take a shilling and
purchase some tobacco at a shop close by; the unsuspecting youth did it,
and when he returned, the fellow immediately seized him, and told him he
had taken the King's money, and he must go for a gentleman soldier. He
was in the act of dragging him away, when the boy, by his cries alarmed
the neighbourhood, who flew to his assistance and rescued him. They
27 Stuart Reid, British Redcoat (Oxford: Osprey, 1996), s; H. Moyse-Bartlett, The British
Army in 18gơ', JSAHR, 52 (1974), 235 and Buckley, British Army in the West Indies, 58.
17
Introduction
seized the kidnapper, and
gave him over to the mob, who calmly heard
the story, and then took him to the next pump, and attempted to purify
him with water.28
Such actions increased the unpopularity of the wars and added to the
difficulties of recruiting.
Though the worst excesses were curbed in the
Recruiting Bill of 1796, crimps continued their activities in many towns
during the French Wars. In 1804, Joseph Pickard of the South Hampshire
Militia was convicted in Brighton of having made an agreement with a
'crimp residing in Guilford'. Andrew Pearson, a Northumbrian weaver's
apprentice, ran away to sea soon after the war broke out again in 1803.
Fetching up in Cork, he was treated with 'cherry whiskey' by a man in a
pub who turned out to be a crimper, and woke up, having been kidnapped
'between 2 soldiers at Fort Duncannon. Though he refused to take a bounty,
his captors claimed his had taken the King's shilling and he was sent to the
Highland levies
In the period between the battles of Culloden and Waterloo, soldiers in the
Scottish Highlands continued to be levied by clan leaders in a traditional
fashion, though this was now linked to the processes of modernisation,
clearance and depopulation. Though the region only had a population
of about 300,000, nearly 50,000 men were recruited between 1756 and
1815,
with 23 line regiments and 26 fencible regiments being allocated
'Highland' status. Matthew Dziennik emphasises that the contract culture
was alive amongst these regiments and that Highlanders were keen to assert
their contractual rights. But these same soldiers could not challenge the
traditional cultural right of the clan chiefs to levy their regiments through
compulsion and bullying, especially in the first mobilisation of the 179Os.
Typical were the ,8th Foot (Seaforth Highlanders) of whom: 'some bands
of young Highlanders who went to the join the regiment, declared ... that
they had enlisted merely to save their parents from being turned out of
their farms'. The problem was that as the recruiting base of the Highland
regiments diminished they could not maintain their numbers as losses
mounted during the French Wars. As we shall see in the section 'Strikes and
28 Arthur N. Gilbert, 'An Analysis of Some Eighteenth Century Army Recruiting
Records, JSAHR, 54 (1976), 42-44; John Stevenson, 'The London "Crimp" Riots of 1794,
International Review of Social History, 16 (1971), 40-58, quoted in Victor E. Neuburg, Gone
for a Soldier: A History of Life in the British Ranks from 1642 (London: Cassell, 1989), 22.
29 Cozens, "The Blackest Perjury", 276 and Arthur H. Haley, The Soldier Who Walked
Away (Liverpool: Bullfinch Publications, 1987), 15.
