108
Soldiers as Workers
the full-blown bands of militia as they became the Special Reserve of their
county regiments.87
Militia bandsmen could enjoy very long careers of relatively obscure but
locally distinguished musicianship. William Shepperd, an Exeter bootaker
enlisted in ist Royal Devon Militia on its embodiment in 1853 at the age of
21. He became a drummer the following year, and achieved band sergeant
in 1889, a post he held until discharge in 1907, aged me His surviving diary
gives a unique picture of the life of a provincial military bandsman. Both
regular and militia bands played a full part in the complex civic and public
life of Victorian Britain. For big civic occasions several military bands could
be hired. The Preston Guild, held once every twenty vears, in 1862, say
the participation of the bands of the ruth Hussars and the doth rot from
Manchester and the locally based 3rd Royal Lancashire Militia 88
Before the development of formal music education, the nineteenth-
century army provided the best training and future career onnortunities
for amateur players of modest means wishing to turn professional Thi
was enhanced by the establishment of advanced training at Kneller Hall
after the Crimean War Armu life touch even for relatively nampered
bandsmen, was too much for many musicians, especially those from shabby
genteel backgrounds. One officer stated in ref. "There is no orenter amount
of desertions in any regiment than from the band; but that is simply
because they get a certain amount of mucial education which anshine then
to earn a livelihood, and they go away! The high rate of desertions from
bandsmen improved with the Cardwell reforms, with ambitious plavers more
willing to endure the new six-year short-term enlistment. But the imperial
gendarmerie role of the infantry continued to thwart ambition
members of the elite London hands continued to undertake a wide range
of outside engagements, opportunities were much more manoen for those
of the line regiments, with their constant moves and forcion postinos This
led in turn to a severe problem of retaining trained musicians in the face of
potential civilian enticements?9
The other training route for army musicians was to enlist when very
young. From 1805, small boys could be enrolled as drummers and fifers if
they were thought likely to grow in stature. Many such trainees came from
87 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 105, 110, IIT-12, 113, 187, 130-37 an
Army List (London: British Army Despatch Press, 1850).
gos. The numbers are calculated from Arthur Sleigh, The Roval Ma and no Cut
wa Herbert and Barlow, Mood to British Me seen
Bandsman, ed. Helen Barlow (www.open.ac.uk/Arts/cultures=of/hrasch.nnd Alma Crosbi
The History of Preston Guild (Lancaster: Carnegie, 1991), 184-
Herbert and Barlow, Music and Mit
Soldiers as Workers
109
families of the regiments with fathers serving in the ranks. Later, most boy
recruits came from the orphans from military families being educated at
the Royal Military Asylum or Hibernian Military Asylum. Here they were
cheaply trained as musicians, playing in the Asylums' own bands. With the
post-1850 need for larger imperial armies, music (along with shoemaking,
tailoring and carpentry) became a training option for boys at a growing
number of Industrial and Workhouse schools - up to 200 by 1903.
These
were designed to prepare juvenile minor offenders or orphans for a useful
life in the armed services.
Military bands offered unique opportunities for some virtuoso working-
class recruits. John Parry, son of a North Wales stonemason, joined the
Denbigh Militia aged r7, in 1793, and subsequently became a leading London-
based woodwind player and composer. Late nineteenth-century talented
bandsmen could extend their careers flexibly into the developing symphony
orchestras. They also became principals, composers and instructors in the
exploding amateur brass band movement. Family dynasties of influential
musicians and band masters covering all these fields usually originated with
the army. The Godfreys, stellar Victorian musicians, were descended from a
drummer in the Napoleonic Royal Surrey Militia who became bandmaster
to the Coldstream Guards and Musician in Ordinary to the King?"
Average players in line infantry battalions received their basic wages of
one shilling a day as a private soldier plus varied extra wages and bonuses
from the officers' Band Fund. Perks could bring in sums far in excess of their
wages. After one performance in 1813, the band of the 7th Light Dragoons
were paid e13 from the officers' Band Fund because
Cornet Blake had
deprived the men of their subsistence. Free drink was also common. For
the band of the goth Foot in 1848, 'On occasions when the band attends at
mess an allowance of one pint of wine shall be given to the Band Master also
one pint of Beer to each man - such expense to be charged to the officers
in mess.?'92
The subsidised cost of military handsmen threatened the wares of civilias
musicians (many of whom were ex-army). Unlike many of the other trades
existing in the army, it was hard to establish trade unions for musicians
because of the widespread availability of potential plovers willing to play
for low wages. Not until the late-Victorian period did musicians become
organised. The newly formed Amalgamated Musicians' Union (AMU)
90 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 70, 138-39 and 203-04. See also 'List
of Industrial, Workhouse and Reformatory Schools in the UK (1903).
" Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 73 and 74:
92 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 77-78: McGufhe, Life of Ligh
Cavalry Regiment, 21; and LIM, Mess Rules goth Regiment.
