112
Soldiers as Workers
First Camp, Bytown, September 1826.
Engineering officer's sketch, typical of the (literally) ground breaking
and skilled work undertaken by artificers in colonial development. Sappers and
Miners of the th company building the first camp for the construction of
the Rideau canal in Canada.
input and construction supervision given by two companies of the Sappers
and Miners (see Illustration 4). By providing water transport away from the
dangerous St Laurence River, it transformed the Canadian economy?8
The requirement to labour from all rank and file was a long-standing
tussle, for which extra money was expected, especially as it was considered
dishonourable for NCOs to do more than supervise. On Minorca in 1800,
'soldiers who construct them [field works) are Duties of honour not fatigue
and in addition they were given a discretionary payment of every eight days,
sixpence per day for the men whose exertions are approved by their officers.
Whilst for the senior NCO of each working party for his extra trouble
in receiving and retiring the Tools etc. [the COl is pleased to increase the
gratuity allowed him to one shilling. Whilst the NCO was also responsible
that they work to the utmost of their abilities' and for enforcing a 'Scale
98 Robert W. Passfield, Building the Rideau Canal: A Pictorial History (Ontario: Fitzhenry
& Whiteside, 1982), 42 and 177.
Soldiers as Workers
113
of fines for misuse of tools, such working situations gave opportunities for
workplace collective bargaining."
In the French Wars, troops seem to have been more willing to do digging.
In the siege of Cadiz in 1810, the goth Foot sent one Sergeant and seven
privates to the engineers as carpenters and artificers as well as 26 posted
as emergency artillerymen and drivers. For those men under fire, rewards
could be greater. Also defending Cadiz, men of the fist Foot were busily
employed at this time working at the batteries, which they were building on
the island; for which they received ninepence per day, in addition to their
pay. They had also extra rations, such as coffee and sugar for breakfast, and
a pint of porter daily; but the labour was very hard and the exposure to
the sun brought on sickness. The same year during the construction of the
Lines of Torres Vedras, tso soldiers of the line, combed out from tradesmen,
helped just 18 Royal Military Artificers to supervise a Portuguese workforce
in the construction of nearly o kilometres of fortifications which protected
Wellington's army. When Portuguese engineering officers claimed that the
task was impossible, Corporal Wilson and Private Douglas stripped off and
did the work themselves, earning promotion 100
The ad hoc extra payments for all troops were regularised in 1811 as; a
summer's day, work of ten hours, and eight in winter, which received an
extra penny an hour, with supervising NCOs receiving an extra one shilling
a day. With the peace this money was reduced. Sergeant Peter McAllister of
the goth Foot took charge of the Tools of the Working Party receiving an
allowance of sd per diem' on Mauritius in 1826. Governor General Napier - a
political radical had the troops working on the civil engineering projects
on 1820s Cephalonia that were designed to bring the
Greek island into
the nineteenth century. Such work was disliked. Despite his admiration of
Napier, hard-bitten veteran Sergeant Wheeler wrote:
'Another complaint
is, the men are obliged to work on the roads. In the same decade, soldiers
of the 48th Foot supervised convict gangs making roads in
New South
Wales, for which they were issued with an extra half ration of tea, sugar
and soap. Although such work may have been considered part of the job in
remote garrisons, by the time of the next major war, soldiers roadmaking at
In the words of one officer:
Sebastopol in 1854 were again objecting.
'Our
youths had not bargained for this when they assumed the red coat. 101
" NAM 1993-03-218, Standing Orders Island of Menorca [sid, 1800.
100 Divall, Redcoats against Napoleon, 42; Donaldson, Recollections, 82; and Whitworth
Porter, History of the Corps of Royal Engineers, vol. r (London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
1880). 150
101 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 72; LIM, Garrison Orders, Mauritius, 1826; Hart, Letters of
Private Wheeler, 202; Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 87; and Myerly, British Military Spectacle, 224.
