Soldiers as Workers
[whol agreed to stick by each other come what would and all plunder would
be equally divided'. The group picked up an (Allied) Dutch cavalryman's
fallen purse and after shooting a French Hussar officer "We had a rich booty,
40 double Napoleons and we had just time to strip his [metallic] lace ...
when we were called to join the skirmishers? On campaign in India in 1818,
John Shipp (a junior officer promoted from the ranks) complained that his
Colonel was killed in a surprise attack because the 'rank and file stole off in
search of plunder??
Soldiers could even loot from the dead of their own side, especially from
officers. Donaldson of the 94th served in the siege of Cadiz in 18IT:
A [British] major of engineers came over to supervise the operations...
when he was struck by a cannon shot and fell a lifeless corpse ... It is
remarkable to observe the covetousness of some men, even in the midst
of danger. When he fell, the epaulettes were torn from his shoulders, and
the gold watch was taken out of his pocket. The watch was afterwards
recovered, but not, I believe, until the chain and scales were disposed of?"
Pickings on Spanish battlefields paled into insignificance alongside those
of the Orient. New to India in 1804, ex-workhouse boy John Shipp was
mesmerised by the riches encountered during the Mahratta Wars:
We took possession of the town having glorious plunder from their hoards
(shawls, silks, satins, money and other spoils) ... the breaking open of
houses, the tearing apart of boxes, and bales of silk, shawls and satins, the
fighting and the tumult... the prize agent hard at work trying to keep our
lads from picking and stealing, but if there had been a thousand of them,
all lynx-eyed as could be, it would have been just as hopeless. I have heard
of a private in the Company's foot artillery, who got away with .. 1,000.
One man, at the sacking of Seringapatam in 1799, walked off with £10,000.
This contrasts with the official es offered in prize money to each ranker
(which was not distributed to the survivors until 1807).?2
British soldiers continued to loot, drink and burn throughout the carly
nineteenth-century wars of Empire, from Rangoon during the Burmese
War of 1824 to the sacking of Multan in the Punjab in 1849.
civilians in the last town was described by Ryder of the 32nd Foot:
One of my fellow corporals, who was never worthy of the jacket he wore,
was guilty of cold-blooded murder. He shot a poor, grey-headed old man
while he was begging that he would spare pod not hurt his wife and
Stranks, John Shipp, 208.
to Costello, The Adventures ofa Soldier, 93; Hart, Letters of Private Wheer, 6g and 173; and
71 Donaldson, Recollections, 77 and Divall, Redcoats against Napoleon, 196-98.
72 Stranks, John Shipp, 46 and Holmes, Sahib, 275 and 278.
Class Conflict in the Army
183
daughters; nor take away the little property they possessed, consisting of
a few paltry rings upon their fingers and in their ears. This fellow pulled
the rings off in a most brutal manner.?3
In the east, native enemies sometimes used their knowledge of harsh terrain
for guerrilla war, so British soldiers were encouraged to loot as a method
of warfare. In the conquest of Sri Lanka in for they hunted down
the unfortunate inhabitants away from their homes, burned their houses,
destroyed their crops, and cut down valuable trees ... since it left them free
to plunder and destroy, was by no means unpopular?74
Radical trooper lohn Pearman had no communction in looting from
civilians in the Second Sikh War:
Each of us had money we made on the Campaign (Lute) I sent home 65
to my friends ... when on piquet when we see a man with two Bullock -
made him tell us where he had put his money but he would not say until
we showed him our pistols when he gave us a Bag of Gold about one quart
Nor was looting in the Sikh Wars confined to the rank and file. An Assistant
Surgeon, Patrick Laing, recorded in his Indian journal of 8: 'ransacked
the loot, boned the medicine chest. some charms and a few odds and ends
.. Things sold well, realising the sum of R2000.75
The Indian Mutiny also afforded ample opportunity Private Wickins
reflected the widely held view that class featured in looting:
the prize agents as busy as their occupation would allow them, seizing
everything that they came into contact with or what they found on any
private soldier or NCO. Of course the staff officers and the commanding
officers had every opportunity of smuggling loots out of the palace, when
the real captors of the place had no opportunity of getting anything away
whatsoever.
As at Vitoria in 1813, the British could not pursue immediately after the
fall of Delhi in September 1857. They were prevented from marching to the
relief of beleaguered Lucknow, as much of the army was still looting. Again
this was not confined to the rank and file. A chaplain's wife, Mrs Harris,
commented: "We bought some very pretty cups and saucers today from a
soldier of the go Ft. The Ferred Bux [palace] was full of china and all sorts of
valuable things, the soldiers are always offering them for sale. Much of this
73 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. I1, 278; Holmes, Sahib, 389, and quoted in
Hernon, Britain's Forgotten Wars, 590.
74 Fortescue. Historv ofthe British Armv. vol. 5, 159.
75 Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 142 and 177 and H.B. Eaton, 'The Journal of Patrick
Sinclair Laing, 86th Regiment, 1842-1848', JSAHR, 62 (1984), 85-
