212
Soldiers as Workers
Soldiers employed part time in other fields generally found their identity
as workers enhanced. The tensions inherent in army life inevitably drew
them into conflict with their officers. Sometimes, the evidence shows
that soldiers resisted the military system in which they found themselves,
through actions which were primarily based on class. The nuances of this
opposition are explored in Chapter 4. Held in a fiercely rigid legal code,
with harsh punishments for any infringement, it is no surprise that most
soldiers' resistance was covert, and this is explored at mainly low and local
levels. Nonetheless, at times, discernible disputes, protests and strikes, some
of substantial size and based on pre-enlistment working-class attitudes,
attempted to enforce contracts or stand up for customary rights, and could
even take place on the battlefield. All were classed as mutiny according to
military law, but many were identical to civilian workplace practice and were
readily transposed from that source, and, remarkably, if skilfully led and
timed, could attract sympathy from some officers and avoid punishment.
Passive resistance and personal acts of opposition were always present, with
backchat, drinking, deliberate crime, desertion, looting, feigned illness,
self-harm and even, in extreme cases, suicide. Taken together, given that
the British army was dominated by class, it does not seem excessive to view
all acts of resistance as a form of collective class conflict.
However, soldiers were not in the main political subversives and the
overwhelming majority would obey orders to break civilian strikes or to
disperse protestors. Such activities do not mean that they agreed with the
outcomes of their own roles in this process. Historians of disempowered
groups, like servants or farmworkers, already know this and a labour history
for these unorganised groups is emerging into which this study belongs. The
very existence of such varied resistance amongst workers least able to voice
their own opinions confirms the potency of class divisions in studying the
era of Victorian Empire.
Above all, soldiering was only one part of an individual's career. Contrary
to most military histories, which portray soldiers as a special caste separate
from society, it is argued in this study that soldiers were, and remained,
primarily working class. Other historians - like Jennine Hurl-Eamon and
John Rumsby - are currently arguing that soldiers loyalties to family, friends
and localities were more powerful than those to regiment, army of crown.
Though these latter allegiances could be well-developed, most soldiers took
working-class attitudes with them into the army and retained them after
discharge. Such attitudes were varied and multiple identities could exist in
one individual. Post-enlistment employment could be the result of officers®
paternalism. Loyalty to regiment could be transposed to railway company
or police force, but the overwhelming attitude of the majority remained
working class.
Conclusion
213
Though soldiers' political views were mixed, they were often surprisingly
radical and invariably class based, even if they were conservative in their
leanings. Though ther often exhibited pride in regiment and nation - usually
combined with anti-foreigner sentiment - they could also demonstrate
growing class consciousness and support for political change.
These issues
will be explored further in the companion volume, which will uncover
the forgotten milieu of the political soldier. These include the involvement
of both officers and men in early-nineteenth-century political activities,
especially focusing on the large number of soldiers and ex-soldiers involved
in radicalism. These activities existed hand in hand with loyalty to regiment
and nation and a growing popular imperialism by the end of the century.
This book will challenge assumptions that the Rritish army was overtly
politically neutral, if privately conservative, by uncovering a rich vein of
Liberal and radical political thinking by soldiers and officers.
This ranges
from the old Whie 'militia' theory through radical militar ideas on tactics
and army reform to attempted ultra-radical subversion amonest troops. and
the involvement of soldiers in riots and risings. A special study is made of
nineteenth-century "military radicals' - soldiers of ex-soldiers who were
radical and later socialist activists.
In contrast, the popular anti-French feeling of the French Wars will be
examined alongside examples of extraordinary rank-and-file bravery which
fostered a widespread loyalist and patriotic narrative. Thus, mid-nineteenth-
century soldiers could be successfully employed in strike breaking and
deployed against rioters or Chartist revolts.
By the late-Victorian period,
popular imperialism was an important component of working-class support
for Conservatism and the book gauges what impact this had on rank-and-
file soldiers. Both volumes aim to illuminate a heretofore absent but now
well-rounded story of the nineteenth-century ranker.
