22
Soldiers as Workers
An imperial army
After the French Wars, the number of British colonies increased from 26 to
43 and included most of the world's safest harbours. This enabled the Royal
Navy to dominate the globe and protect the growth in trade which came
out of the industrial revolution. From 1815, for the next 50 years, colonies
were acquired at an average of 100,000 square miles a year, especially in
India and the Far East. Empire therefore became increasingly important
to the British army. Comparatively smaller than that of other European
powers, the British army, unlike them, did not raise specific units at home
purely for colonial service, except, as we have seen, the private army of
the East India Company. In common with other powers, it also recruited
defeated indigenous local soldiers to supplement its strength.
But Britain
throughout most of the nineteenth century still had to commit its regular
army - particularly its infantry regiments - to a role that was little more
than an imperial gendarmerie. This state of affairs was embraced by the
military authorities as a way of maintaining the size of the army and the
independence of its regiments. Although it decreased in numbers for a
decade after 1815, thereafter the army's upward trajectory was maintained
throughout the century,38
As Linda Colley observed: 'By 1815, virtually every British regular soldier
could expect to spend half, and often virtually two-thirds of his career in
imperial postings. She sees this situation as negative for these working
men in uniform: in Asia, the majority were soldiers, the worker bees of the
British empire, yet still men who, after a fashion, were captives of their own
state, captives in uniform! With no home leave for rankers posted overseas,
this imperial gendarmerie policy could result in their exile from Britain for
many years. By 1854, three-quarters of all infantry regiments were deployed
in colonial garrisons, with i3 years the average length of posting. Between
Waterloo and the Great War for example, the 46th Foot spent less than 15
years in the UK, and the rest abroad 39*
India especially became central to the working lives of most soldiers.
In 1857, 45,000 European soldiers were stationed there, alongside 232,000
Indian sepoys. The mass revolt of many of the latter in that year shook the
38 Knight, Britain against Napoleon, 474; David French, The British Way in Warfare,
1688-2000 (London: Unwin Hyman, 1990), 124; Nick Mansfield, 'Exploited Workers or
Agents of Imperialism? British Common Soldiers in the Nineteenth Century, in Billy
Frank, Craig Horner and David Stewart (eds), The British Labour Movement and Imperialism
[Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010), 9-22 and Floud et al., Height,
Health and History, 46-47.
eal Colley, Captives, 312; French, The British Way in Warfare, 134; R.G. Harris, 'Book
Review: Michael Angelo Hayes, The Costume of the 46th Regiment, ISAHR, st (1973), 56.
Introduction
23
British Empire to its foundations. Thereafter,
at least 62,000 British were
thought necessary to keep internal order and to counter the Russian threat
of the 'Great Game. Service in the late-nineteenth-century British army
became synonymous with India and this was widely reflected in popular
culture. The new two-battalion-linked county regiments of the Cardwell
System were designed to counter this imbalance,
with one stationed at
home and one in the colonies. But even this could not resist the centrifugal
force that was India. The year 1880 saw 59 regular battalions at home and
82 overseas.40
Despite the heat and disease, many rankers found colonial and Indian
service to their taste. Taking advantage of the cheap labour on offer, even
the rank and file employed servants to clean their kit and to care for their
horses if they were cavalrymen. 'Princes could live no better than we',
declared one Victorian trooper. Discipline was more relaxed in India, the
cost of living was low, and there was time for a range of leisure activities,
often in areas associated with higher social classes at home, such as shooting.
Above all, as we shall see in the section 'Pensioners, instructors and adminis-
trators', in Chapter 3, below, it also opened up work opportunities for many
rankers and for a chosen few it created unprecedented careers which would
have been impossible for working-class men in the UK. Indeed, as John
Rumsby concludes: 'Many soldiers found service in India very congenial; in
contrast to life in barracks at home or even civilian lives ... nearly half of
the men, when faced with returning to England, opted to transfer to other
regiments'41
Workers in a period of industrialisation
This book studies the working life of common soldiers during an intense
period of economic and political change. Just as in a world of globalisation
and dominant neoliberalism workers today need varied skills, so nineteenth-
century proletarians often needed to change employment as part of a strategy
to survive in an uncertain world and to achieve a measure of comfort in old
age. So soldiering, even in peacetime, could be part of such a strategy.
A good example of this flexible path is the career of radical soldier John
Pearman. Born in Kingston, Surrey, in 1819, his first trade at 13 was as a
sawyer. After seven years, he joined the Great Western Railway as Guard,
40 Holmes, Sahib, 8t and French, The British Way in Warfare, 140.
41 Holmes, Sahib, 155 and 164; Mansfield, 'Exploited Workers or Agents of Imperialism?',
13-14; Divall, Inside the Regiment, 164 and 190; and John Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers,
1822-1846: The Experience of Regimental Soldiering in India', PhD thesis, University of
Leeds, 2004, 325.
