54
Soldiers as Workers
code in the Peninsula, was constantly overlooked for promotion because of
his lowly origins as an apprentice engraver.61
Some ex-Quartermaster Sergeants ended up as commissioned Quarter-
masters (QMs), though the need to lodge £2,000 as surety for good behaviour
was often a bar to rankers. Though the enjoyment of perks was expected of
such posts, this could easily spill over into corruption, making vulnerable
ex-rankers liable to prosecution by their betters. In a row with a fellow
officer, QM Greenwood of the 7th Light Dragoons was accused of acting
as agent for a contractor, of receiving presents (a couple of fowls from a
farmer for supplying forage), for serving out hay already rejected, charging
items wrongfully against men and issuing short weight candles? Even in
wartime, the integrity of Ms as proper officers and gentlemen could be
found himself court-martialled after a row with a sumerior officer from
challenged. In the Peninsular War in 18t1, M Kingsley of the 3oth Foot
another regiment over transport, which upheld the officer's contention that
he was no gentleman' 62
Even at the height of the mass mobilisation of the French Wars with its
constant warfare, the number of ex-ranker officers was small. Glover claims
that one officer in 20 of Wellington's army had risen from the ranks, but of
the 3,000 plus British officers who were killed or wounded in the Peninsular
War, only twelve had been promoted from the ranks. Of these, only two
achieved a higher rank than Lieutenant and eight were the archetypal
Adjutant or Paymaster concerned with the mundane minutiae of running
the battalion. This figure may be artificially low since many other ex-rankers
who were OMs or Paymasters may have been far from the battlefield. Indeed,
of the 8o3 NCOs commissioned during the period of the Peninsular War,
271 were OMs, 139 Adjutants, and the rest (393) Lieutenants or Ensigns, with
very few able to purchase higher than their initial commission. 63
With the exceptions of the technical posts, ex-ranker officers were rarely
retained by their home regiment and were posted to unfashionable units.
Of the three NCOs promoted from the ranks by the Ith Light Dragoons in
the French Wars, two went as Cornets to the Royal Wagon Train and one
was retained as Adjutant. The Royal African Corps, York Light Infantry,
Garrison, Veteran and the West Indian Regiments were the archetypal
homes of such working-class officers Other opportunes hecame milan
6) John Hussey, Let No Man Lay to... SAR, 8o (2003), 99 and Mark Urban, The Man
Who Broke Napoleon's Codes (London: Faber and Faber, 200t), 26, 48, 73, II3 and 284.
Inside the Regiment, 25, 30-31 and 83-84.
62 T.H. McCuffie, The Life of Light Cavalry Regiment, /SAIR, 39 (1961), 24 and Divall,
) Glover, Wellington's Army, 36 and 38; Hall; History of the Peninsular War, vol. 8, 67, 92,
147, 191, 269, 287, 345, 376, 387, 520, 547, 604; and Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 106.
Class Structure and the British Army
55
in the foreign corps of the French Wars. John Harvey (1776-1860) ex-RSM
of joth Foot, became Adjutant and Ensign in the Royal Corsican Rangers.
Whilst Harvey retired with the peace, a Sergeant Payne, who fought at
Corunna with the Grenadier Guards, became their QM and served until
1855, though he was too old to accompany them to the Crimea.64
Some reforming officers thought that the failure to promote talented NCOs
was a waste, claiming they would be more attentive of duties and sensitive to
potential malingering, but little progress was made. Colonel Le Marchant,
founder of Sandhurst, tried to establish a parallel educational establishment
for NCOs, but this was rejected with the criticism: 'it was inconsistent with
the habits of the country to raise private soldiers to so close an equality with
their officers, as well as from the apprehension that the measure might prove
injurious to the service at large by leading to frequent promotions from
the ranks'. Instead, Sir George Bell, a Peninsular veteran, claimed: 'Many
brave men were driven out of the service by tyrannical injustice. They could
not break the system of being passed by and purchased over by boys from
the nursery, who stayed at home and never smelt powder? As part of the
post-Crimean War reforms, George De Lacy Evans, the radical General and
MP, again pressed the case, hoping to ride the tide against the vestiges of
'Old Corruption', but his Commons motion was defeated. 65
Though tolerated through necessity in the wartime crisis, reaction set in
against existing ranker officers from 1815: 'Soldiers are but soldiers, and officers
are soldiers and gentlemen. Under this consideration the line of distinction is
preserved, the profession, through all its tracts of honour, guarded? Above
all, the Duke of Wellington, who virtually dictated post-war military policy,
vehemently opposed officers being promoted from the ranks, telling an
enquiry in 1836, they 'do not make good officers; it does not answer. They are
brought into a society to the manners of which they are not accustomed ...
they are not persons that can be borne in the society of officers of the Army;
they are different men altogether? Thus, in its place, the army structure
stagnated; 'Between 1834 and 1838, out of 227 first commissions in the cavalry
only six were granted without purchase? 66
There is evidence that ranker officers were sometimes deliberately set up
to fail by their more fortunate colleagues, particularly over the elaborate
peacetime uniforms: 'If the cost of continually replacing the kit was not
6 McGuffie, "The Life of Licht Cavalry Regiment, 2 and J.P. Entract, The Royal!
Corsican Rangers: An Inscription in a Country Churchyard, JSAHR, 47 (1963), 210 - 14.
65 Anglesey, History of the British Cavalry, vol. 1, 146, quoted in Spiers, Army and Society,
22-23 and 109. See also Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers, 16o.
" Quoted in Haythornthwait, Redcoats, 109 and Angles, History of the British Cavalry,
vol. 1, 156.
