5
Conclusion
As outlined in this book, the nuances in working lives, governing the
structures and day-to-day attitudes of soldiers, provide conclusive evidence
that these attitudes mirrored the emerging class system in British society
and that class is the key tool for an analysis of the British army in nineteenth-
century society. It fundamentally challenges the ruffians officered by
gentlemen' theory of most military histories. The simplistic narative of
loyal, cheerful (preferable Irish) toughs, led by proper gentlemen whom
they adored, and who would beat any foreign enemy, is also widespread in
popular culture - from the broadsides of the French Wars to the writings
of Rudyard Kipling. But just as, contrary to myth, the nineteenth-century
British army did not win all its battles, so in reality, rank and file could be
subversive, miserable and hostile to its officers. This research uncovers the
shared hidden world of the nineteenth-century soldier and (to paraphrase
Edward Thompson) rescues him from the enormous condescension of most
military and labour history.
The book's main objective - to define a labour history of soldiers -
is presented in Chapter 1, along with an outline for the non-specialist
reader of the technicalities of the varieties of nineteenth-century British
military service. It identifies potential problems with current literature on
the military, including the complexities of using contemporary rank-and-file
memoirs. It argues, controversially, that quasi conscription existed for much
of the century as the major forces of industrialisation and imperialism acted
upon British working-class men and women.
Chapter 2 covers the class structure of the nineteenth-century British
army. It investigates the background of common soldiers and demonstrates
that service in the ranks was not confined to 'the scum of the earth' but
included a cross section of working-class men, who retained their former
civilian culture. Soldiers were fundamentally working men in uniform,
whose working lives, like many of their civilian counterparts, were governed
Conclusion
211
in civilian working-class mentalities, coping with abrupt changes in the
nineteenth-century labour market. In this way class was a defining aspect
of soldiers' identity.
Class was also reinforced by rankers treatment being consistently worse
than that of officers. The chapter outlines how class affected officers, and
argues that supposed paternalism was generally weak or lacking and that
an amateur officer tradition, with a high degree of anti-intellectualism, was
prevalent. In order for the army to function, NCOs shouldered most of the
day-to-day management responsibility. The continuation of the purchase of
commissions and the deliberate denial of promotion to talented NCOs to
oficer rank, was widely resented. This related to an ongoing debate over
whether men preferred to be led by gentlemen or whether the rank and file
were critical of officers. The chapter concludes that the latter view generally
prevailed and that this contributed to NCOs often becoming part of that
opaque military world of passive resistance which was impenetrable to the
higher ranks.
Soldiers were a huge occupational group in nineteenth-century Britain,
which in Chapter 3 is studied from a labour history viewpoint for the first
time. Most soldiers, uniquely amongst the British working class, had free
time on their hands and many of the more enterprising worked to supplement
their meagre army pay. This situation seems to have been tolerated by officers,
though many of them were probably unaware of this shadow employment.
The chapter surveys regimental tradesmen who were recruited to carry out
official duties as armourers, blacksmiths, butchers, cooks, farriers, harness
makers, musicians, schoolmasters, shoemakers, tailors and wheelwrights,
and finds evidence of civilian trades culture with negotiations, and go-slows.
This ethos extended to skilled engineers and artificers of all sorts, who were
of growing importance as war became more scientific and based away from
the UK. These jobs generally required pre-enlistment skills, but others, like
the large numbers of officers' servants and clerks who manned the growing
army bureaucracy, were open to all ambitious soldiers with common sense,
tact or literacy. Other soldiers worked informally using handicraft or penny
capitalist skills to undertake paid tasks for their comrades or outside
civilians: as victuallers, letter writers or souvenir makers, and to cater for
the needs of modern civilisation, as the army developed into an imperial
gendarmerie.
The Empire also later provided a large number of responsible
administrative postings for steady soldiers. These opportunities in public
service or utilities grew for ex-servicemen, alongside a new uniformed
working class in the UK.
