168
Soldiers as Workers
sent to Gibraltar. His mission was to tighten up discipline in a garrison with
a lax reputation and which was home to the largest contingent of artificers.
Kent's disciplinarian style had already resulted in the mutiny of his own
regiment, the 7th Royal Fusiliers, in Canada. Instituting two daily parades
and closing down most drinking establishments, he rapidly annoyed the
Gibraltar garrison. According to one soldier of the 54th Foot, 'he was a very
bad man, he would not let us drink ... and the parades, he never missed
one. By the Christmas of 1802, Kent's actions resulted in a mutiny which
affected most of the garrison. Corporal Andrew Pearson of the fist Foot
claimed that it was triggered by Kent's imperious reaction to a petition from
soldiers, with 'duration only' contracts, who should have been demobilised
at the Peace, and that the mutineers threatened to hand the garrison over to
the Spanish. Starting with the ist Foot, drunken mutineers botched seizing
Kent himself and failed to gain support from the zsth and s4th Foot, just
arrived in Gibraltar after the Egyptian campaign. Though many of the sth
regiment later joined in the inchoate protest, the CO of the 54th rallied his
men and with the help of an artillery detachment fired on the mutineers,
causing nine casualties, which restored order.?9
Gunner Mille's account of the battle shows sympathy with the
mutineers:
Many of the Royals were shot before they could get their redress ... I was
at a gun that was formed up close in front of them and expected every
man of us would have been put to death, our guns loaded and matches
lighted. They frequently cried out "Charge the Bugars" Fire a volley at the
Bugars. I was more afraid than ever I was fighting against the French, and
we found it more dangerous to fight against exasperated British soldiers
standing out for their rights ... They at last went off to their Barracks....
and every toth man was picked out to be shot or transported. Eleven were
actually transported and a few days afterwards three were shot ... Duke
was obliged to fly to England.30
As discussed in Chapter 3, the tradesmen of Gibraltar stood alof from
the violence and used the opportunity to nerotiate with their ficers for
concessions. Ten mutineers were condemned to death, though seven of
these were transported to Australia for life. Pearson's account has Kent's
oppressive regime toppled by his own officers to avoid further bloodshed.
Whilst this is unlikely, Kent was certainly recalled in disgrace in March
1803, with the soldiers achieving a moral victory. Pearson's memoirs are not
always reliable, being written nearly fifty years afterwards. The 6ist, though
29 Jason R. Musteen, Nelson's Refuge: Gibraltar in the Age of Napoleon (Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 2011), 54, 55-59 and 194.
30 Adventures of Serjeant Benjamin Miller, 30.
Class Conflict in the Army
169
it fought alongside the 25th and 4th in Egypt, was then part of the Malta
garison, so Pearson's account was presumably based on hearsay. That this
faved report celebrates soldiers victorious in their rights is itself fascinating
evidence of the prevalent contract culture.31
Although potentially hazardous to 'ringleaders, protests could be very
sucessful if the officers felt that their position had infringed soldiers'
hatural right. John Shipp witnessed a successful soldiers' strike by the
newly arrived 22nd Foot in Madras, India in 1803:
It had been the custom when troops arrived at Fort William to stop eight
rupees from every man's pay, for what reason no one was ever told ... So
the greater part of two companies marched in a sober, deliberate manner
to Sir Hugh Bailey's HQ to seek redress. Here they were told that it was
the custom to stop the eight runees from each man in arder to make sure
he got a decent burial. This explanation only made bad worse ... Wher
the men returned to barracks drink added to their fury ….. until they were
bent on open rebellion and mutiny. This determination was strongest in
the grenadier company ... the Adjutant they loathed. Kick him out!',
"Turn him out, and he narrowly escaped with his life. When he left they
quieted down again and went sullenly to their cots. The next morning the
eight rupees were refunded.
Shipp, later to be uniquely twice promoted from the ranks for acts of bravery,
was already a Sergeant in 1803, so probably stood aloof from the protest,
which had added weight from being led by the regiment's senior company,
the grenadiers.32
The Volunteer forces were stood down in 1809, as French invasion
seemed unlikely. It was replaced by a more professional and proletarian
local militia, linked to the full-time county militia and subject to military
law and punishment. With their apparent changes in contract. the rank and
file of new regiments, distrustful of their officers, were subject to a wave
of disputes, strikes and mutinies in their early days. In Norwich, with its
radical reputation, in May 1809, a private answered his roll-call with Here,
with an empty belly?33
Though imprisoned, his comrades rescued him, in the sort of action
repeated up and down the country. In 1810, the West Mendip Militia refused
orders after the cost of their trousers was deducted from their one-pound
marching allowance. They then rescued their imprisoned spokesmen from
Bath gaol. In the same year, the jailing of a protesting Sergeant of the
Wiltshire Militia led to an attempted rescue, which was faced down by the
31 Haley, Soldier Who Walked Away, 42-44.
32 Stranks, John Shipp, 42.
33 Colley, Britons, 316-17.
