190
Soldiers as Workers
the latter gangs included deserters and transported ex-soldiers, as well as
escaped convicts, who fought a guerrilla war with their former comrades.
One example was Private Peter Septon of the 2/gsth Rifles who was caught
deserting to the enemy during the Siege of Cadiz in i8r and transported to
New South Wales for life. The following year, Septon deserted again to the
Australian bush, where he joined a gang of bushwhackers and was killed in
a brawl in 1817. Many serving soldiers disappeared into the outback, carrying
messages, pursuing absconders or deserters.93
With rapid settlement in Australia after 1815 and enormous demand for
labour, deserters could now find a hiding place and possibly a new life. In
the words of one officer:
the soldiers are not in Sydney kept in a state of separation from the people;
but mix, marry, and live amongst them and are in all respects identified
with them: they hear their opinions, share in their feelings, discuss their
grievances, and would with infinite difficulty, if at all, in a matter of public
concern be brought to act against them.'4
During the Crimean War, 94 British soldiers deserted to the Russians. They
were ostracised by fellow prisoners of war, but some managed to return to
Britain. One, Thomas Toole of the 7th Fusiliers - a Manchester Trishman -
returned via Germany and the USA and tried to lie low. But, recognised by
a Manchester policeman of his acquaintance, he was arrested and tried for
desertion, with the aggravation of giving intelligence to the enemy, which
had resulted in heavy casualties amongst his own regiment. In 1858, he was
sentenced to transportation for life and apparently ended his days in Western
As in the USA, the free republics established by the Boers after the Great
Trek of the isos, with their shortages of white labour, provided another
opportunity to make new lives for potential deserters in South Africa. Three
survivors from the artillery battery at the Zulu War disaster of Isandhlwana
deserted after so many of their comrades had been slaughtered The local
commanding General wrote in 188o: "The proximity of the Free State offers
a strong inducement ... The desertions among the King's Dragon Chards
have been exceptionally heavy since the regiment was under orders for
India! The Boers organised escape routes, with one claiming 260 deserters.
This was centred on a patriotic Boer brothel Madame, who declared: "Had
93 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 7 and 89-90.
i Quoted in J.F. MeMahon, 'Review of the Military in the Maintenance of Security in
New South Wales, ci8ro-18g0', unpublished paper (1988), 27. COpy in LAM. (1 am grateful
to Jane Davies for bringing this to my attention.)
Inglesant, Prisoners of Voronesh, 20.
%s Glenn Fisher, "Thomas Tole: Deserter to the Russians, JSAHR, 88 (201o), 237-43 and
Class Conflict in the Army
191
she started earlier ... there would not be a single private left in the King's
Dragoon Guards.96
Postings to key ports of the Empire also provided particular opportunities
for desertion. In 18gos Hong Kong, Sergeant Bodell records that his s9th lost
men to American ships (bringing ice) bound for California and Australia and
claimed to have met several of these in his later travels in New Zealand."7
Desertion was also a problem in the county militias which were
re-established in 18g2, after the ballot was suspended in favour of voluntary
recruitment with a bounty. With the heavy manpower needs of the Crimean
War and Indian Mutiny, volunteering was again allowed between militia and
the line. This led to a spate of militia desertions and fraudulent enlistments.
Out of 47,000 militiamen in 1858, there were over 9,000 desertions. One man
had deserted and re-enlisted 47 times in different militia and line regiments.
The Cardwell reforms also resulted in a threefold rise in desertions in the
1870s, as the new young short service recruits quickly found that the harsh
side of soldiering did not live up to the recruiting sergeants' claims. From
1880 to 1882, 7,177 men with less than a year's service deserted. As late as the
Edwardian period, nearly 5 per cent of annual intake were reported missing
within a year.?8
Serving the enemy
As we have already seen in Chapter 3, circumstances, including desertion,
caused many British soldiers to continue their old trade in the service of
Eighteenth-century soldiers frequently took service with
foreign (sometimes opposing) countries in European wars. Though less
common in wars of empire, changing sides was a feature of the lives of
some British rankers. Miserable service in the garrison of Tangiers in
the late seventeenth century caused many British soldiers to desert to the
Moorish opposition - even some veterans of Cromwell's army. Whilst many
converted to Islam, others took their place as Christians against their former
comrades in a 1,500-strong European renegade force. The corsair states of
North Africa continued to recruit Europeans until their suppression after
96 Abbott, 'Royal Artillery at Isandhwana, 1879', 226 and Anglesey, History of the British
Cavalry, vol. 3, 53 and 205.
97 Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire, 60 and 64.
98 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 13, 53r; French, Military Identities, 16; Holmes,
Soldiers, 289; and Richard Van Emden, Boy Soldiers of the Great War (London: Headline,
2005). 21.
99 Colley, Captives, 39 and 95.
