78
Soldiers as Workers
it could form the stock in trade of the handicraft 'penny capitalists described
later in the chapter.14
The supply of materials could also be a useful device for trying to conceal
petty fraud. In 1830, Sergeant Richardson, Principle Orderly Room Clerk
in the 47th Foot at Portsmouth, was found guilty and reduced to the
ranks, as "The Oil and Emery allowance ... had been supported entirely
by false vouchers. In the same regiment, an enquiry was held in Buttivan,
Ireland in 185o, into the Master Shoemakers and Quartermaster's accounts,
which recommended tightening up. This may be evidence of connivance for
common gain and collusion between the shoemakers and the Quartermaster,
who - as we have seen - was often promoted from the ranks.15
Tradesmen could also add to their pay through extra jobs for both their
comrades and for legitimate 'foreigners' for officers. The latter were expected
to pay for all their services, and would have only a vague idea of the truc
value of work provided, which no gentleman would deign to quibble over.
Such extra jobs could be particularly confusing for newcomers to the service.
As a cavalry recruit in the 183os, Somerville describes his introduction to
this new world:
[being] visited by the regimental tailor, who measured us for over-alls,
stable jackets and regimental dress coats. The master bootmaker, who
had soldiers under him seen
and regimental dress boots. The regimental hairdresser came next and
trimmed our locks to the prescribed length. 16
Hairdressers were not amongst the offcial regimental tradamen Instead.
grooming was shared between the rank and file, especially before the
abolition of pigtails in 1808. Former hairdressers, though could end a
market for their skills, as reported by one officer in 1815: 'Gibbons, before he
enlisted, was a journeyman hairdresser and became very useful in charina
hairdressing and setting the razors of ficers? Thase unof eat hoirdressers
are inconsistently recorded - for example, in the Sand oot's standing orders,
which mention 'Hair cutting 6d' in u Thic arm mau ha haan con dard
as Somerville also paid this amount in 183r.17
Not time-served tradesmen, but on the regimental establishment from the
eighteenth century onwards, were pioneers. Each infantry regiment had ten
*4 LIM, 47th Standing Orders (1834), 78-70; Nick Mansfield. Tohn Brown. a Shoemakeris
Place's London, History Workshop Journal, 8 (1979), 13s; and Knight. Britain mine Napoleon,
19 LIM, Courtof Enquiry Records, 183o and 18go, in 471h Foot Order Book, 1830-1853-
16 Somerville, Autobiography of a Working Man, 126-27.
8and Regiment Standing Orders (Dublin, 1844), 77.
79
Soldiers as Workers
Regimental tradesmen and workers, 2nd South Lancashire Regiment, 1907.
Armourer, carpenters, clerks, cooks, tailors, orderlies, pioneers, postman,
shoemakers, waiters and others proudly display the tools of their many trades
in an Aldershot barracks, overseen by the seated central figure of the
Quartermaster Sergeant. Their tradition of informal dress continues.
pioneers, led by a corporal, who performed basic field engineering duties.
Marching at the very front of the column to clear the way, they were big
men entitled to wear beards, leather aprons and grenadier caps, who lugged
an assortment of axes, bill hooks, mattocks, pick axes, saws and spades, as
well as firearms. 'One of the perquisites of the job was that pioneers were
allowed to charge for the wood they provided for the officers kitchen. In the
absence of skilled artificers, they attempted all sorts of tasks in camp. By the
late-Victorian period, with the technical needs of the army increasing all the
time, regiments were feeling that their pioners' skills might be extended:
"The Pioneer Sergeant will exercise a general supervision over the skilled
Artificers who have been appointed Pioneers. He will give every facility
to any other men of the Regiment to practise and improve themselves in
such trades as he may have tools available for! This became widespread in
the more technical climate. A photograph from the nd South Lancashire
Regiment shows pioneers with carpenters tools (see Illustration 3) 18
1* D.S.V. Fosten, Waterloo t8ts: British Infantry, Tradition, 9 (1965), 27; Neuburg, Gone
For a Soldier, 75; and LIM, Standing Orders of the 4yth (The Lancasbire Regiment) (Aldershot:
Gale and Polden, 1876), 25.
