132
Soldiers as Workers
429
5 Sam Atwood,
army tailor and quilter
in India, c.1850.
Such intricate
constructions were made
over months in hot
weather from off-cuts
from the tailor's shop
Aoor.
omnipresent military pin cushions are also said to date from the Crimean
War, with their production, it is claimed, representing a longing for home
and hearth. 146
Needlework skills seem to have been common. In the 1840s, Light
Dragoon John Pearman was taught needlework on the voyage out to India
by a 'comrade named Hamilton, a tailor... which I found afterwards to be
very useful to me ….. as it was very hot in the day we sat on our Charpoy
[and] ... set at the Needle'. Company soldier Quinney described:
When the heat of the day rendered it unpleasant to go abroad, the barrack
room frequently presented the appearance of a workshop, some being
engaged making straw hats, others netting [sic socks and gloves, some
making thread buttons (an article much used here, as they stand the
washing better than any other kind), and a number in sewing ... These
146 Sue Prichard, 'Precision Patchwork: Nineteenth Century Military Quilts, Textile
History and the Military, 47(1) supplement (2010), 216, 218 and 219 and Ruth Kenney, Jeff
McMillan and Martin Myrone, British Folk Art (London: Tate, 2014), 14, 38, 120 and 128. 1
am grateful for the guidance of Sue Prichard and Holly Furneaux on this issue.
133
Soldiers as Workers
together with shoemaking, tinkers, etc., formed a variety seldom met with
in one apartment. 147
Other craftsmen made decorated functional objects, which were needed
by all soldiers in their daily lives and which were coveted by their comrades.
One Corporal in Mauritius in the 18ços described. "The chony buttonstick
of ebony wood (most of them made by a man named Guv) was a work of
art ... but the fashion must be followed'. Although they were already being
superseded by paper cartridges in the late eighteenth century, elaborately
engraved powder horns were still being made by soldiers, with regimental
battle honours and patriotic sentiments. (The Library and Museum of
Freemasonry in London has several examples. one with an anti-war poem.)
Many regimental museums also contain small watercoloured portraits of
rank-and-file soldiers, occasionally with their families. Usually in naive style,
some are self-portraits or pre-photographic illustrations made by talented
comrades to send as keepsakes to families, especially where a long overseas
posting was expected. Artistic ex-rankers also set up business at embarkation
points to provide these souvenirs to departing soldiers. The King's Own
Royal Regiment Museum in Lancaster has two made by Charles Dean, who
signed himself 'Late ith Regiment. His inscription for Private Henry Watts
of the 4th Foot, bound for Auntratia in 1831, reads: * Dear Parents when you
see this remember me And bear me in your mind When i am far in a Foreign
Clime' (see book jacket) 148
The fullest account of the part-time soldier/handicraft-maker comes from
James Bodell of the soth Foot whilst stationed in Hong Kong:
I must not forget to mention my industrious Habits the time before I was
promoted to Sergeant in 1851 ... I had as a comrade a Yarmouth fisherman
... This man was expert in making all kinds of Network …. and it occurred
to me to get my mate to learn me to make nets. I soon picked net making
up, and I was in the habit of earning money by painting the name number
Regt and Company on the Boxes belonging to the men also the same as
the Knapsacks and type cutting also, and Hair Cutting I had a little Cash
in hand land] I suggested to my mate to commence making Horse Nets.
To this he agreed, he making the Needles and holder out of Bamboo cane
... In a few months we had opened a regular business and made Horse
147 Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 146 and 220 and Quinney, quoted in Rumsby, The
Sixteenth Lancers', 174-
148 David J. Rowlands, 'The Dress of the ist Battalion §th Fusiliers', JSAHR, 64 (1986), 213.
(I am grateful to Mark Dennis and Peter Donnelly for their help with folk art.) See www.
kingsownmuseum.plus.com/galleryhenrywatts.htm. For other portraits,
see, for example,
Rene Chartrand, 'Private Charles Traveller, 7oth Foot, Canada, 184T, JSAHR, 70 (1992), 1-3,
a self-portrait by the dying soldier to send to his brother.
