120
Soldiers as Workers
Sapper specialisations amongst the Royal Engineers included architecture,
archacological surveying, chemistry (with a gas department), general
surveying, Morse codes, map makers and meteorology. For campaigns,
there was a mounted corps with artificers' wagons with a huge range of
tools and supplies. The printing department alone employed 4 compositors,
2 lithographers, 2 copperplate engravers, i letterpress printer, 2 assistants
and bookbinders, who worked on 'pay lists, numerous tabular forms
for the issue and receipt of stores, military reports, nominal rolls, notes
of lectures etc? Just as the earlier artificers and sappers had pioneered
exploration, the rank and file of the late-Victorian Royal Engineers was
celebrated for individual ingenuity in encouraging new inventions. By the
188os, the corps had embraced ballooning, diving, electricity, photography,
postal services, railways, submarine mining and telegraphs. Such technical
skills were extended to the engineering contingents in the lat-Victorian
volunteer movement, continuing the enduring existing links with civilian
trades. By 1g00, as the corps numbered over → ooo, the deft for service
in the Boer War sent by the Newcastle Engineer Volunteers contained
such trades as Sergeant farrier, leather hose maker, tinsmith, blacksmith,
wheelwright,
bricklayers.116
patternmaker, engineer, draughtsman, fitters, joiners and
Guards
In London, the special position of the Guards, under the direct order of the
sovereign and protected from overseas service, except in wartime, offered
additional particular part-time emoloument onnortunities Tha mounted
Life Guards had been formed from the Royalist courtiers around the exiled
Charles II. They retained their sense of superiority well into the nineteenth
century with better pay and pensions. They became a home for gentlemen
rankers, who could not afford the cost of officers commissions, mainly
native Londoners with alternative sources of income, whose part-time
jobs as private gentlemen simply furthered family business interests? In
the eighteenth century, Captains of the Foot Guards could hire out their
men to work for civilians for 'outlyers' money', which was used to support
the officers' mess. According to Fortescue, in the 178os: 'the [Royal] Horse
Guards were simply a collection of London tradesmen, and, in the Duke
of York's judgement, they were the most unmilitary troops that were ever
seen. "Outlyers' money was abolished in the Duke's reforms, though the
116 Head, Royal Engineer, 106, 112, 150, 158, 172, 175, 176, 185 and 284-85; Porter, History of
the Corps of Royal Engineers, vol. 1, 144, 145, T43. I5O, 154, 180, 185, 187 and 189; and Hewitson,
Weekend Warriors from Tyne to Tweed, 31 and 116-17.
Soldiers as Workers
121
War Office picked up the costs of the messes and the tradition of working
outside for rankers remained. 117
Frey has reported a much higher percentage of English soldiers in the
77os in the Foot Guards than in the line regiments. As well as recruits
from the Home counties especially Middlesex. in London the Fant Guards
provided a refuge for the penniless migrants from all over southern England
displaced by economic developments throughout the period.
labourers, who could satisfy the stiffer Guards height requirement, formed
almost 40 per cent of their recruits in the t770s and it was this group which
provided much of the casual workforce for the capital. Guards officers who
in the late eighteenth century were allowed eight months leave a year, did
little to change these working traditions.118
This workforce has been noted by
a number of historians,
but not
discuceed in any detail. Cookson asserts guardsmen were 'an extension of
London's proletariat, and Roger Wells claims their brawn was needed on
the docks for coal-heaving: In the docks of the East End ... there were
few employed in deliverine unloading] the coal shins except Irishmen &
Soldiers. The Grenadier huards still apparently retain the nickname of "The
Coalheavers'. Interestingly there is no mention of guardsmen in Dorothy
George's classic account, though Jennine Hurl-Eamon's recent study does
throw some light on the subiect and emphasises the strapping guardsmen as
'lumpers' in unloadino shins esnecially coalers, ne wall as their diversified
employment strategy. One example in 18o5 was Private Thomas Voss who
worked for a hosier as a general servant, a porter ... workling) in the frame
making stockings ... cleaning windows and talking down beds. Others
worked in building trades, like Samuel Barnes of the grd Foot Guards who
was drowned whilst repairing the brickwork of a Pimlico sewer in 1816. Such
activity could be useful to the military. One experienced officer claimed of
their combing-out during Peninsular War sieges: The Guards work better
than any soldiers, from their working habits in London! The frequent queries
about the political loyalties of the Guards will be examined elsewhere. 19
capital offered specialised work opportunities.
'An additional
attraction of serving in a Household regiment was that soldiers were allowed
117 Quoted in Holmes, Soldiers, 79 and Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 3, 539 and
vol. II, 36.
118 Frey, British Soldier in America, 15 and Holmes, Soldiers, 79.
119 Cookson, British Armed Nation, 184; Roger Wells, Insurrection: The British Experience,
1795-1803 (Stroud: Alan Sutton, 1983), 80; Charles Messenger, A History of British Infantry:
For Love of Regiment, vol. 2 (Barnsley: Pen & Sword, 2014), 226; Dorothy George, London Life
in the Eighteenth Century (London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 1930); Hurl-Eamon,
Marriage in the British Army, chap. 6, especially p. 191; Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 72; and
Haythornthwaite, Autobiography of Sir Harry Smith, 6r.
