76
Soldiers as Workers
the Master Tailor's initial cutting, to iod. for a private's trousers. Prices
varied: a year later, the 47th Foot's tailors were charging 'Privates Trousers;
Workman 6d, Master Tailor 8½d'. At the same time, their shoemakers
were charging from gs. 6d. for making oficer' boots, to 4d. for tipping and
nailing a private's boots. By 1844, the tailors of the 82nd Foot in Dublin
could charge 17s. for an officers coatee (perhaps civilian competition in 2
capital city accounted for this price rise) though tod. was still the rate for
making a ranker's trousers. Price lists issued by the shoemakers and tailors
of the overseas military adventurers of the BAL were similar to those of the
regular British army.10
Tradesmen's work was supervised. (The] Quartermaster is to observe a
general superintendence over Regimental Armourer, Shoemakers,
and workmen of every descrintion, The military nrice licte warn an attempi
to control the output and make sure that Quartermasters, who had not
served an apprenticeship, were not being deceived by slacking workmen.
Though standing orders could state ' their work was) liable estimated by three
competent persons, in practice, it is unlikely that this ever happened. The
only sanction was the monthly account submitted by the Master Sergeants
to the Quartermaster, who will cause the same to be charged on the several
companies' abstracts. Though these could reveal obvious abuses, they were
an inadequate tool for assessing the level of production. Though evidence,
unsurprisingly. is absent. in theorv. if the tradesmen maintained a con
relationship with their Sergeant, they could all collude to demonstrate the
agreed outputs, whist actually being in the position of controlling their pace
of work. This was the desired position solo to fenot
achieved because they were supervised by time-served men who knew their
trade intimately. In addition, unlike the civilians, the military tradesmen
were still paid, whatever the output and whatever the state of the trade,
and still ate their army rations. Moreover, the costs were met through bills
to officers and rank-and-file deductions not by the vararies of the market
Unsurprisingly, terefore, army life as a tradesman had many attractions:
A steady year-round income could be attractive to a man in a trade
notorious for seasonal fuctuations, such as building or even tailoring;
A journeyman tailor (there were fiften ailors in the ranks of the tóth
Lancers in 1846) might bring home twenty-ive shillings per week in
summer, but only four to six shillings in winter. All living expenses had
to be paid from such a wages. In these circumstances, the total wage of a
cavalryman, nine shillings and fourpence per week, with most clothing,
40 LIM 47th Foot Standing Orders (Dublin: W. Feret, 1824). 7g, and 82-82 TIM. anth Fo
Orde Ak, 1830-183, LINi, 8and Regiment Standing rde) (Dualin: W. Frazer, 184), 77:
and NAM 6807-198, Regimental Orders 6th Regiment [BAL], 4 Apr. 1836.
Soldiers as Workers
77
food, accommodation and medical care found, all year round, could be
an attractive choice. Even the notorious stoppages from soldiers' pay were
not unknown in civilian life; a coal-miner provided his own candles and
blasting-powder, and a tailor paid for his thread and trimmings."1
Hours were long. Those of the tailors of the 47th were typical in 1834:
'assemble at 6 o'Clock in summer, and at day light in winter, they are to
leave off at sun-set, unless they work by candle light, when they are not to
be dismissed until eight'. For the 82nd's tailors in 1844: 'They are to assemble
at day light and work until sun set, with the necessary intervals for their
meals. But these were broadly similar to those of civilians, and all tradesmen
expected to control the pace of their work through traditional breaks and
other practices. There is some evidence that regimental tradesmen's shops
became strongholds of the alternative opaque world of the rankers, with, for
instance, accusations of illicit drinking sessions. 12
The fierce standing orders stipulation: 'NB Workmen to find their own
tools, would be widely expected, as both civilian and military tradesmen
were expected to own and care for their own tools, an important distin-
guishing feature from the unskilled working class. An additional perk was
the absence of guard duty and fatigues, which meant uninterrupted nights
and even absence at most parades. Tradesmen's time was too valuable to the
regiment: Sist Tailors excused all duties except church parade. 13
Tradesmen could add to their pay through various perks. By time-honoured
trade tradition, sourcing materials, for which they were being paid, was
regarded as the province of the workmen, but was sometimes contested
as part of the constant tension between tradesmen and authorities. In the
47th: 'The Master tailor will find all materials made use of", but not so for
the shoemakers (the most radical of civilian trades): Pay Sergeants to find
Hemp, Hairs and Wax and the Shoemakers to furnish their own tools?
Tradesmen too were expected to pick up leftover material such 'grindery or
Cabbage', which was considered a legitimate perk of the respective trades
of shoemaker and tailor. Likewise, regimental carpenters were entitled to
'chips, the traditional offeuts. It was in the tradesmen's interest to maximise
"waste' materials which could be surreptitiously recycled. In every army trade
" LIM, 47t6 Foot Standing Orders, 7g and John H. Rumsby, Making Choices: Constructing
A Carcer in the Ranks dinhO lers, Vicoin Army, in I.F.W. Becket (ed.), Victorians al
War: New Perspectioves (London: Society for Army Historical Research, 2007), 23-24.
12 LIM, 47th Foot Standing Ordes, 79; Sand Regiment Standing Orders, 7a; and John
H. Rumsby (ed.), The Life of a Lancer in the Ware of the Puniaub (Solihull: Helion, 2014
[1855]), 20.
1861 entry.
13 TI Ca Regiment Standing Orders. Ta and 'Qrst Pegimental Cula Book 18e7-,880'.
