88
Soldiers as Workers
The post ranked as a Sergeant and literacy was essential to record these
numbers. The French Wars proved that such skills were valuable and one
farrier per troop became standard, with as many as ten in most cavalry
regiments. On campaign, farriers were equipped with forge carts and even
mobile forges carried mules in the Peninsular War. In addition, a second
farrier per troop was recruited and every trooper carried spare horseshoes
and nails, with some in each troop being trained to shoe in emergencies.
From farriers evolved the veterinary surgeons - first mentioned in cavalry
regiments in 1796 - which afforded career progression for small numbers
of rankers even into officer status, though they retained their tradesmen's
position and were not commissioned until the late-Victorian period. Cavalry
regiments also employed 'rough rider' for breaking horses. In the tổth
Lancers in mid-Victorian India, the rough riders, who were all privates,
were under Cornet William Webster, a classic ex-ranker who had served at
Waterloo. Rough riders got tips from officers for breaking in chargers and
for helping them pass equitation certificates. In India they could undertake
private work, 'breaking in and training horses for civilians and wealth
A six-gun troop of the new Royal Horse Artillery had an establishment
of two mounted blacksmiths, two saddlers. one farrier and one wheeler. By
IdIo, this had increased to a carriage smith and a farrier, two shoeing smiths.
two collar makers and two wheelwrights. Cavalry and artillery trades
establishments increased further in peacetime. By 1860, C squadron (two
troops) of the roth Hussars had one Farrier Sergeant one Saddler Sergeant
and three Shoeing Smiths for 134 men. In the mid-Victorian armv. skilled
men vere clearly enlisting to take up tradesmens ranks. The most common
recruit trades to the roth Hussars were grooms (1), saddler and smiths (three
each), and farrier (two). Shoeing smithe ween maid more than Cornorale and
Farrier Sergeants more than Sergeants. Bu 1870, artisans attached to a Royal
Artillery battery had risen again to three shoeing smiths, two collar makers
and two wheelers commanded by a Farrier Sergeant paid at 3s. 4d. a day.42
On campaign, even infantry regiments recruited small numbers of
blacksmiths to care for officers' horses and make simple repairs to equipment.
41 NAM 2004-12-28-1 1978, Notebook of a Corporal Farrier of the Roval Horse Guards
D. Chandler, "The Journal of Edward Heeley, ISAHR. 64(1986), 120 Rumsby. "The Sixteenth
Lancers', 77 and g6; and Marquis of Anglesey. A Histom of the Retich Country. vol. 3, 67.
42 R. North, "The Raising and Organizing of the King's German Ten HER, 39
(1961); Roderick MacArthur, 'British Army Establishments during the Napoleonic War
Part 2, JSAHR, 87 (2009), 343, quoted in James, Life in Wellington's Army, 222: Michael
(3984), 207-16: and PE Abbott. Roval Artier at Ten hiana TRo TSAR L(r078)
Soldiers as Workers
89
Costello's memoir tells us the elite light troops of the '95th Rifles had a
blacksmith who erected his forge in an old mail …. shoeing the officers'
horses. With generals taking the field with ten horses (three for servants),
even Wellington's General Staff in the Peninsula were allocated their own
farrier. In peacetime, ambitious officers tended to disregard the contribution
of tradesmen as not proper soldiering.
When adjutant of 7th Hussars in
India in 1892, the future Field Marshal Douglas Haig apparently detested
... the] saddler, farrier, officer's servant, signaller etc? because their work
excused them 'daily parades, drills and lectures'43
Armourers
In-house regimental Armourer Sergeants were first appointed in 1802. They
were mainly recruited from civilian gunsmiths, which was an erratic process
dependent on the state of the firearms trade. John Taylor, archetypically from
Birmingham, served as a Fencible between 1799 and the Peace of Amiens,
and rejoined the army in the 73rd Foot in 1807, at the height of the Orders
in Council slump. He was appointed Armourer Sergeant in its new second
battalion in 1809, fought with the regiment at Waterloo, and decided to stay
on in his job in the Army of Occupation in France, only being discharged,
with a pension, after an injury in 1817. Such was the premium on their skills
that promotion for armourer sergeants could be very swift. Nathaniel Artis,
a new recruit to the 3oth Foot in 1803, and a civilian gun maker, served one
day before being appointed Armourer Sergeant. 41
Regimental Armourer Sergeants, often with a small team, were retained
in the peacetime army after 1815. Given the army's increasingly imperial
role, such skills and resourcefulness were valued a long way from home.
Ongoing colonial conflicts meant the trade became more important ir
the Victorian period. with a specialist training course. based at the Rova
Small Arms (RSA) Factory in Birmingham, whose graduates attracted the
highest NCO wages. Their 8ro weekly rate (er T6s 2d.) was more than
Regimental Sergeant Maiors, and nearly twice as much as iunior officers.
It compared well with the ft 18s. earned bu civilian London engineers and
was the equivalent to the earnings of labour aristocrats like compositors
or coachmakers. It is also likely that regimental Armourers were aware of
the active participation of their civilian counterparts in trade societies and
accompanying radical politics. Certainly, in 1817, there were several attempts
43 Costello, Adventures of a Soldier, 125; James. Life in Mllinaton's Army, 179; and loh
Hussey, 'Douglas Haig Adjutant, JSAHR, 73 (1995), 129.
44 Fortescue, History of the Bian Army, vol. 1, 908-00 Taoden and Sly, 2/7ard at Waterloo.
228; and Divall, Inside the Regiment, 82.
