82
Soldiers as Workers
They celebrated the feast of their patron saint, St Barbara, as with miners
(who had provided most ordnance personnel from early modern times). John
Rumsby connects the binge drinking of cavalry troopers, who in 1820s India
were paid only every two months, with the widely observed contemporary
*Saint Monday celebrations of civilian artisans extending their weekend.
Overlap between military and civilian tradesmen could not be total, as
occasionally troops were called out to disperse workmen's strikes, such as
the Chatham shipwrights' dispute of 1801.24
Military tradesmen's pride and culture were occasionally given public
expression. At an inspection in Clomel, Ireland, in 1802:
Mr Wheeler Burton, was described as a 'cross-grained, grumbling,
chattering politician [who] loved to thwart those in authority over him.
The artificers had been ordered to wait while the soldiers marched past the
Commander of the Forces in Ireland. Burton 'took it into his head that
he was insulted in being left behind' and, in his plum-coloured coat with
large white buttons, marched after the soldiers to the ' horror and rage of
the commanding major: 'With the emblem of his trade, his claw hammer,
held erect between his fingers, and his eyes fixed with imperturbable
insolence of gaze on the Commander of the Forces, who in turn looked on
with unmoved gravity, evidently taking Wheeler Burton for a legitimate
part of the exhibition, whilst the major was foaming with rage, everyone
else bursting with laughter??5
Although army wages were lower than the average civilian tradesmeris,
the latter were dependent on the vagaries of the market, which during the
period of industrialisation could be particularly harsh. It was very rare for
superannuation to be provided by employers and, though the more skilled
trade societies tried to provide it for their members, variable membership
and lack of acturial skills meant that such schemes rarely succeeded. By
contrast, an army career could provide a tradesman regular work, at an
acceptable and often self-controlled pace with an opportunity to accrue
savings through outside work, official perks or unofficial scams, or to earn a
pension. Such jobs were not unique to the army. Similar highly sought-after
positions with similar benefits could sometimes be provided to tradesmen
by large estates or in institutions like the Oxford and Cambridge colleges?
The French Wars, with their rapid growth in the officer corps, increased
the possibilities for private work. Thomas Bennet, Saddler Sergeant of
24 Duffy, Military Experience in the Age of Reason, 232; Rumsby, "The Sixteenth Lancers,
234; J.F.C. Harrison, The Common People (London: Fontana, 1984), 144-45; and Knight,
Britain against Napoleon, 117.
25 Quoted in Myerly, British Military Spectacle, 106.
26 Described in Mansfield, 'Grads and Snobs', 184-98.
Soldiers as Workers
83
the i3th Light Dragoons, made so much on 'foreigners', that he paid 160
guineas for a purpose-made carriage to take his kit to the Peninsular War.
Though peacetime garrisons could not match this sort of money, regimental
tradesmen could still make money dealing with suppliers and undertaking
'foreigners' for outside clients.
Saddler Sergeant John Healey of the 16th
Lancers left over €375 in his will in 1854. There is a general assumption of
spendthrift behaviour by soldiers during this period, but soldiers could save
large sums of money, especially in India where the cost of living was low.
Between 1831 and 1839, the remittances of the 26th (Cameronian) Foot to
their families, via the Edinburgh Savings Bank, amounted to over £8,000.27
At home, tradesmen could also enjoy very long and settled careers,
especially in the Guards, usually posted to London or Windsor, which gave
more access to outside work. In 1888, Saddler-Major McDonald of the and
Life Guards celebrated fifty years in his post. Evidence that even elite skilled
tradesmen - like armourers - looked upon the army as a career choice, comes
with the brother of Thomas Morris, the memoirist of the French Wars.
Armourer Sergeant William Morris, was discharged as incapacitated from
the 73rd Foot in 1820, but chose to re-enlist in the 63rd Foot, bound for Van
Diemen's Land in 1827. After working as an armourer there and in India, he
retired with a 25-year pension in 1840.28
Cookson suggests that military tradesmen or ex-tradesmen may have
been members of benefit or friendly societies.
These were often, in the
period of the Combination Acts and the Tolpuddle Martyrs, trade societies
in disguise. He finds evidence that at least four post-war Scottish benefit
societies were formed exclusively by ex-servicemen. Sylvia Frey has also
found evidence of benefit societies in the British army on the American
frontier in the 178os. Certainly, Joseph Mayett was a member of a Bucking-
hamshire benefit society during his wartime militia service, drawing 15s. a
week during a period of post-war unemployment 29
There is no evidence for trade societies organising in the army. There could
also be potential conflict between regimental tradesmen and their civilian
counterparts, especially those in trade societies. Two sergeants (a tailor and
wright, or general engineer) were challenged at law by the trade societies
27 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats. 36-37: Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 43; and Stephen
Wood (ed.), 'Thomas Carter and a Manuscript History of The 26th (or Cameronian)
Regiment', JSAHR, 67 (1989), 261-63.
28 R.G. Harris, 'The Household Cavalry. 1851-1881, JSAHR, 54 (1966), 205; Selby, Thomas
Morris, uts; and Alan Lagde hold CovalSy The 1/3rd at Waterlo (Brightlingsea: Lagden,
1998), 163-64.
29 Coolcon «Regimental World' o7: Sulvia Freu Tho Doitish Soldier in America: A Social
History of Military Life in the Roanlutionary Period (Auctin. University of Texas Press. 1981)
166; and Kussmaul, Autobiography of Joseph Mayett, 86.
