96
Soldiers as Workers
Clerks and servants
Clerks and other white collar workers were in constant demand and could
provide the literate and competent ranker opportunities for prooression This
is illustrated by the army career of William Cobbett, who saved a hundred
and fifty guineas whilst serving in North America in the 1790s. Clerks could
easily be promoted to Paymaster Sergeant, who, under the supervision of a
regimental Paymaster, handled money and paperwork for each of the ten
companies in a regiment. Sometimes these Sergeants did not even need
to be literate. Nonconformist Private Mayett, balloted into the Bucking-
hamshire Militia, acted as a clerk to his Pay Sergeant who could not read or
write, seemingly a widespread practice during the huge mobilication of the
French Wars.60
Quartermaster Sergeants with their ready opportunities for narks and
fraud, had a notorious reputation but some made the commissioned ranks
as Quartermasters. It was thought that these ex-rankers would be better
at spotting petty larceny. The peacetime army supplemented Paymaste:
Sergeants' Clerks with Orderly Sergeants, but opportunities for peculation
continued. lames Bodell descrihes the unmasking and lo, fallo
Orderly Sergeant in the 186os, after 'several hundred [undelivered) letter
were found ... and the Pennies purloined' With scant sumnathy for sterlim
his comrades' property, this Sergeant Tuke, was tried, fogged and drummed
out of the 59th, far from home in Hong Kong. On the other hand continuing
lack of professionalism by many of the officer corns and increasing Victorian
working-class respectability, led to the growth of a sober and steady organi
sation of clerks. They then provided the bureaucratic backbone of a complex
imperial army and were eventually consolidated into an Army Pay Corps
in 1877. Outside the core staffing of the various stores and offices of the
established Victorian army, army clerks undertook a varietv of other tasks
One example was the earliest history of the 26th Foot. which has hec
attributed to two Victorian Sergeants, successive Orderly Room Clarks 61
Servants, like soldiers, have. until recentlv. largely been ignored bu labour
historians, despite their undoubted importance in the ninateenth-century
workforce. In the Georgian period, officers' servants were still larrely hired
civilians, often wearing their master's or occasionally a special regimental
livery. With the increased size of the officer corps in the French Wars, and
Kussmaul, Joseph Mayett, x, xxx and 47-
60 Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in the British Army, 186; Divall. Inside the Reciment, 82-83; an
or Keith Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire: The Reminiscences of Tames Bodell, 1831-92
(London: Bodley Head, 1982), 68-6g and Wood, "Thomas Carter and a Manuscript History,
Soldiers as Workers
97
with the difficulties of recruiting civilians on overseas operations, personal
servants and grooms began to be provided from the ranks, generally through
pre-enlistment experience.62
Like other soldier workers, personal servants were excused many routine
duties and benefited from tips and perks. On the march or on campaign they
led a pack horse loaded with their masters' and regimental possessions, so
were listed as 'Bat Horse man', which later became shortened to 'batman'.
Specialised servant roles also developed - for example, to staff the growing
number of officers' regimental messes. Memoirists of the French Wars have
left varied accounts of the batman's role. Militia conscript Joseph Mayett, a
dour Baptist, became one and, though tempted by the better food, regarded
the role as sinful. Hard-bitten Private Wheeler of the gist Foot eventually
disliked the job enough to ask to return to his mess mates in the ranks.
Gunner Miller, serving in the Mediterranean, was an officer's batman for 15
months in Gibraltar and in Minorca and then an officer's mess servant in the
Egypt campaign, but again asked to return to his guns. In hard campaigning,
where supply systems broke down, the more unworldly officers were totally
dependent on the scrounging and pillaging abilities of their servants. These
memoirs also demonstrate that the servant's role could be one of several
that a soldier might undertake during his service. Mayett and Wheeler
both became clerks at various times, with Wheeler finishing as Sergeant
Schoolmaster, and Miller undertaking outside building work. A lucky few
found specialised roles and good billets with long term attachments to staff
officers. John Hill of the 3oth Foot, was servant to Generals Graham and
Murray in succession, in the Peninsular War, and continued in this role
when his regiment was posted back to the UK. Cavalry officers going on
active service took large numbers of spare riding and baggage horses. The
27 officers of the 7th Hussars, took 7o horses between them to the Corunna
campaign in 1808, which required large numbers of grooms as ervants.63
It was generally the unfit, underage or elderly soldiers (who were less
useful in combat), who were allocated as officers' servants, and who on
campaign and in battle were stationed with the baggage. At the climax of
the French wars, with overall manpower stretched to capacity, attempts were
made to tighten up the workforce. New regulations in 181 stipulated that:
No Soldier is to be employed as an Officer's Servant, who is not perfect in
the Drill, and who has not acquired a complete knowledge of his Duty as
62 For a discussion of the literature on servante from labour historians, see lohn Benson,
'One Man and his Women', 204-05 and 212.
63 James, Life in Wellington's Army, 25; Kussmaul, Joseph Mayett, x and xxx; Adventures of
Serjeant Benjamin Miller, 6, 13 and 29; Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, ros; Divall, Inside the
Regiment, 6o; and Knight, Britain against Napoleon, 185.
