Abbreviations
BAL
CO
CRO
EIC
HM service/forces
JSAHR
LHR
LIM
British Auxiliary Legion (probably the largest single
one of the overseas military adventures, raised to
intervene on the Liberal side in the First Carlist War
in Spain, 1836-38)
Commanding Officer
Cambridgeshire Record Office
Honourable East Indian Company
His or Her Majesty's service/forces (used particularly
in India to contrast with EIC service)
Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research
Labour History Review
Lancashire Infantry Regiment, museum and archive
(located at Fulwood Barracks, Preston)
Modern Records Centre (Warwick University)
National Army Museum (Chelsea, London)
non-commissioned officer (ranging from Lance
Corporal up to Regimental Sergeant Major)
Quartermaster
Regimental Sergeant Major (the most senior NCO in
a regiment)
Victoria Cross
Working Class Movement Library (Salford)
Notes
In quotes from contemporary letters and journals, all spelling and punctuation
have been retained in their original form. All money is given in pounds,
shillings and pence (£ s. d.): 12 pence made a shilling and there were 20
shillings to a pound. One guinea was zI shillings.
The French Wars is used as a generic term for the French Revolutionary
Wars (1793-1802) and the Napoleonic Wars (1803-15). Within these wars the
Peninsular War ran between 1808 and 1814, with Britain fighting the French
in Spain and Portugal. All dates refer to when Britain was a belligerent. The
Indian Mutiny of 1857-59 is referred to in this contemporary way, rather than
the more modern First War of Indian Independence.
Subaltern
1S
sometimes used generically for a junior officer below
Captain's rank (Ensign/Cornet/Second Lieutenant and Lieutenant). Field
Officer is sometimes used generically for a senior regimental officer above
Captain's rank (Major or Lieutenant Colonel). 'Serjeant', an older spelling of
'Sergeant', is sometime used as per the original quote. 'Rankers' is a generic
term for the rank and file of a regiment; sometimes this includes the NCOs
as well as the privates.
Line infantry regiments - which made up the majority of the British
army - are referred to by number: e.g., 3oth Foot, before 1881, and by title
after then (when that regiment, for instance, became the Ist Battalion,
East Lancashire Regiment). Where a regiment had a specialism (Fusiliers,
Highland, Light Infantry or Rifle), this is used with its number or title.
The Household Cavalry, in the nineteenth century, consisted of the ist
and znd Life Guards and the Royal Horse Guards. The latter regiment was
also often referred to as the Horse Guards or Blues, from the colour of their
uniforms. To confuse matters, Horse Guards is often also used as a synonym
for the offices of the Commander in Chief, from its Whitehall location.
