34
Soldiers as Workers
a bright scarlet and the ranks in a duller brick red. (With a new jacket only
issued every second year, soldiers wore them out, which explains the rarity
of regular rankers uniforms in military museums.) In the Crimea, British
rank-and-file prisoners of war found that their own uniforms were vastly
inferior to those of their allied French fellow captives in facing the Russian
winter.12
Officers also continued to wear 'mufti', or combinations of fashionable
high-grade civilian clothes. Myerly claimed they saw it as [a] sign of their
political status as free-born Britons'. By contrast, rankers were discouraged
from even owning civilian clothes, which were an essential tool for desertion
- a perennial problem within the nineteenth-century army (see the section
'Desertion', in Chapter 4, below). Myerley also argues that bright uniforms
and mass spectacle were 'an essential component of military management
in the British army. Off-parade 'mufti' was prevalent for officers not on
duty, which was the majority of time, as is often illustrated in surviving
contemporary photographs:
The British Army and its derivatives had a special peculiarity in that
without a direct order it was almost impossible to get officers into uniform,
and that if it was achieved they got out of it as soon as possible. Orders
are full of the fulminations of general officers against such deviations as
a tendency to sport a mixed military and civilian costume, presumably in
the interests of comfort.13
Accommodation
In barracks, field officers (Majors and above) were allocated two rooms and
Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns had a room each. All officers shared a
regimental mess room for dining and relaxing.
Until the end of the nineteenth century, soldiers did everything in
their packed barrack rooms: washed, ate, cleaned their kit, slept and even
urinated overnight. Married soldiers quartered their families in temporary
partitions made from blankets in the corner of the barrack room. Although
most working-class people were used to cramped conditions, in 1858, it was
claimed that even convicts got 1,000 cubic feet of space (i.e., about 3o cubic
metres) compared with 400 cubic feet (IT cubic metres) for a soldier, and
that soldiers often had to share a bed. The following year, another report
12 Scott Hughes Myerly, British Military Spectacle from the Napoleonic Wars through the
Crimea (London: Harvard University Press, 1996), 67-69 and David Inglesant, The Prisoners
of Voronesh (Old Woking: Unwin, 1977), 73-
" J.B.R. Nicholson, Military Uniforms: The Splendour of the Past (London: Orbis, 1973), 6.
See, for instance, the photographs from Cheshire Regiment officers in the 185os and 1860s
in Ronald Bart, The Cheshire Regiment (Stroud: Tempus, 2000), 10 and 14.
Class Structure and the British Army
35
on an average barrack concluded: 'The rooms are very confined, the beds
are packed in close together, the windows are insufficient and ill-placed;
where there are ventilators, they are so actively offensive, that the men risk
the unfelt danger and stop them; and thus the soldier sleeps in poison and
dies in consequence.' A private of the isth Hussars reported that Maidstone
cavalry barracks were packed so closely that I have seen them sleeping on
the tables used for dining, under the tables and in the coal-boxes. This in
the middle of summer.14
The first housing reforms came after the Crimea. They allowed 450 cubic
feet to each soldier, though workhouse inmates at the time were getting
30 cubic feet more.
The first baths began to be installed in barracks in
1855, though the overnight urine tubs remained, and had to be cleaned out
before morning washing. Even in modern barracks, like in Chatham, a
space designed for 600 men had to accommodate 1,410 in 1861. It took the
Cardwell reforms and the establishment of county regimental barracks and
depots to drive this space up to 600 cubic feet, and gradually accommodation
improved, with urinals, reading rooms and cookhouses.15
The worst and unhealthiest Victorian barracks were curiously those of the
elite Foot Guards at Portman Street and in Woolwich, both in London:
'The general result was that, whereas the general rate of mortality among
the population of military age varied between seven and a half and nine in
a thousand, that of the Guards was twenty, that of the line eighteen, and
that of the Cavalry was eleven in the thousand? In the UK, consumption
was the main killer, affecting 18 in 1,000 soldiers, compared with 3-5 in
1,000 of the general population. In 1857, the mortality rate in the army in
the UK was 17.5 per cent. Even in Manchester - which contained the worst
of the new industrial slums - it was lower, at 12.5 per cent for civilians.
Some colonial stations, especially in India, were unhealthier still, with a
mortality rate of 69 per 1,000. Unlike in the UK, epidemics here affected
officers and men alike.16
On campaign, officers were consistently allocated the better quarters. In
the Peninsular War, the sparse population made housing a critical issue.
Tired troops were often evicted from their billets to make room for senior
officers. Accounts demonstrate the thoughtlessness of the officer class and
the acceptance that this was part of the natural order. In the Pyrenees in
14 Divall, Inside the Regiment, 38 and Holmes, Soldiers, 522.
15 Spiers, Army and Society, 56-57; Trevor May, Military Barracks (Princes Risborough:
Shire Books, 2002), 19 and 21; Burroughs, 'An Unreformed Army? 1815-1868, 172; and
Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, 38.
16 J.W. Fortescue, A History of the British Army, vol. 13 (London: Macmillan, 1930), 538 and
Holmes, Sahib, 468.
