72
Soldiers as Workers
Sergeant-Major Mechanist; several grades of Instructor and Master-
Gunner; Sergeant Farrier. Trumpeters, Buglers and Drummers might
reach Sergeants rank, and below that there was a variety of specialist jobs
for corporals. There was even a rank of Sergeant Photographer ... and of
course a range of ranks and appointments connected with pay offices and
orderly rooms.?
This chapter will survey all the above aspects of soldiers as workers. It will
further examine the special position of the Guards, mainly stationed in
London, as well as post-demobilisation working lives. This includes soldiers
particular role in the development of the British Empire and in staling the
new uniformed working class of the late-Victorian period. Industrialisation
and its aftermath created a flexible workforce of men who often had to labour
at a variety of jobs. This chapter emphasises that soldiering could be part of
a varied career for many people.
Free time
Instead of combat, tedious garrison dut and repetitive dill and training
comprised the working life of most nineteenth-century soldiers. Warfare
has never played more than a relatively minor part statistically in the life of
the armed forces. It has been claimed that 'the average regiment will chend
five minutes in battle for every fifty years'. Even the soldiers of Wellington's
Peninsular army - the pride of the early-ninstanth-century militarv. spent
at the very most, only x7 per cent of their time fighting during their seven
years of campaigning. In Europe, soldiers had traditionally gone into quiet
winter quarters when the bad weather came. so the soldiers had then a great
deal of leisure time in winter'. This was a Godsend for religious or studious
soldiers: What working man has half the opportunity for improving his
mind, for attending the means of grace, or for usefulness in the world,
possessed by soldiers.?', asked Nonconformist soldier John Stevenson in 184).
Even taking account of the hours spent cleaning uniforms and polishing
kit, or on guard duties of fatigues, most soldiers once trained had time on
their hands. Cavalrymen and artillerymen had to groom their horses an
care for their more extensive kit, but for those stationed in India and other
colonial garrisons, this work was undertaken by black servante All had
plenty of free time.?
The prominent radical William Cobbett was the RSM of the 54th Foot
2 Neuburg, Gone for a Soldier, 25
3 Peter Thwaites, Presenting Arms: Representation of Ruitial Military Mictory s6ho-1000
(Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1996), 2; Kevin Linch and Mathew V Cormack
"Defining Soldiers: Britain's Military, C.1740-781 War in Micry 2o (2012). Theme Tarleson
Soldiers as Workers
73
in Nova Scotia in late 178os. He claimed in his later journalism to run his
battalion for his lazy and corrupt officers. In their absence, he arranged early
parades:
When I was commander, the men had a long day of leisure before them:
they could ramble into town or into the woods; go to get raspberries; to
catch birds, to catch fish, or pursue any other recreation, and such of them
as chose, and were qualified, to work at their trades.
In these quiet Canadian garrisons 'protracted leisure hours once morning
drill and the midday dinner over led to 'Common soldiers often become
thoroughly disgusted with the monotonous hopeless and often annoying
mode of life, and consequently there were high desertion rates.+
Even newly raised units, like the overseas military adventurers of the BAL
of 1836, were licked into shape so quickly that recruits only 'had about three
hours drill at day. With few fatigues, and languor from high temperatures,
India - typical of post-1857 army life - was a particularly lazy posting.
Sergeant John Pearman described his life in the 1840s:
our time was now spent very idle as all Drill was in the morning and
Dismounted Drill in the Evening and as it was very hot during the Day
we sat on our Charboy or Bedstead and Plaid at Cards, Back Gammon or
Chess or anything that took our tast in this way our time was - past and at
other times I would read Books or set at the Needle In the winter months
I mostly went out with my Gun with a Comrade named Danl Larnden'
In the late-Victorian period most soldiers finished work after the midday
meal: 'it was common for soldiers who had completed recruit training and
who were not on guard or fatigue duty thereafter. David French concludes:
"To a civilian, accustomed to the long working hours that characterized
the experience of labour for the working classes, one of the most striking
features of the daily life of a trained soldier was how little work he was
required to do? This situation was maintained into the twentieth century.
John Lacy, a private of the Royal Irish Rifles in 1912, commented:
Working hours are not long, and the holidays are numerous. A duty soldier,
that is, fully trained, may ease his boredom by finding employment in
various stores and workshops, by looking after horses, by making himself
expert in specialized jobs, or by educating himself in the regimental
Lives of Early Methodist Preachers (London: Wesleyan Conference, 1871), vol. 1, 109 and quoted
in Snape, Redcoat and Religion, 143-
* Quoted in John Lewis-tempel, The Autobiograply of the British Soldier (London:
Headline, 2007), 99 and Peter Burroughs, Tackling Army Desertion on British North
America', Canadian Historical Reviero 6l(i) (1980), 34:
s Anon., Autobiography of a Soldier, 276 and Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 145-46.
