18
Soldiers as Workers
mutinies, in Chapter 4, below, these unwilling soldiers were also prepared
actively to protest against changes in their contracts, which would allow
them to be used more flexibly by governments. As the drastic depopulation
was accomplished within two generations, the region could not undertake
any more traditional clan levies, so, increasingly, 'Highland' regiments of the
British army were maintained by lowland Scots, English and Irish recruits.30
Additional balloting
Aside from balloting to the already mobilised militia, Supplementary Militia
battalions were raised in 1799 in every county, again by ballot. Largely
consisting of the poor, the men in these battalions were unprepared for
official bullying of dubious legality. The Northumberland battalion was
ordered to provide one-quarter of its strength to the regular army and 266
'volunteered' for the line. 31
To restore manpower levels after war broke out again, a new legislation
enabled Lords Lieutenant to list all men between 17 and 55. The government
then introduced an Army of Reserve to supplement the militia,
which 50,000 men were to be conscripted by another ballot organised
by magistrates and parish constables. Though service in these Reserve
battalions was limited to the UK, they were encouraged to volunteer into
the line. While it achieved less than half the number of men intended, and
was rapidly abandoned, the Army of Reserve still produced 30,000 men.
Two-thirds of these volunteered for the line, with 285 reservists going to
the new second battalion of the goth Foot. These came from the Army of
Reserve of Buckinghamshire and the regiment had to send armed parties
to bring them back, having been handed over by county authorities. (Joseph
Cozens points out the high desertion rate of the Army of Reserve, at 12.2
per cent.) These three waves of conscription caused hardship and resentment
amongst the inarticulate poor. One landowner spoke for them: 'a ballot is
a ballot ….. and when they have bought exemption from one they cannot
understand how they are liable to another. Such conscription was class
based and acted particularly against the poor who could not afford to buy
exemption through hiring a substitute. Nor could they afford to subscribe
to one of the many insurance policies which could be taken out in case of
30 Robert Clyde, From Rebel to Hero: The Image of the Highlander, 1745-1830 (East Linton:
Tuckwell, 1998), 150, 164, 166, 168, 170 and 176 and Matthew P. Dziennik, '"The Greatest
Number Walked Out: Imperial Conflict and the Contractual Basis of Military Society in
the Early Highland Regiments, in Kennedy and McCormack (eds), Soldiering in Britain and
Ireland, 1750-1850, 17-36.
1 Emsley, British Society and the French Wars, Tor; Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition,
96-97; Cookson, British Armed Nation, 74; and T.L. Hewitson, Weekend Warriors from Tyne
to Tweed (Stroud: Tempus, 2006), 23.
Introduction
19
an unlucky number in the ballots. Many joined the volunteer movement
to escape the ballot.32
In 1809, with the French invasion threat reduced, the huge and time-costly
volunteer movement was absorbed into a more professionalised and
proletarian local militia. They were subject to stricter discipline and better
training and were paid for sessions under arms. Quotas for each county
and parish was again imposed, and with balloting if places were not filled.
However, wartime economic dislocation meant many needy working-class
people volunteered, glad of the regular supplementary income. These local
militiamen included future working-class radical leader Samuel Bamford
in Middleton, Lancashire and the poet John Clare in Northamptonshire.
John Clare expressed the Hobson's choice which many working-class men
faced: '[We] had a cross graind sort of choise left us which was to be forced
to be drawn and go for nothing or take on as Volunteers for the bounty of
2 guineas' Unsurprisingly, Clare and most of the poor took the money. As
we shall see in the section 'Mutinies and strikes', in Chapter 4, below, these
local militiamen were not slow to exercise their rights as citizen soldiers.33
Bullying for the line
Once men were in militia or reservist uniform there was an overriding
strategic need to get soldiers to volunteer for line regiments so that they
could be deployed overseas, and official bullying to achieve this aim was
widespread. This particularly applied to the mobilised county militia,
who were always stationed far from home. These troops were regularly
harassed to try to induce men to volunteer for line regiments. If they were
married, their dependants would lose their separation allowance, but the
high bounties offered tempted unwise militiamen. Though based on hearsay
from a comrade, Thomas Morris described the process:
The militia would be drawn up in line, and the officers, or non-commis-
sioned officers, from the regiments requiring volunteers, would give a
glowing description of their several regiments, describing the victories
they had gained and the honours they had acquired, and conclude by
32 Cookson, British Armed Nation, 101-03; Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition, 96-97;
Carole Divall, Redcoats against Napoleon: The goth Regiment in the Napoleonic Wars (Barnsley:
Pen & Sword, 2009), 26-27; Neil Ballatyne, History of the Thirtieth Regiment (Liverpool, 1923),
226-27; Cozens, 'The Blackest Perjury', 276; and Emsley, British Society and the French Wars,
TOI-02.
33 D.W. King, 'The Surrey Local Militia, JSAHR, 54 (1976), 48; Beckett, The Amateur
Military Tradition, I14-20; Robert Poole 'Bamford, Samuel, 178?-1865', in David Howell
and Neville Kirk (eds), Dictionary of Labour Biography, vol. 12 (Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 2004), 13-19, quoted in Bob Heyes, 'John Clare and the Militia', Journal of
the John Clare Society, 4 (1985), 49; and Cookson, British Armed Nation, 88-89.
