180
Soldiers as Workers
British soldiers regarded plundering from both enemy soldiers and luckless
civilians as a natural right and a just recompense for poor pay, hard service
and danger. Tight discipline would normally prevent too much damage,
but in defeat British soldiers, who were poor campaigners compared with
other armies, could be ruthless as they took out their hungry frustrations.
William Lawrence's memoir records how he cheerfully robbed and scavenged
from French wounded stragglers and hapless Spanish cottagers alike, often
protected by his officers. "These actions are bad, but when you consider the
frequent hungry state that such a large body of men were in during the war,
perhaps they are understandable? It was a short step for such amorality to
be applied to the looting of money or treasure. Moor's army, retreating for
its life to Corunna in 1808-09, looted as it went, with 'upwards of fifte
hundred robust marauders ... whol passed through the rearguard of the
reserve. Wellington's retreat from Burgos in the autumn of 1812 coincided
with the grape harvest and appalling weather. Whole regiments disintegrated
through want of supplies, drinking themselves to a stupor with Spanish wine.
Here, Private Wheeler of the gist Foot, along with his comrades, even robbed
a fellow British soldier from the 6th Dragoons of his stash of 632 dollars. t
Terror and rapine were also unleashed on civilians after successful but
bloody assaults on fortified towns in the Peninsular War at Ciudad Rodrigo,
Badajoz and San Sebastian. Strangely, such activities were meant to be
regulated by international law, as first promoted by Hugo Grotius in 1625.
Besieged towns with a practical breach in the walls, which refused to
surrender, were legally subject to plunder. Then, soldiers could be capable
of appalling conduct, as all control by officers was lost: "it was rather a
dangerous place for all officer to appear, I saw many of them running
as much risk to prevent inhumanity, as ther did the preceding night in
storming the town [Badajoz]. 65
Loot was a key motivation for soldiers volunteering for the dangerous
storming parties sent against fortifications:
All three of us had been quartered at Badajoz after the battle of Talavera
so we knew where the shops were located. Having heard a report that, if
we succeeded in taking the place, three hours of plunder would be allowed,
we arranged to meet at a silversmith's shop.
Lawrence of the 4oth Foot made this rendezvous, despite being wounded
during the assault. Costello, also wounded, confirmed the same motivation:
va Hahaway, Dorset Soldier, 6o; a British officer quated in Ronald Fraser, Napoleon's Cursed
War (London: Verso, 2008), 232; and Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 103.
and Donaldson, Recollections, 159.
65 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 6, 364 and 6t6-23, Bel, Pirst Total War, 46-47:
Class Conflict in the Army
181
if truth must be told, the chances of plunder in the town? Shooting off the
locks of Spanish shops, he secured '26 dollars for my own share? 66
Such behaviour came to a head at Vitoria in north-west Spain in July 1813.
Here, the British army secured a complete victory over Joseph Bonaparte,
Napoleon's brother and the puppet ruler. His army disintegrated and his
wagon train was captured. It contained treasure and artwork plundered
from the whole Peninsula during five years of harsh French occupation. In
adition, s,5 million francs sent by Napoleon to pay Joseph's army largely
disappeared into the back pockets of the Allied soldiers. Only 5 per cent was
recovered: 'Thousands of the men had appropriated large sums of money by
punder, and Little else of value found its way to the Commander in Chief
or military chest' 67
The resulting scene of looting and devastation features in many memoirs
of the war, as British soldiers fought their comrades or allies for the best
pickings, with the retreating French even joining in. Private Wheeler of the
sit Foot, after securing a small box of dollar', compared it to an Arab camp
after a successful attack on some caravan'. Some memoirists mention that
officers, far from holding back the men. also took part themselves, perhaps,
with the war ending, mindful of future genteel poverty on half-pay Costello
of the osth robbed a Spanish muleteer of st.000. He retained his swag by
threatening a British cavalruman of the recently arrived Hussar Brigad
(who looted rather than charged the French) with a loaded rifle. 68
The looting stragglers (about 12,500 men) equalled the army's casualties in
the battle itself. Wellington, outraged because the army could not pursue,
with so many men absent from the ranks, reportedly used his famous phrase,
very scum of the earth for the first time. Furthermore, the rank and file,
beginning 'to look upon their life as of some value, were not over anxious to
go much to the front. Many soldiers now saw an opportunity to take enough
money home to open a pub. Only those veteran regiments not at Vitoria and
the newly arrived troops volunteered for dangerous jobs, like the later assault
on San Sebastian.69
Soldiers sometimes looted during battle. In one Peninsular skirmish,
Costello of the gsth Rifles described both sides looting from riderless horses.
At Waterloo, Wheeler of the sist Foot joined with other old campaigners ...
66 Hathaway, Dorset Soldier, 75 and 76 and Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, 143 and 178.
67 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 9, 186; Oman, History of the Peninsular War,
vol. 6, 434-45 has the most detailed 'inventory.
68 Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 118; Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier, 240; and Oman,
History of the Peninsular War, vol. 6, 443-
69 Glover, Wellington's Army in the Peninsula, 171; Michael Ross, The Reluctant King: Joseph
Bonaparte (London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1976), 214; and Fortescue, History of the British
Army, vol. 9, 197.
