144
Soldiers as Workers
James Daily and John Armstrong of the detachment of the 45th Foot which
shot the Chartists to pieces at the Castle Hotel, Newport in 1839, were
given wardenships by the Duke of Wellington as a reward. Armstrong, it
is argued, was whisked immediately away, to prevent him giving evidence
at the state trial of the Chartist prisoners, thus simplifying the prosecution
case. But implications of consistent political favouritism are hard to sustain.
A later warder was Irish Roman Catholic Edward Costello, late of the gsth
Rifles, Adjutant of the Rifle battalion in the Evans' British Auxiliary Legion
and possible political radical. 174
Before the Municipal Reform Act of 1834, unreformed corporations often
employed small teams of part-time ceremonial officials to perform archaic
rituals on civic occasions. Norwich, for example, had its snap dragon,
whifflers, boy poet and standard bearers. There were striking similarities
between the unwritten language communicated by civic standard bearers
and the etiquette of flourishes used by those carrying military colours.
Surviving examples of both types of banner also have similar union flags in
the upper right canton. It is likely that ex-soldiers were employed in a variety
of these civic ceremonial roles. Even after the reforms many were kept on
for sentimental reasons. Ex-Trumpeter Harry Rowe was musician to the
High Sheriff of Yorkshire for 43 years, which he combined with running a
Discharged soldiers were viewed as ideal candidates for the new Victorian
occupation of policing. The introduction of a professional police force in
the carly nineteenth century, first in Ireland, then in London and lastly
in the provinces, is often regarded as possible only through its staffing by
discharged soldiers. Fortescue emphasised this point: "The first recruits for
the Metropolitan Police in 1829 were mainly disbanded soldiers, who were
reported by the Police Commissioners in 1849 as the most trustworthy
cohort of employees and the bulk of the original police were picked old
174 Janette Martin, 'Reinventing the Tower Beefeater in the Nineteenth Century, History
(20r3), 730-49; Andrew Bamford, A Bold and Ambitious Enterprise (London: Frontline Books,
2013), 213; Charles Dalton, Waterloo Roll Call (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1904), 271; John
Humphries, The Man from the Alamo: Why the Welsh Chartist Uprising Ended in a Massacre (St
Athan: Glyndwr Publishing, 2004), 302-03; and Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier. I am
also grateful for the guidance of Paul Ward.
See Nick Mansfield, 'Radical Rhymes and Union Jacks: A Search for Evidence of
Ideologies in the Symbolism of Nineteenth-Century Banners', University of Manchester,
Working Papers in Economic and Social History, 45 (2000), 22-26 and Haythornthwaite,
Redcoats, 173-
Soldiers as Workers
145
soldiers, and the non-commissioned officers were old military sergeants to a
man? In the provinces, "The institution of police for counties and boroughs
in 186 lightened the Army's burden of maintaining order at home, but ...
deplete the Army of some of its best men? This view is supported by more
modern historians: 'Chief Constables were frequently selected from service
officers...and Peels Irish Constabulary of 1814 and the Metropolitan Police
of 1829 could scarcely have come into existence without the ability of the
authorities to recruit large numbers of ex-servicemen. 176
The situation on the ground was more camnley It wac alen influenced
by the negative reputation of the new police. In London and other cities,
oft duty soldiers had a propensity for joining in anti-police riots on the
peoples side. Carolyn Steedman's research cautions against Fortescue's
positive portraval and points out that ex-coldiers were regarded with some
suspicion bu Chief Constables. as notential drunlarde Once established
the county constabularies attracted a more diverse range of recruits. In
Buckinghamshire, for example, in 1857, only 28 out of 154 new constables
had an army background. Though the Metropolitan Police initially recruited
440 ex-servicemen, this had only risen to 640 by 1866, one-twelfth of its
total strenoth This view is supported bu Rumsby He noints out that the
stipulation from the Metropolitan Police that their recruits had to be under
30, in practice precluded most ex-servicemen. 177
While the senior ranks of the police were often filled straight from
commissioned army officers, ex-rankers started as constables and most
remained at that rank. A minority were promoted, such as Thomas Catlin
of Huddersfield, who served as a private with the 83rd Foot in the Indian
Mutiny. He ended as a 'highly esteemed inspector in the Borough Police'
as did his regimental comrade, Thomas Galvin, in the same force. More
typical, perhaps, was John Smith Parkinson, late of the lith Hussars, who
after working on the railways joined the Birmingham police, and retired as
Sergeant after 26 years. Some specialist police roles also attracted ex-soldiers.
Sergeant Albert Mitchell, late of the 13th Light Dragoons and a Light
Brigade survivor, became
'Instructing
Constable to the Kent Mounted
Constabulary.
Two rank-and-file memoirists of the Sikh Wars, Corporal
John Ryder of the 32nd Foot and Sergeant John Pearman of the 3rd Light
176 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 9, 105; Fortescue, Last Post, 40; Fortescue,
History of the British Army, vol. 13, 524; and Norman Gash, 'After Waterloo: British Society
and the Legacy of the Napoleonic Wars', Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 28 (1978),
69 and 11o.
177 Carolyn Steedman, Policing the Victorian Community (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1984), 74; Peter Reese, Homecoming Heroes (London: Leo Cooper, 1992), 43; and
Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 346.
