154
Soldiers as Workers
To a large extent, army
tradesmen and their ilk were reliant on
pre-enlistment existing skills and training. But other employment opportu-
nities within the ranks or post discharge could be exploited by soldiers
with modest literacy and numeracy skills, especially given the growing
bureaucratisation of the Victorian world of work, with its vast army of
clerks. Although - despite the recruiting sergeants' claims - official training
opportunities were very limited, many rankers used their unique access to
free time to improve their talents and capabilities. These interests could often
make money and provide the foundations for future careers. Some of these,
especially in the Empire, could lead to respectable professions or substantial
financial gains. Others gained experience of more mundane army tasks like
the care of animals or waiting at table, to find similar quiet and modest
employment in civilian life. Many also failed, as former soldiers who lacked
the necessary drive and aptitude successfully to engage in the civilian labour
market could descend into poverty, alcoholism or the workhouse.
This chapter has attempted to do justice to the huge unstudied occupational
group that common soldiers represent. They worked as artisans, artificers,
servants, clerks, dealers and small businessmen providing goods and services
to their comrades and the outside world. Their generous free time often
allowed them to work at several jobs, increasing their employment portfolio
and income. Whatever their part-time occupation, these soldiers largely
showed pre-enlistment working-class attitudes and demonstrated solidarity
in numerous ways. Soldiers continued to act as members of the working class
after discharge, even if going into public or quasi-military employment, like
police, prisons or railways. Military service then usually formed one phase
of their careers and overall life experience. Within the army itself, despite
rigid controls, all sorts of class conflict, albeit at low level, can be uncovered
and this forms the substance of the next chapter.
4
Class Conflict in the Army
Introduction
Service life for nineteenth-century soldiers was generally hard, with poor pay,
strict discipline enforced by severe punishments, cramped living conditions,
inadequate food and a culture of hard drinking. At a time of industriali-
sation and class formation, such hardship was often the lot of the working
class. Whilst much of con, ict that resulted from these conditions could be
termed criminal, much had a class component. It is argued here that military
class conflict merits closer study and can revent milarites with the civitia
labour market.
Resistance in the military could he defned as the classie condict over
similar to that of contemporary civilian workers, was tened and defended
wages. A contract culture, with customary rates of pay and set outputs,
by regimental tradesmen and skilled artificers with the vigour as members
of trade societies - the carly trade unions. Both were adapting to the
demands of the Industrial Revolution, resulting in go-slows and work-to-
rules. Military tradesmen and artificers concentrated on the puce of work,
customary outputs and in acts of resistance when their pructices were
challenged. Evidence for such go-slows and strikes is touch seteby and
opaque. In addition, though, expertise, regulated by contract, often gave
regimental tradesmen the upper hand in their dealings with the Quarter
master, Paymaster and Adiutant, who were meant to organise this work
Wily tradesmen could often tand wink these meaninto supanie this work.
resorting to conflict. There are parallels with some civilian working lives,
such as in agriculture, where, in the absence of formal organisations like
trade unions, informal negotiations seem to have taken place about accepted
outputs. Similarly, in the army, NCOs often acted as a cross between
foreman and shop steward in collective bargaining with management, in the
form of the regiment's Adjutant and Quartermaster. Soldiers, like civilian
