152
Soldiers as Workers
in the cavalry, brought their discharge within the first few years of their
service. Not only did they get valuable training with horses, of great use to
them in civil life, but they also learned ... to keep accounts they are taken
away for clerks? Rumsby has identified the particular careers chosen by some
soldiers in India. Such were the benefits and career opportunities that large
numbers of soldiers elected to transfer to other units when their regiments
were ordered home. Private William Dickenson transferred three times,
having been born in India and never having been to the UK!91
Soldiers not based in India, like Sergeant James Bodell of soth Foot, could
also achieve highly successful careers:
We did very well at this business [netmaking in Hong Kong] better than
Boxes or Knapsacks, in fact I must say that all through my career in the
Service or out of it, I have always been anxious to make money, and never
begrudged working hard for it.
On discharge, Bodell failed at hotel keeping at Ballarat during the Australian
Gold Rush and, penniless, signed up as a militiaman in New Tonland in
1863. Whilst fighting in the Maori Wars:
It became known amongst the officers that I was a rough Carpenter and in
September 1864 an officer came to me and asked if I could make a Clothes
Press. I said I could if I had the tools. He said he had the Tools and I went
to work. In 3 days I had the Job finished and then had another to make for
Mrs Major John. One Job after another kept me going and I was doing
well making 4 to 5 pounds per week beside my pay.
Officers, as private and
public consumers of these products, not only
tolerated but encouraged individual enterprise. Bodell's next job was erecting
camp huts: "The colonel remarked he must have an Orderly Room like it ...
I had a contract to cut out a frame of a Building ... In a few days a Pass
was put into my hand by the Colonel to go to Maketu to build this frame
I had cut out? After discharge from the militia, Bodell married and settled
in New Z caland and tried his hand at brewing, and in the 18yos, 'I worked
14 to 16 hours per day as a Carpenter, Builder, undertaker, Barber, Cordial
Manufacturer He later also sold insurance, was a land agent, grocer,
temperance hotel keeper and photographer. He was wealthy enough to
revisit his family in Leicester in 1883, after an absence of 35 years.192
William Gould, discharged from the cavalry in 1849, had an equally
varied post-service career. This included:
191 Linch and McCormack, 'Defining Soldiers: Britain's Military, C. 740-1815, 152; Anglesey,
History of the British Cavalry, vol. 2, 33t; and Rumsby, The Sixteenth Lancers', 330.
192 Sinclair, Soldier's View of Empire, 69, 158, 168 and 180.
Soldiers as Workers
153
steward at the East India United Services Club, a servant to a gentleman
going to South Africa to breed horses, and as a volunteer officer during the
Kaffir Wars, before entering business, which failed, prompting a return to
England. Here he was employed in quick succession as a railvay station-
master, a volunteer drill-master, and a hotel superintendent, before finally
emigrating to Canada.193
Other ex-rankers rose into professions. losenh Donation Sentrich memoirist
of the Peninsular War, after ten vears as a recruiting sergeant for the EIC.
funded a degree at Glasgow University from the proceeds of his book,
practised medicine and died in Paris aged 37 whilst studying anatomy.
Another French Wars veteran, Troop Sergeant Major Edward Cotton
(1792-1849) of the 7th Hussars, returned to Waterloo and married a local
woman. He ran a very successful inn and museum, conducted British visitors
and published a best-selling tour guide. 194
Archibald Forbes (1838-1900) became the most famous British foreign
correspondent of his day and a major literary figure. This clergyman's son,
thouch educated at Abandon University cared as a cantiman ranker in
the Royal Dragoons until invalided out, an experience which enabled him
to gain support from officers and soldiers in covering numerous Imperial
campaigns. He is also remembered for his sympathetic coverage of the
Revolt of the Field' the mass movement of Enolish farmworkers in 1872.
Robert Riatchford (Re -1012) an ex-Sergeant of the toard Foot. became the
most influential journalist and author of the British socialist movement,
whose Clarion newspaper and cultural organisations dominated the British
left until the 1920s.195
High-Ayers from the ranks were the exception. The majority of the mainly
working-class rank and file of the British army plodded along undertaking
other work, usually in their pre-enlistment trades. The regimental tradesmen
and army artificers retained their artisans' culture and attitudes throughout
their careers. This tradesmen's culture continued throughout the century. The
workmen of the and South Lancashire Regiment, shown in a photograph
from 1907, proudly display the tools of their particular trades in the same
way as their civilian cousins widely did in the milieu of artisan customs and
regalia (see Illustration 3).
193 Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 344.
194 Donaldson, Recollections, iv-vi and Edward Cotton, A Voice from Waterloo (London:
Green, 1862).
195 Philip Knightley, The First Casualty (London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975), 52-53;
Horn, Joseph Arch, 5t; and Judith Laird and John Saville, 'Robert Blatchford (1851-1943), in
J. Saville and J.M. Bellamy, Dictionary of Labour Biography, vol. 4 (London: Macmillan,
1977), 34-42.
