Soldiers as Workers
private armies fighting on the nationalist or liberal side in early-nineteenth-
century wars in South America, Greece, Portugal and Spain.
The terms
and conditions of enlistment of all these soldiers are analysed in relation
to formal and informal contract cultures, which had many similarities with
civilian employment. Wartime compulsion existed, both officially, in terms
of balloting for the militia and reserve units, and unofficially, with crimping,
trickery by recruiting sergeants and mistreatment of home service troops
refusing to volunteer for the front line.
Such a long period needs some justification. Though a soldier of 1900 was
better educated, better equipped and healthier than his counterpart 100 years
earlier, he was still led by officers from a much higher social class. Indeed,
British army officers in 1900 were, on average, more aristocratic than their
equivalents of 1800. The innate conservatism of the army meant that the
basic structure was maintained and affected all its activities, so that soldiers,
both officers and other ranks, would have recognised their regiments of 100
years before and been able to identify with their predecessors' working lives.
This is confirmed by Charles Grey, an infantryman of the 188os:
Indeed but for some changes of small importance in uniforms, the substi-
tution of the rifle for the flintlock musket, the introduction of short service
... there had been almost no changes since Georgian days, and in the
matters of drill, manoeuvre, battle and all else officers and soldiers of even
100 could have if resuscitated have found no difficulty in resuming their
respective places in the ranks.!
This chapter discusses a variety of issues which will familiarise the reader
with the military working class. It relates the topic to the discipline of
labour history, briefly examines military history literature, where these
can also connect with that specialism, and comments critically on soldiers'
memoirs. It details the often bewildering range of types of military service
that soldiers undertook, and argues that, at least during the French Wars,
a quasi-conscription existed. It then
importance of imperialism for common soldiers.
goes on to underpin the growing
Towards a labour history of soldiers
E.P. Thompson, in his seminal labour history account, The Making of the
English Working Class (1963), pleaded: 'We need more studies of the social
attitudes of criminals, of soldiers and sailors? Though a uniformed British
working class had existed for many years, it only began to develop on a large
MSS Eur F391, unpublished transcript (t
1 Charles Grey, Soldiering in Victorian Days: A Memoir and Sketches, British Library
Introduction
scale from the mid-nineteenth century, both in major capitalised private
industries, like the railways, or in the increased role of government or local
authorities to provide services through post offices, transport systems or
amenities. This uniformed workforce, many of them ex-servicemen, has
increasingly been studied by labour historians. Curiously, though, despite
the vast literature on military history, little has been written on the largest
group of the uniformed working class: soldiers themselves. This anomaly was
Most of all there is an overriding need for some military history to be
written 'from below', with an emphasis on the rank and file.
In this
connection I am far from apologetic about mentioning the concept of
'class'. It has proved most fruitful for labour historians and there is no
doubt that it could be equally so in the historical study of armies and war.?
Twenty years later, in her influential account of the formation of the modern
British state during the reign of George III, Linda Colley observed: 'But the
hundreds of thousands of Britons who committed themselves, for whatever
reason, to fight the French, remain in the shadows.' Later, Colley again
queried the lack of serious research on the soldiers of the peacetime British
Empire:
Like the slaves some felt themselves to be, however, white imperial
soldiers in India are hard to investigate outside of the archives compiled
by their masters ... We need to ... uncover different, more subterranean
less dignified stories, stories of renegades and deserters, stories around
punishment and resistance, stories of those majority of British soldiers who
stayed loyal and outwardly obedient but sometimes with gritted teeth.3
labour history:
To be resentful in small and uninscribed ways is one form of resistance,
though the labour movement and socialism have not given such strategies
much more recognition than have the official canons of bravery and
honour.4
2 E.P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (Harmondsworth: Pelican,
1968), 63 and Victor E. Neuburg, in his review of M.R.D. Foot, War and Society (see JSAHR,
52 (1974), 49).
3 Colley, Britons, 284 and Linda Colley, Captives: Britain, Empire and the World, 1600-1850
(London: Pimlico, 2002), 316.
4 Carolyn Steedman,
The Radical Soldier's Tale: John Pearman, 1879-1908 (London:
Routledge, 1988), 2.
