28
Soldiers as Workers
Sergeants and Corporals, the non-commissioned officers, were all
promoted from literate and promising rankers, who held a special position
in the army structure. It was they rather than the leisured officers who were
responsible for most of the daily work and management of the regiment.
With the increasing bureaucratisation of the army and the growth in
technical jobs, the roles and power of the NCOs enlarged. Isolated colonial
postings especially could result in increased responsibility and, given the
right skills, amazing career opportunities for working-class people, which
would be unheard of in their previous civilian life.
'Scum of the earth'?
Throughout the nineteenth century a strict class system operated: 'the rank
and file of the Army have been recruited from the lower stratum in society,
and the command of these men has been entrusted to the higher class,
and never, save at the time of the Commonwealth to any other. Popular
military historians have assumed that the ruffians led by gentlemen' profile
is accurate: 'Soon soldiering reached the low place in British society it
was to occupy until the Great War in 1914, an occupation despised by the
middle and working classes as a disgrace hardly less than prison? Napoleonic
historian Michael Glover claimed that:
These voices from the ranks confirm that Wellington's belief is the truth.
When Wellington said that 'English soldiers are fellows who have enlisted
for drink - that is the plain fact - they have all enlisted for drink', statistics
suggest that he would not be greatly exaggerating.
High-minded historians of a later age have censured Wellington for these
words ... At best, no respectable working-class family cared to see a son
go for a soldier. To do so was the last resort of the shiftless.!
As early as 1969, Elizabeth Longford, in a passage tracing the variations in
Wellington's famous phrase, much repeated by him in the years of peace,
concluded: 'Of course he was wrong. His strictures, as so often happened,
were over dramatized. Not nearly such a large proportion of the Army was
"scum" as he implied?
Since then, she has been joined by other historians:
British privates were indeed recruited from the lower classes, and liberal
1 Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, 62; Correlli Barnett, Britain and her Army (London:
Cassell, 1970), 139; Michael Glover, Wellington's Army in the Peninsula, 1808-1814 (Crediton:
David & Charles, 1977), 24-25; and Michael Glover, Wellington as Military Commander
(London: Batsford, 1968), 21. For similar views, see also Richard Glover, Britain at Bay:
Defence against Bonaparte, 1803-14 (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1973), 131.
Class Structure and the British Army
29
historians who describe them as 'scum' might care to check their philosophic
consistency. But they were not drawn primarily from life-long beggars and
vagabonds.
They were working people who had lost their livelihoods and
communities through economic recession, famine or dispossession of
land.
Roger Buckley also pointed out that almost all accounts of 'scum' come from
upper-class officers, who would be poor at identifying that their rank and
file represented a cross section of working-class society. This view has been
Rather than 'the scum of every county, the refuse of mankind' as [the
contemporary] Lieutenant Colonel Campbell Dalrymple described them,
soldiers came from all the ranks of the labouring classes and from across
the British Isles ... The army proved indiscriminate, skimming the cream
as much as the scum from Britain's plebeians.3
More recently, historians from various disciplines have carried out thorough
research on the social background of rankers. The most detailed is from
Roderick Floud, Kenneth Wachter and Annabel Gregory, who have drawn
No civilian occupation could guarantee uninterrupted employment for
over 20 years, at however meagre a wage, followed by a pension. Nor was
insecurity confined to the unskilled; a skilled worker in the engineering
industry could be dismissed ... and employers in many trades adjusted
their work-force day by day to the level of demand.
[The army was the] employer of last resort. Nevertheless, in the unstable
markets of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain, such a position
made them attractive, at some time or another, to a large fraction of the
British working class. Since this was so, it is no longer possible to regard
military recruits as a race apart.
Whilst generally supporting such views, Edward Spiers's work on the social
composition of Victorian soldiers points out that 'those who joined the
army came primarily from the least skilled sections of the working-class'.
But neat occupation classifications of working-class skills have themselves
been revised in recent labour history. The term 'agricultural labourer, is now
2 Elizabeth Longford, Wellington Years of the Sword (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson,
1969), 379-80 and James Belich, The New Zealand Wars and the Victorian Interpretation of
Racial Conflict (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986), 23.
3 Buckley, British Army in the West, 105-06 and 154 and Way, 'Memoirs of an Invalid', 32.
See also Arthur N. Gilbert, 'An Analysis of Some Eighteenth Century Army Recruiting
Records', JSAHR, 54 (1976), 47.
