2
Class Structure and the British Army
Introduction
This chapter will argue that the army's structure almost exactly reflected
class distinctions as they were developing in industrialising Britain (see
Illustration i). It will examine how class pervaded every part of the
nineteenth-century military. Army officers traditionally came from the
gentry or aristocracy, though, with wartime enlargements, more enlisted
upper-middle-class backgrounds, notably in unfashionable and
technical regiments. Until the 1870s, junior officers, except in the artillery
and engineers, generally purchased their commissions and promotions up
to Lieutenant Colonel, the highest rank in individual regiments. Higher
promotions, up to General, though often dependent on family influence, was
the responsibility of the War Office. The purchase system suited both the
wealthy families of otherwise potentially unemployable younger sons, and
the relatively small state, which did not have to provide for their retirement
pensions. In contrast with much of post-revolutionary Europe, as a deliberate
and class-based policy, British officers were rarely promoted from the ranks.
Those who were elevated mainly had specialist or management roles, such
as adjutants, paymasters or veterinary surgeons, which caused the prevailing
amateurism of the British officer corps to continue. This unprofessional
attitude, characterised by an aristocratic languor, was also adopted by junior
officers from middle-class backgrounds. Even the abolition of the purchase
of commissions in 1871 did not change the army's class-based composition,
and, except during the two world wars of the twentieth century, arguably,
it continues to this day.
The eighteenth-century custom of proprietor Colonels, who were entitled
to make money from their office, was declining by the Napoleonic Wars.
However, vestiges of official graft remained, centred on the provision of
uniforms which was the responsibility of individual Colonels until after
Class Structure and the British Army
27
I Sandown Garrison, 1855.
The class structure of the British
army as drawn by Ensign Crealock
of the g5th Foot; with his company
commander, Captain Foster at the
top left, Crealock himself at the top
right, an NCO at the bottom right
and a miserable looking private at
drill at the bottom left.
the disasters of the Crimean War. In addition, officers in colonial postings
could sometimes make money through trade, gifts or bribes from local
rulers and wartime loot. This was the main compensation for service in the
less prestigious army of the East India Company. War was welcomed by
officers, not just for its honour, but because sudden death meant rapid and
unpurchased promotion and the opportunity for plunder and prize money
which was eagerly seized by officers as much as it was by penniless rankers.
Common soldiers, by contrast, were nearly all working class. They have
traditionally been viewed as a dangerous and unsettled under-class - the
very scum of the earth' in the Duke of Wellington's famous phrase. Even in
the more respectable working class it was believed that 'to go for a soldier'
brought disgrace to your family. In this analysis, the army comprising
ruffians officered by gentry became a separate military caste, remote from
and distrusted by the rest of British society, compounded by long overseas
imperial service.
This widespread and simplistic view is being challenged
by recent research, which argues that recruits - especially in wartime or in
economic depression - were from all parts of the working class and were
not just its wastrels and drifters. Traditional military history has promoted
the view that soldiers liked being officered by gentlemen, but other research
has uncovered a radical rank-and-file voice, which challenged class-based
unfairness, potentially equated gentle birth with incompetence and pressed
the case for experienced sergeants to be commissioned. This was rare except
where they could fulfil a technical role, or as an occasional reward for cases
of extreme bravery on the battlefield.
