190
Soldiers as Workers
the latter gangs included deserters and transported ex-soldiers, as well as
escaped convicts, who fought a guerrilla war with their former comrades.
One example was Private Peter Septon of the 2/95th Rifles who was caught
deserting to the enemy during the Siege of Cadiz in i8rr and transported to
New South Wales for life. The following year, Septon deserted again to the
Australian bush, where he joined a gang of bushwhackers and was killed in
a brawl in 1817. Many serving soldiers disappeared into the outback, carrying
messages, pursuing absconders or deserters.?3
With rapid settlement in Australia after 1815 and enormous demand for
labour, deserters could now find a hiding place and possibly a new life. In
the words of one officer:
the soldiers are not in Sydney kept in a state of separation from the people;
but mix, marry, and live amongst them and are in all respects identified
with them: they hear their opinions, share in their feelings, discuss their
grievances, and would with infinite difficulty, if at all, in a matter of public
concern be brought to act against them.?*
During the Crimean War, 94 British soldiers deserted to the Russians. They
were ostracised by fellow prisoners of war, but some managed to return to
Britain. One, Thomas Toole of the 7th Fusiliers - a Manchester Irishman-
returned via Germany and the USA and tried to lie low. But, recognised by
a Manchester policeman of his acquaintance, he was arrested on tied for
desertion, with the aggravation of giving intelligence to the enemy, which
had resulted in heavy casualties amongst his own regiment. In 1858, he was
sentenced to transportation for life and apparentlv ended his davs in Western
As in the USA, the fice republics established by the Boers after the Great
Trek of the 182os. with their shortages of white lahour provided another
opportunity to make new lives for potential deserters in South Africa. Three
survivors from the artillery battery at the Zulu War disaster of Isandhlwana
deserted after so many of their comrades had been slaughtered. The local
commanding General wrote in 188o: "The proximity of the Free State offers
a strong inducement ... The desertions among the King's Dragoon Guards
have been exceptionally heavy since the regiment was under lars fot
India. The Boers organised escape routes, with one claiming 260 deserters.
This was centred on a patriotic Boer brothel Madame, who declared. Had
93 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 7 and 89-90.
94 Quoted in J.F. McMahon, 'Review of the Military in the Maintenance of Security s
to Jane Davies for bringing this to my attention.)
New South Wales, c.1810-1830', unpublished paper (1088), 27. Copy in TIM. (1 am grateful
Inglesant, Prisoners of Voronesh, 20.
9s Glenn Fisher, 'Thomas Tole: Deserter to the Russiand IS AHR. 88 /anal can-12 and
191
Class Conflict in the Army
she started earlier... there would not be a single private left in
Dragoon Guards.%6
Postings to key ports of the Empire also provided particular opp
for desertion. In 85os Hong Kong, Sergeant Bodell records that hi:
men to American ships (bringing ice) bound for California and Aust
daimed to have met several of these in his later travels in New Zeala
Desertion was also a problem in the county militias
re-established in 1852, after the ballot was suspended in favour of vol
recruitment with a bounty. With the heavy manpower needs of the Cri
War and Indian Mutiny, volunteering was again allowed between militi
the line. This led to a spate of militia desertions and fraudulent enlistme
Out of 47,000 militiamen in 1858, there were over 9,000 desertions. One n
had deserted and re-enlisted 47 times in different militi
The Cardwell reforms also resulted in a threefold rise il
in th
i87os, as the new young short service recruits quickly foun
side of soldiering did not live up to the recruiting sergeants
1880 to 1882, 7,477 men with less than a year's service deserted.
Edwardian period, nearly ≤ per cent of annual tale were repe
within a year?8
As we have alreadv seen in Chapter 2. circumstances including de
caused many British soldiers to continue their old trade in the ser
other powers. Eighteenth-century soldiers frequently
took service
foreign (sometimes opposing) countries in European wars.
Thougl
common in wars of empire, changing sides was a feature of the liv
some British rankers. Miserable service in the garrison of Tangier
the late seventeenth century caused many British soldiers to desert to
Moorish opposition - even some veterans of Cromwell's army. Whilst many
converted to Islam, others took their place as Christians against their former
comrades in a 1,500-strong European renegade force.
The corsair states of
North Africa continued to recruit Europeans until their suppression after
the French Wars."
96 Abbott, 'Royal Artillery at Isandhlwana, 1879', 226 and Anglesey, History of the British
Cavalry, vol. 3, 53 and 205.
97 Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire, 60 and 64.
98 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 13, 53r; French, Military Identities, 16; Holmes,
Soldiers, 289; and Richard Van Emden, Boy Soldiers of the Great War (London: Headline,
2005), 21.
99 Colley, Captives, 39 and 95.
