xiv
Soldiers as Workers
Library, National Army Museum, Library of the Royal United Services
Institute, and Cambridgeshire and Shropshire Record Offices. A particular
debt is owed to Jane Davies at the Lancashire Infantry Museum in Preston.
I also thank Alison Welsby at Liverpool University Press for her great care
and patience, and two anonymous readers for their helpful comments.
Above all, thanks are due to my family, especially Julia. Though Fred and
Ena and most of the older generation are now dead, Bob, Robin,
'Bob's yer
uncle and cousin Joan added more than they realise to my knowledge of the
intricacies of the British class system.
1
Introduction
What this book is about
An understanding of working-class people is a key factor in the analysis of
the British army in the period of industrialisation and Empire. Yet, despite
an immense military literature, we know little about what the huge occupa-
tional group of common soldiers did all day. This book provides an account
of common soldiers pursuing pre-enlistment employment within the army
itself in specialised trades, as servants or as 'penny capitalists'. It discusses
how soldiers exhibited pre-enlistment attitudes and engaged in class conflict
at various levels, including asserting a strong contract culture. It shows how
class pervaded the structure of the army at every level, with the rank and
file being consistently treated less well than officers. Together with a future
companion volume on popular politics, it offers new insights into major
issues which shaped Victorian society, like class, politics, nationhood, racism
and imperialism.
This research on the army and its place in British society comes main
from the long nineteenth century: 1790 to 1914. It is coterminus with thi
momentous and influential events of industrial development and maturity
and with wars of nationhood and imperialism. It concentrates on working-
class professional soldiers, rather than the unpaid and part-time volunteers
formed during the Napoleonic period and later from the mid-Victorian
period. Professionals are distinguished between regulars, who could be
sent anywhere, and the county militia, only mobilised in wartime, whose
contracts specified home service only. In addition, during the French Wars,
other professional soldiers served in the short-lived 'fencibles' (again only
for service in the UK), plus garrison, veterans and some colonial regiments.
The French Wars also saw the creation of small professional staffs in unpaid
volunteer units. The study considers the white soldiers of the private army
of the East India Company, who only signed on for Indian service. It also
covers overseas military adventurers who contracted to serve in British
