208
Soldiers as Workers
into three regiments tasked specifically for garrisoning the islands, as the
Royal West Indian Rangers, the Royal York Rangers and, later in 1813, the
York Chasseurs. These units also developed reputations for mutinies, with
outbreaks occurring on Martinique and Tobago in 181r. Fortunately, with
fewer expeditions being sent to the region, the death rate declined for these
penal corps. The Royal York Rangers have the distinction of the first war
memorial, located at their base on Barbados, on which the names of the
50 rank and file were recorded who had died in their 1809-10 campaigns.
These three battalions were disbanded in 1819, with some soldiers becoming
military settlers in Nova Scotia. 141
The penal colony in Australia was first garrisoned with Royal Marines,
but a small New South Wales Corps was raised in 1789, partly from military
prisoners. As outlined earlier, their scheming officers obtained a monopoly
of liquor in the colony. Nicknamed the 'Rum Corps', they made fortunes in
land and initiated a coup against Governor Bligh (of "Bounty' fame) in 1810.
The rank and file proved unsuitable for supervising convicts (which included
many ex-soldiers). Despite the good behaviour of some during a revolt by
transported United Trishmen, the 'Rum Corps' was replaced with a regula
line regiment. 142
Conclusion
Service life for nineteenth-century soldiers was arguably improving by the
late-Victorian period, but it still remained hard, with low incomes, rigid
and unfair codes of conduct and an often miserable lifestyle, tempered by a
dominant culture of hard drinking. This could foster conflict of all sorts in
which pre-enlistment working-class attitudes were displayed.
At times, there was a classic conflict over wages. A contract culture existed
with customary rates of pay and self-defined outputs, virtually identical to
that of contemporary civilian workers. This was adhered to and defended by
regimental tradesmen or skilled artificers with the same vigour as members
of trade societies while adapting to the demands of the Industrial Revolution,
resulting in go-slows and work-to-rules. Sometimes this robust and slightly
old-fashioned contract culture was embraced by all rankers when faced
with official demands deemed unacceptable to customary practice, in a
combination of Thompsonian 'moral economy' and modern class conflict.
141 Buckley, British Army in the West Indies, 87 and 100-ox; Buckley, "The Destruction of
the British Army', 89; Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 7, 26; and Haythornthwaite,
Redcoats, 177.
Fatal Shore, chap. 9.
142 Oman, Wellingtor's Army, 238; Yarpole, The Auxiliaries, 1802-1817, 12; and Hughes,
Class Conflict in the Army
209
The results could be spectacular, as demands for popular rights overcame
fear of fierce retributive punishment. Large-scale strikes could erupt such as
the White Mutiny of EIC troops in 1858-59, when thousands of soldiers left
work and occupied their barracks over enforced transfer to Crown service
with worse conditions. Equally effective were the hundreds of smaller
forgotten disputes, a few of which are recorded here. Even strikes on the
battlefield were not unknown. Unofficial go-slows and passive resistance
sometimes took place when keen officers expected too long a 'stint' from the
labour of their men. Unpopular officers who persisted in what were seen as
unreasonable demands could find it impossible to enforce discipline and even
risked being shot during the heat of battle. By contrast, wise commanding
officers would accept that soldiers had been pushed too far, concede their
arguments and on occasion tacitly condone their actions.
Other low-level conflict such as drunkenness, looting, desertion, frater-
nisation with the enemy or service with a foreign or even an enemy
power could also have a class element. Some features declined throughout
the century, with the gradual civilisation of manners, while others were
enhanced through long imperial postings, especially in India.
boredom could cause mental health problems or the deliberate committing
of crimes to achieve discharge or transportation. Other conflict centred on
feigning illness to avoid duty or actual self-harm, with the availability of
firearms contributing to an army suicide rate three times that of civilians:
the ultimate resistance.
Soldiers'
class identification
continued in life
post-demobilisation,
although in the late-Victorian period preferred access for ex-servicemen to
some junior public service and quasi-military jobs did lead to more subdued
and conservative feelings. As will be explored in the companion volume,
soldiers often shared strong loyalty to their regiment (less to the army or
Crown). But, as recently propounded by Hurl-Eamon and Rumsby, this was
often overshadowed by durable family allegiances and ties to their home
Their shared social and economic
localities where they planned to return.
backgrounds were defined and maintained in the army, despite its rigid
codes, and could indeed heighten the soldier's identity in his society, and
ultimately increase his class consciousness.
