174
Soldiers as Workers
Private Alfred Burrows of the ist Leicesters recorded such protests in letters
to his family as late as the Boer War:
On the trek, they marched & marched them until the men were thoroughly
done up. One company flung their arms down & refused to go any further
until they had a rest & they got it too. Again about 3 days ago, on the
work they are on now, a Major set them a task to do. They worked hard
& finished it, & up comes the Major again, & was so pleased that he gave
them another job to do. The men struck and refused to do it. The Colonel
fell them in, & after hearing the case, sent them to camp.4s
Mutinies, strikes and disputes took place against a background of unwavering
passive resistance. Although little is found in regimental histories about
this low-level class conflict, some soldiers' memoirs contain accounts of
backchats, the undermining of unpopular officers and widespread collusion
between officers and men. This resulted in sanctioned rule-breaking, with
Sergeants often acting as a combination of foremen and shop stewards.
Passive resistance has also been identified in recent histories of domestic
[which] suggest that rather than taking strike action or seeking legal redress,
domestic staff, both male and female, turned to strategic behaviours..
methods of revenge against unfair treatment, using familiar weapons such
as sulking, misinterpreting orders, semi-deliberate spoiling of materials,
wasting time and sullen dumb insolence.46
As with domestic servants, nineteenth-century soldiers, often displayed
low-level resistance as they went about their day-to-day business evidencing
pre-enlistment attitudes. Such conflict is little recorded but took place,
especially in imperial postings. Dealing with this behaviour, which could
take the form of grumbling, disrespectful talk and binge drinking, was
the responsibility of NCOs, who could collude with or even support it.
Such behaviour carried over from the eighteenth century. William Cobbett
recalled his own army service in the i780s: "Soldiers do not talk in the
hearing of their commanders; but they talk pretty freely behind their backs.
Physical demonstrations of protest were occasionally made like the banging
of musket butts on parade. A Captain of the goth Foot was tried in 18os for
1899-1902', JSAHR, 85 (2007), I.
45 Robin Jenkins, "One of the Human Atoms: A Soldier's View of the South African War,
16 David French has the only recent serious discusion of the issue, See French, Military
Identities, 198 and Benson, 'One Man and his Women', 204.
Class Conflict in the Army
175
- reported:
being drunk on duty in Dublin. Witnesses - officers from other regiments
I heard some of the men say that the Captain ought to be confined as being
disguised in liquor and giving the Guard so much trouble ... it appeared
to me that they were huzzaing and knocking the butts of their firelocks
on the ground.
An officer described the noises made by a punishment parade of soldiers
witnessing an unfair or severe flogging:
the faces of the spectators assumed a look of disgust: there was a low
whispering sound, scarcely audible, issuing from the apparently stern and
silent ranks leven when the soldiers believed in its justice ... the culprit
had disappeared and the martyr had taken his place.47
Private Morris of the ard Foot described how troops could speak to officers
in the field, if no one in authority was around:
We had been several days without any other provision than fruit, and one
of the men was eating potatoes by the camp fire, when an officet name,
up, who was universally disliked ... Coming up to the fire, and assuming,
for the moment, a look of the utmost kindness, he said, 'Smith, I wish
you would give me a few of those potatoes! T'll see you d--d first, was
Smith's reply; (before giving it, however, he ascertained there was no one
by that was likely to bear witness, in case the officer should charge him
with disrespect).48
In the same campaign, Thomas Knisht of the osth Rifles describes dealing
with an unpopular CO in Flanders:
There was a heavy snow on the ground, and Colonel Ross being no
favourite, we one night collected an immense snow-ball, and rolling it up
to the door of his quarters, closed it, and obliged him in the morning to
get out by the back of the house. He laughed at the trick, but never was
afterwards without a sentry.49
In 1836, an anonymous tailor serving with the BAL in the Basque Country
gives a good example of backchat, when asking an officer to pay a debt:
In a bye street leading off the Grand Plaza, I came full butt upon Captain
Oakley, and under the influence of the extra pint of wine, asked him for
a dollar owing for tailoring done some time before. 'Go to your barrack,
47 Cobbett's Weekly Political Pamphlet, 32(37), 13 Dec. 1817, 1146; LIM, Court Martial Records,
Captain Thomas Leach of the goth Foot, 1805, and quoted in Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 85.
48 Selby, Thomas Morris, 5t.
49 Knight, British Battalion at Oporto, 9.
