196
Soldiers as Workers
A few more renegade soldiers can be located in the imperial wars. Private
John Hargreaves deserted from the gist Foot stationed at Shanghai in
March 1863. Two months later he was captured, wounded whilst fighting
for the Taiping rebels, by Chinese levies under the command of Charles
Gordon. He was lucky to be merely tried for desertion and discharged
as a bad character. A few deserters even served with the Maoris in their
wars against British settlers. The most prominent was Kimble Bent - 2
much-flogged Nova Scotian private of the s7th - who deserted in 186s
and went native'. He became a gunsmith within his adopted tribe and
disappeared, but was rediscovered in the bush in the Edwardian period
to authorise a sensational biography. In the South African War, several
colonial troopers changed sides and in 190t a private of the ist Loyals was
tried and shot after having been found fighting for the Boers. The Boer
Republics also raised a small Irish Legion in which several ex-British
soldiers also served. Whilst few of these renegades left any record from
which their motivations can be deduced, it is likely that discontent with
their working lives in the British army and its prevailing class system were
prime motivators and that foreion service was a way of taking control of
their lives and perhaps fighting back. 111
Feigned illness and self-harm
Another method of subversion traditionally resorted to by soldiers was
feigning illness to avoid unpleasant tasks - 'acting the old soldier - a
term used as early as the French Wars. Recipes for noxious substances to
be applied to vulnerable parts of the body or ingested were shared and
implemented. A standard work for regimental surgeons, Henry Marshalls
Hints to Young Medical Officers 1828), contained a long section on detecting
malingerers. Some dodges were known to unwilling victims of the militia
ballot, a tradition that continued with later conscripts in the Great War
and beyond. Eating soap to increase the rate of heart beats, which medical
officers might mistake for palpitations, is recorded in tis and in the 19505.12
Mutineers in India, 1857-9, JSAHR, 80 (2002), 119-22; and Christopher Hibbert, The Great
62-63-
Mutiny, India 1857 (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1978), 421; Llewellyn-Jones, Great Uprising,
record of this soldier.
112 Haythornthwaite, Redcoats, 65 has a list of such substances and their supposed outcomes.
See also Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 18; Rumsby, 'Making Choices', 32; and Mansfield,
English Farmworkers, xi.
Class Conflict in the Army
197
The prospect of dangerous service, such as being posted to the West
Indies in the 179os with its 50 per cent mortality rate, as well as potential
mutinies, could also result in self-harm. Troops destined for the Caribbean
were assembled on Spike Island in Cork Cove in February 1796 to
prevent desertion. Of the 3,000 mustered, over 400 became afflicted by
(self-administered) sores on the leg and were deemed unfit for service abroad
and most of the 8th Foot reported ill when orders came for the region. 113
Prevalence of non-European diseases in the Egyptian campaion of 1801
made troops particularly susceptible to feigning illness, though this could
have unforeseen consequences. One wounded soldier. who after treatment
was told to report back to his regiment, 'scratched his shin with a stone.
cowardice was the cause of his injuring his leg, that he might remain in
hospital until danger was over ... In three or four davs his leo became so much
inflamed, that amputation was necessary ... Ile died before the next day?. 114
Sometimes such feigned illness could be on a spectacular scale:
A most wicked and diabolical conspiracy has lately been discovered in 28th
Foot stationed at Malden sid in Essex, consisting chiefy of Irishmen.
The conspirators having heard that many of our soldiers on their return
from Egypt were afflicted with a disorder called the Opthlamia which
occasioned blindness, originated a report that the complaint was infectious
and that about 300 of that Regiment had experienced its dreadful effects.
Many of the men exhibited every appearance of the alarming malady.
Some were totally blind and others had suffered the loss of one eye...
Some of the men were discharged and others were pensioned and sent
to Chelsea ... At length it appears from the confession of one of the
Irishmen, who gave evidence against the rest, that the
blindness was
temporary, and caused by the application of a certain ointment to the eyes
... Every man using the ointment was bound by a particular oath devised
for the occasion... several examinations of the culprits at Maldon ….. took
place on Friday when the witness deposed, that the ointment was used by
nearly 300 men.
The oath was proved against 23 Irishmen who were
committed to Chelmsford gaol and will take their trials on Tuesday next
for a conspiracy under the Mutiny Act ... either by maiming himself, or
causing himself to be maimed for the purpose of obtaining his discharge,
is liable to be tried by the Civil Power and transported for life.
Such reporting meant that the trick was evidently known in other units,
with the goth Foot becoming known as the 'Blind Half-Hundred. Such
accounts do not appear in regimental histories, which stress soldiers' bravery.
113 Buckley, British Army in the West Indies, 278 and Duffy, 'The British Army and the
Caribbean Expeditions', 67.
114 Narrative of a Private Soldier, 105.
