130
Soldiers as Workers
Gillian Russell points out that, for some soldiers, performance in
military
amateur dramatics could result in future stage careers.
remarkable John Shipp was promoted twice from the ranks. After
performing in India, he wrote plays as well as his memoirs on his return
to the UK. Obscure ex-rankers such as John Brown and Robert Hay
became local strolling players. Earlier, Frey points out the importance of
amateur dramatics in the American frontier, to which civilians were invited
a5 paying customers. Amateur dramatics formed key social events whilst
Wellington's Peninsular army was in winter quarters, creating bonds with
the local population. Some regiments, especially in colonial stations, ran
their own pro-am' theatres, with regimental bandsmen as the orchestra,
and opened their productions to all comers. In a very varied army career,
Sergeant James Bodell was the Stage Manager of the roth Font's theatre
in Hong Kong in the 1850s.142
Trumpeter Daly was recruited to the gth Lancers as a boy soldier of
15 in 1873 through his skills as a contortionist, which were needed in the
regiment's own circus in India. When the circus closed, Daly turned his
hand to running a pickle factory. In India, the zoth Foot in 1880 boasted
their own blackfaced "Christy Minstrels, G Company Nigger Troupe,
which may have been renamed the East Tanrachire Fithinean fid Troune
by 1882. Charles Wells describes these Christy Minstrels and taproom
pianists being paid in beer at the Buffs Depot in the 1880S.
provided an outlet for soldiers to satisfy the popular interest in dramatic
imperial events. In 1897, Piper Findlater of the Cameron Highlanders, who
won the VC on the North West Frontier for continuing playing whilst
wounded, re-enacted this nightly at the Alhambra Theatre in London,
until stopped by senior officers. The well-developed story telling traditions,
especially after lights out, were used by Robert Blatchford as a plot device
in his novels about his army life and transposed wholesale to his Clarion
socialist cycling movement in the 1890s.143
Other entertainers promoted illegal gambling. House (later developed as
bingo) was the favoured game of the army in India by the end of the period.
Soldiers, Citizens and Civilians: Experiences and Perceptions of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Army, 122.
Wars, 1790-1820 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), it and James, Life in Wellington's
142 Russell, The Theatres of War, 183-84; Mansfield, 'Grads and Snobs, 193; Firey, British
Soldier in America, 68; and Sinclair, A Soldie's View of Empire, 157-
143 The Life of Trumpeter C.E. Daly (n.d. [c.1900)) (I am grateful to John Rumsby for this
information); LIM, XXX Gazette, Aug. 1880 and Mar, 1882; Grey, Soldiering in Victorian
Days', 64; Dunlop, Development of the British Army, 8; Robert Blatchford, Tales for the Marines
(London, Clarion Press, 190t); and Denis Pye, Fellowship is Life (Bolton: Clarion Publishing,
1995), 15.
Soldiers as Workers
131
Sessions could last up to seven hours and the promoters' considered that they
had had a bad day if they did not make between thirty shillings and two
pounds between them'144
Handicrafts
Penny capitalists also produced craftwork. Britain's many military museum
collections all contain soldiers' handicrafts... which were encouraged by the
military authorities to prevent the soldiers from turning to drink. Macramé,
embroidery, carvings in wood and bone, examples of poetry,
drawings,
paintings and useful handmade items like brushes, combs, and pots and
pans abound in displays? 145
Little is known
about these ubiquitous objects. A
recent Quilters'
Guild of the Pritich Tales survey sustematically scrutinised some surviving
There is evidence to support the proposition that some quilts were made by
military tailors, constructed from scraps from the cutting floor rather than
pieces of uniform. In addition to access to materials, regimental tailors
would have the skills base to facilitate complex designs and construction,
and the ability to transport unfinished patchwork with their stock of
tailoring materials.
Samuel Atwood, an army tailor active in India in the recos, was certainly
engaged in very complex constructions (see Illustration s).
Sue Prichard
discounts the myth that quilts were made to memorialise fallen comrades
from their uniforms, and suggests that civilian cloth was widelv used.
though considers that their late-Victorian decline may have resulted from
the widespread adoption of khaki. Quilting was very common in Indian
stations in hot weather and reached its apogee amongst the many sick and
Wounded convalescing after the Crimean War. These created elaborate quilts
with up to 30,00o pieces and was actively encouraged by military authorities
and temperance societies to discourage heavy drinking.
One soldier was
quoted as saying: 'I must be employed, or I shall get into mischief.' Quilts
were included in a series of Soldiers' Industrial Exhibitions held from the
I86os in India and in the Royal Military Exhibition at Chelsea in 1890,
with awarded prizes.
Making quilts for practical as well as ornamental
use was a pastime shared by regimental tailors and skilled amateurs, using
cloth from cast-off 'Melton Cloth' from uniforms, and 'cabbage' or offcuts,
the traditional perquisite of tailors in both civilian and military life.
'the
144 Richards, Old Soldier Sahib, 74.
145 Thwaites, Presenting Arms, 84.
