3
Soldiers as Workers
Introduction
As discussed in earlier chapters, we have seen that soldiers were a huge
occupational group which has rarely been studied by labour historians. This
chapter looks at male common soldiers pursuing pre-enlistment emolument
within the army from the period of the Industrial Revolution and class
formation to the mature late-Victorian economy. It groues that coldier
were proletarians with their military phase often forming only part of their
working lives.
As suggested in the section "Scum of the earth"?, in Chapter i, historians
of the eighteenth centurv. like Peter Way haue previously aromad that thi
British military was recruited largely from working-close men Fichteenth
century recruiters tried to avoid enlisting sedentary or 'effeminate' trades
who would not be up to the demands of campaigning. As late as 1803,
one military commentator could write, 'No printers, bookbinders, taylors,
shoemakers or weavers should be enlisted, as from their business they
contract habits of effeminacy, and are unable to support the fatigues of war'
Such were the manpower needs, though, that even in the smaller peacetime
army these warnings were thoroughly ignorede Labourers and tradesmen
adversely affected by trade cycles or mechanisation would still be the
backbone of the rank and file and this became more apparent in the mass
mobilisations of the French Wars. but it continued as the nost-t8is army
gradually grew under the impact of empire.!
Gradually, employment opportunities some of extraordinary complexity
- began to be opened up in which soldiers could use their pre-enlistment trades
or develop new skills. In the infantry regiments, which were the backbone
of the army, some tradesmen were remind to cor out sta The
1 Quoted in Urban, Rifles, 33-
Soldiers as Workers
technical corps, which became typical of the twentieth-century British army,
did not exist for most of the nineteenth century. So most necessary trades
were based on the regiment, giving a wide variety of potential occupations
for ambitious soldiers.
Teams of armourers, blacksmiths, butchers, clerks,
cooks, musicians, schoolmasters, shoemakers and tailors, each led by a
tradesman NCO, were 'on the strength' and were excused nearly all military
duties to carry out their skills on behalf of the regiment. They were paid
more than other privates, through complicated and published price lists
for goods made and supplied, with the money being deducted from their
comrades' pay accounts. They also earned extra money through bills which
they could submit to officers.
In technical arms - like artillery or engineers - and even in the cavalry
or supply troops, the proportion of skilled tradesmen increased to include
harness makers, farriers, wheelwrights and skilled artificers of all sorts. In
times of need - for example, to equip troops suddenly posted abroad - the
ranks were 'combed out to provide temporary extra tradesmen, who received
extra pay. At times, manual labour became compulsory for all soldiers in
building fixed defences or in wartime sieges, for which extra pay was usually
awarded. Expertise governed by contract often gave regimental tradesmen
the upper hand in their dealings with the Quartermasters who were meant
to organise the work. This provided opportunities for go-slows and working-
to-rule, as well as maximising their earnings through various official and
unofficial charges and perks.
Large numbers of rankers were allocated as officers' servants, usually
because of pre-enlistment experience. Though they had less control of their
working lives than the tradesmen, they were also excused many routine
duties and benefited from tips and perks. Other soldiers used various
handicraft or 'penny capitalist skills to undertake paid tasks for their
comrades and for officers and others: as victuallers, letter writers or souvenir
makers. Particularly in the imperial postings, which became the norm by
the late-Victorian period, regiments became self-contained, self-sufficient
communities where most of the needs of European civilisation could be
supplied by talented rankers, operating in their spare time.
The mature Empire - especially in India - also provided a large number
of responsible administrative postings in public service or utilities, both for
steady NCOs and for some ex-ranker junior officers without private incomes.
Neuburg outlines these mature potential opportunities of the late-Victorian
Serving soldiers who achieved rank because they were skilled military
tradesmen created a great leaven in the ranks, besides offering the
beginnings of a varied career structure to able men who enlisted ...
las] Conductors of Supplies and of Stores; Sergeant-Major of Works;
