104
Soldiers as Workers
In the Peninsula, letter distribution was initially an additional respon-
sibility of senior NCOs, like the Bugle Major in the g5th Rifles or the
Trumpet Major in the 3rd Dragoon Guards. Soon, the 7th Light Dragoons
appointed a letter carrier, who ranked above a Corporal, and the grd Foot
Guards appointed a Postmaster Sergeant with a Corporal and a small staf.
Distribution of post from the Lisbon Post Office became the responsibility
of the new Royal Staff Corps. Letters to and from the rank and file could
be infrequent. Those of Private William Windsor of the a/sth Foot might
be considered typical. When he expected to go on active service in on he
wrote to his family in Somerset: If it is Sicily you will not hear from me
for four months, as we shall be on the water a great while? Two years later,
when serving in Spain, he supposed that at home, 'People will think that
soldiers in Spain and Portugal will never come bal Missing the battle of
Waterloo, in 1815, Windsor became part of the Army of Occupation, writing
to his wife: 'I long for the time to be up that I may get my discha roe for I will
never soldier any more? Tragically, he drowned in the wreck of the Seahorse
transport whilst returning to Treland in Tanuary +8t6 In th Ve tarian arm
postal duties were taken over by Royal Engineers.80
Musicians
Musicians were the most numerous military trade, and were needed
throughout the army. Since the early modern period, drummers and
trumpeters were employed to transmit dill orders. They were sunnlemented
over time by Colonels who employed extra musicians to form bands for a
variety of entertaining and recruiting purposes. The government generally
refused to fund these extra musicians unless they also doubled as paid and
efficient soldiers. The best musicians were not necessarily tough fighters
and Colonels were reluctant to expend costly hired talent on repetitive drill
or in battlefield danger. This created a tension which lasted well into the
nineteenth century. It was generally solved by getting the extra handsmen
to act as stretcher bearers in the event of war, for which they drew the basic
Private's wage (an arrangement standardised in Ros) and bu the ficers
mess covering other expenses. including the generous nore Inctrument
were often provided by the regiment, as well as army uniforms, which could
also be worn during private civilian engagements, with these providing
bonuses, tips, free food and drink. Even more than the shoemakers or
Postal Service of Wellington's Army in the Peninsula and France, 180g-1818' in Alan I. Guy,
The Road to Waterloo (London: National Army Museum, 1990), 149-50.
LIM, manuscript letters of William Windsor.
no Fortescue, History of the British Army vol. 4. on Harthorn waite Rodont 0o; and
Soldiers as Workers
105
tailors, tossed around by fluctuations in trade, the peripatetic nature of a
musician's life could make army service, with regular bed and board, seem
As Herbert and Barlow point out: 'Military music was an attractive
proposition as one of the few lines of work that provided musicians with a
regular salary, while also allowing them to take external engagements. Some
bands accompanied their regiments on campaign. They played to improve
morale in camp, on marches or even on the battlefield. In the Peninsular
War they also gave concerts to cement relationships with Portuguese and
Spanish civilian populations. Bands had a key role in entertaining the troops
in the monotonous imperial postings which became common in the second
half of the century. In remote garrisons like New South Wales, the presence
of a regimental band formed a kev part of the survival strategy of a Aedging
colony, with the players of the 48th Foot being paid €42 for performing
between 1822 and 1821. The death of First Fleet Marine Randsman Sergeant
Harry Parsons in 1819 left a gap as The was of very great utility to the
Colony as Instructor of Sacred Music. Parsons had remained with each
successive garrison regiment's band. Such men forged careers as music
pioneers in Canada, South Africa and New Zealand 31
Drum and Trumpet Majors enioved snecial status as skilled plavers and
arrangers. They were later joined later by Fife Majors in the infantry, Foot
Guards and Royal Artillery. In the early modern period, guilds of trumpeters
which existed to protect their interests were tolerated by military authorities.
The nineteenth-century army often overlooked the hich-handed behaviour of
regimental bandmasters, often still civilian and frequently foreign, especially
German. Their emphasis on highbrow music could confict with the need for
stirring marches or popular favourites which were to the taste of most of the
troops. This could also lead to disnutes with their bandsmen trving to control.
their working lives. Paolo Castaldini, Bandmaster of the ist Foot, was beaten
up in 1847 by sixteen of his musicians, whose sentences were mitigated when
the court martial heard that Castaldini had left three nrevious bandmaster
positions under a cloud.?2
In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries black nercussionist
were emploved to add a touch of exoticism, dressed in outlandish tastern'
costumes and plaving "Turkish, instruments like the linoling Johnny. Even
Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 7, 59, 248, 226-27 and 261-63 (the authors
were kind enough to make their book available to the author in proof form). See als
Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 148-49.
82 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 26, 32, 46. 61 and 134 and Holmes
Soldiers, 476.
