176
Soldiers as Workers
you drunken scoundrel', he said, 'and I'll give you two dozen [lashes) in
the morning, - I am not afraid of you, said I, looking round to be sure
there were no witnesses, 'so sure as you flog me I'll shoot you? I think he
could see mischief in my face as I turned away, and he called me back
and threw a dollar towards me, which, after saluting him, I picked up
and walked off with it.
Though NCOs and privates were usually united in this passive resistance:
If an officious young man [NCO] overweighted with his own importance
commenced to throw his weight around among the old soldiers, they
found ways of getting level with him without incurring a risk of the Guard
The white regiments of the EIC were especially noted for their relaxed
discipline and relatively casual relationships between soldiers and officers. A
sentry could challenge an orderly officer with: 'Arrah ... Major ... go home
again, the boys are very tired &x fast asleep!' and not be charged. NCOs
and privates were also allowed to socialise and interact in ways which were
forbidden in HIM service, including the settling of private scores.
Soldiers and hard drink had to be dealt with carefully given the culture
of excess. Standing orders advised: "Officers should avoid speaking to, or
reprimanding a man in liquor, but they are of course to take immediate steps
to confine him? But officers licensed potentially drunken celebrations for
special anniversaries. The dominance of Trish soldiers in 18t6 meant that St
Patrick's Day as celebrated even in 'English' regiments like the goth Foot.
In the words of one of their officers:
Such days were the saturnalia of our poor fellows, so we could not refuse
them. They brought us to our room on their shoulders, preceded by a blind
fiddler ... our strict disciplinarians may frown on this, but heaven knows
I care not for their wrinkles. If I can contribute to the happiness of the
brave fellows under me, by now and then running with them a few vards
out of the highway of regulation, I'll do it.52
Officers also tolerated a certain amount of licensed binge drinking when
hard-earned back pay had arrived. After the end of the Peninsular War,
Donaldson of the 94th Foot reported: exiled from home and all its enjoyments
for number of years, without some spreeing, the commanding officer wisely
resolved to relax the reins of discipline a little? Another example of officers
turning a blind eye to official policy took place on changing regimental
50 Anon., Autobiography of a Soldier, 287 and Grey, Soldiering in Victorian Days, 85.
51 Stanley, White Mutiny, 74.
of the Thirtieth Regiment, 335.
7hh Standing Orders (Dublin: William Frazier, 1834) and quoted in Ballatyne, History
Class Conflict in the Army
177
stations in the UK. Here 'unofficial women - common law wives or
svethearts- were found spaces on carts or railway transport: Of course the
officers and non-commissioned officers shut their eyes to all this?53
Peter Stanley's pioneering work shows how soldiers in India used graffiti
chalked on walls to demonstrate a variety of previously concealed feelings,
in the otherwise hidden world of the Victorian barrack room'. Comments
cover racism: Kill the Darkie; the resentment of the 'non-gentlemen' EIC
officers: Sind him back to his ould mutinous sepoy regiment'; corrupt
NCOs: 'Sergeant - is suspected of having put water in the grom. 'tis to
be hoped that he'll not be guilty of such unsoldierlike conduct in future';
resentment against prize agents: 'Delhi taken and India saved for 36 rupees
and 1o annas, and the White Mutiny of 1859: ""Unity is Strength", Men and
Comrades are we to be sold like a lot of pigs ….. now let us be men and stand
up for our rites sic), Damn the Queen, Company for ever, give us bounty,
shoot Briggs, 'Stick up for discharge or bounty: if refuced immediately
for Delhi and, lastly, Tohn Company is dead. we will not soldier for the
The miserable British captives after the surrender of their failed assault
on Buenos Aires in 1807 no doubt mystified their captors with the chalked
comment on their commander: 'General Whitelocke is a coward or a traitor
or both. This slogan was apparently soon also seen on the streets of London
During the Crimean War groups of prisoners of war being escorted into the
Russian interior communicated with each other through pencilled graffiti
left in their nightly billets. This technique was a long-established form of
civilian working-class protest. It was used extensively bu trade societies in
disputes to shame mean employers who would not pay the agreed price of
labour, and adonted bu nolitical radicals to campaion and communicate in
the post-1815 government repression.55
Fraternisation with the enemy was on occasions tolerated in this hidden
world of passive resistance. In the more formal eighteenth-century wars,
trading of goods between outposts and informal truces were common. This
continued in the more ideological French Wars:
It was no uncommon sight to see a British or French soldier picking apples
from the same tree, with as much unconcern as if they were belonging to
the same service. Commissaries of opposing armies ignored their enemies
53 Donaldson, Recollections, 254 and Sinclair, A Soldier's View, 40.
54 Stanley, 'Highly Inflammatory Writings, 236, 238, 240 and 242-43. (The last penultimate
example refers to the way Delhi was taken by black mutineers in 1857) See also Anglesey,
History of the British Cavalry, vol. 2, 234.
55 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 5, 430 and Inglesant, Prisoners of Voronesh, 87.
For civilian political and trades graffiti, see Prothero, Artisans and Politics, chap. 2.
