94
Soldiers as Workers
the Army of Occupation, referred to the stigma attached to these regimental
policemen who:
seldom go back to their own regiments, but generally get promoted in
some other corps, where they take special care not to mention the duty
they have been on, or they would be received in the same way that 'Jack
Ketch' would probably be, if he were to force himself into respectable civil
society.
According to Sergeant Joseph Donaldson of the gath Foot, in Spain in 183,
provosts were guided more by caprice and personal pique than any regard to
justice. In fact, they seemed to be above all control, doing what they pleased,
without being brought to account, and were often greater robbers than the
men they punished.55
By the 187os, each battalion had its own full time Regimental Policemen,
under a Provost Sergeant. The regimental police of the ret Fact laneshire
Regiment (ex-oth Foot) in ,ogf consisted of one provost Sergeant two
Provost Corporals and six to ten 'habitually steady and well conducted
privates. Although specialised corps of mounted and foot police were
formed in 1877 and 1885, these were mainly active in large garrisons and the
regimental policemen continued until the Great War.56
Wheeled transport was required on campaign or in movement between
stations. Traditionally, army transport was provided by ad hoc hired civilians,
but was supplemented with combed-out regimental carters. particularly in
wartime. A waggoner from the sand Mich anders was renontad de a desertes
in 1779 New York, to be recognised from his 'grev duffel coar' working
dress rather than a kilt. In trot a specialist unit the pardoners
was formed. Though now part of the military, the personnel were the same
rough civilians, according to one army official: 'A greater set of scoundrels
never disgraced an army. I believe it to be true that halfafthem if not take
from the hulks, have at times visited them ... They have committed every
species of villainy, and treat their horses badly. Clad in blue, rather than the
red coats of the line, they were sardonically nicknamed "The Newgate Blues'
by other soldiers. They were soon followed by a Corns of Artillery Drivers,
whose reputation was similar: 'drivers were notorious above other corps for
their misconduct'57
55 Thomas Dwight Veve, The Duke of Wellington and the British Army of Occubation in
France, 1845-1818 (London: Greenwood Press, 1992), 86; Divall, Inside the Regiment, 87 and
94; Selby, Thomas Morris, 50; and Donaldson, Recollections, 222.
* LIM, Standing Orders of the A7th me lancashire Regiment (Alone c0-6), 37;
Standing Orders Ist East Lancashire Regiment (Lahore, 1896) and Holmes Sai 543-44
Preparation, 88.
Soldiers as Workers
95
The waggoners and drivers had their own farriers, saddlers and blacksmiths
to care for their horses and equipment. Although renamed the Royal Wagon
Train in 1812, the Waggoners' performance in the French Wars was poor and
the corps was abolished with the peace. A new Land Transport Corps and
a Commissariat Corps of Waggoners (both 1,000 strong) had to be hastily
assembled to help cope with the horrors of the Crimean War, with the
same lack of success. In the same conflict, another ill-disciplined workforce
was the semi-militarised Army Works Corps formed from London navvies.
Though subject to military law, they were drunk, insubordinate and mutinous
and loathed by soldiers for being better paid (5 shillings a day) and worse
at digging trenches. 'All they did was to drink, smoke and play at cards'
according to one hussar private.58
The post-Crimea army reforms saw the gradual removal of many of
these transport and manual jobs from the regiments. They transferred to
new army departments, like the service, medical and veterinary corps, and
became increasingly professional. However, this was a slow process and
even by the Boer War many tasks were still duplicated by the regiments,
a product of innate conservatism, compounded by long foreign postings
in battalion-sized garrisons. Not until the late-Victorian period did army
transport become militarised, with the labour corps having to wait until
the Great War.
Most regiments employed various other NCOs or senior soldiers in
specialist roles. In training, fuglemen demonstrated drill movements to
recruits. On the march, the regimental Quartermaster employed camp
colour men' who would mark out with small flags the position of each
company's bivouac for the coming night. Telegraph men were employed both
in the UK and in overseas garrisons to staff the new coastal communication
system. Recorded examples of telegraph men range from the Shropshire
Militia at Gorlestone in 1813, critical to the defence of the port of Great
Yarmouth, to 'Signal Man' Private Charles Hutchinson of the 29th Foot,
who received a 24 shillings a vear extra pav on Mauritius in the late one 59
58 MacArthur, 'British Army Establishments during the Napoleonic Wars', 354-55;
Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 4, 299, vol. 13, 224-25; Dick Sullivan, Navvyman
(Edinburgh: Black, 1865), 163.
(London: Coracle, 1983), chan te and William Douglas. Soldiering in Sunshine and Storm
59 Hauthornthwaite Rodroats or McGuf. "Th. Lord Readford Militia Documents'
142; Knight, Britain against Napoleon, 258-30r; and LIM, Garrison Orders, Mauritius, 7826-31,
