204
Soldiers as Workers
the Seven Years War in Germany, who apparently gave grants to deserving
wounded ex-soldiers, many of whom invested in licensed premises. The
once common pub name,
'The King of Prussia' (mostly changed abruptly
in 1914) dates from the same conflict as a salute to Frederick the Great, the
Protestant allied hero. The occasional pub name The Case is Altered is said
to be a corruption of Casa Alta (High House) a frequent name for Spanish
inns which would have been familiar to British troops in the Peninsular
War. Such pubs may have been bought with part of the 5 million francs
from King Joseph's treasure which ended up in their back pockets after the
battle of Vitoria. 130
Assassination of officers
As we have seen, battlefield protests could result in violence towards
officers by their own soldiers. The premeditated settling of old scores by
rankers is unsurprisingly not much mentioned in archives or literature but
it clearly went on in campaigns and occasionally in barracks and is the
clearest indication of conflict based on class. The linear tactics employed
by the British army meant that the killing of unpopular officers deployed
in front of the firing line was comparatively easy. The loss of discipline
after storming fortified towns gave particular opportunities for shooting
officers. Lieutenant Gleig of the 8sth Light Infantry witnessed this at the
sack of San Sebastian in 18t3: 'All order and discipline were abandoned.
The officers had no control over their men, who, on the contrary, controlled
the officers; nor is it certain that several of the latter did not fall by the
hands of the former, when they vainly attempted to bring them back to a
sense of subordination. 131
Also in the Peninsular War, Major Pearson, an unpopular logger in the
23rd Foot, was deliberately left by his men to be captured when trapped under
his stricken horse. Sergeant Andrew Pearson of the 6rst Foot complained
of an unpopular fogging Colonel: 'I am convinced that the feeling of the
regiment was such that had he gone into battle, he would have been found
amongst the slain? In the course of the war, two soldiers (of the 3rd Foot and
the 42nd Highlanders) were convicted and hanged for killing their officers.
In the Waterloo campaign John Cameron, the CO of the gand Highlanders,
130 Lewis Winstock, Songs and Music of the Redcoats (London: Leo Cooper, 1970), 55-57;
Palmer, Rambling Soldier, 21-23: Jacob Larwood and John Camden Hotten, English In Signs
(London: Chatto & Windus, 195t [1866)), 43 and 269; Holmes, Soldiers, Soo; and Hathaway,
Dorset Soldier, 130.
131 Duffy, Military Experience in the Age of Reason, 163 and 220 and G.R. Gleig, The
Subaltern (London: Cadell, 1825), 56.
Class Conflict in the Army
was killed by one of his own men whom he recently flogged, who seems to
have got away with the crime in the chaos of the campaign. 132
The shooting of officers, or its threat, continued into the Victorian wars.
The 22nd Foot featured in a similar incident during the battle of Meance
against the Sikhs in 1843. When their Lieutenant McMurdo urged a
dangerous attack against a strong enemy position, his soldiers called out: Mr
McMurdo if you don't leave it off, we'll shoot you? Whilst willing to fire
at the enemy, they refused to undertake a bayonet charge. In the same war,
the Colonel of the roth Foot, prior to the battle of Sobraon, declared to his
men: I understand you mean to shoot me to-day, but I want you to do me
a favour; don't shoot me until the battle is over.®
to be particularly prone to shootine their officers in their savage Spanish
campaign of the 183os. One example was Lieutenant Disney, Adiutant of
the ist Lancers (and ex-regular NCO) who was wounded in May 1837 by
Trooper Steinson, who had been flogged and transferred to the infantry in
disgrace. Another ascictant Commandant of the RAT, denot was throws
overboard by returning invalids in the passage between Spain and the UK. 133
Even after their heroic performance in the Crimea, described by William
Howard Russell as the original thin red line, some of the Calvinist g3rd
Highlanders drank excessively on their voyage to India in 185.
reprimanded by a subaltern, he testified that one of these men: "threatened
to be even with me" the first time we were under fire together. The threat was
still there in the Boer War, according to Private Burrows of the Leicesters:
All this shows that a spirit of discontent pervades the whole Regt. & if
their complaints are not attended to there will be something that happen
I know what these things mean, & a man does not take chances of being
shot by a file of his own men for nothing, depend on that. 134
In barracks, the availability of firearms, as well as facilitating suicides, could
occasionally result in petty disputes becoming tragedies. The most celebrated
example is the murder of two senior officers of the 32nd Foot at Fulwood
Barracks, Preston by Patrick M'Caffrey in 186r. M'Caffrey's violent protest
was against unfair punishment by his adjutant and he apologised at his trial
for accidentally shooting his CO. The M'Caffery story became a rebel ballad,
132 Crook, Very Thing, 65; Haley, Soldier Who Walked Away, 83; and Charles Oman,
Wellington's Army, 1809-1814 (London: Arnold, 1913), 244; and Richard Holmes, Firing Line
(London: Jonathan Cape, 1985), 331.
133 Gilby, Britain at Arms, 251-52; Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 12, 290; Brett,
British Auxiliary Legion, 30; anon., Autobiography of a Soldier, s63; and Somerville, History
of the British Legion, 299-300 and 396.
114 Holmes, Soldier Sahib, for and Robin Jenkins, ''One of the Human Atoms": A Soldier's
View of the South African War, 1899-1902', JSAHR, 85 (2007), II.
