80
Soldiers as Workers
New recruits were especially vulnerable to cruel deceits arranged between
tradesmen and Pay Sergeants, in being issued faulty equipment and being
charged for replacements:
One mode of depriving the recruit of his pay is to give him an old shattered
musket, easily injured; thus there are ten chances to one that some part
of it gets broken while it is in his possession; and he has in consequence a
round sum to pay on delivering it into stores when leaving the garrison ...
the armourer alone can decide; but in any case, he and the pay sergeants
quietly arranged it all their own way.19
In the late-Victorian army the same tradesmen sustem still previled
with soldiers being charged for equipment which was accounted for in a
cumbersome way. In 18g0, the annual stoppages for a battalion of nearl
70o men amounted to nearly 214 for tajors bills and over £176 for the
shoemakers. In the same decade, ex-Sergeant Arthur Palmer of the oth
Highlanders asserted: 'Although they get their clothes cunlied periodin th
as is promised ... they find out, much to their sorrow, that they have to
pay the tailor for their being altered to fit them? Such a system functioned,
albeit inefficiently, in the peacetime army in the UK. However, it struggled
under pressure, especially on campaign, when tradesmen accommanied thei
regiments and were expected to carry out their duties whilst on the march 2
The pressures thrown up by campaigning or in preparation for war, ar
to fulfil particular tasks in garrison. could result a comb out ether
tradesmen serving in the ranks as ordinary soldiers, to suonlement the
chosen team. These comb outs could in dire need he compulsory and
involved non time-served men's extemporised sall When Costello the
Peninsular veteran Sergeant of the net piles ae panic centenant
and Adjutant of the BAL's new Rifle battalion in 1836, he took care to
enlist all the trades necessary to form a national hive of cunning craft and
industry. The flogged radical Alexander Somerville, recruited as a Sergeant
in the BAL, recorded shoemakers and tailors and states that later in the
campaign the Legion combed out all carnenters bricklavere placiors etc to
be set to work into a habitable state of repair [on billets) ... also set gardeners
and others to work, and cultivated the gardens that were laying waste??
Sometimes tradesmen were combed out by senior officere for strategic
purposes. These could be for mundane tasks. From the Napoleonic garrison
in Sicily: "The troops in the Citadel will furnish five carpenters. also the
Victorian Army, 134.
20 Palmer, 'A Private Soldier on the Private Soldier Wronge 226 and Saiare 1
19 J. Macmullen, quoted in Palmer, Rambling Soldier, 85.
and 298.
and Costello, The Aduentures of a Soldier, 3a3 and Somerville, History of the British Legion, 107
Soldiers as Workers
81
troops in Messina ... a like number who will attend the QMG [Quarter
Master General's] office... to receive their instruction' Their tasks could be
connected to grand strategy. After the seizure of the Danish fleet in 1807,
3,000 carpenters were combed out of the British army and navy, 25,000
strong, occupying Copenhagen to prepare ships for the return to Britain.
During the defence of Canada in the War of 1812, sailors were combed
out of infantry regiments to man gunboats on the strategically important
Great Lakes.22
Trades culture
It is likely that military tradesmen shared much of the rich culture enjoyed by
civilian handicraft artisans. This centred on pride in craftsmanship, serving
recognised apprenticeship, and the trade societies that met convivially to
discuss work-related issues. Trade societies stressed custom and practice in
deciding the pace and outputs of work, through price lists agreed with master
tradesmen or larger employers. Though trade societies saw their roots in the
medieval guilds, most had evolved in the late eighteenth century but were
threatened by mechanisation, with its emphasis on flexible unskilled labour
and with the outlawing of their activities by the state as potentially subversive.
They met these threats through sophisticated mutual support systems,
elaborate tramping' arrangements to spread unmarried men geographically
and by recourse to law, including petitioning Parliament to retain legal
protection for apprenticeship.
The
last tactic was largely defeated by the
Repeal of the Tudor Statute of Artificers in 1813, thus contributing to the
flexible labour force needed by the Industrial Revolution, so artisans turned
to radical politics for redress.23
Evidence is scarce to assess how much of this culture was shared by
military tradesmen, though there are many similarities between pride in
craftsmanship and pride in regiment. Duffy stresses that the Pan-European
character of the 'craft guild' of eighteenth-century artillerymen was well
established. Artillerymen defended their ancient' mysteries' and rights, like
ownership of bells in captured towns to melt down for their own purposes.
22 NAM 1972-04-08, Order Book, 2/27th Foot, 1808; Jonathan Crook (ed.), The Very Thing:
The Memoirs of Drummer Richard Bertink (London, Frontline, 201), 17; and Fortescue,
History of the British Army, vol. 8, 535.
23 See The Bonk of Enlich Trades (London: Phillips, 1824); lorwerth Prasharo Artisans and
Politics in Early Nineteenth Century London (Polkestone: Dawson, 1979), especially chap y
R.A. Leeson, Travellen b Century London Giest 1979); and Malcolm Chase, Early
Trade Unions (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000) For shoemakers, especially, see Eric Hobsbawm
Uncommon People (London: gate, 2000), FONion, 198), chap. 6 and Mansfield, John
Brown' (1979), 128-35-
