98
Soldiers as Workers
a Soldier ... They are to mount Guard with the officers they are allowed
... They are to fall in with their Companies at all reviews, Field Days,
Inspections and Marches.
Assuming that the tallest men made the best fighters and to weed out the
shortest soldiers, General Orders from 181s stipulated that men selected as
officers' servants were to be the chortect in the regiment Private civilian
servants continued in the UK and in nearby seats of war - one i5-year-ola
groom left a Waterloo memoir. In more exotic postings, foreign civilian
servants were generally hired. All servants could draw rankers rations and
were subject to martial law.64
With the peace in 18t5, private civilian servants continued to be hired
by wealthier officers. This led to the practice of some officers of dressing
their soldier-servants in their own liverv instead of the corns uniform
Regimental standing orders tried to outlaw this practice. for example, in
the gth Lancers in 1836. In the zoth Foot, a regimental livery was specified
as late as 1852 on Cephalonia, where it was stipulated that 'officers' servants
who attend mess are to be dressed in the Regimental Livery viz Brown
Coat, white waistcoat and yellow plush breeches with a button bearing the
Sphinx and Crown? 65
Such formality centred on the officers' mess. Here, individual ficers
servants were supervised by the Mess Sergeant, with a small tom of mess
waiters, often with a specialised 'silver man', who cared for the repimental
trophies. Mess servants fed hatter than comrades do ta tenders and
could beneft from tips, especially given the often hard drinking culture.
For the Mess Sergeant this could he very luertive Mace servante along
with Quartermasters, could easily extend perle throuch theft or carruntion.
With the Empire, a dual system of hiring servants - either locals or soldiers
- continued. In India, menial work was done bu locals. but more trustworthy
and potentially lucrative jobs were held by British rankers. Thomas King of
14th Light Dragoons was described as in charge of the Offror Mess, a
very trustworthy and responsible black servante under
his command... moving in a very respectable sphere in the army ... equal to
any gentleman in England... The sergeant who meiend held thie not for
I2 years had died last month leaving egoo. In contrast, in parts of the 'white'
Empire, the high cost of all labour generally meant soldier servants were
employed, with perhaps the exception of French Canada where an English
servant cannot get on well in marketing unlace he can chant. Franch 6
i Haythornhwaite, Redoats, 100 and Chandler, The Journal of Edward Heeley, 99.
65 Myerly, British Military Spectacle, 7E and LIM, Mess Rules goth Regiment.
s Holmes, Soldiers, 566-68; Peter Beattie (ed.) "The Letters of John Curtis Binkley,
1843-1849, JSAHR, 67 (1983), 32, quoted in Senior, British Regulars in Montreal, 53-
Soldiers as Workers
99
Amongst other specialist servants were the huntsmen employed by
regimental officers who travelled abroad with packs of fox hounds. Wellington
also had his own pack from Shropshire during the Peninsular War.
Tom Crane was Wellington's huntsman, a Shropshire man, he had been a
private in the Coldstream Guards, and before that a huntsman to a border
pack. Wellington had obtained his release from the shackles of marching
and musket, and now, clad in a different kind of red coat, he pursued his
legitimate occupation across the Plains of Portugal and Spain.
Crane later joined Wellington at the Congress of Vienna and in the British
Army of Occupation in France. British officers also ran horse races in
garrisons and campaigns and employed their soldiers as menials. Twenty
dragoons kept the course clear at Op Hasselt in Flanders,
the month
before Waterloo. Hunts were found in overseas garrisons across the world,
some of which had enormous cachet. The Royal Calpe Hunt, for example,
which was formed by officers in Gibraltar in 1813, immediately after the
French withdrawal, had successive Kings of Spain as patrons. The pastime
continued to be an obsession of many officers into the twentieth century.
Cavalry regiments hunted behind the Western Front and in Egyptian
deserts in the Great War and mounted yeomanry regiments still had their
packs in 1942 in the Middle East.67
By the late-Victorian period, rates of pay for soldier servants had become
standardised at 2s. 6d. a week in the cavalry and is. 6d. in the infantry.
Upper-class feers comnared their hatmen with their civition servants
General Bengough sentimentalised his 'Guppy:
'the
British soldier is
possessed with the strongest feudal feeling that makes him ready and willing
to follow the leader of the higher social rank, which he and his forbears have
for generations been accustomed to regard with respect and submission?
Although private civilian servants had mainly disapneared by the end of
century, as late as the Boer War, Captain Richard Foot of the Inniskilling
Fusiliers, when summonsed immediately to the Cape. recruited Herbert
Camfield as a servant. This man was a civilian footman at a country house
where Foot had been staying at the time.68
67 Obituary in Sporting Magazine (1830), 35I; James, Life in Wellingtor's Army, 197-205; and
Mansfield Foxhunting and the Yeomanry, 247-56.
and MR D Foot Mannis a Coe Dice (Barna Be Suard 2000).
