46
Soldiers as Workers
the Guards was actually higher in 1912 than in 1830 or 1852. In 1912, 70 per
cent of ist Life Guards officers were aristocrats. These officers were allowed
two days' fox-hunting away from London a week, and continued to attract
middle-class and radical criticism as the epitome of useless aristocratic
drones. So even on the eve of the Great War, 'A wide gulf continued to
separate the soldiers from their officers, who, despite the abolition of the
Purchase System, were still recruited from a limited area of society?39
Amateur officer tradition
Compared to the officer corps in other European powers, British officers
were often wilfully unprofessional and anti-intellectual. Training in the
Sandhurst and Woolwich academies was regarded as optional, being beneath
the dignity of gentlemen, whose sole attribute was to lead men coolly under
fire. From the carly ninetenth century, reforming officers like Sir John
Moore had been trying to change this culture, with severe criticism of those
who did not take the profession of soldiering seriously. Moore disparaged
the officers of the 6th Foot in Spain in 1808 as unworthy to go upon active
service and left them behind in garrison. Even in wartime, the taste for a
hard drinking and leisured society prevailed and (it is claimed): the officer
corps of the British Army ... were to a man given over to West Indian sexual
debauchery. Overall it was often difficult to get administration done, as the
British officer hates ... literary work even in the form of writing letters,
complained the head of the Staff College. Lord Palmerston grumbled that
officers wrote like kitchen maids, who should be taught to 'compose English
correctly? 40
With the long peace after 18t5, the professionalism built up in the long
war was dissipated. Officers could take long leaves (in the Guards, even
o lonels could take up to siy monthe a vene) and training and adminis-
tration were left to the Adjutants and COs, with soldiers rarely even
meeting an officer. Officers stationed in the UK became well known for hard
drinking and appallingly selfish and boorish behaviour. Especially in the
cavalry, they had little or no work to do, land found it hard not to get into
loafing, idle, if not disreputable ways. In August 1839, near Canterbury, six
young 'Hooray Henrys' of the lith Hussars rode across standing crops and
assaulted the owner, John Brent, when he tried to remonstrate with them.
› Harries-Jenkins, Army in Victorian Society, 29, 31-42, 44, 100-05; David Nason, The
Victorian Soldier (Princes Risborough: Shire BookS, 2-4), 5, 4 noosey, History of the British
Cavalry, vol. 4, 457; and Moyse-Bartlett, 'The British Army in 1850', 231.
10 Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 6, 30s; Buckley, British Army in the West Indies,
167, quoted in IF W. Beckett, The Victorians at War (London: Hambledon, 2003), 179 and
quoted in 'Book Reviews', JSAHR, 5o (1972), 186.
Class Structure and the British Army
47
A prosperous miller, alderman and magistrate, Brent could get no response
from the CO of the tith Hussars, except a challenge to a duel, but his
case, taken up by the Morning Chronicle, led to widespread public criticism.
Army authorities ignored such matters and fifteen years later the same CO,
the Earl of Cardigan, led the Charge of the Light Cavalry Brigade in the
Crimean War.41
Throughout the century, 'talking shop' - professional business, was
forbidden in the officers' mess.
'Ragging' organised bullying often
sanctioned by senior officers - was widely carried out against junior officers
who tried to study their profession or came from modest backgrounds, which
ensured their transfer to less fashionable regiments. At best, interest in a
military education was haphazard: 'Eventually I suppose [the officer] feels
an interest in his profession and desires to have a knowledge of it', and at
worst, downright hostile: 'I think not in the English [sic] army, because we
do not desire to make our officers more than serjeant majors. These attitudes
affected the prevailing ethos at Sandhurst: The majority of young officers
will not work unless compelled; that "keenness is out of fashion", that it is
"not the correct form", the spirit and fashion is rather not to show keenness;
and that the idea is ... to do as little as possible? 42
Michael Snape suggests that after the Crimean war the rowdy officer
culture was being tamed, not only through the influential evangelical
movement, with notable pious heroes such as Havelock and Gordon, but
also because large numbers of officers were now the sons of clergy. This
was especially so in higher regimental ranks, with 14 per cent of Colonels
coming from a clerical background in 1854. But even after the abolition of
purchase, overall there was little change in ….. social composition' and the
regular cavalry officer was very much a part timer. The higher social groups
(the peerage and the gentry) were over-represented amongst senior officers
of Colonels and Generals and the officer gentleman tradition remained
pervasive'. 43
In 1903, a reforming officer voiced his concerns about ongoing amateurism:
The system which has stood in our way since [18ts] had demoralised all
ranks and paralysed all initiative. The young officers were not allowed to
11 Spiers, Army and Society, 22 and 26 and Cecil Woodham-Smith, The Reason Wby
(London: Constable, 1953), 56-57.
42 French, Military Identities, 126; Spiers, Army and Society, 24; Anglesey, History of the
British Cavalry, vol y, entesting evidence to the Military Education Commitee from
Earl de Gray and Captain H.M. Hozier; and Spiers, Late Victorian Army, 102.
43 Michael Snape, The Redcoat and Religion (London: Routledge, 2005), 120-22; Spiers,
Late Victorian Army, 94; Bruce, The Purchase System, 158-5g; and Anglesey, History of the British
Cavalry, vol. 4, 362.
