20
Soldiers as Workers
offering a bounty, to volunteers for life e14; to volunteers for the limited
period of seven years, fil. If these inducements were not effectual in
getting men, then coercive measures were adopted; heavy and long drills,
and field exercises were forced on them; which were so oppressive that, to
escape them, the men would embrace the alternative and join the regulars.
It took determination, such as displayed by conscripted Buckinghamshire
Baptist Private Mayett, to resist such 'heavy volunteering into the line;
*during which time we that did not volunteer was very Sharply disciplined
for they Continually marched us about from place to place and made us do
all the duty? 34
William Wheeler, bored with garrison duty and excessive drilling in
the Royal Surrey Militia, and fearful of a flogging, volunteered for the sist
Light Infantry: I have at length escaped from the Militia without being
flead [sic alive. I have taken the first opportunity and volunteered together
with 127 of my comrades ... I rejoice to say that I have escaped with a
whole skin? His comrade Robert Fairfoot, who volunteered for the 95th
Rifles, had also suffered under Major Hudson of the Royal Surrey Militia:
'as great a tyrant as ever disgraced the Army, known as "Bloody Bob" or
"Wheel 'em again Bob'' 35
From
the
widespread nature of these accusations, it was clearly an
operational function of militias to use tedious regimes to encourage
volunteering for the line. An analysis of the 1813-14 Court Martial Book of
the ist Royal Tower Hamlet Militia confirms the hard lives of militiamen
who, for example, were denied leave to visit sick relations - which resulted in
a high rate of desertion. With identical training to the line, many militiamen
easily slotted in their new regiments, which were less taxing than their old
militia, and by the end of the French Wars one-third of the regular army
had come that route. Former militiamen were also responsible for some of
the most important rank-and-file memoirs of the wars.36
Women
This book concentrates almost exclusively on male workers, which reflects
the overwhelmingly masculine nature of the army. A few married women
34 John Selby (ed.), Thomas Morris: The Napoleonic Wars (London: Longmans, 1967), 6 and
Ann Kussmaul (ed.), The Autobiography of Joseph Mayett of Quainton (Buckingham: Bucking-
hamshire Record Society, 1986), 47.
35 Basil Liddell Hart (ed.), The Letters of Private Wheeler (London: Michael Joseph, 195t),
17 and i9 and quoted in Mark Urban, Rifles (London: Faber and Faber, 2003), 85.
Amateur Military Tradition, 110.
36 R.J. Goulden, 'Deserter Bounty Certificate', ISAHR, so (1972), 164 and Beckett, The
Introduction
21
were allowed 'on the strength' of each company of each regiment from the
earliest days of the British army, where they drew rations. Unofficial and
unmarried women also followed the regiments, even on campaign. Soldiers
had to obtain permission to marry, which was largely discouraged by senior
ranks. In 1871, only 13.19 per cent of rankers were married and in some
regiments it could be much lower; in the 77th Foot in 1854 it was only 3.83
per cent. Only with the Cardwell reforms were the new county regimental
depots provided with married quarters for NCOs, and after 1881, marriage
was made easier for them, as a way of encouraging overall stability within
the regiment. Others have chronicled how these women participated in the
hardships of their men's lives, sharing barrack rooms and, until the Crimean
War, on campaign.
Many of these women clearly worked; notably at laundry in cantonments
or camps. Here a strictly rank-based class system was in operation, with
NCOs' wives being prevented from doing the washing for privates, but
often doing laundry for officers. Regimental tradesmen were keen to retain
their monopoly of some tasks commonly performed by women. All uniform
repairs and alterations had to be done (at least officially) by the regimental
tailors, but probably women's seamstressing skills were also surreptitiously
used. Cooking - at least in barracks - seems to have been the sole respon-
sibility of company cooks. Nonetheless, on manoeuvres and on campaign,
wives are recorded as aiding their husbands' messes. Women, especially
widows keen to take responsibility for their own lives rather than remarrying,
often set up as sutleresses and competed with men (mainly retired soldiers)
for potentially lucrative regimental contracts to supply supplementary food
and drink. Women also acted as cleaners, nurses and midwives. Some
later became army school mistresses, a trade reserved for NCOs wives
or daughters. By 1865, 443 of them were running classes for infants and
instructing older girls in laundry and industrial work. Outside the barracks,
by the late-Victorian period, regimental women were a large component of a
substantial outworking labour force which supplied the demand for 'off the
peg' military clothing (especially shirts), which grew up around the main
garrison towns of Aldershot, Colchester and Woolwich to dress the larger
imperial army.37
37 Myna Trustram, Women of the Regiment: Marriage and the Victorian Army (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1984), 32, 35 and Ils; Veronica Bamfield, On the Strength: The
Story of the British Army Wife (London: Knight, 1974), 59; and Holmes, Soldiers, 599. For a
recent discussion of Georgian soldiers' wives' lives and work, see Hurl-Eamon, Marriage in
the British Army.
