178
Soldiers as Workers
if encountered in no man's land whilst foraging, both sides cavalry watered
their horses in turn at the same stream and rankers developed a regular
trade in trading commodities scarce in each camp. Outlying pickets also
adopted a system of live and let live with notice given if an advance was
ordered from higher command.56
Such actions may be less class resistance and more soldier solidarity over
shared hardships across armies. But Sergeant Donaldson of the gạth
described French and British soldiers looting wrecked ships on the beach
side by side during the siege of Cadiz and then drinking together. From
these incidents grew regularised gentlemen's agreements about foraging and
watering horses, and trading of scarce goods was often colluded with or even
encouraged by officers.57
British militiamen guarding French prisoners of war also fraternised
with their captives. It is likely that they acted as agents for imprisoned
French craftsmen in the marketing of the intricate folk art produced for
British civilians. There were at least three successful instances of bribery. In
Dartmoor Prison in July 180g, two Nottinghamshire militiamen were shot
and two flogged for accepting a bribe to facilitate an escape. Two years later,
four privates from the same regiment were again caught for bribery, though
only one (who had supplied a pistol received (450) lashes. At Perth Depot
in 1813, six prisoners bribed Durham militiamen. The plot was only betrayed
when one soldier found out that the bribe was in forged bank notes.s8
Fraternisation could also take place in the wars of Empire. Unlike most
Indian campaigns where no quarter was given Britch troone in Nenal in
1816 fraternised with Gurkha soldiers, whose basic English came from the
words of command used by European adventurers.59
Looting and prize money
In contrast with many European armies, the British were well supplied on
their home ground or within range of their properly equipped navy. Shortages
of food only occurred when their expeditions penetrated the interiors of
Europe or Empire. To maintain discipline, lo pens, it caught, could face
capital punishment from their Generals. John Cookson suggests that: 'On
s6 Duffy, Military Experience in the Age of Reason, 16y; Costello, The Adventures of 2
Soldier, 74-75 and 83; and Hart, Letters of Private Wheeler, 130
57 Donaldson, Recollections, 65-66 and 301-02; Janels, Life in Willingtor's Army, chap. 18
and 3or-02; and Oman, History of the Peninsular War, 7, 294-95.
58 ve 1 Tond. A History of Napoleoni and American Prisoners of War Maide
Antique Collectors' Club, 2007), 280, 313 and 353.
59 Stranks, John Shipp, 136.
Class Conflict in the Army
179
active service, among foreign populations, a "moral economy" seems to have
operated in that soldiers assumed a "right" of forage, requisition and even
plunder from civilians whatever the "law" in the shape of military authority,
directed: In the words of George Lindau, a German soldier serving in the
Peninsular War: 'A soldier in the field, even if he gets supplied ... according
to the commissary's weioht has a persistent overwhelming hunger. he looks
for provisions, knows where to find them and sits himself down ... in spite
of all the provosts with cords and lashes? The problem was particularly
pronounced in Spain, as candidly recorded by British rankers: 'At this period
(1810] the English troops made sad work in Portugal by plundering the
inhabitants ... to steal pigs. poultry, wine et' and We haversacked a few
sheep, and ran into an old shepherd. We soon relieved him of all he had,
viz. A four-pound loaf, some cheese and about a auart of wine The poor old
fellow cried. It was no use: we had not seen a bit of bread these eleven davs '60
Officers' collusion with their men over looting was widespread when all
were hungry: Nor were Officers any better off. They would look steadfastly
another way if they came across a soldiers staggering under a side of pork
and a piece of it quietly dropped into their tent would seal their lips to
silence? In the Peninsular War, collusion could extend to senior officers. A
Grenadier of the 42nd Highlanders, when digging up potatoes in a peasant's
field, was warned by General Pack, his brigade commander. to 'take care of
the provosts' 61
Unsurprisingly, collusion over looting also occurred in the overseas
military interventions. The British Battalion intervening for the liberals
during the Portuguese Civil war of 1832-33 found:
The best of all were the pigs themselves; - we had leave to kill those that
made their way into the garden, but est to touch those in the wood and
roads; however ... we fell upon the plan of driving them in, closing the
gate and killing them. The first night we caught three, which the Captain
saw lying dead in the kitchen going his rounds ... 'Oh, I see how it is, but
take care I don't catch you at it? 62
Similar activities sometimes occurred in remote imperial campaigns.
Ex-regular Sergeant Bodell, serving in the New Zealand Militia in 1864,
poached settlers' cattle: 'The Beef was soon cut up and hung up in Joints.
Farly next morning we sent a nice Plate of Steaks into the officers Hut, no
questions asked?63°
60 Cookson, 'Regimental Worlds', 25, quoted in a review of his memoirs in /SAHR, 88
(2010), 211: Cooper. Rouch Notes. 12: and Hart. Letters of Private Wheeler, 117.
61 Crook, Very Thing, 66 and Roy, 'The Memoirs of Private James Gunn', 65.
62 Knight, British Battalion at Oporto, 65.
63 Sinclair, A Soldier's View of Empire, 155.
