158
Soldiers as Workers
of customary obligations ... the right to a just wage as well as a tradition of
plebeian resistance too perceived incursions on customary rights.?
Way's view is partly supported by other eighteenth-century specialists.
Conway emphasises that soldiers had not entirely given up the character
of liberty-loving Britons when they joined the colours. Volunter recruits
effectively entered into a contract. They would provide military service, and
in return their officers would undertake to ensure that they were properly
provisioned and not ill-treated? Tatum has investigated the range of soldiers®
reactions when they felt their contracts had been broken, from complaints,
quiet subversion, firm negotiations to downright mutinies?
John Cookson suggests that in the French Wars soldiers continued to
value their freedom to protect their own interests:
It is not too much to say that soldiers (and seamen) had a conception of
their rights even if it often seemed to be nothing more than an elementary
sense of justice and resistance to servility at the hands of their ssuperiors...
In this they were hardly different from the poor in general.
Specifically, this related to contract culture:
Most trouble within the army and 'permanent' auxiliaries (militia
assumed the form of trade disputes' in which pay and conditions were
the chief issues and the rank and file took collective action, usually by
peaceful representation through the NCOs, against their officers. Soldiers,
often regarded as little better off than slaves by wealthy civilians, still
maintained a firm sense of their 'rights' in terms of army regulations,
parliamentary legislation pertaining to them, their original agreement to
enlist and general entitlement to fair treatment.
Evidence suggests that this culture continued amongst soldiers throughout
the nineteenth century. John Rumsby has emphasised the contractual right
in the cavalry over the widespread career strategy of men exchanging
regiments remaining in India. Rumsby located one soldier who exchanged
regiments four times in the early Victorian period.4
Contracts were especially important for the post-185 overseas military
interventions since pay was a prime motivation for the rank and file. In the
BAL in Spain, in 1836-37, one soldier reported a comrade named Nelson
who was invalided for home and left hospital; to go on board ship ...
2 Way, 'Rebellion of the Regulars', 789, 767 and 791.
* Stephen Conway, "The Eightenth-Century British Army as a European Institution;
29 and Tatum, The Soldiers Murmured Much on Account of this Usage, in Linch and
McCormack, Britain's Soldiers, 100 and 112.
'Making Choices', 26-27.
+ Cookson, 'Regimental Worlds', 25; Cookson, British Armed Nation, 190; and Rumsby,
Class Conflict in the Army
159
but came back the same evening, refusing to embark unless he was paid
his back pay before going on board'. Nelson died that night in hospital.
Edward Costello, adjutant of the BAL Rifle battalion was an ex-ranker who
successfully negotiated contracts with the mutinous soldiers by admitting:
their claims I acknowledged as just, enabling him to stop the disintegration
of the unit.
As late as 1858-59, the contract culture was central to the successful
White Mutiny, where EIC troops objected to their transfer to Crown
service, as their expressed grievances to authority make clear:
I do not find myself justified by serving her Majesty without either
reenlistment or bounty, and consider it unlawful and unjust in the manner
they have handed me over to the crown.
I agreed to serve the Company and the contract is at an end. Like as if I
had agreed to serve a man who became bankrupt.
Sometimes these disputes could be accurately defined as the classic conflict
over wages. A contract culture existed, with customary rates of pay and
self defined outputs, which was virtually identical to that of contemporary
civilian workers. In late 1792, a group of the Royal Scots Greys quartered in
Manchester met as a committee, apparently with the support of many of the
rank and file, in reaction to the high cost of provisions in the burgeoning.
industrial town. They later met weekly to read the work of Tom Paine.
As the onlv Scottish regular cavalry regiment the Greys attracted more
educated recruits, and displayed a long radical tradition?
NCOs often acted as a combination of foreman and shop steward in
their dealings with officers. A good example occurred during the career of
Andrew Pearson of the 6rst foot. Serving in Sicily as an acting bodyguard
to the absolutist King of Nables in r8os. the Gret had been promised prize
money from their part in the victory of the Battle of Maida the previous
year. Sergeant Pearson recorded his feelings when this only amounted to a
derisory sum:
I was dumfounded and did not know how to face my company, as the
greatest of rejoicings had been going on for some days on the faith
that every man would receive at least a guinea. When I returned to the
5 Anon., Autobiography of a Soldier', 497 and Costello, The Adventures of a Soldier,
403-04.
* Quoted in Stanley, White Mutiny, 2 and 154. The last witness, a former wailmaker,
emphasises the artisan origins of many of these soldiers.
7 Clive Emsley, The Military and Popular Disorder in England, 1790-180r, JSAHR, 6r
(2004), 100 and Mansfield, 'Military Radicals and the Making of Class', 6r-62. Soldiers'
political radicalism will be discussed in more detail in the companion volume.
