164
Soldiers as Workers
regimental records. He insisted on pursuing his case to a magistrates court
and was awarded damages.19
The citizen soldiers of the Channel Islands, which had conscription for
its militia since 1771, were also potential protesters. After heavy punishments
from an unpopular CO, in May 18g9 there was mass insubordination in
the and Royal Guernsey Militia when nearly 150 men refused to parade
for their annual training. The Jersey Militia had similarly 'mutinied' in
1895. Even as they were effectively wound up in the Edwardian Haldane
reforms, over a third of all existing British militia rank and file refused to
join the new Special Reserve battalions. Instead, they took free discharges
or stubbornly served out their period of enlistment of their militia contracts
as militiamen. Earlier, 4 militia regiments (3 Irish and I Scottish) even
refused to send volunteer drafts to the Boer War, though the vast majority
did comply, with over 45.000 militiamen departing for the Cape or the
imperial garrisons.20
Strikes and mutinies
Standard military histories, especially regimental ones, largely ignore the
contract culture, especially when it spilled over into strikes or mutinies.
Sporadic incidents could, though, be extensive and widespread, as will be
outlined in this section.
Peter Way has researched the large-scale mutinies which occurred all over
the eastern seaboard of North America in 1763-64, when troops were being
stood down after the Seven Year War. Their reactions, as their wages and
conditions were being reduced, were recorded in contemporary accounts:
When he ordered out a party [of the 44th Foot] to cut wood: the men
came in a body and complained of the grievance they laboured under in
being Stopp'd for their provisions and ordered to work which they Said
they Expected to be paid for otherwise they would not work.
Soldiers of the 4oth: with one consent, threw down their Arms and
Accoutrements, and with one voice declared, That it was Impossible for
them to Serve in this Country upon these Terms.21
In the Georgian period, Highlanders, in particular were concerned with
contract culture and the danger of being sold by their lairds to service
1 Garth Christian (ed.), James Haker's Journal: A Victorian Poacher (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1978), 6 and 8-9.
20 French, Military Identities, 108: Dunlop. Develotment of the Britich Army. go: and
Bowman and Connelly, Edwardian Army, 121.
21 Way, 'Rebellion of the Regulars', 783 and 786.
Class Conflict in the Army
165
in the East or West Indies. Matthew Dziennik's recent work argues that
the exiting contract culture of the Highland soldiers was consolidated
by growth of the market economy, the decline of paternalism in their
regional society and its relationship with dynamic British imperialism.
Such fears were shared by other troops and could lead to mass action.
In 1,80, the Anglesea Militia, which had been mobilised during the
American Revolutionary War, mutinied at Ellesmere,
Shropshire and
'abused and very ill treated their officers. The Worcestershire Militia at
Shrewsbury put down the revolt and arrested the ringleaders. The line
regiment, the 83rd Foot, mutinied at Portsmouth in 1783 against being sent
to India. They won the conflict, with the soldiers discharged according to
their contracts.22
The fencible regiments, raised mainly in Scotland during the French
Revolutionary Wars for home service only, seemed particularly prone to
contract protests. (No Scottish militia had yet been formed.) After their
officers attempted to extend their contract to England, the Strathspey
Fencibles mutinied at Linlithgow in 1794. Trouble continued the following
year in their next two postings in Dumfries and Musselburgh. Although
arrested protestors had been released from prison in Musselburgh by soldiers
their strike was then broken by fresh troops. Four soldiers were condemnes
to death and, after drawing lots, two were shot on Gullane Links, with three
other regiments paraded to observe the draconian punishment. Cookson
argues that the French Wars bred extensive suspicion in all troops - line,
militia, fencible and volunteers - of being inveigled into signing away rights
and being sold for unhealthy service in the Indies 23
A different sort of protest arose in tha cricia caring of 1706.
Soldiers
from the Gloucestershire,
Hampshire,
Northamptonshire and
Herefordshire militia regiments joined other food rioters - including some
from volunteer units - in sixteen locations all over southern England. These
ranged from Devon, Somerset,
Oxfordshire, Hampshire, to Sussex and
Kent. In Plymouth, rioters were joined by some regulars from the 6ith
Foot and the newly raised uath Foot joined in at Wantage. The Royal
Oxfordshire Militia staged the most care athl Theu ba hacnd ho
the south coast camps at Seaford, waiting for the French invasion. When
quelled, the militiamen were court-martialled and two leaders (Sergeant
Corke and Private Parish) were shot in Brighton by a firing squad formed
from their pardoned comrades, as an object lesson in front of the entire
invasion camp. It is claimed that the disgraced Oxfordshires lost their
22 Dziennik, 'The Greatest Number Walked Out', 17-36; Shrewsbury Chronicle, 5 Aug. 1780
and 5 May 1781; and Tatum, 'The Soldiers Murmured Much', 109-10.
23 Clyde, From Rebel to Hero, 166 and Cookson, British Armed Nation, 9 and 234.
