188
Soldiers as Workers
the French Irish Legion. But Riley's luck held. His luckless guard had died
in Spain, and lack of evidence failed to convict him and he even got his
back pay.88
After the large-scale looting at Vitoria in 1813, the army's desertion
problems increased as it neared the borders of France. The French distributed
handbills which promised, amongst other things, permission for deserters
to pursue their pre-enlistment trades. Wellington wrote: "The desertion is
terrible, and is quite unaccountable, particularly amongst British troops.
I am not astonished that the foreigners should go ... but they entice
away the British soldiers, there is no accounting for their going away in
such numbers as they do? The General clearly could not understand the
survival needs of the working-class men under his command and regular
shootings of deserters were carried out to halt the flood. After the end of
the Peninsular War, as troops waited at Bordeaux in the spring of 1844
to return to Britain, many who had contracted common-law marriages to
Spanish women deserted and disappeared over the border. There were six
cases alone in the 1/95th Rifles.89
With the US frontier within walking distance, and its endless possibilities
of future land and prospects, Canada was particularly prone to desertion:
'Desertion was probably worse here ... than anywhere else the British army
was posted in the nineteenth century and a soldier would know he would be
deserting to a similar society to his? The situation deteriorated with the War
of 1812 between the two countries. In the summer of 1813, three defending
British battalions lost 122 deserters to the other side. One British Colone
wrote to his sster; I have had a hard set to deal with, the 4ist Regiment
have plagued me to Death ~ numbers deserting to the Enemy, don't mention
this, but the Americans hold out such inducements to our men to come ovet,
besides the getting of liberty which is perhaps not so much to be wondered
at. British defeats worsened the situation further (as reported); the affair on
Lake Champlain and the retreat of the army before a handful of Americans
which caused about five hundred English soldiers to desert ... everyone is
discontented'90
After 1815, the American military authorities were keen to tempt British
soldiers into their own army with offers of more money, easier service
•a Haley, Soldier Who Walked Away, 16-21; LIM, Court Martial Records; and Divall,
Redcoats against Napoleon, 196-98.
« Esdale, Perinsular Eyeitnes, 273 James, Life in Wellington's Army, 305; Costello, The
Adventures of a Soldier, 276; and Urban, Rifles, 254.
" Carol Whitield, The Deserter, National Historic Parks News, (1973), 2; Robert
S, Allen (ed), The Bishopp Papers during the War of tez, Ast , 6s (1983), 25, and uoted
in James, Warrior Race, 309.
Class Conflict in the Army
189
and free land on the frontier when their contracts had expired. This took
place despite heavy fines imposed on these American crimpers' throughout
the period. The Horse Guards discouraged regimental savings banks in
Canadian garrisons, arguing that this would result in more desertions
a soldiers would be tempted to seek a better life. An American border
sentry told a British officer that there were only seven Americans in the
regiment, the rest were almost all British deserters, Canadian employers,
themselves desperate for labour. would readily shelter soldiers on the run,
despite various pieces of legislation threatening harsh punishments enacted
between 18o1 and the 1860s. The Californian Gold Rush of 1849 also saw
another peak in desertions. Recruiters from south of the border were
particularly active during the American Civil War co Pritich reriments
had to undertake Look-Out Service: This duty was peculiar to
and originated during the American Civil War, when the Union felt the
want of trained soldiers and NCOs. They therefore held out bribes and
hopes of commissions to any English soldier who would desert their
colours and enlist with them! With the Trish, especially: 'At least some
recruits, deliberately joined regiments serving or embading for British
North America with the premeditated intention of thereby reaching the
US: This process was intensified by the Fenian movement in the USA,
which invaded Canada in 1867, as members of the brotherhood had entisted
in the British army to take advantage of military training before their
desertion south."]
Reforms were attempted to curb Canadian desertion from the 184os.
Taverns were controlled, bartacks were better lit in the long winters, und
libraries, fives courts and cricket pitches established. The system existing in
Indio was adonted wherehy soldiers could transfer to an incoming reviment
when their own was being posted elsewhere. This enabled soldiers with
Canadian wives or other ties to settle legitimately when their army service
was over, and married quarters in barracks began to be provided. In addition,
the Royal Canadian Rife Regiment of experienced and married soldiers was
raised specifically for garrison duties in isolated settlements (see the section
'Adventurers and settlers', in Chapter 3, above)."
In the early days of the colony, remote Australia was a difficult station
from which to desert. However, with the long regimental postings, many
were tempted by the rumour of China being just beyond the horizon, only
to fall victim to the outback, aborigines or bush rangers. Indeed, many of
91 Whitfield, Tommy Atkins, 60, 63, 67, 140 and 143; Burroughs, Tackling Army Desertion;
7-8; and LIM, XXX Gazette, Aug. 1880. (I am grateful to Mairtin O'Cathain's extensive
knowledge of Fenianism.)
92 Senior, British Regulars in Montreal, 35, 149 and 150.
