106
Soldiers as Workers
the unfashionable Denbigh Militia employed a black drummer in 18os.
Though seemingly the practice died out, regimental inspection reports il
asked about 'men of colour' in the 1840s. John Baptist, a French Caribean
percussionist was not discharged from the ard Foot Guards until 184t and
the ith Hussars still had three black musicians in the 18405.83
A wide range of army musicians existed in the nineteenth century. At
the top, serving London society, members of the bands of the elite London.
regiments generally did not go near any military conflict, because they
made their living in London opera houses and theatres These were mint
from the Guards but also included the famous Royal Artillery band, the
largest and most talented in Britain. Generally, a good living was made by
wind players who accumulated a portfolio of engagements through work
in theatres, oratorios, pleasure gardens and regimental band? A typical
London musician was William Tenkinson, a bassoonist who in the 1700
made his living variously with the 3rd Regiment of Guards, at Ranelagh
Gardens and the Circus, and through "other Musical Business". By 1839,
theatres 84
average London-based bandsmen could earn up to 8 shillings per night in
At the bottom end, with the Peace of that the Couthmant Marine
reported 'the number of military bands establiched in the Kinadom. have so
much extended a degree of knowledge, in musick. that either some discarded
soldier, servant, or player, scrapes a fiddle in every parish, and promotes
drunkenness, lewdness, and idleness by bringing the inde and girls together
to dance' At a time when obnorto boo muce were page militar
bands served to attract people to an unpopular service. Several memoirists
of the French Wars attest that being charmed by musicians accompanying
recruiting parties was a major factor in their enlistment. As late as 1859, the
recruiting parties?5
Horse Guards confirmed that Fifes and Drums should be amploved in all
Regulations in 1803 tried to limit musician numbers to one private soldie
per infantry company of cavalry troop and one NCO as bandmaster. But
these were constantly transgressed in the nineteenth century. as rroiment
vied with each other for best band and fudged the number of civilians
employed. Even after 18is, with the peacetime cuts, the number of musicians
per regiment increased, and was given official sanction to ra nlus a Sergeant
x3 Holmes, Soldiers, 475; Rumsby, "The Sixteenth Lancers' Tom. John D Thin tut sit to the
Streets and the Workhouse' The Life, Visual Representation and Death of John Baptist, and
Scots Fusilier Guards, JSAHR, 82 (2004), 206; and Holmes, Redcoat, 127-
* Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 30, 49 and 77.
the British Military, 34-
Soldiers as Workers
107
in 1823, and to 20 in 1846. Corps bands were even bigger. The celebrated
Royal Artillery band mustered 80 in 1856 and gI by 1882, with what was
in effect a full-scale orchestra. With the addition of drummers, even
infantry bands like the Queen's regiment numbered 6o in 1876 and that of
the Grenadier Guards 55 in 1907. The Commander in Chief, the Duke of
Cambridge, whilst considering an Army School of Music, asked for numbers
of musicians to be counted in 1856. It was concluded that bands existed for
II2 battalions of infantry, 26 regiments of cavalry, to colonial units, plus the
Royal Artillery and Royal Engineers and for various depots (despite these
being officially forbidden). These provided employment for about 4,500
musicians, which had risen to 140 regular bands with 5,000 employees
by 1894: tens of thousands of men passed through the British military as
musicians in the nineteenth century, making the army easily the largest
single employer of British musicians.86
These numbers did not include musicians employed in the parallel
militia establishment of I3o county infantry regiments, or the 69 yeomanry
regiments, which often employed a few py fessionals, and those in some
rifle volunteer units, formed from 1859. Even the tiny Rutland Militia of
97 men employed an eight-strong band during its French Wars mobili-
sation, whilst Shrodshire's larger county militia regiment encared ,8
most significant means through which the aristocracy and gentry of the
British shires sponsored instrumental musie. They became a key part of
social and cultural life, playing for county occasions and events even in
peacetime, when not embodied. This also applied to Parliamentary county
politics, especially before the Reform Act of 1832. Despite standing down
after 1815 and their erratic record or ual training, county militias often
retained their band. In 1833, the Dorset Militia still mustered eleven players.
Militia Colonels also hired musicians to double up as NOs - who could
undertake their limited peacetime tasks and even perhaps cope with the
official annual training. The special corial role of hands in provincial polite
society trumped military efficiency in the non-embodied militia cadre. Like
the regular bands, the militian sicians played a very wide repertoire,
ranging from marches through to dances and concerts Militia hands had
another maior Aowering during their mobilication for the Cemean War.
After demobilisation in 1856, some regiments (like the grd West Yorkshire)
retained their Bandmasters in their full-time cadres, alone with Adiutants,
Quartermaster. Sergeants and drummera.
Shortly afterwards, the rifle
volunteer movement gave an immense hoost to the profession of military
music and later the Childers and Haldane Reforms gave official status to
86 Herbert and Barlow, Music and the British Military, 55, 57, 58, 64, 65, 191, 197 and 207.
