142
Soldiers as Workers
possibilities for experienced NOs. By 1899, they gave full-time employment
to 4,332 Sergeants and musicians. As the militias were now part of the
county regimental depots, there was a better career structure for NCOs
between regular, militia and volunteer battalions, especially as instructors
for training new recruits. Fulwood Barracks at Preston had 47 NCOs and
other experienced men in 188t, with another 19 as associated commissariat,
administrative and domestic staff. 169
The county militias lost their political role and became more profesion-
alised as a regularised part of Britain's army. However, the county yeomany
remained a key part of county society in every sense. As part-time mounted
volunteers, farmers' sons officered by the gentry and based on local foxhunts,
they saw themselves as the rural elite. In the nineteenth century they acted
as a class-based and politically motivated country gendarmerie against a
huge variety of radical and working-class opponents, frequentlv with violent
consequences They operated as private armies often funded by the aristocracy
and only loosely controlled by the Home fice through the county Lords
Lieutenants, and were largely held in contempt by regular soldiers.10
Yeomanry units sought the best staff as instructors. In Lancashire, the
Furness Cuirassiers chose Waterloo veteran Private Thomas Gardener as
their drill Sergeant and built him a suitable memorial in Great Unswick
Church after his carly death. The and West Yorkshire Yeomanry Cavalry
appointed Major Thomas Johnson, ex-private of the ith Hussars and
survivor of the Charge of the Light Brigade, as their Adjutant between
186g and 1881. William Courts retired as Troop Sergeant Major of the tốth
Lancers in 1860, and became instructor in Midlothian Yeomanry and then
the Fife Mounted Rifles. Richard Hall Williams of roth lancers and another
Light Brigade charger, was Troop Sergeant Major to the Worsley Troop of
the Duke of Lancaste's Yeomanry. He was postmaster of Worsley and also
taught drill to schoolchildren on a local estate. Hussar memoirist Edwin
Mole was appointed a Sergeant instructot to a yeomanry regiment in the
Fastern counties on his discharge in the 188os, where he supplemented his
earnings by giving private riding lessons to officers. By 1869, the permanent
staff of the Yeomanry employed 33 Adjutants, 280 Sergeant Majors and 44
Trumpeters; most were ex-regular cavalry NCOs.171
169 Dunlop, Development of the British Army, 327 and Appendix D and W.D. Shannon,
•Soldiers and their Families in Fulwood, 1851-1887, MA thesis, Lancaster University, 2004, 21.
170 Mansfield, 'Foxhunting and the Yeomanry, 247-56 and Nick Mansfield, "The Yeomanry:
Bir John t. Comty Arie So fire no yod ore Militia, Voluners and
Military Service in the Huddersfield District,
1757-1957, 145-70, in E.A. Hilary Craig,
Huddersfield a Most Handsome Town (Huddersfield: Kirklees Cultural Services, 1992), 155;
Rumsby, "The Sixteenth Lancer', 345; James W. Bancroft, The Way to Glory: Men of the North
Soldiers as Workers
143
After the big expansion of the part-time volunteer movement from 1859,
there were also many vacancies for instructors in rifle volunteer units. Given
the lower-middle-class and even working-class composition of these corps,
such posts had less cachet and lower pay than those in the yeomanry. John
Ford, an Indian Mutiny veteran, was for 20 years Armoury attendant and
instructor to the Huddersfield Volunteers. To make a living he had to
combine the post with a job as a theatre usher. But aristocratic employ did
not guarantee high pay: in 1840, William Williams (ex-Royal Artillery) was
appointed as armourer and gunner to the Duke of Northumberland's own
Household Artillery, a post he had to combine with Keeper of the Abbey
Lodge at Alnwick Castle. 172
Overseas, there were increasing opportunities for instructors in colonial
militias and volunteers. William Brown, former Sergeant Major of the 3and
Foot, became adjutant of the ist Montreal Volunteer Militia before joining
the Montreal police. Even more successful was Colour Sergeant Thomas
Wily of the 8grd Foot (middle class though a ranker) who used his fluency
in French to become drillmaster of the Royal Quebec Volunteers in 1838, and
then was commissioned as Adjutant in the ist Provincial Regiment. In 1844,
he became Montreal's Chief of Police. Senior bandsmen could also take up
posts as musical instructors to colonial units, with those of the Indian army
being particularly lucrative.173
Another small area of nublic semi-military service was that of the Yeomen
Warders of the Tower or Beefeaters, as they were popularly known. These
posts were highly sought-after in the carly nineteenth century, because
of the fees and tips given by tourists coming to the Tower of London.
Warders' posts were bought and sold to anybody as part of Old Corruption:
The Duke of Wellington reformed these posts after his appointment as
Constable of the Tower in 1806. Numbers were reduced to around so, the
service militarised and made the prerogative of long-serving, well-behaved
and gallant sergeants. Sergeant Townshend of ist Foot Guards, who refused
to surrender in the debacle of Bergen op Zoom in 1814, first became steward
and porter at Wellington's residence, Walmer Castle, and was then brought
into the reformed Yeomen. Brice McGregor, one of the party of Foot
Guards that closed the gates at Hougoumont during the battle of Waterloo,
also served as a Yeoman Warder for 25 years. It is claimed that Sergeants
West Who Rode in the Charge of the Light Brigade (Manchester: Richardson, 1998), 11, 15, 18 au
21; Edwin Mole, A King's Hussar (London: Cassell, 1893), 247; and Anglesey, British Cavalr
vol. 2, 151 and 445-
172 Rumsby, 'Attentive Soldiers and Good Citizens', 163 and Hewitson, Weekend Warriors, 51.
173 Senior, British Regulars in Montreal, 27 and 34 and Herbert and Barlow, Music and the
British Military, 265.
