62
Soldiers as Workers
eight years more in British service. He went to Spain ... and then got
promoted to a commission in the Legion artillery.
Somerville was himself promoted to Sergeant and was later involved in
the sort of trickery all too common in the British army to get his BAL
comrades to renew their contracts in Spain:
[It became necessary to resort to the common modes of recruiting - that
mode which was always, when levies of men were required, pursued with
militia regiments in Britain, in order to get them to volunteer into the
regulars, namely, that of giving men money, and every facility to wallow
in drunkenness until it was all spent.
By and large we can conclude that overseas military adventurers were
largely governed by the British style of military organism and were subject
to the same class-based pressures. But later groups like the Garibaldi
Excursionists of 1860-67, largely London liberal artisans many of whom had
been members of the new Rifle Volunteer movement, probably had a freet
discipline inspired by their charismatic Italian idol.80
Criticism of officers by the rank and file
Many rank-and-file soldiers were critical of their officers on class grounds.
Such was the sense of oppression under which they worked, that these
feelings could be revealed only in private. We cannot know how this was
communicated in the opaque world of the barrack room at the time, but we
do know that it is a consistent thread in private journals and later published
accounts, especially when these were not dependant on gentry patronage:
Unsurprisingly, cocksure William Cobbett asserted of his 1780s regimental
comrades: There is not a fault or foible of those commanders that they do not
criticise. They canvas all their actions and all their motives? From a distance
of twenty-five years, he also argued that soldiers had generally supported his
radical stance; a dubious claim given his own inconsistencies.31
Independent evidence survives from exactly the same period as Cobbet's
soldiering, from James Aytoun, a Scottish shoemakerwho served in the goth
Foot in the 178os and gos. Aytoun was consistently anti-officer in his private
journal which was not published until the 198os:
During the time we were in Dominka we were commanded by officers
who were very unfit for their trust of commanding four hundred men or
80 Somerville, History of the British Legion, G1o and Beckett, The Amateur Military Tradition,
19g. Overseas military adventurers will be featured in the companion volume; in the
meantime, see the author's 'Military Radicals and the Making of Class', 67-69.
81 Cobbett's Weekly Political Pamphlet, 32(37), 13 Dec. 1817, 1147.
63
Class Structure and the British Army
more. Altho' I write of the absurditys I have seen, still I am certain a great
deal will not be believed.
No wonder the Yankee drove such ill-treated men who were beaten by a
parcel of raw militia. No wonder that so many of our men deserted to the
enemy. The Practice of beating was so great that no man who went to drill
... was sure of returning to barracks without a smart beating. 32
Similar complaints appear in an anonymous surviving radical handbill
distributed at Chatham barracks in May 1797 and supposedly written by
Is there not a man among us who does not want to defend his country
and who would willingly do it without being subject to the insolence and
cruelty of effeminate puppies?
What makes a difference between a commissioned officer and a private, or
non-commissioned? Are they better men? You must laugh at the thought?
Do they know discipline half as well as our Serjeants? Don't they owe their
promotions to their connections with placemen and pensioners ... Don't
colonels now draw half their income from what we ought to have, but of
which we are robbed?83
The well-known memoir of Sergeant Wheeler of the sist Light Infantry,
originally written as letters to his friends and family in Somerset, also report
similar objections:
I have often been tick[lled in reading the General despatches of the Army,
when Some Lord or General or Colonel has been killed or wounded ...
Lord A- fell in the moment of achieving some great exploit, then follows
a long lamentation of the serious loss Old England and H.M. Service has
sustained. Then General B- is severely wounded, with a long panegyric of
his military virtues and services etc. Or that Colonel C- of the General
Staff of the Army had received a severe wound (scratch it should have
been) that will deprive the Army of a valuable service for some time to
come etc. But who shall record the glorious deeds of the soldier whose lot
is numbered with the thousands in the ranks who live and die and fight
in obscurity.
In contrast, Wheeler highlighted his comrade Tom Hooker, killed in the
Pyrences in 18r3: 'He was pre-eminently courageous, and would in any other
service, but the British, have ranked as an officer.84
82 James Aytoun, Redcoats in the Caribbean (Blackburn: Blackburn Recreation Services,
1984), 7, 8 and IT.
8' Handbill entitled "To the British Army, in the Queen's Dragoon Guards collection,
Firing Line Museum, Card if Thritish Arm also has two loyal response handbills.
84 Selby, Thomas Morris, 5t
