128
Soldiers as Workers
Sergeant Thomas claimed to have made £1,400 in eighteen months and
another Sergeant left £4,000 in his will.136
Sergeant Laverack of the g8th Foot developed a whole catering empire at
Umballa, in 186os India:
The Colonel has taken the sale of coffee and eatables from a native for
selling inferior articles, and I am appointed sole proprietor of the cofice
and eating rooms, manufacturer of ginger beer, baker of bread and confec-
Employing two European and eight native bakers, Laverack had his own
bread ovens built and won the Divisional contract to supply the men at
daybreak with coffee, cakes, buns, tarts, spice loaves, etc., etc? A trusted
businessman as well as a Methodist and temperance supporter. he was als
'appointed canteen superintendent ... and head president of the sergeant's
mess. I have kept an eye on the mess liquor books and prevented excessive
Regimental canteens remained open to abuse and graft, with Canteen
Sergeants and Quartermasters a byword for making money from their
comrades. This continued despite the intervention of three officers who formed
the Canteen Mess Co-operative Society in 1894. Its unlikelv membership of
the co-operative movement enabled it to undertake bulk-buying and pass
on savings to soldiers. Ex-service private traders gradually disappeared from
the barracks and regimental canteens were reformed, with official tenders
supervised by Colonels replacing the old graft and sub-standard supplies of
stewards and sutlers. But new corruption appeared, with contracting-out to
major suppliers like Liptons, who provided canteens to 87 regiments. This
business was worth over 6500,000 a year in 1910. The allegations of their
wholesale bribery resulted in nearly iso prosecutions, mainly of NCOs, but
also of one former CO.138
On a smaller scale, smart thinkers amongst the ranks could take advantage
of changes in station and varying exchange rates to trade rare goods. On his
return from India in 1853, Sergeant John Pearman evaded customs duties for
cigars and even found one 'Custom officer Brought most of Cigars themselves
I sold one 300 Cinsurah Cigars at i penny each they only Cost me I rupee 12
annas about s 6d in English money. Though early trading in the East Indies
136 Bonnie Huskins, 'From Haute Cuisine to Ox Roasts: Public Feasting and the Negotiation
of Class in Mid-rgth-Century Saint John and Halifax, Labour/Le Travail, 37 (1996), 9-36;
Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 47, 49 and 147; and Rumsby, 'The Sixteenth Lancers', 165-67.
A. Laverack, A Methodist Soldier in the Indian Army (London: T. Wollmer, 1887), 178-79-
138 French, Military Identities, 112-13 and Bowman and Connelly, Edwardian Army, 163. See
also J.W. Fortescue, A Short Account of Canteens in the British Army (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1928).
Soldiers as Workers
129
was dominated by officers - especially those of the EIC - very occasionally
rank-and-file penny capitalists could find undreamed of wealth. William
Hope - once a private in the Madras Europeans - founded the merchant
house, Hope and Co., and became the richest white man in the Presidency,
only to drown with his entire family on the homeward voyage in 181r. Probably
more typical was ex-Troop Sergeant Major William Musgrave, who, after
discharge at Meerut, India in 1842, set up as wine merchant with his son. 139
Entertainment for the troops was another avenue for soldiers' talents and
money making enterprise. An enormous impact had been made on Britain's
leisure world a generation earlier by one ey-serviceman. Cabinetmaker's son
Philip Astley (1742-814) enlisted in the newly formed i5th Light Dragoons
in the Seven Years War and after distinguished service in Germany was
discharged as a Sergeant Major in 1766, with his horse Gibraltar. By the
time of his death he had set up a multinational entertainment business based
on equestrian skills and battle re-enactments and is considered the creator
of the modern circus. He was also a philanthropist. To helo alleviate the
sufferings of British troops in the Low Countries in r703, Astley donated
500 flannel jackets and at the corner of each of them was sewed in a shilling
that made the latter popular through the whole army ….. being thoroughly
conversant with the wants of soldier in a campaign. After the Peace of
Amiens, he gave free wants at sis shows for returning soldiers: This made
him more popular than ats a with the government and military ... landl it
drew him crowded audiences every night, to behold so many brave men who
had endured the fatigues and toils of a soldier's life? 140
Subsequently, entertainers of various sorts found work, catering mainly
for their comrades especially in isolated postings at home or abroad. In the
1790s, Edward McMurdy, a gunner in the Royal Artillery, augmented his
salary while his regiment was in Jamaica, by being employed as a singing
man'. On a grander scale, in 1813, Joe Kelly, a singer serving in the Life
Guards, performed at a dinner given by the Duke of Wellington to his
generals in Spain. 141
139 Steedman, Radical Soldier's Tale, 186; Stephen Taylor, Storm and Conquest: The Battle
for the Indian Ocean, 1809 (London: Faber and Faber, 2007), 16 and 137; and Rumsby, 'The
Sixteenth Lancers', 342.
140 Russell, Theatres
of War, 117 and J. Decastro, The Memoirs of J. Decastro, comedian ...
accompanied by an analysis of the life of the late Philip Astley (London: Humphreys, 1824), 72
and 74-
141 Patricia Y.C.E. Lin, 'Caring for the Nation's Families: British Soldiers' and Sailors'
Families and the State, 1793-1815, in Alan Forest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendell (eds),
