74
Soldiers as Workers
school. While in the army he may become, among other things, a cook, a
waiter, a valet, a clerk, a butcher, an armourer or a storekeeper.
Disproportionate free time was the key factor in the army's main social
problem: excessive drinking of alcohol in reaction to boredom. Cavalrymen
behaved better than infantry, partly because they tended to be more educated
and of higher social standing, and partly because care for their horses and
equipment occupied the idle hours. So a certain amount of licence to the
rank and file was deliberately allowed by officers in everyday army life. This
included -where at all possible - allowing the more enterprising to work in
their spare time to supplement their meagre wages?
Regimental tradesmen
A recent detailed analysis of the occupations of the men, numbering over
2,000, who went through the soth Foot during the French Wars has located
86 shoemakers and 54 tailors. These were the most common army trades
in the nineteenth century. Under a tradesmen Sergeant, a team of aroun
six were excused all drills and duties (except church parade) and made
and repaired uniforms and boots for officers and men (cas Illuntention 2)
These workers seem to have been found by the Sergeant tradesman from
scrutinising new recruits for those who were «ime-served' in a recognised
apprenticeship. Their higher pay was met throuch regimentally doreed
price lists of charges that they could make to officers. The price lists also
recorded the deductions that could be made from their comrades' pay if the
tradesmen needed to repair or supply more equipment than their regular
issued allocation. Use of regimental tradesmen tae compulsory decrite the
often unfair deductions from the rankers' meagre Day. "The men are strictl
prohibited from altering the clothing themselves, all alterations however
trifling are to be executed in the Tailor's shop?®
Surviving price lists were usually included in the official Regimental
standing orders, which after 182o were often printed These often record
other artisans working in the regiment, including small numbers of
blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, painters and armourers Prica lists are
almost identical to those agreed in vilian life hated earle tourneumen
trade societies (the forerunners of trade unions) and their masters
employers, which was the mainstay of early-nineteenth-century industrial
relations for handicraft trades. Given the very detailed and specialised
French, Military Identities, 97, 102 and 109.
Fortescue, History of the British Army, vol. 11, 16.
* Divall, Inside the Regiment, 27 and LIM, 8ist Regimental Order Book, 1857-1880, 27.
Soldiers as Workers
75
2 Shoemakers' shop, Burma, 1906.
The tools, equipment and lay-out of this shop of the ist King's Own Regiment,
would be familiar to civilian and military tradesmen throughout the
nineteenth century.
nature of those parts of the tailoring trade covered by the London tailors'
Military Lodge, it seems very likely that this tailors' union branch consisted
of ex-regimental tradesmen.'
Standing orders also record soldier tradesmen's wages, which were roughly
a third higher than those of their comrades: 'Daily pay rates carpenters,
painters, masons and other tradesmen is 6d a day, tailors when working
for the Master Tailor is a day, labourers per day rod? These rates were
considerably less than those of most civilian artisans. Civilian shoemakers
and tailors, even though not regarded as the most 'honourable trades, like
printers, could easily make twice that figure. But civilians had to produce
what the price list dictated in a given time. They had to be concerned about
the supply of work, and be aware of trade cycles, either seasonal or related
to technology, before they could necessarily reach an expected appropriate
living wage. In contrast, military tradesmen had a constant supply of steady
work, and had their bed and board found.
Military tradesmen were expected to fulfil their outputs in the regimental
price lists, which were very precise. In the 47th Foot in 1834, for example,
tailors' prices ranged from 8s. for an officer's Regimental coatee, including
° For civilian price lists for common regimental trades, see Modern Records Centre
(MRC), Archives of Nation for common rot and Shoe Operatives, files, MS 547/6/1/1, 7,
9 and it, Working Class Movement Library, Salford, London Tailors archives, 1844, TU/
Tailors/7/20/1, TU/Tailors/3/7 and 14 Military Lodge.
