56
Soldiers as Workers
enough to drive these poorer men out, those in command had only to alter
the styles and thus increase expenses! The Duke of Cumberland (1771-185),
arch-Tory and future King of Hanover, was particularly active against
those who had got war commissions, whom he saw as 'a class of officers
who were never intended for such a profession'. Current senior NCOs were
reluctant to question these views, and were further discouraged by the more
expensive uniforms and mess fees of the post-war army, with many NCOs
also reluctant to give up their potentially lucrative perks.7
Nonetheless, the
growth in imperial wars necessitated some ranker
promotions. After bloody fighting in the First Sikh War in the 18405,
General Gough promoted five Sergeant Majors, but felt the need to defend
his actions by saying: 'I scarcely had an alternative; my losses in officers were
so great that it was absolutely necessary? One was Sergeant Bernard McCabe
of fist Foot who became an Ensign for recovering his regiment's colour at
the Battle of Sobraon. The mass expansion of the army in the Crimean War
resulted in 127 NCOs being commissioned in 1854, but this was less than one
in five of new commissions. This was followed by the Indian Mutiny where
three ex-ranker Lieutenants were promoted to Captain in 1858 for gallantry
at Lucknow, but significantly into an unfashionable new colonial corps, the
Royal Canadians, stationed on the North American frontier.68
The abolition of the purchase of commissions in 1871 curiously made the
officer corps subsequently more exclusive Statistics vary - between 1871
and 1893, only 3.1 per cent of commissions were made from the ranks, and
less than 2 per cent between i87t and t87s; but the trend is clear. Instead,
'regiments continued to restrict the area of officer recruitment; they sought
fresh blood from the products of particular schools, usually public schools,
and from those aspirants who possessed the necessary degree of financial
independence. By 1900, 62 per cent of officers who served in the Boer War
had been educated in public schools, with it per cent from Eton alone:
Only I in a6 commissions from the ranks was granted between root and
Igiz (and that one not in the cavalry and a mere seven in tote T ner cent of
the total. Most of these few fortunate ex-rankers were Adjutants, who ran
the regiments, whilst their social superiors got on with social activities like
hunting.69
67 Myerly, British Military Spectacle, 218 and Divall, Inside the Regiment, 81.
* Quoted in Hernon, Britain's Forgotten Wars, 56t, Philip Stinger, Promotion as a
Campaigning Reward in the Late Victorian Army, and an Unresolved Problem, /SAHR, 76
(1998), 255; and Holmes, Soldiers, 172.
" Skeley, Victorian Army at Home, 200; Spiers, Army and Society, 24; Holmes, Soldiers,
201; Anglesey, A History of the British Cavalry, vol. 4, 472 and Bowyman and Connelly, The
Edwardian Army, 13.
Class Structure and the British Army
57
Late Victorian rankers who aspired to more than the technical roles had
to be exceptional, like Hector MacDonald (1853-1903), a Highland crofter's
son. He joined the gand Highlanders, was commissioned for bravery in
the znd Afghan War in 1879, served in both Boer Wars, and 'saved' the
British line at Omdurman in 1897. Promoted to Major General, he killed
himself rather than face investigation for homosexual offences. Even more
remarkable was William Robertson (1860-1933), who uniquely rose from
cavalry trooper to Great War Field Marshal. But Robertson claimed: 'Apart
from riding masters and Quartermasters it was very seldom that any one
was promoted from the ranks - not more than 4 or 5 a year on average?
Robertson could only afford life as a junior cavalry officer with his tailor
father making his uniforms and by drinking water in the mess.?"
Not quite ex-rankers were the deserving déclassé officers, which some
Generals patronised, particularly the reforming Commander in Chief,
the Duke of York. These were often from relatively impoverished genteel
families who lacked the money for first commissions. A good example was
Sir Colin Campbell (1792-1863), whose
Colonel uncle educated him and
secured him a commission through the Duke of York. After service in the
Peninsular War, long-serving Campbell became a hero, with his Highland
Brigade, of the Crimean War and Indian Mutiny. York also had more
working-class protégés, such as John Gillies, 'born of very poor parents',
though of a respectable Highland clan background, who had enlisted in
the ranks after working as a canal navvy. Despite being a Roman Catholic,
after service in the Peninsular War, Gillies became a Lieutenant Colonel,
and was knighted in 183t. With the need for more officers in the French
Wars, some aristocratic or gentry families also found niches for their
illegitimate offspring. A good example was George Dean (?1781-18gt), a
Berkshire plumber who served in the marines between 1797 and 1805,
reaching sergeant. He was then recognised as a natural son by his father,
George Pitt, 2nd Baron Rivers, who secured him a commission in the
Royal African Corps. After service in the Caribbean and the Peninsular
War and a period on half-pay, Dean was promoted through the ranks by
merit rather than purchase. After various imperial postings he was made
Commander in Chief in New Zealand and died there as a Major General
in 185I, remembered as one of the founders of the country?
70 Hernon, Britain's Forgotten Wars, 204-05 and William Robertson, From Private to Field
Marshal (London: Constable, 1926), 29.
71 Holmes, Redcoat, 168-69;
Glover, Wellington's Army, 38; Alastair Roberts, 'Faith
Restored: Highland Catholics and the King's Commission, ISAHR, 85 (2007), 153; and
Gervase Belfield, 'Major-General George Dean-Pit', JSAHR, 92 (2014), 177-88.
