xii
Soldiers as Workers
where he was billeted in the Napoleonic defences of the Western Heights.
(These had been constructed by soldier-tradesmen 140 years before; see the
section 'Artificers and sappers', in Chapter 3, below.) Fred also continued
his promising football career, making guest appearances for a number of
League clubs in the scratch wartime programme, and even playing once
against the famous Stanley Matthews. Though in uniform, his working
life continued in a way that would have been familiar to many soldiers
throughout the previous century. This untold narrative forms the substance
of this book, as the techniques of labour history are applied to the largest
group of unstudied nineteenth-century workers.
At the time of writing, Britain is embarking on a massive public history
jamboree to commemorate the centenary of the First World War. Its
overwhelming storyline is emotive, which I suspect that that the citizen
soldiers I knew as a boy and who I interviewed in the ig8os, would have
found distasteful. The generation-long Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars,
referred to here as the French Wars, were sometimes termed the 'Great War'
in nineteenth-century histories. On a worldwide scale, others have noted
that, for Britain, the mobilisation and the loss of life in this earlier 'Great
War' was proportionately greater than in the First World War?
Relatively little evidence of national mourning or private grief is recorded
in the soldiers' memoirs which followed the conflict. The deaths of senior
officers might be recorded in cathedrals and the families of junior officers
might erect monuments in parish churches, but the thousands of the
rank-and-file
fatalities received nothing but an unmarked grave, with
families often receiving little word about their fates. Whilst contemporary
civilian mortality rates were high, there is no doubt that working-class
families grieved in a largely unrecorded story. This is chronicled by a radical
hatter, whose father was a soldier and who was a boy during the conflict:
'The French War was carrying desolation over a large portion of Europe, and
there were few of the people even in the lonely, and sequestered valleys who
had not occasion to mourn some dear relative who had fallen in the service
of his country... and many a loving heart was left with an empty void which
might never be filled? Even the unmarked graves were not always respected.
Communal grave-pits of the big battles were excavated within decades, to be
ground up for bone fertiliser and imported to drive the British agricultural
revolution. The 'father of the fertiliser industry, Justus von Liebig, claimed:
'Already in her eagerness she [England] has turned up the battlefields of
Leipsic and Waterloo, and those of the Crimea? Such actions would have
2 Clive Emsley, British Society and the French Wars, 1793-1815 (London: Macmillan, 1979),
133 and 16g and Linda Colley, Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707-1837 (London: Pimlico, 1991),
chap. 7.
xiii
Preface
been unthinkable both post 1918 and especially in the context of the current
centenary?
However, folk knowledge of momentous conflicts does persist down the
years in working-class families. My father told us approvingly that Oliver
Cromwell stabled his horses in the chapel of King's College Chapel in
Cambridge, a boast which also caused the imprisonment in the town of
a radical journeyman baker, John Cook, during the anti-Jacobin 'White
Terror of 1793.4 My father's grandmother, Martha Mansfield, née Wayman
(1860-1941), told him that her grandmother, as a little girl, walked from her
village of Kingston into Cambridge to view the street bonfires celebrating
a great victory.
The occasion was recorded more officially:
'On th of
November, there was a general illumination on account of the battle of
Trafalgar. The bells of Great St. Mary's rang a dumb peal for Lord Nelson.'5
Family legend also remembers the name of Stephen Mansfield, who was said
to have fought at Waterloo. So perhaps the combatants of the French Wars
are closer to living memory than one might think, and the continuities with
the citizen armies of 1914-18 are more vivid. The relative ease with which
British society, and especially
the working class, engaged in twentieth-
century wars, may owe much to knowledge of military service in the earlier
great conflicts.
Many debts to professional and amateur historians of various stripes are
gratefully acknowledged here: Bob Amey, Derek Beadles, John Benson,
Chris Burgess, Alan Campbell, Eddie Cass, Tim Cockitt, Len Collinson,
Joe Cozens,
Gavin Daly, Alex Danchev, Mark Dennis, Francis Devine,
Peter Donnelly, Billy Frank, Peter Gattrell, Keith Gildart, Trevor Herbert,
Craig Horner, Alun Howkins, Jennine Hurl-Eamon,
Bonnie Huskins,
Kevin Linch, Catriona Kennedy, Matthew McCormack, Malcolm McVicar,
Janette Martin, Mairtin O' Cathain, Bryn Owen, David Pink, Robert Poole,
lori Prothero, Martin Purdy, John Rumsby, Glenn Steppler, David Stewart,
David Swift, Melanie Tebbutt, Myna Trustram and John Walton. Thanks
too are offered to the staffs of various archives, libraries and museums,
including John Rylands University of Manchester Library, UCLan, British
3 James Dawson Burn, The Autobiography of a Beggar Boy (London: Tweedie, 1855 [19781),
64-65. Though long suspected as an 'urban' myth, bone grinding is recorded as fact in Neil
Oliver, Not Forgotten (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 2005), 42-45 and von Leibig, as cited
in Edward Russell, The Fertility of the Soil (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1921), 58.
4 Nick Mansfield, 'Grads and Snobs: John Brown, Town and Gown in Early Nineteenth-
Century Cambridge', History Workshop Journal, 35 (1993), 183.
s C.H. Cooper, Annals of Cambridge, vol. 4 (Cambridge: Metcalfe and Palmer, 1852), 483.
