14
Soldiers as Workers
regular officers but were well paid and had good pensions. They had a long
tradition of protest and strikes (which they shared with the rank and file)
to preserve their high pay and high allowances. Officers took a cut from
the 'Bazaar' tax, levied by regiments over Indian traders who wanted to
deal with the regiment. Revenue money, the tax revenues of the Presidency,
was shared by senior officers as well as by civilian administrators of the
EIC. Soldiers could also trade, though for rank and file this was generally
on a small scale. But all soldiers shared in the plunder generated by the
EIC's aggressive wars by which they conquered most of India in the early
nineteenth century.23
would meet, comprising 9o per cent of white people in India. In these wars
the EIC was helped by regular troops of the British army, referred to as 'HIM
troops. They shared in the batta, and loot, making Indian service popular:
John Company behaved well to us shared some of the Plunder with us
Soldiers I mean in prize money not so the Queens Government and then
John Company did not make us work found us plenty of servants plenty of
Grog and good living?24
Overseas military adventurers
In the period 1815 to 1861, several thousand Britons were recruited to private
armies to participate in overseas military ventures, usually on the nationalist
or liberal side in early nineteenth-century wars in South America, Greece,
Portugal, Spain and Italy. Many were former British army soldiers, though
many others were new to soldiering and some enlisted for ideological reasons
to support political radicalism, though the lack of rank-and-file memoirs for
these overseas military adventurers makes it difficult to gauge. Given the
unofficial nature of these movements and their overall lack of records, it is
also difficult to estimate the numbers involved. Though many later claimed
to have fought for Greek independence against the Turks, fewer than 1,000
men followed Lords Cochrane and Byron. The various South American
expeditions numbered over 10,000, though the often made claim that many
of Wellington's veterans participated is contradicted by new research. The
23 Richard Holmes, Sabib: The British Soldier in India (London: Harper, 2005), 197, 249
and 235 and Stanley, White Mutiny, 23-29, 49-50. For officers trading, see Douglas M. Peers,
Between Mars and Mammon: Colonial Armies and the Garrison State in India, 1819-1835
(London: I.B. Tauris, 1995), 10, 64 and 75-76.
24 Colley, Captives, 257 and 316 and Steedman, Radical Soldiers Tale, 48.
Introduction
15
British intervention in the Portuguese Civil War of the early 183os may
have involved 2,000 to 3,000 men, but the best organised was the British
Auxiliary Legion (BAL) raised by radical General Sir George De Lacy
Evans, MP in 1835. With some British government support, this initially sent
an expeditionary force of 10,000 to northern Spain, consisting of infantry,
cavalry and artillery. With its own depots in Britain, the BAL may have
sent several thousand more over the next two years. As late as 1861, London
radicals sent 1,200 'Excursionists' in a British battalion to help Garibaldi
liberate Italy.25
As far as can be judged, rank-and-file recruits for these ventures were
from working-class backgrounds, similar to other British soldiers. In the
words of radical journalist Alexander Somerville, formerly of the Royal
Scots Greys and Sergeant in the BAL: 'I shall shew the Legion to have
been as like British soldiers, as one British army has been like another. The
liberal Spanish government offered pensions to BAL recruits and surviving
claim forms show the usual range of artisan and labouring occupations.
Corporal Thomas Knight, who fought with the 2/95th Rifles at Antwerp and
Waterloo and then served in the British battalion on the liberal side in the
'War of Two Brothers' in Portugal, could find little difference: 'As far as I
have seen whether in the British service or in the British battalion at Oporto,
the constant look-out among the men was plunder, and to lay their hands
on what they could, so long as they thought they should escape shooting or
flogging? Punishment was certainly as stringent as in the British army, with
De Lacy Evans being noted for using the lash to lick his recruits into shape,
despite his radical opinions. The structure, organisation, pay and uniforms
of the BAL were also adopted wholesale from the British service. 26
25 The National Army Museum (NAM) has some patchy BAL records, mainly on
pensions, though the British 'Garibaldini' have extensive records at the Bishopsgate Institute
Library. Only three rank and file memoirs of the overseas military adventurers have been
traced, though more survive from participating officers. These and a growing secondary
literature will be reviewed in the companion volume. In the meantime, see Mansfield,
Military Radicals and the Making of Class, 1790-1860', 67-69. The recent research is in
Matthew Brown, Adventuring through Spanish Colonies: Simon Bolivar, Foreign Mercenaries
and the Birth of New Nations (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2006), from whom the
term 'overseas military adventurers' is borrowed.
26 Alexander Somerville, History of the British Legion in Spain (London: James Pattie, 1839),
469; Thomas Knight, The British Battalion at Oporto (London: Effingham Wilson, 1834), 33.
For the BAL, see Edward M. Spiers, Radical General: Sir George de Lacy Evans, 1787-1870
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1983) and Edward M. Brett, The British Auxiliary
Legion in the First Carlist War (Dublin: Four Courts Press, 2003).
