118
Soldiers as Workers
Rough Stone Masons, Plaisterers (sic), Miners, Lime Burners, Smiths,
White Smiths, Plumbers, Glaziers, Painters, Wheelwrights and Coopers: In
addition to carrying out the work of providing accurate maps of the UK on
the pioneering Ordnance Survey, a small specialist Corps of Royal Military
Surveyors and Draftsmen existed from 180s to 1817, supervised by officers
of the Royal Engineers. Their tasks were taken over by a specialist survey
company of the Sappers and Miners in 1824.110
In remote imperial outposts, lone artificers and tradesmen of the Sappers
and Miners
retained the artisan's pride in craftsmanship.
They were
responsible for astonishing and unsupervised feats of nineteenth-century
engineering, and for the development of settlements. In New South Wales
they were trained to undertake a wide variety of tasks including trigon-
metrical and topographical surveying', even before the addition of the survey
company. Private John Bennett, Clerk of Work and Island Storekeeper on
St Helena (where his comrades had built fortifications during Napoleon's
incarceration), returned to the UK in 1843, when he became Surveyon
General of Prisons, and died as the Steward of Dartmoor in 1853. Corporal
Andrew Lawson, a bricklayer on Public Works on Corfu, died as the Clerk
of Works in Sierra Leone, in 1834. Lance Corporal William Real surveved
the rock strata of Ascension Island, then his career took him to Bermuda
and Nova Scotia. His last job before discharge in 1849 was as a draughtsman
on the Rideau Canal, linking Upper and Lower Canada. Private Robert
Mustard, on the hazardous New Holland expedition in Australia in 1837, was
described by his CO as the "jack of all trades, the mechanic and architect;
equally a tailor and a tinker, the ready mender of boats and the efficient
millwright and armourer of the party. Thirteen artificers volunteered to
accompany the BAL to Spain in 1837, where they could turn their hands
to anything and everything, said Lord John Hay RN. Tielve artificers
surveyed and built the official buildings on the Falklands Islands, with
Sergeant Hearden proclaiming the government of Falklands in 1843, as well
as giving his name to a hill fought over in 1982.111
Many of the artificers' skills - particularly as draughtsmen - were
eminently transferable to the private firms of Victorian capitalism. Sergeant
Major Forbes became surveyor of Trent and Mersey Canal. Some of his
colleagues who had already helped drive through the Shakespeare Tunnel at
Dover for South East Railway were 'head hunted'. The corps lost over 300 to
the 184os railway boom, immediately negating its increase to t,200 in 1839.112
110 Glover, Peninsular Preparation, 1o5 and Roper, Records of the War Office, 44.
11 Sergeant, Colonial Garrison, 71; Whitworth Porter, History of the Corps of Royal Engineers,
vol. 1, 144; and Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 257, 279, 310, 368 and 388.
112 Connolly, History of the Royal Sappers and Miners, 344, 415, 416 and 447-
119
Soldiers as Workers
Engineers
By the outbreak of the Crimean War in 1854, the Royal Sappers and
Miners mustered over 4,000, proving their worth to the expanding Empire.
Amongst those mobilised for the conflict was a three-man photographic unit
which was especially trained for war service. Sadly, all were drowned and
their equipment lost whilst aboard a transport in Balaclava harbour before
they could begin their work in earnest. 113
The post-Crimea army reforms amalgamated the Royal Sappers and
Miners with the engineer officer corps, to consolidate technical skills. This
more protessionalised Royal Engineers grew to contain within their ranks
an increasing and varied selection of skilled trades emerging from the
mature Industrial Revolution, which reads like a catalogue from the Great
Exhibition. Royal Engineer Sappers (the term was retained for all rank and
file) had to be s foot inches (peem) minimum height (t inch higher than
men of the line) and of
(glood character, able to read and write; and lastly, by actual trial in the
trades to which they profess to have been brought up or apprenticed, their
qualifications must be scrupulously and accurately tested. The attraction
of intelligent recruits ... is precisely that which attracts London police
and Trick constabulary and indeed to all trades and professions, men of
superior attainments.
They were sunervised by the lowest proportion of officers to men in the
service: 1 officer to 47 men, compared with i to 22 for the line. In 1857, the
Roval Enoineers had the highest percentage of rank and fle able to read and
Write: 97 per cent.114
Sappers were more casily recruited than the rest of the army, as tradesmen
Were prepared to accept lower wages than in civilian life in exchange for
constant employment. By the late-Victorian period their working pay' was
officially standardised at 2 shillings a day.
In practice, individual trades
still received working pay in accordance to their classification as workmen
or artificers for those days on which they are actually employed on public
works, in a series of complicated pay scales similar to those of comparable
civilians. The working hours of the corps were fixed by the Engineer
Code, ranging from g hours so minutes in summer to just over 7 hours in
December, with one hour for dinner.115
113 Francis B. Head, The Royal Engineer (London: John Murray, 1869), 32 and Glenn Fisher,
John Pendred, Royal Sappers and Miners', JSAHR, 87 (2009), 146-61.
114 Head, Royal Engineer, 89 and 195 and Skelley, Victorian Army at Home, 87.
115 Spiers, Late Victorian Army, 124 and 134 and Head, Royal Engineer, 89 and 92.
