68
Soldiers as Workers
But Myerly's assertion that 'Sergeants frequently took on the role of
an old family servant, guiding the young and inexperienced officers in
the ways of the service seems to rest on quite Aimsy ground. Myna
Trustram, in her work on army women, more convincingly argues that in
the Victorian army the continuing paternalism by 'officers and gentlemen
towards their regimental rankers and their families was a key element in the
maintenance of their very identity. This was in the face of the potentilly
hostile professionalism being imposed by a more industrial society and
related back to their gentry origins. Anne Crosby Stevens, in her detailed
survey of the ninetenth-century Rifle Brigade, suggests that the officers
of this elite regiment generally acted paternalistically towards their soldiers.
Even after discharge she contends that contacts were maintained smal
gifts were given, soldier servants were retained and, later, help was given
towards future employment. The survival of paternalism concurs with the
prevailing upper-class view of the army as expressed by such as the Duke
of Wellington: "The British army is what it is because it is officered by
gentlemen: men who scorn to do a dichonourable thing and who have
something more at stake than a reputation for military smartness '94
What is clear is that NCOs and soldiers largely succeeded in hiding
their working-class allegiances from the middle- or upper-class worlds of
their officers. A small example of this is recorded hu Gunner Beniamin
Miller who succeeded in avoiding punishment in on Returning from
drunken shore leave in Malta. Miller lost his headgear: should have
been in a hobble for losing my hat and feather. But one of our men died
soon after, so I got his hat and the Serjeant told the Officers that mine was
blown overboard' These conflicting spheres did sometimes overlap, often
in exceptional circumstances, especially during hard campaigning.
prolonged misery in Moor's retreat to Corunna in 18o9 affected officers
more, according to a private of the mist: 'I have seen officers of the guards
and others, worth thousands, with pieces of old blanket wrant around thei
feet; the men pointing at them with malicious satisfaction, saying,
goes three thousand a year"' 95
As we shall see later, on special celebratory occasions, officers. NCOs and
men could collude in a truce of forced normality:
* Myerly, British Military Spectacle, 3; Trustram, Women of the Regiment, is. and Anne
Crosby Stevens The Ride Brigade, 1800870A So a plans
Attitudes, PhD thesis, University of Sheffeld, toot wite and tea and cuated in Thomas
Gilby, Britain at Arms (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1953), 344.
9s The Adventures of Serjeant Benjamin Miller, 1796-7815 (Uckfield: Arms and Armour Press,
out), 16 and anon. Journa Soldier of editor t o
Class Structure and the British Army
On this day [Christmas Day] stern N.C.O.s winked their eye at everything:
a man had to be raving mad before they would rush him along to clink ...
unpopular N.C.O.s made themselves scarce for the remainder of the day.
Although all gambling was strictly prohibited, even the most regimental
of the NCOs in the Second Battalion always winked an eye at it. Most
were fond of a gamble themselves and on the line of march every one of
them had a flutter now and then.?6
69
Conclusion
Close examination has shown the intricate and nuanced way in which class
influenced the structure, development and individual experiences of all types
of the nineteenth-century British military at every level.
This concurs with recent research which emphasises how nineteenth-
century soldiers were not a separate semi-criminal caste, cut off from society,
but a cross section of working-class men, whose pre-enlistment backgrounds
and outside links with family, friends and home localities influenced their
behaviour in uniform. This chapter has analysed the background of officers
in the regular and other paid armies and concluded that despite gentlemanly
pretensions the corps was keen on making money, generally lacked profes-
sionalism and enjoyed much better treatment than
their rank and file.
The growing importance of able NCOs has been shown in the actual
management of the army and how the reluctance to promote them to
Officer's rank - entirely on class grounds - created an unnecessary structural
weakness in the British military. Instead, NCOs, to get by, usually sided
with the soldiers they supervised to form an amorphous ranker' world
which officers could not penetrate. It has analysed the debate about whether
soldiers preferred to be commanded by gentlemen and uncovered a critical
majority rank-and-file voice, which judged that officer paternalism was often
illusionary, and which pressed the case for promotion for talented rankers.
Typically, serving rank-and-file soldiers Fouckled down to the army's
system and relied on their own hidden underground of the barracks, which
was largely based on work. The next chapter describes the working lives of
soldiers in more detail.
Richards, Old Soldier Sabib, 49 and 74-
