176
The Lifeblood of War
Giap was absolutely clear from the outset where the French logistic
'Achilles Heel' was situated. On 6-7 March Vietminh guerrillas
infiltrated the two major French bases of Gia Lam and Cat Bi, and,
ignoring other aircraft, destroyed seventy-eight transports. By mid-
March, the Vietminh had so cratered the runway at Dien Bien Phu by
artillery fire, that the French were forced to deliver supplies by
parachute. Besides preventing fighters being forward-based close to the
troops they were supporting, Vietminh artillery put paid to air casualty
evacuation. The last aircraft to land at Dien Bien Phu was a casevac
C-47, during the early hours of 28 March 1954. As it was about to take
off the next morning with twenty-five casualties, having been delayed
until daybreak by an oil leak in one engine, it was destroyed by
Vietminh artillery fire. The crew, including a nurse, Genevieve de
Galard-Tarraubes, stayed in Dien Bien Phu until the end.
Parachuting supplies is wasteful at the best of times. But instead of
dropping from the normal height of between 500 and 1,000 feet, the
French were forced by Vietminh flak to drop from 2,500 feet, then from
6,000 feet, and finally from 8,500 feet. Dispersion increased with the
height of drop. During the battle of Dien Bien Phu, the French dropped
an average of 120 tons of supplies a day. The defenders never recovered
more than 100 tons a day, and even that is a surprisingly high figure,
felliparing well with other operations supplied by parachute.24 Some
fell into enemy hands, including 105 mm howitzer ammunition which
fitted their guns. However, far more significant, is the calculation by
United States Army logistic experts that the French garrison needed a
minimum of 200 tons a day to maintain combat effectiveness.?5 So
even if every ton of supplies had landed on the DZ, it would not have
been sufficient. Finally, most French vehicles were soon destroyed by
Vietminh artillery and mortar fire, so supplies had to be collected and
distributed by men on foot, a time consuming and exhausting task.
Eventually, the centralised logistic system at Dien Bien Phu broke
down, and supplies were consumed at the strongpoint where they
landed, which was not necessarily where they were needed.
The Battle
The Vietminh got their supplies through, the French did not. It is
now time to round off the story of Dien Bien Phu by briefly relating the
course of events which led to the French surrender.
Castries's defensive layout consisted of a main central position
around the airstrip and village of Dien Bien Phu; divided into four
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
177
mutually supporting defensive areas, Huguette, Dominique, Elaine,
and Claudine. These were manned by a total of five infantry battalions,
a 105 mm artillery battalion, and the four 155 mm guns on which the
French were relying to win the counter-battery fire fight. Castries's
reserve and counter-attack force was also situated here, consisting of
1 BEP and 8 BPC, supported by seven light tanks. Three forward
positions, each manned by a battalion, were sited about two kilometres
out from the main position, in the direction from which the French had
correctly discerned the Vietminh would launch their first major attack:
to the North-West, Anne-Marie; North, Gabrielle; and North-East,
Beatrice. Seven kilometres to the south of the main position, Castries
located a strong post, Isabelle, held by two infantry battalions, two
105 mm batteries, and three light tanks. Castries's reason for siting so
many of his guns in Isabelle was to provide artillery support for the
main position, but his reasoning was flawed, because enemy attacking
the exposed positions of Gabrielle and Beatrice were out of range of
over half of his artillery. He had also hoped to use Isabelle as an anchor
position from which to mount counter-attacks, but again it was too far
away; something he might have discovered had he made proper
counter-attack plans, and rehearsed them.
In addition to the airstrip at Dien Bien Phu, the French constructed
a secondary strip just north of Isabelle. It was never used. Six Hellcat
fighters and six observation aircraft were forward-based on the main
strip, and it was capable of accepting C-47s and C-119s; until the
Vietminh artillery closed it.
The Concept of the Defence
Castries had a textbook defence plan: counter-battery fire on the
enemy artillery to weaken his supporting fire, artillery and mortar fire
missions on the enemy as they formed up for the attack, continuing and
intensifying as they assaulted and started breaching minefields and
barbed wire. All the while, the defenders would remain under cover to
protect them from the enemy bombardment supporting the attack. As
the enemy closed up to the bunkers, and their own artillery lifted, the
defenders, hitherto crouching under cover, would man their machine
guns and small arms, to pour streams of bullets into the thinned ranks
of any enemy who had survived a pasting by artillery and mortars. Any
enemy that succeeded in penetrating French positions would be hit
with artillery fire, followed up by a swift counter-attack while they were
still re-organising.
