216
The Lifeblood of War
laser-guided 2,000 lb bomb. After 12 days, the North Vietnamese
military potential, its industry and economy were totally destroyed.
For the last three days, American aircraft were hardly fired upon, there
was no more ammunition, and more important, no more surface-to-air
missiles. Nixon had demonstrated, for the first time by any President in
this war, the will to win. In doing so he had used one of the two real
principles of war, surprise. Few people expected him to defy the
American media, who had predicted that a bombing campaign would
stiflen resistance, or the cries of condemnation all over the world. The
next item on the bombing programme might be the Red River dikes.
The Politburo in Hanoi agreed to talk.
Agreement Follows
The resulting agreement includof, among other things, the with-
drawal of all United States forces from Vietnam. The eflect was to
suspend operations until the North Vietnamese could prepare for the
final denouement in South Vietnam. As a palliative, the United States
poured equipment into South Vietnam, but the logistic system and
training apparatus in the South Vietnamese forces could not cope with
the influx. They had aircraft they could not fly, ships, tanks and other
equipment they could not man or maintain. The flaws in the structure
of the armed forces were unchanged. The South Vietnamese clung
Pathetically to the hope that if the North Vietnamese attacked, the
allowing any such thing.
Americans would come to brewyd. Congress had no intention of
1973 4: The NVA Re-Organise and Re-Equip
In 1973 and 1974, the NVA, now under the command of General
Van Tien Dung reorganised and re-equipped. Enormous strides were
taken in improving the logisueuistem to support a large, moble
conventional army. The Ho Chi Minh Trail was widened and given a
nara surlace.
all-weather
eight
metres wide,
Constructed from Khe Sanh to Loc Ninh, down the east side of the
Annamite Chain. Altogether 12,000 miles of roads were built by the
NVA in the areas they occupied in South Vietnam. A fuel pipeline was
built from North Vietnam to Loc Ninh. 50 A comprehensive military
telephone system was installed by the NVA in South Vietnam, which
involved stringing 20,000 kilometres of lines. The NVA built thirteen
new airfields in South Vietnam. In base areas in Cambodia, Laos and
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
217
South Vietnam huge depots were built or expanded, including
hospitals, training centres, and repair facilities. The realisation by the
North Vietnamese that logistics had always been the Achilles heel of
the NVA and that a conventional army needs an effective logistical
ystem, was the key to their battlefield success. To this enormously
increased logistical capability, the NVA added a major reorganisation,
grouping their divisions into four corps. The command system was
thus modernised and streamlined. To better their position
in
preparation for the final campaign, the NVA mounted a series of
strategic raids' throughout South Vietnam. One of the major aims of
these was to widen their logistics corridor east of the Annamites. In
addition these raids seized the initiative, regained territory
and
population lost in the Pacification Programme, caused casualties to the
ARVN and lowered its morale, while enhancing the battle worthiness
of the NVA.
The Problems Facing the ARVN
The ARVN had enormous problems. The United States Congress
drastically cut military assistance to South Vietnam. The first to feel the
pinch was the Republic of Vietnam Air Force (RVNAF) which had
been trained on American lines to be lavish with fuel, ammunition, and
spares. They were suddenly forced to cut their coats according to their
cloth, of which there was pitifully little. To save resources, the RVNAF
cut training to nothing. Shortage of spares cut the strategic mobility of
the ARVN by use of helicopters and transport aircraft by up to
70 per cent. Shortages of spares also resulted in the grounding of
aurcraft, and the cannibalisation of vehicles for parts. Fuel stocks
dwindled, and were not replaced.
All types of ammunition were
rationed. Hand grenades had to be accounted for, fire plans were
curtailed, and rifle ammunition was cut by 50 per cent. The blow to
ARVN morale was devastating.
Less ammunition meant
more
casualties. Casualty evacuation was often done by Honda motorbikes,
or a string of ambulances with empty petrol tanks, pulled by a truck
and even sampans. If a casualty arrived at a hospital alive, he found
shortages of bandages, medicines, antibiotics, and intravenous fluids.
As the malarial season approached, the supply of insect repellent was
exhausted.
The supplies of boots and clothing ran short. Pay did not keep up
with inflation. Men deserted at a rate of 15,000 to 20,000 per month to
look after their families. Others made arrangements with their
