164
The Lifeblood of War
Giap's lines of communication, in the event of him making a move
towards Laos. However, Navarre forbade any implementation of the
plan until he had resolved the matter of his responsibility for the
defence of Laos. Unfortunately, the National Defence Committee of
the French Government would not give Navarre a straight answer,
leaving him with the impression that he still had responsibility for
Laos. The Committee, presided over by the President, and including
the Premier, several senior ministers, and the Chiefs of Staff, hesitated
to declare their hand, which was that they had no intention of honouring
their obligation to defend Laos as a member of the French Union. Their
cowardice was coloured by the knowledge that almost everything said in
the Committee was invariably leaked to the press, and they did not wish
the Laotians to discover the intention to dump them if push came to
shove. For lack of clear direction, Navarre signalled back to his deputy
in Indo-China the order to implement the contingency plan to reoccupy
Dien Bien Phu if Giap started an offensive towards Laos. In October
1953, the French politicians gave further proof of their duplicity by
entering into a treaty with the Laotian Government, which by inference
declared that France intended to defend Laos. This further confirmed
Navarre's belief that he was required to protect that country. The French
Government finally came off the fence on 4 December 1953, when they
sent a directive to Navarre telling him that he was not responsible for the
defence of Northern Laos; two weeks after he had initiated the battle of
Dien Bien Phu.
DIEN BIEN PHU
At the end of October 1953, French intelligence detected that Giap
had started to move his divisions out of the Viet Bac towards Laos. On
2 November, Navarre ordered General Cogny, the commander of
Northern Command, to implement the contingency plan, and seize
Dien Bien Phu with a force of six parachute battalions no later than
1 December. Both Cogny and two senior air force officers protested.
Apart from presenting a number of tactical objections, Cogny stated
that the operation would need almost all the combat and air support
aircraft in his command. The commander of the air transport fleet
reported that he could not guarantee the flow of supplies into Dien Bien
Phu because of poor weather and heavy flak over the village. He was
supported by the air commander in northern Vietnam, adding that the
average distance from the Delta airfields to Dien Bien Phu was
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
165
200 miles, which would limit the time close air support aircraft could
spend over the target to a few minutes, and even this would be
expensive in spares because of engine wear, and fuel. The picture was
muddled further because Cogny understood that Dien Bien Phu was to
be seized as a 'mooring point' from which guerrillas and mobile units
could interdict the Vietminh supply line; although he did not say so,
rather in the manner of the strongholds set up by the Chindits in
Burma. This was not Navarre's intention at all. He envisaged a fortified
airstrip, a hedgehog (hérrison) actually sitting astride the Vietminh
supply line.
Navarre's motives for continuing to order the operation in the face of
Cogny's and the airmen's objections are difficult to unravel, and it has
been suggested were strongly influenced by his notions of the honour of
the French Army. However, if he felt obliged to defend Laos, and chose
the hedgehog concept, then Dien Bien Phu was unquestionably the
best place. Giap himself in an appreciation of the situation written
beforehand said:
•Dien Bien Phu is a large plain 18 kilometres long and six to eight kilometres wide
in the mountain zone of the North-West. It is the biggest and richest of the four
plains in this hilly region close to the Vietnam-Laos frontier. It is situated at the
junction of important roads running to the North-East towards Lai Chau, to the
South-East towards Tuan Giao, Son La, Na San; to the West toward Louang
Phrabang, and to the South towards Sam Neua. In the theatre of operation of Bac
Lo (Tonkin) and upper Laos, Dien Bien Phu is a strategic position of first
importance,
capable of becoming an infantry base and air base of extreme
efficiency in their scheme of aggression in South East Asia?20
There were two major disadvantages to locating a base at Dien Bien
Phu. First, and absolutely crucially, it was dependent entirely on air
supply and reinforcement, and the distances over which this would
have to be delivered have already been discussed. Second, although
Navarre thought that the commanding heights around the valley
bottom were 10 to 12 kilometres from the airstrip, actually there was a
hill line 700 metres above the valley floor, and only 5,500 metres from
the centre of the position. A secondary hill line about 100 metres
above the valley floor lay within 2,000 metres of the centre of the
position. Once two hills, codenamed Gabrielle and Beatrice were
taken, the Vietminh would have an uninterrupted view of all the
French positions and the airstrip:
Despite these disadvantages,
Navarre pressed ahead, advised by his intelligence staff that there was
little risk, based on the assessment that Giap could not possibly
support a large force at Dien Bien Phu. Furthermore, they said that
because of the terrain, Giap could not bring large amounts of artillery
