120
The Lifeblood of War
interior of North Korea stretching to Manchuria, would be extremely
difficult to sustain. Because the main logistic base for the war in Korea
was Japan, it was as simple to ship supplies to Wonsan direct as to
Inchon, thus reducing the overland distance. In arriving at this
conclusion MacArthur took into consideration the state of communi-
cations from the Pusan Perimeter to the 38th Parallel. Air interdiction
and North Korean demolitions had destroyed nearly all the road and
rail bridges north of the Pusan Perimeter. The communication system
in North Korea was in a similar state.
MacArthur had a second reason for the Wonsan landing, subsidiary
to logistics, but nevertheless important. By driving west from Wonsan,
X Corps could take Pyongyang from the north, while Eighth Army
advanced from the south.
There were flaws in MacArthur's operational and logistic concepts,
some of which were spotted by Walker. To delay the advance while X
Corps reloaded in the ships, would allow the remaining North Korean
forces to escape. Furthermore, the ROK Army, advancing up the East
coast, might capture Wonsan before X Corps landed. Walker believed
that X Corps should take Wonsan by advancing along the corridor
from Seoul. When this had been achieved, their logistic support could
be switched to that port and Hungnam, further north. He was
supported by the Commander Naval Forces Far East who considered
that X Corps could march to Wonsan in shorter time than it would take
to reload, steam round, and land. Walker was proved right in his
forecast that his Army would arrive at Pyongyang before X Corps
could move west, and that the ROK I Corps would take Wonsan before
the amphibious landing. However, MacArthur persisted with his plan
to land X Corps at Wonsan, and for them to operate independently. He
confirmed it by drawing the boundary between X Corps and Eighth
Army to run north from the Pyongyang corridor to the Yalu River,
along the watershed of the Taebaek Range.
Conceptual Flaws Create Logistical Problems
The decision to continue with the Wonsan landing by X Corps,
despite the capture of the port by ROK I Corps on 10 October, was to
have logistic repercussions on Eighth Army. For the first half of
October, nearly all the facilities of Inchon port were busy mounting out
the Ist Marine Division, and unable to offload ships for Eighth Army.
Supplies had therefore to continue to come all the way from Pusan.
Levels of stocks were at times reduced to one day's worth of supply.
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
121
Each day, armoured units operated in the battle zone, without
knowing whether there would be fuel available to continue the
following day. This situation continued until after mid-November.
Eighth Army needed 4,000 tons of supplies a day for offensive
operations, and this level of supply
was not achieved until
20 November. Walker was forced to advance into North Korea with
I Corps only, leaving IX Corps behind, until the logistical situation
improved. As the army advanced, the age-old problem of stretched
lines of communication and supply manifested itself. The key to the
logistical problem lay, as so often before, with the railway. But despite
prodigious efforts by the engineers re-building the bridges over the
numerous rivers and replacing track, in general the railhead lagged
about 200 miles behind the advancing Eighth Army front throughout
October 1950.19
The distance from railhead to the front threw a considerable strain
on the truck companies moving supplies forward along the rough
roads. The longer the trucks ran over these roads, the more they
became unserviceable, and as spares were in short supply, a breakdown
of the logistic system looked likely. By the end of October a pipeline for
aviation fuel was laid from Inchon to Kimpo airfield east of Seoul,
which eased the strain on road transport. Eighth Army had captured
Pyongyang before Inchon was available for its logistic support. As
soon as Pyongyang fell, supplies began to be airlifted from Japan and
Kimpo. Most of the loads consisted of ammunition; on one day,
28 October, 1,037 tons of ammunition was carried from Kimpo to
Pyongyang.
A Dangerous Complacency
At the end of October, there was a general feeling among most
American senior commanders that although the logistic situation was
precarious, this was beginning to matter less and less for, in their
opinion, the Korean War was all but over. Plans were in hand to
backload troops to Japan, the United States, and Europe. General
Walker sought permission to divert to Japan all ammunition ships
arriving in Korea, because he considered there was enough ammuni-
tion in Korea to meet foreseeable requirements. MacArthur approved,
and his chief logistician cancelled further sailings of ammunition ships
from the United States. Meanwhile MacArthur having ordered a
general advance on all available axes to the Yalu River, the ROK II
Corps reached Chosan on the Yalu on 26 October, and ROK I Corps
