'the daily maintenance demand had averaged between 5,500 and 6,000
tons a day.16
considerable achievement when it is
remembered that in early April, 18 Army Group switched its American
Il Corps from the area south-east of Tebessa, north to the Bone-Bizerta
axis, on the left of British 1st Army. The Americans were no longer
needed in the south because Montgomery had now closed up to
Fondouk and Kairouan. This not only necessitated the move of the
United States II Corps across 1st Army's main supply route, but also a
change of Line of Communication for the Corps. Instead of running
from Constantine through Tebessa and forward, it ran direct from the
port of Bone, but because some supplies still came on their old route to
Constantine, these were taken by rail via Bone and thence forward.
During April, the lift using the sea flank was further increased.
Locally requisitioned vessels from 10 to 60 tons capacity, operated by
British Army crews, sailed from La Calle to the roadhead at Tabarka.
They lifted 1,300 tons of supplies, including POL and ammunition,
helping to relieve the transport on a bad stretch of road. The logistic
build-up for the final battle was completed in time. The only major
worry with which the logistic staffs had to contend, was a shortfall of
400,000 gallons of petrol, oil and lubricants delivered at railheads in
the last week. At the same time consumption had increased by
600,000 gallons because of intensified air operations.
The French
railway stock was starting to crack under the strain. Eventually, a
special train carrying aviation fuel was sent forward to Souk el Arba
where it was met by queues of RAF and USAAF trucks from airfields
all over Tunisia.
THE ADVANCE INTO ITALY
The Allies entered Tunis and Bizerta on 7 May 1943, bringing to an
end the North African campaign. Their quarter of a million prisoners
included 150,000 Germans, many more than were captured at
Stalingrad. The next items on the agenda for those logisticians who
until then had been fully occupied with events in North Africa, were the
campaigns in Sicily and Italy. Space does not allow a detailed
examination of these. But because the North African campaign had
some logistical parallels with the Italian campaign, it is worth a passing
glance at the latter. In Italy, as in North Africa, geography played a
major part in the pattern of logistics. The Apennines severely restrict
communications between the east and west coasts, and between the
southern half of Italy and the Po valley. To begin with, the railways
Three Campaigns in a Global War
worked efficiently, but the familiar problem of worn out and defective
locomotives soon reared its head.
This was aggravated by the
comprehensive destruction wrought by the Germans in the course of
their slow withdrawal north; with extensive damage to railway bridges
and tunnels. Only the west coast ports were damaged, mainly Naples,
Civitavecchia, Leghorn and Genoa. However, congestion at all ports
was experienced when the railways could not cope with clearing the
offloaded stocks. As in North Africa, there was a major distraction
caused by mounting another operation from an area in
which a
campaign was already underway. In the case of Italy, the
other
operation was DRAGOON, the invasion of southern France by an
American and a French army.
The Dividend of Experience
Supply to the airforces was again to add to the logistic burden. But in
Italy, in addition to the supply of tactical airforces, the logisticians had
to cope with the stores, ammunition and fuel requirements of the
Mediterranean Allied Strategic Air Force (MASAF), on the Foggia
airfields. The MASAF was not in Italy to support the Allied Armies,
but to bomb targets as far afield as southern Germany and Romania.
They imposed
a great strain on the logistic assets of 8th Army,
requiring almost the same supply tonnage as the whole of that Army.
Montgomery severely criticised the theatre logistic plan for Italy; a
major factor in the failure of the Allies to capture Rome in 1943. This
arose because there was no coherent Allied strategy for this campaign;
hence the impossibility of formulating a proper, high level logistical
plan. The situation was exacerbated when landing craft, and troops
were withdrawn for the Normandy landings. However, despite the
difficulties, the logistic staffs, with the North African and desert
experience behind them, were able to cope, as they demonstrated when
required to move two corps of 8th Army across the Apennines in
August 1944. In fifteen days, five infantry divisions, two armoured
divisions, one armoured brigade, two tank brigades, one independent
brigade, one army group Royal Artillery, and two corps headquarters
with corps troops, totalling about 80,000 vehicles, were moved over
two mountain roads, each of which was mainly one-way.
The Role of the Sea Flanks
As in North Africa, the sea flanks played an important part in the
Italian campaign, logistically as well as tactically. But there were more
SONY
