276
The Lifeblood of War
FiG. 8.4
Chinook re-fuelling from rubber bladders at Port San Carlos.
These could be lifted forward (IWM).
running, if the missile system was to stay in action. All these, BYs,
raiders and Rapiers, could only be refuelled by jerricans. The ability to
hold CIVGAS and dieso in bulk at Ajax Bay, became severely limited
when the only 10,000 litre rubber pillow-tank available, was holed by
aircraft cannon shells, as was the Mexeflote transporting it ashore.
Problems of Lift and Movement
Lack of dedicated assets to move supplies was another problem. The
organisation of the Logistic Regiment, and indeed all the plans for the
brigade's employment on NATO's Northern Flank, had assumed that
road movement of supplies would be possible. The supply system was
based on trucks, all under the direct control of the Logistic Regiment,
and hence the Brigade Commander. Helicopters and craft were a bonus
or adjunct. Now they were all that was available, but remained under
the control of Commodore Amphibious Warfare (COMAW) through-
out the war, and could be arbitrarily removed, without warning, even if
half-way through a task. Furthermore, there were insufficient Mobile
Air Operations Teams (MAOT) to spare one for the Logistic
Regiment. So there was no means of joining the helicopter control
radio net, to receive warning of incoming helicopters, and tell them to
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
277
switch to the logistic regiment's VHF frequency in order to direct them
to loads, and brief them on the task. The means to move every pallet of
ammunition, box of rations and drum of fuel, had to be fiercely bid for
against a number of other conflicting demands. The result was that
ammunition, particularly gun ammunition, took absolute priority over
all other loads. Troops often went short of rations or found themselves
without sleeping bags and replacement dry clothing, for lack of
helicopters to move their large rucksacks forward. As one experienced
rifle company commander saw it:
"All comments and lessons from the logistics of the campaign should be leavened
with the fact that this must be one of the few campaigns fought by a regular force
since the internal combustion engine became generally available, where the
widespread use of wheeled transport was not possible. This, combined with the
speed with which it was necessary to put the whole act together, and the enemy's
efforts to disrupt the act, makes it arguable that we were fortunate to have any
logistics at all!'20
Until the logistic offload had been completed, and more helicopters
had arrived, any ideas of advancing to the high ground overlooking
Port Stanley, the Mount Kent area, had to be postponed. The infantry
could advance on foot, but major battles, or repelling counter-attacks
on the key positions near Stanley, would require the heavy expenditure
of ammunition-shells and mortars in particular. In this terrain, the
only way to lift these was by helicopter and there were insufficient
helicopters to maintain a substantial force, in contact with the enemy,
over the distances involved. 21 The distance could be reduced by taking
stores round to Teal Inlet in Port Salvador by LSL, and there was every
intention of doing just this. But Port Salvador was overlooked by the
very high ground that also overlooked Port Stanley. Until this was in
friendly hands, any ships using Port Salvador would be seen, and
subjected to air attack at the very least.
Vulnerability to Air Attack
A further consideration was the vulnerability to air attack of the line
of communication as the Brigade moved away from the air defence
umbrella around San Carlos Water. As well as mainland based fighters,
the Argentines had several Pucara ground attack aircraft based on East
Falkland. The Amphibious and Landing Forces could not risk losing
even a
few of the small number of medium helicopters to air
interdiction. More helicopters were on the way in Atlantic Conveyor,
due into San Carlos on the night 25/26 May. But the crucial battle,
fought by the ships and Harriers, under Commodore Clapp's control,
