The Assyrians 700 BC to the
Armistice AD 1918
'Surely one of the strangest things in Military History is the almost complete silence
upon the problem of supply?"
Organised armies had their earliest origins in the emergence of hunting
bands and raiding parties, fighting over land, women or food. As other
drives, such as the urge to dominate others or to defend men's homes
and villages from marauders, or to seek independence from tyranny
became more general, so did the need to organise larger and larger
fighting groups emerge, and with that need the imperative for a system
of supply. As weapons became more sophisticated and arrows and
javelins superseded sticks and stones, so did metal armour replace the
wicker shield and the need for craftsmen to forge and repair not only
weapons but also the new means of waging war chariots and, later,
siege engines. The now universal horse, the mules and oxen used for
pulling transport, needed fodder— which would ultimately become fuel
with the advent of mechanical vehicles. Men and beasts called for an
ever increasing range of warlike equipment and supplies and a system,
which we now call logistics, by which these essentials could be provided
and administered.
The Assyrians
In about 700 BC, the Assyrians had the earliest known standing
army in history. It was equipped with iron chariots; iron weapons and
armour replaced the bronze accoutrements of earlier soldiers. At about
the same time, the art of fortification of the larger cities in what we now
call the Middle East, had developed to a degree that their reduction had
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
FIG. 2.1
Assyrian infantry and charioteers. An encampment bottom left.
From the portion
of bronze band from the gates
of the palace of
Shalmaneser III, King of Assyria 860-825 BC (Hulton Picture Company).
become a considerable undertaking, involving trains of battering rams,
wooden towers, and a plentiful supply of arrows and other missiles for
protracted siege operations. The Assyrian army had a high degree of
organisation, and displayed an ability to fight successfully over all
kinds of terrain. It may have approached 50,000 men, and a formation
of this size would require a large supply organisation for desert and
mountain operations. It would also have been familiar with the
problem of all armies up to the age of the railway and beyond which,
put crudely, was: 'to live, keep moving'. If an army stopped, even in a
well populated area, the available food was soon consumed; unless its
commander had had the foresight to make arrangements to carry food
with him or have it brought in. If armies stopped at any time of year
from late spring to harvest, there was little food for the taking, as the
inhabitants were at subsistance level themselves. Arrival just after the
harvest was the best time for the army, although not for the local
population; the complete harvest was available for requisitioning. The
most voracious consumers of the grain were the increasing number of
animals, mainly horses and mules, but sometimes bullocks, elephants,
