372
The Lifeblood of War
Three gun batteries, each of six 105 mm light gun (a)
One gun battery of six 105 mm light gun (c)
One Naval Gunfire Support Observation battery (a)
One air defence battery (RAPIER SAM) (b)
59 Commando Engineer Squadron Royal Engineers (reinforced) (a)
40 Commando Royal Marines (a)
42 Commando Royal Marines (a)
45 Commando Koyal Maries (a)
2nd Battalion The Parachute Regiment (c)
3rd Battalion The Parachute Regiment (b)
Special Boat Squadron Royal Marines (b)
Headquarters and D and G Squadrons 22 SAS (b), (c)
Mountain and Arctic Warfare Cadre RM (Brigade Reconnaissance) (a)
Mountain do Arcade Air Squadron RM (light helicopters) (reinforced) (a) (b)
3 Commando Brigade Air Defence Troop (BLOWPIPE) (reinforced)
Commando Logistic Regiment RM (a)
Ten other minor units, such as a Field Record Office and a Force Reinforcement
Holding Unit (a) (b) (c)
Notes:
(a) Original Units of 3rd Commando Brigade Royal Marines.
(b) Added to the Brigade before sailing from the U.K. in early April 1982.
(c) Joined the Brigade at Ascension Island before 7 May 1982 or at sea just before
•-Day Li May.
15. Ship-shore movement assets are craft, helicopters, and ferries for moving men,
yuipment, and supplies ashore. They include hovercraft, amphibious armoured
and amphibious wheeled vehicles such as the Second
World Wal
DUKW, none of which the British possessed.
3 Commando
The only amphibious vehicles in
Brigade were two
Combat
Engineer
tracked and
armoured plant, on loan. The type and numbers of ship-shore assets available to
the Amphibious Task Group Commander, under whose command they came,
wole as lollows.
Craft available for Logistics
Type
8 Landing Craft Utility (LCU)
(4 in each LPD)
8 Landing Craft Vehicles and
Personnel (4 in each LPD)
5 Mexeflote Pontoons (a)
Helicopters
Type
11 SEA KING
Load
100 tons cargo
or 140 men
or two tanks
•tons of cargo
or one landrover and trailer
or 35 men
120 tons (but loaded with up to 200 tons in
this campaign)
Typical loads
20 fully loaded men (b)
• One lus gun
or one landrover
5 Wessex
or two pallets 105 ammo (48 rounds)
O fully loaded men (c)
Notes:
or one pallet 105 ammo (24 rounds)
(a) Five was the maximum number available. On D-day, 5 x 120 foot rafts were
assembled,
one was subsequently holed by cannon fre
and was unuseable. A
further raft, the only other Mexeflote possessed by the British anywhere in the
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
373
world, arrived in the beachhead on 4 June. Mexeflotes can be assembled as 60 ft or
120 ft rafts. Driven by two large outboard engines.
(b) This could be exceeded for short moves depending on the load carried on the
men, and the fuel load in the helicopter, but 20 fully loaded infantry is the planning
ngure.
(c) Can take up to 15 men, depending on fuel state and load on men. The plannin
figure is given.
16. Flight decks are marked with a circle to indicate where helicopters should land. A
one-spot deck means that only one helicopter can land on that deck at a time
LPDs had three-spot decks, although the clutter of stores usually allowed only two
to be operated.
17. A Turnaway Landing is a form of amphibious rehearsal, in which all ships
approach the rehearsal beachhead, first waves of helicopters and landing craft are
launched, but turn away without landing. The purpose is to test communications,
boat and helicopter assault lanes, and check timings, allowing amendments to be
made before the actual event. It is the absolute minimum rehearsal recommended
by the pamphlets before any amphibious operation!
18. At Ascension, the amount of ammunition in Elk was reduced by transferring
129 tons of unit first line ammunition, including gun ammunition, to the ships in
which units were travelling, so it could be issued before, or be immediately
available on, D-day. The sixteen days supplies in MV Elk included 2,000 tons of
ammunition, defence stores, and much besides; so much so, that when stores could
not be located in other ships, it was always worth looking in Elk. This led to the
Commando Brigade logisticians' cry of it's on the
Elk!' The quan*
ammunition she carried also led to a reluctance to allow her into the anchol
the beaches until the air threat had been reduced. Had she been hit and expl
the damage to ships nearby and troops and equipment on the beaches could h
neen sevelt.
19. Conversation Thompson/Moore.
20. Gardiner, A Personal Account of Operations on the Falkland Islands, Appen-
dix 1, p. 2.
21. The medium lift helicopter availability, all controlled by COMAW, for the period
21 May-1 June 1982 was as follows:
21-26 May
11 x SEA KING
less: 1 x SEA KING allocated to RAPIER support for
fuel and spares
4 x SEA KING PNG for night use. Crew rest and
servicing precludes day use except in emergency
5 x WESSEX
Therefore daily availability:
6 x SEA KING
$ × WESSEX
26 May-1 June
6 x SEA KING
remaining 5 x SEA KING allocated as above
5 x WESSEX
1 x CHINOOK
Example load:
To move a battery of 6 x 105 mm light guns with ammunition (480 RPG), 2 x half
ton vehicles for battle battery charging, and men, takes:
82 x SEA KING Sorties
To lift 480 rounds per gun takes:
60 x SEA KING Sorties
