170
The Lifeblood of War
Annam, planned as his major offensive in 1954. Here the Vietminh were
weaker than in the North, and the climate allowed operations at a
different time than in Tonkin or Cochin China. Navarre's objective was
the elimination of the Vietminh Military Region V, which stretched in a
semi-circle, 200 miles long, from Da Nang on the coast through
Kontum in the Central Highlands to Nha Trang on the coast. So
important was the region in his eyes, that he decided to subordinate
Operation ATLANTE to the conduct of the whole Indo-China
campaign.
It was an important area, containing two and a half million people,
producing vast quantities of rice and fish. Transferring it to the control
of the National Vietnamese government would be a major boost to
morale. Besides the political benefits, the Vietminh forces in the area
totalled some 30,000 men. Although less formidable than Giap's North
Vietnamese formations, they were rapidly improving and would pose a
serious threat in 1954 or 1955, which would tie up at least five or six
French mobile groups. There was far more to be gained, in his view, by
offensive action in Annam than by defensive operations in Tonkin.
Navarre's operational concept for ATLANTE consisted of three
phases. In phase one, involving 30 battalions, an amphibious operation
at Tuy Hoa would be launched in concert with an advance out of Nha
Trang to clear the coast to the north, and hold Route 19 from Qui
Nhon to An Khe. Phases two and three never took place, but would
have included a pincer movement from Da Nang in the north and
Pleiku in the west. The second phase would have required 39
battalions, and the third phase 53.
Navarre has been criticised for mounting this operation and tying up
troops and logistic support in a region of far less importance than the
Tonkin Delta or Dien Bien Phu. However four of the six mobile groups
in Annam consisted of troops from Central Vietnam who could not be
employed outside their home area. The families of South Vietnamese
soldiers lived in the army camps, or in adjacent villages. If the unit
moved, families would be left unprotected, and without financial
support. This always ended in mass desertions of troops returning to
look after their dependants. Employing soldiers in their home areas
had some advantages: they knew the country, spoke the local dialect,
and were motivated to protect their homes and families; caring little
about defending another part of the country. This limitation on the use
of South Vietnamese troops was to bedevil operations until the end of
Round Four in 1975.
It is also easy to be wise with the advantage of hindsight; in
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
171
December 1953, when Navarre gave the orders which were to set
ATLANTE in motion, he was not to know that Dien Bien Phu was to
be a disastrous debacle.
Navarre's problem was that even if he
succeeded in Military Region V, this would not win the war. Indeed
Giap would not have to surrender the initiative by having to divert
Main Force troops from a more important area. But he could, and did
increase guerrilla activity to ensure that Navarre was tied down as
much as possible.
The first phase of ATLANTE quickly became bogged down in the
face of Vietminh harrassing and delaying tactics. This was the first
operation by the Vietnamese National Army, and they proved to be
utterly incapable, deserting in droves, mutinying, and looting. Giap
struck back while Navarre was pre-occupied with the coastal region,
taking Dak To and Kontum in the Central Highlands. Navarre's
counter moves proved fruitless, and he abandoned Kontum to the
Vietminh.
Not content with this, Giap managed to keep Navarre off balance by
offensives in central and southern Laos, and the Central Highlands. He
even moved 308th Division away from Dien Bien Phu, about 25 miles
to Muong Khoua, where they destroyed the garrison, a French
battalion. These moves were aimed at forcing Navarre to deploy his
mobile reserve as widely as possible, where they would then be a drain
on his precious air supply assets, thus hindering the logistic build up at
Dien Bien Phu.
Logistics the Key
Navarre and Giap were well aware that the key to Dien Bien Phu
was winning the logistic battle, Each realised that as well as building up
stocks and supplying his own force, he had to reduce the flow of
supplies reaching his opponent.
Giap's Supply System: A Triumph of Organisation
Giap's supply system at Dien Bien Phu depended on porters and
trucks. The trucks carried the heavier items: artillery, most of the
ammunition, and the larger spares. The porters mainly carried rice,
about 76 per cent of which came from Thanh Hoa province, south of
the de Lattre Line. This rice was carried by 260,000 porters walking up
the Song Ma river valley from Thanh Hoa to the forward base at Tuan
Giao 35 miles from Dien Bien Phu; a journey of 350 to 400 overland
