202
The Lifeblood of War
-130 drops supplies to Khe Sanh (Unite
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
203
and forcing them into relying totally on supply by parachute, delivered
by an inadequate, largely obsolete, air transport force. At no time did
the NVA have fire superiority at Khe Sanh. The Americans had an
enormous firepower advantage, from B-52s, ground attack aircraft,
175 mm howitzers and 8 inch guns outside the base, and 105 mm guns
and 81 mm mortars inside it. Over 100,000 tons of bombs and 150,000
artillery rounds were delivered by the Americans on to the NVA during
the 77 day siege.44
More important, the NVA never cut, or seriously inhibited the air
supply to Khe Sanh.
Techniques for Re-Supply by Air
The techniques of re-supply by air had come a long way since Dien
Bien Phu. When, some six weeks after the battle began, a C-130 was
destroyed on the strip by NVA mortar fire, air supply was switched to
the use of the Low Alitude Parachute Extraction System (LAPES), the
Ground Proximity Extraction System (GPES), parachute dropping,
C-123 fixed wing transports and helicopters.
When making a LAPES run, the C-130 flew at five feet over the
runway, with tail-gate down. At the extraction point, the pilot threw an
electronic switch operating a drogue parachute attached to the roller-
mounted cargo pallets in the fuselage of the aircraft. The deploying
parachute snatched the cargo out of the rear of the aircraft, and the
pallets skidded to a stop on the runway. Marines moved in with fork-
lift trucks and quickly gathered in the supplies. With the GPE System,
the C-130 followed the same flight profile, but attached to the reste
was a long hook, with which the pilot attempted to catch an arrester
Wire, similar to the one used on aircraft carriers. If he succeeded, the
pallet was pulled out, and stopped dead on the runway. Once the initial
problems with this system were overcome, it was so successful that a
load containing 30 dozen eggs was extracted without a single egg being
cracked. However, only 15 GPE deliveries were made during the siege
compared with 52 LAPES. Both systems required good visibility, and
the low cloud and crachin of the North-East monsoon, precluded the
use for much of the time. So the majority of supplies were dropped
parachute. By 1968, techniques for air dropping supplies had im
considerably since Dien Bien Phu, as had the soph
navigational aids. At the computed release point the pilot
Marine Air Traffic Control Unit at Khe Sanh, pulled the
a nose up attitude, and 16 parachute bundles, conta
