86
The Lifeblood of War
route ran north through the Sundarbans, the vast maze of waterways
formed by the mouths of the Ganges, and after about 500 miles,
branched off into the Brahmaputra, ending at Dibrugarh, 1,136 river
miles, and 809 rail miles, from Calcutta. Chittagong could also be
supplied by water, and this allowed the greater part of the effort put
into developing the railways to be devoted to those serving the Assam
front 23 To begin with, however, there was a shortage of craft. In 1941,
twenty-seven large river steamers and forty-nine flats had been sent to
Iraq to work the Euphrates from Basra. These were released in 1943
When the war situation in the Middle East improved. Lack of trained
skippers, crews and dock operators also delayed the full exploitation of
the water transport system. This situation was alleviated, to some
extent, when the crews of the Irrawaddy steamers arrived in India,
overland from Burma, but without their craft.
To back up the small number of fuel tank wagons, five pipelines were
eventually built by the Americans and the British. Laying them, let
alone maintaining them in the mountains and jungle, was a remarkable
feat of engineering, probably unsurpassed in any other campaign in the
Second World War. They were completed between April and June
1945, but sections were in operation a year before, and as northern
Burma was cleared of Japanese the extensions were constructed. The
first section from Calcutta to Tinsukia in northern Assam (575 air
miles, 779 rail miles), was working by August 1944. The longest ran
from Calcutta to Kunming in China to serve the air effort described
earlier, although by the time it was completed, the B29s were able to
Operate from the Marianas, and had been doing so since the end of
October 1944.
Thus, the Line of Communication was a combination of rail, road,
water, pipeline, and air. It had to serve seven groups of customers. In
addition to the 14th Army in Burma, the Americans building the Ledo
road, and the Chinese/American Task Force operating in North
Burma; there was the United States Air Force flying stores to China
over the 'Hump'; the tea gardens which had to be kept supplied with
fertilisers, tea chests and other stores; the civil population of Assam;
and coal for the railways, river steamers and the Armed Forces.
The Weather
Then there was the weather. In the cold weather, the climate is
perfect. In April and May temperatures rise so that at noon, the heat
strikes like an open oven, with high humidity. The
south-west
Three Campaigns in a Global War
87
monsoon arrives in Rangoon about the middle of May and envelopes
the whole of Assam and Burma by the end of the month, except for the
dry zone in the lower Irrawaddy valley, of which Meiktila is the centre.
Disease flourished. In the year 1943-44 the British suffered 250,000
cases of malaria and dysentery alone. Only the dry zone of Burma was
free from malaria. General Slim, being the truly great commander that
he was, had no illusions about the importance of the fight against
disease-
-both as a casualty producer in a remote theatre of war where
every fighting man was precious and as an insidious influence on
morale in a climate which demanded much of the staying power of the
soldier. In consequence, he moved his medical support well forward
and had special arrangements made to ensure that the fullest use was
made of the new drugs to fight disease and to nurse the sick within the
combat zone, rather than have a steady stream of sickness casualties
backloaded to India.
A Momentous Decision
When Admiral Mountbatten the Supreme Allied Commander
SEAC took over in autumn 1943, he decreed that there was to be no
interruption to the campaign caused by monsoon conditions. The
Japanese considered this impossible, and the pressure maintained on
them when they thought that the weather would bring a respite was a
major factor in bringing the campaign to a successful conclusion.
Mountbatten's order, which was to have a decisive effect upon the
outcome of the campaign, threw a considerable responsibility on the
logisticians because a drop in tonnages being delivered forward was not
acceptable. Indeed, it should be realised that had the logisticians failed,
nothing could have saved the 14th Army. That they succeeded so
brilliantly, as we shall see, was a tremendous tribute to their skill and to
the rugged determination of the British and Indian troops to fight on in
such conditions, often on half-rations. The monsoon regularly caused
the water level in the Brahmaputra to rise up to 37 feet high, making the
small
communications happened every week; vehicles moving off the road
drowned; and stores disappeared from view under the floodwater at
dumps and railheads. These difficulties had to be, and were overcome.
Work was put in hand to double the broad gauge track the whole
distance from
Calcutta to Parbatipur, the northerly of the two
junctions with the metre
gauge
system.
The
transhipment and
marshalling facilities at key points along the system were extended, and
SONY
