Preface
numerically superior enemies in the Yom Kippur War of 1973. Israell
fighting qualities have never been in doubt, but their free-wheeling,
indisciplined methods could be their undoing logistically. It is difficult
to obtain much hard information from the Israelis,
who regard
questions on any military matter with deep suspicion. However, some
reading between the lines' in conversation, and much questioning of
those who have made a study of the subject, has led me to the views
expressed above.
The 1971 Indian campaign in Bangla Desh, provides a good example
oi the logistic problems to be encountered in an underdeveloped
country, which is why it is placed out of historical context, after the
Yom Kippur War of 1973, and right before the Falklands Campaign of
1982. The latter was fought in an even more underdeveloped country
than Bangla Desh, from the point of view of a soldier, with the added
complication that every bean, bullet, and drop of fuel had to come
8,000 miles and, having arrived, be carried into battle on the backs of
soldiers, by helicopter, or in the handful of tracked vehicles capable of
travelling over the peat bog.
In these days of Perestroika and Glasnost, a chapter on the logistics
of NATO and the Warsaw Pact seems almost superfluous. However, it
does provide an example of how logistics can be planned (Warsaw
Pact) and the more ad hoc approach of the NATO Alliance. With luck,
the two systems will never be put to the test, but perhaps future
historians will find something on which to ponder. It also provides a
convenient stepping-stone to lead into the chapter on future war.
Writing on war in the future in these fast-moving times, is like
describing a game in which the goalposts are moved every day, and the
rules changed every night. Here I have had to take the plunge and
overcome my own distrust of those who claim to be able to predict the
trend of future events. However, it seems to me that there is merit in
seeing where we might be twenty or more years from now in defence
terms. It is highly unlikely that we will be in a situation that bears much
similarity to the present, and almost anyone's guess can be as good as
the next person's.
It was originally my intention to include some low intensity
operations. However, after preliminary research, it became clear to me,
that they provided few examples where logistics played an important
part in their success, or otherwise. Writers on the Borneo campaign,
Preface
during confrontation, have used
such words as logistics were
important'. The answer of course is that they always are. However,
with the huge Singapore base near the theatre of operations, plentiful
shipping and air transport, and an adequate helicopter force, there was
never, from my personal experience, nor as far as I can discover, anyone
else's, any constraint on operations for logistic reasons. By their very
nature, low intensity operations involve low ammunition expenditure,
particularly shells, and compared with mobile warfare, little fuel. Such
wars are usually decided politically, rather than militarily. The ragged,
poorly equipped and trained guerilla forces, in what is now Zimbabwe,
were consistently defeated by numerically inferior, but better equipped
and trained Southern Rhodesian troops. The campaign was won, and
lost, round a conference table in London, as a result of political
pressure, and the drain on the Southern Rhodesian economy and
morale, caused by a long war with no prospect of an end in sight.
One of the longest wars in modern times, the Iran/Iraq conflict, has
ended too recently for any detailed study to be made of the logistic
aspects. To do so would involve examining reports, which, apart from
being written in Arabic and Farsee respectively, are, given the nature of
the two régimes involved, unlikely to see the light of day for some time
to come ifever. What is known, is that there was heavy expenditure of
all types of war-like resources on both sides. In this respect, the
Iran/Iraq war does not differ greatly from any modern war fought by
equally matched sides. On the Iranian side, however, they quickly
found that, having ousted their American advisers, who had managed
their computerised stores inventory, they were now unable to trace the
vital spares they needed for tanks and aircraft. Very soon, large
numbers of both were lying idle because they could not be repaired.
The intensity of that war served to underline the need for holding large
stocks of expensive war materials if one is contemplating war or
intending to deter a potential aggressor. Such stocks offer little appeal
to most politicians with their eyes on the electorate: nor to those who
wish to cut defence spending for moral or economic reasons, or, indeed,
to those who wish to be seen to have their country's defence interests at
heart, by building up the shop-window with men and equipment. All
too often, that shop window has pitifully small stocks of war reserves
behind it, simply because to cut back on the holdings of war reserves
represents an easy and invisible path to economy. Yet, to deter, stocks
need not only to exist but be seen to exist.
