218
The Lifeblood of War
commanders to 'moonlight'. The junior commanders made money
through graft, and by selling equipment. Their seniors became rich by
feeding on the corruption. As the fighting spread, commanders avoided
the battlefield. The miasma of defeat spread."
ROUND FOUR
Round Four of the Indo-China war kicked off in earnest on 26
December 1974, with the battle for Don Luan and Phuoc Long
province. It ended with the Ho Chi Minh campaign to take Saigon
beginning on 26 April 1975. The NVA attacked with the equipment of
eighteen divisions, organised into five corps, supported by engineers,
artillery, tanks, flak units, and a hastily scraped together tactical air
force; a far cry from Giap's ragged platoon in the Viet Bac in 1945. The
NVA entered the city on 30 April 1975. They had finally learned that
logistics was the key to success, the two years of logistic preparation
and build-up had paid off. It was not entirely a walk-over. The 18th
ARVN Division, attacked by the entire IVth NVA Corps, lost 30 per
cent of its strength destroying 37 NVA tanks, and killing over 5,000
North Vietnamese. Again, they demonstrated that South Vietnamese
soldiers could fight, and again, the truth of the saying; there are no bad
soldiers, only bad officers'.
CONCLUSION
it is not the purpose of this chapter to defend, or otherwise, the
French or the
American involvement in Indo-China, or become
involved in rights and wrongs. Sadly, being right' does not always
soldantee victory, indeed 'nice guys' often come last. As a professional
soldier, the Author is only interested in the military possibilities which
are always linked to logistics. The French were never logistically
powerful enough to win; the Americans were, but chose the wrong
strategy. The French had the supplies and much of the equipment
needed to win, much of it from the USA, but lacked the means to deliver
it to where it was required, and keep it sustained in battle. The United
States had both the equipment and the means to move it. Once shorn of
United States support and supplies, the ARVN never had the resources
to enable them to win. Despite their logistic power, the Americans
played into the North Vietnamese hands by using the tactics for a long
war, without the support back home for such a strategy. They failed to
maximise their strength, massive air power, and couple this with an
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
219
invasion of the North, to crush the North Vietnamese in the mid-
sixties; as they had demonstrated that they could have with their
December bombing campaign in 1972.52 By not keeping up relentless
pressure both in the air and on the ground, they allowed the NVA to
cictate the pace of the war, and tailor their operations to their resources
and logistic capability. Again, it is not the purpose of this book to
suggest that the Americans would have been morally right to have
invaded North Vietnam and bombed them to the conference table
much earlier, only to suggest how they might have won the war, if it was
worth winning in such a way. In the end, they had the worst of all
worlds, took more casualties, and lost more prestige by their strategy;
losing the war in the process. The scars remain.
