254
The Lifeblood of War
As Units Are Added, the Complications of Loading
Increase
As units were added to the Commando Brigade, the tonnage of
supplies to be taken south increased accordingly. Because of the need
to load within three days, there was insufficient time to move ships to
convenient ports. There was insufficient suitable shipping, and as more
and more was crammed into the vessels made available, combat
loading had to be forgone in the interests of meeting the requirement to
get south. Some ships were down below their loading marks, others
had mixed loads of packed fuel and ammunition in the same space.
Normally, every effort is made to keep a unit's assault pack together on
one ship. This did not happen on this occasion. Types of ammunition
and rations were dificult to identify when they reached the docks, and
were sometimes put on the wrong ships. Once aboard, it was not
possible to establish exactly what had been loaded where. In an effort to
produce a comprehensive inventory of each ship's load, the Command-
ing Officer of the Logistic Regiment placed an NCO from the Regiment
on each ship with orders to complete a detailed load state, and signal it
back to Regimental Headquarters. By 6 April, it was decided that the
scaling of supplies being taken would be insufficient, therefore the
balance of the Brigade's War Maintenance Reserve of ammunition was
loaded in the container ship Elk. A re-stow before any landing took
place was absolutely essential. This would be done at Ascension Island,
just over half way to the Falklands.
The Task Force: Preliminary Measures
Meanwhile the Royal Navy's logisticians had also been busy. Storing
the warships was the easy part, although done at twice the normal
speed, at least it was a familiar task. Storing and making the necessary
conversions to the Ships Taken Up From Trade (STUFT), of which
there were ultimately 54, was a different matter. Converting merchant-
men for war required a wide range of stores from communications fits,
life-jackets, anti-flash gear, and code books, to helicopter decks and
mornishment at sea (RAS) rigs. 1ยบ The conversions usually involved
more than just providing the equipment. For example, fitting a flat steel
deck on which a helicopter can land on a ship is only part of the job.
Communications must be provided to enable the ship to speak to the
helicopter, and a small flight deck party to marshal it and, if necessary
lash it down if the ship is rolling or pitching. Many ferries, designed for
short passages of up to only 24 hours, had no fresh water make-up
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
255
equipment, carrying what was needed in tanks. This would not meet
the needs of ships on long passages, spending weeks at sea, usually
carrying far in excess of their peacetime passenger load. Most ships
needing this facility were fitted with reverse osmosis (RO) plants.
Similarly, ferries designed for short-haul work do not need to carry
great quantities of fuel. To avoid the need for a daily RAS of fuel
FIG. 8.1 Atlantic Conveyor about to RAS(L) from an RFA oiler (IWM).
(RAS(L)), the ballast tanks in some ferries were converted to take fuel,
which involved major pipework to allow the fuel to be embarked at sea
and transferred to the engines. In the case of ships that were to be used
essentially in their peacetime role, some of the tankers and dry store
Ships, the conversion was limited to radio equipment and RAS rigs.
Where the role was changed, conversion was more complex and almost
all done in the Royal Dockyards. At first, attempts were made to carry
out major conversion in a commercial yard, but the volume of labour
and skilled resources required swamped the available facilities. Ships in
the Royal Dockyards were converted on average in four days and
nights.
Some Specialist Conversions
In Gibraltar, the SS Uganda, normally a schools cruise tour ship,
having disembarked her load of schoolchildren, was converted in two-
