The Lifeblood of War
Staffs to prepare an appreciation leading up to a plan for the defeat of
Japan, including an estimate of the forces required for its implemen-
tation. From the start, the plan produced by the staffs covered the
whole field of the Japanese war, a battlefield stretching from the
Aleutians to Australia, from the Andamans to Honolulu. The plan that
emerged, although altered in detail, was to form the basis of the
strategy to the end of the war. It envisaged the advance of the main
American forces across the Pacific through the Gilberts, Marshalls and
Carolines, and then, either north or south of the Philippines to
Formosa and Japan. A co-ordinated British advance from the West
was to take place via Burma and Malaya. However, at a number of
stages in the planning, major alterations to this strategy were mooted.
In discussing the subject of planning at the highest, that is Combined
Chiefs of Staff, level, it must be borne in mind that, although we now
know that the war in Japan ended, because of the use of the atomic
bomb, in August 1945, this was by no means the anticipated finishing
date. Indeed at the QUADRANT conference in August 1943, the date
set for the invasion of Japan was the summer of 1946 at the earliest, the
summer of 1947 being more probable. The war ended before two vast
amphibious operations, and two potentially protracted land cam-
paigns, Malaya and mainland Japan, could be carried out.
The Strategic Debate: A Conflict of Views
In the initial planning there was a difference of opinion between the
British and the Americans on the scale of support to the Chinese forces.
While the British appreciated the need to keep the Chinese in the war in
order to tie down large numbers of Japanese troops, there was
disagreement on the practicability of organising, training and equip-
ping the Chinese in time for them to play a major part before the war
ended. The Americans, however, pressed the British to adopt a strategy
that would include opening a land line of communication to China,
because clearly there was no chance of using ports on the Chinese
mainland in the timescale envisaged for the prosecution of the war
against Japan. To open the old Burma Road would require the capture
of Rangoon, the clearance of most of Burma, re-opening rail and river
communications from Rangoon to Lashio, and rebuilding the road
from Lashio to Kunming which had been blown at various points by
the Chinese to deny it to the Japanese. The alternative was to build a
road and a pipeline from Ledo, at the end of the Bengal-Assam railway,
to Myitkyina, and on to join the old Burma Road at Paoshan. The
Three Campaigns in a Global War
British did not view either course of action with much enthusiasm.
Both would tie up large forces in some of the most difficult campaigning
country in the world, and even if the battle was won, the enormous
construction effort to open the land route would, in the British view, be
largely wasted, because it would be too late to affect the outcome. The
British favoured by-passing Burma, and going straight for Singapore.
This major divergence of views turned on differing perceptions of
logistic difficulties and how to overcome them. The Americans, with
enormous resources and boundless enthusiasm and confidence, were
not deterred by the huge logistic effort their strategy entailed. The
British agreed that there should be improvements made to the lines of
communication to support the forces facing the Japanese in Assam and
North Burma, and to provide for transport to the airfields in Assam
from where they could be air-lifted to China; but they still preferred the
fastest possible advance to the strategic objective, in their eyes,
Singapore. As late as August 1943, at the Quebec conference,
QUADRANT, the British strategy of by-passing Burma was still an
option. However, a new factor appeared on the scene, the selection of
suitable airfields from which the American Very Long Range bomber,
the B29 Super Fortress, could bomb the Japanese mainland.
This
factor, although not decisive in itself, was nevertheless to have a
bearing on the ultimate strategy adopted. Although the bomber was
not yet in production, it was due to come into service in early 1944; the
Marianas, the only islands in the Pacific suitable for its effective
operation against Japan, were not likely to have been captured, and
airhelds constructed until the end of 1944. In casting around for an
alternative which would allow the B29s to be deployed earlier, the
planners hit upon the idea of basing them in India, with forward bases
in China, where they would refuel and bomb up before flying on to hit
their targets in Japan. This led to the need to develop further the base
airfields in Bengal; the construction of fuel pipelines from Calcutta to
Ledo, and onto Kunming when North Burma was cleared; and, in the
interim, a massive increase in the airlift of fuel, bombs, spares, and
ammunition from Bengal to the Kweilin area in China, where the 12th
Air Force USAAF, 'Chennault's Flying Tigers', was already operating.
As in other theatres of war, the British were to relearn the lesson of what
Terraine calls 'the disciplines of coalition strategy', which were to
override their preferences. In other words, the senior partner in the
coalition, in this case the Americans, was going to nudge the junior
partner, the British, down strategic paths which they might otherwise
have avoided. 19 Furthermore, the Americans would exercise the
SONY
