174
The Lifeblood of War
FIG. 5.3
e. Angs of peasants equipped with hand tools', women repair
bomb damage. Although this is a propaganda photograph taken by TASS in
1966, the methods used apply equally to 1954 and earlier (TASS).
Dien Bien Phu, and were not therefore in a position to force the
Vietminh to expend supplies at a faster rate than they could afford.
To attack the Vietminh lines of communication, and to provide close
air support to their forces in Dien Bien Phu and in the remainder of
Northern Indo-China, the French had a puny, obsolescent striking air
force: thirty-two fighters, forty-five fighter-bombers, between thirty
and forty-seven B-26 medium bombers, six C-119 (flying box-car)
transports
converted to
drop
napalm, and five anti-submarine
bombers each of which could carry a four ton bombload. These figures
are totals, and even the best maintained air force in the world does not
have a 100 per cent serviceability rate all the time, least of all when it has
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
175
to cope with battle damage.
The French kept about 75 per cent
operational at any one time, which, despite the remarks made earlier
about French repair standards, is quite creditable, considering that the
maintenance force was one-third under-strength, and in the last stage
of the war had to be augmented with American technicians.
Finally, the flak corridor along the Vietminh line of communication
forced French aircraft to attack at a higher altitude, and divert a
proportion of aircraft to flak suppression, limiting the numbers on
interdiction, and close air support of ground forces.
But Giap Succeeds
The Vietminh were more successful in their efforts to disrupt the
French line of communication to Dien Bien Phu. In their favour was
the inadequacy of the French air transport fleet. The figures of
transport aircraft possessed by the French in Indo-China vary, but not
by much, and Davidson comes to the conclusion that a maximum of
seventy-five to one hundred aircraft were available to support Dien
Bien Phu, giving a serviceability figure of between fifty-six to
seventy-five 23 Sources disagree on the proportion of C-119s to C-47s.
However, it is clear that there were still a considerable number of C-47s
in use. The C-47, the great parachuting and air supply work-horse of
the Second World War was obsolete, even by the standards of 1954
and, unlike the C-119, did not have a tail-gate. With only a side door,
the C-47 was slower to load and unload on the ground, and therefore
had a longer turnround time. When it came to parachuting supplies,
the C-47's disparity was even more marked, it was restricted to far
smaller and lighter loads. This was to be significant in the days to come
at Dien Bien Phu.
The shortage of suitable air transports was aggravated by the
shortage of airfields in the Delta from which the aircraft could oper
Only around Hanoi, at the maximum radius of operation, were
any suitable airfields. Other low-lying, and therefore flat, areas we
wet that building airfields required a ton of crushed roc'
yard, which had to be allowed time to settle. The Fren
the engineer resources nor the time to build airfields a
further hindrance to air support operations was the lac,
weather forecasting and navigational aids. This, como
inaccurate French maps, made night and bad weather flvin
mountains, whose heights and positions were sometimes
plotted, hazardous.
