132
The Lifeblood of War
remote, and the effort can be switched on and off. It is likely to be less
than effective. If in addition there is an under-estimation of the
effectiveness of the opponents' 'primitive' logistic system, combined
with an unwillingness, or inability, for whatever reason, political or
military, to take the battle to him, so that he is not forced to consume
supplies faster than he can replace them, air interdiction is unlikely to
cut his supply system completely. Putting it crudely, if your opponent is
allowed to 'call the shots', because he is able, for geographic, or political
reasons, to dictate the tempo of operations, he will also be able to cut
his operational coat according to the amount of logistic cloth he has
available.
A Final Comment and an Unheeded Warning
Seeking a final comment on the logistic aspects of a war fought
against an Asian nation, one could find few more apposite than the
view expressed in the fourth volume of the United States Army Official
History of the Korean War published in 1966:
'Lacking construction equipment, Chiang Kai-shek had used hand labor to
construct the airfields for US planes in World War II and successfully completed
the huge task. In Korea the Chinese again demonstrated how manpower could be
used in quantity to take the place of machines. Although this process might be
uneconomical and wasteful in principle, it was effective as an expedient and as a
countermeasure In this case superior technology, far from leading to an easy
victory, produced no victory at
all. It would be unfortunate if the hard-won
lessons learned in the Korean War, both on the battlefield and in the negotiations
should be ignored or forgotten because of the absence of victory?30
By 1966 the United States would again be pitting itself against an
Asian nation.
5
Insufficiency and
Super-Abundance:
Indo-China and Vietnam 1946-75
LOGISTIC DEFEAT
On 7 May 1954 the exhausted survivors of the French garrison of the
main, central camp at Dien Bien Phu surrendered to the forces of the
Vietnamese Independence League (the Vietminh) after a siege lashad
three months. Over the preceding days, successive waves of attacks had
overrun the mutually supporting strongholds sited to provide an
interlocking system of defence round the central position.
In a
landscape reminiscent of the Third Battle of Ypres, both sides fought,
often waist deep in waterlogged trench systems, battered by artillery
fire. Mining operations by the Vietminh collapsed the French trenches,
and in one case blew up a complete strongpoint. The wounded of both
sides lay in mud and filth in the feld hospitals, without drugs, many
dying of gangrene. The stench of hundreds of decaying bodies pervaded
the air. Some of the finest fighting units in the French Army had be on
completely destroyed, their officers and soldiers, dead, wounded or
taken prisoner. When the battle started, the garrison had consisted of
twelve infantry battalions, including élite parachute and Foreign
Legion battalions, the equivalent of two battalions (in British terms,
regiments) of artillery, and ten light tanks. In the course of the battle,
five more parachute battalions and three complete Airborne Surgical
Teams were dropped to reinforce the garrison, and 1,530 volunteers
were parachuted in as individual replacements for specialists who had
become casualies. The last group of 94 volunteers dropped one day
