The Lifeblood of War
One of the most lasting was the importance of logistics, an art that had
almost disappeared in the West with the fall of Rome. Western
European armies had, for centuries, lived off the countryside and when
they had consumed everything, they dispersed or starved. Campaigns
were usually short because the length of obligatory feudal service was
limited by the amount of time that barons and their retainers could, or
were willing to, spend away from their fiefs. Sieges were occasionally
protracted and, in a few cases, campaigns would be carried on by small
armies of mercenaries, whose lack of numbers reduced the problem of
maintaining them. In the face of Turkish scorched earth tactics, most
Western armies, lacking knowledge of the terrain and climate, ill-
disciplined and without an organised wagon train, disintegrated. 1ยบ In
the long drawn out campaigns in Western Asia, with long marches and
operations in barren desert or mountain, the generals had to re-learn
the logistical lessons that Alexander had learned from his father
fourteen centuries before the Crusades; plan properly, or die. In the
First and Second Crusades, more men and animals died of starvation
than from any other cause. Richard demonstrated that good logistic
planning could change the picture completely. He established a
logistic base in Cyprus and sea lines of communication, which he used
to advantage on his march from Acre to Ascalon. His refusal to
embark upon a lengthy seige of Jerusalem, despite the urgings of the
medieval equivalent of the 'G Snobs' among the more senior and
influential of his followers, is a mark of a general who understands the
logistic problem. He was a fearless fighter, a brilliant tactician and a
canny logistician.
Time Passes: A Napoleonic Folly
As the centuries passed, the logistic imperatives remained largely
unchanged by strategic and tactical modifications, the advent of
gunpowder and the coming of the railways. The main problem facing
an army for the greater part of any campaign was still not how to fight
the enemy but how to exist in the field. It was to solve this problem that
staffs and staff work were invented 20 In the time of Frederick the
Great, by Tempelhoff's reckoning, an army of 100,000 men would be
accompanied by 48,000 horses. Dry fodder was so bulky that it could
only be transported readily by water. Campaigning did not normally
begin until the green grass grew. There were long intervals in
campaigns when nothing happened. The greater part of Frederick's
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
instructions to his generals were concerned, not with battles or the
higher reaches of strategy, but with the routine of feeding, moving, and
encamping the army. Although Napoleon was able to take advantage
of the better road system that was beginning to be constructed in
Europe by the end of the eighteenth century, and an increasing
population density and thus a greater ability to support armies, he still
held to the methods of his predecessors, a combination of magazines to
stock supplies, and foraging. Clausewitz tells us that armies abandoned
tents during the wars of the French Revolution to cut the number of
baggage animals, but as these were replaced by cavalry or more guns,
drawn by horses, the forage requirement was not reduced and the speed
of advance did not increase.2i Fifteen miles a day was regarded as a
normal rate of advance in Clausewitz's day, reducing to an average of
ten over a long period in order to allow time for rest days on which
repairs and maintenance could be carried out. The penalty for
abandoning tents was loss of manpower, because of an increased
sickness rate. Although, as Clausewitz records, this did not slow the
tempo of operations, it increased the logistic problem, because of the
need to set up larger sick quarters (which themselves had to be
supplied), and to expand the reinforcement system.
Napoleon for all his genius at organisation, failed the test when faced
with the greatest logistic challenge of his career; the campaign in
Russia. He crossed the Niemen with 301,000 men, and subsequently
detached 13,500 men at Smolensk 52 days later, so that 287,500 should
have been left. But his actual strength was 182,000, which means he had
lost 105,500. Only two engagements had taken place, which would
have caused 10,000 battle casualties at most. So the losses from sickness
and stragglers on an advance of 350 miles must have come to some
95,000 men, or about one-third of the army. By the time Napoleon
reached Moscow, his total losses were 198,000 men. It was summer, the
roads were in good condition, albeit crowded by the enormous mass of
troops. The advance was not particularly fast by the standards of the
day, so there should have been time for stragglers to catch up.
Napoleon was taking a gamble. He knew that his logistic system
would not carry him to Moscow and maintain him there, but, like
Hitler, he hoped to defeat the Russians, and dictate peace-terms, before
logistics imposed on the strategy. Unfortunately for him, the Russians
traded space for time, and their army, although in retreat, was by no
means in flight, and certainly not destroyed. For lack of logistic
preparation, Napoleon's subsequent retreat was a
disaster.
The
pursuing Russian army did little better, they left the Kaluga area with
