242
The Lifeblood of War
FIG.
7.1
Indian troops repairing the Jessore road-the flat terrain and
primitive road communications are evident (Evening Standard).
During October ... we started moving to our concentration areas around
Balurghat. The move posed a lot of problems and was carried out strictly by night
only. We moved by road and rail as the T-55 tanks and medium guns could not be
moved to Balurghat via Raiganias thing to the weak bridges near Raiganj. T-55
canks, medium guns and large
quantities of combat engineer equipment were
moved by train to Malda, while the rest moved by road and metre-gauge to
iri to division took nearly twenty days to concentrate. The direct road
from Siliguri to Balurghat could not take heavy vehicles or tanks. We had only
twelve railway flats to move PT-76 tanks up to Raiganj, so the move had to be
slow because of the shuttle service.
ammunition had to be moved by road on the
one-way road to Balurghat, and the availability of transport was limited. Owns
to the narrow road from Raiganj to Balurghat, I had to enforce strict one-way
traffic
The road berms (edges) were soft, and there were traffic jams whenever a
vehicle tried to get off the ro:
ad. Some of the existing bridges on this road had to be
strengthened, while a number of rafts had to be constructed to take heavy tanks
over rivers into the Balurghat area.'
The Course of the Campaign
By 9 December,
20th
Palashbari, a key road junction,
Indian Mountain
Division had taken
and advanced to Gaibanda, a
War in a Snipe Marsh
243
road/rail junction by the Jamuna river, thus cutting off the whole of the
north-east sector of Bangla Desh. By 14 December, this division was
fighting for the town of Bogra, and had swung a brigade north to join in
the battle for Rangpur.
4th Indian Corps had perhaps the most difficult task of all, with the
objective of bouncing the Meghna, and the smaller Brahmaputra, and
racing for Dacca. The Corps Commander's subsidiary tasks were to cut
the road/rail link from Dacca to Chittagong. The Meghna was about a
mile wide at the most suitable crossing point, where there was a railway
bridge at Ashuganj, but no road following the line of the railway. By 11
December 4th Corps had closed up to the Meghna on a broad front
and, despite the railway bridge being blown, had bounced a crossing
using helicopters and PT-76 tanks. The latter designed by the Russians
for crossing
European rivers, overheated after half-an-hour
swimming the wide, swift-flowing Meghna, by which time they were
less than a sixth of the way across. Local boats were pressed into service
pushing and towing these amphibious tanks.
The Defence Fragmented
By this time the bulk of the Pakistani Army was cut off from Dacca,
except for a Pakistani brigade, commanded by Brigadier Qadir, east of
the Jamuna river, north-east of Dacca. This brigade, together with the
Pakistani forces withdrawing in front of 4th Corps crossing at
Ashuganj, would be a considerable reinforcement to the Dacca
garrison. Although the fall of Dacca was now only a question of time,
General Aurora feared widespread destruction and loss of civilian lives
resulting from a battle in the city; and to judge from Pakistani
behaviour hitherto, savage reprisals. At Tangail, a small force held a
bridge and a ferry site over a tributary of the Padma, to provide a
withdrawal route for Qadir's brigade, which had received orders to pull
back to Dacca. On the afternoon of 11 December, a battalion of the
Indian Parachute Brigade was dropped just north of the river, and
during the hours of darkness, seized the crossing sites in rear of Qadir's
brigade as it withdrew towards Dacca. The Pakistanis made four
attempts to cross the river, and finally, with another Indian brigade
hard on their heels, Qadir's men melted away into the countryside.
This was not the only combined operation by the Indian forces on
the Eastern Front. Aircraft from the Indian Navy aircraft carrier
Vikrant bombed Cox's Bazaar airfield and Chittagong harbour and
airfield on the first day of the war. It was then learned that Pakistani
