The Lifeblood of War
United States direct and designated the Western Task Force; Oran to be
assaulted by US forces mounted from the United Kingdom and
designated the Centre Task Force; and the assault on Algiers by a
combined British/United States task force designated the Eastern Task
Force. Airborne operations were planned for Tunis, Sousse, and other
key airfields in Tunisia, but for lack of aircraft only a battalion at a time,
and only after most of the parachute battalions had arrived by sea
following the amphibious assault. In the event, most of the objectives for
these airborne operations were subsequently changed in the light of
events immediately after the seaborne landings. The planning for the
operation was complicated by one special factor upon which much
depended: the degree to which the French would resist the landings.
Intelligence reports indicated that there was a reasonable chance that
resistance would be light. Indeed, it was possible they might welcome the
Anglo/American forces. But there was no certainty, and the Allies had to
plan on the assumption that the landings would be opposed. To reduce
the possibility of resistance, the leading troops to come ashore, were to be
American, even on beaches allocated to the British. It was felt that the
French, still smarting after the destruction of their ships at Oran in 1940
by the British, might allow feelings of outrage rather than common sense
to dictate their actions if they encountered British troops in the first
assault waves ashore.
The British logistic staffs had allowed for sufficient supplies to maintain
all the troops in the assault for seven days. The first follow-up convoy
contained fourteen days' maintenance for all the troops in the theatre,
including all those planned to arrive before the second follow-up convoy
docked. The first follow-up convoy would also bring fourteen days'
reserves to be landed at Bougie and Algiers, and seven days reserves to be
landed at Philippeville and Bone. By D + 90 it was planned to have 45
days' reserves for the total force ashore. The troops would land with suffi-
cient rations to last two days in their mess-tins. Thereafter they would be
fed on the recently introduced 14 man composite ration. Planning for fuel
was equally detailed. A major problem which exercised the logistic staffs
during the planning for the operation was the shortage of motor transport
(MT) ships. Progressively more and more vehicles were shut out of the
first and subsequent convoys. Without vehicles ashore to move supplies,
they would remain in the docks or at the railheads. The situation became
so bad that the Deputy Director Supplies and Transport 1st Army told
the operational staffs that it would be impossible to maintain the force at a
greater distance than 100 miles east of Bone until the convoy on D + 32
brought more transport.' He was subsequently proved to be right.
Three Campaigns in a Global War
FIG. 3.2
'The British Army was still using the old fashioned petrol tins'
Petrol filling depot,
Maison
cantomere,
North Africa, February 1943
Fortunately there
was only light opposition to the seaborne
landings, because many basic mistakes were made which slowed down
the disembarkation of American vehicles, such as difficulties in finding
the drivers in some of the ships, missing ignition keys, and flat batteries.
In the ships carrying British vehicles there was no problem with finding
keys, because the drivers had been ordered to wire them to the steering
Wheel. However, this led to many vehicle toolboxes being pilfered,
which had an adverse effect on vehicle maintenance for months. At Y
Beach, at Oran, an unexpected sand-bar off the beach caused a number
of vehicles to drown. The chaos at Y Beach was exacerbated when the
heavy swell prompted the Senior Naval Officer to order all craft to use
the nearby port of Arzeu. Unfortunately, for lack of a proper transport
organisation, and of transport, the docks quickly became congested,
and for a while all craft had to be diverted back to the beaches. It is
worth glancing at the offload figures achieved on the three Centre Task
Force beaches, X, Y and Z, because they show that only an elementary
ANOS
