94
The Lifeblood of War
prevent them attacking the stronghold. Once these conditions were
fulfilled, the strongholds would become a spear wound in the enemy's
side, through which his life-blood would flow. At least that was the
theory.
The first phase went well. The first lift of the second phase was to
consist of 80 gliders carrying in the first wave of 77 Brigade to Piccadilly
and Broadway on 5 March 1944. At the last moment it was discovered
that Piccadilly was covered with large felled trees; by the enemy it was
thought at the time. But in fact they were part of normal logging
operations. The number of gliders was reduced to 60, and 77 Brigade
started their lift to Broadway. Despite some exciting moments and a
few casualties, by dusk that evening the strip was ready to accept
Dakotas. Two flew in that night, the second with a full load of 6,000 ib.
That night the sequence was repeated at Chowringhee, and Dakotas
were being accepted with troops and stores within 24 hours. Wingate
then decided to switch the main effort to Broadway, and evacuate
Chowringhee, which was close to a motor road and an airfield. By mid
March 1944, three brigades were behind the Japanese lines, well
placed to disrupt the lines of communications of four enemy divisions.
Wingate ordered a new block set up, codename Aberdeen. Gliders
flew in with engineer plant to construct a Dakota strip. A follow-up
lift of 360 Dakota sorties over six nights was planned to complete the
move of the Chindit division. At this juncture, the Japanese offensive
against 4 Corps south of Imphal started, slightly earlier than
anticipated. All the units of 4 Corps were back in their planned
positions, but only just. As the attack gathered momentum, 14th
Army needed all available supply dropping aircraft to maintain the
hard pressed 4 Corps. The number of Dakotas available to the
Chindits was cut to 25, and the airlift of the two follow-up brigades
Choking the Japanese Lines of Supply
By early April 77 Brigade had set up a very successful block,
nicknamed White City; firmly astride the road and rail communi-
cations of the Japanese 18th Division facing Stilwell. Lentaigne, now
commanding the Chindits, after Wingate's death in an air crash, closed
down Aberdeen, and reinforced White City. Although the Chindits
dominated the area of the Japanese lines of communication, Stilwell
Three Campaigns in a Global War
was so inactive, that the Japanese 18th Division had no need to call on
their third line ammunition and supplies. At the same time it was clear
that the Chindits were a logistic embarrassment to 14th Army. The
Japanese having cut in behind 4 Corps at Imphal, attacking with
fanatical courage, maintained the siege for more than two months.
But as in the Arakan a month earlier, the defenders by standing firm,
denied the Japanese the supplies they so desperately needed. 4 Corps
was supplied entirely by air. Five-hundred-and-forty tons a day were
flown in to the airstrips. The main problem was not food, but
ammunition, and other stores with which to fight the battle. Again, as
in the Arakan, the Japanese
not support their offensive
logistically, and the emaciated survivors drifted back across the
Chindwin. Although the monsoon was about to break, Mountbatten,
as was noted earlier, and with Slim's full support, decided to continue
Operations. 4 Corps was ordered to follow up the retreating Japanese.
Greatly weakened by losses in battle and from starvation resulting
from inadequate logistics, the Japanese now found 14th Army on
Air Supply: A Conflict of Priorities
Meanwhile the Chindits were ordered to evacuate all existing
blocks, and operate in support of Stilwell. A new block, Blackpool,
was set up nearer Stilwell. But by now surprise had been lost, the
monsoon had begun, and night drops were too hazardous. The
Japanese brought up anti-aircraft guns as well as artillery and soon
day supply in the breaks in the monsoon downpour became far too
risky. Blackpool, running low on ammunition and supplies, was
evacuated on 25 May. Men too severely wounded to be carried on
mules, the only means of casualty evacuation, were shot by their own
side. Eventually the severely depleted Chindits captured Mogaung,
and linked up with Stilwell. In August, soon after the capture of
Mogaung and Myitkyina, the Chindits were withdrawn. Many were
weakened by the strain of operating in such harsh terrain, with
minimum support, and after medical examinations, a large propor-
tion of the force was declared unfit for action until after a period of rest
and recuperation. Although a limited success, the second Wingate
operation was extremely wasteful of five well trained brigades, the
sixth was used in a conventional role. The air effort to keep such a
large force supplied especially when in contact with the enemy, and
consuming ammunition, was out of all proportion to the effect it was
SONY
