252
The Lifeblood of War
on the little information available. For lack of anything better, the plan
for the reinforcement of Northern Norway in a time of tension was used
as a planning guide. However, as units were added to the order of battle
of 3rd Commando Brigade, the need arose for more ships than had at
first been allocated by Fleet Headquarters. There was also the matter of
the War Maintenance Reserve, the fuel, ammunition, food and spares
needed to supply the Brigade in battle. This amounted to 9,000 tons.
However, the Brigade was not the only formation outloading. The
Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force also needed stores to be moved
from depôts in various parts of the United Kingdom.
With the
Brigade's war maintenance reserve, this amounted to 1,260 tons of
petrol, oil and lubricants (POL), 8,260 tons of ammunition, and
3,880 tons of ordnance stores (all types of stores, including spares).
Most of this was outloaded within the first 72 hours.® Because the
move of stores was over the weekend, and at short notice, the outload
could not be completed by British Rail, as envisaged in the Northern
Norway contingency plan.
7 The bulk was lifted by road transport using
virtually all the United Kingdom-based Regular Army Transport
Units, as well as several Territorial Army Transport Units called up for
service. Commercial operators also provided a substantial lift. During
this period, one unit travelled more than 510,000 miles, performed 293
tasks with 1,231 vehicles, moved more than 15,000 tons of materials,
and consumed 249,000 litres of fuel.8
In the first eighty hours, the full 30 days War Maintenance Reserve
(WMR) of all items, and first line scales consisting of two days
ammunition and five days rations for 3rd Commando Brigade had
been loaded into shipping. By an unlucky coincidence, the crisis caught
the Royal Fleet Auxiliary storeship that was permanently loaded with
the War Maintenance Reserve for one commando, in the process of
unloading in order to turn-over her stocks; an event that occurred only
once every four years.
The Influence of Terrain on Logistic Planning
An important logistic decision to take a minimum of wheeled
vehicles was made early in planning, resulting from a study of the
terrain in the projected area of operations. Terrain usually has a
profound affect on land force logistics, far more so than Naval and Air
logistics. Most of the ground in the Islands, particularly in East Falkland
is peat bog, with, in places, large areas of hummocky tussock grass.
Stone runs also abound, up to hundreds of yards wide and several
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
253
miles long. These are like rivers of stone consisting of boulders varying
from the size of a man's head to that of a car. The mountains, although
not high, and more akin to moorland hills (the highest, Mount
Usborne being 2,300 feet), were almost all crowned with great, craggy
castles of rock, which stood up like the spines of some vast prehistoric
reptile. These crenellated bastions, with deep fissures, sudden sheer
drops, and great buttresses were obstacles to any type of vehicle,
wheeled or tracked. Few were less than 500 metres long, and some in
excess of 2,000 metres. In 1982, apart from the environs of Stanley, and
a surfaced track to Fitzroy, there were no other roads, or tracks. A
lightly loaded Landrover would be lucky to cover four miles in the
hour; provided it kept off tussock and stone run, and did not follow the
tracks of a predecessor which had broken through the light crust and
reduced the going to a black slurry. A wheeled vehicle loaded with
ammunition or towing a gun would not move at all. The Brigade did
have seventy-six of its BV202 tracked oversnow vehicles in Britain, the
remainder being stockpiled in Norway. Although designed to operate
over snow, it was assessed that these vehicles with a ground pressure of
only about one-and-a-half pounds per square inch, about that of a man
on skis, would be able to motor across the peat bog. All were taken.
Fortunately, the commanding
officer of the Logistic
Regiment
persuaded the Brigade commander to allow him to take ten trucks
equipped with fuel pods, and nine Eager Beaver four-wheel-drive
rough-terrain fork-lift trucks. Without these late additions to the order
of battle, the logistic situation would have been difficult, to say the least.
The Weather Factor
The weather was also an important consideration. Although the
Islands lie on the same latitude south of the equator, as Britain lies
north, the great Southern Ocean, with no equivalent of the Gulf Stream
to warm the sea, and the proximity of the vast frozen continent of
Antarctica, Cape Horn, and the Andes, combine to make the climate
significantly different. Icebergs regularly come within 200 miles of the
islands, and if a huge tabular berg grounds on the Burdwood Bank to
the South, it can alter the weather pattern in the Falklands. Snow, rain,
fog, and brilliant sunshine follow each other with bewildering rapidity
at all times of the year, even in summer; the only constant is the wind.
The average windspeed throughout the year in Britain is 4 knots, in the
Falklands it is 15 mph. It would be approaching mid-winter when the
landing force was likely to arrive.
