290
The Lifeblood of War
by the deterrent, not by NATO's conventional strength. Without
nuclear weapons, however gallant a show the West made, and provided
the Soviet Union had performed reasonably competently, after a few
days, the West would have lost for lack of anything with which to
continue fighting. This lack of sustainability had a spin-off in NATO
exercises, many of which were 'military minuets', where the forces
involved went through the motions as a demonstration in Alliance
solidarity. The logistic wonderland behind the facade was evident only
to the professionals, and not to all of them. So what? A time may come
when an alliance is being constructed, where the imperfections of
NATO might serve as a lesson.
Van Creveld in his book Supplying War, states that the logistic
aspect of war is nothing but an endless series of difficulties succeeding
each other. He goes on to wonder how armies managed to move at all,
how campaigns were waged, and victories occasionally won. This
endless series of difficulties, and things that go wrong is a common-
place, and is exactly what Clausewitz meant when talking about the
friction of war' ? He surmises that logistics makes up as much as 90 per
cent of the business of war, and the staff-work involved requires hours,
days, and sometimes weeks, of calculations.
From Alexander the Great at one end of Asia, to Giap in Vietnam at
the other, there are a host of examples where logistics were the
overriding factor in the success or failure of the plan. Bearing this in
mind, it would seem, says van Creveld, that the trick is to work out
what is the optimum logistic organisation for a
given
set of
circumstances; advance, defence etc. But as he notes:
In practice there is scant evidence that the task has been attempted by the
majority of twentieth century (not to mention earlier) operational planners.
Rather most armies seem to have prepared their campaigns as best tiey could on an
ad hoc basis, making great, if unco-ordinated, efforts to gather toucther the largest
possible number of tactical vehicles, trucks of all descriptions, railway troops, etc.,
while giving little, if any, thought to the "ideal" combination which, in theory, would
have carried them the furthest'3
We will look at some aspects of NATO and Soviet logistic planning
for war in the light of this assertion. Soviet, because, without the Soviet
Union there would be no Warsaw Pact. The Warsaw Pact is (or, in the
light of recent events, one might say 'was') an extension of the Soviet
General Staff, taking its orders directly from that staff. NATO
Headquarters in Brussels, consisting of a collection of officers and
civilian officials representing all the members of the Alliance, receives
its authority from the governments of sixteen sovereign nations acting
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
291
collectively through the machinery of the North Atlantic Council, and
the civil and military structures. So it would not be true to say that
without the United States there would be no NATO; almost
inconceivable, but not totally, if the threat was sufficient, and the
political will was there. But first we need to remind ourselves of some of
the logistic trends covered earlier.
Two Logistic Watersheds
The major watershed in military logistics occurred in 1914, with
another, during the Second World War. The first watershed was
reached when it was no longer true to say, putting it crudely, that
logistics are easier when you keep moving, because when you stop, you
quickly exhaust the local resources of food for men and the fuel for
prime movers, i.e., fodder for your animals. From 1914 onwards the
reverse has applied. The reason; the vast increase in ammunition
expenditure and the consequent huge expansion in transport to lift it,
and, once taken to a chosen spot, the great effort required to relocate it.
The second watershed alluded to was the arrival of the all-
mechanised and motorised army, and, since 1953, the use of
helicopters. With mechanisation/motorisation, of course, fuel for the
horses, in the form of fodder, was replaced by petrol and oil for vehicles,
commodities which, regrettably, do not grow in the fields for collection
by foraging parties, or provide grazing for vehicles, something which,
in horse-drawn days, went some way towards reducing the load of
fodder that needed lifting forward. Most Soviet sources agree that in a
major offensive, 50 per cent of all supplies by tonnage will be fuel. * But,
as we shall see, foraging is not completely dead, in some armies.
The Effent of Movement on Logistics
So, static warfare is usually easier to supply than mobile warfare,
because ammunition can be stocked, and fuel expenditure reduced.
This was as true in the Falklands as in the First and Second World
Wars, and in Korea. A rapid advance or pursuit will use fuel, but
ammunition expenditure wil usually fall. Whereas a slow, grinding
advance will usually use both in large quantities. Soviet tank armies
advancing at a rate of between 16 and 45 kilometres a day in 1944 45
suffered only one-third the losses in men and two-thirds the losse in
tanks of tank armies advancing only 4.5 to 13 kilometres a day
consumed a third of the fuel and one sixth of the ammunition.' A
