198
The Lifeblood of War
FIG. 5.5
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
199
change the Army's willingness to seek Air Force assistance. The further
forward the USAF could supply, the better.
Centralising the Logistic System
The centralised logistic system under 1st Logistical Command in
Vietnam has been criticised, notably by
General Starry in
monograph,
Mounted Combat in Vietnam.40 The burden of the
complaint: that logistic units were stripped away from formations,
centralised, and lived in base camps. Although the first part of the
complaint is fair, the second, implying that logistic units never moved is
not. For specific operations, normally brigade size or larger, Forward
Support Areas (FSAs), were established adjacent to a forward airstrip
capable of accepting C-130s. The FSA was hived off from the Ist
Logistical Command, and handled all types of supply. From the FSA,
helicopters lifted supplies out to the fire support bases, and battalions
and companies operating in the field. By 1966, nearly everywhere in
Vietnam was within 25 miles of a C-130 capable strip.41
Given the circumstances of this war, it is difficult to see what else
could have been done. In a conventional war, logistic units usually
form part of almost every formation, from brigade upwards. They
operate as part of the formation, and, to provide the necessary service,
occupy real estate in the rear of the formation for workshops, supply
points, transport parks, fuel dumps, and so forth. They move, using
their own transport resources, in order to conform to their customer's
moves, following the ebb and flow of battle. In Vietnam, as has already
been explained, there were no rear areas behind the customers, the
formations and units doing the fighting. Nor, as has already been
stated, did operations during the period of American involvement
conform to the 'normal' pattern. Units and formations lived in bases
from which they sortied, usually for a few days at a time, by helicopter,
on foot, or in armoured vehicles; and to which they withdrew on
completion of the operation. Their objectives were rarely exactly the
same each time. There was no question of logistic units moving with
them to 'set up shop'. The drain on transport and defence resources
would have been prohibitive. Siting logistic units at the unit or
formation base would have enlarged the dependency: mouths to feed
and the need for clothing, spares, equipment, and ammunition fon
personal weapons; incrasing the resupply bill and the resources to lift
the additional items. The presence of logistic units and the real estate to
provide working space, would expand the area to protect, placing a
