The Lifeblood of War
-Ban Nam Coung Lao Cai
ỗ Viet Bac
• Lai Chau
CHINA:
River 5O:
Louangphuabang
LAOS
lain ot Jars
Chau Hon
Diem,
hanh
10d
TONKIN
HAINAN
THAILAND
CAMBODIA
• Qui Nhen
(Trung Bo)
SULE
HAILAND
SOUTH CHINA SEA
150 Miles
1 To Kilornesto
MAp V Indo-China 1947-75.
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
139
agricultural and industrial possibilities: Nam Bo or South Vietnam, a
vast alluvial plain furrowed by the arms of the Mekong and especially
favourable to agriculture, and Trung Bo, or Central Vietnam, a long
narrow belt of land joining them? More than one half of Vietnam
consists of heavily forested hills and mountains. The Annamite chain of
mountains runs from China along the western edge of, and for two-
thirds the length of, Vietnam. Not high by European standards, these
mountains are steep and covered with dense jungle. In many areas, the
mountains contained numerous, large limestone caves, big enough to
store supplies, and hide headquarters and equipment. The two huge
river deltas are connected by a narrow coastal plain. The plains in the
river deltas are heavily populated, and subject to natural flooding, the
Mekong delta more so than the Red River, or Tonkin, delta. The
Mekong delta is criss-crossed by streams, rivers and canals, forcing all
vehicles to follow dikes, dams and the few roads. From mid-May to
mid-October vast areas of the Mekong delta are under water. In the
monsoon, the Red River and its tributaries actually flow above ground
level in some places because of the huge earth banks, or bunds, built to
contain them in the flood time. This constituted a weakness, which in
Round Two the Americans decided not to exploit. Although views are
divided on the matter, the balance of opinion is that despite the banks
being up to forty feet thick in places, they could have been breached by
iron bombs, causing extensive flooding of the key agricultural and
industrial areas in the delta.
Climate
The climate is sub-tropical, with high humidity throughout the year.
The South-West Monsoon starts about mid-May and ends about mid-
October. The North-East Monsoon starts about mid-September,
ending towards the end of December. Of the two, the South-West
Monsoon has by far the greater impact on operations. The North-East
Monsoon affects only coastal areas in the centre of the country, with
drizzle, fog (known to the French as Crachin, spit), and rain. Most,
although not all, Vietminh and North Vietnamese/Viet Cong major
operations took place in the dry season, early January to mid-May;
among the exceptions, Dien Bien Phu.
Terrain
Over 80 per cont of tie country is covered by forest. The triple
canopy jungle provided cover for defensive positions, movement,
