68
The Lifeblood of War
Eastern
Algeria, eased the load on the overworked and poorly
maintained French rolling stock. British and American
railway
operating units took over complete sections of the lines, and British
railway construction units were responsible for much of the repair and
refurbishment of the tracks, and for laying some new track. They also
had to repair bridges. Towards the end of 1942, the Germans had
mounted a series of raids to destroy the bridges on the metre gauge line
south and east of Tebessa. The technique was for the raiding party to
land by moonlight in a light aircraft near the chosen target, disperse the
Arab guards, blow the bridge, and take off. Attempts by small parties of
German paratroops dropped near several bridges on the main line east
of Algiers, were beaten off by police and local guards. Although it was
not realised at the time, these raids were probably in preparation for
their push up the Kasserine pass. When the push came, it was a near
disaster. The Germans broke through the United States II Corps, and
almost reached the key supply centre of Tebessa. This failure had been
caused,
in part at least, by the way in which formations and
nationalities had been deployed piecemeal by General Anderson, the
1st Army commander.
Reorganisation
The outcome, after the push had been halted, was, however, an
improvement in two key aspects. The commander of the US II Corps
was replaced by the dynamic Patton, and 18 Army Group tidied up the
patchwork troop deployment, concentrating British 1st Army in
northern Tunisia, and the United States II Corps in southern Tunisia.
The new deployment allowed the logistic chain to be simplified; the
British Line of Communication now ran from Algiers and Bone to
Souk Ahras and thence eastwards; while the American Line of
Communication ran from Oran and Philippeville through Constantine
and Tebessa.
A New Spoke in the Logistic Wheel: The Build-Up for
HUSKY
In early January 1943, the logistic situation had been aggravated by
the decision of the Combined Chiefs of Staff at their meeting at
Casablanca, presided over by Roosevelt and Churchill, to mount the
invasion of Sicily (codename HUSKY), as quickly as possible after the
end of the Tunisian campaign. The Allied armies in North Africa, both
Ist, 8th and the Americans would provide the majority of the force for
Three Campaigns in a Global War
HUSKY, and these, augmented by formations from Britain and
United States, would mount from ports and airfields in Algeria a
Tunisia. Late June was chosen as the period in which D-day for
HUSK Y would be selected, provided that the Tunisian campaign was
finished by the end of April. Experience gained in the North African
campaign showed the need to start planning for a major combined
operation at least four months ahead; planning for HUSKY should
start at once. Furthermore, the shipping of stores, supplies, equipment,
and additional formations to North Africa in preparation for HUSKY
would have to be done while the Tunisian campaign was still being
fought. AFHQ was tasked with overall co-ordination of the planning
for HUSKY, an additional burden for the logisticians. But, in material
terms, the principal effect was the congestion in the ports as the
HUSKY equipment and stores started flooding in, while the logistic
staffs were wrestling with the problem of trying to achieve the fastest
possible building up of formations and supplies for the final battles in
Tunisia.
The ships carrying the transport and equipment of British forma-
tions for the Tunisian campaign were unloaded at Algiers, Bone or
Philippeville, as many as possible to the latter two to reduce the
distance from the Front. But the bigger, faster ships carrying the troops
could not go east of Algiers because of the German air threat. To relieve
the strain on the railways, and because there were insufficient troop-
carrying trucks, the troops were sent forward in four small, fast assault
ships, which became known as the 'moonlight ferry', because they
steamed most of the dangerous part of the route in darkness. By the end
of March, they had moved 45,000 men without a single casualty. Most
of the wheeled vehicles were driven from the port to the area where they
married up with their units, but tracked vehicles travelled on rail flat
cars to save track life. By the end of March, British 1st Army had been
built up to two British Corps, V which had been in Tunisia from the
outset, and IX. At the same time the United States II Corps was built up
to full strength with three divisions.
Preparations for the Final Push
By March 1943, the improved road and rail communications
allowed the full offload capacity of Bone and Philippeville to be moved
forward. By the middle of April, there were over 100,000 tons of British
and American reserves on the ground for the final push on Tunis and
Bizerta, and these had been accumulated in seven weeks during which
SONY
