338
The Lifeblood of War
government troops. In the liberated areas, the guerrillas establish their own
institutions, conduct propaganda and engage in other open political activities.
None of this applies to terrorists, whose base of operations is in the cities, and
who have to operate clandestinely in small units. Any major concentration would
immediately expose them to retaliation by the government. The terrorists maticl
part of a political movement that engages in propaganda and other political
activities (such as the IRA and the Basque ETA), but there is a strict division of
labour between the legal and the military arms of the movement. Terroris is to
mma engage in political propaganda than spies, as their chief assignment is to
remain under deep cover:
The logistics of a typical guerrilla movement were examined in the
chapter on Vietnam, including the problems that can beset a guerilla
commander because of the inherent inflexibility of his supply system.
The logistics of forces fighting a guerrilla movement have also been
comprehensively covered in the same chapter. Suffice it to say that,
although the
advent of the rotary-wing vehicle opened up new
possibilities for operations and tactics, the campaigns in Vietnam and
Afghanistan (and others not covered such as Borneo and Dholar),
proved that the possession of a substantial force of helicopters will nol
in itself confer success on a conventional army engaged in a campaign
fighting guerrillas, unless the operational concepts and tactics are
correct. But without helicopters, supply would have been even more
difficult, and at times impossible. They allowed armies to conduct far
more ambitious operations than was possible in the pre-helicopter age.
So the restructured British Forces would be well placed to fight a
campaign against guerrillas, in any type of terrain.
Terrorist Logistics
In this chapter on the logistics of future wars, it is worth glancing at
to borist logistics. Because terrorists have been, are, and will continue
to be, an enemy of harmony, and therefore an ingredient of future wars.
Just as we examined the logistics of another potential enemy, the Soviet
Union; a look at the terrorist logistical system and its problems, may
provide one clue that might be worth following up in greater detail, as
level. Neit battle to defeat, or at least contain terrorism at a bearable
level. Neither space, nor time, permits an analysis of terrorist logistics,
even one that equates with the brief treatment accorded to Soviet
supply in this book. We are dealing with a multitude of terrorist
organisations, with a host of differing aims, and operating areas.
However, there do seem to be some common themes.
'Modern terrorists, unlike their predecessors do not live by enthusiasm alone; they
need a great deal of money.
The preparation for major operations is usually
expensive; money is needed for logistic purposes, for arms, for information and,
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
339
generally speaking for paying the expenses of the militants who have no other
ncomes. Cars can be stolen, but frequently it is less risky to buy them. Safe houses
cannot be stolen and money is also needed for bribes and various emergencies."
The necessary funds can be obtained from a variety of sources, from
robbing banks and post offices, from donations by sympathisers and
friendly governments, and from the drug trade. The Provisional Irish
Republican Army (PIRA) is a typical example. The Irish Northern Aid
Committee (NORAID) in the United States is the most well known,
although not necessarily always the most generous, funder of the
PIRA. There is evidence that they have found support in more than
twenty other countries,
including
West
Germany, Holland and
Scandinavia. Support ranges from cash to training. In addition, the
PIRA runs a number of business operations, some legal, some not: a
fleet of taxis in Belfast, protection rackets under the guise of guarding'
buildings and construction sites, 'kick-backs' from contractors in
return for frightening off the opposition when tendering for contracts,
and unofficial taxes on drink in public houses in Catholic areas, to
name but some. Opinions vary widely on the subject of how much is
made by terrorist organisations throughout the world. But there is no
doubt that the PIRA are in a small-time league compared with Abu
Nidal whose income in 1985 was estimated as US$30 40 million at
1980 prices. And this, in its turn, looks small beer beside the drug
funded terrorists (narco-terrorism) of the Colombian group M19,
whose income in 1985, was estimated at US$50-150 million at 1980
prices. 17 The collection of funds can in itself be an indicator that a
terrorist group is planning an operation. For example, the German
Red Army Faction (RAF), not one of the richer organisations, had to
rob banks to obtain funds for the purchase of weapons and explosives,
and other requirements, before each operation. If forced to steal
explosives, the terrorist may give a clue to the authorities that he is
preparing for an operation. The need for the terrorist to hide weapons
and explosives, and subsequently collect them before use, can also be a
weakness in his logistic system, sometimes leading to his capture.
Setting up a terrorist operation requires a great deal of logistical and
other preparation, and time. Which is why fears in some circles that the
Libyans might immediately react to the United States bombing of
Tripoli with a massive terrorist campaign in Britain were ridiculous.
Unless the means for such a campaign had already been in place, the
sheer size of the logistic problem involved made such a reaction
impossible.
Logistics will also dictate the scale and complexity of
operations that a terrorist organisation will attempt. For example after
