The Lifeblood of War
‹e lines of communication in some detail. As in the Western Desert,
and later in Italy, the advance was made with one flank resting on the
coast, with the advantage this gave to the side that controlled the sea.
The coastal sea route was set up from Algiers to Bone, with
intermediate ports at Bougie and Philippeville. A single standard gauge
railway ran eastwards from Algiers through Sétif, Ouled Rahmoun (a
few miles south-east of Constantine), Duvivier and Souk Ahras into
northern Tunisia, with branch lines leading in from the ports at Bougie,
Philippeville and Bone. This standard gauge line was supplemented by
a metre gauge line running south-east from Ouled Rahmoun through
Tebessa into Southern Tunisia. Tebessa was also connected by metre
gauge with the main line at Ouled Kebrit, south of Souk Ahras. The
only other metre gauge line of any importance was that running east
from Bone to La Calle.
A single main road ran for most of its length, roughly parallel to the
standard gauge railway and also to the metre gauge lines to Tebessa
from Ouled Rahmoun and Ouled Kebrit. This road, which, on average,
was about 50 miles from the coast, had access roads to the ports. The
coast road from Algiers, through Bougie, Djidjelli and Philippeville
was totally unsuitable as an alternative to the main road. The
mountainous section west of Bougie was bad enough, but there was a
thirty mile stretch between Bougie and Philippeville consisting of
continuous hair-pin bends and numerous tunnels. This made it totally
impossible for two-way military traffic, and nearly so for one-way
heavy vehicles.
The Impact of Geography on Logistics
Both the railway and main road climbed from sea-level east of
Algiers to over 4,000 feet at Sétif, and after travelling over the plateau
to Constantine, ran through the mountains for at least half the way into
Tunisia, until descending to the Tunisian plain. The main airfields east
of Algiers were in the Constantine area, which was the advanced
logistic base for 1st Army. Except for these airfields, Tebessa and
another east of Bone, there were no suitable strips for air supply using
the aircraft of the period, until the Plain of Tunis was reached. The
terrain was far too mountainous for airfield construction. Geography
dictated the single sea route, single rail route, single road route, and a
lack of airstrips in the area where most of the fighting was to take place.
Similarly, geography restricted the forward basing of Allied fighters.
The Germans near their bases in Tunis and Bizerta, holding the plain,
Three Campaigns in a Global War
with numerous airstrips, were in a very strong position both tactic
and logistically.
Geography also limited the capability of the ports. Algiers was the
only suitable base for the British 1st Army, because of its size and
relative freedom from air and submarine attack. It was also large
enough to be used as a holding base for American supplies.
The
restricted capacity and length of the rail and road line of communi-
cation from Algiers to the east made it imperative to establish forward
ports to supply British and
United
States forces.
Bougie was
unsuitable, it was small, and its railway led straight on to the single line
between Algiers and Sétif, whose capacity was already being fully used®
Philippeville was also very small, and the depth of water alongside the
wharves restricted the draught of ships to 21 feet. So, unless ships from
America and Britain were specially lightly loaded, shipping using
Philippeville was restricted to coasters loaded locally at Algiers, Oran,
and Casablanca. Philippeville did however have good rail communi-
cations with Constantine, which did not seriously conflict with the
main eastward flow to the front. Bone was a good, medium sized port,
near to the front line, with good rail communications south to join the
main line at Duvivier. From here the rail was restricted, but it was
immaterial whether the traffic originated from Bone or ports to the
west. However, both Bone and Philippeville were vulnerable to air
attack from airfields in Tunisia or across the Mediterranean.
Problems of Rail Capacity
Apart from geography, there was insufficient rolling stock to make
full use of the limited capacity of the railway line. Much of it was in a
bad state of repair. The shortages were aggravated as more and more
American units became involved in the battle, and their supplies were
hauled from bases as far away as Casablanca, 1,235 miles from
Constantine. Big distances made great demands on locomotives and
vastly increased the turnround time of scarce wagons. In addition,
there were problems of coal shortages and a lack of trained operators.
Locomotives, wagons, coal, and railway units were to take weeks to
reach North Africa from Britain and the United States, even though
called forward as soon as the problem had been
recognised.
Fortunately, two months before the first landing, the British transpor-
tation staffs had asked the Americans to demand 250 locomotives and
5,000 wagons in order that production in the States could be geared up.
They had worked on the assumption that half the total locomotives in
SONY
