149
148
The Lifeblood of War
CHINA
Oct 50,
• Chem hoa
Mao Khe p
GULFOF TONKIN
Viet Minh gains
battle initiated by Viet Minh
Thanh Hoa
40 Miles
MAp VII Vietminh Offensive Operations October 1950-February 1952.
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
Defeats for General Giap
Giap's second attempt at securing a foothold in the Delta, at Mao
Khe on the northern hinge of the de Lattre Line, 13 also ended in defeat.
Logistics had influenced Giap's choice of objective: Mao Khes
proximity to Haiphong, the French supply lifeline, and its closeness to
the Viet Bac and China, thus easing his own supply problems. It was
held by 400 men. Once again Giap failed to take into account the
French ability to reinforce rapidly by air, and the effect of air attack on
troops in the open when committed to an assault. However, a major
miscalculation was selecting an objective near a major river, which
enabled the French to steam destroyers to within range of Giap's
troops and subject them to heavy bombardment. Like others before
him, including Napoleon, he paid the penalty for ignoring the sea
flank
Despite these two defeats, Giap decided to mount one more offensive
before the monsoon broke. Again logistics was the driving force behind
this decision: the need for rice and his perception that with American
ald the French were growing stronger. His objective, the Day River
line, along the south-western face of the de Lattre Line, was aimed at
gaining control of the Ninh Binh and Nam Ha provinces. These had
three rice crops a year, and were densely populated; the latter
important not only as a source of manpower, but so that the Vietminh
could be seen to be controlling an increasing percentage of the people.
The Day River campaign was the most ambitious attempted by Giap to
date. His plan involved four divisions, one (312th), to attack the
western tip of the de Lattre Line at Vinh Yen as a diversion. The other
three divisions were to mount the main assault across the Day River.
Two divisions (304th and
308th), assisted by two independent
regiments striking from guerrilla bases within the Delta, were to seize
objectives aimed at tying down the French reserves, while the third
(320th), struck out for Phat Diem and Nioh Binh in the southern hinge
of the de Lattre Line. The use of such a large force which included
moving one division right round the Delta, about 10,000 troops and
40,000 porters, was a massive logistic undertaking.
Giap planned to start his offensive just before the South-West
monsoon in mid May, so that if it succeeded, the rain would protect
him from French air attacks; if it failed, he could withdraw, covered by
the bad weather. Unfortunately for Giap, his staff were still too
inexperienced for the task of calculating the complex march tables
required to move such large bodies of men by night along jungle tracks;
