The Lifeblood of War
few that existed. To begin with, their efficiency was greatly impaired by
mistakes made by the novice drivers and officers. The art of pack mule
driving and maintenance was not a skill that could be acquired in a few
weeks training. Such bad habits as loading mules too early before
starting the march, failure to offload at halts of more than half an hour,
overloading, and unbalanced loading caused sore backs. To com-
pound the problem there was a word shortage of mules.
Attacking the Enemy's Supply Lines
The Allies also attempted to interdict the German supply lines by air
attack. For example by the end of March 1944, the Tactical Air Forces
were causing an average of 25 cuts a day in the enemy's railways. By May
this figure had risen to 71 a day. However valuable these, and attacks on
marshalling yards, locomotive repair sheds and
convoys were in the short term in assisting the Allied offensive
(codename DIADEM) which finally breached the Gustav Line south of
Rome, there were significant portents for the future in the assessment
made by Air Marshal Slessor's reports on the results. Slessor, the C-in-C
RAF Mediterranean and Middle East, having described how the almost
unremitting interdiction was maintained, says:
"On the whole, it is probable that the Germans suffered no serious
shortages during the static phase.' (i.e. before DIADEM).
After commenting on the serious effect the Italian winter weather
had on flying operations, he continues thus:
'But apart from that, I personally underrated the unsurpassed
capacity of the Hun's Q staff to keep him supplied in apparently
impossible conditions. Since March 24, every single railway behind the
enemy front has been cut and kept cut in several places between the
front and the Pisa-Rimini line, and at the same time we have delivered a
number of really heavy blows at the great marshalling yards, with their
loco sheds and repair facilities, in the north. At the same time, in the
month of February, we know we destroyed between eight and nine
hundred MT vehicles, and in March probably more than half that
number.
. We have not yet succeeded in making him pull out, and I
don't think we will by air action alone: what we have done, I think, is to
make it impossible for him to resist successfully a determined and
sustained offensive by the ground forces?
In June 1944, Slessor crystallised his views in an Appreciation on Air
Power given to the American Generals Marshall and Arnold when they
visited him:
Three Campaigns in a Global War
It may clear the issue to mention first the things that air-power
cannot be expected to do in a land campaign of this nature:
(a) It cannot by itself defeat a highly organised and disciplined army,
even When that army is virtually without air support of its
(b) It cannot by itself enforce a withdrawal by drying up the flow of
essential supplies. The German's efficient Q
organisation, his
policy of living off the country regardless of the interests of the
inhabitants, and his extreme frugality and hardiness, result in an
unsurpassed capacity to maintain his
impossible circumstances at the essential minimum in circum-
stances where he is not being forced to expend ammunition, fuel,
vehicles, engineer stores etc. at a high rate.
(c) It cannot entirely prevent the movement of strategic reserves to the
battlefront, of tactical reserves from one part of the front to
another, or of forward troops to fresh positions in rear.
(d) In short, it cannot absolutely isolate the battlefield from enemy supply
or reinforcement? 18 (Author's italics)
The battles in Normandy, which were then reaching their height,
were to show both the enormous dividends to be gained by the correct
application of air power on the enemy lines of communication, and the
limitations pointed out by Slessor. His 'wise words', as Terraine has
called them, could have been heeded with advantage by the possessors
of overwhelming air superiority fighting two other wars, Korea and
Vietnam, respectively six and twenty years later.
THE WAR IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA: BURMA
If the war in the Mediterranean was difficult logistically, that in
South-East Asia was infinitely more so. Indeed it is hard to find any
other theatre of the war which posed so many logistic conundrums or
Where supply played such a dominating part in deciding the outcome,
on both sides. Before discussing the campaign, it is necessary to look at
the overall strategic picture of the war against Japan, jumping ahead of
the narrative to do so, because the decisions, and in one case indecision,
of the Combined Chiefs of Staff on the part of the British were to play in
the strategy to defeat Japan, were to impinge on logistics.
At the May 1943 TRIDENT conference in Washington,
Combined Chiefs of Staff instructed the Combined Joint Planning
SONY
