The Lifeblood of War
The Age of Charlemagne
With the decline of the Western Roman Empire and its military
system in the fifth century AD, armies in Western Europe became
smaller, as the tribal groupings that supported them became increas-
ingly fragmented. Logistics descended to the plunder level as the art of
war degenerated. Only with the advent of Charlemagne in the ninth
century AD, did matters in Western Europe improve. He provided the
basis for the feudalism of the Middle Ages, by establishing a system of
calling men to service through noble vassals. For lack of a logistic
organisation, his predecessors had been unable to keep armies in the
field for long periods, and supply shortages usually caused the dispersal
of Frankish armies after a few weeks of campaigning. Charlemagne
instituted a logistic system including supply trains with sufficient food
and equipment to maintain his troops for several weeks. 1' This enabled
him to campaign 1,000 miles from the heart of France, and to maintain
armies in the field, or in sieges, throughout the winter; almost unknown
in Western Europe since the time of the Romans. A key element in his
logistic system, was the use of fortified frontier posts, or burgs. These
were built along the frontier of every conquered province, and
connected to each other by a road. A road also led back to the old
frontier from each burg. These forts were stocked with supplies, and
became the bases from which the Frankish cavalry could sortie to
maintain order in the conquered territory, and from which to make
fresh advances.
The Byzantine Empire
In Eastern Europe, the Byzantines, the military heirs of the Roman
Empire, owed their survival to the fact that their army was the most
efficient military body in the world at that time. The Byzantine Empire
maintained a standing army of between 120,000 and 150,000 men,
about fifty per cent horse, the remainder foot. Except in the ninth
century, when a series of great soldier Emperors led a counterattack
against the Muslims, the Bulgars and the Slavs, Byzantine strategy was
mainly defensive, foreign conquest being expensive in lives and
treasure. They recognized that their wealth was a constant attraction to
the barbarian tribes that surrounded them, and they adopted a
deterrent policy, avoiding war if possible, but energetically repelling
invaders, following up by punishing and harrassing their aggressors
with a minimum expenditure of wealth and manpower, rather in the
manner of the Israelis today. Their striking force consisted of heavily
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
armoured horsemen, the cataphracts, highly disciplined and well
By operating a defensive strategy, the Byzantine's logistic problems
were simplified. As Clausewitz noted over a thousand years later,
supply is easier in defence than in attack, provided proper prep-
arations have been made in advance.
Communications were also
made easier by being on the defensive; the army was able to switch
from one base to another by changing its lines of communication in a
way that was more difficult in enemy territory. Thanks to their
excellent military organisation, in which logistics played an indis-
pensable part, the Byzantines were able to turn back the Muslim
invasion of Christian Europe from the East in the early eighth
century; perhaps a more significant event than the battle of Tours,
thirteen years later, which marked Islam's high
water-mark in
Western Europe.
Unlike the Moors operating from Spain, the Muslim armies in the
East were closer to their own heartland, and logistically better
positioned to drive deep into Eastern Europe, as they eventually were
to do centuries later. If in the eighth century, they had defeated and
advanced through the Byzantine Empire, they would have found the
hodge-podge of petty kingdoms beyond easier to gobble up than the
powerful combination of European powers, mainly Austria and Spain,
that were later to bar their way from the end of the fifteenth century
until the middle of the eighteenth. When Constantinople, held by seven
exhausted men, finally fell on 29 May 1453 to eighty
thousand Turks, who had battered a breach in its wall, it had provided
a bulwark against the tides of chaos and disorder for over a thousand
At a time when most of Western Europe was sunk in a state of brutal
barbarism, the Byzantine Empire was a major world power, and centre
of civilization. A significant setback occurred, however, at the battle of
Manzikurt in 1071, when, mainly through treason, the Byzantine army
was defeated by the Seljuk Turks. The subsequent loss of most of
Anatolia was a stupendous blow. The Turks ravaged the countryside
until what had been the main Byzantine recruiting ground, became
virtually a desert, from which most of the surviving non-Turkish
population had fled. When parts of the province were reconquered, the
Byzantines were no longer able to raise any worthwhile force from the
region. ' In consequence they were forced to resort to mercenaries,
from Western Europe, Russia, Scandinavia, and the tribes on their
northern borders. Nevertheless, the professional skill of that army was
