286
The Lifeblood of War
route (MSR) by which BVs could reach the forward units. The Royal
Engineers mounted an ingenious operation which involved building an
air-portable bridge at Fitzroy and flying it under a Chinook to replace
the damaged bridge and re-open the route.
Alter the Argentine surrender, fuel continued to dominate the
logistic scene for some time, mainly because 3rd Commando Brigade
requisitioned all the Argentine transport on arrival in Stanley for
logistic use on the network of roads and tracks within and around the
town. The Rapier
generators too were voracious consumers
CIVGAS, and on one occasion, there were only 90 jerricans of fuel in
Port Stanley, 85 allocated to Rapier. Again, distribution, not bulk
stocks, was the problem.
Four Lessons
The Ministry of Defence in their report to Parliament highlighted
four lessons from the Falklands war. 24 First, the high expenditure of
ammunition, including missiles and anti-submarine weapons. Second,
and following from the first, that the level of logistic support for
operations outside the NATO area needed to be reviewed. Third, the
importance of air-to-air refuelling. Fourth, the significance that civil
resources can make to defence. On the first and second, one can only
comment by saying that they fall into the blinding glimpse of the
obvious department; being lessons that did not need to be learned',
there were plenty of examples in the past to go by, but as Hegel has
said:
*What experience and history teach us is this that people and governments never
have learned anything from history, or acted on principles deduced from it?
On the third lesson, the comment might be, 'fair enough', but ditto
above. On the fourth lesson, at the time of writing, the merchant navy
has been allowed to run down to the extent that a Falklands type
operation might be impossible to repeat,? without using ships under
flags of convenience. Certainly there is no ship that lends itself to being
used as a hospital ship. It is even difficult to find enough of the right
Ype of merchant ships to meet the comparatively modest demands of
NATO exercises. Again, 'ditto above'.
It was fortunate that the commander of 3rd Commando Brigade
was blessed with a highly competent staff, whose achievements are
hard to overrate. Herein lies another lesson, a first class, well trained
staff can make bricks from very little straw. Conversely a poor staff
would have lost the battle for their commander. Lieutenant Colonel
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
287
Hellberg, the commanding officer of the Commando Logistic Regi-
ment, deserves special mention. His regiment, like most military
organisations, reflected their commanding officer's competence. That
they achieved what they did is proof enough of the level of his
professionalism.
The Missing 5th Lesson
The Ministry of Defence report alluded to above fails to spell out the
most important lesson of all; the relationship between logistics and
operations. For all that it is so obvious, it is so often forgotten; if ever
learned in the first place. The reasons for 3rd Commando Brigade
being unable to advance out of the beachhead on D-day, and for
several days after, have been explained, they were above all logistic
reasons. Apparently this was never fully understood in Northwood
and Whitehall, partly because of the command structure. But also, we
contend, because there were few, even the most senior among the
military
and
civilians
in the United Kingdom
with
personal
experience of amphibious operations at higher rank, i.e. one star or
above. Even the handful at the top of the tree, with considerable
experience in the Second World War, had been junior officers, and
concerned with leading their platoons and companies, or equivalent
tasks. The logistics and movement problems of amphibious, or any
other, operations had been no concern of theirs. So when one
distinguished Cabinet Minister, interviewed for a television pro-
gramme after the Falklands war, likened the beachhead at San Carlos
to Anzio, by implication that there was lack of drive, he was falling
into a trap. In attempting to prove his point by the selective use of
military history, he demonstrated his ignorance of the actual reason,
and of the logistic imperatives at the operational level. The majority
of senior officers and their staffs were handicapped by a dearth of
understanding of the logistic realities of fighting a conventional war.
Brush-fire wars and Northern Ireland had provided few logistic
problems, and most peacetime exercises, with their emphasis on
tactical movement, teach false logistic lessons. Commanders on these
exercises are seldom faced with the choice between moving men, and
moving beans, bullets and fuel. In war, if helicopters are in short
supply, and for some reason other means of movement are not
available, or cannot be used, the men will walk carrying some of the
beans and bullets, and the helicopters will be almost exclusively
employed carrying the rest.
