244
The Lifeblood of War
FIG. 7.2
Marching infantry under load, with a difference; this soldier prefers
to carry his pack on his head (Central Press).
groups were escaping overland to Burma through Cox's Bazaar. An
amphibious
operation was quickly
battalion taken
from 2nd
mounted using a reinforced
Corps, and transported in an Indian
merchant vessel, SS Vishwavijaya, which happened to be anchored in
the river Hoogly. Off Cox's Bazaar, the battalion was transferred to the
only available Landing Ship (LST), which was at sea already, and
landed at Cox's Bazaar; the first ever amphibious operation carried out
by the Indian armed forces.
Surrender
General Niazi
On 16 December, with Dacca surrounded by the Indian Army,
surrendered.
it had
taken
12 days for the seven
reinforced divisions of the Indian Army to liberate Bangla Desh, in the
face of four reinforced Pakistani divisions who had had ample time to
prepare, in terrain which favoured the defender. The major share of the
credit for this remarkable achievement must go to Lieutenant General
Aurora for his bold concept, and to
his corps and divisional
War in a Snipe Marsh
245
commanders for maintaining the tempo of operations. Credit is also
due to the Indian Air Force and Indian Navy, for providing close air
support, and in particular for helicopters to air bridge' rivers. The
success of many of the Indian bypassing operations were a direct result
of the speed with which routes round Pakistani positions could be
identified, thanks to the Mukti Bahini. But most critical of all, the
Indians had time to plan and make the necessary logistic arrangements.
Conclusions
In 1971 the Indian Army was mainly an infantry force; for thirty
divisions, there were only 1,500 tanks, 500 APCs, no self-propelled
(SP) artillery and 250 helicopters. Transport was in short supply and
mainly road-bound. The principal road and rail transport links had
been constructed for commercial or strategic purposes before 1947,
when the sub-continent was one country.
Therefore, they did not
necessarily run in directions suitable for operations within the sub-
continent.
Without sufficient transport capable of cross-country
movement, the Indians were faced with the problem that moves off the
main communications axes were difficult to support logistically.® With
eight months to prepare for the war, particularly in the demanding
terrain of Bangla Desh, the Indian Army was able to take steps to offset
some of their logistic shortcomings, for example by requisitioning
civilian transport, and re-allocating transport to formations that were
short. However, these expedients did not always prove satisfactory.?
Had the Pakistanis opted for a different operational plan, the Indians
might have found themselves expending more ammunition, and the
war might have lasted longer, with accompanying logistic difficulties. A
combination of time to prepare, and an inept Pakistani plan, allowed
Indian logistic shortcomings to be overcome. The shorter the time
there is to prepare, the more important logistic mobility becomes.
Armour, infantry, and guns can be moved relatively swiftly off the main
communications network to meet the unexpected, or carry out moves
in response to the operational situation. But without ammunition and
fuel, they will rapidly become ineffective. So their logistic support must
also be capable of keeping up with them in terrain with few, or no
roads. This requires large numbers of suitable load carriers, preferably
a combination of helicopters and rough terrain vehicles, even at the
expense of cutting down on teeth arms.lº The problems of logistic
mobility were to show themselves to be the key issue in the land battle,
in the campaign described in the next chapter.
