118
The Lifeblood of War
enemy lines. The planners refined the options to two beachheads:
Inchon, 18 miles from Seoul; and Kunsan, 100 miles south of Inchon.
MacArthur favoured Inchon, the Navy and the Marines preferred
Kunsan. The lack of suitable beaches at Inchon, the large tidal range,
and navigational problems made it a far less attractive prospect from a
Naval point of view.16
MacArthur held firm for a landing at Inchon, despite the advice of
the Navy. He considered that the North Koreans had neglected their
rear and were 'dangling on a thin logistical rope that could be quickly
cut in the Seoul area, that the enemy had committed practically all his
forces against Eighth Army in the south and had no trained reserves
and little power of recuperation'. Precisely because it was so difficult to
land at Inchon, the enemy would believe that no one would be foolish
enough to attempt such a move. He also considered that the quick
capture of Seoul would be a psychological as well as a strategic victory.
in his words: the anvil on which the hammer of Walker's Eighth Army
from the south would crush the North Koreans'.
A landing at Kunsan would not sever the North Korean supply line,
and succeed in destroying their army."' As a landing never took place
at Kunsan, it is difficult to disprove MacArthur's contention that such
a move would not bring about the cutting of the North Korean line of
communication. However, a glance at a map shows that the distance
from Kunsan to Taejon, the nearest road and rail centre on the North
Korean lines of communication to Kunsan, is 50 miles as the crow flies,
and nearer 70 miles along the twisting road. Taejon itself was only
marginally further from the North Korean Army's positions, than from
Kunsan. It was conceivable that the North Koreans could have moved
troops to contest the seizure of Taejon, once the landing at Kunsan had
been made, and bottled up the landing force in a second perimeter.
Inchon being further away, would take longer to reinforce. In the event,
it took thirteen days for the landing force to secure Seoul, only eighteen
miles from the beaches.
MacArthur got his way. The landing was set for 15 September 1950.
The force assigned to the operation was the newly formed X Corps,
commanded by Almond until then MacArthur's chief of staff, and
consisting of the Ist Marine Division and 7th Infantry Division. The
landings at Inchon were a complete success, and Seoul was captured
on 28 September. Until the link-up with Eighth Army, the Inchon
operation was supported exclusively by ship-borne supply, much of
which had come straight from the United States, thereby avoiding
double handling in Japan or Pusan. Herculean efforts which had been
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
119
made in the United States to meet MacArthur's logistic requirements
made this amphibious landing possible.
The Eighth Army Breaks Out-Link-Up
Eighth Army began its attack all along the Pusan Perimeter on 16
September, aiming to fix the enemy to prevent him moving forces to
meet the threat to his rear. Walker had logistic problems. His most
serious shortage was artillery ammunition. 18 Even for the break-out,
he had imposed a ration of fifty rounds per-gun per-day for important
attacks, and twenty-five rounds for secondary attacks, until a ship-load
of 105 mm shells arrived just in time for their use in the offensive. To
begin with there was hard fighting, as the North Koreans resisted
strongly. But from 19 September the effect of the Inchon landing and
the battles round Seoul became apparent when the North koreans
started withdrawing from around the Pusan Perimeter, and moving
north. By 23 September, they had withdrawn completely, and were in
full retreat. MacArthur's choice had been vindicated. Eighth Army and
the ROK Army advanced on eight axes. The leading troops of US
I Corps linked up with X Corps at Osan on 27 September 1950, exactly
twelve weeks after Task Force Smith's battle with the advancing North
Koreans.
To Sieze a Port: Wonsan
After the junction of Eighth Army and X Corps, it would have
appeared logical to place the latter under Walker. Apparently Walker
thought so too, because shortly before the link-up, hé sent a signal to
MacArthur asking to be kept informed of X Corp's movements and
plans so that he could plan for the junction. It then emerged that
MacArthur had plans for another amphibious hook by X Corps, this
time on the East coast at Wonsan, while Eighth Army continued with
the main advance in the West. This plan was almost entirely driven by
logistical arguments on the part of MacArthur in support of his plan to
advance on a broad front to the borders of North Korea. He reasoned
that he had to seize a port through which he could supply his forces
operating on the eastern side of Korea. Two corridors ran to Wonsan
from the west coast: one from Seoul, one from Pyongyang, the North
Korean capital. A railway and a road ran along each corridor. North of
the Pyongyang corridor there were no satisfactory lateral communi-
cations. Therefore, any operations in the rugged mountains of the
