128
The Lifeblood of War
removable spans each night, allowing the bridge to be used throughout
the hours of darkness.
The Resourceful Enemy
Communist resourcefulness was not the only reason for STRAN-
GLE's partial success. In a period of static defence, the consumption of
ammunition and supplies was low enough for the Communists not
merely to support their troops adequately, but also to stockpile
supplies and build up their troop strength. By early January 1952,
General Ridgway assessed that unless the Communists were forced to
expend their supplies at a faster rate, by a change in the battle situation,
they would be in a position to mount and sustain a major offensive. Rail
cutting operations were accordingly stepped up, to include putting out
of action ever longer stretches of line. To begin with, this took the
Communists by surprise and lines were sometimes out of action for as
much as ten to fourteen days at a time. However, the Communists
countered by moving flak guns to the threatened areas, shooting down
ever increasing numbers of attacking aircraft. Communist manpower
was also mobilised to meet the threat. The North Koreans had three
brigades of 7,700 men each, engaged exclusively on railway repair. At
every major station 50 men were positioned to carry out the skilled
work, and 10 man teams were spaced at four mile intervals along the
track. When a rail walker reported a break, these teams rushed to the
scene. Unskilled local labour was moved in at once to refill holes and
repair the road-bed. At night the experts laid sleepers and rails.
American intelligence estimated that up to half a million troops and
civilians were engaged on rail repair work. In this way the Communists
have constantly been able to repair a given stretch of track on a vital
line in twelve hours or less. On occasions repair crews were found
repairing fresh cuts while strikes were still being made', reported naval
pilots.?" The Communists also hid their trains during daylight in the
numerous tunnels in the mountainous country. Wagons containing the
important supplies, such as fuel and ammunition, were located in the
centre part of the train. Attempts by United Nations airmen to skip
bombs into the mouths of tunnels, merely blocked the tunnel entrance.
Unskilled local labour could clear the debris in daylight, and the trains
steamed on as soon as it was dark. As spring 1952 approached
STRANGLE was becoming less and less cost-effective.
Even an
operation known as SATURATE, which consisted of concentrating on
a particular stretch of road-bed around-the-clock proved disappoint-
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
129
ing. The Communists repaired the section in six days, meanwhile,
during SATURATE, other parts of the network were left free from
attack. Muscle power and simple tools were frustrating all the efforts of
air power, summed up in a sentence from the United States Air Force
historical study: to continue the rail attacks would be, in effect, to pit
skilled pilots, equipped with modern expensive aircraft, against
unskilled oriental coolie laborers armed with pick and shovel??8 This
extract also unconsciously reveals a lack of understanding of, and
contempt for, the Asian peasant; a sentiment that was to persist into the
next war in which the United States was to be involved in Asia, with
dire consequences. It must be said that the United Nations air forces
were unable to bomb at night and in bad weather, during which repairs
could be effected and trains moved. By the end of April 1950, the
interdiction campaign had reached stalemate. In May the realisation of
this led to a significant change in the air interdiction methods employed
by the United Nations.
However, all the efforts had not been completely wasted, a report
from Eighth Army to Ridgway in mid-March included the paragraph:
The air interdiction program has not been able to prevent the enemy from
accumulating supplies at the front in a static situation. It has, however, been a
major factor in preventing the enemy from attaining equality or superiority in
riler and defense capabily or at the front,
Thus it has also decreased the
The new tactics involved fighter-bombers striking at the Communist
supplies, equipment and troops massed behind their lines, while
medium bombers devoted their attention to airfields, railway systems,
and supply and communication centres. In addition attacks were
mounted on hydro-electric systems in the north of North Korea, which
resulted in a two week power black out of the whole country, and only
gradual restoration for weeks afterwards. This was followed by further
attacks on industrial and strategic targets, which continued up to the
end of the war, aimed at putting pressure on the Communist side in the
Armistice negotiations, as well as reducing the war-fighting capability
of the North Koreans. The ending of the rail interdiction programme
released more aircraft for close air support of ground
troops,
particularly heartening during the bitter battles of winter 1952 and
spring 1953. These battles usually started with massed Chinese attacks,
followed by United Nations counter-attacks, often resulting in hand-
to-hand fighting, as features with names like Porkchop, Old Baldy,
Spud Hill, Reno, Vegas, and the Hook changed hands, or were held in
desperate fights. Despite the air effort against the Communist supply
