168
The Lifeblood of War
Therefore, any idea of disrupting Giap's logistic installations and lines
of communication from Dien Bien
Phu was a fantasy. On 29
December, Navarre spotted this, and ordered Cogny to prepare a plan
to withdraw the garrison. Cogny did not deliver the plan until three
weeks later, by which time the Vietminh had surrounded Dien Bien
Phu in great strength. Cogny suggested that the withdrawal plan be
shelved, and Navarre, who had only been lukewarm about withdraw-
ing, agreed. If Dien Bien Phu was to be held against heavy artillery fire
and massed infantry attacks, military prudence demanded that certain
steps be taken to make the position as strong as possible. A
combination of the lethargy referred to earlier, and logistic weakness
resulted in incomplete and inadequate preparations.
Inadequate Preparation for the Defence
To build a position that can withstand prolonged pounding by
artillery requires copious supplies of construction materials. Wood
taken from every building in the valley provided only about 5 per cent
of the shoring required. Parties sent to the surrounding hills to cut
wood, were driven back by the Vietminh. The French airlift was
already stretched supplying the daily consumption of the garrison, and
had no spare capacity to fly in the tons of sandbags, concrete, steel and
wooden beams; let alone the plant, bulldozers, diggers, and concrete
mixers that would have been needed to build a really strong position.
Forced by lack of materials to dig, and without sufficient revetting, the
light, friable soil only allowed shallow positions to be constructed. The
earth soon broke up into dust under artillery fire, making further
digging impossible. The high water table softened the soil, causing
many of the bunkers to collapse, and flooded others. The monsoon
rains, arriving in April, earlier than usual, flooded out whole areas of
the defensive positions.
Because the trees in the valley had to be cut for construction of
bunkers, and what brush remained was soon gathered as fuel for
cooking fires, the French positions were quickly stripped bare of
natural camouflage. The movement of hundreds of men around, within,
and between positions, soon wore a web of paths, which combined with
the freshly turned earth of the bunkers and gun pits, enabled the
Vietminh on the surrounding hills to pin-point every position. This state
of affairs reveals a lack of grip by commanders
from
Castries
downwards. There seems to have been no attempt made to dig dummy
positions, institute track discipline, fly in camouflage nets, or ban the
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
use of brush for cooking fires. By 1954 most armies had equipped their
soldiers with small, portable stoves using smokeless, solid fuel blocks,
to avoid the time consuming and revealing business of cooking on
wood fires. Camouflage nets are cheap to make and could have been
produced in Indo-China. Although they are bulky, they are also light,
and considerable numbers can be dropped in bundles from large
formations of aircraft, at low level, without need for parachutes. This
method of delivery is quick, dispensing with the need to keep aircraft on
the ground, taking up valuable space on a limited airstrip while they are
unloaded.
Although the French defensive plan, like any other, called for
counter-attacks to eject penetrations by attackers, few plans were
made, and none rehearsed. Valuable airlift had been allocated to lifting
in light tanks, a sensible move in view of the Vietminh superiority of
numbers, but lack of armour. But no training was done in infantry/tank
co-operation.
This lackadaisical approach extended to the prep-
arations for the artillery fire plan. There were insufficient guns, poor co-
ordination, and the open, uncamouflaged gun pits became death traps
for the crews.
There was time to replace the unreliable T'ai battalions and the
eleven companies of the T'ai Mobile Group at Dien Bien Phu with
troops whose morale, training and steadfastness could be relied upon
to sustain them in the tough days ahead. It was not done.
Most of these deficiencies in planning and preparation flowed from
French underestimation of the Vietminh and Giap. They believed that
the heaviest artillery they would have to face would be mortars and a
few 75 mm howitzers, for which there would be little ammunition. As
the Vietminh attacks came in they would be broken up by artillery fire
and air attack. Any guns or mortars that revealed their positions by
firing, would be quickly neutralised by air attacks and counter-battery
fire. Consequently, there was, in French eyes, nothing unduly to worry
about.
While the French had been making desultory preparations, the
Vietminh had, by the end of January 1954, concentrated three infantry
divisions with supporting artillery, anti-aircraft units, and logistic
support units around Dien Bien Phu. The staff work and logistic
planning to complete such a move, and maintain a force of this size was
a major achievement, and an indication of the level of professional
expertise attained by the staffs of the Vietminh Main Force formations
and units.
Meanwhile Navarre was pre-occupied with operation ATLANTE in
