324
The Lifeblood of War
Where Now With the Tank?
This is not to suggest that the tank has had its day; yet. But its future
is probably limited. Sheer economics alone militate against wholesale
scrapping of all British AFVs in one fell swoop. But it is important to
decide whether or not the present generation of tanks should be
replaced with what amounts to just a "better tank', or by something
absolutely different. What should be done, it is suggested, is a gradual
re-organisation along the lines suggested below, over a period of years.
Clearly the scenario will be politically driven, but by intelligent reading
of the play, it should be possible to ensure that changes in the British
defence posture are timed, so that although they might not exactly
synchronise with shifts in policy, they are at least not too far behind the
game. The first step is to start thinking the unthinkable now.
Thinking the Unthinkable
The Royal Navy and the Royal Marines
The Royal Navy would retain its present roles, but there would be a
move for more ships, including, eventually, carriers and assault ships to
be built with the ability to go sub-surface. Nava! manpower would be
reduced by having smaller crews in warships, following the trend that
still continues as technology improves, and ships progressively become
less man-power intensive. As suggested by Simpkin, there would be
two Marine brigades, although the overall manpower strength of the
Royal Marines would not increase. Each brigade would consist of an
assault helicopter commando, a light mechanised regiment (army
cavalry), a light commando, an artillery regiment (army), engineer
squadron (army), and a logistic regiment (marine/army mix). The
manpower for the additional brigade would be achieved by rationalis-
ing training, dispensing with landing craft crews when these are no
longer required, disbanding bands, and reducing the number of officers
in units. All helicopters, except those with a strictly maritime role,
would be flown by the Army Air Cavalry (see below). It could be argued
that the Royal Marines should become part of the Army, and this
possibility should not be ruled out, especially if economies could be
made, particularly in training; and career opportunities increased.
The Royal Air Force
The Royal Air Force would retain its present roles, except that it
would hand over all its helicopters to the Army Air Cavalry. It would
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
325
need modernised tactical transport aircraft, of the type envisaged by
the European Future Large Aircraft Group (EUROFLAG), the FLA
tactical transport (tactran), about which more later.
The Regular Army
The Regular Army would start to structure itself as suggested by
Simpkin, but modified, and would, following total withdrawal from
Germany, eventually consist of something along the following lines:
• A corps headquarters.
› Three divisional headquarters.
• One Special Forces Brigade,
consisting of an SAS regiment and an SBS
regiment, the latter from the Royal Marines.
• Two parachute brigades.
• Assault helicopter brigades (number to be decided but one provided by the
Foot Guards).
> Light infantry brigades (number to be decided but one to be provided by the
Light Division).
› Three light mechanised brigades (one Household Cavalry).
• Four artillery brigades.
• Four engineer brigades.
• Logistic groups.
Definitions
Before going further, it is necessary to establish a few definitions to
clarify terms used in later discussion. The term 'air mobile' will refer to a
force that rides to battle or fights in helicopters. An 'air-landed' force is
one which is taken to its destination by fixed-wing transport aircraft,
which lands on arrival and disgorges its load. A 'parachute' force is self-
explanatory.
'Airborne' will be used as an all embracing term for a
combination of two or more of the forces described above.
Re-organisation
Brigades
would have organic artillery, engineer, and logistic
support. Infantry battalions would be much smaller than at present,
but with fire-and-forget, all-weather, hand-held missiles capable of
more 'punch'. Cavalry regiments not included in the light mechanised
formations, would form part of the new Army Air Cavalry, which
would take over the Army Air Corps, and change its name (but, by
sheer coincidence, not its initials). The Army Air Cavalry would fly and
service all helicopters involved in the land and amphibious battle. They
would not, as in the United States Army, provide the 'bayonets', the
