230
The Lifeblood of War
Magan on his right flank. By nightfall on 24 October, Adan's two
brigades had reached the outskirts of Suez. At first light, Magen's
leading armoured brigade, down to 17 tanks, reached the shore of the
gulf of Suez, at Ras Adabiah, ten kilometres south-west of Suez town.
The encirclement of the Egyptian Third Army was now almosi
complete.
Rebuff at Suez
Adan's attempts to capture Suez were, however, rebuffed. Although
two of his armoured brigades fought their way into the centre of town,
clearing it was a different matter.
This was a far cry from slashing
attacks and massed tank charges in the open desert; instead, a grinding
house-to-house battle, where a handful could hold up a host, inflicting
heavy losses. A battle, moreover, for which the Israeli Army had neither
the training nor the experience. Eventually, the Israelis settled for
sealing off the town from the desert.
Containment and Cease-Fire
The Israelis now turned their attention to squeezing the Egyptian
Third Army until it surrendered. Success would more than compensate
for the defeats the Israelis had suffered initially. As the ceasefire was
finally imposed before Israeli redeployment had been completed, one
can only speculate on the outcome. Howevst, despite the Third Army'S
position, they still had plentiful stocks of food and ammunition, and
water was available from wells in Suez. The Egyptians were also able to
organise a supply route across the Gulf of Suez. 24 The Third Army's
morale was high as they repulsed repeated Israeli attacks on their
northern flank. To bring sufficient pressure to bear on the Third Army,
the Israelis ordered Adan back to the East Bank, leaving only two
divisions in the salient on the West Bank. The Egyptians sealed off this
salient. For the Israelis to concentrate their efforts on attacking Third
Army on the East Bank, would have left their troops in the salient
thinly spread, inviting attack by the Egyptians, who might have
battered through to Suez. It is possible, however, that had the cease-fire
not intervened, the Israelis, with their overwhelming air superiority,
and greater skill in armoured warfare, could ultimately have succeeded
in forcing the Third Army to surrender.
The Value of American Support to Israel
How important
was the American supply effort to the Israeli
prosecution of the war, and the way in which they fought? Within two
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
231
days of the start of the war, the Israelis sent civilian Boeing 707, 720 and
747 airliners to the United States to pick up small quantities of urgently
needed specialised equipment, such as chaff to confuse radars, and
'smart' bombs to hit pin-point targets. But the capacity of even the 747s
was too limited to lift large amounts of bulky and heavy items. The first
of these flights left the United States on 9 October. A limited American
airlift also began on 9 or 10 October with small quantities of anti-tank
and artillery ammunition, Sidewinder and Sparrow air-to-air missiles
and chaff.
However, shaken by early
Arab success, and high
ammunition expenditure on the first two days of the war, the Israeli
Government came to the conclusion that another week of consumption
at that rate and Israel, shorn of supplies, would be overrun. On 12
October the Israeli Ambassador presented a note to the United States
Government part of which read: the future of the State of Israel is at
stake: On 13 October, President Nixon decided to provide the Israelis
with almost everything they wanted, even at the cost of digging into
American war reserves. On 14 October, the first aircraft of this lift
arrived in Israel. Over a period of 33 days the C-141s and C-5s flew 566
sorties, lifting a total of 22,395 tons. In addition 56 combat aircraft, A-4
Skyhawks and F-4 Phantoms, were delivered from the USAAF in
Germany, possibly via, or air-to-air refuelled by tankers from, the
carriers of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean 25
It has been argued that the Israelis would not have beaten off the
Egyptian offensive of 14 October without American re-supply, in
particular of TOW wire-guided anti-tank missiles. This is difficult to
substantiate. The first aircraft of the main airlift did not arrive in Israel
until 14 October, far too late to influence the battle. On the matter of the
TOWs, Dupuy26 who spoke to Adan, Elazar and others, is unable to
discover if any were available on 14 October, but has concluded that
there may have been a few in Sharon's division. Adan categorically
denied having any in his. Whereas Keisewetter, an armoured officer in
the Bundeswehr, who visited Israel in November 1973, and spoke to a
number of Israeli officers, mentions that TOWs were employed on the
Golan front. 27 If there were TOWs, even in small quantities, who trained
the operators? TOW has different sighting and control arrangements to
SS11 and SS10 with which the Israelis were equipped, but which were so
unreliable that they had ceased to use them. A number of Israeli students
on courses in the United States were ordered to the US Army Infantry
School at Fort Benning to learn how to operate and, as important,
maintain, the TOW system. However, by the time these 'instructors'
arrived back in Israel, on 24 October, the war was virtually over. It was,
