The Lifeblood of War
FIG. 3.6 Mules-Burma (IWM).
having on the battle. When the Japanese attacked in the centre, Slim
was faced by a logistic choice: maintain air supply to the Chindits at the
originally planned level, at the expense of aircraft to supply 4 Corps in
their crucial battle to keep the Japanese out of the Imphal plain; or vice
versa It could hardly have taken much cerebration to arrive at the
solution he did.
The 14th Army Advances
We must now return to the main battle. The 14th Army was on the
threshold of the campaign that would eventually carry them to
Rangoon and beyond. As they followed up the retreating Japanese,
they opened the distance from their bases, and soon found that the
replenishment of ammunition entailed a round trip of 100 miles, a
journey that could take 24 hours because of the state of the roads, and
in particular, landslides blocking the route. To cater for this, mobile
ammunition points were set up, consisting of trucks loaded with small
arms ammunition, anti-tank shells, and some other natures; but, for
Three Campaigns in a Global War
97
lack of sufficient trucks, not artillery ammunition. Fuel, artillery
ammunition, and rations were dumped as far forward as possible, and
units came back to collect as required. Fuel usage was higher than
normal in an advance of this nature, because guns were ferried forward,
rather than towed; this being found easier.
As the advance gathered momentum,
26 and the army drew further
and further from its bases on the Imphal plain, it became necessary to
set up the North Burma line of communication which will be described
in full at this stage, although, plainly, each section could only be set up
after it had been cleared of the enemy. It was a combination of road,
water, and rail: from Manipur Road, 320 miles by road to Kalewa on
the west bank of the Chindwin; thence by river, 240 miles to Myingyan;
and the 430 miles to Rangoon, by road or rail. A total of 990 miles, -.
more than twice the distance over which the Germans supplied their
thrust on Moscow in 1941; and only marginally less than the lines of
communication of Rommel's Deutsche Afrika Korps in the desert,
and of Hoth's Army Group B advancing on Stalingrad. And these
figures discount the distances and difficulties involved in a line of
communication that ran from Britain and the United States to
Calcutta, and from Calcutta to Manipur Road. But even a recitation
of the distances do not convey the complete picture in the Burma
campaign. The weather and terrain as always had a dramatic effect on
logistics as well as tactics. For example the turn-round time from
Manipur Road to Kelawa, a total journey of 640 miles, took 7 days in
dry weather; in the monsoon it took 14-16. Air supply played an
increasingly important part in covering these distances; by April
1945, out of 14th Army's daily requirement of 2,090 tons of supplies of
all kinds, an average of 88 per cent (1,845 tons) were delivered by air.
The economic range of the Dakota was 250 miles, after which the
payload decreased in proportion to the distance flown. So, if possible,
supplies were air-landed rather than air-dropped, 27 and, as a rule of
thumb, only troops out of economic truck range of an airfield, or
operating off the axis, were supplied by air-drop. In January 1945,
the aim of 15 Corps in the Arakan campaign was to capture sites
suitable for the construction of airfields from which to maintain the
remainder of 14th Army, now consisting of two corps, 4 and 33, in
the re-conquest of Burma. While 33 Corps cleared the Yenan-
gyaung oilfields, and then advanced parallel with the Irrawaddy,
4 Corps consisting of about 70,000 men, 250 tracked and 8,000
wheeled vehicles, thrust down the Mandalay-Toungoo-Rangoon
road.
SONY
