214
The Lifeblood of War
The Value of American Support
Although the NVA made substantial territorial gains in the Easter
offensive, they attained none of their objectives. On the whole, in
contrast to Lam Son 719, the ARVN fought the defensive battle well.
The American advisers, staying with their units whatever the outcome,
played a vital part in this metamorphosis.
The advisers, besides
virtually commanding the ARVN units and formations they advised,
buttressed the commanders at all levels. Well led, the ARVN could
fight as well as anybody. As important, the advisers planned and
controlled the awesome power wielded by the American B-52s trom
Guam and U-Tapao in Thailand, the close support by ground attack
jets and the gunships and TOW Cobras (wire guided anti-armour
missiles mounted on Cobra gunships). American air power blunted the
NVA armoured thrusts and destroyed huge quantities of tanks, guns
and equipment, as well as inflicting mass casualties on the NVA. Time
and again, assaults withered away in the face of air strikes. In one area,
the B-52s bombed an NVA regiment moving in the open.
When the
dust cleared, the regiment had vanished without trace. United States
C- power was also critical in supplying the battle, the helicopters and
C-130s made resistance possible, and fuelled the ARVN counter-
Giap's Mistakes
The NVA helped by making mistakes. This was the first time they
had fought an armoured battle on this scale. Their command and
poderol was slow, and tactical employment of armour and infantry
attastrian. By fighting on three fronts, and not co-ordinating his
move th Crap allowed the AR VN to shift troops, and the Americans to
move their air power to meet them. He actually had no alternative. His
logistic system was still inflexible and inadequate. He could not mass
his army on one front because he could not support such a deployment.
Had he stockpiled behind one massed thrust, he did not possess the
ability to push supplies forward from the stockpiles at the rate
(thousands of tons a day), required to feed a high intensity battle being
fought by his whole army. Even had he possessed the means, the large
concentrations of supplies, and long convoys of trucks required to
support massed mobile warfare would have been hit by American air
strikes. Because of the time it took to build up for each push, he was
forced into the attack-lull-attack-lull pattern that has been noted
before in this war. Giap was facing a new operational situation; because
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
215
he was attacking, using armour, he was forced to expend his supplies at
a rat faster than he could replenish. He was attempting the impossible,
to conduct mobile warfare with high ammunition and fuel expenditure,
and the need to refuel and re-ammunition well forward, by day if
necessary, if momentum was to be maintained, in the face of air
supremacy. This was totally different from the situation noted by
Sessor in Italy, and the American attempts to cut the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. In the former the Allies were attacking. In the latter, Giap could
trim his operations to take account of his supply situation.
As the Easter offensive ground to a halt, there was much euphoria at
the political level in the United States about the success of Vietnamisa-
tion. American air power, including the vital logistic and troop lift
capability, and the crucial part played by the advisers concealed the
cracks that stil lay under the surface in the ARVN . The no
leadership, poor organisation and the lack of mobility. The
the ARVN would be on its own.
The Full Weight of United States Air Power Unleashed
In December 1972, after fruitless negotiations for most of the year,
the Americans "bombed the North Vietnamese to the confere
At last American air power was allowed to be exercised v
hit the North Vietnamese where it would have the m
economy, their industry, their military pote
Haiphong harbour was mined, not for the
cutting off Soviet supplies.
But more im
restricted attacks of the years before, often.
strikes were aimed where they would hurt. Pre
extensive strike-free areas particularly around Ha
and the North Vietnamese had moved their m
logistic dumps into there sanctuaries. This ti
effort aimed at all military installations in th
well as railway yards, bridges, roads, elect
works. The Red River dikes, destruction of
e flc
the area to a depth of eleven feet in some pla
Improved techniques helped accuracy. In an
paign that year, the railway bridge at Thanh Hoa, o
States Navy had lost 97 aircraft between 1965 an
bringing it down, was destroyed in one run in May,
