The Lifeblood of War
strategy, campaign history, a treatise on the art of war, in addition to
being a biography of Jackson. It remains, to this day, one of the best
books on the Civil War. It was widely studied in the British Army, and
the consequent resurgence of interest in the Civil War which both it and
Henderson's lectures engendered, were to have a perceptible influence
on military thought in Britain. There was a snag, Henderson's writings
concentrate on the war in Virginia to the exclusion of the campaigns in
the West, and on the period leading up to Jackson's death in May 1863.
Grant and Sherman get only passing mention, even when the former,
although General-in-Chief of Union Armies in all theatres of war,
accompanied Meade's Army of the Potomac and directed its efforts for
a year, in the very theatre in which Henderson's book is set. Although
Henderson advised officers of all ranks to study Grant's campaigns in
the Wilderness as they provided a clue to the fighting of the future,
particularly as a lesson in how the ability to manoeuvre had turned
Lee's entrenchments, the British Army paid more attention to the first
half of the American Civil War, the period before the armies started
entrenching to offset the increasing firepower of contemporary
weapons; the period before the year of grinding battles of attrition that
led to Lee's surrender. In any case, the doctrine of the traditional
offensive, which played down the employment of trenches,
brilliantly demonstrated by the Prussians, was favoured by the military
theorists of the day, and the British were no exception. The short war,
fought with great intensity, was the war of the future.
The Austro-Prussian and Franco-Prussian Wars
Before turning to the war which was to overturn so many of the
theories held by most armies pre-1914, it is worth glancing at the two
wars which so entranced military thinkers, almost to the exclusion of
the far longer Civil War which preceded the later of the two by only six
years; the Austro-Prussian and Franco-Prussian wars, to see if they
contain any logistic pointers to the future. The logistic aspects have
already been well covered in van Creveld's superb book, Supplying
War, and whilst it is not the intention to cover all the same ground, it
may be fruitful to look at two particular aspects, the effect of railways
on the campaigns, and ammunition expenditure rates.
Both, and particularly the Franco-Prussian war, have been called
'Railway Wars', which conjures up a mental picture of the armies, with
their supplies, riding swiftly into battle, fighting, and riding on. But as
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
FIG. 2.6
As old as antiquity, ox wagon (IWM).
we have already seen in North America, railways have a number of
shortcomings in war. Soldiers cannot fight from the train; once they de-
train, their movement is at a foot pace. The lines, which take a long time
to build, may not run in the direction the general would like. Once the
railhead is reached, which may be miles from the area of operations,
supplies must be transferred to wagons, in those days drawn by horses
or mules which consumed forage, and might take days to reach the
army, particularly if it was advancing away from the railhead. What the
railways were able to provide was a swift means of mobilisation.
Napoleon took four months to raise and equip an army in Southern
France and move into Italy. In 1866, against the Austrians, the
Prussians mobilised 280,000 men and deployed them into the frontier
area in under six weeks. There were not enough lines, nor did they run
to destinations to fit Moltke's plan, but because it was still quicker to
move men by train, he took a risk, which ended in the Prussian Army
being split between the westernmost railhead at Zeitz, and the
easternmost at Neisse, a distance of 290 miles. Fortunately, the
Austrians did not take advantage of this, and through their passive
strategy and bad generalship, rather than the brilliance of Moltke, lost
the war. In 1870, the Germans deployed 400,000 men in 11 days. By
then there were nine lines available to the Germans to move their
troops to the French frontier, compared with the three and a half
available for use against Austria. As the railway networks within
Germany, after 1866, were built with an eye to their usefulness in war,
and the French were the likely enemy, the lines ran to where the
commanders wished to go, within Germany. Once in France, however,
it was a different matter. The French railways did not always run in the
