232
The Lifeblood of War
in fact, good tactics on the part of the Israelis that defeated the Egyptians,
not a handful of allegedly war winning weapons.
Planning for the Israeli counter-offensive across the Canal started well
before it was known that there would be a substantial American supply
effort. The plan was approved by Gonen on 11 October, the day before
the Israeli Ambassador presented the emotional note to the Americans.
According to Dupuy,28 it was discovered after the war that, with the
exception of one or two natures of ammunition, the Israelis never
actually used up their pre-war stocks. Van Creveld maintains that the
shortages at the front were caused by hoarding of up to su per cent of
stocks of ammunition at various points along the supply pipeline. The
Israelis finished the war with more than they began, thanks to American
supply. It is doubtlul whether the American airlift had any influence on
the outcome of any battle in this war. However, it is probably true to
state that it affected the way in which the Israelis fought, because they
always had at the back of their minds the knowledge that stocks would
not run out.
Striking a Logistical Balance
It is evident that, at the operational level, the Israelis usually struck a
nice balance between what was logistically possible and what was not,
without letting logistics bear down too heavily upon them. Bar Lev
stopping further crossings on the first day of the cross-Canal operation,
despite pressure from Sharon, and Adan's measures to open up his line
of communication while he headed for Suez, are the marks of level-
headed generalship. Most logisticians, in most armies, would recoil
from the idea of pushing three divisions across a double water obstacle,
which involved their line of communication running across the flank of
a superior and undefeated army, at the most only 8 kilometres away. It
was a nice judgement on the part of the Israelis that they would get
away with it. If to some it smacks of "bash on regardless', it is worth
bearing in mind that if logisties is about supply, it is also about
movement. In this respect, as in so many others, the Israelis, with their
canny preparation of crossing sites and the roads leading to them, and
their skill in improvisation when all did not go to plan, showed
themselves to be operational masters of the battlefield.
Principal Lessons: A Watershed in the Study of Logistics
However, the war also showed that high attrition rates are a
consequence of a confrontation between two sides who both possess
Into Africa-Sinai to Suez
233
modern weapons, and are both determined to win. The exact figures
have not been published, but there is general agreement that the Israelis
Lost between 97 and 102 combat aircraft. The combined losses by the
Egyptians and Syrians amounted to around 347 to 387 combat aircraft,
and 41 helicopters. All but three of the Israeli aircraft were shot down
by SAMs or anti-aircraft fire. The Egyptians and Syrians lost 334
aircraft in air-to-air combat with the Israeli air force. The Egyptians
lost 900 AFVs, the Syrians 1,050, and the Israelis 810.30,31 There is
universal agreement that the loss rate, particularly in tanks and
aircraft, took everybody by surprise. 32 Throughout history, a clash
between mass armies has produced mass casualties in men and
materiel. The attrition rate experienced in the Arab-Israeli war of 1973
raises the question of how long a major war between the super-powers
and their allies, could be sustained after losses which, in view of the
greater numbers that would be engaged, would be higher in absolute
terms.
Herzog claims33 that, in 1973, the tank production of the United
States was 30 tanks a month, 36U a year. The soviets were able lo
resupply Syria with all tanks lost in the war (1,050). This followed, or
was concurrent with, shipments of tanks totalling over 1,000 to Egypt,
Iraq, Algeria, Somalia, India and the two Yemens. The Russians, with a
mathematical and analytical approach to strategy and the operation
art, are likely to be better prepared to meet high attrition rates than t
West, whose amouries are not based on the threat, but of
the
defence budgets will stand. However, it remains to be see
could maintain their tempo of operations against a detery
This will be discussed in a later chapter. But the Ara
represents a major watershed in the study of logistics
conflict, in that it serves notice that the sophisticated weapon
which allow operations to be carried out at such a high tem
expensive that supplies are not virtually limitless as they w
wars. The high tempo of itself is a voracious consumer
systems which make it possible.
