152
The Lifeblood of War
Salan Takes Over: Withdrawal from Hoa Binh
Salan decided to re-open Route Coloniales 6, and to clear the
undergrowth from the roadside. It took twelve infantry battalions and
three artillery groups eleven days to clear twenty-five miles of road. At
this point Salan decided to withdraw from Hoa Binh which had
become a trap. Besides he needed the troops to deal with the two
Vietminh divisions who had successfully infiltrated the Delta.
He
succeeded in evacuating the Hoa Binh garrison in a conventional,
phased operation; withdrawing units through each other, from one
defensive position to the next. On the first day, Giap was taken by
surprise, enabling the French and 1,000 Muong civilians to get back
over the Black River during the night unmolested. He struck the next
morning and a savage running fight ensued. Last back in to the safety of
the de Lattre Line was a battalion of the Foreign Legion. The French
artillery had expended over 30,000 rounds in three days, and the
French Air Force had provided continuous close air support. The
French lost 5,000 men, and the Vietminh at least as many. The Hoa
Binh battle was a pointer to the future, which the French chose to
ignore. Despite having been clearly shown that they had little offensive
capability outside the Delta, very largely for logistic reasons, they
persisted in what Fall has called, their search for the big set-piece battle
in which they could outmanoeuvre and outgun the enemy? 15
Hoa Binh had also underlined the difficulties faced by Giap when he
was forced to react to a swiftly changing tactical situation, such as the
well executed and sudden French withdrawal; of which he had no
warning, because the local inhabitants, the Muongs, were hostile. He
was hampered by lack of good radios, and the Vietminh propensity to
plan in great detail and rehearse. But most of all, he was encumbered by
a logistic system that could not respond to a change of axis at short
notice.
De Lattre's Approach to the United States
Despite his considerable achievements, particularly in restoring
French morale, de Lattre's first and only offensive had failed. He was
more successful in achieving another aim: to increase the volume and
pace of delivery of American military material. To this end,
in
September and October 1951, he visited the United States. He realised
that his mission would be greatly assisted if he could convince the
American leaders and population that the Korean and Indo-China Wars
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
153
were all part of the same conflict: against 'Red colonialism'; and that
the West in general, and America in particular had as much to lose in
Indo-China as in Korea. At the Pentagon he was specific in his warnings
of the outcome if Indo-China was lost, and, although he did not refer to it
as such, he used the terminology of what was to become the domino
theory? 16 De Lattre outlined his supply difficulties, for example during
the Day River campaign there were at times less than 6,000 artillery
shells in the whole of Indo-China. Lack of reserve ammunition had
prevented any counter-attacks for eight days. Lack of airlift had reduced
parachute operations.
The
French
Hellcat piston-engine fighter-
bombers were 'finished', and should be replaced by F-86 jets.
The Price of Poor Administration
The Americans conceded that deliveries in the summer of 1951,
particularly of military vehicles, had been slow; less than half the jeeps,
and about a third of the 6 x 6 trucks. American domestic problems such
as strikes; and lack of production capacity, machine tools, materials,
and the necessary skills in producing new equipment had contributed
to the problem. Nevertheless, the French were also partly to blame for
the parlous state of their equipmeut. Lack of maintenance was just as
much a reason for the Hellcats being 'finished', as battle damage and
wear and tear. Delivery of supplies in Vietnam could only be by armed
convoy, by water or by road. This resulted in a high level of stocks
being held in forward areas to compensate for the long re-supply cycle.
Poor maintenance had been a constant theme in reports from the
American Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAÂG) which had
been in Saigon since September 1950. French aircraft fitters came in for
considerable criticism for lack of appreciation of safety precautions,
lack of respect for preventative maintenance.
the standard French
procedure of drinking while working. insufficient maintenance was
draining spare parts... Under these conditions no amount of logistical
support supplied
will greatly reduce the difficulties now being
experienced by the French Air Force in maintaining sufficient aircraft
at operational level.'17
The French logistic system was similarly
chaotic. For example they had no stock control system and did not
know what they had received or despatched forward.
America Steps Up Supplies
However, the Americans promised to speed things up, and were as
good as their word. Between October 1951 and February 1952, the
