viti
masterpiece on the subject of military logistics. Christopher Donnelly,
head of the Soviet Studies Research Centre at the Royal Military
College Sandhurst, at present the Sovietologist in Residence at the
office of the Secretary
General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, was most
generous in allowing me access to his
publications and in reading the typescript of the chapter on the
Warsaw Pact and NATO logistics. Without his advice, it would not
have been possible to have made any progress on Soviet logistics.
Charles Blandy, a Soviet research consultant who contributes to the
Soviet Studies Research Centre, has been of considerable assistance in
the same field. Brigadier Alstead allowed me to see an early draft of his
comprehensive work Ten in Ten: a Study of the Central Region
Transport Capability in Crisis and War, which helped towards an
understanding of the movement problems that would
transition to war in the Central Region.
I must also thank the following for giving their time and their
encouragement: Miss Alex Ward of the Army Historical Branch,
Ministry of Defence; Brigadier General Meyara, the Defence Attaché
at the Embassy of Israel in London; General Sir Richard Trant,
formerly Quartermaster General of the British Army; General Sir
Martin Farndale, formerly Commander Northern Army Group and
Commander-in-Chief British Army of the Rhine; General Sir Anthony
Farrar-Hockley, formerly Commander-in-Chief Northern European
Command, and British Official Historian of the Korean War; Major
General Baxter, formerly Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (Logistics),
Ministry of Defence; Major General Istead, formerly Director General
Logistics Policy (Army); Brigadier Hunt, formerly Director NATO on
the Staff of the Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (NATO/UK) Ministry
of Defence; Brigadier Pitt, formerly Director of Movements (Army);
Colonel Colston, formerly Director Defence Logistics (Movements);
Brigadier Heath, formerly Director Support Planning (Army); Briga-
dier Hulme, formerly Director Logistic Operations (Army); Dr Pauline
Creasey; Colonel Hellberg; Lieutenant Colonel Macdonald; Lieu-
tenant Colonel Wells-Cole; Group Captain Empson of British
Aerospace Commercial Aircraft Limited.
I am grateful to a number of authorities, publishers, and authors for
permission to reproduce passages from their works in this book. The
extracts on pages 352 and 353 are British Crown copyright of the
Ministry of Defence and are reproduced with the permission of the
Controller of Her Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office. Extracts from
the papers of General Sir Humfrey Gale are quoted with the permission
Acknowledgements
of the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, King's College
London. Professor van Creveld of the Hebrew University Jerusalem
and the Cambridge University Press have kindly allowed me to quote
passages from Supplying War. The passages from Alexander the Great,
published by Penguin Books, are reproduced with the permission of
the author, Dr Robin Lane Fox of New College Oxford. John Keegan,
now Defence Editor of the Daily Telegraph, has allowed me to quote
from his book The Price of Admiralty, War at Sea from the Man of War
to the Submarine, published by Hutchinson. The notes on Alexander
the Great's logistics are reproduced from Alexander the Great and the
Logistics of the Macedonian Army, copyright © 1978 The Regents of
the University of California, by permission of the publisher, The
University of California Press.
Terraine has generously permitted me to quote extensively from The
Right of The Line, The RAF in the European War 1939-1945, published
by Sceptre London. The passage from The Rise and Fall of the Great
Powers, published by Fontana, is reproduced with the permission of
Professor Paul Kennedy, The J Richardson Dilworth Professor of
History at Yale. Books published by the Center of Military History
Washington DC are in the public domain, however I am grateful to Dr
Meyerson for pointing this out to me. General Mathew B Ridgway
kindly allowed me to quote a passage from his book, The Korean War,
published by Doubleday & Company Inc, New York. Sidgwick and
Jackson, the publishers of General Davidson's Vietnam at War, have
been most generous in permitting passages to be reproduced. Professor
Ronald Spector, now Professor of History and International Relations
at the Elliot School of International Affairs, George Washington
University, has permitted me to quote from his book, Advice and
Support, The Early Years, The US Army in Vietnam, published by the
United States Army Center of Military History. Lieutenant Colonel
Gardiner, Royal Marines, has again allowed me to quote from his
private diary. George Weidenfeld & Nicolson Limited have permitted
me to quote from Walter Lacquer's The Age of Terrorism, which they
published. Curtis Brown of Regent Street, London have permitted me
to reproduce a
from Sir Fitzroy
Approaches, published by Jonathan Cape. Jane's Information Group
have allowed me to quote from Colonel Dupuy's Elusive Victory. The
quote in note 52 of Chapter Five is reprinted with permission from
Presidio Press, 31 Pamaron Way, Novato, CA 94949, from the book
Strategy for Defeat: Vietnam in Retrospect, by Adm U.S. G. Sharp,
Copyright © 1978. The passage from The Battle for Khe Sanh, by M. S.
