158
The Lifeblood of War
more than the five battalion task force, and to have moved the
remainder of the Operation LORRAINE force north from Phu Doan
would have been difficult, if not impossible, besides increasing the
range over which air re-supply would have to operate, thus further
aggravating the logistic problem. Besides, Salan could not afford to
have such a large slice of his mobile reserve tied up in a bloody and
prolonged battle so far away from the Delta and the T'ai country.
The withdrawal was to show just what this battle might have been
like. The bloodiest part occurred in the Chan-Muong valley, involving
a heavy convoy protected by two mobile groups. The Vietminh Main
Force Regiment 36 cunningly isolated the two mile long string of soft-
skinned vehicles travelling in the centre of the column, by pinning down
the leading infantry, and preventing the armour at the rear moving up
to assist, by disabling a tank, which blocked the road. As the French
did not have a single armoured bulldozer in Indo-China, recovery of
armoured vehicles under fire was impossible. The Vietminh massacred
the drivers and logistic troops, before blowing up
the vehicles.
Fortunately, the French commanders were not caught in the trap, and
quickly set about extracting the force. After bitter hand-to-hand
fighting, with the help of air support and artillery fire, the French
succeeded in clearing the road of Vietminh. The next problem was to
clear the hills on either side to enable the column to move on. The task
was given to 2nd Battalion 2nd Regiment Foreign Legion and
Battalion de Marche Indochinoise (BMI), a tough battle-wise battalion
of Frenchmen, Cambodians, and Vietnamese. The Legionnaires, With
less distance to go, made
good progress,
and soon held the
commanding hillsides. The BMI had a tougher time, after being pinned
down three times, the battalion fixed bayonets and charged. The
Vietminh had had enough, and withdrew, but not for long. They
snapped at the heels of the column as it moved to establish a block
where they could draw breath after eighteen hours of marching and
fighting. Eventually, over a month after Operation LORRAINE was
launched, the last French troops were back behind the de Lattre Line.
It had cost the French about 1,200 men.
A Bloody Nose at Na San: Giap Withdraws
Giap, having refused to abandon his plans, proceeded to capture one
of the Black River forts. His next attempt, to seize Na San, was a failure.
Operating in unfriendly T'ai country, his intelligence was scant, and he
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
159
was under the impression that Na San was held by five understrength
battalions, whereas it contained ten well dug in full strength battalions,
with artillery and air support. He left 1,000 dead in front of Na San
when he finally called off the attack; and the offensive had cost him a
total of 7,000 casualties. After this set-back, he reverted to the strategy
of drawing the French into distant areas which, for political, or other
reasons, they had to defend. Bypassing the remaining Black River forts,
he headed for Laos. Although he encountered only light opposition, he
was forced for logistic reasons to halt short of his objective. His
problem on this occasion, the need to conscript T'ais to supplement his
Vietnamese porters. The T'ais either hid in the jungle to avoid the press,
or threw away their loads when they could and vanished. Giap
withdrew to north-west Vietnam.
Into Laos: A Logistic Triumph
His defeat at Na San taught him that he needed to draw the French
further away from the Tonkin Delta if he was to stretch their logistic
resources to the point where they could not sustain operations. He
chose Laos. It had a number of attractive features: the politicians in
France would be perturbed that the war was being carried into the
most loyal Indo-Chinese colony; the French forces in Laos were weak,
reinforcing and supporting them from the Delta
was extremely
difficult; and the monsoon, a month away, would cover him if he had to
withdraw. For him it was a 'can win, can't lose' operation; he might
gain an easy victory, but if he did not, the unsettling effect that his
ability to invade Laos would have on the French,
Laotians and
Vietnamese would far outweigh any lack of military success. To
improve his logistic ability, he stocked a forward base to cut the
distance his porters would have to carry supplies, he persuaded the
communists in Laos to stock rice along his planned invasion routes,
and he dispensed with the need for the unreliable T'ais by bringing
porters from other areas.
Giap advanced on three axes, a division to each. Within three weeks,
the French had abandoned all the small posts in the path of Giap's
three-pronged advance, and he had surrounded the Laotian capital of
Louang Phrabang, a large French garrison at Jars Camp, on the Plain
of Jars, and a small unit at Muong Khoua. At first the French had
indicated their wish to abandon Louang Phrabang, but the Laotian
King refused to budge. To avoid losing face, the French flew in three
battalions of Legionnaires and Moroccans, artillery and defence stores.
