180
The Lifeblood of War
Beatrice was in Vietminh hands. The French had lost 400 out of the 500
man garrison, all the officers were dead, wounded, or taken prisoner;
312 Division lost 600 dead and 1,200 wounded. The French counter-
attack was beaten off. That day, 5 BPVN were dropped on to the DZs
within the perimeter.
The aircraft all escaped the flak,
but the
Vietnamese paratroopers took casualties on the DZs from artillery and
mortar fire.
Gabrielle
That night it was Gabrielle's turn. Held by 5th Battalion,
7th
Algerian Rifles, it was the only strongpoint with a second line of
defence, and proved a harder nut to crack. For a while it seemed that
the French had contained the attack by two regiments of 308 Division,
who dug in on the edge of the position. After a furious bombardment of
the French strongpoint, the Vietminh resumed the attack, pushing
back the two forward Algerian companies, who had taken heavy
casualties and lost all their officers. At this point, a shellburst killed or
wounded the battalion commander, his deputy, and all the battalion
staff, destroying the radios communicating with the companies and
with Castries. Two Algerian companies fought on, clinging to the
southern half of the position. Before dawn, Castries ordered Langlais,
who commanded all the parachute battalions, and was in command of
the reserve and
of the main position,
to mount a combined
tank/infantry counter-attack. Langlais ordered one company of
S BEP, his own former battalion, to spear-head the counter-attack
supported by the tanks. He chose 5 BPVN as the main force. This was a
major error. After an unpleasant drop the previous day, the battalion
had spent most of the night digging in on Elaine. To get to the forming-
up position for the counter-attack, they were required to move in
darkness across the whole of the central position, a mass of bunkers,
minefields, and wire, with which they were totally unfamiliar. Finally,
they were far less experienced than the other two reserve battalions.
mortar
As the counter-attack force was advancing it was hit by a heavy
and artillery concentration, and small arms fire from a
battalion of infantry dug into their left front. The Ist BEP company and
the tanks, moved on out of the fire zone. Most of 5 BPVN did what the
majority of inexperienced troops do the first time under fire, they went
to ground. They were pinned down and took heavy casualties.
By
themselves, the tanks and company of 1 BEP could not maintain the
momentum, and the counter-attack ground to a halt south of
181
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
Gabrielle. Here they were joined by the remnants of the Algerian Rifles
who had withdrawn from Gabrielle. Together this force clawed its way
back, lashed by fire, and eventually regained the main position. On
Gabrielle and in the counter-attack the French lost about 1,000 men,
dead, wounded and taken prisoner. Giap lost between 1,000 and 2,000
dead, and about twice that number wounded.
The Beginning of the End
The loss of Beatrice and Gabrielle spelled the end for the French
garrison of Dien Bien Phu, for now the Vietminh possessed most of the
ground which would give them an uninterrupted view over the whole
position. The last piece fell into their hands on 17 March, when the 3rd
T'ai Battalion abandoned Anne Marie under the cover of thick fog, and
either joined the Vietminh or headed home. They had been subjected to
weeks of Vietminh propaganda, and had seen the fall of Beatrice and
Gabrielle. It is hard to blame them, it was not their style of warfare. The
blame should be placed with Navarre, Cogny, and Castries, who failing
to replace them when they had the opportunity, instead placed them in
a vital outpost. Anne-Marie was abandoned, and the few Tais, and the
Frenchmen who had remained, were absorbed into the Huguette
strongpoint.
By 16 March the French artillerymen in Dien Bien Phu knew that
they were outnumbered and outgunned. The coming days would prove
that the air force would not be able to provide much help. Locating the
Vietminh guns under the cover of the foliage was difficult enough. To
attack, the fighter bombers had to fly directly at the gun position, so
presenting a good target to the flak guns sited in the vicinity. Losses
were heavy. Once the monsoon started, the heavy, wet follage was
almost impervious to napalm. The French air force was incapable of
the sustained offensive required to destroy the ring of Vietminh guns.
Colonel Piroth, Castries's artillery commander, ridden with guilt at the
failure of his command, and aware how flawed his advice had been,
committed suicide the night after the fall of Gabrielle.
Ammunition: A Fatal Lack of Foresight
Between 17 and 30 March there was a lull in the fighting, which was
probably just as well for the French who had started with an estimated
six days' worth of ammunition at Dien Bien Phu, and expended most of
it by the second day. This has not been the first, nor will it be the last
