288
The Lifeblood of War
Logistics the Driving Factor
In the Falklands, as in previous wars, logistics was the principle
factor driving planning. The high rate of expenditure of ammunition
was oftset by the relative shortness of the battles within what was, itself,
a short campaign, and because such a small proportion of Britain's
land forces (only two brigades) was involved. Because Britain was not
embroiled in a war elsewhere, resources earmarked for other forma-
tions could be diverted to sustain this campaign. Total expenditure
rates would be vastly higher in a general war, or a conflict on the scale
of the Iran/Iraq war. The logistic unpreparedness noted in the chapter
on Korea, based on a flawed perception of future conflict, was repeated
in the Falklands in the case of 5th Infantry Brigade. Despite there being
time to make up the leeway, little was done. The flexibility of sea power
was again demonstrated, not only at tactical level, but also logistically,
as it had been in antiquity by Alexander the Great, in the Middle Ages
by Richard the Lionheart and, in our own era, in North Africa, Italy,
Korea and Vietnam, to name but a few examples from the last fifty
years.
9
Supplying the War That Never
Was-Yet
"I don't know what the hell this logistics is that Marshall is always talking about, but I
want some of it.'
Fleet Admiral King USN
*Without the combat readiness of the Soviet Armed Forces Rear Services there is no
troop combat readiness. War may begin, but without a well prepared rear, without
precise and comprehensive rear support, it would end sadly a few days later. That is
why we must make every effort to see that the Soviet Armed Forces Rear Services are
always combat ready as the forces they are supporting?
Marshal Grechkol
'That's the reason they're called lessons' the Gryphon remarked: 'because they lessen
from day to day?
Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
As the author said in the Preface, some readers may wonder why this
chapter is incided. The clue lies in the last quote above. Collective and
individual memories are short, and in the flush of the West's victory
over the Soviet Union without a shot being fired, two points may be
overlooked.
First, despite its economic weakness and commercial and industrial
inefficiency, the Soviet Union possessed mighty and highly competent
armed forces. Indeed, they were probably one of the few efficient parts
of the Soviet Union. They included, and include, some excellent brains,
and, as will be discussed, a system of analysis, that made for a very
different approach to war-fighting from that in NATO.
Second, despite its ideals, the NATO Alliance had a number of
drawbacks. The most serious, as will be explained, being its lack of
sustainability. As the author contends, the Soviet Union was deterred
