The Lifeblood of War
direction desired by the Prussians, sometimes they did and sometimes
not. This had a considerable effect on the Prussian supply and
reinforcement capability. The French railways were just as efficient
(according to van Creveld, they were better than the Germans'),32 but
their mobilisation
plan was not. The lethargy of the
French
commanders completed their downfall. Moltke's overail direction was
better, he made fewer mistakes. Tactically, the Germans were no better
than the French, except perhaps in their use of their mobile,
quickfiring, breechloading artillery well forward to neutralise the
superiority of the Chassepot rifle. So, although railways speeded up the
mobilisation and initial moves of armies, once operations began, the
pace at which troops moved, and their method of supply from the
railhead was no different from the armies of the past.
The war of 1870 was similar to the wars of the past in another aspect.
Despite the greater sophistication of the weaponry, it was still easier to
supply the troops with ammunition than to keep them fed. Ammuni-
tion formed less than 1 per cent of all supplies. Prussian infantry
regiments carried 200 rounds of small arms ammunition per rifle, split
between the men and the wagon trains accompanying the regiment (in
modern parlance, first line transport). In six months, only fifty-six
rounds per rifle were expended, just over half that carried on the man.
At the battle of Sedan, the Prussian artillery deployed 606 guns, firing a
total of 33,134 rounds, an average of just over fifty-four rounds per
gun. 33 To put this in perspective, in one of the night battles in the
Falklands campaign in 1982, 30 British guns fired an average of 450
rounds per gun (similar to the daily expenditure in artillery barrages in
the First World War), a total of 13,500 rounds, well over a third of the
number fired by the whole Prussian army over the same period of time.
August 1914 and A Very Different War
The next war in Europe was to be very different. The German
planners considered that, as always, the supply of ammunition would
be as nothing compared with food and fodder. 34 This view was also
held by the Russians, whose gloomy forecast was that moving fodder
for the fifty divisions of cavalry, totalling nearly a million horses,
thought necessary in a country so poorly served by roads, would throw
such a strain on the railway system as to inhibit the moves of reserves,
slow down any offensive and result in the breakdown of the railway
system.35 To begin with, it seemed as if they were right, but although to
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
the end of the war fodder was the major item on the logistic shopping
list in terms of tonnage, ammunition resupply soon became more
critical.
The Price of A Gamble
In the summer of 1914, the German armies, totalling about 1,485,000
men, were mobilised and deployed on the frontiers of Belgium and
France in seventeen days. The Germans had made sparse arrange-
ments to feed the horses, ordering the cavalry commanders to live off
the country. As they wheeled through Belgium and Northern France in
August, even though some of the
conveniently been
harvested and was there for the taking, much of it was still green, and
the time and effort expended in foraging over a wide area slowed the
rate of advance. So critical did the fodder situation become, through
lack of proper logistic planning, that, in some cases, their cavalry and
artillery horses died early in the campaign and many more were too
weak to move fast. The condition of the cavalry horses was not
improved by the troopers riding them most of the time on the march. In
contrast, the British cavalrymen rested their horses by spending as
much time dismounted, leading their horses on foot, as astride them.
The German troops, as had been proved so often before, were easier to
feed. They lived off the land—in some cases, quite well; and as they
advanced, the country they traversed became richer. However, by the
time of the battle of the Marne, the German heavy artillery, which was
the one arm in which they had a distinct tactical advantage over the
French, was no longer able to keep up. The German cavalry horses
became so weak that the reconnaissance capability of the advancing
armies was severely reduced. In short, the cavalry generally became
more of a hindrance than a help. The German planners had taken an
enormous gamble. Only the fact that the war had started after the
harvest, something they could not possibly have foreseen, saved them
Miscalculations Over Ammunition Supply
Although there was no excuse for such off-the-cuff arrangements for
food and fodder, after all the problem was as old as warfare itself, there
was no precedent for the even more serious matter of ammunition
supply. The Germans, like everybody else, had underestimated the rate
at which ammunition would be consumed, and underrated the
