302
The Lifeblood of War
Organisation of Rear Support: Guidelines
They have laid down broad guidelines for the organisation of rear
support, listed below. Although broad, they are, nevertheless, con-
siderably less broad-brush compared with the British and American
logistic principles (Chapter One).
1. The organisation of the rear must reflect the character of the war
and the nature of the fighting.
2. Reserves must be echeloned in depth and deployed before the war
starts.
3. The higher command is responsible for supplying lower forma-
tions, units, and sub-units.
4. All available forms of transport must be used.
5. Equipment repair assets must be deployed to those areas with the
greatest number of repairable vehicles or weapons.
6. The medical services must deploy as near as possible to the areas
of the largest number of casualties.
7. Foraging for local supplies must be undertaken wherever possible.
The first principle may seem obvious, but has been broken on
numerous occasions in the past by other armies. As will be seen, the
Soviet Army tailored its logistic organisation especially for the war in
Afghanistan.
The second principle, which demands the establishment of supply
bases well forward along all axes of advance, may conflict with the
Soviet need to preserve surprise, unless considerable pains are taken to
camouflage the pre-positioned stocks in concert with a comprehensive
deception plan.
indicator of Soviet intentions.
The movement of stocks forward could provide an
The third principle, supply forward, has led to considerable under-
estimates in the West of the logistic capability of the standard Soviet
division, leading to the erroneous conclusion that it is not logistically
viable. In fact, most of the division's support comes from Army or
Front, and the logistic resources are held, and controlled by these
formation commanders. Army vehicles will deliver not only to the
divisional rear, but also to the regimental rear when battle permits. So
instead
of operating on corps-level 'tramlines',
backwards and
forwards along national layers of the sponge-cake style NATO
deployment, the Soviet commander can switch support along his
desired axes very quickly.
The fourth principle demonstrates the Soviet realisation that the
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
303
main problem will be moving stocks along congested roads. Their
analysis of the rates of expenditure of ammunition and fuel in the
Arab/Israeli and Iran/Iraq wars has reinforced the need to use every
means possible, including captured transport, to lift supplies forward.
The fifth and sixth principles are proof that the Soviets recognise the
nature of the battle they would fight, and flow from the first principle.
The battle they intend would be fought on narrow axes. There will be
no secure rear areas, and no forward edge of the battle area, or front
line. Deep penetrations would result in great distances from the
spearhead to the relatively safe rear bases behind the initial start lines.
Therefore the Soviet response is to move repair and medical assets well
forward. Immediate attention would be given to those men and
equipments that are only lightly affected, so that they can be returned
to the battle as soon as possible. Equipment needing more in-depth
repair would be left for recovery by higher formation workshops, and
badly wounded men evacuated to advancing field hospitals. It is a
misconception that the Soviet Army has a 'use and throw away'
attitude to men and equipment. On the contrary, the Soviets constantly
aim to reduce the attrition rate by returning as many lightly wounded
soldiers and easily repairable equipment as possible to the battle, in
order to keep up the strength of the formation for as long as possible.
However, once the formation is badly mauled, it would be replaced by a
fresh one; the Soviets do not believe in topping up' with reinforce-
ments. The Soviet attitude to casualties, both human and equipment,
and its effect on viability, is so important that we will return to it later.
The final principle, making use of local resources, has been alluded to
before. The Soviets must be one of the few armies that include it as a
principle of logistics; by doing so, they demonstrate their professional
and level-headed approach to war-fighting.28
A Mix of Movement Resources
The Soviets are clear in their own minds that despite the abundance
of cargo vehicles and stocks at their disposal, giving them the potential
to support a long war, the main problem will be getting the supplies to
where they are needed. Their own experience in war and on exercises,
and their study of the Arab/Israeli wars has impressed upon them the
voracious consumption of ammunition and fuel in modern war. As a
consequence, they are prepared for the effort involved. Their tables and
daily estimated requirements take these factors into account. 29 As has
been noted earlier, the Soviets still place considerable reliance on the
