186
The Lifeblood of War
was beyond his capability. The same limitation applied if he wished to
switch the direction of effort, or regroup rapidly. His stockpiles might
be in the wrong place, and need reconstituting in another location. This
accounts very largely for the episodic nature of his offensives right up to
the early 1970s; attacks were followed by pauses, often long in
duration, while stocks were built up for the next move.
While the NVA was being reorganised, a debate was in progress in
North Vietnam over the correct strategy to adopt for the conquest of
South Vietnam. The outcome was to have a profound effect on NVA
logistics over the years to come. One faction, led by Le Duan, a
southerner, argued for large-scale military action in South Vietnam.
Giap and others supported a long-drawn out guerrilla campaign. In
1959 Ho Chi Minh came down on the side of the southerners, deciding
that the campaign would take the form of an armed revolt supported by
North Vietnam. About 4,500 South Vietnamese communists who had
moved north after the partition in 1954, infiltrated back to form the
nucleus of the Viet Cong (Viet Cong, or VC, derived from Viet Con
Son, meaning Vietnamese Communist) battalions and regiments. In
response to this, a transport group was formed by the NVA to provide
logistic support to the Viet Cong; their line of communication through
Laos, the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
In South Vietnam, the ARVN had also been re-equipping,
and
training. For about a year this had been a joint French/United States
task. The Americans had been reluctant to see a complete French
withdrawal from South Vietnam, particularly as the ARVN was neither
trained nor organised to meet an attack by the NVA. They suggested a
number of ways in which the French could retain substantial forces in the
country, without offending Diem, the President of South Vietnam;
including the artifice of keeping them there under the terms of the South
East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), which would make the French
subordinate to the SEATO commander. But a number of factors
frustrated the American hopes; among them, Diem's desire to get rid of
the French, in any capacity, as speedily as possible. This coincided with
the French wish to be shot of Vietnam in general, and Diem in particular,
for what they saw as his treachery and irresponsibility, and concentrate
their energies on the growing insurrection in Algeria.
The French Depart
The bitterness felt by the French at their defeat and the brash attitude
of the inexperienced Americans, manifested itself particularly strongly
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
187
when it came to allocating the American equipment supplied to the
French Army during the last four years of Round One. The terms of the
aid scheme under which the equipment had been provided, stipulated
that it was all to revert to the Americans at the conclusion of the war.
However the small USMAAG had been unable to keep track of which
items the French had bought, and which had been furnished under the
scheme. The French were determined to keep the best and removed it,
sometimes refusing to allow the American inspection teams to examine
depots or ports, and erasing assistance scheme markings. At the same
time, they dumped huge quantities of unserviceable equipment on the
ARVN. As the French had removed most of the spares, it could not be
repaired until more spares had been shipped over from the USA. The
ARVN was unable to cope with such a massive logistic burden.
Formed from the remnants of the ineffectual Vietnamese National
Army, which had little logistic capability, the ARVN was overwhelmed
with a deluge of equipment, most of which was fit only for the scrap
heap. The strain on the creaking logistic services was aggravated by
Diem and his army commander's reluctance to part with a single
item 28 To save an investment estimated at $500 million, the Ameri-
cans found themselves being sucked inexorably into advising on the
management of the ARVN logistics.
The ARVN: A Pattern of Corruption, Incompetence and
Poor Leadership
Space does not permit a full review of the years leading up to full
American involvement in Vietnam. Suffice to say that they faced
daunting problems in attempting to assist with the formation and
training of an army which was riddled with corruption at every level
from the generals down.
Political considerations were invariably
uppermost in Diem's mind when selecting his senior officers, and many
in their turn responded to this cynical approach by supplementing their
income by dealing on the drug and black markets, running prostitutes,
embezzling public funds and, in remoter areas, setting up as warlords
and collecting taxes. Taking their cue from their superiors, junior
officers resorted to extortion and robbery against the local population
in outlying districts. Motivation was lacking at all levels in the South
Vietnamese population. Students called up for service on mobilization,
volunteered for service in the Navy, not from any wish to serve at sea,
but to avoid the Army. In any case the Navy hardly ever put to sea;
there was no incentive, even for the most venal, since a bonus in the
