The Lifeblood or war
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
FIG. 8.6
Chinook lifts load off LPD starboard after spot WM).
stocks, and the men of two Ordnance companies, but little else; no
podded vehicles, no more craft, no Eager Beaver fork-lift trucks; in
short, nothing with which to ease the key problem: distribution. Even
their stocks were defcient, their 5,000 jerricans were loaded empty,
decause peace-time regulations were invoked in Britain. Although
Board of Irade rules on the carriage of ammunition were waived to
allow first line to be carried with troops on passenger ships. But most
cargo was not combat loaded, being stowed in the order in which it had
arrived at the dockside 22
The reason for this paucity of logistic assets was rooted in the
uncertainty that attended 5th Infantry Brigade's deployment south.
*IG. 8.7 Forward Arming and Re-fuelling Point (FARP) at Teal Inlet
settlement-Scout helicopters re-fuelling from 40 gallon drum (W M).
The Brigade's
primary mission
'Intervention Role', a
euphemism for the protection and rescue of British Nationals from
countries overseas in time of crisis. This, it was assumed, because it was
convenient to do so, would be by invitation on the part of the country
concerned, or at worst, in the face of very light opposition; a few
dissidents equipped with small arms. In short, operations against the
sort of enemy that constituted the sole experience of the majority of
British servicemen.
The Brigade was equipped accordingly. This
Intervention Role' was a glance in the direction of recognising that
something might occur outside the NATO area, requiring a response
by the British. Unfortunately it was only a glance, resulting from an
over-inflated confidence on the part of officials, politicians, and many
military, in their powers of foreseeing the future, and predicting the
nature, timing, and place of the next conflict. Although to be fair, there
is evidence that before the Falklands war, the Ministry of Defence
(MOD), had been planning improvements to the 5th Infantry Brigade's
capability; but these had not been implemented by May 1982.23
Nevertheless, there was plenty of time to make good deficiencies in the
Brigade's logistic organisation and equipment, by borrowing from
other formations. However, another factor came to the fore; possibly
linked to the aforesaid confidence by some in their expertise at
operational crystal-ball gazing, and perhaps symptomatic of disbelief
