122
The Lifeblood of War
pushed to Chongjin, in the north-east corner of Korea, 60 miles from
the Russian border.
X Corps having landed administratively at
Wonsan and Hungnam between 26 and 31 October, advanced to the
Yalu at Hyesanjin. Although the Chinese Army had attacked the
advancing Eighth Army at the end of October, by early November,
they had withdrawn, and apparently faded out of the picture.
Soldierly Precautions
X Corps, with the exception of Ist Marine Division, had rushed
forward to the Yalu in a precipitate manner. Major General Smith,
commanding the Marines, had objected to the X Corps plans for the
dispersal of his division over a wide area, and much to General
Almond's dissatisfaction, the Marines had taken a long time to move;
at times averaging about a mile a day. Smith also argued that he should
not advance to the Chosin Reservoir with winter so close. Almond
became more amenable to Smith's representations about leaving his
Division concentrated, after Eighth Army's contact with the Chinese
Army, and the appearance of Chinese on his own front, in early
November. However, when this was followed by reports that the
Chinese were withdrawing, Almond reiterated the order to close up to
the border. Smith still advanced slowly, concentrating his attention on
comming the road behind him, and securing his exposed line of
overtunication back to Hungnam with outposts on the high ground
overlooking the route. He was particularly concerned about his left
ank, exposed by the gap between his Division and Eighth Army 2° He
improved his base at Hagaru-ri, including building an airstrip which
would take C-47s. By 23 November, despite Almond's irritation, Smith
had established a firm base for further operations in the frigid barren
wastes around the Chosin Reservoir. The winter had already arrived
two weeks before, bringing snow and sub-zero temperatures. Smith's
careful preparation, and soldierly precautions, would ensure the
survival of his Division.
... And a Faulty Assessment
Almond had been making plans to advance to destroy North
Korean and Chinese forces in the Chosin Reservoir area, and threaten
or cut the Chinese line of communication in the Eighth Army zone. The
absence of enemy contact on Eighth Army's front led to optimism in
MacArthur's headquarters that air attacks had succeeded in cutting the
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
123
flow of supplies to the Chinese Army. He felt that if they tried to stop
the advance of Walker's troops, they would be at a disadvantage. He
told the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington that: the Chinese had
embarked on their Korean venture in some cases with only three days'
rations, and that constant contest with UN ground
forces had
undoubtedly depleted the enemy's ammunition reserves.?? And Major
General Willoughby,
MacArthur's chief of intelligence, did not
consider the Chinese high command would make any appreciable
effort to alleviate the supply shortage of their forces,.. "as the Chinese
have always been, by Western standards, notoriously poor providers
for their soldiers.
This assessment was probably based upon experience in the Second
World War, when the performance of Chinese troops, including their
commanders' staff work and administration, had consistently been
inferior to the Japanese, and thus by inference, to the Americans.
The Chinese Re-Enter and the Eighth Army Withdraws
Hopes of victory, which seemed so close on 24 November, waned
when the Chinese Army re-entered the scene on 25 November, starting
by crushing ROK II Corps, and following up with attacks on the
remainder of Eighth Army, the ROK Army, and X Corps. As Eighth
Army withdrew towards Seoul, X Corps was ordered to pull back to a
perimeter round Hungnam, and eventually to re-embark and abandon
North Korea. The Ist Marine Division was cut off at the Chosin
Reservoir, but thanks to Smith's preparations,
and the
fighting
qualities of his marines he was able to battle his way out of the trap.
Asked if he was withdrawing by correspondents, he replied, 'Gentle-
men, we are not retreating. We are merely advancing in another
direction'. The Marines' performance was by far the most creditable of
any American formation that winter. It had its basis in good logistic
planning, the leadership of Smith, and, it must be said, in a soldierly
pride and spirit, lacking in the majority of the United States Army at
the time.
Ridgway
By Christmas 1950, Eighth Army and the ROK Army were back on
the general line of the 38th Parallel. As they fled south in near panic,
they abandoned 8,000-10,000 tons of supplies in Pyongyang, and
destroyed another 2,000 tons that could not be saved at Chinnampo.
