300
The Lifeblood of War
required. But this centralised control gives the senior commander a
great deal of flexibility in deciding which axes to support, and which to
abandon, and it enables him to concentrate his effort on the chosen
axes very quickly indeed-rather different from NATO Army Group
commanders. Soviet priorities for supply are: ammunition, POL,
spares and technical support, food and medical supplies and clothing;
in that order. Reflecting their doctrine they regard the supply of fuel as
the greatest challenge, and have evolved a system of tactical pipelines to
cope with the problem. But it is interesting to see that they still include
in their principles of the rear services, that of making maximum use of
local resources. Foraging for food and for POL particularly, is still
considered to be of great importance if the length of the battle exceeds
the planned period. The intendence or quartermaster service has
butchery and grain grinding facilities. All units have cooks well used to
dealing with totally unprepared foodstuffs, raw grain, cattle on the hoof
and such like. Their engineers of the fuel service are equipped with
pumps which could be used to evacuate the tanks of service stations
overrun intact. In this respect they have retained a capability as old as
warfare itself. As a consequence of their doctrinal approach, viability is
not a subjective evaluation. The Soviet commander is able to establish
his combat requirement before the war starts. He does not have to
make a subjective judgement, or in plain English, guess, whether he can
sustain his battle. It may be some consolation to reflect that the Soviets
themselves are becoming worried that their sums' may be inadequate
for accurate prediction, or too long-winded to permit rapid reaction.
Furthermore, they do not always implement their system very well due
to national inefficiency. 24
Fighting Hard and Moving Fast
However, the Soviet commander would not have had it all his own
way. Committed to a doctrine which demands a high tempo of
operations,
fighting hard and moving fast, he would have been
consuming huge quantities of ammunition and fuel. It has been
assessed that in order to provide these supplies the Soviet Army would
have had to use every wood, village, and town to hide them, and every
road and track to move them up. These areas should be well known to
NATO and, we assume, had already been targeted. Some assessments
predict that, as a result, Soviet formations would have been unable to
maintain this tempo, calling for an advance averaging fifty miles a day.
Although, as Donnelly has pointed out, these figures are based on
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
301
calculations to determine the capacity of roads, and other routes. The
saturation of the battlefield, and resulting immobility is a strong reason
in Soviet eyes, for reducing force density on both sides in order to
return the advantage to the offensive, i.e. to them.25,26 The Soviets
have given this a great deal of thought in the light of historical study,
including the Yom Kippur War of 1973, and, it is safe to assume, the
Iran/Iraq war. Their logistic system to cope with the war they have
envisaged is discussed below.
As Donnelly has pointed out, the Russian word 'TYL' meaning
'rear', embodies two very wide-embracing concepts. First, it denotes
the homeland with all its industrial production capacity, its human and
material resources from which the state draws its military strength.
Second, it refers to the entire rear services of the Armed Forces.27
The Rear Services
To co-ordinate and control the Rear Services in peace and war, the
Soviets have a Chief of Rear Services, a Deputy Minister of Defence. He
has direct responsibility for logistics planning, procurement, resource
allocation and administration. In war, his responsibilities included
Warsaw Pact logistics. It is as if the American Deputy Secretary for
Defence had a controlling and co-ordinating function over the whole of
the NATO Alliance, with the authority to go with it. This centralised
logistic control permeates down through the Soviet Army, again in
contrast to NATO, where each national corps or group of corps has its
own logistic system.
Fitzroy Maclean's description, quoted earlier, of the Soviet logistic
system is as apposite in a general sense today as it was forty-five years
ago. The Soviet Army still maintains a strict control of supply
priorities, and a ruthless determination to maintain its aim in any
operation. Nevertheless, as tactics and equipment have changed, so
have the rear services. The Soviets believe that success in future war
against a major opponent, NATO or China, will depend on their
ability to achieve surprise and maintain a continuous high-speed
offensive. To meet the first requirement, surprise, the main objectives
must be attained by the forces in being, with only the minimum of pre-
war reinforcement. To achieve the second requirement, the armies of
the Soviet first strategic echelon must be capable of continuous
sustained combat over the whole period of the strategic operation, two
weeks or more. They do not under-estimate the difficulties involved,
and recognise that these will certainly be greater than in the past.
