272
The Lifeblood of War
naval gunfire and air support, the Argentines would have found it
difficult to dislodge them. Therefore, depending on the scale of losses,
and providing these did not lead to faltering, either at political or
military level, the British would still have had a chance to win.
However, there is little doubt that such a situation would have led to a
much longer war, while more supplies, further back in the line of
communication, were brought up and offloaded.
The Assault and Subsequent Advance
Meanwhile, the offload proceeded as best it could, with the limited
ship shore movement assets available. To begin with, STUFT was
only allowed into the anchorage during the hours of darkness, which,
allowing passage time to and from the eastern edge of the TEZ,
restricted offloading time to four hours. Helicopters could not operate
from STUFT at night, so all unloading was by Mexeflote and LCU. In
darkness, in swell up to six feet in height, the difficulties of unloading
ships that were not purpose-built for amphibious operations became
even more apparent. In many cases the Ro-Ro ramp would not match
the Mexeflote height, and at times, one end of the raft was lifted out of
the water by the Ro-Ro ramp as the ship pitched, endangering the
vehicles, men, and fork-lift trucks as they busily shuttled to and iro
from ship to raft. The situation was made no easier by the cross-decking
of landing force stocks by the Navy, without reference to the Logistic
Regiment. This led to ships being called in because they were thought
to have specific stores on board, only to discover that they were now
somewhere else. The Logistic Regiment took to sending teams on
board every STUFT as soon as it arrived in the anchorage, to pick over
the stores to see what was on board, and to interrogate the first officer
on what, if anything, had been transferred, and to whom. This was both
time-consuming and extremely frustrating for the logisticians.
Problems Arising from a Lack of Centralised Command
To add to their problems, the ships that they had requested did not
always arrive at the anchorage. Each night the commanding officer of
the Commando Logistic Regiment would visit Commodore Clapp
aboard Fearless, and give him a list of ships to be steamed into the
anchorage the following night from the holding position east of the
Islands. Clapp, always co-operative, would signal Woodward to ask
him to send them in. Often, for operational reasons, the ship, or ships
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
273
asked for would not arrive. A substitute might come in, sometimes
arbitrarily picked and containing none of the stores needed in the
beachhead at that particular time. This confusion was a direct result of
the lack of an overall commander in the theatre of operations to
allocate priorities. From D-Day there were two different battles in
progress simultaneously, and when the landing force moved away from
the immediate beachhead, there would be three. Drawing together the
operational and logistical threads of these battles, miles apart, and
usually with conflicting priorities,
could not be, and was not,
satisfactorily achieved from a headquarters 8,000 miles away, by a
commander and staff whose information was frequently out of date by
the time it was received.
The command system was further muddled by being altered to that
shown below, to reflect the impending arrival of General Moore with
another brigade.
COMMAND CHAIN FROM 20 MAY
CTF 317
Admiral Fieldhouse at Northwood England
Air Commander
Air Marshal Curtiss
Land Deputy
Lieutenant General
Trant
Commander
Carrier Battle Group
Rear Admiral
Woodward
CTG 317.8
Commander
Amphibious Task
Group
Commodore Clapp
CTG 317.0
Commander
Landing Force
Major General Moore
CTG 317.1
3rd Commando Brigade
Brigadier Thompson
CTU 317.1.1*
5th Infantry Brigade
Brigadier Wilson
CTU 317.1.2
* Task unit, a curious way to describe a formation of 5,500 men, with eight major units,
and sixteen sub-units under command.
