The Lifeblood of War
co-operation between nations in every aspect of military affairs, that
such a logistic nightmare should have been created seems almost
beyond belief-but so it was-
the logistic principles of Foresight and
Co-operation had been ignored and the price had to be paid.
March 1918: Ludendorff's Great Spring Offensive
Much is made by some authors of the German offensive of March
1918, particularly the command and control arrangements and the
tactics. It is held up as a model in contrast with the admittedly inflexible
British system in 1916; ignoring the factors that forced the British to
fight in that way at that period in the war. However, in Spring 1918,
provided the Allies, kept their nerve, which they did, particularly Haig,
the offensive was doomed before the German stormtroopers crossed
their start lines. They had few tanks, the majority of even those which
they had had been captured from the British, and therefore no spares.
In common with their opponents they had no radios, and were
consequently beset by all the command problems that had plagued
every offensive on the Western Front so far: the difficulty of passing
FiG. 2.13
First World War, Western Front. Without tracked vehicles and
unable to operate away from roads- British transport (IWM).
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
information back to the commander; the inability to give fresh orders
to meet a changing situation, to reinforce success, and to concentrate
follow-up forces for the decisive blow. The Germans were faced with
exactly the same logistic conundrum as all other attackers in this
theatre of operations, with the added complication that they were
advancing first over ground which they had devastated implementing
the 'scorched earth' policy during their deliberate withdrawal to the
Hindenburg line, and then over the old Somme battlefields. Without
tracked transport, able to operate away from the devastated roads,
they lacked the means to re-supply their armies at the rate required to
maintain momentum. The men could, and did, live off the British
supply dumps. But spares, guns, and ammunition could only be
provided from their own resources, being left further and further
behind. The British, falling back on their own supplies, were
stronger daily. As the defences firmed up, after the initial shock, a full
blooded, co-ordinated assault by the three German armies acting in
concert was needed to smash
through, and regain momentum.
Although there is no documentary evidence that logistics were the
overriding factor in Ludendorff's decision to call off the offensive, after
an advance of about 40 miles at its furthest point, it is clear that, despite
the new flexible tactics, the Germans were technically unable to
support such swift progress.
1918: The Hundred Days
It was left to the British to demonstrate how an offensive should be
carried out. In the battles of The Hundred Days, starting in August and
finishing in November 1918, including breaching the formidable
Hindenburg line, the British armies advanced between 60 and 80 miles,
capturing more prisoners than the French and American armies
combined. Learning the lessons of the past four years, obsolete tanks
pulled sledges loaded with supplies, specially designed supply tanks
carried supplies in their hulls, and gun tanks moved artillery pieces; all
played a vital part in maintaining the momentum of Haig's advance.
Even so, had the Germans not sued for an Armistice, a pause would
have been necessary
-the British armies were outrunning their
logistics.3ยบ However, the penny had dropped, at least in the British
Army. Fuller's brilliantly imaginative tank programme for 1919 called
for 7,700 fighting tanks and 3,282 administrative tanks.
