206
The Lifeblood of War
held by the NVA north of the base. The NVA could have poisoned the
water within the terms of the Geneva Convention, and forced the
Marines to fly in water, vastly increasing the logistic problem. Perhaps
Giap and the NVA commanders on the ground, simply overlooked the
vulnerability of the water supply to the base. This is the opinion of
Major General Tompkins, the commander of 3rd Marine Division,
who visited the base almost daily. He has also stated that he believed
that the base could have been supplied with water.
The Impact of the Tet Offensive
The Tet offensive virtually destroyed the Viet Cong and mauled the
NVA, it was a major military defeat for Giap, who had been against the
concept from the beginning. The immediate outcome was a drastic
scaling-down of operations reverting to an emphasis on guerrilla raids.
No large offensives were planned, and operations at battalion level and
above were rare. But the Viet Cong and the NVA had unwittingly
gained a stunning political victory. Domestic disillusionment in the
United States with the war was growing. It was fuelled by predictions of
failure by some of the most respected personalities in the American
media, who portrayed the Tet battles and the siege of Khe Sanh as
defeats. There was growing pressure on the United States Government
to disengage.
Eventually
the new American
President,
Nixon,
buidinced a new war policy based on four pillars: Vietnamisation;
building up and modernising the AR VN, the navy and the air force, so
that they could take over all the fighting; negotiations with the North
Vietnamese for an honourable peace; pacification of the countryside in
South Vietnam; and American troop withdrawal. This played straight
into the hands of Giap, who merely had to maintain sufficient activity
to keep the coffins going home to the United States, whilst keeping his
own casualties to the minimum, until the Americans withdrew. Time
was on his side, as it had always been.
Logistic Problems of Vietnamisation
The Vietnamisation programme immediately ran into trouble for
logistic reasons. There was no dearth of equipment, the Americans
could supply that. But possessing military hardware is only one third of
the picture. Not only must an army be trained in its use in battle, but it
must also know
how to store, maintain,
issue, and repair the
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
207
equipment. The more complex the equipment, the more highly trained
must be the fitters and storemen needed, and equally well qualified
officers and NCOs to plan and supervise the work, tying together the
supply and maintenance framework without which no army can exist.
In a word, logisticians. There were some, but never enough, and skilled
technicians and logistics staff officers cannot be trained overnight.
Cambodia
In early 1970, the political situation in Cambodia led to combined
United States and ARVN forces dealing a major blow to communist
plans in the south of South Vietnam. For years the ruler of Cambodia,
Prince Sihanouk, had allowed the Vietnamese communists to bring in
supplies through the port of Sihanoukville. From here, the Sihanouk
Route ran to a complex of logistic bases and troop staging areas just
inside the Cambodian/South Vietnam border, which sustained the
whole communist war effort in southern South Vietnam. These bases
were concentrated in two salients where the Cambodian border bulged
into South Vietnam, nicknamed the Fish Hook' and the 'Parrot's
Beak'. In his efforts to run with the fox and hunt with the hounds,
Sihanouk turned a blind eye to American bombing of these bases. In
March 1970, the prime minister of Cambodia, Lon Nol, led a successful
coup against Sihanouk, who was out of the country. Lon Nol,
immediately closed the port of Sihanouk ville, and foolishly announced
that he would evict the Vietnamese communists from their bases on the
Cambodian/Vietnamese border. The Viet Cong and NVA reacted
swiftly by advancing on the Cambodian capital Phnom Penh, pushing
back the puny Cambodian army. It soon became clear that if the
United States did not assist Lon Nol, the Vietnamese communists
would soon control the whole of Cambodia, re-opening Sihanouk ville,
and turning the whole country into a base; outflanking South Vietnam.
Capture of 'The City'; A Heavy Blow to the NVA'S
Logistics
After about six weeks of indecision, Nixon gave clearance for
American troops to be used in a raid on Cambodia; General Abrams
having said that he could not guarantee success without American
involvement. On 1 May 1970, the Americans with an ARVN airborne
brigade attacked the northern salient, the 'Fish Hook', and the ARVN
the southern, the 'Parrot's Beak'. Both salients were attacked by
