The Lifeblood of War
both. Most significant; the joint, unified Allied command over armies,
air forces and navies,
reaching down from government to the
equivalent of corps and lower. Because so many campaigns started
with an amphibious phase, some an ocean away from the home base,
the logistic problems were daunting, but gave rise to ingenious
solutions, of which the artificial harbours and under-sea fuel pipelines
for the Normandy invasion, and the fleet trains and
replenishment groups, that accompanied the amphibious task forces
and carrier battle-groups in the Pacific, are but two examples. As well
as ships, craft, and all the means of transport familiar to soldiers of the
First World War, men, equipment and supplies were carried into battle
in ever increasing numbers on both sides, by gliders and aircraft,
imposing yet greater strain on the logistic staffs; often to keep them
supplied with the wherewithal to fight and live deep behind enemy
The Role of the Railways
There were, of course, some well tried and tested methods of
transport that were as vital in this war as in the past. Railways, for the
reason given in the previous chapter, were, and still are, the most
efficient way of moving loads on land. To this day the Soviet Army
relies heavily on railways for the movement of troops and materiel.'
But in the 1939 45 War, with the coming of age of air power, railways
were subjected to more pressure than ever before. Aircraft were able to
reach out beyond the immediate battle area, cross the sea, and interdict
rail networks. Britain's rail system had been virtually immune from the
pin-prick air raids of the First World War, but in the Second it was a
different story. In the autumn and winter of 1940 41, German air raids
produced considerable congestion on the railways in Britain.
principal limiting factor in the British war effort during this period, was
the inability of the railways to clear the ports. Shipping was held up,
and imports severely reduced. The situation was exacerbated by the
totally different pattern of traffic, both at the ports, and on the internal
transpod store rom hit for which the alway da in had been,
considerable effort was put into air interdiction of the key junctions on
the rail system in France and Belgium, in order to slow down the
movement of German formations to meet the Allied threat.? Once the
invasion started, resistance groups added to the chaos, by sabotaging
the rolling stock and lines likely to be used by divisions being switched
Three Campaigns in a Global War
53
to reinforce formations attempting to contain the Allied beachheads.
Some divisions were held up for days, travelling by road, for lack of
flatcars to carry their armoured fighting vehicles, and because the lines
were blocked. Travel by rail, in daylight could be a hazardous affair for
German troops throughout most of the campaign in north-west
Europe; the Allies controlled the skies, their rocket-firing, fighter-
ground-attack aircraft were able to roam well behind the German lines,
shooting up trains, and destroying track and rolling stock. Because of
the air threat, the German railheads had to be sited behind the Loire
and Seine, some 125 and 100 miles away from the Allied lodgement
area in Normandy. 4
As we saw in the last chapter, the key to unshackling from the
tyranny of the railroads lay in the vehicle powered by the internal
combustion engine, and by 1939 the era of the mass mechanised army
had almost arrived, but for some, not totally. The German Army
started that war with 103 divisions of which only 16 were armoured or
mechanised. The remainder marched, and although there were 942
vehicles on the establishment of each infantry division, the bulk of
supplies were carried by 1,200 horse-drawn wagons in each division. In
this context it is interesting that for operation SEALION, the invasion
of Britain, the German army required 4,500 horses to be lifted in the
first wave of landing barges. All these motor and horse-drawn vehicles
were organic to the divisions for use in the operational area. For
movement of supplies in the communication zone, behind corps, there
were only three motor transport regiments for the whole army, with a
total capacity of 19,500 tons. As an aside, the Allies in North West
Europe in 1944, had motor transport with a capacity of 69,400 tons to
support 47 divisions, and were still short of lift. Although the Germans
were to vastly increase the number of mechanised and armoured
divisions and vehicles to service them as the war progressed, they used
horse-drawn transport to the very end, which at times was to prove a
grave disadvantage, because, as Van Creveld points out:
Instead of being thinly spread over the entire army, Germany's military motor
vehicles were concentrated among a small number of units. In effect, this meant
that there were two separate forces, one fast and mobile and the other slow anc
piodding... It was imperative to exercise the strictest control over the movements
of the infantry formations in order to prevent them from obstructing the supply
convoys of the all-important armoured spearheads. It was a nice problem of
selecting roads,
calculating the time it would take to move along them, and
maintaining traffic discipline in short logistics."
Few people today realise how dependent the German Army was upon
horse-drawn transport. Hitler's failure to build up the necessary
