Preface
the logisticians, despatching quantities of defence stores and other
material, by sea and air. A team to brush up the British plans in the
event of trouble in the South-West Pacific, including Fiji, the
Solomons, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, and New Hebrides (said to
have inspired the show 'South Pacific'), included me as the logistician.
It transpired that there were few operational plans, and none for
logistics. It required tact and persistence to prise out of local officials
and contractors the figures for stock-holdings of fuel and food, the
number of bulldozers and a host of other bread and butter matters. A
trip to Aden followed on the heels of a month in the romantic setting of
the South Pacific. Plans for the withdrawal were in full swing, and the
Far East theatre was to become involved in the latter stages. As this
would also include me when I returned to commando soldiering on
completion of my staff tour, I took considerable interest in the plans,
including the logistic arrangements.
I learned a great deal about logistics in that appointment, not least
the critical importance of supply and the suppliers in any operation.
Nothing that I have seen since changed that view. Often, the results of
one's labours were more tangible, more easily measured than those of
other staff departments, and therefore a greater source of satisfaction.
My original intention for this book was to carry on where Professor
Martin van Creveld, in his scholarly work Supplying War, left off in
1944. However, the more I read and researched, the more I formed the
opinion that there was much still left unsaid about logistics and armed
conflict from antiquity up to the end of the Second World War, my
original starting point. For example, there were campaigns that gave
pointers for the future, such as the American Civil War and the First
World War. The sea flank, and the logistic advantage it gave to
generals who would, or could, make use of it was interesting to me;
from Alexander the Great over 300 years BC, to Field Marshal
Alexander in Italy in AD 1943/45. The campaign in Normandy 1944
included the greatest amphibious operation of all time and has been
covered frequently, but there were many logistic lessons learned in the
Torch landings in North Africa in 1942. Bringing in supplies from the
sea adds another dimension to the logistic problem, one not readily
appreciated by those whose professional horizons are bounded by
continental experience. Finally, Burma, perhaps the logistic triumph of
the Second World War, in the most daunting terrain; the longest land
campaign fought by the Allies against the Japanese.
The post-Second World War campaigns and wars have been selected
Preface
with an eye to bringing out certain lessons. I speak no language other
than my own,
and for this reason chose campaigns that are well
documented in English.
In Korea, the initial unpreparedness of the United States was based
on their experience in the Second World War, and the time allowed
them to build up their defence industries, both before Pearl Harbor,
and afterwards. This coloured their view of how any future war would
unfold. They paid the price for placing too much faith in what is high on
my private list of military sins; over-confidence in one's ability to
foretell the future. Korea also provides an excellent example of the use
of the sea flank, as well as the interplay between the effectiveness of
interdiction of an enemy's lines of communication and the pressure
being applied on his forces at the front. Unless the two are co-
ordinated, the effort put into the former may be wasted. This was also
the first time the Americans had taken on a Communist Asiatic enemy,
and produced valuable lessons, many of which they failed to apply in
Vietnam, the next war against Asiatics of the same political persuasion.
Vietnam, which is the longest chapter, provides a chance to look at
four logistic phases (referred to in Chapter 5 as Rounds 1, 2, 3 and 4).
Phase One, the French campaign, failed militarily, mainly because they
did not possess the logistic means to flesh out their operational plans.
Phase Two, the period between the French withdrawal and the
committal of American forces in strength, held portents for the future,
in the lack of administrative skills among the South Vietnamese, which
were to prove a considerable drawback towards the end of the period of
American involvement, and afterwards. In Phase Three, the Americans
had logistic problems, but possessed the means to overcome them; as
we shall see, their strategy, and hence their operational and tactical
methods, were at fault. Finally, in Phase Four, the steady reduction of
American logistic support to the South Vietnamese, post 1973, was a
major factor in the latter's defeat.
Vietnam also provides an interesting example of the build-up of a
guerilla army from a platoon to a force of several corps, with armour,
artillery and all modern weapons. The logistic problems facing a
guerilla commander, fighting a power equipped with sophisticated
weapons and enjoying total air domination, is also interesting.
If those masters of mobile warfare, the Israelis, have an Achilles heel,
it is logistics. Nevertheless, thanks to support from the Americans, and
the brilliance of the Israeli generals, they managed to inflict defeat upon
