The Lifeblood of War
MEDITERRANEAN
Maret
Medeni
Foum Tatahouin
Aha
louggour
Scale of miles
100 150 Miles
Miles 50
International boundary
Y A
Intercolonial boundary
Roads
Hill Teatures
Swamn
Railways (Metre gauge)
(Standard gauge
Three Campaigns in a Global War
difference to the future support of the campaign in Tunisia by relieving
the single railway from Algiers of thousands of tons of supplies daily.
To begin with, and until fighters were deployed forward to the airfields
at Bone, and Djidjelli (40 miles from Bougie), the Germans were able to
bomb the ports at Bougie and Bone with impunity. In two days, they
succeeded in sinking five allied ships at Bougie and slowing down
unloading at both. The forward basing of fighters had to await the
landing of aviation fuel and ammunition, and at Bone, pierced steel
planking and engineer work, in addition to resurface the runway.
Operations Ashore: The Race is Lost
However, despite all their efforts, the Allies failed in the race to build
up sufficient force in Tunisia to eject the Germans while they were still
weak in numbers. Although elements of British 78th Division, British
1st Parachute Brigade, and US II Corps, all under British V Corps, got
within sight of Tunis, they came up against increasing German
resistance, as the latter brought a stream of reinforcements to Tunis
and Bizerta by air. This German deployment was neither prevented nor
interfered with by the French troops in Tunisia. The Germans, able to
reinforce their airforce from Sicily, Sardinia and Italy, based fighters
and tactical bombers at Tunis, Bizerta, and at some forward strips.
They brought over the FW 190 fighter, superior to any Allied fighter at
the time, except the Spitfire Mark IX and the Mustang Mark II. Their
aircraft operated in support of their own ground troops, in stark
contrast to the Allied ground troops, who, fighting at the extreme range
of their own air cover, were hard pressed to hold their positions with
inadequate air support. All the lessons learned in the Western Desert
about army/air force co-operation were ignored from Allied Force
Headquarters downwards, and were painfully relearned. V Corps was
stopped, pushed back, and soon found themselves fighting a defensive
battle.
Some Reasons
Among the reasons for failure were insufficient ground and air forces,
inadequate transport, 13
and bad weather. One of the main causes was
the problem of supporting a very rapid advance over a long line of
communication. Units constantly outran the ability of the logisticians
to supply them. Tunis is 600 miles from Algiers, the British base, and
nearly 1,000 miles from Oran, the American base. It is worth looking at
SONY
