314
The Lifeblood of War
conventional war against the Soviet Union, and using short-range
nuclear forces in order to stave off defeat seems, to the author, to have
lacked credibility years ago, and is now probably out of the question,
given the situation in Eastern Europe. Yet all the recent experience,
including the Iran/Iraq War, points to high expenditure of conven-
tional weapons, and highlights the West's reliance on battlefield
nuclear weapons. It appears that the only way NATO could reduce
this dependence, would be to increase its stocks of conventional
weapons and the size of its armies.
However, the question had to be asked what is the threat from the
Soviet Union? Intentions can change quickly; capability, both in
hardware and training terms takes years to build up; whereas the
ability to deploy one's capability is subject to changes which may be
outside one's control. As an example of this last point, because of the
situation in Eastern Europe the ability of the Soviet Union to deploy its
armies in a surprise attack on the West, has disappeared in a matter of
months. Nevertheless, it is worth pursuing the matter of capability in
hardware terms, because there can be little argument that far from
abating the production and modernisation of equipment, the Soviets
have increased it. For example, Soviet tank production for the years
1986-88 ran at an average 3,400 per year, compared with 2,800 per year
from 1982-84' Although the 1989 production is estimated at 1,700
tanks:? from which one can conclude that either the modernisation run
is nearing completion, or that the Soviets are cutting their overall tank
numbers; depending on what one wishes to believe. General Galvin,
the Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR), has said that the
Soviets have merely replaced old tanks with new, so although the
number of tanks is not greater overall, the tank fleet has been
modernised, and therefore presents a greater potential threat. On the
other hand, the Chief of the Main Directorate of the Soviet General
Staff was quoted in October 1989 rejecting these allegations, claiming
that not one single new tank had reached Soviet troops situated on the
territory of Hungary, East Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.3
SACEUR has not so far replied, but stated in a speech in May 1989
that:
Over the last 10 years or so, the Soviets have engaged in a very sophisticateu
modernisation programme with their entire short-range missile force. They have
continued to replace FROG with the SS-21; in fact, they have doubled the number
of SS-21s that were in Europe when President Gorbachev took office. They have
improved the accuracy and range of the SCUD. Indeed they have incorporated
accuracy and range improvements in all of their missile systems. In addition, there
are a number of other systems that are being developed that will have a significant
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
315
flect on European security such as the AS-15 (an air-launched cruise missile) and
the SS-N-21 (a submarine-launched cruise missile)?*
There is also the matter of 530,000 Soviet troops still stationed in
Eastern Europe, of which 300,000 are in East Germany alone. At the
time of writing (June 1990) the withdrawal of these has stopped.
Whereas NATO has modernised some systems, including dual-
capable aircraft, it has not modernised Lance, the one ground-to-
ground missile in the West's armoury, nor is it likely to; and tank
production in the United States fell from 938 in 1987 to 610 in 1989.
Therefore, despite the claim and counter-claim, there is no reason to
assume that the Soviet Union has changed its offensive capability, or
concepts at all. Furthermore, there is no clear picture of the future
shape and size of Soviet forces, and when they will restructure for
'defensive defence', an expression which can mean all things to all men,
since any defensive strategy must include plans to restore the situation
by counter-offensive; ergo possessing the means to effect an offensive:
the equipment, doctrine, and training.
Problems for NATO in CFE
Talks on reduction of Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) appear
to offer the prospect of reducing that capability. However, it is easy for
one nation as well equipped as the Soviet Union, to reduce its overall
number of equipments, and, at the same time, retain the most modern
items in the armoury. The sixteen nations of the NATO Alliance will
find it far more difficult to manage reductions in step with keeping the
most modern equipment. The Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers
Europe (SHAPE) plan to shuffle equipment among Alliance partners;
to ensure that the most modern weapons in the NATO arsenal escape
cuts resulting from any arms reduction agreements is known as
'cascading'. CFE is a treaty between nations, not alliances, although
co-ordination must be done
on an alliance
basis.
Nevertheless,
individual nations, certainly within NATO, are free to implement the
agreement as they see fit. Redistribution could be very difficult. For
example, to reduce NATO's overall total of combat aircraft, should
Belgium hand over some of its 108 F-16s to Turkey, in exchange for the
latter disposing of an equal number of its ageing aircraft; thereby
reducing the Belgian Air Force below a viable level, and doing little to
enhance the Turkish Air Force? Such a move, and others like it, are
unlikely to commend themselves to national governments.
Paradoxically, but for different reasons, the plan is also likely to
