24
The Lifeblood of War
their camp in an area
where there
was
no
water nearby. Not
surprisingly the siege failed.
The Third Crusade
The Third Crusade, forty years later, following the disastrous defeat
of the Christian army at Hattin and the capture of Jerusalem, by the
redoubtable Saladin, was a far better managed affair, led by three
kings. Two were the ablest and most experienced soldiers in Europe;
King Richard I of England and the Emperor Frederick I of Germany.
The third, King Philip II of France, was not an inspiring leader.
Frederick was the first on the scene, successfully marching through
Anatolia, routing the Turks where most of his predecessors had failed.
After capturing Iconium, disaster struck the German army. Frederick
was drowned, and his son, lacking his father's tactical and logistical
ability, lost most of his men to the Turks and those twin scourges of so
many medieval European armies, hunger and disease.
A year later, after spending the winter quarrelling in Sicily, first
Philip and then Richard, arrived at Acre, which had been under siege
by the Christian armies for nearly two years. Within twenty-four hours,
Richard had put new heart into the Christian army, having assumed
command of the whole force on arrival. Although he fell ill soon
afterwards and was forced to command from his tent, such was the
power of his personality that siege operations were conducted with
considerably more energy than under his predecessor Philip. Saladin's
attempts at lifting the siege were beaten off, and the city finally
surrendered. Philip went back to France, leaving Richard in sole
charge of subsequent operations. He immediately started the advance
to Jerusalem, marching along the coast, keeping contact with his fleet
guarding his right flank. His planning and logistics were far superior to
the haphazard arrangements which were commonplace in most
Western armies at the time. He kept his marches short to preserve the
strength of his soldiers in the blinding August heat. He even arranged
for a laundry organisation to keep clothes clean. After defeating
Saladin at Arsuf, losing 700 to Saladin's 7,000, he halted for a time at
Jaffa, before pressing on towards Jerusalem in the winter rains. His men
suffered miserably, and quickly recognising his mistake, he marched
back to the coast at Ascalon.
In the following spring, Richard set out again, but Saladin retired
before him, destroying crops and grazing, and poisoning wells. Because
of the lack of fodder for his horses and water for all, Richard eventually
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
25
halted at Beit-Nuba and reluctantly concluded that he could not risk
his army by besieging Jerusalem. Even if he had captured the city, it is
highly unlikely that it could have been held by the Christian army after
Richard's return to England; a move that was becoming increasingly
pressing, because of his brother John's treasonable negotiations with
the King of France.
Before he finally withdrew from Beit-Nuba,
Richard improved his logistic situation by capturing a large resupply
caravan, after a night reconnaissance patrol which he led personally.
On withdrawing to Acre, he learned that Saladin had mounted a
lightning attack on Jaffa, taking the city by surprise. Richard reacted
with a speed worthy of a German panzer grenadier divisional
commander of the Second World War. Despatching most of his army
overland, he took a small force by sea to Acre. At the sight of his ships,
the Christians in the city siezed their arms and attacked Saladin's men.
At this stage, a priest jumped down from the city wall, and swam out to
Richard's ship, which was painted red with a dragon's head prow, and
so easily recognised. He told the king that Saladin would soon
overwhelm the Christians again. Although he had only a few knights
and a few hundred infantrymen with him, Richard ordered his sailors
to beach their boats and, wading ashore at the head of his men, stormed
into the city. Saladin's men were routed.
Richard's conduct of his last battle in Palestine was typical of this
great soldier. Saladin, hoping to catch Richard before his main army
arrived, and with only a small force of fifty-four knights and two
thousand infantry, planned a surprise attack on Jaffa at first light after
a night approach march. Fortunately, his force was spotted by a soldier
who gave the alarm. Richard drew up his own small force behind the
medieval equivalent of a low-wire entanglement constructed out of tent
pegs. He ordered his men at arms to form a shield wall, interspersed
with long-bowmen and cross-bowmen, and had spears driven into the
ground like punji stakes. Like a square at Waterloo, Richard's men beat
off repeated charges by Saladin's cavalry. By evening Saladin and his
men had had enough, and pulled back, convinced that Richard was
invincible.
The Lessons
The Crusades, which provided examples of the best and the worst in
the military art of Western Europe, were important for the military
education of Western soldiers. Several tactical and military engineering
lessons were learned, but space precludes discussion of them all here.
