14
The Lifeblood of War
FIG. 2.3 Roman infantry crossing a pontoon bridge. Trajan's column. Each soldier carried his pack and other kit on a stick
Notes 2 and 3 to this chapter. (Hulton Picture Company).
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
nor to satisfy their normal desires, perhaps by force, at the expense of
the females in newly conquered territory.
Seaborne Supply
He also made extensive use of ships to carry fodder, since a large
merchant ship could carry about 400 tons,' while a pack horse carrying
only 200 lbs would eat 20 lbs of fodder daily, thus consuming its own
load in ten days.® Indeed, Engels concludes that Alexander never spent
the winter, or even a few weeks, with his entire army in a region remote
from a sea port or navigable river.' He was also astute enough to take
advantage of the logistic weakness of his enemies' warships. As Robin
Lane Fox has noted in his study of Alexander: 10
'Like all warships in the ancient world, the Persians' men-of-war were like
"glorified racing-eights", and had so little room on board in which to store
provisions that they were forced to remain in daily touch with a land base. Meals
could not be cooked on the move and fresh water had to be collected by putting
into a nearby river-mouth.
Sharp as ever, Alexander had anticipated them and
sent several units by land to beat them off. Thwarted and thirsty, the Persian crews
sailed away to the island of Samos where they stocked with stores, perhaps with
the help of its resident Athenians. On their return to Miletus, they still fared no
better for water, and so gave up the struggle in the interests of their stomachs, and
sailed away south-wards.'
Having used these tactics in the Aegean, he was to use them again to
force the Cypriot and Phoenician ships to surrender
and join him.
Alexander's grasp of the significance of logistics was not limited to
matters of supply alone, but encompassed morale and reinforcements,
as Lane Fox shows.11
'Before advancing (to the coast of Lycia and Pamphylia to hold the seaboard and
render the enemy useless), he gave orders that all Macedonians who had married
"shortly before his Asian campaign" would be sent back home to Macedonia to
spend the coming winter with their wives. "Of all his actions, this earned
Alexander popularity among his Macedonians", besides helping the homeland's
birthrate and encouraging more reinforcements'.
Nowhere is Alexander's use of his merchant fleet to provide logistic
support for the army more evident than at the end of his campaign in
India. He planned to march from the mouth of the Indus at Pattala
(120 miles north-east of present day Karachi) along the coast to Pasni
on the coast of the Makran in Baluchistan. Engels tells us 2 that
Alexander had collected four months provisions for his army, totalling
about 52,600 tons. He would have to take little water, because the
rivers that flowed to the coast would be full in the monsoon which was
