The Lifeblood of War
constructed where they did not already exist. The river ghats were
enlarged. These and other measures were so successful that whereas in
November 1943 an average of 2,800 tons a day was moved forward
against a target figure of 3,700 tons a day, by September 1944 the
tonnages achieved were 6,537 tons a day against a target of 5,900 tons a
day; and by March 1945 the average tons a day being lifted was 8,973
against a target of 6,900 tons a day. 24 Here again, Slim's remarkable
qualities as the whole soldier, in whose calculations the logistical factor
was never far from the front of his mind, emerged. It was he who saw the
opportunities offered by the seizure of a sizeable stretch of the
Chindwin to create an additional means of producing lift — by creating
a fleet of boats and rafts from the limitless timber available. The
500 tons a day he aimed for may have seemed modest in relation to the
overall requirement but in that campaign, every ton counted.
Furthermore, he was already looking ahead to the formidable
problems posed by the Irrawaddy and foresaw how invaluable a fleet of
river craft would be, no matter how rudimentary. In addition,
numerous much larger vessels were salvaged from the bottom of the
Chindwin, victims of the first Burma campaign or of Allied air attack.
In this way, the Inland Water Transport organisation of the 14th Army
made a substantial contribution to the success of its operations against
an enemy whose logistic difficulties were driving his troops to the edge
of starvation and beyond.
The Campaign
However, all these improvements to the logistic system were a long
way off when, in May 1942, the exhausted, malaria-ridden soldiers of
what was then known as Burma Corps, arrived in Assam by the track
from Kalewa to Imphal. Fortunately, with the onset of the monsoon,
the Japanese did not follow-up hard. They had their own logistic
problems. By remaining in Burma, with their bases in the malaria free
zone, and using the natural communications in the country, and eating
the bountiful rice harvests, they would live perfectly comfortably. Any
attempt on their part to invade India with a force of sufficient size to
have a chance of succeeding, would require a major upgrading of their
lines of communication forward of the Chindwin river. Furthermore,
their supply lines for spares, ammunition, and equipment ran all the
way back to Japan. Unless, and until the Japanese made a radical
reappraisal of their strategic priorities, with a reassignment of the
Three Campaigns in a Global War
necessary assets to support them, an improvement of the order
required to support a major offensive was highly unlikely. Put simply,
they had overreached themselves. They faced the classic logistic
dilemma, if they advanced they outran their supplies, and, unless they
could resupply themselves at their opponent's expense, they became
progressively weaker. The British falling back on their own bases,
became progressively stronger. Provided they did not take council of
their fears, as they had in Malaya and Singapore, where they had given
ground and surrendered to an
enemy
who was weaker
both
numerically and logistically, the Japanese would not prevail. Strategic-
ally the Japanese were on the defensive, but mounted a series of attacks
to secure a better defensive position from which to hold Burma. The
Allied aim was offensive, to retake Burma, and force the road through
to China. In this case they would be moving away from their bases, and
have to improve their supply lines. But first they had to build up their
strength, while holding off the Japanese attacks, like a badly hurt boxer
keeping an aggressive opponent at bay, while he recovers sufficiently to
go over to the attack.
The British Build-Up
In general terms, therefore, the British forces in Assam and Arakan,
remained on the defensive from May 1942 to May 1944. Although there
were offensive operations, they were of a comparatively minor
character. Active operations virtually ceased during the monsoon of
1942/43. This static situation naturally made the supply of the force
easier, and allowed time for the improvements in the logistic system
discussed already. Another feature of the earlier part of the campaign
had been the tendency of units threatened with being cut off by the
Japanese infiltration tactic, to withdraw to keep open their logistic life-
line. The means to keep open this life-line, air supply, was not available
to begin with, but when it arrived it was to change the tactical and
logistic picture so radically that it has been deemed the single most
important reason for eventual victory.
Manipur Road became the logistic base for the Army in Assam long
before it was ready to take on this task. It was
responsible for
maintaining 30,000 troops at a distance of 100 miles. The railhead, it
was planned, would handle 1,000 tons a day, rising to 2,000 tons. But
the rail extensions had not yet reached the supply depots, and to begin
with all supplies had a six to seven mile journey by road, throwing an
unwelcome additional strain on the already overworked transport. At
SONY
