280
The Lifeblood of War
because Argentine Pucara aircraft, based on the Falklands, dominated
the air line of communication for a vital few hours, while mist at sea
kept the British Harriers deck-bound. This air strike also underlined
the need for the BSA and other logistic installations to have adequate
air defence. The BSA was at least within the air defence umbrella in San
Carlos Water, others which were about to be established would not be
so fortunate. An air strike against the landing force logistic assets was
potentially far more damaging than any other form of enemy action.
Ammunition Expenditure Mounts
The Goose Green battle showed that the ammunition rates for which
the commando brigade's reserves had been stocked were unrealistically
low. In fairness, this had been recognised for some years, but Treasury
parsimony had prevented an increase in stocks. As a hang-over from its
FiG. 8.5'... heavy expenditure of ammunition'. 105 mm gun and ammuni-
days in the Far East and before, the brigade was provisioned to Limited
War Rates of ammunition, perfectly adequate for the brush-fire wars
on which it had been engaged in the recent past. The small arms
ammunition expended at Goose Green and Darwin was four times that
of the daily ammunition expenditure rate (DAER) allowed for in
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
limited war, and that of 105 mm guns and 81 mm mortars, five times.
This represented an expenditure higher by a factor of 25 per cent than
General War Rates (the rate for the most intense operations envisaged
in a war against the Warsaw Pact). Not for the first time was the rate at
which ammunition was actually expended in war to exceed expecta-
tions.
Fortunately,
the Commanding Officer of the Commando
Logistic Regiment, Hellberg, and Baxter, Moore's chief logistician, had
agreed during the meeting at Ascension on 17 April, that 30 days worth
of ammunition at Limited War Rates might not be sufficient. They
estimated that the entire stock of 105 mm and 81 mm ammunition
would last only about a week at intense rates of fire. Baxter accordingly
arranged for a further 30 days stocks of War Maintenance Reserve,
taken from holdings earmarked for other formations, to be sent South
well before the landing force arrived in the Falkland Islands.
This
included additional 30 mm Armour Piercing Discarded Sabot ammu-
nition for the Scimitar light tanks (at that time still trial ammunition),
and extra VT and other fuses for 105 mm shells.
The Forward BMA Established
By 2 June, establishment of the Forward Brigade Maintenance Area
(BMA) for 3rd Commando Brigade at Teal Inlet was well under way. A
Distribution Point (DP) was established at Estancia, the head of the
creek nearest to the positions occupied by the Brigade. LSLs could now
bring supplies to the Forward BMA, and from there they could be lifted
by boat to the DP for collection by units by BV, or a requisitioned farm
tractor, or taken by helicopter direct to unit locations from Teal Inlet.
This system saved a great deal of helicopter lift, and resulted in a better
service to the Brigade than provisioning direct from Ajax Bay. AVTUR
in drums was positioned at Teal Inlet, which became the Forward
Fuelling
and Re-arming
Point (FARP) for the Brigade's light
helicopters, dispensing with the need for them to fly a 90-100 mile
round trip every time they needed replenishment. The use of Port
Salvador in this way, capitalising on the amphibious capability and
expertise of the Brigade and Clapp's force of ships and craft, had been
planned weeks ago, before sailing from Ascension. It was a source of
much satisfaction to see it being put into effect and working so well.
A Severe Case of Cognitive Dissonance
The logistic situation in Sth Infantry Brigade (who arrived on
2 June), through no fault of theirs, was less happy. They brought
