142
The Lifeblood of War
more pressing was the prospect of Nationalist China crumbling, and
the arrival of communist forces on Vietnam's northern border. Valluy's
aim was to take the Vietminh governmental and military headquarters
in the village of Bac Kan in the Viet Bac. The concept for the operation,
codeword LEA, was two pincers and a prong. The prong would be
provided by Groupement S, two parachute battalions under Lieu-
tenant Colonel Sauvagnac dropping on to Bac Kan, and two villages
on the track to Bac Kan; Cho Don, twelve miles away, and Cho Mol,
twenty miles away. Quite a dispersion for a force of 1,100 men!
Meanwhile Groupement B, under Colonel Beauffre, consisting of three
infantry battalions, supported by three armoured and three artillery
battalions, one engineering and one transport battalion, would form
the northern pincer. Starting at Lang Son, they would advance
140 miles along the road via Cao Bang and Nguyen Binh to link up
with the parachute force.
The southern pincer,
Groupement C,
consisted of three infantry battalions, supported by one artillery
battalion under Lieutenant Colonel Communal. They were to be lifted
in landing craft from Hanoi up the Red River, the Clear River to Tuyen
Quang, and on, if possible up the Song Gam River, to assault the Bac
Kan area from the south and west. Close air support was provided by
all the Spitfire IXs of 4th Fighter Group. The parachute battalions
were to jump from American C-47s (Dakotas), and German Junkers
52s (the same types that had delivered the German paratroopers to
Crete six years before); the equipment had a distinctly Second World
War look, which was fair enough as that war had ended barely two and
a half years before. However, the tactics were Second World War too,
and this nearly led to disaster.
The parachute drop went exactly to plan and took Giap and Ho Chi
Minh, sitting in their headquarters, by surprise. They hid, and then
escaped. It was the last time that the French came near to having either
of them in their grasp. The next day, the Vietminh, inspired by Ho and
Giap, attacked the paratroopers in strength, and by Day Three had
them surrounded and battling for their lives. The prong had failed to
spear the fish, and was in danger of being destroyed. Group B, the
northern pincer, crawled slowly forward. The whole group,
the
equivalent of a reinforced brigade group, tied to one road by its
vehicles, was forced to advance on a section (8-10 men) front.
Ambushes, blown brigades, road demolitions, felled trees, resulted in
clearing operations every mile or so of the 140 miles. The Vietminh did
not stay to fight, but melted away as soon as the infantry, supported by
the leading tank, deployed to attack. It took six days to cover
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
143
CHINA
Nguyen Binh
TONKIN
(Bac Bo)
ao bane
Phu ond hod
Chiem Hoa S
Cho Moi
Thai Nguyen
urs arousemento
TONKIN
MAp VI Operation LEA Autumn 1947.
