pg_0035.pdf:
V10322 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
32
troops are a danger which can never be ignored. Every
column will therefore require throughout its length local
protection against minor interference.
This may be provided
by piquets for flank protection; but, if there are objectives
—e.g., bridges the capture or destruction of which would
seriously hamper the advance, it may be necessary to seize
and hoid them until the columns have passed.
3. Protection from the air
Protection from the air is obtained by dispersion and
concealment; by speed of movement by day, or movement
under cover of darkness; by efficient traffic control; and,
lastly, by the correct positioning of anti-aircraft weapons.
The relative value of dispersion and concealment should
always be considered. Concealment is of little value if the
cover affording it is an obvious target, in which event dis-
persion is preferable.
If air attack is likely to be very heavy, some measure of
protection by day will always be obtainable by decreasing
the density and by enforcing the very strictest march dis-
cipline, to ensure that vehicles do not close up and present
vulnerable targets when blocks occur. A column moving along
a road at low density is not an easy target from the air.
Unit A.A.L.M.Gs. must be spaced out with the object of
discouraging attacks from low levels.
One of the objects of traffic control is to ensure that
natural or artificial obstacles, or enemy action, do not cause
traffic blocks.
Defiles must be foreseen, and adequate pre-
parations made in advance.
Lastly, the correct positioning of the limited number of.
light anti-aircraft guns is of the greatest importance.
The
divisional commander must decide what are the most vulner-
able areas, and allot guns accordingly. Such guns must be
in position very eaily on if they are to be of any use; and,
since they cannot overtake a column on the move, the
problem will be to find space for them well forward. Having
made the allotment, which may exceed the normal allotment
of a battery to each route, the divisional commander must
irdicate to the brigade commander where the guns are to
the gap between the mobile force-or reconnaissance screen
-and the advanced guard.
V10322 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

