pg_0046.pdf:
V10322 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
43
3. Petrol
initial advance, and the possibity a the leoth def the
move at short notice.
Since all units of a division, other than the tracked vehicles
of the divisional reconnaissance battalion, have a range of 150
miles, there will be many occasions on which no difficulty will
arise, provided that it has been possible to refill before the
move, and that petrol points move with the leading brigades
to meet the needs of the divisional reconnaissance battalion,
reconnaissance parties, staff cars, and despatch riders.
Owing to the short range of army tanks, they will always
require special provision; and priority must be given to their
B echelon transport accordingly, particularly when the tanks
are moving well forward.
If heavy demands at the end of the day are certain, sections
of the divisional petrol company must bound forward at the
rear of the columns until a clear road can be made available
to run them up to within reasonable distance of unit petrol
vehicles.
4. Ammunition
Much will depend on the anticipated expenditures
during the initial fighting and on the role of the division on
arrival.
An essential feature of the thrusting policy advocated in
this pamphlet is that all units must be at liberty to expend
ammunition freely. The divisional reconnaissance battalion,
army tanks when moving well forward, field artillery allotted
to leading brigades, and anti-aircraft batteries, are all likely
to have a heavy expenditure.
Provided, however, that the
lorries sent forward are limited to those carrying essentials,
comparatively few lorries will meet the needs of the leading
brigades.
If the outcome of the advance is likely to be a battle in
which the support of the whole divisional artillery will be
necessary, a serious problem arises.
Speed will be of first
importance, since ammunition requirements are liable to
increase if the enemy is given respite in which to improve
his defences. It will then not be enough to move ammunition
vehicles well forward. A likely solution will be for the division-
al ammunition company to dump during the day in a locality
reasonably far forward, from which the artillery lorries can
draw. The ammunition company, having refilled, should
then be able to deliver a second echelon during the night.
V10322 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

