pg_0040.pdf:
V10322 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
37
Artillery needs some time to carry out the preparations for -
a divisional fire plan. These preparations can be made while
tanks and infantry are deploying, provided that the majority
of O.Ps. and some guns are well forward in the order of march.
The latter's vehicles are, however, large and bulky, and it
will not usually be convenient to have many of them well
forward. This difficulty can be overcome by placing some
guns near the head of the column and some farther back.
This organization will enable initial preparations, including
observation of the enemy's positions and registration, to be
carried out while the remainder of the guns move forward
into previously reconnoitred positions to carry out a fire plan
already prepared.
At the first sign of opposition, one troop in each forward
battery will drop into action.
A second troop may later
come into action against the same targets if more fire is required,
or it may leap-frog forward to ensure continuous support.
Prompt and vigorous application of fire is essential if other
arms are not to suffer unnecessary delay. This calls for
intelligent anticipation on the part of the artillery com-
manders, for a simple fire plan, and for a high degree of
initiative on the part of all artillery officers. Artillery must
be handled boldly, and the distance between O.Ps. and guns
reduced to a minimum, since short communications make for
good fire control.
•...
It may sometimes be necessary to use a single gun to engage
with direct fire an isolated enemy post. The moral effect
both on our own forward troops and on the enemy will be
great, and the risk often justified.
As the opposition stiffens, more guns will be deployed,
and the artillery will be centralized under the highest com-
mander who can exercise control. It will be of vital importance,
at this stage, so to organize observation that all the enemy's
foremost positions are constantly watched, otherwise the
subsequent fire plan will be based on guesswork. For the
same reason, the artillery already in position must carry out
reconnaissance for, and pass on all information to, the rein-
forcing artillery.
Further, commanders of forward artillery
must ensure, as far as possible, that their initial dispositions
will assist the rapid deployment of the reinforcing artillery.
Survey should be commenced as soon as the advance shows
signs of slowing up. For this purpose, survey reconnaissance
parties should be well forward.
2. Medium artillery
Since medium artillery guns and vehicles are bulky and
unwieldy, it will usually be advisable to keep them well back
V10322 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

