pg_0016.pdf:
V10322 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
13
i. Air veconnaissance.-Its value will largely depend upon
how intelligently it is directed, and upon the
arrangements made immediately to convey the
information obtained to the commanders
best
disposed to make use of it.
A careful appreciation of probable enemy action
will determine where and when tactical reconnais-
sance by air should be directed. The most valuable
news will generally be early information of any
movement of enemy armoured formations.
ii. Army air suppori.- The value of aircraft allotted for
army air support of a division in the advance lies
in their ability to strike at the enemy wherever he
is found, with none of the limitations of range that
hamper ground weapons; and in the flexibility
which enables a commander to hold this support
in reserve, yet in a position to deliver its attack at
very short notice. Successful employment will
therefore depend on close co-operation between air
reconnaissance and air support, and on good com-
munications between army formations and their
supporting aircraft.
The plan both for air reconnaissance and army air support
will normally be made by the corps or army commander.
Even so, the commander of a division to which air support
has been allotted should represent to corps headquarters
how he requires this support to be used, and the objects
he hopes it will attain.
Air support is discussed in greater detail in Sec. 17.
8. The engineer problem
The enemy will attempt to delay the advance by con-
centrated attacks on the main roads forward, particularly
at defiles, where any successes achieved will teap the richest
reward. Such attacks may take the form of previous demoli-
tions, some of which will be effected shortly before the leading
troops arrive; by delay action methods; by air bombing;
and by contamination with persistent gas.
It is therefore essential that the divisional plan should
state clearly on which roads the engineer resources will be
concentrated. If this is not done, the advance may be
disastrously delayed by a frittering away of the limited
engineer resources over the whole front
V10322 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

