pg_0020.pdf:
V10322 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
17
6. ADVANCE BY A DETACHED FORCE OR FORCES
TO SEIZE AN OBJECTIVE (see also Sec. 4, para. 4.)
1. General
A quick appreciation by a commander of the time and
space problem, as affecting both his own and the enemy
forces, will often reveal that a rapidly moving detachment will
forestall the enemy and gain possession of an important
tactical feature with little or no opposition; whereas a slower
moving force might have to deliver a considerable attack to
dislodge an enemy who had arrived there first. The objective
of the detachment might be the division's final objective,
or some intermediate feature.
If the distance to the objective is considerable, or if there
is a probability of a large time lag between the arrival of the
detachment and the main body, the mobile detachment
should be correspondingly strong; and it will be an advantage
if it can operate under a singie commander nominated by
divisional headquarters.
II, however,
the frontage is wide,
it will be advisable for each leading brigade to send forward
its own detached force.
2. Instructions
The object of the detachment must be unmistakable and
must be known to all troops co-operating.
The instructions to the commander or commanders of
detached forces sent forward should include all available
information, and a clear statement of the object. If detached
forces are sent forward under leading brigades, the operation
must be co-ordinated in the divisional instructions; the
method, however, should be left to the commanders, who must
be given a free hand to act as may seem best to carry out the
higher commander's intention.
3. The detachment commander
The detachment commander will be detailed by name in
orders. He will usually be the one whose arm is going to play
the predominant part in fighting the battle.
Since speed will be of vital importance, the machinery
of command must work perfectly: any improvisation may fail.
A commander must therefore have a staff able to handle the
various arms under his command; and this requirement
should be borne in mind when detailing him. It is un-
desirable to improvise a staff. A brigade commander will
therefore normally be detailed to command the detachment,
although this will not be practicable when each leading
brigade sends forward its own detached force.
V10322 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

