pg_0038.pdf:
V10322 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
35
17. ROYAL AIR FORCE (see also Sec. 4, para. 7.)
1. General
Control of air support is normally exercised by corps or
army headquarters. It is, however, imperative that all officers
should clearly understand the value and capabilities of such
support.
2. Reconnaissance
The main task of the Royal Air Force before an advance
will be reconnaissance, which will include photographic
reconnaissance.
The objects will be :-
i. To discover the whereabouts and strength of enemy
concentrations, particularly armoured formations.
These points will vitally affect the method of advance.
ii. To supplement topographical information available
from maps, particularly regarding obstacles and
defiles, and the presence of any new roads or tracks.
It is on this information that the bridging plan for
the advance involving the allotment of engineers
and bridging equipment-will largely depend.
ili. To locate enemy positions, and artificial obstacles or
belts of demolitions. This, again, will affect the
order of march and the handling of the divisional
engineers.
Commanders and staff officers may also be flown over the
area if the general air situation permits.
Reconnaissance during the advance will be concentrated
on any enemy movements-particularly of armoured forces,
which must immediately be reported to the division-and on
the progress of demolitions.
Contact reconnaissance
will be of great importance if
wireless silence is in force. It will, for instance, often be
essential for the commander to know when the leading troops
have secured a tactical feature.
3. Offensive action
The volume of air support allotted will often fall short of
what is wanted; and, if the best use is to be made of what
is available, it is of great importance that both the air force
commander and the army staff officer at the A.A.S.C.
which is controlling the support should be perfectly clear
as to the objects to be attained.
Before the advance
commences, the divisional commander should, therefore,
V10322 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

