520
AIR DESPATCH
The Task and how the RIASC rose to it
During the operations in Burma, air supply varied from the
support of an advanced patrol to the support of a complete army,
necessitating the deployment of nine RIASC air despatch companies
and one RASC air despatch company in the theatre.
The first
real advantage of having a sound organization for air supply was
evident during the very heavy fighting in Arakan in carly 1944.
The 7th Indian Division, after being surrounded by the Japanese,
was supplied by air to such good effect that it was able to stand
firm against all attacks and, with the aid of the relieving 5th and
2gth Indian Divisions, to force the enemy to withdraw.
this, some hundreds of miles to the north, powerful Japanese forces
attacked and surrounded IV Corps.
Air supply enabled the Corps
to hold the positions at Imphal and Kohima until relieving forma-
tions were able to defeat the enemy and reopen the road lines
of communication.
Air supply had established itself, and it continued on all fronts,
while the Japanese forces, having negligible air support and no
organization for air supply, were never able again to launch a
great offensive.
In March, 1945, more than 60,000 tons of stores
and 48,000 reinforcements were flown into
Burma and 11,000
casualties were flown out. Serious casualties had priority on all
returning aircraft, and it was not unusual for 'normal' passengers,
of the rank of colonel or above, to be left on the air-strip while a
stretcher case, of any rank, race or colour, took up five normal
"seats' in the plane.
This did a lot to maintain the excellent
relations between officers and men which distinguished this army
of many races.
The Part played by the RASC
Although the RIASC played the greatest part in the provision of
air despatch companies, that played by the RASC must not be
forgotten.
6r Company RASC was trained in air supply duties
at Chaklala and, after taking part in the support of formations and
units of 7oth (British) Division employed in the Wingate operations,
it was made available for general air supply dutier in the theatre,
When working for yoth Division its duties included the establishment
of air bases deep in Japanese held territory, notably at "Broadway
and 'White City' - bases whose homely names were classic examples
of British understatement.
Rarly in 1945 two further RASC air despatch companies and two
headquarters air despatch arrived from the United Kingdom and,
although too late for operations in Burma, one company and one
headquarters air despatch were made solely responsible for air
AIR DESPATCH
521
supply in support of operations in Java.
One of these companies,
799 Company RASC, had an inter-allied existence. After serving
with the British Air Despatch Group in support of the Special Air
Service Brigade in Normandy and
of ist Airborne Division at
Arnhem, it was placed in support of the USAAF in Burma, and
finished up at the end of the war by helping the Dutch survivors
and their Indian Army liberators in Indonesia,
The Final Organization
The organization evolved in SEAC for air supply is of interest as
it became the pattern for the present organization for air supply.
An Army Air Transport Organization (AATO) was set up, consisting
of HQ ÁATO and a number of rear air maintenance organizations
(RAMO») and forward air maintenance organizations (FAMOs),
and an AATO signal regiment.
The functions of the HQ AATO were to implement the overall
air supply plan laid down by the Supreme Commander, SEAG,
to control all RAMOs working under it, to receive demands from
consumer formations and to allot priorities, and to correlate these
demands with available air transport capacity, It also had to
apportion accepted demands to RAMOs and to give them air lift
forecasts, broken down into commodities, specifying landing or
supply dropping, in time for the RAMO concerned to work out its
own details, to ensure that adequate stocks were held by or were
immediately available to RAMOs, and to act as a central authority
in all matters connected with army organization for air supply,
I was a staff headquarters, and consisted of a commander of
brigadie's rank and a mall walf, which included ST and other
services representatives.
The RAMO was the executive despatching, agency for both air-
landed and air-dropped supplies.
Its detailed duties were almost
identical with those of the CRASC Air Despatch, already fully
described in the paragraphs on the British organization.
In its
case it was a waff wnit, although the commanders were often
RASC/RIASC officers.
The PAMO was located forward and was the receiving agency
Sor air landed supplies delivered by RAMON
They were allotted
on a wale of one for each corp, but were not put down where
supply dropping, was the planned method of supply, Their duties
Wee to supervine the unloading of air landed supplies and to
record receipts, to supervise the collection by the receiving, formation
of the air landed supolies, and to sucerse the tolleading d
returned sores and of casualties Of no RAY organization exinted
to do so, they hans to load the casualties into the aireraft,
When
Mores were dropped on a lorward air strip temporarily unable ta
