462
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
of food which would be acceptable to the service man.
Various
studies of the nutritional requirements of the service man had been
made in the past,
but like so many other studies they were not
necessarily conclusive and opinion tended to change with the years.
As the war years went on, the situation became such that even
though a given scale of food was considered desirable, and indeed
necessary, the stocks to provide it were no longer available.
National Rationing of staple foods
When the question of rationing meat was first raised in October,
1939, the fact that a service unit could purchase up to 12 oz a head
daily, and more if they wished, caused some perturbation and had
the effect of bringing
the whole question of service rations into
prominence.
The Food Policy Committee directed the War Office
to set up a committee to consider (a) whether the military ration
should differ from the scales that might have to be enforced for the
civil population if national food rationing had to be introduced,
and b) if national rationing were not adopted, what the military
scale should be, and (c) whether some discrimination should be
made in the scales provided for active and sedentary service men.
The War Office Committee reported that they did not agree
that the service man's requirements were necessarily the same as
those of the average civilian, nor did they consider it administra-
tively possible to provide different messing arrangements for those
actively and for those less actively employed.
They did agree, how-
ever, that the guide scales of meat and bacon could be reduced and
recommended that the sugar scale should be increased.
But they
declared that any reductions or restrictions in the pre-war guide
scale should be made good by a compensatory cash allowance.
cost of this compensatory sum was assessed at f1,500,000 a year,
for the three services.
The proposal that reductions in staple commodities should be
made good by such additional cash met with strong opposition from
the Treasury.
Their view was that as the value of the ration had
been increased, by the addition of a supper cash element in 1937,
'solely as a recruiting measure', there should be no difficulty in
returning to the pre-1937 standard; by that time service in the
forces had been made compulsory.
The Treasury
felt that if
compensation had to be given for reductions it should be in the
form of foods cheaper than those reduced in scale, and they advanced
opinion
that substitutes should be purchased at wholesale
rather than retail prices from NAAFI so as to avoid the possibility
of the accumulation of excessive NAAFI profits.
Suggestions for
economy even went so far as advocating that cocoa should be use
in place of meat and dates in place of sugar!
SUPPLIES
46g
It was clear to the War Office that the future path was going to
be a thorny one and that if the war lasted very long, further attempts
would be made to impose reductions in the standard of the forces'
rations.
The strong differences of opinion that arose between the
War Office and the Treasury led to the
Cabinet Food Policy
Committee directing that a special committee be set up under
Ministry of Health aegis to examine why the Services' rations should
not be similar to those of the civil population; and if they should
differ what scale should be provided for the forces, and whether a
lesser scale should be given to troops employed on sedentary duties.
The committee was a strong one, and it met in February, 1940;
it included some of the foremost nutritional experts in the country,
with Professor E. P. Cathcart* as chairman, and Sir John Boyd
Orri and Professor Jack Drummond among its earlier members.
Professor Catheart had, with Sir John Boyd Orr, conducted the
earlier studies connected with nutrition of the services
1914-18 war
period, while Professor Drummond (later Sir Jack
Drummond) had recently been transferred from his appointment as
professor of biochemistry at University
College, London, to be
Chief Scientific Food Adviser to the Ministry of Food.
The committee came to the conclusion that the service meat
ration could be reduced so long as the total service ration was
maintained at 4,000 calories (gross).
They recommended a greater
use of certain other foods (cheese, sausages, etc.) and decided that,
because of service catering arrangements, it was not possible to
discriminate between the active and sedentary service man from a
ration aspect.
They also recommended certain reductions in the
scale of meat and bacon for women.
(At that time service
women were receiving four-fifths of the soldiers' scale.)
Their
recommendations were referred to the Food Policy Committee at
the end of February, 1940.
By that time the Government had
already accepted the need for rationing the civil population; bacon,
ham, butter and sugar were rationed for the first time in January,
1940, and meat was rationed in March, 1940.
The Food Policy Committee accepted the recommendations in
respect of the women's ration but considered that the total money
value of the women's scale should remain the same.
accepting the experts' conclusions on the men's ration. the committee
directed that the Army should take a census of actual usage of
staple foods in service messes.
While these investigations were in
progress the War Office invited units to adopt a scheme of voluntary
underdrawals of meat, especially by large units, and it was agreed
Research Institute.
the University of Clashe, and Sir. Son, now ordioyd Orr, was Director of the Rowatt
' Professor E. P. Cathcart, F.R.S
was at that time Regius Professor of Physiology at
