614
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
detached from sections.
Life for a platoon officer became very
harassing; sections moved from one RE company to another very
quickly, so that he had a very difficult task in keeping touch with
his section corporals and vehicles.
The attack swung southwards to Tilly and Villers Bocage.
On
this thrust one vehicle of D Platoon was working in advance of the
infantry on a RE detail.
The sappers and tipper were ambushed
by a German patrol, and in a matter of moments the vehicle was
under fire and left abandoned.
Several days later the vehicle was
recovered and towed into company headquarters' location,
the
whole vehicle being complete riddled with rifle and small arms fire.
By the time the drivers had become accustomed to working under
shell and mortar fire, there was hardly a tipper vehicle in
the
company that did not have some battle scars.
As battleships have destroyer and cruiser escort, so tanks must
have an escort.
The escort did not provide extra fire power for
attack, but they were tippers loaded with rubble so that when the
tanks met the obstruction of shell and mine craters, the rubble was
tipped and so hastened the advance.
A typical example was when
one section of A Platoon were operating on the Villiers Caen road.
A small bridge had been blown, and tanks of the 7th Armoured
Division were delayed.
This section was immediately moved up
and the stream was filled with rubble, thus allowing the armour to
pass on again into the attack on Caen.
And so the tippers worked and worried throughout the whole
of the beach-head campaign.
Then came Falaise, the enemy was
routed, and the company began the long journey from Falaise to
Nijmegen.
The company worked unceasingly.
Problems of re-
pairs were not so acute, owing to the job done by the workshops
LAD teams in platoon headquarters.
In company headquarters
big repairs were effected under more static conditions.
Platoons
became scattered, and it was the policy of the company commander
to place his headquarters as centrally as possible.
The Seine was bridged and crossed, all platoons taking part in
assisting the RE in their magnificent work of bridging.
A and D
Platoons were left behind at Beauvais, and headquarters leap-frogged
them to Songeons while B and C Platoons were still pushing towards
Belgium.
But even then, platoon officers had problems.
D Platoon
officer, although his headquarters was at Beauvais, had one section,
in charge of his platoon sergeant, who were pushing on with the
Guards Armoured Division.
He lost his section for many weeks
and finally caught up with it at Grave.
B Platoon pushed on to
the Belgian border and into Tournai, C Platoon, also hard on their
heels, overtook them, and were in Brussels immediately after the
city was liberated, and to this platoon fell the honour of having
486 COMPANY (TIPPER)
615
driven the first soft vehicle into the Netherlands.
Again the tippers
were escorting tanks of the Guards Armoured Division, the order
of march being tank, tipper, tank, tipper, and so on.
This continued
up to Nijmegen, where the long flog came to a halt.
At this period of the operation, the Royal Engineers decided, now
that the advance was approaching the Low Countries, that stone
was essential.
Overnight, A, B and C Platoons were ordered to take
up location at Quenast Quarry, between Enghien and Hal, some
5,000 tons of stone having to be dumped at the stone dump, at
Bourg Leopold.
D Platoon headquarters moved up from Beauvais
to follow up the rapid advance of XXX Corps.
The stone dump completed, A, B, and C Platoons returned to
their normal role of roadmaking.
C Platoon pushed up to Nijmegen,
half the platoon going over the Maas to work with the airborne
divisional RE, A and B Platoons operating at Bourg Leopold and
Son, north of Eindhoven.
Company headquarters moved into
Eindhoven which subsequently
turned out to be the company
headquarters location throughout the winter.
The move was made
on October 10th, and it was in March, 1945, that it pulled out again
to continue in the Battle of the Rhine.
B Platoon made a move from Son to Veghel farther north up the
corridor between Eindhoven and Nijmegen a mile from the actual
line.
Enemy patrols passed through the location, but, discretion
being the better part of valour, these patrols were left entirely
alone.
But again we have evidence of how close the tipper platoons
worked to the front line.
Sections of C Platoon had a similar
experience while they were operating with VIII Corps at Deurne,
One particular section operating with the 15th (Scottish) Division
were only 1,000 yards from the front line, and they also had the
experience of enemy patrols passing through the location.
Between October, 1944, and March, 1945, static winter warfare
set in, but that did not mean that the company had any periods of
rest.
Throughout the whole of the winter months the tippers were
working all daylight hours on road maintenance.
Platoons were
moved with great rapidity to work with the RE in an area from
Nijmegen in the north to Maastricht in the south, with the Mans
making the eastern flank.
These were hard months for the vehicles;
owing to the pressure of work and climatic conditions it was difficult
to carry out good maintenance, but every effort was made and the
officer commanding the company started a big drive, realizing that
only by harsh methods could he hope to keep his maintenance at a
fairly high standard.
Then came
the bombshell of Von Rundstedt's thrust to the
Ardennes.
The American Army was retreating, and the position
Field Marshal
on that sector of the front was becoming serious.
