254
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
Simeto by a parachute brigade of the ist Airborne Division and
leading elements of the 50th Division.
General Montgomery
decided that he would try to turn the
enemy's position by
a
left hook executed by the ist Canadian
Division, which had already reached the important road centre of
Enna,
and the 78th
Division,
which he directed on Centuripe.
This manoeuvre, in combination with an attack by the 5Ist Division
on the Sferro hills, was designed to cut the enemy's communications
between the Catanian plain and the road round the western slopes
of Mount Etna.
At the same
time the Americans were making a
wider sweep
and
were
advancing
along the coastal road from
Palermo towards Messina.
On August 2nd Centuripe fell; on the 5th Catania was captured
by the 50th Division, and on the 6th the Americans, by capturing
Troina, once more linked up with the left flank of the ist Canadian
Division.
The enemy was now mainly concerned with extricating his forces
from Sicily and imposing the greatest possible delay on the Allied
Aided by a number of small-scale amphibious operations,
the 5oth Division along the east coast road and the 3rd United
States Infantry Division along the north coast made steady progress.
On August 17th, after 38 days, the Sicilian campaign came to an
end, as patrols of the 3rd United States Infantry Division,
closely
followed by the goth Division, entered Messina to find it deserted
by the enemy.
The Coming of Dukws
Without doubt, the most important aspect of this campaign for
the RASC was the coming of the dukw.
It is no exaggeration to
say that this wheeled amphibious vehicle revolutionized the business
of beach maintenance.
By being able to unload direct from LSIs
into dukws, which could deliver their loads to beach maintenance
dumps without any intermediate handling, we were able to speed
up enormously the rate of discharge of stores over beaches.
became less dependent on the weather and calm seas and were not
so restricted in our use of beaches.
It was easy to divert dukws
from an unfavourable beach to a better one without the necessity
of moving landing ships and craft and without causing congestion
at the beach exits.
Owing to the reduced handling there was also
a great saving in labour.
Beach maintenance was undertaken by beach groups in the case
of formations mounted from the
United Kingdom or from North
Africa and by beach 'bricks' in the case of formations mounted
from the Middle East.
These beach 'bricks' consisted of an infantry
battalion with the necessary service units and depots attached.
ITALY
255
the case of the RASC these consisted of two platoons of a general
transport company, a small petrol depot and a detail issue depot.
They had been rapidly formed and trained in the Middle East and
carried out their beach maintenance functions admirably.
In the planning of an amphibious operation there is always great
competition for the available transport capacity in the assault and
follow-up phases.
In some cases in this operation the maintenance
of formations was made more difficult by the failure to include
sufficient second line transport in the early stages of the build-up.
Another problem faced by the RASC was that of rapidly collecting
the transport of the divisional column in the beach-head.
In the
case of the 5th Division the RASC was dispersed over 46 different
There was no real problem in connection with supplies. All
troops landed in Sicily with a 48-hour mess-tin ration.
rations were issued until D plus 18 (July 28th) after which normal
bulk rations were issued.
Fresh bread was supplied from D plus 13.
To begin with, this was baked in Malta and despatched daily by
LCT.
Later two field bakeries were set up in Sicily, and contracts
were made with civil bakeries in Syracuse and Catania.
Although plans had been made for the supply of petrol in bulk to
airfields in Sicily, it proved impossible to develop bulk supply until
the campaign was over.
Good bulk storage existed at Syracuse
and Catania, but this was extensively sabotaged by the Germans
and took several weeks to put in order.
There was no movement
of petrol in bulk by road tank wagons during the campaign, as it
had not been possible to give a sufficiently high priority to bulk
petrol transport companies.
In the maintenance planning large tonnages had been set aside
for drinking-water, a great deal of it in 41-gallon drums.
event, none of it was required and considerable delay in unloading
other urgently required commodities was caused by the necessity
of unloading the water first.
It had been foreseen that there would be a need for pack transport
in the mountainous areas in central Sicily, and six pack transport
companies had been included in the order of battle.
However
these were very low on the priority list, and there was hardly a
hope of their arriving until the end of the campaign.
Plans were
also made to make use of local Sicilian mules and saddlery.
The
Ist Canadian Division brought 250 sets of pack saddlery with its
reserves of equipment, and every infantry battalion, field regiment
and field company in the Bighth Army was equipped with 30 pairs
of mule pack ropes each.
attached to each corps headquarters.
arrangements proved most valuable,
As it turned out these
but the improvisation that
