404
OTHER THEATRES
organization was called upon to shoulder the maintenance of the
first line transport of other arms.
This was because in August,
1940, the Royal Army Ordnance Corps had been doubtful of their
ability to meet this commitment, and the RASC had undertaken
to maintain all MT in West Africa.
Exceptionally, in Sierra Leone
where there were already Ordnance workshops, it was arranged
that Ordnance should maintain the base units, and the WAASC
the transport of forward troops.
This proved unworkable, and in
October, I94I, the WAASC took over the maintenance of all army
vehicles in the colony, including those hitherto looked after by
Ordnance.
The arrangement continued until October, 1942, and
is one of the few instances of first line transport being maintained
by the RASC on such a large scale.
In October, 1942, the third
line workshops went over en bloc to REME; but the amount of
repair work which had accumulated made it necessary for the
WAASC workshops to help REME as the latter were just as much
handicapped by lack of men and stores, etc., as the WAASC had
The work of the MT stores depots was a long uphill fight. Besides
the sinking of spares and equipment, lorries arrived without tool
kits, workshop and stores lorries without essential stores and equip-
ment, and the deficiencies had to be made good out of stock.
October, 1941, it was decided that all MT spares held by Ordnance
were to come under WAASC control in the MTSDs which had
been established in each colony.
In late 1940 relations with the French worsened because of our
abortive attempt on Dakar, and had there been an attack on British
West Africa from the French territories, it is questionable whether
it would not have been possible to offer effective opposition.
rough and ready force was hastily produced, but there was a
serious shortage of transport.
in Nigeria, there were only
sufficient vehicles to equip the three brigades available with one
general transport company each.
When this threat receded, two
West African divisions, the 8rst and 82nd, were formed to take
part in the campaign in Burma.
The officers and British warrant
licens and Acos of the WAASC companies were all RASC.
The needs of jungle warfare had made clear the need for another
kind of transport to work in advance of jeep or muleheads
auxiliary groups,
The WAASC therefore raised a number of units named
commanded by a
lieutenant-colonel with a cadre of British NCOs.
were trained to carry a 50-lb load on their heads, and also in bush-
Their usefulness was proved in the Burmese jungle,
where. thoush they were redesionated infantry, they still retaine
many of their original RASC officers and NCOs.
WEST AFRICA
405
There was no WD fleet in West Africa before the war.
Then
vessels gradually came into use at the main ports, and it became
necessary to send out a motorboat company in April, 1940, to
take them over.
The RASC
who went out included officers,
coxswains, and administrative and workshop personnel only, the
deck crews and engineers being recruited locally into the WAASC.
The unit took out a number of craft and made up the balance of its
requirements by local acquisition.
The company, which later became a water transport company,
had a difficult career, partly because of the lack of appreciation in
the command of the principles of administration of water transport,
and partly because of the lack of proper slipways for the maintenance
necessary to counteract the ravages of the teredo worm.
In this
branch, too, the lack of British personnel made itself felt.
This
deficiency, and lack of craft. led to the service falling into a bad
state, but this was eventually rectified by an increase in the British
strength, and in the number of vessels employed, while workshop
and slipway
facilities
were provided.
The commander of the
company had to administer a unit stretched over 2,000 miles of
coastline. Added to thie diMenlty, there were the lack of rail and
telephone facilities, and the effects of continuous tropical rainfall,
humid heat, rust and mildew-all to be contended with.
Many of the above problems were at that period of the most
difcult problem lav in the raising and training of the native
common to all theatres.
Possibly, however, West Africa's most
soldiers, a problem which also existed in East Africa.
The Haproblem Which as Nigeria made fine soldiers, but were
slow to learn the PASC trades and most WAASC men were found
from 'coast boys', mainly of the Ibo and Yoruba tribes.
Fulani, also northerners, and accustomed to cattle, were enlisted
for RASC cattle and butchery tasks.
The language difficulty in
such circumstances was almost insurmountable, and finally the old
system whereby British officers learned the language of their troops
was abandoned, and pidgin English was taught to all native soldiers.
East.
The battles were won, in the Middle East, in Europe, in the Far
The war ended.
The West African divisions returned and
were disbanded.
Transport training centres ran down, and supply
officers pored anxiously over their remaining surpluses.
The end
had come without a shot having been fired in West African territory,
but the WAASC had made a useful contribution to victory.
Their success is a tribute a us only to the skill and pertinacity of
the relatively small body of RASC officers and warrant officers and
NCOs who created the WAASC out of nothing, but also to the
courage, cheerfulness and hard work of the Africans who filled in
the ranks and who, in
two short years,
learned and mastered
