PRELUDE
The need for national retrenchment and the limited role of the
Regular Army led to sweeping reductions in the strength of the
forces to be maintained and in the sums voted by Parliament for
their upkeep.
The RASC had of course to take its share of this
financial stringency, but in doing so it became a shadow of its former
self,
being left with barely enough officers and men to carry out
minimum routine tasks.
The military conscience was put at rest
by the thought that if war did occur the Corps could be casily
expanded again.
Such a premise was based on the grounds that
the general nature of RASC duties were considered comparable to
those performed by equivalent civilian agencies.*
The 'no great war policy' was, at the end of the tenth year, to be
again extended until the failure of the Disarmament Conference of
I931 made it quite evident that if there was to be 'peace in our time'
it could only be at the cost of such a strong defence policy as would
deter
any
potential
enemy
from aggression, not only against
Imperial interests,
but also on the continent of Europe.
nation, however, was not in the mood politically to accept heavy
expenditure,
nor indeed was it ready to recognize the
growing menace of Nazi Germany.
The first effective decision to
rearm was not taken until 1934, but the prodigious cost of rearma-
ment on
the scale which was eventually proved to be necessary
limited the steps which could be taken by the army to re-equip and
orient its training.
At that time policy tended to place protection
of Middle East interests first and any Continental commitment
second.
The dual nature of these objectives was to cause immense
complications in obtaining types of equipment and transport and
in the location of strategic reserves.
The size and shape which the British Expeditionary Force was
to take was not finally settled until after Munich.
By that time it
had also been driven home that with the growth of air power Great
Britain would be vulnerable unless she could offer adequate military
support in Europe so as to deny the use of the Low Countries and
Northern France to a potential enemy.
With this general picture as a background a short descrintion of
the life and work of the Corps in the period between the wars will
perhaps be more readily understandable.
Adverse effects of Retrenchment on the RASC
The nuclee of PASCHrer and men left at home dealing wil
routine duties between the wars were robbed of much of thei
However,
interest by
the paucity
of men at their command.
they
completed
their
daily tasks reasonably
not,
for lack of time and numbers, manage the bigger task of
well but could
* The RASC were directly affected on questions of food, transport and petrol
GENERAL SURVEY
preparing themselves for future operations.
Indeed, they were so
few on the ground that, outside the purely training
units, they
could not muster sufficient numbers for ceremonial occasions.
Nor
was it possible to raise sufficient men for collective training.
The
lack of vehicles, too, was so acute that the smallest composite units
allotted a part in such training that did occur, were almost invariably
in a neutral role so as to husband resources.
Even as late as 1937,
with rearmament in full swing, it is on record that one divisional
RASC, to carry out its own exercises
on company training,
WaS
constrained to borrow vehicles and drivers from i other units of
all arms to make one of its companies up to a semblance of its war
establishment! The predecessors of this unit were even less fortu-
nate, for there was for a long time a Treasury ban on the use of
MT in training schemes if, as was inevitable, this meant hiring
civilian vehicles in home stations.
The Corps had, too, to find the men for the administration of the
barrack services at home and overseas.
The responsibility of the
RASC O i/c Barracks towards the buildings and their occupants
was comparable to that of the landlord of an unfurnished house,
but with the additional duty of supplying the tenant with fuel, light
and water, plus a certain minimum of furniture.
This was unexcit-
ing work, but it filled a need and was of great benefit to the Corps,
because the barrack service offered scope for the employment in
commissioned rank of the best of our
senior
warrant
officers,
particularly on the supply side.
It proved a great incentive in the
enlistment in the Corps as clerks of an excellent stamp of man (often
the son of a Corps soldier) with ambition to make a career of the
Army.
While the Corps was unavoidably stuck in a rut of routine and
deprived of opportunities of training for war,
it suffered also the
almost total loss of its horses with which it
had been
closely
associated since its beginning in 1794 in the
guise of the Royal
Waggoners.
It is a curious paradox that the horse in the army is
a strong humanizing element! The
soldiers'
regard for
their
mounts and their pride in appearance of their charges provide a
strong bond of union between all ranks and, in war, provide perhaps
a sense of man-animal comradeship which may be lacking in other
units.
The loss of their horses was thus a
distinct blow to the
mounted units of the army, and the Corps was one of the first to
be affected, although
none who witnessed the horses' sufferings
during the First World War would wish to see them used, and
expended (over 800,000 died in the British service alone), to the same
extent again.
At the same time an unfortunate decision on the
eligibility of RASC officers for Corps pay and on its amount, coupled
with an unwelcome block in promotion for officers, were further
