280
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
During October, difficulties of supply resulted in ammunition
expenditure being rationed to 25 rounds a gun a day for field
artillery, and 15 rounds a gun a day for medium and heavy artillery.
Later, in January, 1945, an 'all time low' of five rounds a gun a
day was reached.
A further drain on Allied strength was imposed by the necessity
to withdraw the
Greek Mountain Brigade and
the 4th Indian
Division to Greece at the end of October, and a still further blow
fell on the preparations for the spring offensive,
when it was
announced in February that the North-West Europe campaign
would require the ist Canadian Corps and 200 American fighter-
bombers from Italy, and the ist, 5th and 46th Divisions from Greece
and the Middle East instead of their returning to Italy.
In spite of all these difficulties the Allied armies were buoyed up
by the thought that they were advancing the whole time, however
slowly, and that their ultimate victory was assured.
The only
serious German threat came at Christmas, 1944, when a sudden
German attack down the Serchio valley took the United States
g2nd Division by surprise and was only
resistance and counterattacks by the formations on the flanks.
The Final Offensive
In December, Field-Marshal Alexander became Supreme Allied
Commander in the Mediterranean and handed over command of
the Allied armies in Italy (henceforth to be known once more as
15 Army Group) to General Mark Clark.
All our efforts were now concentrated on making adequate
preparations for the final spring offensive.
Stocks of ammunition
were built up; bridging material for crossing the countless rivers
and canals, including the Po, was amassed; equipment and spare
parts were brought up to scale;
reinforcements were absorbed;
communications were improved and railheads pushed as far forward
certain formations were given
special training in the use of a new tracked amphibian, which had
already proved its value in north-west Europe and in the Pacific
the LVI (landing vehicles tracked - known in Italy by its code
The spring offensive opened with an attack by the Eighth Army
in the Adriatic sector, making use of the 'Fantails' to overcome the
flooded areas around Lake Comacchio, on April gth, 1945.
was followed by the attack of the Fifth Army on April 12th.
From the start everything went well.
Bologna was captured on
April 2ist,
followed swiftly by
Genoa on the 26th,
Venice on the 29th, and Milan on the goth.
The
Germans in
Italy were finally defeated, and on May 2nd, 1945,
the German
Army Group in Italy surrendered unconditionally, and the war in
this theatre was at an end.
The battle casualties sustained by the RASC during the campaign
in Italy amounted to five officers and 156 other ranks killed, 34
officers and 679 other ranks wounded, and two officers and 48 other
During these last iI months of the campaign in Italy the pattern
of RASC work did not change much; the same problems of supply
under difficult mountainous terrain and in appalling weather were
met with and solved by the same methods that had been learned
in the earlier stages of the campaign.
The use of mules and jeep
and trailer platoons became as much a part of the normal mainten-
ance systems as the 3-tonner.
The efficient operation of transport
over the limited and winding roads demanded a high standard of
traffic control and discipline.
The regular supply of many forma-
tions of many different nationalities became a commonplace RASC
Perhaps the outstanding achievement of this campaign
from an RASC point of view was the way divisional columns of
many nations unfailingly and successfully followed the same methods
and systems that had been studied and learned by the RASC.
In the later stages of the campaign men of the RASC continued
to earn their share of awards for gallantry. Space alone precludes
a recital of their many achievements.
The foregoing account of the RASC in Italy has necessarily to be
a short one, but before closing the chapter a brief note is given on
some of the other aspects of the work of the Corps, both usual and
unusual.
Amphibious Transport
We have already seen what an important part the dukw companies
played in the invasion of Italy, in the assault at Anzio and in many
of the great river crossings.
They were invaluable too in assisting
in the carly development of captured ports, and in the final stages
of the campaign they helped to run a ferry service across the Po.
One of the greatest contributions which the RASC made to the
success of operations in northern Italy was the provision of a regiment
of LVTs.
These lightly armoured tracked amphibious vehicles
were equipped with heavy machine guns and could be used for
transporting infantry or 25-pounder guns across rivers and swamps
or over flooded areas.
This regiment of tracked amphibians was formed in February,
1045, to enable the Eighth Army to turn the enemy's left flank
which was securely protected by Lake Comacchio and a large area
of flooded country.
The regiment proved a conspicuous success,
and its equipment contributed materially to the advance of the
