218
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
and an attack on the Clive by Messerschmidts only resulted in broken
windows.
The remaining ship, the Snipe, escaped damage, but after
repairs most of the vessels were soon made shipshape and were
ready for work again.
When the island was relieved at the end of 1942, there was still
much to be done.
The first need was to give some change to the
many of those who had served for six and even seven years continu-
ously in the garrison and to give some respite to those who had borne
the brunt of the siege.
The RASC were kept busily at work in
transporting the stocks of essentials which began to arrive in quantity
and in supplying the everyday needs which the garrison
forego during the siege.
There was no time to be lost so that
Malta, G.C., could play its next part as one of the launching places
for the landings in Sicily and for the return of the British Army to
the offensive in Europe.
GIBRALTAR
The Second World War was to add once again to the rich fund of
historical military associations of Gibraltar.
Living in the shadow
of investment, the peninsula remained the one bastion on the route
to beleaguered Malta and to Africa and the Middle East.
garrison had not only to face an almost continuous threat of siege,
but also had to minister in one way and another to the many thou-
sands of men, aircraft and ships which made use of the Rock.
Although the peninsula seemed impregnable, plans for defence
had to be made to meet a possible three-sided attack.
Weapons and
defensive sites needed modernization.
Both serviceman and civilian
were living tightly compressed in the little town at the north end of
the Rock, and the houses were so situated that they could all be
swept by enemy fire from both land and sea.
The Naval Dockyard,
public utilities and storehouses were equally vulnerable, and the
military and civilian populations were entirely dependent on imports
for their daily needs.
Much of the labour employed in the dockyard
had to be drawn from Spanish workers who daily crossed the border
from Spain and returned each evening at nightfall.
There was no airfield, and the only means of providing one was
to utilize the small strip of land contiguous to the border and to
extend it by building an extension into the sea.
Water supply was
solely dependent on catchments,
huge cisterns dug out of the heart of the Rock.
the rainfall being collected into
Given labour and equipment, it was not difficult technically to
provide protected accommodation by tunnelling at suitable points
in the Rock, but the work would take time-millions of cubic feet
of rock would have to be blasted and removed before all needs were
There were many projects to be fulfilled which were to
concern the small RASC establishment, which at the outbreak of
war consisted of a motor transport company of 34 vehicles, a supply
depot, and a bakery located in the heart of the town.
storage depot was situated in a gully which afforded protection from
everything but a direct hit and, being the only one of any size, it also
held the main requirements of the civil population.
There were four
WD vessels for harbour work and the usual transport and barrack
The whole was commanded by an OC RASC.
Pre-war plans included the reinforcement of the garrison.
the time of Italy's entry into the war, the strength had grown from
3,000 to 10,000, and in 1943 it was to reach a peak figure of 20,000.
Among the main administrative defence problems were the storage of
enough food to enable the garrison to withstand a siege of many
months, protection of the food from damage by enemy action, and
keeping it in good condition.
Nothing could be grown on the
Rock, and no livestock could be maintained.
Apart from a few
horses the only animals were the famous apes on which the fortunes
of the fortress were supposedly so dependent.
there was a plentiful supply of fresh produce of all kinds from Spain
and Africa, but even if the colony were not invested an embargo
might be placed on this daily flow.
The civil population would be
equally affected, although their needs and food habits were perhaps
simpler than those of the garrison.
Stocks of all types of tinned and preserved foods were gradually
amassed, special care being taken to select those which, thanks to
the advance in food science, had good anti-scorbutic properties.
Unfortunately, protected storage room could not be provided at the
rate at which the stocks were being built up.
This nearly led to a minor disaster.
A sudden scare that the
fortress might be besieged, one of several during the war,
hasty decision to remove the more important stocks to a place of
safety, and to use remove the more water cisterns, which had been
When the last case of the precious reserves were safely
stowed, the key was tuast case be doors of the cavern with a feeling
of relief that all was well.
A few weeks later it was reported by a passer-by that curious
odours were emanati it was reporteen and when the stores were
examined it was found that rust was causing their deterioration
was obvious that the risk of the stock being destroyed by enemy fire
was considerably less than that of leaving it in its temporary storage
place, and the whole of the stores arain had to be hastilv moved.
