346
BURMA AND CEYLON
flying hours to their credit.
They would have had more if the
skill of the trained RASC men had not been needed for packing
at the air base, so that the task of ejecting supplies from aircraft
was mainly assumed by men of the infantry unfit to go with the
Chindits.
Another air despatch company, 799, took part in the later stages
of the maintenance of Fourteenth
Army.
Having supplied the
French resistance forces, our troops in Normandy and at Arnhem,
and the Americans in the Ardennes, it was sent out East, and began
operations with the United States Army Air Force in May, 1945.
Hitherto, the unit's work had been for emergencies only, but in
Burma operations were a daily routine, and the climate made
conditions different.
After a month there, the unit was withdrawn
to take part in the invasion of Malaya, and later went to work in
Java.
Although the RASC and RIASC performed the air despatch
duties in
SEAC, control was not an ST responsibility, as in the
United Kingdom and other theatres, but that of the staff.
This
was because of local difficulties which often required decisions on
the spot.
These difficulties included bad communications; long
distances, especially from depots; limitations of airfields in numbers
and availability-many were fair-weather only; a chronic shortage
of aircraft; and the fact that, to a far greater extent than in other
theatres,
reinforcements,
units,
and
even formations,
were air-
transported. Strict staff control of rear airfields was consequently
considered essential, and the ST responsibility was for the executive
duties.
These consisted of holding supplies and petrol, packing
stores for dropping,
loading aircraft, providing men for ejection
duties in aircraft, receiving and distributing stores at the forward
airfields and dropping zones, and all the business connected with
supply dropping equipment.
The 'odd-job' units
When 70th Division arrived in India from the Middle East early
in 1942,
it brought with it some small RASC supply and petrol
units as its quota for employment on the lines of communication.
These included several DIDs, a field bakery, a field butchery, and
102 and 106 Petrol Depots.
One DID, 78, had quite an active
career, and so did the petrol depots, but the other units remained
in India and Ceylon on routine tasks.
In May,
1942, an urgent
request reached IV Corps from the manager of the oil wells at
Tinsukia in the extreme eastern corner of India, for a British unit,
trained in handling petroleum products, to be sent up there to stand
by and, if necessary,
take over the installations if the local staff
decamped for fear of the Japanese, which they were likely to do.
BURMA
347
India could not have produced a suitable unit from her own
resources, for the RIASC organization for handling petrol and oil
had not gone beyond the stage of using ordinary supply issue
sections for issuing petrol in containers.
The DDST IV Corps
knew that those two depots were idle in India, and that they exactly
suited the bill.
It was soon arranged for one of them to go up to
Tinsukia,
but then the request was cancelled.
Later, when the
pipeline from Chittagong reached Dimapur, this depot organized
and operated the bulk installation there; and, when Akyab on the
Arakan coast was captured early in 1945, the depot was put in
charge of the bulk installation there too, which it helped to erect.
It operated both the main depot and the pipelines running from it,
took in its first delivery from an ocean tanker in April, and at once
began pumping to airfield tankage; and so it continued the task of
keeping Fourteenth Army moving.
The other depot, which had
been working at Chittagong, was brought down to operate the bulk
installations at Kyaukpyu on Ramree Island, performing a role
similar to that at Akyab.
In April, 1942, 2nd Divisional RASC arrived in India.
division had formed part of the BEF in 1939-40, and after the
evacuation was for about two years in Yorkshire.
for India, its RASC, commanded by Lieut-Colonel C. M. G. Luff,
consisted of 8, 24, and 2g Brigade Companies, and 387 Divisional
Troops Company.
For nearly two years, the division as a whole
remained in Western India, and the RASC was engaged in jungle
training at Belgaum, amphibious training near Bombay, and famine
relief work at Bijapur.
In order to take part in projected amphibious
operations in Arakan, 387 Company became a
However, its only real job there turned out to be a rush troop-
one, by land from Cox's Bazar and over the difficult
Ngakyedauk Pass.
project for an attack
cancelled, so none of the divisional RASC saw active service during
1943-44, except for a small detachment which
Brigade to Arakan early in 1943, where it worked with 78 DID.
Towards the end of that year a new chapter in the story of the
war in this theatre began, when SEAC was formed and took over
from India the control of operations.
The Supreme Allied Com-
mander was Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, who initiated a new
policy for the war against the Japanese.
Hitherto, when the enemy
employed his favourite tactics of cutting our communications,
troops had fallen back to restore them; and the process was then
often repeated.
Also, both sides had been more or less inactive
during the monsoon.
Now all that was changed.
