and the project was deferred until the spring.
In the intervening
months most of the territory west of the high ground which flanks
the river was cleared up, an extensive series of muddy operations
took place in the flooded Northern Netherlands, and the Germans
staged their last great counterattack through the Ardennes, into
Luxembourg and
Belgium, cutting off the 10ist United States
Airborne Division in Bastogne.
The 6th Airborne Division, in a
ground role, was sent to help restore the position, and when this
was withdrawn again to England to prepare for the
assault of the Rhine in the vicinity Xanten-Wesel, a joint Anglo-
American, land, air, and partly amphibious operation known by
the code word 'Varsity-Plunder'.
Hitherto, airborne forces had been employed as the spearhead
of assault, to make the fullest use of the factor of surprise inherent
in their rapid approach.
On this occasion however, surprise was
impossible our intention to cross was only too obvious to the
Germans watching from the other bank.
So it was decided, by a
really heavy artillery bombardment, to drive them as far back as
possible.
This would allow a night assault in boats and amphibian
vehicles by ground forces.
However, on the German side excellent
cover was available in dense woods a mile or two from the river, and
the bridgehead would be precarious if the German counterattack
forces were allowed to build up.
So the 6th Airborne Division was to
be dropped some four miles on the German side in the general area
of Hamminkeln after the assault phase had been completed to cover
the consolidation of the bridgehead and the initial advances from it.
American plans in the adjoining sector to the south were similar.
This was a short-range operation,
and the CRASC's plans for
maintaining the 6th Division were simple, although their actual
execution demanded very careful co-ordination between the sea-
borne and airborne elements of the
column, and between
former and the ground forces with which they were located.
The light company less two transport platoons (i.e. three parachute
platoons and one transport platoon)
equipped with 12 carriers
and trailers instead of jeeps, were to fly in with the division,
the
transport being in Hamilcar gliders which also stowed as many
pannier loads of stores as could be got within the weight limit.
The company's first duty on landing was to select a divisional
maintenance area and begin stocking it, the initial stores comprising
the panniers from the Hamilcars,
two boxes of composite rations
from nearly all other oliders used in the operation and whatever
could be recovered from the jettison drop.
Fast work was needed,
since the first full day's supply drop was due three hours after the
and it was dirable to berin collecting it ae soon as it
came, so as to clear the SD7, for the next drop due at dawn the
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
535
following morning and consisting of two days' requirements.
In
the event this latter drop was not needed, and was cancelled because
the land maintenance route had been established before it was due.
Since the requirements of an airborne division are of somewhat
different nature from those of more normal formations, it was
thought necessary to have ready an immediate supply to bring
forward when the ground forces linked up with the division; XII
Corps CMA would not normally hold the required stocks.
Accord-
ingly, well before the operation, a depot area known as Nutcracker
dump was established near Sonsbeck, about six miles south-west
of the Rhine bend at Xanten.
At Xanten also there were assembled the land elements of the
division, including HQ RASC and the two heavy companies.
second depot area, to be known as Pegasus dump, on the east side
within reach of the battle.
The adjutant, with provost and pioneer
assistance, was to reconnoitre a suitable position for Pegasus dump
as soon as he could get across, and, having guided the leading
vehicles to it, would make contact with the officer commanding
light company and let him know that maintenance was assured.
When the operation started CRASC's plan worked well, in spite
of unforeseen difficulties.
The airborne party, of seven officers
and gi other ranks, with 10 public relations men under their wing,
met with formidable opposition
when
they landed at about
10.45 a.m. on March 24th, 1945•
Visibility was bad, the whole
ground being blanketed by a fog of smoke and dust set up by the
intensive artillery bombardment.
To show the risks of this kind of
operation, a brief account of the fate of each RASC glider is given:-
No. 267-A good landing,
but shelled and set on fire as the
carrier was got out.
The carrier crew went to assist in getting a
wounded man from another glider, which was itself hit, and burned
out. Casualties, one officer, six ORs RASC wounded, glider pilot
killed.
No. 268 Crashed in England after take-off. All occupants
badly injured.
No. 26g-Missing.
No. 270- A good landing in the midst of a battle. Tail hit by
anti-aircraft fire, but nobody injured.
No. 271- Shot down, breaking up badly, but nobody hurt.
Carrier shed a track, but was repaired by unit fitter.
No. 272. Hit by flak, managed a fair landing, losing a wheel
and crashing through a fence.
No. 273-
No casualties.
-Subsequently found outside the divisional perimeter,
with both pilots dead, but no sign of RASC crew or load.
