490
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
MANPOWER
Reference has already been made to the difficulties of the Army
in general and the RASC in particular in the matters connected
with manpower during the years leading up to the war.
While
establishments always lagged behind actual or potential commit-
ments, recruiting always lagged behind establishments.
Some of
the measures taken to alleviate these evils have already been listed.
This specialized section of the story deals with the months immedi-
ately preceding the outbreak of war and with the war years
themselves.
AG 8/ST 5 (referred to in future, for the sake of brevity, as AG 8)
was the War Office
General, for the manning of the
branch responsible, under the
Adjutant-
RASC.
Like its counterparts
under the DST's control, AG 8 was of modest proportions while,
unlike the QMG 3 and QMG 6 branches, it had the difficult task
of serving two masters, the Director of Recruiting and Organization
(later the Director of Organization) under the AG, and the Director
of Supplies and Transport under the QMG.
Apart from the Civil
Service element common to all War Office branches, it was staffed
exclusively from the RASC, In 1938, even after Munich, when
things were already warming up, it consisted only of an AAG
(colonel), a staff captain, a supervising officer, a quartermaster,
and eight clerks, of whom two were military.
Its duties of 'manning'
included the administration of all members of the RASC and all
civilians paid out of "Vote 6', that part of the annual Army Estimates
which covered supplies and transport.
This organization was barely adequate to deal with normal peace
routine and had little or no capacity to spare for considering in any
detail the many problems bound to arise on and after mobilization.
As an instance of its consequent divorce from real forward planning
may be cited the fact that only three months before mobilization
four of the military members of AC & were fully occupied for a
month in preparing the normal programme of relicts for the trooping
season 1939-40 and the raising,
RASC men required for the autumn manoeuvres.
from existing resources, of the
On the eve of mobilization, however, approvall was obtained for
a marked increase in the branch, which thereafter consisted of an
AAG and eight officers, of whom three were DAAGis,
with a
corresponding increase in other ranks and civilians.
AG 8 was
then organized into three sections
ranks
planning, officers and other
and this general distribution of duties remained throughout
the war. the number of subordinate staff required to deal with the
increasing load being suitably raised from time to time.
Those who
MANPOWER
491
held the key positions in AG 8 were Colonels P. L. Spafford, J. E.
Witt, C. E. Browne, W. J. J. Allen, R. C. Atwill, H. N. Gallagher,
W. N. Craig MeFeely and deep is the debt of the Corps to all of
The first fence which AG 8 had to negotiate was mobilization on
September grd, 1939, for which detailed plans had been made
after the release by the War Office of the 'New Conspectus 1938'
only in November of that year. Broadly speaking, this document
the mobilization of two army corps,
four
divisions, and their supporting troops, to be built up of one third
Regulars, one third Regular reservists, and one third Supplementary
The follow up was to be the Territorial Army, the
mobilization of which was to be spread over, following a priority
dependent on the strength and state of training of its divisions in
peacetime.
Some 5t cadres of MT companies existed in peacetime, 49 of
which were intended for the field force against a requirement of
53, and two for home against a requirement of seven.
The missing
field force cadres were to be provided by two TA divisional RASCA
of lowest priority, while it was hoped that recourse to hiring would
meet home requirements until new post-mobilization companies
could be raised.
To meet the mobilization commitments of the striking force there
were available at home, 677 Regular officers, 320 Supplementary
Reserve officers and 346 officers of various other reserve categories.
The comparable figures for men were about 8,600 Regular serving
soldiers and 15,000 reservists of all kinds.
On paper the call for
one third Regulars could be met for the two army corps, but in
practice this was not so.
Many Regular officers and men were
reserved for staff, extra regimental employment and training units
and, as mobilization drew nearer, still greater demands on the Corps
for officers were made.
These led to the appearance of some square
pegs in round holes, the most notable being a highly qualified
engineer commanding, a field bakery.
There was also a Ford dis-
tributor who was undoubtedly a capable executive in the motorcar
world but, because of his had headwriting, found himself a food
distributor in a supply dep bid hame wig,
The principal short-
ages among other ranks were clerks, bakers and loaders.
It was
hoped. and the hobe was luatided that the two firat trades could be
filled by post-mobilization enlistments.
The loaders were provided
by the Royal Artillery, who had some 2,000 unwanted reservists.
Most of these RA reservists were eventually trained as drivers.
meet the needs of new units not covered by the existing Regular
