120
THE MIDDLE EAST I
were a well defined road was nothing of the sort.
It was just a
trail, and as time went on it was wiped off the face of the desert by
the multiplication of wheel tracks which, as the years went on,
began to make a spider's web of shallow troughs on the hitherto
almost unblemished surface of the sand.
In such country it was not possible to establish supply, petrol and
ammunition points.
There were no means by which points would
be identified on the ground, and individual drivers, even if equipped
with compasses, could not be expected to find map references in a
sandy waste.
At a later date, formation axes were to be established.
These were marked at suitable intervals by means of steel rods
carrying the divisional or corps sign.
Units could place their unit
signs on the axes with suitable directions in the way of bearings and
distance so that they might be located-when the sign had not been
blown down.
But in the early days it was visualized that war in
the desert was going to be even more like war at sea than it eventually
turned out to be, and it was considered undesirable to mark our
'wash' to allow it to be picked up by the enemy.
Moreover, the
necessary steel rods were hard to come by and wandering Arabs
took all wooden posts for firewood.
What was required was some system which would include disper-
sion, as no other method of evading air attack was forthcoming, and
yet would overcome the difficulty that all transport would be com-
pelled to operate in sub-units, probably under an officer.
The transfer of second to first line was tackled first, as taking place
nearer the enemy: anyway, there was no third line.
It soon became
clear that any idea of a 24-hour service would have to be abandoned,
and that except perhaps in the case of 25-pounder ammunition,
where the quantities were likely to be large, and it was impossible
to estimate them in advance, the whole operation of replenishing
first line transport would have to take place at the same time and
once a day only.
A map spot in the desert, usually devoid of any landmark, was
selected for each brigade.
The first and second line transport of
the brigade approached this point from west and east respectively,
dispersed at least 100 yards between vehicles.
All vehicles were
marshalled by units, and by commodities within units, in such order
that, when they were lined up facing each other, each first line
vehicle was opposite its second line counterpart.
Needless to say, good navigation and discipline were required,
It was
but in due course all concerned became extremely expert.
usual for the two bodies to halt some miles apart and for the leaders
to meet and arrange for an orderly forming-up.
During
the
transfer of commodities to first line, the second line vehicles dumped
their loads and withdrew before the first line vehicle came forward.
THE MIDDLE EAST I
121
When the enemy has air superiority, and there is inadequate anti-
aircraft protection, and no cover, dispersion is the only answer.
It was truly a wondrous sight if one could find a high place from
which to view it.
High places were hard to find in the desert, but
on the other hand 'high' had a relative value, and the spoil heap of
a desert bir or water tank afforded a view for miles around.
If
replenishment took place near one of these, the vehicles could be
seen approaching each other, halting, exchanging their wares and
going off home again, almost as well as from the air.
And the fact
that an insignificant air target was afforded could be fully appreci-
ated.
Subsequently
this system,
or
some variation
of it,
was
adopted by all units operating in the desert, and not only rations,
petrol and ammunition were transferred in this manner, but all the
requirements of the
fighting
troops, including
reinforcements.
Return loads of prisoners and salvage were transferred at the same
time.
A similar system was, when applicable, followed in the case
of transfer from third to second line, but, as will later be described,
there was in most cases some reserve on the ground at this transfer
point.
Although, therefore, most second line transport was loaded
simultaneously, third line vehicles were not tied to a definite time-
table.
Because of heavy user demands, the above system could not always
be applied to 25-pounder ammunition.
It is the responsibility of
the RASC, if required, to deliver ammunition to battery wagon
lines, or even gun positions, in order to avoid unnecessary transfer
of complete loads from one vehicle to another.
The vehicles are
guided forward from ammunition points.
Obviously a system by
which 25-pounder ammunition became available once every 24
hours only could not meet artillery
requirements if expenditure
exceeded the amount of one day's lift, which it frequently did,
although there were corresponding slack periods.
It was usual,
therefore, for 25-pounder and any other type of ammunition for
which there was a considerable demand, to short-circuit the daily
transfer system.
This could obviously be applied to any commodity
for which there was an urgent or heavy demand,
but it required
careful arrangements and,
above all, enough competent guides.
Adequate dispersion was still necessary, and many more navigators
had to be made available.
RASC vehicles had to be retained in
sub-units under their officers or NCOs, otherwise the vehicle and
driver as well as the ammunition were likely to be retained by the
customer.
After a winter of uneasy peace in Cairo, Italy finally staged her
back-stabbing act, and the Mobile Division,
now known as the
'Armoured Division (Egypt)', took the field still with its attenuated
RASC resources.
As time went on,
the odd additional vehicle
