62
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
rounds a gun by the 3rd Divisional Ammunition Company for a
dumping programme-a technique which had been well practised
in peace.
The programme was
24
hours.
the day, only to find a little later that this effort was to be a common-
place.
that formations must have had an unquenchable thirst; for instance,
that made on one divisional petrol company which cleared the
whole of their stock, of 20,000 gallons, at one fell swoop and was
followed by urgent representations that unless more could be
provided the formation would be immobile.
of crying wolf, as further supplies were already within sight at
petrol points on the main route over the Escaut, and petrol trains
had arrived at their new railheads.
It took a few days for our RASC units to settle down, but before
they had the opportunity of getting fully used to the system of
replenishment for supply during an advance, they were called upon
to carry out a reverse procedure.
The Enemy cross the Meuse
By the evening of May 13th the enemy had established themselves
firmly west of the river Meuse on either side of Dinant and Sedan,
and they followed up their success the next day by pressing forward,
with an overpowering weight of armoured formations, against the
French Ninth and part of the Second Armies.
preliminary to a thrustto the coast, and from then onwards the French
were unable to make any concerted effort to restore the situation.
immediate effect of the advance was to threaten the security of the right
flank of the First French Army and the BEF.
Space does not permit of
examining the causes of this sudden disaster, but it now seems to be
confirmed that neither the French Ninth or Second Armies had
reached or consolidated the positions allotted to them when the enemy
made his unexpected and rapid advance through the Ardennes
On May I4th touch was lost between the French First and the
Ninth Armies and there
the north and the main
was a wide gap between the Allies in
forces which held the Maginot defences.
Although the BEF held the line of the Dyle firmly on the 14th, the
2nd Division, which was on the right of the line, had to be with-
drawn in the evening to the Lasne, a small tributary of the Dyle,
to conform to the movement of the french First Army which had
been heavily engaged and forced back.
The Germans continued their advance on the 15th, and by the
evening were well to the west of the Meuse on a front of about
50 miles, when it became obvious that the original Allied plan for
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
63
holding the enemy's advance on the Dyle was no longer feasible
and a withdrawal was imperative.
So serious was the position in
the eyes of the French Prime Minister M. Reynaud that he declared
'We are beaten, we have lost the battle'.
More bad news came with the announcement by the Dutch High
Command that they had capitulated to the enemy at II a.m. on
the 15th.
The struggle in the Netherlands had been a short but
violent one. Little direct help could be given to them apart from
some British naval support and answering an appeal for assistance
to safeguard the departure of their Government from the Hague,
which was threatened by the landing of enemy troops by sea and
by air.
The appeal was answered by the hasty formation and
despatch of a composite battalion of the Guards who embarked at
Dover and landed at the Hook of Holland at first light on the morn-
ing of May I3th with orders to move to the Hague to restore the
situation there, and, in the event of the Government withdrawing,
to re-embark for Britain.
The only officer of the administrative
services to accompany them was an RASC captain who, in the
absence of any material supplies, was presented with a large bag
of money and told to buy what he wanted to maintain the little
force.
The Queen of the Netherlands arrived soon after the Guards
had landed and was embarked safely in one of His Majesty's ships.
She was followed by members of the Diplomatic Corps, but their
arrival coincided with the appearance of enemy aircraft which, with
little regard for diplomatic immunity, showered bombs down on the
village and its surroundings, and these attacks could only be met by
the light automatic weapons of the Guards.
Further air attacks
took place the next morning and the battalion, having completed its
task, arrived back in Dover, battle scarred but, as always with the
Guards, in good order. A tired and dusty RASC officer reported
back to the War Office the next day, to return his bag of money—
The First Withdrawal
Orders for the BEF to withdraw to the River Escaut were issued
on May 16th, the first stage, to the River Senne, to start that night,
to be followed the next day by withdrawal to the Dendre and then
to the Escaut which was to be reached on the Igth.
Action had already been taken, on May 15th, to select new rail-
heads from 20 to 3o miles to the rear and to reconnoitre others as
far back as behind the French frontier.
The 15th also marked the
first heavy attacks by low flying aircraft on the rear areas, as the
enemy, no doubt heartened by the success of the blitz tactics which
contributed to the sudden capitulation of the Dutch, made indis-
criminate attacks on both military and civil traffic and the refugees
