The task was rendered difficult by the desertion of
Chinese crews, even though they were covered by rifles.
On the night of December irth, supplies and forage for 10 days
were put ashore at Devil's Peak, a mainland position which was to
be held to the last, and men who had missed their normal evacuation
timings were brought back from Ma Tau Kok, Kai Tek and Devil's
These operations were successfully conducted with water
transport which worked continuously for 24 hours. In addition,
the WD vessel French, a target tower of MTB type, went outside
the harbour to High Junk to take off a Royal Artillery observa-
The French was commanded by its civilian master,
Mr. Holden, who was later killed in action in the fighting on the
On the night of December i2th three water transport operations
One, directed by the Royal Navy, and with a
vessel manned by Europeans of the Harbour Department, was to
bring explosives from Green Island to Victoria to assist in fire
fighting; a second controlled by Captain C. G. Turner, RASC, was
to tow the mule lighter from the RASC camber to Devil's Peak to
move mules to the island.
The third, under the command of Major
Dewar, was to evacuate remnants of units which had missed their
evacuation points on December Ith and were known to be at
The first vessel was, unfortunately, fired on by our
own troops on its return journey and blew up with all hands, the
second was disabled by our own fire, and launch and lighter aban-
doned, but the operation at Devil's Peak proceeded according to
Operating initially with two vessels, the WD vessel Victoria and a
hired launch, Major A. J. Dewar, RASC, effected the move of some
300 men, despatched the hired launch to a sheltered position,
stood by with the Victoria.
At 2300 hours, he was informed that
the final evacuation of Devils' Peak would take place and that the
Royal Navy would assist.
The task was carried out during the
night although Lye Mun Pier, the island arrival point, was under
constant shellfire, and some 1,200 men, with pack artillery and
equipment, were cleared from Devil's Peak.
Help was given by
Major Dewar was assisted in the final stages of this
operation, which ended about o8oo hours, by Captain Turner, who
had made his way by car to Lye Mun pier.
The precaution of moving the RASC installations on the island
proved to have been a wise one.
Within 24 hours from the begin-
ning of hostilities everything had been evacuated from the crowded
northern area,
the original buildings,
occupied formerly by the
RASC, having been the first to be destroyed by enemy fire.
a few days that part of the island was in complete ruins, and had the
installations remained there, they would soon have been out of
As it was, supply was maintained, though in the face of
many difficulties.
The CRASC (Lieut-Colonel K.
T. Andrewes
Levinge), had to cope with broken
communications,
changes in orders and in the location of units, desertion of Chinese
drivers with their lorries, and the employment of his few technical
and supply men on operational duties.
The MT workshops had one of the most difficult tasks of any
unit in the garrison, and it was largely due to Mechanist Staff-
Sergeant Keast that the transport services were maintained until
the end, in spite of almost insurmountable difficulties.
and abandoned vehicles were recovered at all hours of the day and
night, often under heavy fire, and put in service again and the
RASC workshops even produced improvised armoured cars.
was also due to Lieutenant M. H. Howell, who was in charge of
transport and workshops.
The final withdrawal from the mainland on the night of December
I2th was at once followed by a peremptory Japanese demand for
the surrender of the Colony.
This was categorically refused.
island was now open to direct fire from all directions, and the volume,
intensity and accuracy of both artillery fire and bombing increased,
causing considerable destruction, fires and interruption of communi-
There were many signs of movement indicating prepara-
tions for attempted landings on the island, but it was not until the
night of the 18th that the enemy gained the first foothold.
appreciate the subsequent situation would entail a detailed descrip-
tion of the operations which developed, so that this account must
be restricted to mentioning that by the Igth troops had been in
action for II days without respite, but the small garrison, although
hopelessly outnumbered, continued the struggle for six days more.
Soon after midday on the igth, a force of about 70 RASC men
was collected in the Pok Fu Lam area and moved up to Bennet's
Hill to take up an emergency defensive position in
exploitation by the enemy was attempted.
They were then to move
up to support the Winnipeg Grenadiers at the neighbouring Wong
Later in the evening, a second party of RASC
from the transport details at Repulse Bay were ordered to hold on
and defend their transport area and not to withdraw.
the small force on Bennet's Hill had been reinforced, but as they
were unable to reach the gap they joined up with a party of RAOG
Early the next day, the enemy had surrounded the hotel at Repulse
Bay in which there were many women and children.
The area
around the hotel was cleared in the afternoon, but in the meantime
