418
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
equipped to take an active part in defence, and the remainder
were ready by the end of July, although all formations lacked much
of the weapons and equipment they needed most.
The advent of this new field army in
the
United Kingdom
tended to complicate command and administrative control,
but
generally speaking, as soon as the divisional RASC had been re-
formed and become effective, they drew their food and petrol from
command resources and undertook their detailed distribution to
their own formations.
These active divisions were supplemented
by specially formed static 'county' divisions, independent brigades
and home defence battalions, so that the mobile formations could
be directed to any threatened area if required.
The RASC estab-
lishment provided for the county divisions was, in view of their
limited role, one composite company, RASC.
Almost without exception, in the early days every RASC unit in
the vulnerable areas was given an operational role.
One such unit
which had assumed a part time infantry
role was assigned to
guarding the beaches of Harlech, in Wales, together with certain
vulnerable points in the area.
The unit spent a few weeks in
section training and getting to know the ground over which they
were to operate.
When their training was completed, they were
required to furnish night patrols in the hills with the particular
task of stopping any signalling to enemy aircraft.
On one occasion
a scout from one of the patrols reported a flashing light some distance
away.
The need for a silent but swift approach was impressed
upon the patrol, and they advanced towards the light.
In that
part of the world the fields are divided by walls of loose stone.
On nearing the light a wall was met and the patrol began to clamber
over with great care, one by one.
Suddenly the silence was broken
by the noise of collapsing stones, the thud of a falling body,
the
latter of a rifle, and an outburst of oaths; the light was doused and
seen no more.
In spite of failure to make a capture, it was clear
that their task was a real one, for there was no more signalling from
this area.
Another most important role fulfilled by the Corps was the
It was
provision of 'mobility' for the re-formed infantry divisions.
essential that the divisions guarding our coasts, and even more so
the general reserve, should be able to move rapidly from one sector
to another.
coach companies.
To this end 32 RASC units were re-formed into motor-
placed under command of CRASC.
They were corps troops allotted to divisions and
There were no troop-carrying
vehicles available, and 2,500 civil motorcoaches had to be requisi
By this time the RASC impresent scheme, admirably
suited for this sort of transaction, was coming to a halt, and demand
for civilian owned vehicles were met by the Ministry of Supply in
GENERAL SURVEY
419
collaboration with the Ministry of Transport. Suitable vehicles
were difficult to find, and it was decided that the best readily
available type was the 3o-seater coach.
Unfortunately these had
to be obtained and issued within a few days, and the RASC had to
accept what the Ministries offered, and were unable to carry
out
searching inspection before acceptance.
To get these vehicles
quickly and at the same time not to dislocate the public transport
service, the Ministries decided to take over the coaches held by
civil organizations as a reserve to meet sudden demands for transport.
These were delivered to our vehicle reserve depots and quickly
issued to units.
Then the trouble began.
Issues were made to units so that each
had to operate as few as possible of different makes and types.
No
stocks of maintenance spares were available, and units had to
overcome this difficulty by approaching manufacturers or agents
direct in order to meet their needs.
Later, coaches were redistributed to give units vehicles of similar
performance in convoy, and all vehicles were modified as time
permitted to facilitate the carriage of fully accoutred troops (a very
different sort of load to the tourists for whom they were designed).
In a short time, therefore, the technical drawbacks were overcome
and the technique of troop-carrying was perfected.
In the former
task the RASC Vehicle Census Branch gave valuable help.
This
branch was a small team of 'backroom boys' whose efforts are little
known or appreciated, who not only kept the record of RASC
vehicles up to date but also collated much valuable information on
their technical history.
These motorcoach companies played a valuable part while our
Army was in its defensive role.
Never before, one imagines, was a
whole service of troop-carrying companies, 32 in number, formed,
equipped and operative in a fortnight.
Reorganization at Home
While the Army was being rapidly re-formed, decisions on many
important measures of defence and of organizational policy were
being made and put into effect, and the gradual conception of
preparing for the immediate danger and at the same time looking
forward to the day when it might be possible to challenge the enemy
on his own ground began to crystallize.
The superimposing of what was really a mobile field army on
the static organization of the home commands gave rise to many
problems which required settlement before the home organization
could be regarded as a satisfactory working entity,
capable of
meeting the conditions which might arise should invasion come.
The situation citions which mied from the presence of the Air
