282
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
Eighth Army across the Po valley, which with its many swamps and
waterways presented a considerable obstacle to a normal advance.
In six weeks 55 officers and 1,200 other ranks were trained for
their new roles in this regiment, most of the men coming from
HQ RASC,
15 Army Transport
Column, 385 Company (GT),
and 931 Company (GT).
Training took place on Lake Trasimene
and the River Tiber and was conducted in great secrecy, as was
equipment.
After a sticky start on April ist, the regiment soon proved its
worth and, after a visit by the Supreme Allied Commander, Field-
Marshal Alexander, on Ápril 6th, achieved its first big success on
April ith when two battalions of the Queen's Royal Regiment
completely surprised the enemy and captured the Menate Gap.
From then until the end of April the regiment was continuously
employed with great success and earned its share of awards for
gallantry.
The RASC were involved in one other type
of amphibious
operation on Lake Comacchio and the River Po: the manning of
storm-boats, which were shallow draught, unarmoured craft, about
20 feet long and were driven by an outboard motor.
They could
carry 18 fully
about seven knots.
Anti-Tank Battery, RA, reinforced by
Company, RASG.
60 dukw drivers of 239
by commandos, or as maintenance craft for small isolated parties
on islands or the shores of Lake Comacchio.
On May 4th after
the German capitulation the RASC dukw drivers left to rejoin
their company, with a few more landings to add to their already
imposing record.
Local Resources
The Italian campaign provided ample scope for that important
RASC activity, 'the use of local resources, which resulted in an
average monthly savina of 97.000 tons of shipping space and involved
a monthly expenditure of about £1,394,000.
The organization was
directed from AFHQ with local resources officers stationed at the
principal headquarters and at centres of production.
do different commodities were procured, varying from articles in
daily use to more exceptional ones such as tobacco seed, live rabbits
(for RAMC in connection with anti-rabies serum), and garlic. and
Arrangements were made for the collection,
28
ITALY
grading of millions of eggs.
Special forage depots were set up for
the collection, storage and distribution of large quantities of animal
feeding stuffs, the main depot being situated just outside Foggia in
the great central plain. At the peak period this depot supplied
forage for about 32,000 mules and 8,000 horses.
Meat on the hoof was another of the main activities of the
organization.
In one year 125,000 sheep were obtained for the
use of Indian troops, and supplies had to be drawn from as far afield
as the Sudan and North Africa.
Things did not always go smoothly,
as is instanced by the failure of arrangements made to draw on
Sardinia, where everything seemed to combine to bring the plans
made to nought owing to foot and mouth disease and other causes.
Poultry and fish for hospitals were purchased in large quantities.
In the Eighth Army a regular supply of fresh fish was arranged from
San Benedetto and forwarded in refrigeration vehicles for issue to
the troops.
Fresh fruit and vegetables were obtained in vast quantities to
meet the demands of an army which in numbers had topped the
million mark.
Fruits such as peaches and grapes, which are
regarded as delicacies at home, were in daily issue during the season,
and tomatoes and celery, asparagus and sea kale often formed part
of the ordinary fresh vegetable ration.
Providing supplies of potatoes was one of the most difficult
problems.
They were comparatively scarce, and to avoid demands
on the United Kingdom a combined plan between the British, the
Americans and the Italian Government was made to organize
production to grow, it was hoped, 20,000 tons from local seed.
The crop was to be grown on an old extinct volcanic basin known
as Lake Fucino, in
planted.
Avezzano, where 2,500 acres
were to be
But the scheme turned out to come under the old adage,
"the best laid plans', as with the restoration of welf-government to
the Italians and the lifting of control, little of the produce was
returned for sale back to the forces.
Many manufactured foods were also obtained through the local
resources organization, such as spaghetti (over 700 tons a month
was wanted for feeding the Italian co-operators), and jams and
marmalade, the sugar and pectin being provided by the organiza-
Vinegar, coffee, pepper and fruit juices and ice eream for
hospitals were also made to order. Many other items had to be
obtained such as alcohol, pigeon corn, capers, and even rat poison.
Although bread
production does not strictly speaking come
within the scope of local resources, it may be mentioned that go per
cent of the bread produced in Italy was baked in civil bakeries
from the Army's ingredients by Italian bakers working under
British supervision.
