358
BURMA AND CEYLON
A transporter shuttle service in five stages was the method em-
ployed.
In one stretch of 20 miles, south of Gangaw, the tanks
had to be off-loaded 17 times and in some places they had to tow
the empty transporters.
The company had little opportunity and
no
facilities for maintenance; but it finally accomplished a task
which the brigade described as well-nigh impossible, and IV Corps
duly effected its surprise.
Across the Irrawaddy, the country was quite different.
of in the jungle-clad mountains north of the Chindwin, Fourteenth
Army was now fighting in level country, sparsely wooded, with all-
weather main roads.
advantage, and IV Corps,
Mechanized forces could operate here with
which was highly mechanized, was
consequently given a suitable task,
that of driving all out for
Rangoon, which it was to try and capture at all costs before the
If that plan were not achieved, it would be
impossible to maintain
Fourteenth Army in Burma during the
rains, which would make movement on much of the land Lof a
impossible, and would prevent or at least severely restrict supply by
It might be necessary for the army to go right back behind
the Chindwin.
down the Toungoo
road on April 5th, and 590 Company went with it.
The formation
It reached Pegu on
May ist; two days later, its spearhead, 17th Division, delayed by
mines, demolitions and mud, was still go miles from its goal, which
fell that day to XV Indian Corps, which had been brought round by
sea from Arakan.
The rains started a fortnight earlier than usual
and on the day that Toungoo was captured.
Strong Japanese detachments still held out in the Pegu Yoma
mountain tracts; in July they tried to break out, and were severely
handled, but not before they had caused considerable trouble to
the maintenance arrangements by cutting the road between Toungoo
and Pegu.
A platoon of 590 Company was attached to IV Corps
for these operations.
The war with the Japanese in this theatre ended with the
surrender of their forces on August 15th, 1945•
the valuable work accomplished by the RASC during the Burma
campaign, the commander of the Twelfth Army (which controlled
the final operations in Burma) presented Brigadier Luff with a
sword which formerly belonged to the Commander, Japanese field
supply depots, Burma Area Army, and this is now in the RASC
Museum at Aldershot.
BURMA
359
Some reflections on India
In assessing the maintenance difficulties of the Army in Burma it
must be remembered that, during the initial stages of its advance
Fourteenth Army's railhead at Manipur Road was
about as far from its base at Calcutta as London is from Glasgow,
and that the forward echelons were anything up to 200 miles farther
Paucity of communications made it impossible to build up
and carry forward any appreciable reserves from
base to the forward area.
All available transport was used, on
the return journeys, for carrying sick and wounded and men who
were returning for one reason or another to the base.
possible the returning vehicles were also used for bringing back
damaged equipment for repair at the base workshops.
forward journeys priority was given to the L of C transport column
and, ammunition, stores, and men were given priority in that order.
The work carried out by this column was regarded as being so
important that HQ ALESEA dealt direct with the column com-
mander.
Arrangements were made that the column had priority
over all otherranits for such MT spares as were available.
Each of
the companies of the column were given spare vehicles to make
they were also allotted strong IEME second echelon workshops.
certain that they would have a too per cent carrying capacity and
The facilitieg which were given to the column were perhaps a
little extravagant in certain respects, and some other units and
formations cast envious eyes on its wealth of vehicles, its ample
workshop cover, and its priorities; but it literally delivered the
goods, when no other agency could have done so, overcoming
enormous difficulties on the way.
During the later part of the war in Burma, a growing flow of
RASC units and individuals arrived in India and SEAC, mainly
because of the build-up in preparation for the intensive war against
Japan which was planned to follow on the defeat of the Germans in
Europe; but also partly because of the increasing tendency on the
part of the ST Directorate in India to look to that at the War Office
for assistance, and partly because SEAG, while.
an independent
command, was responsible to, and supported by, the War Office
and not India.
There was no ST representation on the staff of SACISEA, but on
that of i1 Army Group, later to be known as ALF'SEA, there was
a DST with all the usual staff.
At first that officer was drawn from
the RIASC, and had as his deputy an RASC DDST.
Later, the
position was reversed, and the DST was an RASC officer (Brigadier
P. A. Arden), whose staft was partly from one corps and partly
from the other. oradually, more and more RASC oficers arrived
