270
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
operations would have been quite impossible to undertake.
An
example of their use can be taken from an operation of a battalion
in the 5th Division to take the small town of Alfedena.
This opera-
tion involved an advance of some
12 miles over very difficult
country.
The route was inaccessible to ordinary motor transport
owing to the narrowness of some of the tracks and the destruction
of many small bridges, one of them over a rapidly flowing stream.
Two companies of mules were barely sufficient to meet the require-
ments of the battalion over six miles.
By using jeeps and trailers
a 'jeep-head' was established four miles beyond the point where
MT could go, and it was just possible to keep the battalion supplied
long enough for the capture of its objective.
During this phase two North African mule companies 573 and
574 Pack Transport Companies, which were formed into a pack
transport group commanded by Lieut-Colonel J. Dudgeon-
-were
constantly in operation; there were never enough mules to meet all
commitments,
and these two companies were switched from
division to division in the Eighth Army as each formation established
its claim for their assistance.
In the type of operation undertaken,
two companies were just about enough to meet the first line require-
ments of an infantry
brigade,
that operations over country
restricted to mule tracks were limited in their range of action to
about 8 to 10 miles from a road-head or 'jeep-head'.
In X Corps improvised pack transport units were formed from
Italian army mules, and these proved invaluable in the mountain
areas in which the corps was operating.
The pack transport companies throughout, in spite of being
heavily over-worked and of the unpleasant conditions and the many
casualties which they suffered, kept up a high morale, as the following
extract from a letter by the Officer Commanding 4 Pack Transport
Group shows:-
'We had rather an interesting incident a few days ago.
A party
with 50 mules were returning to roadhead early in the morning
and came across a German fighting patrol of one officer and 17
Really
other ranks.
Our party took all the Germans prisoner.
rather remarkable as you can well imagine the gigantic superiority
of German fire-power!
It appears to have been a foggy morning,
and the Germans evidently came to the conclusion that they were
faced by a big party.
Tommy guns but failed to score a hit!'
Our British corporals were busy with their
Many awards for gallantry were earned by men in pack transport
units at this time; among them were Farrier Cpl G. H. Sharpe,
574. Pack Transport Company, who won the Military Medal at
Jelsi, and Cpl E.
also won the Military Medal.
Orford, of 573 Pack Transport Company, who
ITALY
271
X Corps found that it was necessary in the mountainous country
in which they were operating to rely on porters in addition to mules
in order to get supplies forward.
At a later stage these duties were
performed by auxiliary military pioneer companies, but during this
period, when such companies were not available, infantry battalions
were used in this role, and during the autumn of 1943, when they
were badly needed in the firing line, as many as three whole
battalions had to be used for carrying supplies.
Numerous attempts were made to drop supplies to forward posi-
tions, mainly in the Fifth Army sector, but few of these sorties were
successful owing to the small target areas and the
very difficult
flying conditions in the mountains.
In the central sector, after a
particularly heavy fall of snow, a number of units of the 5th Infantry
Division amounting to almost a brigade group, were cut off for over a
week near Agnone and were maintained entirely by air supply, the
RASC having to collect the widely dispersed loads on skis.
Some idea of the quantities of artillery ammunition fired in these
battles can be given by the following example: in a 24-hour period
on December 2nd and grd, 1943, the artillery of the United States
Il Corps fired 64,000 rounds (about 1,500 tons) of ammunition,
and the X Corps artillery fired 8g,883 rounds, of which nearly
76,000 was 25-pounder ammunition.
Later in the campaign even
heavier barrages were fired.
This all placed a heavy burden on
RASC transport, owing to the inaccessible positions in which the
gunners often managed to site their guns.
Here the jeep platoons
proved invaluable.
Most of the Royal Engineers' effort at this time was devoted to
the re-building of bridges and the repair of the heavily damaged
This involved the carriage forward of great quantities of
bridging materials and of army track.
In the operations on the Volturno, 236 Bridge Company took
part in the building of six bridges over the river in the X Corps
sector: and for the 390-foot-long Bailey bridge which
was built
over the River Trigno in the Eighth Army sector, 71 g-ton and
two ro-ton lorries were required as well as six tippers.
quantities of army track were also carried forward.
Most of these
operations had to be conducted either by day under enemy machine-
gun and artillery fire or by night.
For his part in a bridging
operation in the 78th Division's area, Gpl G. P. Mann, of 142
General Transport Company, was awarded the Military Medal.
The bridge over the River Sangro was 1,000 feet long, and tank
transporter tractors were used to winch Bailey bridging across the
Owing to their length these bridges were only single-track
and caused severe bottlenecks on the maintenance
traffic blocks of up to 15 miles were quite normal.
routes, and
