228
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
which arrived to find that their first task had already been done
for them.
Twelve hours after landing the DIDs were in operation, issuing
composite rations and water, and reconnaissance parties were
at work on the sites which had been selected for the base depots
due to arrive on the second and third convoys.
Complete in-
formation
was obtained about the petroleum facilities
in the
country thanks to the help of the local Shell Company headquarters,
and tentative arrangements were made to take over 60,000 tons of
bulk storage and to plan for their cleaning and rehabilitation before
bulk supplies arrived.
As soon as the two DIDs at Algiers could be relieved one was sent
forward to Bone.
Its convoy was heavily attacked on the way,
but it was in action again issuing supplies on D plus 7.
The other
reached Philippeville on D plus 12 but it also had an adventuresome
journey owing to accidents on the mountain roads.
The DID and
petrol depot landed at Bougie were also in action by the same date.
The Advance of the Striking Force
With Algiers in Allied hands the striking force left lost no time
in moving eastwards and, encouraged by the active help of the
French, General Eisenhower gave orders for the transfer from Oran
to Tunisia of various American combat teams, tanks and air force
units and for the rest of II Corps to follow as soon as possible.
The advance began with the 36th Brigade moving by road, rail
and sea for Bone on November 19th (D plus 5) and by D plus 7 the
pattern of the campaign began to take shape.
On that day part
of the Brigade pushed on to Tabarka which was only 6o miles from
Tunis.
They were carried forward in the charcoal burning buses
which had been collected together for the purpose.
Meanwhile the
Column of the t1th Brigade was rushed up by road close to Beja.
Bladeforce left Algiers by road on November 15th and on the 16th
French patrols made their first contact with enemy troops near
Beja and some French troops drove back small parties of the enemy
The action of these
French forces marked the
beginning of military co-operation with the French troops which
were stationed in Tunisia.
On the following day British troops
made contact with the enemy, the 36th Brigade at Jebel Abiod
and the ist Parachute Battalion in the vicinity of Beja.
It was already evident that the Axis forces in Tunisia could not
be lightly brushed aside, so orders were given for the ,8th Division
to concentrate the troops under command for an attack on Tunis
with the immediate objective of the line Mateur-Tebourba.
Before
the concentration was complete, the enemy struck heavily at the
36th Brigade, near Jebel Abiod, and the French, near Medjez el
NORTH AFRICA
224
Bab. The Germans were only driven back towards Medjez with the
aid of a detachment from Bladeforce and an American field battery.
By November 24th all was ready for a combined assault against
the enemy positions, and for three days the attacks prospered.
The 36th Brigade got within 10 miles of Mateur; Bladeforce reached
a point midway between Mateur and Tebourba and pressed on to
within 16 miles of Tunis.
The 11th Brigade took Tebourba.
The
prospects looked bright, but a combination of adverse circumstances
brought all three attacks to a standstill.
The Axis forces were being heavily reinforced from Sicily and
Sardinia, more than 50 troop-carrying aircraft arriving daily.
Our
small force of fighters had the almost impossible task of covering
the forward area and communications which stretched back towards
Algiers for over 400 miles.
The Germans' main bases in Sicily were
only half an hour's flying time distant.
The spearheads of our
advance were over 100 miles ahead of the nearest railhead, and
second line transport and the few additional platoons of load
carriers were still on light scales.
To complete the list of adverse
factors heavy and continuous rain began to fall, turning the roads
into mud covered slippery tracks with boggy verges.
An uneasy pause followed during which each side strove desper-
ately to accumulate sufficient strength for a crowning punch.
The
enemy struck first and nearly isolated the iith Brigade at Tebourba
and as the 8th Division had already suffered severe casualties it
was decided to withdraw from the more forward position at Medjez
turned the forward area into a veritable quagmire from which a
The withdrawal was however not at all easy as rain had
large number of tanks of Combat Team B were never recovered.
Mediez el Bab was held by the ist Guards Brigade,
the third
Brigade of the 78th Division which on its arrival in North Africa
was immediately carried forward by a GT company to occupy that
keypoint.
In the meantime a Franco-American force had seized
the important pass Faid on the Kasserine-Sfax road.
It was at
Tebourba that I/Cipl G. Bowyer, of 463 Company, won the Military
Medal for gallant work when in charge of a section of water-tank
lorries.
He organized the defence of his section and supplied units
under heavy fire.
It was about this time that Sgt B. Philips, who
was one of the RASC clerks at 36th Brigade headquarters,
was
awarded a Military Medal for his gallantry in helping to remove a
blazing ammunition lorry and extricating a wounded man from an
adjoining burning building.
General Eisenhower hoped to make one last attempt to reach his
goal, but as the result of a personal inspection of the stuation on
the ground it was obvious to him that General Winter' had won
the day, as movement ost the roads was practically impossible,
