THE MIDDLE EAST I
145
In one incident, L/Cpl J. P. L. Clarke, 524 Company (5oth
Division)
was concerned.
He won the Military Medal when he
drove his lorry, loaded with troops, many of whom were wounded,
through a gap in the enemy defences which was under enemy
machine-gun fire. A bullet shattered his right elbow, but he went
on driving until they were clear of the enemy, when he collapsed.
Headquarters X. Corps had a difficult pamage, and two of the
staff car drivers won Military Medals.
Dvr V. E. T. Paragreen
was driving the car which was leading the column of corps vehicles.
The convoy was continuously under fire, and on one occasion was
attacked by a 2-pounder anti-tank gun.
Paragreen drove his car
to within 15 yards of the enemy, and engaged them with his rifle,
under cover of which fire the column was able to proceed.
Dvr G.
Duncan was driving the DA & QMG of the corps (an officer of
the RIASC).
The route was over unknown and difficult tracks,
and his car was acting as leader to vehicles which had straggled
from the main convoy.
The driver's window was shot away, and a
bullet went through the windscreen, but Duncan was unperturbed,
although he had never been under fire before,
It was his skill and
devotion to duty that brought his officer and many vehicles to salety.
As a result of fighting during the withdrawal, many tanks were
stranded, damaged in action or broken down, in the desert south
west of Alamein, and the tank transporter companies were kept busy.
Captain W. M. Nichol, of 141 Company, with a1 tank transporters,
was ordered to recover as many as possible.
In spite of much
interference from enemy armoured fighting vehicles and artillery,
he succeeded in recovering
12 tanks and their crews.
For this
action he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order,
The Alamein Line
The situation was stabilized with the Eighth Army holding the
It Alamein position which had been partially prepared in
previous year, and from the beginning of August preparations went
on for the offensive which was to be launched in October,
and wastage in men, equipment, and vehicles had to be made good,
forward stocks built up, and the administrative machine conditioned
to be able to maintain the momentum of the pursuit.
Some initial difficulty arose in establishing MCa at the normal
distance behind the front line, as in the general area in which they
would naturally be established (it will be remembered that except
for a few minor escarpments this was all featureless desert), there
was a great deal of bad going including large patches of soft sand
impassible to
10-tonners and difficult for g-tonners,
Until the
wall and the RASC got to know the area better, the sight of fleets
of 10-tonners, immobile and looking as if they had in some way 'run
