610
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
Between March igth and 23rd we supplied only a few dukws
for carriage of casualties, as 297 Company took over the run to
the FMC.
On the 23rd we moved as a whole to Boxmeer.
natural ferrying crossing on the Maas was found and the sappers
were summoned to clear mines from the approaches.
There were many mines in this area and, as later events proved,
the sappers did not by any means completely clear the ground.
Between March ist and i6th we worked spasmodically between
the petrol depot at Haps or ammunition depot at Veghel and 168
FMC at Goch, crossing the Maas by water every time, thus relieving
to a certain extent congestion on the bridges at Gennep.
March 5th two dukws of B Platoon were blown up by Teller mines
on the east side of the Maas at Boxmeer.
Once again no one was
hurt as all men in the vicinity were sitting inside dukws.
course the dukws concerned were written off.
The mines had been
buried about three feet down, because at least 300 dukws must
have passed over them before they went off.
Between the 16th and 2oth we were joined by one and a half
platoons from 297 Company and half a platoon from 50 Company,
both lots with their dukws, and also collected 22 dukws to form a
D Platoon.
An officer and 30 other ranks arrived from the
Terrapin Platoon to man these dukws.
So we now had nearly
200 dukws under command.
This was of course for the Rhine
crossing named operation "Turnscrew'.
On March z2nd we moved to Till near the west bank of the
Rhine. We found things very noisy on the next day, because we
were surrounded by batteries of 25-pounders and 5•5's, to say
nothing of the odd 7•2 inch.
During the day we set up a dukw
transhipment area,
complete with a composite platoon, RASC,
pioneer labour, and a corps ST report centre.
Petrol, ammunition
and supplies were brought into this area by corps and army transport.
The enemy lobbed over a few shells in our direction, and four dukws
were damaged by shrapnel.
These were repaired overnight by
workshops.
H hour was 2130 hours that night.
This was preceded
My four hours of the most terrific barrage ever; we were practically
deafened by the noise.
The sappers were supposed to have some ramps ready for us by
midday on the 24th.
For several reasons, one of which was the
high casualties suffered by the engineers on the west bank, caused
by mortar fire from that part of Rees still held by the German
paratroops, the ramps were not ready.
For this operation some
dukws had previously been attached to various formations and units
within the corps, and two of these, attached to gist Divisional RE
for rescue work, entered the water early on the 24th.
These were
both B Platoon dukws.
The driver of one of these was killed, and
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
611
his co-driver wounded by a German sniper firing from Rees; the
wounded co-driver managed to get the dukw back on land again.
On the morning of the following day the ramp was finally ready and
the first dukws swam across.
When the first dukw did cross the
river it was discovered that because of continued resistance of enemy
paratroops in Rees, the originally planned location of the FMC
could not be used, so the stores had to be dumped in a temporary
place by the river.
Another driver of C Platoon was wounded by
a sniper, and three dukws were sunk by enemy action, fortunately
with no loss of life.
During the 25th and 26th we continued to
ferry vital ammunition, petrol and supplies across the Rhine.
found that the actual crossing was a comparatively easy one.
The
current was not as strong as at Nijmegen or Arnhem,
because of
the greater width of the river.
The ramps made for us were not
very good, being too steep,
and some
of the more inexperienced
drivers who were attached from the Terrapin platoon had difficulty
in climbing the ramp on the west bank, having to make several
attempts.
The usual dukw evacuation post for casualties was
established on the east bank of the river,
and eight dukws were
kept solely for this purpose.
On the night of the 26th a third bridge
was completed right on top of our crossing, making it unusable.
We had previously made a reconnaissance farther downstream for
an alternative crossing, but had found nothing suitable.
Conse-
quently, on the 27th,
we found ourselves with loaded dukws, a
transhipment area with 1,200 loads in—and no river crossing.
So
we took the stuff over the bridge.
After four days' intensive work
the transhipment area was finally cleared, and the FMC at Rees
pretty well stocked.
On the gist the platoons from 297 and 50 companies returned to
their companies.
On April and the company left XXX Corps
and moved to Wijchen under I Canadian Corps.
We were all
sorry about this, as we had been looking forward to following XXX
Corps up to the Hamburg area.
As it turned out, the Rhine
crossing was the last real job the company was to do.
From
Wijchen we discovered a suitable crossing of the Rhine at Millingen
and proceeded to establish a dump at Pannerden on the east bank of
the river, bringing petrol from Nijmegen and ammunition from Oss.
On the 8th we had been warned to take part in the assault on
Arnhem from the south, the Drill area, by 49th Division.
After
we had been nearly snowed under with orders, instructions, and
counter instructions from the division, it was reported by Dutch
civilians from Arnhem that the Germans were expecting us, so
the exercise was called off. It was later discovered that the Dutch
were correct and that Jerry had a considerable number of 88s lined
up covering where the assault was to have been effected.
