4g%
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
and TA framework, as well as for building established units to their
The agreement of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service was therefore obtained to the voluntary enlistment
of the necessary numbers,
including a quota of such key men (in
civil life) as heavy goods vehicle drivers, petrol installation workers,
and certain classes of engineering tradesmen.
Mobilization proceeded smoothly
according to plan.
It was
controlled by commands who managed to solve most of the man-
power problems locally.
The RASC Record Office beat the pistol
in posting call-up notices to reservists.
They were informed by
AG & that the signal was ready and would be issued in about one
hour, Notices could therefore be posted in an hour's time without
waiting for the signal.
This timing proved to be dead right,
What was not covered by long established planning, was the fact
that within 12 hours of mobilization being ordered volunters from
recruiting offices poured into No. 1 Training Battalion, RASC, at
Aldershot by every train.
Luckily there was a commanding officer
(Bt Colonel E. B. Roweroft) who could take this sort of thing in
his stride, Barrack blocks were doubled up, drill sheds, mobilization
store buildings, miniature ranges, gymnasia, and even
stables
emptied of their horses, were converted into dormitories, and finally
Rushmoor Arena was taken over.
By good fortune the weather
was pertect, and no steps were taken try the enemy to bomb this
loose knit concentration of men.
It was clear that Aldershot could not stand this indigestion for
long, and there was also the problem of keeping the volunteers
employed and out of mischief.
Hatches of up to too at a time were
When
sent to those TA divisions which could find room for them,
the TA could take no more, the men were posted to home command
to fill the gaps left by mobilized units.
This, however, was a policy
of coedieney: the men still had to be trained, a task completely
beyond both the TA and the emaciated home units,
Movement to the embarkation ports of the mobilized units went
accrding to timetable except for some third line units which vete
delayed by shipping difficulties,
One sub-park of an ammunition
park was codered to her our at basbourse cending a call toward
The tolice at this carly stage of the war were still very peace
the streets.
minera red steroe olderone to vehicles belor parked to
unit commander promptly
appropriated the
Sussex county cricket ground,
which was not ton
well recent, at death terrain taff etchedent a Come
cricket enthusiast, was in control!
At first the cadres were thus filled on the officer side bry the all
too thin sorend of Regulars, by Afcers of the Regular Army Reere
by shent service officers whe had been enrolled during the fes
MANPOWER
458
months before the war, by a number of ex-Indian Army officers, by
Supplementary Reserve officers and, for the balance immediately
required, by men of previous officer experience who offered them-
selves for the Army Emergency Officers' Reserve,
Although this
catalogue may give the impression of haphazard selection, this was
not the case.
Every potential officer was interviewed by the DST%
senior representatives in commands, and the records of all were
'vetted' in person by the Inspector of the RASC, who also inter.
viewed large numbers of the applicants.
The resulting intake was
of great value to the Corps, whose wartime intake of olficers (parti-
cularly in the early stages) compared favourably with that in any
other arm of the service, and rendered excellent service throughout
the world,
The reserve of other ranks was supplemented by some 2,000
national servicemen from the first two intakes of the newly formed
'Militia", by 3,000 similar men from the Royal Artillery not im-
mediately required by that arm, and by the volunteers of all trades
already mentioned,
Of these, the Regulars, including reservists,
and national servicemen, had had some military training (of varying
degrees of completeness), but the
RA militiamen had no trade
training,
and the Supplementary reservists and the volunteers had
their civilian aptitudes and trades, but no military training.
Much
therefore remained to be done within units and formations before
this hotchpotch of manpower could be regarded as fit to take the
How was it to be accomplished?
In the very carly stages the RASC Training Centre continued to
function as the offcer training unit for the Corps, and the existing
training battalions, augmented by newly formed battalions which
were later formed into three training brigades, gave both military
and technical training to the men.
Later, as the call-up became
properly canalized and as the time available for basic military
training became shorter, this part of the mat's training was done
y general service training units, which turned out the militarily
finished exoduct for all accos do a set beded of ox gecks, after whiel
refresher training was left to the man's unit,
The training brigades,
herwever, remained in existence in modified form for the rest of the
war, for continued wiltary training, and for trade training, and
were an essential part of the RASC men producing machine,
To revert to the ofheer question, it soon became apparent that
the RASC Training Chette, like the training centres of other arms,
would be inadequate by self to produce and train the requint,
mumber of officers for our expanding army.
In mid-1940, therefore,
an officer producing wit was planned and formed try the Training
Centre and located initially at Bournemouth, later meving to Clifton
College and thence to southend.
There volunteer and reserve
