170
THE MIDDLE EAST II
In June, 1940, when Italy entered the war and reinforcements
began to arrive in the Sudan, there were no second or third line
administrative units to deal with any large influx of troops.
Spare
storage space was non-existent, although depots to hold 150 days'
reserve for about 30,000 troops were planned.
Supplies, ammuni-
tion and other stores soon began to pour into the country.
Impro-
visation became essential and, for the Corps, remained so throughout
the campaign.
RASC and RIASC reinforcements trickled in and
such was the urgency that they were often formed into units on the
platform at Khartoum station and hurriedly sent on to their unit
locality, usually a virgin patch of sand or small village beside the
single track Sudan Railway line.
The Italian Advance
By the end of June, 1940, the Italians had advanced from Eritrea
to Kassala and Gallabat just inside the Sudan's eastern boundary.
Here, for reasons known only to themselves, they halted although of
considerable strength, immensely outnumbering the two British
infantry battalions,
the SDF,
one squadron of Vincents,
and an
ancient gun (which fired one blank round at noon daily in the old
fort at Khartoum) which constituted the Sudan garrison.
However,
the 5th Indian Division arrived before the
Italians realized how
meagre were our defences, immediately moved up to the easter
front and was concentrated there by the end of October.
Because of the complete absence of third line units, the division
had now to undertake many of the administrative duties normally
performed by Corps staffs and troops.
The abnormally long line
of communication,
its vulnerability to air attack, and the lack of
transport rendered it essential to hold large stocks of all commodities
well forward.
These
dumps had to be formed and held by 5th
Indian Division and this threw a heavy load on the divisional staff
and services.
The calls on the limited administrative resources
available rapidly multiplied, and the burden on units and formations
throughout the theatre became heavier and heavier.
The magnitude of the task confronting the small ST staff at HQ
Troops Sudan and the pressure on the limited RASC and RIASC
units committed to the battle at that time can be well appreciated
since there were soon five cenarate fronts stretching from Ranatorial
Province in the southern Sudan to the Red Sea littoral, about 1,20
miles to the north.
Also the total ration strength was now about
28,000 all ranks, and the MT resources available consisted only of
two sections of an SDF reserve MT company, second line transport
of 5th Indian Division, one MT company of the Sudan Defence
Force; altogether totalling about 500 military vehicles,
with a limited number of hired civil lorries.
THE SUDAN AND ERITREA
171
In December, 1940, it was decided further to reinforce in the
Sudan so that defence could be turned to attack and the Italian
forces in Eritrea destroyed.
The reinforcements allotted were the
4th Indian Division together with a considerable number of non-
divisional units including a squadron of I tanks and anti-aircraft
units.
The fighting formations arrived first, followed by a very
inadequate administrative backing.
Further considerable strain
was therefore placed on staff and services already overworked in a
trying climate.
It soon became obvious, that with the large dis-
tances to be covered in the advance into Eritrea, the provision of
extra transport was vital.
After repeated requests four South
African Cape Corps MT companies were allotted.
They arrived
by overland route from South Africa in the middle of January, 1941,
and helped to relieve the anxious MT situation.
On January 18th, 1941, because of exaggerated and distorted
intelligence of the strength of our forces,
the enemy evacuated
Kassala and withdrew eastwards to the safety of their own border.
The order was given for the two Indian divisions and attached
troops to pursue, and so swift was our advance that by January
25th, 4th Indian Division had reached Agordat, 120 miles from
Kassala, and the 5th Indian Division had reached Barentu, 100
miles from railhead.
felt.
The lack of line of communication units was now most acutely
Recovery vehicles were non-existent, with the result that all
removable parts were stripped from abandoned vehicles by the
local natives until in most cases nothing but the chassis remained.
The lack of supply units was particularly acute and both divisions
had still to run their own railheads.
Yet neither now nor later
did the administrative staffs of divisions fail to get forward all
essential requirements.
little to help.
Headquarters
Troops
Sudan could
were available.
Not even the men to form a corps headquarters
Agordat fell on January 3rst, Barentu was occupied on February
and, and the enemy fell back son to stron vassitions at Keren where
they were able to halt the advance.
The campaign had been controlled from HQ at Khartoum until
mid January when a small advanced HQ was established and moved
forward in touch withall advanced Had was
No ST officers could
be spared permanently from Khartoum for this headquarters.
The
time of the ADST and his staft, already over full, had therefore to
be divided between
Khartoum and the advanced headquarters.
The lack of aircrait for visitoo staft officers to the forward area was
a serious drawback, since it took three days by road and rail to cover
the return trip even to Kassala.
While the main effort was concentrated in the Kassala-Keren
