THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
Return to Malaya and other Far Eastern Territories
After some three months of this type of wörk, the men of 884
Company were withdrawn to Calcutta, where they joined up
again with their workshops and the rest of the unit.
These had
been receiving their own craft from the United Kingdom and
checking them over in readiness for operational service in the
attack upon Malaya.
Although the Japanese surrendered before
this assault could be made, 884 Company
went into Malaya as
planned in September, 1945, with the initial landing forces at
Port Swettenham and formed the basis for the RASC water transport
services subsequently provided in that command.
The remaining unit of 56 Water Transport Units was 626
Company RASC (motorboat).
As we have
seen, this company
had reverted to War Office control after service off the Normandy
beaches.
It was reformed and despatched to the Far East as the
third harbour launch company of the formation, arriving in Calcutta
in June, 1945•
Events were moving rapidly at that time, and it
became necessary to revise the plans for the company's deployment.
One section, with attached workshop men and operating 1o harbour
launches, went to Java with the occupying Allied forces, another
similar section went to Hong Kong, and the remainder of the unit,
equipped with both fast motorboats and harbour launches, entered
Singapore with the HQ CRASC
56 Water
Transport Units.
There the pre-war RASC Fleet base at Pulau Brani was re-estab-
lished, much to the joy of the local inhabitants, who gave them a
special ronggeng as a warm and sincere
'home-coming'.
Main-
taining these units was No. 6 Boat Stores Depot RASC which,
after being uprooted first from Chittagong and then Rangoon,
finally became established at Singapore, also on Pulau Brani.
Meanwhile yet another group
of big operational waterborne
units was being formed in the
United Kingdom to assist in the
Far Eastern campaign when VJ Day (August 15th,
1945) was
declared.
Plans for its despatch were therefore cancelled, but
before it was dispersed the formation was reviewed off Hurst Castle
by the Director of Supplies and Transport.
Its strength at that
time was approximately 200 officers and 1,400 other ranks, and in
all some 200 craft were in line astern.
Had these units completed
mobilization they would have opened a new era in the history of
the RASC Fleet, for they were to consist of a floating workshop
company,
coaster companies and ambulance
launch companies,
and would have had to make the trip under their own power.
In
fact, the Ambulance Launch Company (No. 935) was mobilized
and due to sail in its 112 ft converted motor launches seven days
after VJ Day. This was a severe disappointment, as the unit had
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
583
proved itself well up to the task, and the opportunity of making
RASC history by undertaking the Army's first long-distance forma-
tion voyage was the ambition of all ranks.
The vessels themselves
are worthy of special comment.
They were fitted out to carry
20 lying or 40 sitting patients, with the necessary medical staff.
The crew of 12 was commanded by a captain, with a subaltern as
first officer and a warrant officer in
charge of the engine room.
The main machinery consisted of two
Hall Scot 660 hp petrol
engines giving a maximum speed of 18 knots.
The cruising speed
was 10 to
12 knots, and the maximum range was 1,500 miles,
enabling the voyage to the Far East to be accomplished easily in
various 'legs'.
Although these craft did not make the trip, it must
be recorded that one of the large RASC go ft fire boats sailed to
Singapore under her own power in 1946.
Let us conclude the chapter with incidents from one or two of
the other overseas stations at which our vessels served.
Malta, G.C.
RASC water transport services had long been provided in Malta,
the vessels in pre-war days carrying out the normal administrative
and target towing details.
Civilian officers of the Fleet were sent
out from home on special agreements; a few officers and all ratings
were engaged locally.
The craft were controlled and administered
by the local RASC officer-in-charge transport, Valetta being the
main station, and it was not until July, 1945, that a water transport
company was established there.
The difficulties and dangers under which the vessels operated
during the years of siege need little emphasis.
By 1943, of the six
craft there, one had been lost, one sunk (but subsequently salved
and recommissioned), and the remaining four had suffered damage
of one sort or another, all from enemy air attacks.
One day in July, 1941, while standing by for air/sea rescue duty,
the 57 ft high speed target towing launch Clive was called out to
pick up a British pilot shot down some 25 miles north of the St Elmo
lighthouse during an E-boat attack.
Unarmed except for a single
Lewis gun mounted aft (but with no gunner on board), the Clive
proceeded to the area and found, not the pilot, but the crew of an
E-boat clinging to the wreckage of their craft.
They had been
badly shot up and were taken on board the launch where their
wounds were dressed.
Search for the pilot was resumed,
another well armed E-boat was located in a seemingly undamaged
condition.
A rather active looking individual was hopping about
on board waving the Italian flag, and as the rescued Italians were
beginning to sit up and take notice they were secured below decks.
The E-boat was circled warily, but as the Clive was almost unarmed
