40
PRELUDE
Was,
however,
accompanied by a financial minority opinion
aimed at reducing the scope of the recommendations made.
Naturally the findings of the committee required some study by
the many authorities who would be concerned by their recommenda-
tions.
It was not long before the question of improved catering
became linked with the view, which was being strongly pressed home
by the then Secretary of State, that the status of the Army and the
soldier should be radically improved.
In 1938,
therefore,
Sir Isidore Salmon was invited to become
Honorary Catering Adviser to the Army, and within a few days of
his official acceptance he was hard at work exploring every aspect
of the messing position of the Army.
No better choice could have
been made, for not only was Sir Isidore the titular head of the
largest catering organization in the country, but he was well versed
in the ways of public life and had given frequent service on many
parliamentary committees.
By June, 1938, Sir Isidore Salmon had completed his first survey,
which showed that although the recommendations of the committee
of 1937 had gone some way towards the improvements required, the
committee had failed to realize that a cook should be a highly skilled
craftsman and that the Army was not in a position to provide the
special type of training to produce catering
phasized that the direct connection between the standards aimed at
under peace conditions and the more difficult conditions of active
service had been overlooked, and that the greater the skill of the
cook in peacetime, the greater would be the general state of effi-
ciency and well-being of the soldier in the field.
The general scope of Sir Isidore Salmon's recommendations was
accepted. Although the Army Catering Corps was not formed until
three years later, a great deal was done in the intervening period.
Expert catering advisers were brought in from the civil catering
industry, the first being Colonel R. A. Byford.
Cooking equipment
was modernized, and work on building a new School of Cookery,
planned on the most modern lines, began in August, 1939.
of training at the existing school were expanded and reorganized,
and a new interest was created in the whole of that important
sphere the soldiers' messing.
PETROLEUM
Provision of Fuel and Lubricants in the First World War
During the First World War the RASC had no special organiza-
tion for petrol supply.
Nor did wartime experiences indicate that
one was required, as it was found that petrol, oils and lubricanis,
PETROLEUM
41
now commonly referred to in the Army as POL, could be easily
handled and distributed through the normal food supply organiza-
tion.
POL supply had not been a big task.
Only about 125,000
mechanical vehicles of all kinds had to be provided with fuel, and
the consumption of aviation spirit, for which the Corps was also
responsible, did not exceed i] million gallons a month in the peak
period in 1918.
Supplies of petrol were obtained either by contract or through
the agency of the oil industry, which held the stocks in bulk and
produced filled containers with their own commercial facilities or
quasi-military organizations, which were established especially to
meet war needs.
POL remained, therefore,
administrative question of no particular significance and no special
courses of training in either supply or petroleum technology were
considered necessary.
Mechanization calls for New Methods
The gradual spread of mechanization in the Army in the early
twenties began to change this outlook slowly.
The visionaries of
those days foresaw the replacement of the marching army by small
forces composed entirely of armoured and unarmoured vehicles
moving freely over great distances, maintained by an equally mobile
administrative organization and dependent for their mobility on petrol.
Early exercises which were held, on paper, to study the organization
and potentialities of armoured forces indicated that vastly greater
quantities of petrol would be required than anything which had been
known in the First World War.
It seemed that the replenishment of
petrol might have to be effected at any time of day or night if momen-
tum were to be maintained, and under certain conditions supplies
might have to be delivered into vehicle tanks during short lulls in the
heat of battle.
These trends of thought began to throw doubts on the
adequacy of the previously accepted means of refuelline by means of
small cans. Even if cans still proved to be the best means of replenish-
ment, the re-collection and refilling of the huge number which would
be required also seemed to present new problems.
Probing the question
In
1928 exercises specially
designed to examine
petrol and
lubricant supply were held for the first time at the RASC Training
College.
These exercises went far towards placing the many new
problems which arose from mechanization in a better perspective.
They showed that the question was not only a quantitative one, ol
one of methods of distribution and storing in bulk, but also was one
of the means of providino and protecting the storte which would
have to be held in every potential theatre of war.
