Convoy
on the
Road
TRANSPORT
433
5,000 six-wheeled vehicles with a liberal allowance of open concreted
space for marshalling areas.
It also included an MT stores depot
twice as big as that at Feltham, and the total area, was sufficient to
allow for considerable expansion as both a vehicle and a stores
depot.
It was ideally situated in relation to the southern and
western ports and was safe in that it was not adjacent to any large
city,
The plan of this depot may be said to have been ideal, and
it was erected in its entirety except that the incidence of war forced
us to accept hutted accommodation for officers and men instead of
the originally planned brick barracks.
This depot was handed
over to the RAOC in April, 1942, when certain responsibilities,
details of which will be given later, were handed over to that corps.
Although vehicles provided by the Ministry of Supply were
provided with equipment such as tools, the RASC had to fit each
one of them with three 2-gallon petrol cans for carrying spare
petrol, oil and water.
The cans were procured by contract by the
sister petroleum branch at the War Office (ST 2), and large stocks
were held on their behalf in the MT Stores Depot at Slough, so
much so that they took up accommodation wanted badly for other
things.
Quite by chance, during the Dunkirk evacuation, the duty
officer of ST 3 received an urgent telephone call from a worried
movement control officer at Dover to the effect that the troops on
the beaches at Dunkirk were in desperate need of drinking water.
The ST g officer thought and acted quickly,
Within a few hours
two MT companies were loaded with 60,000 of the new cans, held
at Slough, and were on their way to Dover,
At the coast they were
filled with drinking water and shipped to the Dunkirk beaches in
time to save the situation.
The ATS
During these opening, months of the war new units were formed
for home service and some of them were "manned' by the ATS.
Already, on mobilization, companies of this corps had been placed
in certain static establishments, such as training centres, to relieve
men of clerical, cookhouse and store-keeping duties, and had won
golden opinions.
Now, under the inspiration and leadership of
many former members of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry and of
the Women's Legion, complete transport companies were formed,
initially for
driving staff cars and ambulances only
but later
extending their scope to load carrying vehicles as well, and these
units provided a service which could otherwise only have been met
by inroads on our already hard pressed manpower resources.
The ATS, too, provided larye numbers of administrative personnel
and convoy drivers for our vehicle depots.
With the lengthening
of the war and the ever growing demands on our male population,
EA RASC
