SOUTH-EAST ASIA
There was clearly no point in superimposing a separate supply
system on that of the command, especially as some Indian troops
were already being successfully supplied by the normal command
organization and, after an exchange of signals with Army HQ in
India, which at first demurred, it was agreed that supply arrange-
ments should be merged.
The two supply depot sections and cattle
stock section, although continuing to cater for their own formation,
were incorporated with the British rearward organization, and the
issue section remained with its brigade, the officer commanding
the section being appointed brigade supply officer.
Demands for
Indian foods were included in the command's general requirements.
The two different systems of accounting were maintained without
undue trouble.
Thus the arrival of the Indian brigade brought home the differ-
ences that can exist within the
Commonwealth,
differences to be
repeated to some extent with the arrival of the Australian Imperial
Later, when an Indian corps was formed, the DDST took
into his staff two DADs ST (RIASC) to advise on Indian matters,
to maintain liaison with the DST India, and to ensure permanent
liaison with the Indian formations in the command.
Mobilization
On the outbreak of war in Europe the GOC took the opportunity
of testing the plan for the mobilization of impressed and hired
transport.
On the appointed day the Registrar of Vehicles (an
official of the Government of Singapore), with the aid of the civil
police, diverted some 500 civil vehicles which were returning home
it was a Saturday afternoon-to a parking place close to 52 MT
company's lines.
There the drivers were told that they must stay
and await further instructions.
The drivers, a mixture of Malays,
Indians and Chinese, had visions of being 'shanghaied' and shipped
off immediately to Europe to the war without even an opportunity
of taking leave of their families, and they began forcibly to demon-
strate their displeasure.
The RASC subaltern in charge sought the
aid of an adjoining British battalion which quickly turned out a
company
to surround the 'rioters'.
After a good meal hastily
provided by the MT company, the test was completed, and when
the real day came the lessons had been learned, and the drivers
were content to sit and wait and gamble, only leaving their vehicles
to take their turn at the cookhouse door.
What pleased them
particularly was the thoughtful plan, a security one, of providing a
ring of lights around their camp to enable them, as they thought, to
continue their gaming throughout the night.
The outbreak of war also gave the first opportunity for pressing
for the need for systematic training and the allotment of a definite
war role to the ASC element of the SVC. RASC instructors were
provided, and drill nights and weekend exercises on the lines of
territorial training at home were arranged.
The DDST's long term plan was that the FMSVF transport
element should be used to form a reserve MT company when
The plan was furthered when in early
1940 all volunteers were called up for two months' training,
MT men being concentrated in Singapore and given an intensive
period of instruction.
The company which was formed eventually
from the FMSVF was designated No. 45 (FMSVF) Reserve MT
Company.
A further review of the military situation made in the early part
of 1940 showed that if the island base were to be denied to an
enemy, it would be vital to prevent him from making any large scale
incursion into the Malayan Peninsula which would allow him to set
up a base for operations against Singapore and to establish airfields
on the mainland.
There was a clear case for the protection of the
whole of the Malayan Peninsula, and it was obvious that consider-
able land, air and sea reinforcements would be required for the
purpose, with a special emphasis on the air. Unfortunately the
estimate of the air strength required could not be accepted because
of the time it would take to build up the requisite organization, and
the best that could be offered was an increase in the number of
ground troops to be provided.
These decisions had barely been
made when the defeat of France and the occupation by the Japanese
of pro-Vichy Indo-China followed, thus opening
the way to an
immediate occupation of neighbouring Siam if the enemy decided
on such a course.
This produced a fresh need for more air power,
but once again the resources were not available. By this time
there was no
question of the seriousness of the position being
unrecognized, but, as is so aptly described by Sir Winston Churchill,
'the Japanese menace lay in a sinister twilight compared with other
needs'.
Thus within a matter of months the whole complexion of
defence arrangements was to alter,
began to arrive in considerable strength.
and military reinforcements
August, 1940, were two British battalions which had been withdrawn
from Shanghai (see the section on Hong Kong) and, with a battalion
of the locally raised Malay Regiment, were formed into a second
Malaya Brigade.
Between October,
1940, and May, 1941,
9th and ith Indian Divisions, each of two brigade groups, arrived.
The Australian Imperial Force also joined the command,
second of the two brigades of the 8th Australian Infantry Division
completing the Dominion contingent when this arrived in August,
1947. A brigade of Ghurkas the 28th Brigade- came from India
in September, and individual field regiments, an anti-tank regiment
