64
THE BRITON LASEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
who by this time were tending to paralyse all traffic on the lines of
retirement.
Many RASC columns suffered casualties and some
vehicles
were destroyed or burnt out.
Companies' anti-aircraft
teams were in action throughout the day and gave a good account
of themselves. Many awards for gallantry were earned in the
ensuing days, for example by L/Cpl J. H. Fairchild, who fought off
14 enemy aircraft, by Dvr W. H. Hall, of 5oth Division, who carried
on firing although seriously wounded, and by Dvrs B. Wallsworth
and J. G. Lee,
of 42nd Division, who were given immediate
awards of the Military Medal.
As the withdrawal went on, some confusion arose from the various
cross movements of formations, continued changes in the loca-
tion of units, and
alterations in the points used in the chain of
replenishment, which caused temporary loss of touch between the
RASC and formations.
But in the absence of detailed information
about future movements, petrol and supply points were established
on the main routes for the withdrawal.
CRASC chief preoccupa-
tion was how to maintain communications with the ST staff at
corps headquarters, with their own Q staff and with their own units.
Telephone communication was usually impracticable, and motor-
cyclists were often crowded off the road or jammed in heavy traffic.
An extensive use had to be made of liaison officers who set forth each
day to get the latest information of the operational situation and to
keep in touch with those they were supplying.
However, RASC motorcyclists played an important part during
the campaign as did also car drivers.
Many motorcyclists were
awarded the Military Medal for their devotion to duty in acts such
as those of Dvr E. Shepherd, HQ RASC 42nd Division, Dvr V. Askew,
44th Division, and Dvr J. W. Priest, 45 Company.
But perhaps
the most unique award was earned by a car driver who, running into
direct enemy fire, put his car into reverse gear and drove backwards
at 30 miles an hour, for over half a mile, thus saving the lives of his
passengers.
Officers and men got little rest during the withdrawal.
Many
transport units had to give a hand, in addition to doing their own
duties, in collecting up the stores and ammunition which
had
accumulated on the ground during the advance.
Hundreds of
lorries which had to dump their own loads were needed for this
purpose and for moving semi-mobile units such as hospitals, railhead
detachments and various headquarters to the rear.
Even when the day's work was done it was not uncommon for
men who had been at the wheel all day to spend the night manning
their unit's local defences.
The situation in the rear areas
already being affected by the break which had occurred in the
French lines to the south, and the need for guarding against sabotage
In Workshops
Workshop Lorry
