108
there was
one Size of messes.
For instance, an
RASC platoon might run about five, varying in strength from half
a dozen to a dozen
and so on throughout all arms.
Cutting up
fresh meat to provide for such conditions was not easy, nor was the
meat particularly easy to cook.
A source of waste was the 'vehicle' ration.
Under the prevalent
conditions in the Middle East campaign a vehicle might easily be
lost or stranded in the desert for several days.
It was, therefore,
necessary for every vehicle to carry three days' "hard rations' and,
of course,
water for the number of men forming its crew.
In the
absence of any better method in those days this involved carrying a
number of tins of 'bully', packets of biscuits, tea, sugar and milk in
any available container,
frequently a discarded flimsy petrol can.
Their condition was not improved by weeks of bumping about the
desert, and it was difficult to ensure the restriction of their consump-
tion to legitimate occasions.
However, they were necessary and
proved their worth on many occasions.
'Composite rations' were never available for issue during opera-
tions in the Middle East, and, when shipping supplies to ports along
the coast, the only method of ensuring the arrival of a 'balanced
ration' was to load ships in balanced units of 100 tons.
Unsatisfac
tory as this was from the shipping aspect, the need of a 'balanced
ration' for immediate use outweighed the disadvantages.
In spite of tremendous losses at sea and on land, it can be said
that there was never any real lack of food in the Middle East.
Instances of losses are the abandonment and destruction of supplies
in Greece in 1941, and at the fall of Tobruk in June, 1942, where
more than a million rations were lost.
Often a heavy strain was
thrown on supply resources, and an example of this occurred after
the capture of Tripoli in 1943, when the GHQ provision commitment
was fourfold,
In addition to Eighth Army loadings (the greater
commitment), loading took place simultaneously for restocking
Malta and for providing Benghazi and Tobruk by sea and rail.
The locking up of such large stocks in transit caused a severe drain
on reserves in Egypt and Palestine, and it became necessary to
transfer stocks from Syria and the Sudan to meet demands.
How-
ever, at no time was there any failure to send a full and balanced
ration to meet the requirements of all troops in the command.
Petroleum
Throughout the war the provision and distribution of petroleum
products raised greater problems in the Middle East than did any
other forms of RASC supply.
This had several causes.
First, on
the outbreak of war there was no separate RASC petrol organization,
and no petrol units existed, Secondly, there had been little pre-war
THE MIDDLE EAST I
109
planning, and except for the Jebel Dave scheme, provision had not
been made for a large scale organization for the storage, transporta-
tion and distribution of petroleum products.
Thirdly, the light
1-gallon (non-returnable) can,
designed as the sole means of
distribution in the field, was not stout enough for use in war.
However, starting from zero, a large and efficient organization
was built up, which never failed to despatch from the base the
quantities required to meet the needs of the field forces.
The
occasions when petrol was scarce may all be attributed to the 4-gallon
'flimsy' can, from which the losses in transit were so great as some-
times to imperil operations.
In the early days, the Army had to
depend almost entirely on the civilian oil companies until it could
build up its own organization, and it was the civilian employees of
these companies who performed the task.
Many of them were later
commissioned in the RASC,
The oil firms placed their technical
skill, and advice, and material resources unreservedly at the disposal
of the Army, and without their help there might well have been a
failure to meet operational needs in 1940/41.
As in the case of supplies, lack of men at the outset was the main
problem.
No petrol units arrived from Britain until August, 1940,
and later many units were excluded from convoys, giving place to
fighting troops.
But gradually an organization was built up, and
by August, 1941, there were in operation more than a dozen petrol
depots, two base filling centres, two storage companies, and some
bulk transport companies.
The storage companies were the most
useful. They had a high ratio of officers, and were made up of self-
contained sections, which could be employed on detached work,
Among the duties they performed, generally in detachments of one
or two sections, were dealing with bulk stocks at main installations,
operating refuelling stations and petrol DIDs, construction and
maintenance of bulk outfits, and filling containers.
The main source of supply of petrol was by tanker from Abadan.
There was an initial lack of tankage for the reception of bulk stocks
until the completion of the Jebel Dave scheme, but the tanks for
holding MT spirit were installed and filled during 1940, and those
for aviation spirit were ready by the middle of 1941.
Additional
tankage was
constructed later as an extension of the Jebel Dave
scheme, and thereafter the situation was reasonably satisfactory.
In the early stages of the war, reserves of packed spirit had to be
built up, because of the initial shortage of tankage, but the accumula-
tion of these reserves was limited by the lack of can factories, and a
certain amount of canned petrol had to be imported from Abadan,
Dificulties also arose over the lack of reserves, as in addition to its
other shortcomings,
the 4-gallon can showed poor resistance to
Middle Fast climatic conditions (for which nevertheless it had been
