216
THE WEDLEKN
A TERRANEAN
supply go round.
Fortunately, in one year of the siege there was a
glut of potatoes and it was found possible to make a passable loaf out
of flour consisting of three quarters wheat and one quarter potato.
In the following year the potato crop was entirely ruined by bad
weather.
Even biscuits had then to be carefully rationed.
When
one of the ships which contained a cargo of flour was sunk it was
found that even after three weeks at the bottom of the sea, the salved
stock could be used.
The outer caking caused by its immersion
had provided a protective layer for the inner contents of the sacks
and, after a little sorting', good bread was made from the remainder.
So long as flour was available everything possible was done to
continue a supply of bread.
Some yeast was brought in as a special
priority requirement both by submarine and by air, but for some
time baking had to be done with potato balm, and the skill of the
bakers was well tried.
The question of providing an underground
bakery does not seem to have arisen and in view of the conditions
it was a creditable performance that the army bakers produced some
nine million ib of bread in the year when the siege was at its height.
The main bakery was not unscathed; in 1942 it received a direct hit.
The ovens, which were protected by an intervening wall, were
untouched, but the damage by blast was considerable and for some
time afterwards the bakers had to work without a roof.
Throughout the siege there was usually some fresh local produce
available after meeting the needs of the civil population, but the
supply was irregular and the price was high. At the height of the
siege the
Government Gazette showed the controlled price of
potatoes to be £go a ton, and eggs, of which there was a small
supply for hospitals, were 3s. 6d. each.
Every means of conserving
and utilizing the produce available was adopted, and at one period
the civil loaf of bread was being made of any type of corn that could
be grown, the yeast being replaced by potato balm.
Rations reduced
From 1940 onwards the ration scale had to be constantly adjusted
according to the stocks available, but matters became really critical
in early 1942.
Between January and April it was only possible to
make two issues of frozen meat, and the ration of tinned meat was
drastically reduced.
In May, 1942, the whole ration scale had to
be cut, and life was made no easier by the heavy and continuous air
raids which were being made on the island and seemed to be the
It had
forerunner of a full scale combined offensive by air and sea.
to be decided whether the defenders could be expected to hold out
without further relief, and consequently whether one more attempt
should be made to get a convoy through.
It was a most serious
decision to make, as even if any ships could be got safely through,
and the hours of darkness were getting less as the summer drew near,
there was every chance of their being sunk in harbour as had hap-
pened in March, when one of the two ships was sunk before they
could be offloaded and only about a quarter of the cargo could be
Relief was needed not only by the garrison, but also by
the large civil population whose ration was at this time so meagre
that there was a danger of famine, their main means of sustenance
being one meal a day provided through communal kitchens.
It was decided that another convoy must be sent, but it was to
It is now a matter of history that only five of the 14
merchant ships survived the heavy attacks made on the convoy,
and the naval escorting vessels suffered grievous losses.
the five ships made harbour on August I3th, another arrived the
next day, and the remaining vessel, the tanker Ohio limped in under
tow on the 15th.
These ships may have been few in number, but
their arrival saved the day, as it was again possible to refuel sub-
marines and to eke out the remaining stocks of food until relief
finally came in December.
The most meagre ration issued during the siege was in the fortnight
before these ships arrived, after which it was possible to make small
token increases in such items as bread, bacon, milk, and cigarettes.
Even then all troubles were not over, as in October and November
it was again necessary to make other reductions in the ration scale
which persisted until the advance of the Eighth Army to Benghazi
made it possible to run a convoy from the east, which reached Malta
on December 7th, 1942.
Water Transport
No account of the RASC in Malta would be complete without
some mention of the water transport detachment even though a
reference is made to its deeds in the chapter on water transport.
There were only a few vessels, and there were many long periods
when they could not be used for their legitimate tasks, but they
carned their keep in other ways by helping in the laying of under-
water obstacles, by air-sea rescue, and by undertaking
hazardous tasks.
various
When their crews were immobilized they
yeoman service in helping to unload army cargoes from submarines
and in giving a general hand in anything they were put to.
the final enemy effort began on March soth the opening of a period
in which 7,000 tons of bombs were dropped on the island, many of
the vessels were damaged.
with minor damage to ricoing the Pundle had her engine room roof
The largest, the Lord Plumer, came off
stove in, the Pike. awaitine repair in the dockvard. was crushed bu
heavy stones from the rong of a boat house, the Trout was sunk by
part of the bridge of a neighbouring ship being blown on to her,
