THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
The next day another motor launch blew up one and a half miles
The same coxswain, although the crew were in the
midst of doing gearbox repairs, quickly improvised a gear lever by
using a Stillson wrench and hurried to the scene of the explosion.
They saved six of the crew.
On the 21st, HL 278 was ordered to
the assistance of the destroyer Fury, which had struck a mine, caught
fire and been blown on the rocks.
HL 278 made many attempts
to take a line from the destroyer to one of the tugs which could not
get alongside because of the enormous seas.
It was during these
heroic efforts that the harbour launch herself was flung on the rocks
and completely wrecked.
Fortunately, her gallant crew were saved.
Another proud occasion for the Corps was on July 22nd, 1944,
when 626 Company, RASC (motorboat)
was called on at three
Minister, Mr.
Churchill, from the small boat pier to his ship.
signal was received by the unit from the Naval Officer-in-Charge,
'The Prime Minister was grateful for the use of your boat this
He remarked upon its smart appearance and its good
In addition to the FMBs and MFVs; a total of 48 harbour launches
were finally employed off the beaches, while four were despatched
up the canal to work under the Port Commandant at Caen.
by September, 1944, there were approximately 14 army fire boats
fiVe and 4 LVs) operating on the Normandy coast, ani a
further detachment was sent in the October to Dieppe.
spare parts for the theatre were provided by No. 2 Boat Stores
In all 10 of our men
Normandy operations.
were decorated for gallantry in the
Much to their disappointment, the two MOB companies were
retained in the United Kingdom and employed at the request of
the Admiralty to replenish shipping in the South Coast ports with
All the craft were sailed to their various destinations under
their own power-and this was no mean feat in itself.
their role was unspectacular, it was arduous, and they performed
a most useful task, freeing larger tankers for carrying petrol to
The Return from Normandy
Towards the end of the August, it became apparent that the
work of the RASC
motorboat companies off the beaches
was
drawing to a close.
The Allied armies were over the River Seine,
and it was known that the weather by the middle of September
was unlikely to be suitable for small craft operating from open
Moreover, if they were to return to Britain under their
own power, they must leave before the end of September.
As channels had not been swept, movement up the French coast
was out of the question.
The intention, therefore, was to return
624 Company and half of 626 Company to West Mersea to refit
and then to despatch them to Antwerp as soon afterwards as possible.
It was also proposed to employ the MOB companies, augmented
by civilian barges, on petrol distribution along the waterways of
Belgium, thus relieving the strain on the General Transport Com-
On September gth, 1944, a detachment of HQ CRASC,
42 Water Transport Units, moved by road to Antwerp and there
took over accommodation for the HQ CRASC and two companies.
Many civilian barges were also obtained and, after many difficulties,
began to move considerable quantities of petrol and oil in bulk
from Ostend to Ghent and Bruges.
With the exception of one
section of harbour launches and two MFVs of 626 Company which
returned early in the December, the move of the RASC vessels
from Normandy could not be completed until October 23rd, and
so the small craft had to be returned to England as deck cargo.
Although the MOB companies had been withdrawn from their
water-carrying duties and kept for some weeks at 48 hours' notice
to move, they could not be sent over to the Continent because of
delay in the opening of the Ghent canal at Ostend.
the Scheldt was open, the number of civilian barges was adequate
to meet our requirements.
In fact, as they had a far greater
capacity than the MOBs and were more suited to the job, it was
decided (by December 1oth) that the MOBs would not be required.
The number of RASC craft required for operation in Belgium and
the Netherlands was also reviewed and eventually, in mid-January,
1945, only 624 Company was sent to Antwerp,
and that with a
modified establishment of 10 fast launches or FMBs, 20 harbour
launches and two MFVs.
All these craft were sent as deck cargo.
A few weeks later some of these FMBs were employed in the Rhine
Finally, the running of the civilian barges was handed over to
detachment of HQ CRASC was withdrawn
England by January 21st, 1945, for re-equipping with other RASC
Fleet units for service in the Far East.
Provision of RASC Fleet Units for the Far East
Such are the stories of the RASC Fleet in the Mediterranean
and European theatres.
What of its activities in the Far East?
Here again the motorboat companies demonstrated that same
spirit and adaptability to take on anything and everything that
came their way.
