424
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
permanent depot at Ashchurch, Glos., which had been planned
before the war, provided room for another VRD and MTSD, while
other units were also established in the north and in Northern
Ireland.
More heavy repair shops were also opened, but this
expansion had only just been completed when there was to be a
profound change in the allocation of responsibility for the main-
tenance of MT.
This caused the RASC to hand over complete
responsibility for heavy repairs to a new corps, the Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers, and that for the supply of vehicles and
spare parts to the Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
This change is
discussed in more detail later.
The main impact of operation 'Torch' on the home organization
was the work of fitting out and mobilizing the many RASC units
which were to accompany the force and are referred to in more
detail in the relevant chapter of this book.
To provide the transport
needed, 21 companies had to be withdrawn from the home establish-
ment, but the various measures already described helped to over-
come the fact that they could not be replaced.
Unlike the planning
of the BEF, it was found possible to preserve adequate secrecy
without impairing the administrative preparations required, and
past lessons were taken to heart when it came to the allotment of
RASC units for the force and the priority of their landing.
The
accumulation of the tonnage of food required was mainly a matter
of stepping up production, but the expedition was the first occasion
on which the newly designed 'composite pack' was to be provided
in considerable quantities.
As this form of pack and its provision
was to play such an important part in the war effort, it is discussed
in more detail elsewhere in this volume.
Arrival of the Americans
Meanwhile the plan ('Bolero') to bring over the United States
forces which would ultimately be engaged in the final return to the
offensive on the
Continent was being rapidly perfected.
This
project for receiving, housing
and providing all the ancillary
services and accommodation needed by 1,500,000 men, and super-
imposing this vast army on the already strained resources of the
United Kingdom, was probably one of the greatest administrative
achievements of the war.
It involved not only the provision
new camps, hospitals, airfields and training grounds,
but also a
redistribution of the accommodation in use by our own forces, par-
ticularly in the Southern and Western Commands.
"Bolero' also marked the first opportunity afforded to the British
Army to get to know and to understand their 'cousins',
Before
long the RASC officer began to realize that the 'quartermaster' was
not that well known character, the COMS or RQM, but was a
GENERAL SURVEY
425
highly placed general, that food was 'subsistence', that the Q Staff
were 'G4', and so on.
The main impact of the plan fell on the RASC supplies organiza-
tion as, working on the well accepted relation of host and guest,
the two model and main depots (SRDs) which they prized so much
had to be cleared and handed over to the American forces just at
a time when extra accommodation for housing the reserves being
built up for operation
'Torch' was being sought. However, with
the co-operation of the Board of Trade's department of storage and
factory control, alternative depots were found, and the work is
described in more detail in the section dealing with supplies which
follows later in this chapter.
The years 1941 and 1942 saw great developments in transport
techniques on land, in the air and in amphibious operations.
The
years 1943 and onwards were more marked for the growth in petrol
installations and
petrol handling plants.
This, based
on the
experience gained in Africa, went ahead with much quickened tempo
until the very
complete fuel replenishment organization
which
served 21 Army Group in North-West Europe came to full fruition.
The year 1941 saw, too, the reorganization of RASC units, begin-
ning with transport units, into platoons, companies and columns,
following closely the infantry pattern and simplifying war establish-
ments, equipment tables and, where necessary, the switch of Corps
units to an infantry role.
As the tempo of operations overseas, particularly in Europe,
quickened and as victory came in sight, so the scope and size of
training units at home decreased until, during operation 'Overlord',
whole training brigades were disbanded, and their assets in men and
vehicles were built up into GT companies for immediate service on
the Continent.
In somewhat similar style the dukw and Terrapin
amphibious
companies
gradually
'lost
their webbed feet' and
reverted to their alternative role as GT companies.
This run-down of the effort at home was becoming increasingly
evident from late 1943 onwards, and explains why the greater
part of this chapter appears to deal with the early struggles of a
beleaguered Britain.
striking improvisations and special efforts.
It was the early years which saw the more
In 1944 and 1945 history repeated itself when the Corps was
called upon to transfer to the infantry a number of officers and men,
thus fulfilling what has become its traditional role when the man-
power resources of Britain dwindled, this time happily not solely
through battle casualties, but partly through the increased calls of
the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force.
While these later events were taking place, operation 'Bolero'
ceased, most of the United States forces having moved across the
