238
THE WESTERN
MEDITERRANEAN
All 44 Company's vehicles were lost on the voyage from home, but
a party of the workshop men of the unit assisted in assembling a
reserve of lorries which were being uncrated, and the company was
re-equipped within a week.
Thus the strength of the army was being gradually built up with
both British and American formations.
But the early period of the
year had been a critical one, and the strength of the enemy opposing
us had been clearly demonstrated by the determination and vigour
of his attacks, especially at Kasserine.
Transport in the defensive period
Although the number of RASC transport units increased during
the winter defensive period, the tasks to be performed were far
heavier than had been foreseen,
and
many units were short of
vehicles owing to lack of replacements and to the deferred arrival, for
various reasons, of their equipment.
But the ruling factor which
affected British road transport during this defensive phase-and
indeed throughout the campaign-was the low carrying capacity of
the railways.
This necessitated the organization of supplementary
road lifts as a permanent measure, which meant that AFHQ had
to skin the base transport maintenance units to the bone to provide
a pool for the First Army.
The administrative situation
in the forward area had become
extremely confused owing to the intermingling of the forces of the
three
nations which had resulted from
the constant
need for
reinforcing threatened areas with such troops as were available at
the time.
On February Ist the French Corps d'Afrique and 139th
Brigade Group were being maintained from La Calle; Souk el Arba
was used to supply most of V Corps, an American combat team and
six French battalions.
The French XIX Corps was maintained
from le Kef,
and the Ist American Division and British Army
troops from Ebba K'Sour.
Tebessa was the main railhead for the
American II Corps and another French division.
This confused pattern was reflected in the transport organization;
for example, at one time the
CRASC 6th Armoured Divisional
RASC had none of his own units under command.
Each situation
had to be met as it arose without thought for the niceties of text-book
organization.
Assistance
had to be given to the
French and
American forces as the former had little transport of their own and
some American formations were short of special types of vehicles such
as ambulances and tank transporters.
The transport with the French
led an eventful life in keeping pace with Gallic élan, in clearing up
enemy minefields and in
building up dumps in the more lonely
desert-like country in the south.
Almost all types of units took a share in carrying out special tasks.
NORTH AFRICA
239
One GT company detailed to convey an American combat team
from Biskra to the battle position at Thala covered 497 miles of
difficult terrain in 41 hours.
Tank transporters performed some
quite spectacular deeds, such as the ferrying
forward of the
Churchill tanks of 25th Tank Brigade, when drivers had little or no
rest for several weeks.
Their work is instanced by the award of
the British Empire Medal to Dvr R. Roberts who drove his 7o-ton
load for 14 days with never more than a few hours' rest. On some
of the mountain passes the speed of these vehicles was reduced to
about four miles an hour, and the general road conditions were so
bad and the expenditure in tyres so high that replacement stocks
became depleted.
There were some losses too.
For example,
during the approach to the Kasserine battle, one company lost 16
transporters through enemy air attack and many of the other
vehicles had an epidemic of burnt-out clutch plates.
The roads from Philippeville and Bone leading to the forward
area were narrow and hilly but men and vehicles emerged from these
tests with complete success.
The general dearth of ambulance car
units and water tank companies meant that the only ambulance car
unit available had to operate over a huge area and perform tasks
which normally fall to the vehicles with field ambulances and
ambulance car companies.
The individual gallantry of many
members of the ambulance units was recognized by various awards.
CISM Rowe of 16 Para Field Ambulance received a Military Medal
for a series of acts of gallantry which included his maintaining a
supply of water to an advance dressing station, the rescue of a badly
damaged ambulance and repairing another vehicle under heavy
Dvr R. Willshire was awarded a Military Medal for driving
under fire over a road which was known to be heavily mined, and
Dvr A. Stern of 88 Company was also given a similar award, for
gallantry in bringing wounded (he was an ambulance driver) to
safety.
The lack of water-tank lorries was due to the mishap which befell
the second company to arrive in the theatre, which lost most of its
vehicles and unhappily some of its men when the ship carrying them
was sunk on the voyage out.
A tipper company, too, had many
adventures before it was finally concentrated in Africa, as its men
were spread over no fewer than nine different ships and its vehicles
over eight ships.
A ship carrying one platoon was torpedoed and
another platoon was caught in a heavy air raid as it was disembark-
An MT ship which contained some of the unit's vehicles was
torpedoed, but made port with holds flooded, and all vehicles had
to be stripped after landing and reassembled before they could be
loss of life.
Another of the ships was sunk off Oran, but without any
