SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
The first snag was a message that the Cheltenham Flier had
taken 24 hours to take the 1,000 yards of the Medjez Sfa diversion.
We were too early, and too heavy.
The roads had not settled
down, but the RE got Somerfelt track down, and the situation
Up and down we went, from Bone to Le Kef, Le Kef to Bone,
grinding up through Laverdure at 4 mph.
Messages arrived that
the Cornish Riviera was two hours ahead of schedule, that the
Flying Scot had slipped a coach on the Souk Ahras mountain.
We dropped one off the Cheltenham Flier, as she came round next,
to pick up the tank.
The tempo quickened with the deterioration of the situation
the schedule'
was the cry.
They
wanted the tanks.
We were already reckoning to drive 16 hours a
day.
Well, we would have to boost it to 20.
our bulky and precious 'goods'.
We had to deliver
We quickly developed a respect for, and appreciation of 'Move-
could not do without them.
The situation worsened.
The Hun might come up to Le Kef.
Did they want us as infantry? No, just keep delivering the tanks.
Company headquarters and workshops stood by as a mobile reserve
for the defence of Le Kef, but the non-arrival of the enemy frustrated
their bloodthirsty preparations.
Aircraft were happily not too interfering.
There was a bit of
blasphemy when one came low at Le
Kef and put a 20 mm
incendiary plumb through the radiator, and a few tracer bullets
through the fuel tanks.
The fuel tanks did not blow up; bless the
man who gave us a diesel engine.
The workshops officer had to
have the radiator news broken to him gently, as radiators were not
possible to get, but in 48 hours she was under way with a combined
Thornycroft-cum-Leyland radiator, which
did till we could get
a replacement.
Another enemy aircraft nonned off 1y tures on one vehicle once.
The lananas of the corporal who had taken shelter under the
trailer was unfortunately never recorded.
Next we heard that
another radiator had gone.
eve tankcorn amok on the Souk Ahras-
Chardimaou junction after its transporter got a wheel spin and had
to off-load the tank.
This particular tank had faulty brakes and
fluffed its gears on a bend.
The te ultro a a be mountain road with a gradient of 1 in 12
might have been shocking.
30 yards, all 40 tons of it, but before it could disappear into space
The tank careered backwards for
534 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
the next transporter heaved round the corner, and, rather involun-
'collected' the runaway.
The thought that one tank had
been saved at the expense of one radiator was no consolation to
Then came a call from Sedjenane-Would we deliver half a
dozen reinforcement Churchills to the squadron of the North Irish
Horse up there?
We ran them up from Beja by night, and what a
night, with rain in torrents and six off-loads in 3o miles! The
news that Hun patrols often crossed that road at night was no
We remember an NCO mending his motorcycle by the
roadside in the dark that night; for months afterwards it was the
best maintained one in the unit.
Our contacts with various regiments, both armoured and infantry,
made us many friends, especially the North Irish Horse, to whom
we normally delivered tanks at Beja.
Many were the kindnesses we
received there.
to our drivers when they pulled in.
Infantry units, too, issued complete sets of clothing
In striking contrast to the kindness of our fellow soldiers was the
cruelty of nature as evidenced to the south by the dreadful mockeries
of road around El Aroussa, Gafour and down through Maktar,
But we were nearing the end; we were on the last lap.
still the cry was, faster!
It was a fortnight now since anyone had
had more than four hours' sleep a night, but it was the last lap and
they wanted the tanks faster.
We accepted the challenge and went
flat out for a 6o hours' unbroken stretch.
We had promised the whole 180 tanks of the brigade by the night
of March 2nd.
Barring breakdowns, we would make it.
we counted our chickens later that evening.
Were they all in?
No, there was one with an injector pump gone at Ghardimaou.
The transporter crew were determined to get it rolling; there were
She was moving, she was in, her tank was
delivered. It was five minutes to midnight! We were through;
there was not a tank left at the ports, and 185 had been safely
Now the transporters limped home off the last convoy,
last convoy was coming in.
I stopped the leader and opened the
The driver fell out.
'O.K. son, take it easy, you've
only 800 yards to go, and then you're not going out for f8 hours.'
triver opened his eyes and grinned; 'I shan't spéed, sir,
I can only get goo revs out of my engine.'
Sleep, blessed sleep, for 12 of our 48 hours, and then the other
36 to get the vehicles fit for the next jobs, and then off we went to
re-equip 6th Armoured Division with Shermans.
seemed to make it a rest cure.
We had to carry Shermans for the
division, Shermans as reserves, nearly goo in all, but the pace was
