gree of secrecy was secured,
and a
ated; those from Tromsö were
taken off ,
rich also conveyed the King of
Norway and Crown Prince Olaf, beside many other prominent
Norwegians.
All ranks of the RASC acquitted themselves in accord with the
highest tradition of the Corps.
They evacuated such vehicles as
they could, including a German petrol tanker, formerly a Luftwaffe
refueller, which was found at Tromsö, and was used at Harstad to
good effect after the destruction of the packed petrol and oil stocks.
The tanker, the first captured enemy vehicle,
was later tested by
the Weapons and Vehicles Experimental Establishment and inspec-
ted by the Quarter-Master-General.
The Andalsnes Operations
We must now go back to the beginning for a short account of
the operations based on Andalsnes.
The RASC destined for this port had spent several days swinging
at anchor in the Clyde, dispersed among
various liners, before
returning to Glasgow to be hurriedly disembarked, transferred by
rail to Rosyth, and re-embarked at once in cruisers which immedi-
ately left for Norway.
The result of this haste was, of course,
disorganization.
The only transport unit embarked was 2 Lof G
Brigade Company (though there was no Lof C brigade), and its
vehicles were left in other ships still peacefully anchored in the
Clyde.
It did, however, enjoy first reinforcements in the shape of
a corporal and about 20 men of another unit who, on their way as
normal postings to Catterick, had been helplessly swept into the
movements channel for Norway.
Two ST headquarters, that of
ADST* Sickle Force and that of ADST Base Sub-area, also landed,
and dwelt somewhat uncomfortably together in the restricted base,
though there was only work enough for one headquarters, since the
base installations and units did not arrive at all.
The approach up the deep and lovely fjord, with its magnificent
precipitous mountains towering straight from the still water to the
blue of the evening sky,
soon to be flickering with the delicate
fringes of the Northern Lights, was no proper preparation for the
turmoil which followed in the next few days.
Andalsnes itself proved to be a wooden village of great charm,
but dal re i value an a bate, having only one small concrete layd
one much smaller wooden one, and one
5-ton crane.
immediately behind the port, approachable from the quays only
by two narrow roads through the village, opens out into a fairly
wide plain, formed from the silt of the river which tumbles down the
* Lieut-Colonel C. J. Williams.
NORWAY, 1940
97
Romsdal; but at this season of the year it was marshy and quite
unsuited for depot areas.
Two or three miles up, the plain gives
place suddenly to the mountains, among which it would be hard to
find even half a level acre for a depot.
From Andalanes one road,
broken by winter frosts and floating on a deep sea of greasy green
mud, inter-wound its way with the single-line railway and, in places,
the river, 60 miles to Dombas, beyond which to the south our
troops were operating.
The mountains on either side were snow-
covered halfway down.
Waterfalls, which flung down their sides in
hundreds, froze to silence about tea-time.
After quick reconnaissance by night, the most likely places for
supplies and petrol depots, though insecure and far from ideal,
had been picked, and the transport company secured comfortable
billets in the wooden hotels of the village.
The DAD Transport,
thanks to the willing help of Captain Starhem, the indefatigable
Norwegian officer engaged in hunting and allocating local transport,
obtained about 20 vehicles, mostly Ford 2-tonners, and well before
daybreak the clearance of supplies, ordnance stores, and ammunition
landed overnight by HM ships was begun.
Turn-rounds were
short, the depots being only three or four miles up the valley;
however, only part of the stores could be cleared from the quay,
since soon after o8o0 hours on April e6th the flow of transport for
loading thinned rapidly and then stopped altogether,
It turned
out that the first air raid of the day was (correctly) expected at o8go.
From
that moment the Luftwaffe made life continuously and
increasingly difficult with HE, incendiaries, and bullets.
An hour
without a raid was considered a long respite. Some further elear-
ance of supplies took place later the first morning during a lull,
when some 'compo' (of excellent quality and variety) left behind
by units which had gone straight to Dombas was moved to swell
the slender stocks in the supply depot.
2 L of C Company was
ordered out of its billets at 1500 hours to find a safer location four
miles inland.
As the last man left, the buildings were hit and
quickly joined the rest of the town in smoking oblivion.
An organized hunt for the missing Norwegian vehicles occupied
most of the day, and as each was found in nooks and crannies of
the hinterland, it was put in charge of a RASC driver, instructed
never to let the Norwegian driver, or the ignition key, out of his
This hunt in fact never ceased during the remaining days
of the campaign: as vehicles broke down beyond repair,
necessary to discover and borrow fresh ones,
it was
many available in the district.
and there were not
During a lull, a supply train was
assembled, loaded with ammunition and 2,500 composite rations
and despatched to Dombas.
Our troops who were operating up to
Bo miles south of this place, and igo or io from base at Andalanes,
