344
BURMA AND CEYLO.
results, for there was nothing to stop them going over the edge.
Even these conditions would not have been so bad if the drivers,
who were responsible for carrying forward the requirements of
some 40,000 men, had been experienced; but they were not.
India
was still in
the early days of expanding her army, and the only
motor transport companies she could make available to send up to
this front were some which had been raised a few months before.
The men had no experience of driving before they joined the army,
and even then had only been driving for a few weeks, when they
were called upon to work on this difficult and dangerous road.
Somehow they did it, though many crawled in low gear all the way
up the hill; if a lorry stopped, it could not pull off the road to let
others pass,
and the resulting
block often stretched for miles.
There were at first only six of these companies, each with a total
of 120 lorries, and many of these were off the road in need of repair.
At that time, RIASC companies had no workshops, but only a light
aid detachment with a few mechanics and electricians, and they
had to depend for repairs of a more serious nature on the static
workshops of the IAOC, which were hopelessly overloaded and
unable to cope with the mass of vehicles requiring repair.
Burma
Army had brought out no transport, and its men were exhausted,
so there was no help from them.
This was not the only anxiety of the ST staff of IV Corps.
The
supply situation
was desperate, and the stocks in the advanced
base supply depot at Dimapur constantly showed less than a day's
supplies of some of the most vital commodities: rice, atta, barley,
sugar, milk, and even tea
in a tea-growing area.
Often lorries
had to be loaded direct from trucks discovered just in time in the
trains which reached Dimapur.
The railway system, never intended for heavy traffic, had become
almost completely disorganized, largely because of the defection of
the railway staff,
and
trains were simply left standing after
Japanese bombed Imphal.
Farther back, every wagon had to be
ferried across the Brahmaputra, and still farther back there was a
break of gauge
where all loads had to be transhipped,
unfortunately the opportunity was not taken there to ensure that
the supplies sent forward first were those most needed.
Local purchase was almost impossible, especially of meat, as the
Manipuris objected on religious grounds to the slaughter of cattle,
and drove them away out of reach.
Those that were caught were
generally diseased and unfit for food.
Somehow or other, in spite
of all those difficulties,
enough food was got forward, and small
reserves were built up, before landslides blocked the road.
Fortu-
nately the enemy remained tortive during the monsoon, and the
situation gradually improved.
BURMA
345
Supply by Air
The ensuing two years on this Assam-Manipur front were a
mainly defensive period, while the lines of communication
were
improved, as part of the process of preparation
for an ultimate
offensive, and India expanded her army.
The principal operations
were the great defensive battles around Imphal and at Kohima in
1944, to be mentioned later, and the actions of Wingate's long
range penetration troops, famous under the name of 'Chindits',
which in 1943 and 1944 infiltrated far behind the enemy lines in
Burma, creating confusion and damaging enemy communications.
During their inroads they were maintained entirely by air supply;
and it was in this connection that the RASC were again in operation
on this front.
The British components of Special Force, a development late in
1943 on Wingate's original Long Range Penetration Group, were
drawn from 7oth British Division, and it was decided that, although
an RIASC air despatch organization was in existence, the British
Chindits must be served in this respect by their own RASC.
61 Company was reorganized as an air despatch company, and
continued with this task until the Chindits withdrew.
Its duties
included the
establishment of air bases in the advanced strong-
holds of the Chindits such as 'Broadway' and 'White City', deep in
Japanese occupied territory.
After this special task, the company
continued to be employed as part of the great Army-Air Transport
Organization, on which Fourteenth Army depended to an ever-
increasing extent for its maintenance as it drove south through
Burma.
The land L of C eventually stretched so far that it could not
provide for Let rays needs, and supply by air became
the
normal method.
By April, 1945, nine-tenths of the supplies of all
sorts for the army in Burma were being delivered by air: air-landed
when airstrips were available on which aircraft could come down,
air-dropped when landing was impossible.
In this process,
Company played its part, helping to maintain the forces which
were pursuing the retreating enemy, down to the Chindwin, on to
the
Irrawaddy,
and beyond
to
Meiktila and Mandalay.
February and March, 1945, this company sent almost 10,000 tons
of supplies to the two corps engaged.
When mechanized forces
made their dash for Meiktila, 61 Company supplied them with over
250,000 gallons of petrol.
Then the advance of IV Corps towards
Rangoon was maintained, until Toungoo was reached in April, by
which time air supply from East Bengal became uneconomic, and
the task was switched to the airfields in Arakan.
When the com-
pany had done its air despatch work, many of its members had 100
