252
THE
CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
airfields.
The Eighth Army was allotted the eastern sector which
included Syracuse, while the American Seventh Army were on their
western flank.
The Eighth Army consisted of the XIII and XXX Corps and the
Ist Airborne Division.
The
XIII Corps had the 5th and 5oth
Divisions and the 4th Armoured Brigade under command.
XXX Corps was made up of the ist Canadian and 5ist (Highland)
Divisions,
the 23rd Armoured Brigade,
and the 23ist Infantry
Brigade Group, which had been
formed from units which had
garrisoned Malta.
The 78th Division
and the
Ist
Canadian
Army Tank Brigade were to be available as a follow-up reserve, and
the 46th Division could be called on if required.
Planning and mounting was made difficult because the formations
and their headquarters were spread over the Middle East and in
North Africa and some were in the United Kingdom.
Each of the
mounting headquarters-
- GHQ Middle
East at Cairo, AFHQ at
Algiers, and the
War Office were responsible for providing the
initial maintenance requirements of the forces which were
being
mounted in their area.
GHQ ME was then to be responsible for
regular
maintenance convoys until D plus 42, after which date
fortnightly convoys were to arrive direct from home.
Because of Malta's dominating position and its excellent com-
munications it was decided to use the island as an advanced base
and a staging post in the early stages.
Eighth Army Headquarters
was set up there and a ferry control organization was formed to
control the ferrying of build-up units and stores from Malta and
Sousse in LSTs.
Units awaiting embarkation in the Sousse area
were placed in a forecast order of priority, which could be altered
meet the current operational situation in Sicily.
Similarly,
estimates of probable requirements of stores were worked out to
cover the first fortnight and these were to be shipped automatically
unless instructions were received from Sicily to alter the order of
priority.
One of the chief points of interest for the RASC in the preparations
for this operation was the arrival at Didielli and Sousse of the first
dukws.
Of these amphibious vehicles 230, with a smaller number
of amphibious jeeps, were allotted to the Eighth Army for the main
purpose of getting urgent stores and anti-tank guns ashore in the
early stages, before it was possible for vehicles to be driven ashore
from LSTs.
Three platoons of dukws were also to accompany the
Ist Canadian Division.
Most of the
dukws were not due to arrive from America until
just before the date of the invasion, but a few were provided for
training purposes at the end of May, and for six weeks 385 General
Transport Company was busily engaged on a sandy beach near
ITALY
253
Sousse, training as many men as possible to drive and navigate
this novel form of transport.
Because of the lack of port capacity in the American sector, it
was planned that the Seventh Army would share the port of Syracuse
after D plus 14.
In order to meet conflicting claims and settle
priorities a special headquarters was planned, known as Fortbase, to
control the operation of Sicilian ports and to make allocations
between the Allies.
As it happened, the great success of the dukws
in increasing beach maintenance capacities and the rapidity with
which the Americans captured Palermo (D plus 12) made it unneces-
sary for Fortbase to adopt this role, and it became the British I, of C
Headquarters in Sicily.
By July 4th all training exercises had been completed and the
final stages of water-proofing vehicles were rapidly
undertaken.
All was ready for the first step in the liberation of Europe.
The airborne landings were timed to take place before midnight
July gth/1oth.
For many reasons these landings did not go accord-
ing to plan.
Nevertheless a vital bridge south of Syracuse was
captured and saved intact by the gallant action of men of the ist
Airborne Division, and a small detachment of American paratroops
succeeded in holding valuable high ground at Gela and preventing
enemy reinforcements from reaching the beach defences.
The seaborne landings everywhere met with success.
Owing to
the rough sea the attack completely surprised the enemy.
The
initial objectives were soon in Allied hands, and the business of
beach clearance went rapidly ahead. The dukws immediately
proved their worth and, in spite of the bad weather, ensured that
the build-up of beach maintenance areas was up to schedule.
less than two days 80,000 men, 7,000 vehicles, 300 tanks and 900
guns were ashore.
Both Licata and Syracuse were captured on
D Day, and on D plus 3 ships were discharging in the latter port,
as well as at Augusta, which had been captured by the 17th Infantry
Brigade of the 5th Division.
After early counterattacks against the American sector, the enemy
gradually withdrew to strong positions defending the Catanian
plain and the western approaches to Etna.
With the pressure thus
eased on their sector, the American Seventh Army rapidly overran
the western hall of, the American a Vely 22nd occupied Palermo
without opposition.
Things had gone so well in the first days and the stock position was
looking so healthy that i+ was decided to ferry across the -8th
Division from Sousse in LifTs at the expense of a more rapid build-
up of stores and supplies.
Their arrival was well-timed, as the
frontal attack rainst Cotania was meeting with little success. after
the initial achievement of the centure if Dima Cle hide over the
