76
THE BRITIS.
1939/1940
clearing supplies from the ships wmen nad been able to make the port
and, in face of many hazards, as much as from 200 to 400 tons
were unloaded in a day.
But as the days went on, the disinclination
of local labour to face the continued raids and the final defection of
skilled men wanted for operating the dockside cranes brought
unloading almost to a standstill.
At low tide ships' derricks could
not be used owing to the damage to dock gates, and holds could
only be emptied by hand—a laborious process.
Major A. Forward,
who was in charge of unloading supplies, was awarded a Military
Cross for his devotion to duty, and Captain C. V. Ferrey was given
a similar award for his work in clearing ammunition.
Some of the food unloaded was used for supplying a small detail
issue depot which had been set up outside the town, and other
consignments were sent forward to rendezvous which had been
fixed for each corps.
The detail issue depot was kept hard at
work, as units and smaller bodies of men were by that time arriving
in great numbers.
Communal cookhouses were established for
feeding the hundreds of men who had become detached from their
parent units.
There was such a shortage of transport that Colonel Collins took
over any sections of transport which came his way and manned
abandoned vehicles to form makeshift columns.
Work in the docks
area was hazardous, and several awards were earned in those last
days.
and Lieutenant C. Baillie, who had already distinguished
himself in an encounter with enemy infantry at Ardres, was given
a Military Cross, and Dvr J. E. S. Sankey, of the same unit (4 Com-
pany) won a Military Medal as did also Dvr J. C. W. Govan, 76
Company.
Colonel Jenkins was able to report that the last of the two supply
ships had been unloaded by the evening of May 26th with the
exception of a few tons of damaged packages. No other ships were
in sight, and the days of Dunkirk as a supply port were at an end.
In a report dated May 27th Colonel Jenkins records:-
'I spent the afternoon at the docks.
Bombing increased consider-
ably, and by 1700 hours it was impossible to get any of the few
remaining lorries either in or out of the docks, which were blazing
furiously.
It was impossible to get any of the water away from the
quayside out of the docks.
The QMG arrived at the HQ at the
Bastion at 1830 and told us that the BEF was to be evacuated.
further supplies should be sent forward, but if any lorries were under
load they should be placed on the lines of withdrawal and formations
would help themselves as they passed.
There was nothing more to
be done except to obey the orders we received to proceed to the
beaches and await our turn for evacuation, as the telephone line to
the UK had ceased to function from 1700?
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
77
The water referred to was 200,000 cans of drinking water which
had been sent from England for the use of the men on the beaches.
It could not be moved because any transport available at that time
had to be used for ammunition.
Because of fire and destruction all troops were ordered to clear
the town that night, GHQ taking over control of the port as the
outer mole was still usable. There was nothing more which the
RASC at Dunkirk could do except to obey the order they received
to await their turn for evacuation.
The Last Phase
There was great congestion in the area around the Dunkirk
perimeter as units were directed to the beaches.
Roads became
almost jammed with a flow of French military and civil vehicles
converging from all directions, and instructions that units should
abandon their vehicles in selected places outside the bridgehead do
not seem to have reached them, while there was also some uncertainty
as to whether vehicles should be put out of action or how this was
to be done.
A report by the CRASC 5th Divisional RASC at that time reads:—
'We had orders to destroy all surplus kit and office equipment on
the 27th, so the end was obviously near.
I was told that a dump of
supplies had been found at Steenworde, but on arrival there found
that the stock seemed to consist mostly of rum, and there appeared
to be no one in charge.
The congestion on the roads was terrific
(the HQ of the Div. RASC were at the time at Ploegsteert) and
drivers are almost whacked with long hours at the wheel and keep
dozing off.
Orders to withdraw to the coast were received on the
29th.
The roads were almost impassable, with streams of traffic
joining into our route from every possible direction.
We eventually
arrived at Adinkerke (close to Dunkirk), where we handed over our
remaining stock of ammunition to goth Division, but where we also
found some abandoned trucks full of Belgian supplies.
This chance
find enabled us to open a supply noint between the time we received
orders to be prepared to move for embarkation, at 30 minutes'
notice, and our actual departure later in the evening.
But as this account by the officer commanding a corps ammunition
park shows, not all of those embarked were to arrive unscathed in
England:-
When we eventually arrived at Dunkirk the town
and seemed to me to be completely destroyed.
was ablaze
It was a depressing
business, this departure, as although I got my unit of nearly fre
of shore batteries, and coey not escape by dodging about owing to
aboard ship, we had barely left port when we came under the fire
the Channel being mined on either side.
We were hit just above
