468
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
The result of these adjustments was that although the service
scale had not yet been brought down to the level of the civil ration
it was very near it.
While the numerous alterations in the ration
were being made, the need for maintaining the scale at a reasonable
nutritional level had been kept in
mind, but it was becoming
increasingly difficult to do so and at the same time to provide for
an acceptable ration.
There was a limit to the amount of starchy
foods, such as potatoes and bread, still in fairly ample supply,
which could be absorbed.
The growing national shortage of food
in 1941 had brought with it the introduction of the points rationing
scheme, and by the end of 1942 there were few commodities in
general demand which were not subject to this form of rationing.
As the reductions made in March, 1941, were the last great cuts
in the service ration it will be of historical interest to record the
quantity of principal commodities, which were:—
Men
oz daily
Women
oz daily
1, (sausages
only)
Meat (Bone in)
Bacon
Offal or Sausages.
Bread.
10
Flour.
Butter and Margarine
Cheese
Milk, Tinned
3
Sugar
Potatoes
Fresh Vegetables
13
54
12
Tea
There were of course manv other changed made bafore the war
ended, but generally speaking it can be said that the ration was
maintained at a level of about o 800 calories gross for the rest of the
war, which included the food value obtainable with the small cash
allowance of 2bd, which accompanied the articles issued in kind.
The soldier's ration both at home and abroad continued to be one
of constant preoccupation, as although no attempt had been made
to ration those on active service, overseas scales had to be adjusted
from time to con active service, with the general food situation.
At the end of 1942 a long felt want was filled by the setting up
of a Services ration scales committee under the chairmanship of a
deputy secretary of the MOF, which allowed of the Services being
keot in close touch with the Rational food outlook and provided a
SUPPLIES
46g
ready instrument for examining and presenting a co-ordinated
view on matters of service food policy.
Before concluding this condensed account of the work connected
with the service ration tribute must be paid to parts played by the
Ministry of Food and the NAAFI.
The Ministry had the difficult
role of combining the duty of poacher and gamekeeper.
When
they had to poach on service preserves, it was as gamekeeper for
the national good.
At the same time they took good care that the
serviceman received his due share of the national larder and that
he received perhaps just that little bit extra of the few luxuries
which were popularly known as 'being in short supply'.
The NAAFI were faced with a double task of acting as the agents
of the Government for supplying a considerable portion of the
ration for all three Services at home and at the same time of
endeavouring to satisfy the demands of the serviceman in
canteens throughout the world.
They also undertook the whole
of the responsibility, on behalf of the Ministry and the Services, for
the administration of the rationing procedure for canteens, for the
control of sweets rationing, and for instituting unofficial 'rationing'
for such much sought after articles as cigarettes.
They had a great
deal to contend with throughout the war.
THE COMPOSITE RATION
The introduction of the composite ration
was probably the
greatest acquisition provided for the Army by the supply branch,
because it eussition providere would be few occasions when either
officer or soldier would have to put up with the hard fare, which,
in the past, he was expected to exist on in times of stress.
idea of packing a complete day's ration for so many men into one
box can hardly be regarded as an invention, but it was certainly
an innovation in the British Army and one which was adopted by
almost all our Allies.
The original ration, although a comparatively plain affair, was
used for the firsation, annous during the operations in Norway,
and it was voted as an immediate success.
The plan was then so
developed that special ration packs were produced to meet many
types of operational conditions, and by the end of the war no fewer
than 40,000,000 packs were manufactured in different varieties.
The packs were not intended to replace the normal field service
ration, with its variety of fresh produce.
The object was to ensure
that the man would be no less well provided for, until the normal
ration could be issued to him.
The proposal originated from the experience gained by the BEF
in 1939, when it was found that the administrative organization
