570
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
cake from th
Too us.
These they enjoyed at sea on the Christ-
mas Day, while bound for Algiers in a full gale.
The two vessels
were delivered safely to the motorboat company the next day.
Two more trawlers, the Lucien Gougy and Elizabeth Therese, were
delivered in like manner by runner crews soon afterwards, and the
500-ton RASC vessel Malplaquet, with its civilian crew, was also
diverted from the United Kingdom for duty in the Mediterranean.
With the opening of the offensive against Sicily and Italy, the
company moved forward with 15 Army Group.
Work with the Central Mediterranean Forces
The shape of the
Italian peninsula, of Yugoslavia, Albania,
Greece, Corsica, Sardinia, Malta and the North African coastlines,
with their many small ports, coupled with the limitations placed
upon road and rail transport-both by the difficulties of terrain
and by the destruction of war-made the Central Mediterranean
an ideal theatre for the employment of RASC water transport.
For years the Italians had made extensive use of coasting schooners,
and consequently there were many suitable vessels available on the
No. 247 Company soon had far more commitments than it
could properly handle, and from it three water transport companies
(Nos. 797, 798 and 8o1) of special establishment were formed in
October, 1943, and April
company was then restored to strength with enthusiastic volunteers
As in the earlier days of 1940 these varied from
professional seamen, through boat builders, barge hands and yachts-
men to mere land-lubbers.
The headquarters of 247 Company had been established at
Torre del Greco, south of Naples, and operated around Sicily and
on the North African coast, while the two first water transport
companies, based on Bari and Torre del Greco, were responsible
for RASC craft operating on the east and west coasts of Italy
respectively.
The waters of the east coast included the islands
occupied by the Yugoslavs off the Dalmation coast, Albania and
Greece, and those of the west coast included Sardinia and Corsica.
As the Allied armies advanced, a reorganization of unit waters
became necessary,
Company
and in the autumn
assumed responsibility for those around Southern Italy, Sicily and
Malta, 797 for the Northern Adriatic from Ancona,
798 for the
Northern Turrhenian Sea from Nanles. and 8o1 for the Southern
Adriatic, Yugoslavia, Albania and Greece.
However, the activities
of vessels were not confined to their own waters.
Some of the schooners were manned entirely by military crews,
especially in the
early days when shipments to
Yugoslavia first
began, for the Yugoslavs firmly refused to allow an Italian manned
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
vessel to call at their ports.
Those trips to Yugoslavia were very
much of the 'sail-by-night' type, because of the attention of enemy
aircraft in the Adriatic.
Vessels were loaded in Bari and then
sailed to Manfredonia, where they anchored until darkness fell.
Then they would surreptitiously make the passage to the island of
Vis with their cargo of ammunition or stores for the British forces
and the partisans.
Another route used was that to the Yugoslav
port of Split, and trips were made even down to Kalamata in Greece.
In addition to the hazards of war, there were always the forces of
nature to reckon with on this passage.
The bora, a very strong wind,
often blew up without warning and caused many an anxious time.
One vessel was blown so far off her course that when daylight came
the master found himself uncomfortably near the shore of an enemy
occupied island.
Other schooners
were chartered, complete with Italian crews,
and carried RASC 'escorts' of one NCO and one private waterman.
The Laura of some 500 tons, was one.
She was in the first flight of
those which followed close in the wake of the liberating forces.
Laden with food supplies for the starving Greeks, she received a
warm welcome.
The NCO escort (Sgt Jackson, RASC) sent this
letter to his company commander:
'Sir-Please accept this 10-million drachma note as a souvenir
from Greece.
Our trip was most successful and very interesting.
'Our arrival at Pylos and Kyparissa was the signal for general
festivity.
We were entertained by the civil chiefs and officers of
the Free Greek Army in a most lavish manner.
We were the first
British troops to return to this port after nearly four years and at
both places dinners were given in our honour.
Representing the RASC (water transport) in this historical
episode gave me very great pleasure.'
The summer of 1944 was also enlivened by many incidents
arising from the assembly of the force which was being prepared to
land in the south of France.
As an instance, one junior RASC
officer's truthfulness was strongly suspected when he reported on
his return from a training cruise in the Ray of Nanles that he had
seen a large and noisy canvas boat proceeding at three knots which,
on investigation, was found to have a tank suspended in the bottom
of it!
This subsequently proved to be the Fleet's first acquaintance
in the Mediterranean with the Sherman DD tank.
Again, security
notified of them.
measures were so secure that at least one of our units was not
This gave rise to several days of inexplicable
silence from all the RASC schooners which were supplying the
American Air Force and French Expeditionary Force in Corsica
and Sardinia. The comnany became worried shout the annarent
loss without trace of all these vessels, until repeated enquiries brought
