236
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
divisional RASC consisted of 519, 520, 521 and 570 Companies.
Of these the first three had originally belonged to the 49th Division.
The first company to go forward was 520 Company, which remained
in the Sedjenane area until April.
Two of its men soon earned
immediate awards of the Military Medal: L/Cpl R. Butler for
continuing to issue ammunition until the site of his dump became
untenable after being machine-gunned and bombed, and Dvr P.
Murphy, who delivered supplies to an isolated unit, although his
route was under direct fire from snipers and his lorry was hit three
times.
The other units of 46th
Divisional RASC came forward in
February to about Beja.
It was there that Dvr A. A. Lawton, a
motorcyclist attached to 128th Brigade HQ, earned a Military
Medal for reconnoitring the enemy's movements and that Dvr
W. J. Hughes, of 183 Field Ambulance,
was also awarded the
Military Medal for collecting casualties under heavy fire.
The first part of the defensive period was marked by both sides
carrying on sparring activity in the central sector. In early January
the 6th Armoured Division made a successful probing attack and
encountered little opposition.
The Germans, after a preliminary
thrust at Fondouk, attacked the junction of the French and British
The Drench, who were ill-equipped, gave way, and it was
only after a week of severe fighting when
British and American
troops had to come to their assistance
that the situation
was
stabilized on a line a little to the rear of the original front held.
The enemy, having gained the initiative,
was determined not to
Well aware of the small strength of the Allies who
opposed him and the difficult terrain on their long lines of com-
munication, he planned to strike hard at the southern flank with
the object of capturing
would jeopardize
position of the British in the north and would be the signal for Von
Arnim to attack our forces in that area.
By the end of January the continued need for strengthening the
line at each point of enemy attack from the comparatively small
resources available to the Allies had left the army in a somewhat
unsatisfactory position.
General Eisenhower was fully aware of
this and had given orders for the 34th (US) Division to complete its
concentration by February 15th, and for the gth (US) Division to
move up from Oran.
arrive in the same month.
The 25th Tank Brigade was also
due to
The storm broke on February lath when the enemy struck in
force against the widely dispersed United States Ist
Armoured
Division, inflicting heavy losses in men tanks and equipment on the
Americans as they withdrew.
enemy had captured
By nightfall of February 17th the
Kasserine and Gafsa and was infiltrating
NORTH AFRICA
237
through the Kasserine pass.
Then, breaking through the pass, he
directed two armoured columns on Tebessa and Thala, and for
some days the situation was critical. It was at Thala that 4 Com-
pany, RASC was ordered to stand by to fight as infantry in support
of The Leicestershire
Regiment.
Allied
reinforcements
already on their way, but the situation became so serious that
regiments and even companies had to be committed to the battle as
they arrived.
These reinforcements were, however, able to turn
the tide, and a week later the enemy had withdrawn to almost his
original starting line while the attacks made on the British in the
north gained little success, although the fate of Beja at one time was
in the balance.
When the enemy's break-through was assuming
dangerous proportions, the RASC men in a reinforcement unit were
organized into a temporary company of infantry and went into
action.
The
defensive period ended with two further attacks by
the
enemy at the end of February, one in the Bou Arada area and the
Other against the Eighth Army at Medenine.
enemy thrusts were a failure the Axis had been able to keep open
the land rusts were ween his two commands (Von Arnim in the
north and the Italian General Messe, who replaced General
Rommel, in the south). When the fighting died down, the Allied
forces in Tunisia were in a confused pattern as British, American
and French troops had become intermingled and dispersed with
little regard to the position of their parent units or formation.
While the enemy was making his last efforts it was decided that
the two converging Allied armies, the Eighth Army and the First
Army, with Americans and French,
should operate
under the
unified command of headquarters 18 Army Group,
with General
Alexander at its head.
to reorganiat its head. The arno British, American and Frsnch
The army group had two clear cut tasks:
formations to simplify administration, and to build up reserves for
the future combined efforts of the unified command.
At about this time there were some changes in the senior ST
appointments.
Brigadier Hinde relieved Brigadier White as DST,
APHQ, and Brigagadil: K. Gillespie became DDST of th March.
The ist Division did not arrive in North Africa until March.
Three of its RASC CompaniestY, 40 and 42-were those which
went to France in 1930, and the fourth company was 295 Company.
All the companies had undergone battle training when at home,
and it was put to good nurnose when each company was ordered to
provide one platoon of an infantry company to hold a sector and
guard a minefold in a tale Ina fannedanh for anemy tanks
The 4th Division arrived later in March with two of its original
'BEF' companies, 21 and 44•
The other two were 107 and 473.
