488
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
sound although various changes were made in their organization as
experience was gained.
One feature which was common to all was
their ingenuity and their constant readiness to taken on
tasks
which were outside their normal function.
Another feature was
their ability to extemporize whether the task was a large scale one,
such as the rehabilitation of a shattered installation, or the every-
day one of erecting a roadside filling point.
between
the responsibility of the
The dividing line
Royal Engineers who
were
responsible for engineering work and that of the more technical
petroleum units was small, which greatly assisted the co-operation
between the two Corps.
The speed with which new tankage could
be erected and pipelines laid over both short and long distances had
been amply demonstrated as had the rate at which bulk distribution
could be introduced on lines of communication.
The plans for supply for 'Overlord' differed in many respects from
those made for previous expeditions inasmuch as initial supplies were
to be in returnable cans (jerricans) and bulk supply for refilling
cans was to be
developed immediately after the first landings and
not deferred as had been formerly done, until civil installations were
captured and rehabilitated.
Portable and prefabricated tankage
was to be landed quickly and supplied from floating tank barges
and bulk petrol lorries used to carry forward supplies to mobile
filling centres.
The supply of bulk spirits from England was to be
maintained by a fleet of small shallow draft petrol carriers and by a
submarine pipeline which rejoiced in the code name of "Pluto'.
The whole scheme was a gigantic one which involved the
operation of the Navy, the Royal Engineers and the Oil Industry,
and the production of huge quantities of material.
Although bulk supply was to be developed soon after the first
landings many millions of cans were required to build up the can
population.
The reception and filling
of the numbers
wanted
preparatory to the launching of the offensive entailed the con-
struction of six more War Office petrol reserve depots.
(There were
six in existence before planning began.)
Five of the depots were
each equipped for filling 100,000 cans in a week.
Three of the new
depots were located adjacon, do citing bulk storage installations,
but the other three had to be placed at inland sites and fed by rail
tank cars.
The production of ferricans was already proceeding apace.
It
had taken some time to work up production, as some of the presse
required had to be ordered in America, but by 1943 four of the bie,
steel manufacturers were fully engaged in mass producing the new
Six plants had also been sent outto the Middle Rast and
It was
others had been provided for India and for Australia.
planned that 30,000,000 cans would be manufactured
by
the
PETROLEUM
48g
summer of 1943. But even so the can supply had to be supple-
mented by the use of 4-gallon tins and 4,500,000 tins were actually
shipped to the Continent in 1944.
The provision of marine craft portable tankage and pipelines was
not a direct ST 2 responsibility although they were concerned with
their ultimate use.
Some idea of the overall effort involved will be
of interest.
The equipments on order in July, 1943, included
1,400 miles of pipelines, 900 rail tank wagons, 130,000 tons
'quickly erected' tankage, 200 prefabricated 1,000-ton tanks,
200
barges, and a programme for go dual purpose carrier vessels for the
carriage of petrol in bulk or in cans.
There were 121 contractors employed in producing the equipment
which had to be provided by ST 2 alone.
The items on order
ranged from 155,000,000 clips, for identifying the contents of
jerricans, to 55 mobile filling plants.
Raising and training, the 85 RASC petroleum units which
appeared in the order of battle was also a big task.
It was greatly
assisted by the existence of a Petroleum Technical Training Centre
where courses were arranged for both technical and general duty
A special headquarters (a HQ CRASC) was set up at No. 4
Mobilization Centre, where units were prepared for handing over
to 21 Army Group.
This HQ arranged for realistic training and
Another
rehearsals of unite future tasks in France and Germany.
special unit wait Future the Petrol Supply Demonstration Unit,
to instruct both RASC and other arms in the technique of the
handling and use of petroleum products.
Supervision and control
from a War Office angle of the training arrangements was simplified
by the addition of a training branch to DST'& staff, ST B.
The provision of the two hich pressure submarine pipelines. 'Pluto',
was the responsibility of the Petroleum Warfare Board, ST 2 being
concerned with the control and pumping and operation of the land
'Bambi' and
terminals.
The two land terminals were
Dumbo' respectively with the addition of the word "far' for the
Continental ends of the lines.
As the technique of control over
pumping recuired a bich dearee of technical dall, units were
specially trained beforehand.
The home commands played an important part in the pre-
Additional
parations for concentrating and marshalling the forces,
petroleurn units and equipment were given to them where necessary
for refuelling vehicles and for other duties, which included the pro
vision of fuel and lubricants for loading in the massof ferry craft whiel
Wete to cacey a dealt deck coons of toot? so cock of their journeys
Other social arrangemente had to be made hu ST a for emer
geney air supply of anted and supply to the airborne forces.
all the other plans made, no detail was omitted.
