80
THE BRITISH
EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
with supplies to provide initial stocks. As the situation became
clearer, the orders were cancelled on the z2nd, and by the 24th the
depot was again concentrated at Le Havre, but one of the two field
bakeries was withdrawn to Rennes, where it came into operation
again until finally evacuated in June.
In the meantime the ist Armoured Division had begun to arrive
from England, but it was not complete as part of the support gro if
and a tank regiment had been taken for the defence of Calais.
was the first division of its kind to take the field, but it never had
the opportunity of fulfilling its real role, or of operating as a complete
formation, because it was employed piecemeal as it landed.
The RASC organization for the division was also a new one, as it
was composed of seven companies in place of the three allowed for
an infantry division.
Each armoured brigade, the support group
and the divisional troops were allotted one company for carrying
their food, ammunition and petrol, and three
companies were
provided for carrying sufficient reserves to make the
division self-
contained for several days.
Four of the companies were Territorial
RASC, one of them being a true family affair, as it had been raised
by a well known brewery firm.
The division was one company short
on landing, a deficiency made good by forming it in France with
vehicles drawn from the lines of communication reserves.
The urgent necessity
for trying to relieve the situation on the
Somme then led to a series of abortive attacks by the Ist Armoured
Division, or rather by units and sub-formations of it, as they arrived,
between the 22nd and 25th, and by the end of that period they had
suffered such heavy losses that the division had lost its potential
power as a formation.
The divisional RASC had preceded the
arrival of the brigades.
Their sealed orders, 'only to be opened after
embarkation', indicated that they were to concentrate near Brussels
—by that time almost in enemy hands.
They were just assembled
in time, in the region of Pacy, to go straight into action,
under all
the circumstances which surround a losing battle.
All movement
and the work of clearing supplies from railheads had to be done by
night,
no lights being allowed, so that the first practical work of
checking and sorting their loads had to be done with the aid of
well dimmed hurricane lamps.
The division was badly mauled in its attacks on the Somme bridge-
heads and, less part of the support group and a composite regiment
which was detached to the gist Division, had to be withdrawn to
refit to the south of the Somme.
On May zoth the 5Ist Division received a warning order that
they were to be relieved bu French troons and were to concentrate
at Etain, north of Metz, before moving to the west with the avowed
object of rejoining the BEF.
The move had to be conducted by
Typical
Group,
1940
