384
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
distances involved, and so army transport companies were continu-
ally being allotted to corps and subsequently withdrawn.
Corps
basic transport was, of course,
used to the full, and on
the few
occasions when a division was in reserve on a non-operational role
the assistance of portions of the divisional second line transport for
corps duties was sought and given.
According to normal standards,
all transport was overworked and none could be spared for rest.
High standards of morale and training enabled our transport units
to
maintain
the high pressure and swift improvisation demanded
of them.
The administrative lessons of the campaign compiled by XII
Corps give a clear picture of how their links in the transport chain
worked.
During the advance from the beach-head to the Dutch
frontier, a distance of some 500 miles, nine FMAs were established,
and a further six were used during the winter campaign in the
Netherlands.
The distance from army roadhead to FMAs varied
from 30 to 150 miles.
Corps basic transport was mainly engaged
in lifting from army roadhead to FMA, and, for
'third line' tasks.
Corps was often dependent upon second line transport withdrawn
from divisions.
Assistance by army was confined to the allotment,
for a limited period,
of a varying number of companies or the
positioning of 'packs' of ammunition, petrol and supplies to help
the Corps in specially difficult circumstances.
Under these condi-
tions, CRASC corps troops obviously had to control the maintenance
and traffic between army roadhead and FMA.
Two transport
lying-up areas were established, one just forward of the army road-
head and the other just behind FMA.
The CRASC corps troops
with a small staff was stationed at one, and his second-in-command
at the other.
DDST corps had two RT sets, one forming a direct
line to ST army, the other working on the corps ST net to CRASC.
The daily volume of traffic in the corps area was large, and much
of the maintenance transport had to be filtered forward in small
blocks.
Section commanders,
shepherding their six vehicles,
largely responsible for getting the vital loads through, and a high
standard of training and resource was demanded of them.
For the RASC transport columns and their companies operating
between the RMA and FMAs, it was a long period of sheer hard
Except that they knew the Germans were on the run, there
were no thrills to maintain morale.
In the words of the drivers
themselves, it was just a continuous hard flos, and how well they
On one occasion, for example, a convoy from !7 Company
arrived back in the RMA from the Netherlands and was immediately
detailed for a further trip to Brussels.
Off they went, without rest,
and completed the run in 26 hours.
On another occasion, a column
from 905 Company did the same trip in 22 hours.
Dukw making for Shore
Dukw Loading
