392
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
surrender of all German naval, land and air forces opposite 21 Army
Group•
The cease fire was ordered on 21 Army
from 0800 hours on May 5th.
Group front as
Reference has already been made to the intense period of
administrative preparation between December, 1944, and March,
1945, which enabled the Rhine crossing to be made only a fortnight
after the end of the Battle of the Rhineland.
Since road transport
played a great part in that preparation, this seems a suitable place
to record some of the tasks on which our transport was engaged
during the period, certain reorganization which took place and, in
broad terms, the transport which was available to 21 Army Group
during the period immediately preceding the assault across the
Rhine.
Once the advanced base had been established in Belgium, the
main task of the GHQ transport pool became dock clearance at
Antwerp and the Channel ports.
But there were many other and
varying jobs to be done, from bridge building and airfield construc-
tion all over the BLA area, which involved general transport as
well as the ubiquitous 'tipper', to civil affairs tasks.
Examples of
these were bringing pit-props from the Ardennes for the French and
Belgian mines and moving civil patients from the uninhabitable
hospitals in the damaged area to other accommodation, or evacuat-
ing lunatics from enemy-held territory under special truce arrange-
ments.
As always, the calls for transport exceeded the availability,
and the strain was increased in February by operation 'Goldflake.
A road line of communication was organized between Italy and
BLA, for which the Corps provided a headquarters RASC.
Along
this line of communication, I Canadian
Corps and 5th British
Division were transferred from Italy to 21 Army Group.
They
brought their own formation transport, but not their quota of GT
companies.
In order to relieve this strain, a large number of
Belgian and Dutch companies were formed and trained by
Corps.
Captured German and
civil horse transport was
also
brought into use, and played quite a large part in short dock
clearance hauls in Antwerp.
A further strain on the transport
organization was the 'pruning' which took place at the end of 194t
to provide more fit officers and other ranks for the infantry.
divisional RASC had to find II captains and subalterns for transfer,
while a group of four GT companies produced 140 other ranks.
In early March, 1945,
cher mies the equivalent of 80 g.4on
companies working on
the lines of communication,
Canadian Army had nine and Second Army had eight from GHQ
pool.
In the GHQ pool itself there
remained only about 20
equivalent 3-ton companies,
all of which were committed on
permanent tasks, such as timber haulage and construction work.
INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
393
In the period before the Rhine assault, as much as possible was
moved by rail right up to within three miles of the front line.
But
the tonnages to be lifted by road were still formidable.
For
example, the tonnage off-loaded into road transport at Canadian
Army railhead in February amounted to 343,000.
As the build-up
progressed, the lift with the armies was increased to 1o companies
with the Canadian Army and 22 with the Second Army.
The main
task confronting Second Army was
the formation of 10 Army
Roadhead immediately west of the Rhine.
The work could not
begin until the Rhineland battle was over and the country between
the Maas and the Rhine cleared of the enemy, and there were only
three two-way bridges over the Maas, so that maintenance traffic
was not allowed to use the bridges at night.
In addition to the
stocking of 10 Army Roadhead, large quantities of ammunition had
to be dumped for division and corps.
Stocks were drawn from the
accumulation already built up in No. 8 Army Roadhead Depot
west of the Maas, direct from 10 different army railheads in the
same area, and also in certain cases all the way from advance base.
Thanks to close co-ordination of all transport echelons and the
sustained efforts of commanders and drivers, 152,000 tons were
moved in 16 days.
The tank transporters effected 4,000 operational
moves in the Second Army area during the week preceding the
opening of the battle, while the bridging and tipper companies
were fully engaged and in many cases working under heavy fire.
On March 26th, Brigadier Eassie, DDST, Second Army, issued
the following letter to CRASC concerned:
'In response to the call given in my letter dated February 15th,
1945, the results have been even beyond my personal expectations.
You reached a target which was considered almost impossible three,
four and five days ahead of D Day and schedule.
This was a really
grand achievement and at a time when weariness and war fatigue
might well have been a sound excuse.
Yet the build-up was a
record build-up, and the time in which it was completed another
record.
Such a success is not the result of a "flash in the pan".
It
is achieved only by solid and speedy thinking and hard manual work.
It was done by ranks in all trades, well and truly aided by the
Pioneer Corps.
ing and tary man ,
My staff prepared the plot, the officers and men
of the units carried it out.
Everyone was on it from colonels to
cooks.
Drivers, artificers, clerks and issuers all played their part
and played it well.
You can all be justly proud of your share in the
crossing of the Rhine.
'What lies ahead?
There is little doubt it will be to your liking.
Possibly a real "Hog" and, not impossibly, a fast one.
It may be
that some units will be allotted to support the advancing corps.
Whatever it is, I have no doubt whatsoever, it will be a success.
