232
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
Brigadier Hinde's foresight in ordering
each unit to fit up an
"unofficial' 15-cwt 'first aid' vehicle and the provision of 'picnic
baskets' (sets of spare parts) saved the day.
Supplies in the First Phase
The dominant factor in the advance of the striking force to Tunis
southern Tunisia.
Supplies were sent to Philippeville and Bone, where base depots
were established, and then forwarded by rail and road.
Every
column of lorries moving to the east also carried forward a load of
supplies.
Four supply railheads were established for the forward troops and
two for lines of communication troops, at Setif and Constantine,
and three railheads were brought into use for the American air
force.
Stocks of supplies had also to be provided at five staging
points on the lines of communication.
There were insufficient DIDs to go round, and officers and men
had to be taken from other supply units to man these numerous
points.
equipment, and only the fact that the composite ration was so easy
to check and issue enabled them to cope with the situation.
had to be found in most cases from local Arabs, indifferent workers
who, as the weather became worse, had to be persuaded with some
difficulty to carry on.
In the bases everything had to be sacrificed to a quick turn-round
of ships, which in turn necessitated a rapid turn-round of the vehicles
employed in clearing the docks.
The result was that supplies were
discharged pell-mell and the whole problem of sorting assumed such
proportions that special re-sorting centres had to
The rough handling to which supplies were subjected led to
hundreds and later thousands of cases being
broken, and there
was also considerable loss by
This was a perpetual
bugbear and was almost impossible to stop owing to the confused
Thousands of cases of composite rations were broken
open to remove the cigarettes and chocolate, an easy process as
cases had to be made of fibre-board because of a lack of timber at
home. In Algiers 120 arrests were made for pilferage in three days,
and an order declaring that pilferage would be regarded as looting
seemed to have little deterrent effect.
The general conditions at the bases made it difficult to take stock
at first of the supplies which were available in the country, but by
the beginning of December the fog had lifted sufficiently to disclose
NORTH AFRICA
233
that about 20 days' food had been accumulated although it was not
sited to the best advantage.
By December zist the stock had grown
to 29 days for 170,000 men.
As it was becoming clear that the
original estimated strength of the
force would be considerably
exceeded, an urgent demand was made on the War Office for extra
supply units to be sent out as soon as possible. During this early
period a large number of American troops had to subsist on British
rations, and the British supply organization had to give a helping
hand as the Americans were not at first able to provide their own
supply depots.
For the first six weeks of the campaign the Army was fed entirely
on composite rations.
The arrival from home of the normal field
service ration commodities coincided with the first issues of fresh
bread, although only one of the mobile bakeries which had been
landed at that time was accompanied by its equipment, a deficiency
made good by taking over French bakeries.
The hope that fresh
meat could be obtained locally was not fulfilled, as contrary to
intelligence reports the supposed vast sheep population of North
Africa proe re pole illussy, and this led to some delay before plans
could be made to import frozen produce.
Cold storage was avail-
able at Algiers, but elsewhere accommodation was limited, and the
refrigerating plant was in need of repair.
The initial Petroleum Organization
During the initial drive to Tunis by the striking force the amount
of petrol and oils required was relatively small and supply was at
first maintained in the form of packed stocks forwarded by road
and rail and by sea from Algiers and the other base ports.
other hand the supplies which were in four-gallon tins were already
showing the effect of much handling and it was not uncommon to
see lorries leaving for the front with petrol streaming from them.
and develop supply in bule so that the amount of road and rail
The princinal task of the petroleum organization was to build up
transport required for packed stocks could be reduced.
As sectione of the bulk storare companies beran to arrive, existin®
civil storage for about eight million gallons was taken over at
Algiers and six million at Bone.
There was a great deal to be done
before the tanks could be filled, but with the aid of the civil oil
companies who collaborated in the work in every possible way and
of the French authorities, tanks and pipes were cleaned and put into
order and the installations made ready for use.
At the same time
active steps were taken to develop the system for distribution in bulk.
At Bone
often
interrupted by air raids,
necessitated further inspections to make certain that the repairs
which had been effected had not again been damaged.
