42
PRELUDE
Although the policy of mechanization was one which was followed
cautiously in the first decade between the wars, the need for rearma-
ment brought about the decision to start mechanizing the whole of the
transport of the Army.
The Corps itself had already been placed on a
fully mechanized basis in 1926.
The decision to rearm was accom-
panied by fairly firm information on the pattern of the force which
would be required for an expeditionary force overseas in the event
of war.
This field force, as it was known then, was to be composed
of infantry divisions, apart from a single tank brigade.
Preliminary
calculations showed that the quantity of petrol required for its
transport, which was to be wholly mechanized, would be extremely
large, and, if the can continued to be used for distribution, would
involve the provision of a prodigious number of containers.
This first positive requirement provided the supply branch at the
War Office with firm data to open the question of a plan for supply
and to seek a defined policy on methods of distribution.
Here
it should be mentioned that a War Office committee had been set
up a few years before to examine petrol and lubricant supply in the
field, but had not produced any effective solution.
Oil supply was, of course, a national problem, and a special sub-
committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence, the Oil Board, was
charged with the responsibility of ensuring that national defence
requirements would be met in the event of war.
They had to cover
a wide field. Their deliberations embraced the whole question of supply
and maintenance of strategic reserves and the general plans for meeting
the requirements of the three services.
It was the duty of the service representatives to put forward their
detailed requirements to the Board, and to indicate the means
which they considered would have to be adopted to meet their needs.
The RASC have always accepted that administrative prepared-
ness for war must be based on making the best use of existing
commercial facilities.
With this in mind, the DST had already
instituted unofficial enquiries into the whole question of the existing
and future trends of supply and distribution of oil in commercial life.
The range of petroleum products required by the Army was
increasing.
There was already a growing use of diesel oil which
would undoubtedly increase as the diesel engine became perfected
for use in small MT vehicles.
A second, high octane, spirit was by
this time required for certain fighting vehicles and even
'motor
spirit', the type used for normal commercial vehicles, did not imply
a single standard, particularly on the Continent where the low grade
in general use was not thought to be suited to British built engines,
under service conditions.
This fact seemed to indicate that, if a war
was to be fought on the Continent, all supplies required would have
to be specially shipped from the United Kingdom in the initial phase.
43
The Plan takes shape-carriage in Bulk or in Cans?
The Director saw that it was essential to seek independent expert
advice on an official basis and then to seek agreement within the
War Office on the methods to be adopted for storage and distribution.
Time was pressing, as preparations were to be completed by
It was then 1935, and the news that an invitation had been
extended by the Quartermaster General, and accepted by Mr.
William Fraser,* then deputy chairman of the Anglo-Iranian Oil
Company, to act as honorary adviser to the War Office, was
received with great relief by the Directorate of Supplies and Trans-
From then plans were to materialize rapidly, and the liaison
with the oil industry began to take shape.
There were, of course,
many important matters of policy to be settled, such as the location
and protection of reserves, particularly as all commercial installations
were highly vulnerable to air attack and usually situated at or close
to highly populated or congested areas.
But the first thing to be
settled was the method to be employed for distribution.
There were at the time two schools of thought within the War
Office, the 'can' school and those who considered that special bulk
carrying road vehicles should be provided which could rapidly
refill several vehicles at the same time.
The use of bulk vehicles
would mean the provision of a fleet of vehicles which were not in
general commercial use.
No doubt bulk tankers could be adapted
for military needs, but their use implied the possibility of bringing
bulk supplies for replenishing the tankers up to near the forward
areas, which in turn hinged on the existence of rail tankers and
generally restricted the system to the more developed countries of
The War Office committee which had considered the general
question some years before was resuscitated, and after considerable
briefing and perhaps unofficial 'steering', the can school of thought
Immediate steps were then taken to form a plan for
supply and to relate other cognate questions to it.
Provision of Reserve Stocks and of Containers
The deliberations of the Oil Board on military requirements
showed that, whereas the normal stocks held in the United Kingdom
were sufficient to meet day to day civil needs, they were not enough
to provide for the strategic reserves for the services, which ran into
many hundreds of thousands of tons.
It was decided that consider-
the Army and RAF, the cost being borne by the two services votes.
In the first place, this extra storage was to be built with adequate
spacing to minimize the effect of air attack and with sufficient earth
* Sir William Fraser, C.B.E.
