464
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
to reduce the quantity of meat obtainable by service ration card
holders.
As a result of the analysis of consumption of staple foods,
the War Office recommended to the Food Policy Committee that
the service guide scales of commodities might be restricted to meat
10 oz, bacon 1, oz, and bread 12 oz a head daily.
They
also
recommended an increase in the guide scale of sugar from 1 oz
to 2% oz.
The Home Service Ration Scale
The recommendations
mentioned above
coincided with the
possibility of a German invasion.
The unsuitable cash system of
messing was, therefore,
abolished and replaced by a complete
fixed scale of rations which was issued in kind.
It was called the
Home Service Ration Scale (officers and men). Members of the
women's services received four-fifths of this scale.
The introduction
of this scale was an important step in the history of feeding the army
The need for abolishing the cash messing system in the
event of war had been constantly urged by DST, War Office; all
such proposals were, however, countered by various arguments to
show that they were impractical.
The new ration scale was so designed as to incorporate the pro-
posed reduced scales of meat, etc., and to include all the components
sufficient to provide a good breakfast, midday dinner, and substantial
tea meal, which, if required, could be split into a light tea and
Valuable information regarding the average recuirement
and tastes of units was provided by the NAAFI and by an analysis
of units' pre-war messing accounts that had already been made.
With the agreement of the medical and financial branches, the
Home Service Ration Scale was promulgated in June, 1940, and all
commands were asked to report on its suitability at the end of July.
The new scale was generally voted to be a preat success: when
command reports were received, it was only
necessary to make
some minor adjustments to the scale.
Trial of the new scale also
proved that the arrangement whereby members of the women's
provice received four-hiehs at he men's rations was unsatisfactory,
Furthermore certain items in the men's scale had proved unpopular
with the women.
was therefore introduced.
A separate ration scale for the women's services
By arranging that all goods supplied by the NAAFI were provided
at approximately wholesale prices, it had been possible to provide
better fare within the previous cash messing allowance, a large part of
which had to be expended by units at retail prices.
War conditions,
the increased strengths of units, and recognition of the need for
providing central welfare facilities went far to compensate for any
reduction in the income of units from rebate under the former
SUPPLIES
465
messing system, which was the main source for providing welfare
amenities in units.
The supply branch at the War Office had good reason to be
satisfied with the speedy manner in which the new messing system
had been introduced, and the home supply organization was fortified
to meet the conditions which might arise if an invasion took place.
As soon as it became clear that the new messing system had proved
to be a success, a further improvement was made by removing a
few less popular commodities, e.g. meat and fish pastes and condi-
ments, from the fixed scale and replacing them by a small cash
allowance of ild a man a day.
This allowance was paid from a
unit's imprest account, and no special messing account had to be
maintained for the purpose.
The cash entitlement of a unit was
determined by a simple certificate of the commanding officer
showing the numbers fed.
This arrangement obviated the previous
meticulous post-checks by paymasters and the keeping of the pre-
war complex messing account.
To meet public suggestions that
the forces in areas which had been evacuated of their civilian
population should utilize surplus local fresh produce, units were
permitted to buy fresh vegetables, fruit, etc., from sources other
than NAAFI.
But even so the soldiers' ration remained one of the main pre-
occupations of the supply branch as the national food situation
began to deteriorate and the first effects of Great Britain being
virtually a beleaguered country were felt, particularly as the battle
of the Átlantic became more severe.
In July, 1940, rationing for the population had to be imposed on.
tea and cooking fats,
and margarine was rationed in September.
(Jam and eggs were not rationed until 1941 and 1942 respectively.)
The Ration Situation, Autumn, 1940
In the autumn of 1940 there was growing evidence that the service
ration was to come under close scrutiny again.
The Government
were faced with the continued and heavy sinkings by U-boats and
surface raiders.
These losses were reducing imports to a serious
degree; furthermore, the continued bombing of London and other
towns had created a situation where the hazards to life of the
civilian seemed little different from those which the soldier at
home might be called on to undergo.
The fact that a soldier
living out of barracks could obtain more highly prized food, such
as meat, than the civilian living in the same house, caused resent-
ment, and to many people there seemed to be little difference
between the energy expended by the factory worker engaged in
long hours on war work and that expended by the soldier under
active training.
GI RASC
These opinions were not necessarily well founded,
