458
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
this ration was not considered suitable for use in the Far East,
special 'jungle' ration was evolved, and the first deliveries of this
new ration to India began in early 1944-
The ration was subse-
quently modified, and a new series of Pacific packs was introduced
which included some specially designed for Indian troops, the whole
of the supply being arranged from home.
The War Office had
also to undertake the provision of supplies which could not be
procured in India, and demands were then made direct by the
headquarters of the Pacific Command on the War Office.
ST 6 had many other duties apart from procurement and the
wide field of work connected with rations and rationing.
One of
the first questions which had to be explored was the reorganization
of the supply system in the theatres of war.
The experience
of the BEF showed that the base supply depots were too big and
inflexible, and the arrangements for providing all other types of
depots required, such as DIDs, railhead supply detachments and
other field supply depots, from a single unit were quite unworkable.
The internal organization of BSDs was altered in such a way that
they could be used singly or in groups.
They were provided with
their own transport specially designed for depot work and labour-
saving equipment which could be used under field conditions.
The
supply personnel company was abolished and eventually replaced
by a system of standard sized supply platoons, each self-contained
and of such a size that they were easily adaptable for the various
supply duties which they would have to perform.
These platoons
could, where necessary, be grouped together to form larger field
depots, and suitable headquarters for both groups of BSDs and
groups of DIDs were also provided for.
The arrangements for producing bread in the field were consider-
ably improved by the introduction of mobile bakeries which were
completely self-contained for transport, power and plant,
could
move quickly from place to place and come into action within a
few hours of arrival at their site.
The design and production
were largely due to the willing co-operation of Messis:
Baker
Perkins, and they were such a success that the same design was
adopted by the American Army.
The organization for providing
frozen meat in the
field underwent little change and perhaps
lagged behind progress made in other directions.
The supply of
frozen meat for large numbers under field conditions and parti-
cularly in hot climates, was beset with certain drawbacks,.
as it
involved the installation of large stores at bases, and the provision of
rail or road refrigerator trucks, and the provision of some form of
cool storage at every railhead or DID.
Full use was made wherever
possible of existing facilities in theatres of war, but it was rare to find
that the requisite facilities for all three stages of distribution were
SUPPLIES
459
available.
Mobile, or rather movable, cold stores were designed
which could be erected in the field, but their size was limited, and for
various reasons there was often some delay before the whole of the
parts and plant were shipped and could be erected.
Experiments had been conducted with providing refrigerator
road vehicles, but these were not adopted as standard equipment,
as the number of vehicles which would have been required was
prohibitive, and as they were one-purpose vehicles only, it would
have been an uneconomic proposition.
There were few dull moments in the life of the supply branches at
the War Office and at the
headquarters of the theatres of war
overseas.
As stated above they had to keep a continuous watch on
the expected future strengths to be supplied, on the existing stock
situation, and on the demands which had to be placed so many
months ahead.
At the same time they had to be prepared to meet
any new commitment which might arise.
Later in the war they
had frequently to come to the rescue of the organizations for civil
relief.
In one theatre they had to 'lend' a matter of a million
pounds of flour for the purpose.
As the war turned in our favour
they were frequently confronted with being asked whether they
could feed some indeterminate number of expected prisoners of
war.
They had to produce new ration scales one after the other to
provide for practically every nationality under the sun.
They
were also called upon for 'ration scales' for a variety of animals,
other than horses and mules.
They included dogs, pigeons and
even guinea pigs.
When the occasion demanded they supplied all
and sundry whether the latter was some merchant ship which had
temporarily run out of food or some new 'secret mission' which
was to be set up in neutral territory.
Perhaps one of the strangest demands made in a certain theatre
of war was a request to produce some French champagne and
"real brandy for a very very important person who was expected
on a visit.
It was a request which was gladly met.
Pre-war Planning
THE SOLDIER's RATION
The general plans made by the Food Defence Plans Department
of the Board of Trade for ensuring the nation's food in war had to
be based on the premise that as early war measures, the Government
would assume control of all essential staple foods and introduce
rationing if required.
Consequently the arrangements for applying
rationing to the Services had been discussed and agreed in some
detail well before the war broke out.
The view that a serviceman,
