244
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
rate of about 800 tons a week brought forward in the main from
Philippeville by road.
The build-up in the army area was completed by April 20th,
much of it in the form of barrelled stocks which were distributed
over the axis La Calle-Souk el Arba-Le Kef and at Souk Ahras.
Although the work of building up these stocks went on unmolested
from the air, a small dump of 1,000 tons which was put down for
the use of the Eighth Army received much attention from the Luft-
waffe in
the form of hundreds of flares dropped at night,
but a
combination of scrim nets and olive groves defeated the German
efforts to locate the stacks.
The
petroleum units in
the army area worked with a will,
MPFCs filling 21,000 gallons a day
for days on end, and at one
'B' type depot barrels
were emptied faster than they
could be
cleared away.
As there was no room to stack the barrels in the
depot they were placed 1o deep along an adjacent railway line,
eventually stretching along it for over three miles.
There was no lack of petrol during the battle although anxious
moments were caused by intensive air operations, so much so that
when a special trainload of 100 octane petrol reached Souk el Arba
the station
was besieged by queues of RAF and USAAF lorries
which had come from all over Tunisia.
The building up of the organization on the lines of communication
had made rapid strides, and work was done at great speed once the
order to go was given; ocean tanker storage was installed at Philippe-
ville, by an American unit, in the form of I3 bolted tanks of 1,000
tons capacity each, in a matter of six weeks, while the 'stringing'
together of two 4-inch pipelines and the setting down of pumping
stations
went on simultaneously.
The line
which led to
American advanced base at Ouled Rahmoun, where four 1,000-ton
tanks had also been built, had to traverse 55 miles of mountainous
country rising to a peak of 2,000 feet above sea level.
The first
ship discharged its contents into the tanks at Philippeville between
April t6th and rgth, and the first supply took 33 hours to go through
the line to Ouled Rahmoun.
As there had been no time to test
the line with water, about 8} per cent of spirit was lost.
The same American unit then left for Bone, where it erected
Gur soo-ton tanks for the Britch base and at the same time com
pleted a line 6g miles long to the British pipehead at Soul el Arba.
This work
was finished
month,
after which the line was
handed over in working order to the British engineer unit detailed
to maintain it.
The engineers and the staff of the CRASC petroleum installations
had till seone for displaving their ingenuity at many places, such
as at Bone, where special arrangeme in for iny ke from ocean tankers
NORTH AFRICA
245
were made and a refuelling organization was set up to provide a
24-hour service for small naval craft.
They also took a hand at
pipe laying at Algiers by running a nine-mile line to Maison Blanche
airfield which, helped by half a section of pioneers, they completed
in nine days.
Transit of petroleum by road and rail was also developed with
the aid of 8,000-gallon railcars imported from America and addi-
tional rolling stock obtained from Morocco, and British road tank
companies
and American
quartermaster companies
maintained
shuttle services of bulk supplies for refilling barrels and small inland
installations.
The pool of road transport which could be provided for the Army
was not great, the two corps being left with only one third line
company each, as the remainder of the third line companies had
to be drawn into the general pool.
The First Army was undoubtedly
very short of transport, a fact brought home when the Brigadier
A/Q of a corps found that his opposite number in the Eighth Army
had many more companies at his disposal.
The First Army had
only the equivalent of to general transport companies, and many of
these had to be employed in operating a shuttle service from Bone to
try to relieve the railway bottleneck at Duvivier.
There were three
tank transporter companies and four troop-carrying
companies,
but each corps could be given one bridging
platoon and some
sections of tippers. Of the three MACs available one had to be
lent to the French.
railhead, but
During the advance. supplies were usually drawn direct from the
ammunition and petrol were obtained
series of FMCs. But owing
to
the heavy expenditure in 25-
pounder and 105-mm ammunition, the ammunition
companies
lad to return to the more rearward FMCs and even to the Ordnance
Depot at Tehousek to keep un supply-journevs which involved a
turn-round of 120 to 180 miles.
The Final Battles
Space does not allow of anything more than a brief chronological
description of the operations which followed the opening
battle,
when the American II Corps attacked with vigour on March 17th
to draw off troops from the Mareth position and six days later
occupied Cafsa. El Guettar and Maknassy, after which bad weather
brought the movement of armour to a standstill.
However,
operation pinned down a considerable Axis force and allowed the
establishment of a dump of ammunition and petrol for the use of
the Eighth Army when it approached Sfax.
This project was
surrounded by such great sepproy as to warrant a code name
'Sahara'.
Four GT companies, taken from the First Army pool,
