572
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
forth the guarded answer that no vessels were allowed to return to
the mainland
until after the invasion
had been
launched.
therefore
became questionable whether the invasion would
be
launched before the unit had run out of schooners.
Thousands of tons of stores of all kinds were carried by these
vessels by many and devious routes.
Supplies were ferried to
special forces operating in Yugoslavia, Albania and Greece, including
the islands off those coasts, coastwise shipments relieved the pressure
on road and rail traffic in Italy itself, forces in Corsica and Sardinia
were maintained, while smaller craft ran the more usual harbour
services at the big ports.
So vast and complex was the work that
a special RASC water transport office was established at Allied
Force
Headquarters to co-ordinate it.
The operational pattern
gradually evolved until at its peak the RASC Fleet with the Central
Mediterranean Forces operated 114 schooners of which one was a
refrigerated
meat ship, as well as a variety of launches,
drifters,
trawlers and MFVs over routes which covered most of the Adriatic,
the west coast of Italy,
Malta and the North African coastline.
Naturally, the boat maintenance load was heavy.
Two RASC boat
stores depots were provided, No. 4 for North Africa and No. 5 for
Italy, and for some time repairs were done in requisitioned ship-
yards, the locally employed Italian craftsmen being supervised by
the company workshops' staff.
The largest of these shipyards was at
Molfetta.
There up to 17 vessels of various types could be slipped at
one time and the yard had its own foundry, machine shops, saw mill
and carpentry sheds, a sail loft and rigging shop.
Slipping the
schooners was particularly exacting, since the method used was
identical with that used in the last century and involved drawing the
ships on to dry land while delicately balanced on their keels in a cradle
which was rarely more than six feet wide.
A sudden gust of wind
while the vessel was actually in movement up or down the slip could
easily lead to disaster.
On one occasion, a particularly land-based
officer inspecting the shipyard failed to appreciate the significance
of the mass of cordage required to secure the slipped vessels and
ordered the company commander to have the ropes put away and
the place properly tidied up immediately.
Later the control of
these shipyards reverted to their Italian owners, although the work
was still done under the supervision of the unit workshops officer.
The fall of Venice with its many waterways brought new problems,
and it was decided that 797 Company should dispose of its schooners
and operate the many small craft plying there.
All motor launches,
Pore el large, even the local Back Mara can take up For the
Military Police.
The only boats left to the Venetians were gondolas
and electrically operated launches which were not considered
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
573
suitable for military operation because of maintenance difficulties.
And so we have come to 1945•
The RASC Fleet had played its
full part throughout the operations and fortunately its casualties
were light.
The RASC Fleet with the Middle East Forces
Farther to the east, yet other RASC Fleet units had come into
being.
In
November, 1943,
782 Company
(motorboat)
was
formed at Alexandria to take over all small craft operated by the
military forces in the Middle East.
Military crews were trained
from local volunteers with the help of the RAF air/sea rescue
instructional centres.
Four 68 ft and one 57 ft high speed target
towing launches were quickly manned and operated at Alexandria,
Port Said and Haifa.
Within a short time of its formation, the
unit itself was training soldiers in handling the local sailing vessels
known as caiques.
These vessels, built at Tyre and Sidon since
biblical days, still conform to the original schooner-like design.
Fortunately two NCOs were found who had been in sea-going
sailing ships, and a caique was purchased and based on Port Said
and Alexandria for training purposes.
As crews became available, they manned caiques allotted by the
Sea Transport Officer, GHQ Middle East, for duty in the Eastern
Mediterranean, sailing between Alexandria,
Port
Said, Haifa,
Cyprus, Beirut and northwards.
They were affectionately known
by their crews as 'apple barrels' and proved a valuable link in the
supply chain.
Moreover they did not attract undue enemy atten-
tion, and so were able to work almost under the very noses of the
Germans, who held the islands of Rhodes, Cos, Leros and the rest.
They ferried high-octane aviation fuel to forward bases on Castello-
riso ahead of the RAF, ferried urgently required supplies from
Famagusta to the recently occupied Dodecanese, carried Italian
prisoners of war and enemy agents, and a hundred-and-one other
cargoes.
Some of the runs were fraught with danger and many
with anxious moments.
The Fleet's high speed craft also had other duties more exciting
than target towing.
With the capture of some of the islands in the
Dodecanese group, the General Staff decided to establish a fast
launch service from the island of Simi, about 350 miles north of
Alexandria,
to carry mail, fresh meat and vegetables to them.
Delivery of the mail by air, had original been considered but was
ruled out because of the long turn-round and the difficulty of
collecting containers in those heavily
mined areas.
The only
vessels available were our fast target towing launches, all of which
were diverted to this service.
run and they were replaced ev Two mot ope
Two craft operated at a time on the
They left Alexandria
