PRELUDE
high initial cost of the vehicles and of licensing difficulties.
main object had been attained, however, for the medium six-wheeler
was still one of the standard types of Army vehicle which had the
necessary performance when the Second World War broke out 14
The Training Centre also produced schemes for a four-wheel
drive tractor, based on the best features of a large range of captured
or ceded German equipment, besides many fresh ideas incorporated
in the finished design.
Other schemes included an adaptation of
the Morris one-ton truck to convert it into a field gun towing
machine, a three-wheeled motor cycle with an astonishing cross-
(which was not, however,
adopted), and
many developments in pneumatic tyres, culminating in the sand
tyre of later years.
The Technical Position assailed
While these events were taking place, the use of MT by arms
other than the RASC was increasing rapidly, and the whole question
of unifying control and responsibility for what was then knowi
as 'mechanization' came under serious consideration.
The diverg-
ence between the avenues of development for wheeled and tracked
vehicles was only one
pointer in the rapidly developing situation.
In passing, it might be noted that a healthy rivalry between the
two schools of 'wheels' and 'tracks' may have contributed to the
sense of urgency impelling
both teams to extra effort.
rivalry reached a moment of greatest drama when, at a trial of
wheeled versus tracked machines, the tracks won over a particularly
soft and treacherous bit of ground, and a French manufacturer,
interested in the production of tracked vehicles, hurled his hat into
the air, and subsequently into the bog, yelling at the top of his
voice,
'C'est la mort de la roue'!)
In the more practical field the
RASC organization and its wheeled MT vehicles covered a great
part of those in the hands of the Army as a whole, and represented
also one of the simplest aspects of the much wider term, mechaniza-
tion.
This implied not only the replacement of horse transport by
mechanical vehicles, but also the provision, operation and mainten-
ance of a great variety
of armoured, semi-armoured and special
types of machines, both wheeled and tracked, to meet the present
or future needs of the fighting arms.
A British compromise
The provision and maintenance of wheeled vehicles were familiar
and relatively easy administrative tasks.
Commercial production
could be relied on for the production of the types of vehicle required,
and for the necessary supply of spare parts for their maintenance.
TRANSPORT
23
The
provision of armoured fighting
vehicles and
gun
towing
machines was a very different matter, and entailed the reorganiza-
tion of many industries to meet the purely military demands made
upon them.
But before any such reorganization could profitably
be undertaken or any solely military vehicle could be designed, the
whole question of the size and composition of the mechanized
armies of the future, and of their tactical and strategical uses, had
to be determined.
When these had been defined, their practical
requirements could be translated into a series of General Staff
specifications from which the technical
specifications
followed.
Throughout there were always two vital factors
affecting such
decisions, one the question of mounting cost, and the other the
progress of our potential enemies in mechanizing their forces.
The matter of design, provision and maintenance of such fighting
equipment belonged to the province of the Master-General of the
Ordnance at the War Office, and followed the precedent set up for
similar services in the production of weapons.
The General Staff
laid down the tactical requirement,
the Armament Inspection
Department (under the Chief Inspector of Armaments,
CIA)
produced the technical specification, and the Design Department (or
a selected manufacturer) produced the design to meet these specifi-
cations.
The MGO branch concerned ordered production of the
equipment, after which its receipt, storage,
issue and maintenance
were the responsibility of the Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
In 1936,
the mechanization requirements of the Army had become so wide-
spread that the whole of the above chain of responsibilities, down to
the receint of the friched equioment or spare part. became the
responsibility of a separate ministry, the Ministry of Supply, to which
certain of the officers in the MGO's branches, and all those in the
Design and Inspection Departments were seconded, while the MGO
ceased to exist.
Before and after this happened there were thus two branches, the
QMG's and the MGO's (later the Ministry of Supply) dealing, as
far as transport vehicles were concerned,
maintenance of closely allied and sometimes even identical, articles.
After the departure of the MGO the situation became even stranger,
for two OMG denartments. those of the DST and of the Director
of Equipment and Ordnance Stores, were competing in the same
field, and this form of duplicated endeavour continued for many
excellent reasons until May, 1942.
and to grasp the delimitation of responsibilities between the RASC
and the RAOC in vehicle matters, it is necessary to revert to the
I920's again.
The first great measure towards centralization was the passing of
responsibility for all research and design, both for wheeled and for
