112
THE MIDDLE EAST I
could always be depended upon from the Works Directorate.
Schemes were discussed for the laying of petrol pipelines in the
Western Desert, but they were not considered practicable.
A pipe-
line was, however, laid from the main installation in the
Canal
zone to Cairo, a scheme which had been rejected before the war as
inessential on military grounds. Now it released numbers of tank
lorries and rail tank wagons.
The high proportion of petrol and oil, compared with other
maintenance commodities, required by modern
Armies and
Air
Forces, is not always realized.
By far the easiest and most economical
method of moving petrol is in bulk, but this depends on bulk storage,
and discharge and filling facilities at the delivery terminal.
This
was understood only too well by the enemy, who always did his best
to demolish bulk petrol facilities before evacuating a port.
By cur-
tailing the use of bulk storage, he compelled us to maintain heavy
tonnages of packed petrol.
It was, therefore, most important that,
in every British advance during the Western Desert campaigns,
skilled technicians should be available to begin the repair of tankage
immediately after the capture of a port; and this was always done.
For example, on the capture of Tripoli in 1943, work was put in
hand at once by the Royal Engineers to recommission some of the
tanks, and the discharge and filling facilities, which had been put out
of action by the enemy.
Within a month, 10,000 tons
of storage
capacity was ready, and the first tanker was discharging; and to
enable full advantage to be taken of this bulk supply, a tin factory
moved to Tripoli and started work, while all serviceable returnable
containers were retained for filling at the bulk installation.
This at
once relieved the pressure on the main base.
The same principle
was adopted after the capture of Tobruk and Benghazi, but in the
former case, bulk supplies were sent by rail and not by sea.
Mobile
petrol filling centres proved invaluable for filling from bulk into
small containers.
A mobile petrol laboratory was formed to follow our troops during
the advance, in order to test stocks of captured fuels and lubricants.
Those found suitable were issued to our own vehicles, thus effecting
considerable economy in despatches from the base.
Transport
To say that lack of transport was the second greatest single factor
adversely affecting operations in the Middle East is probably correct.
But any quantity of transport would not have served to overcome our
fighting inferiority in the
Western
Desert, which arose largely,
tactical handling excepted, from the fact that the Germans were
usually one step ahead of us in tank armament and anti-tank guns.
The question is frequently asked by those insufficiently informed
Inspecting the Batch
Supply Men under Training
