148
THE MIDDLE EAST
cold blooded-Eighth Army was 'off' again, and this time they
were not swinging back.
The drivers were straining at the leash,
and strain they had to because it took approximately one long week
to break open Rommel's Line and let the armour loose! It was a
strenuous and in many cases a hazardous week for the ambulance
drivers, six of whom were awarded the Military Medal:-Dvr B. A.
Tipper, Dvr W. G. Tebutt, Dvr J. Tomlinson, of roth Armoured
Division; Dvr I. P. Creighton, of gist Division; Dvr G. W. Machlin,
and Dvr T. S. Hartley, of ist Armoured Division.
This desert campaign was one of big 'jumps' either forward or
backward.
The bigger the backward jumps of the defence,
the
the strain placed on the attackers by their continually
greater ing line of communication. The solution of this problem
of course lay in the establishment, as far forward as possible along
the coast, of supply by
sea; hence the vital importance of the
immediate opening up of any possible port once it was uncovered.
It was unknown whether Rommel would attempt to hold Tobruk
or not, and the immediate short term policy was the re-establishment
of Mersa Matruh as an advanced base.
Various units were put on
what was known as the 'golden list', a priority of movement into this
well-known desert village.
The main road from Alexandria runs
direct to the southern side of Matruh, but there is an alternative
route by which it is possible to reach the barracks area without
passing through the town.
On the golden list was an RASC bakery
commanded by a warrant officer, who, not long before, had been
forced to evacuate his well established position in Matruh.
unit became detached from the main body of the golden list and
the warrant officer,
knowing his way, took the alternative route
direct to his old bakery site.
On arrival, however, he was met by
a platoon of German infantry!
But the warrant officer did not
lose his head, although it took him a little time to convince the
German infantry commander that he was surrounded and that his
only alternative was to capitulate.
This incident, no doubt, is the
foundation of later stories of how the RASC recaptured Matruh.
Pursuit of Rommel
To return to the main operation.
The armour had bad luck,
For once, it rained in the desert, and this made going dificult and in
places impossible.
This enabled Rommel to withdraw in compara-
tive safety and the idea that he would call a halt at Tobruk proved
Corps, much to their chagrin, were left behind at El Alamein.
With them was left the gth Australian Division,
During the short
period of their stay at El Alamein the vision had won both the
THE MIDDLE EAST 1
149
affection and admiration of their British comrades.
Their divi-
sional RASC, commanded by Lieut-Colonel (later Brigadier)
J. A. Watson,
adapted themselves
to desert
conditions
with
quite remarkable rapidity.
On one
occasion they earned the
personal commendation of the Commander XXX Corps for their
driving and desert discipline.
But XXX Corps were not to be
without Dominion representation; 2nd New
Zealand
Division
remained with them, then and for many a long day.
It speaks highly for the training of the RASC MT units of all
echelons that XXX Corps were able to advance with such rapidity
and without any administrative hitch to the area of Mersa Brega, a
distance of nearly 8oo miles from El Alamein and 400 miles from
Tobruk.
This was all the more so since for some units, and indeed
formations, it was their first experience of a 'desert gallop', while
even the 7th Armoured Division found themselves breaking new
ground.
It was during this advance that Lieut-Colonel H. J.
Gilman, CRASC 7th Armoured Division,
gained an immediate
award of the Distinguished Service Order.
Tobruk was, of course,
opened without delay, and a start was made at feverish speed to
build up stocks.
X Corps remained in the Tobruk area, presenting
no maintenance problem, while XXX Corps in the Agheila area
initially were maintained by road from
Tobruk.
However, a
prerequisite to any future advance on Tripoli was the formation of
an advanced base considerably further west than Tobruk. Benghazi
was the obvious location.
On our previous visits Benghazi had not
been a workable proposition as a port, because of enemy action and
weather.
Now, with a great effort,
port and docks
gradually got into working order, and simultaneously with Tobruk
the stocks in Benghazi began to mount steadily, coming in by both
sea and land.
Luck was not with us, however, and by the middle of this build-up
an unprecedented storm destroyed the harbour mole,
and ships
broke their anchorage and bounced about like corks in the harbour.
To meet this disaster, the Army Commander ordered X Corps,
which were in the Tobruk area, to be 'grounded'.
Every unit, no
matter how large or how small, was to unload all its vehicles and
form them into transport units.
Every possible vehicle was used
and
amazing results were achieved.
General Brian Horrocks,
commanding X Corps, offered weekly prizes to the unit covering
the most mileage and carrying the greatest tonnage proportionate
to their strength, and types of vehicle.
The RASC were regular
winners, but it was hardly a worthy contest, as the Corps were
being taken on at their own job, and knew all the tricks of the trade.
In the meantime, the recond and third line transport of XXX Corps
were busy building up their FMC for the coming attack on Agheila.
