102
THE MIDDLE EAST I
and with the Suez installations. Work on the Jebel Dave scheme
began in 1939.
Formation of GHQ Middle East, and expansion of ST Directorate
GHQ Middle East was formed in Cairo on the outbreak of war,
and assumed operational control of British troops in Egypt, Cyprus,
the Sudan, Palestine and Trans-Jordan.
Responsibility for British
Somaliland was added in January, 1940:
On the declaration of war
by Italy in June, 1940, active operations began in the Western
Desert, and this remained the main theatre in the Middle East,
until, after many vicissitudes, victory was achieved in 1943.
For-
midable problems arose for the RASC from this new type of warfare.
The areas over which operations took place were vast; railways and
roads were inadequate or non-existent; water was scarce.
had to be maintained by transport following desert tracks or crossing
open desert with few landmarks.
This necessitated the special
training of transport units in such matters as the use of compass
bearings for desert navigation.
A high standard of driving was
required over desert terrain with its stretches of soft sand, and even
higher standards of vehicle maintenance,
of discipline and of
initiative.
Because of the need for the wide dispersion of transport
by day,
the difficulties of controlling units scattered over large
areas were manifold.
Problems at GHQ were not only concerned with operations in
the Western Desert.
Operations in the Sudan and Eritrea began
soon after the entry of Italy into the war, and responsibility for Aden
was taken over from India in November, 1940.
Early in 1941, the
campaign in Greece took place, followed by the defence and evacua-
tion of Crete.
In March, 1941, Middle East also became responsible
for the provisioning of Malta, and in the early summer of the same
year operations had to be undertaken in Iraq and Syria.
Finally,
in January, 1942, the Tenth Army in Persia and Iraq passed from
the control of India to Middle East Command.
It was inevitable
that there should be an ever-increasing expansion of the ST Direc-
torate to cope with these diverse responsibilities.
The appointment of DST (brigadier during 1940) was raised to
major-general's status, and was held by Major-General C. Le B.
Goldney, from early in 1941 to June, 1944•
Active operations had
then ceased in this theatre, and DST reverted to a brigadier's
appointment (Brigadier C. E. Browne).
When first formed, the directorate was composed of a skeleton
staff, chiefly concerned with planning, the two pre-war commands
continuing to carry out normal maintenance, until GHQ gradually
assumed administrative control.
At first the directorate consisted
of two branches (supplies and transport) only, but in 1940 a POL
THE MIDDLE EAST I
103
branch was added, as the importance that petrol was to take in the
course of operations soon became apparent.
A local resources
branch was also formed which, by exploiting various sources of
supply within the countries of the Middle
East, helped to save
shipping, and to provide fresh supplies for the forces.
It was found
essential to have a planning branch to manage the organization,
formation and disbandment of all types of RASC units, including
questions of war establishments and the RASC manpower ceiling;
Numerous local units of non-British nationalities were formed
with British cadres, and units for which no previous establishment
existed had to be improvised to meet special needs, or for special
operational roles.
Because of the lapse of time between the demand
for units and reinforcements and their actual arrival from Britain,
units had to be broken up and reorganized with a disturbing
frequency, to meet changed conditions.
The closest liaison was
maintained at all times between ST (Plans), G, Q and A branches,
and the staff were kept constantly advised as to what was and what
was not possible with the RASC' resources available.
Other additions to the directorate were a
branch of the MT
Inspectorate, a catering branch controlling a school of cookery, an
accounts and supply investigation section, bakery, meat and petrol
inspectors, and an Indian branch.
At first, there was a personnel
branch under DST dealino with reinforcements, postings, promo-
tions, etc., but towards the end of 194x this branch became part of
the A branch of the staff, as is the normal procedure.
Expansion of RASC Services
In June, 1940, the entry of Italy into the war, and the threat to
our sea communications in the Mediterranean. made the holding of
large stocks of essential commodities a matter of vital necessity,
The creation of a large base involved not only the despatch of
enormous quantities of RASC supplies and stores from the United
Kingdom, but also the provision of members of the Corps to man
the depots and units dealing with them.
Furthermore,
struction of the depots and installations,
the building of railways
and roads to serve them, and the laying on of water in desert areas,
presented serious problems to the Royal Engineers.
All this took a
considerable time, and the magnitude of the task was increased by
the wide dispersion considered necessary to minimize losses from air
The provision of adequate transport for such RE services
was difficult at a time when there was a great shortage of transport
for operations in the field.
The arrival of men and stores was delayed when the Mediter-
ranean was closed to merchant shipping, and convoys had to follow
the long sea route round the Cade of Good Hope, a voyage of to
