32
PRELUDE
the horsed divisional trains. The bigger and more technical task
of procuring supplies and
provisioning the theatres
of war fell
mainly on the War Office and the general headquarters overseas,
although local resources were
drawn upon as far as possible,
especially for fresh vegetables and hay.
The effects of Retrenchment
The apparent ease with which the Army had been supplied had an
unfortunate effect on the RASC after the war, as it was decided that
it was unnecessary to maintain supply units in peacetime comparable
to those used in war and, on the grounds of better management of
messing and of economy, the Army at home was to procure most of
its food by purchasing it from the new canteen (NACB, later re-
named NAAFI) organization with a cash allowance provided for the
purpose.
Only a few staple items such as meat and bread were to
continue to be provided by the RASC, and the Corps were left with
only a few supply depots at home.
At small stations these com-
modities were delivered direct to units' cookhouses by contractors.
True the RASC were to continue to feed the army abroad, but as
most of the forces were stationed in India, where supplies were an
IASC responsibility, there was little opportunity for any practical
training
in supply
work
at overseas stations.
The few supply
officers and men allowed for in the peace establishments had little
to do beyond acting as accountants for a few commodities which
they never saw or
handled'.
Thus in the 1920's the RASC were
left with neither a nucleus of units on which to build if war came nor
any physical stocks of food to meet an emergency.
The lack of
supply units for training and as a nucleus for an expeditionary force
nearly caused disastrous effects in France in 1939.
The best that
could be done between the wars was to give special prominence to
the theoretical examination of war supply organization in the war
courses which were held at the RASC Training Centre from 1928
onwards.
But although the RASC were divested of practically all responsi-
bility for supplying the Army at home in peacetime, the DST was
still charged with responsibility for the inspection of messing and,
theoretically, messing accounts, although the latter were in fact more
the concern
of the local auditor's department.
In practice the
but on
good management of messing depended not on the DST,
commanding officers and on the interest displayed by unit messing
The officers commanding units had to find cooks as best
they could from within their own ranks.
The 'cook' was, however,
regarded as a trained soldier rather than a cratsman and had to be
prepared to take his place in the ranks at any time.
He was, there-
fore, not graded as a tradesman or paid as such, although the officer
Supply
Dropping
