612
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
The plan for this operation was then changed so that the assault
would be made from the east side of Arnhem across the river Ijssel
and from the Duiven direction.
This new assault actually took
place on the 12th.
The amount of amphibious equipment was
remarkable, and of course very little of it was used.
some idea of using the dukws to swim downstream from Millingen
down the Nederijn to the Ijssel to Arnhem and then land.
These
dukws would be carrying small arms ammunition.
in view, a reconnaissance was made of the part of Arnhem on the
Nederijn for a suitable landing place.
The officer who did this
reconnaissance quite inadvertently found himself acting as an
advance reconnaissance
patrol for the troops
who were street
fighting.
He later arrived back in a somewhat shaken state and
demanded a drink.
He did, incidentally, find a suitable crossing
place which was, however, immediately snapped up by the sappers
as being just the site for a bridge.
So, in effect, we did nothing in
this operation.
On April 15th we moved into Bemmel on the island' and stayed
there until the war with Germany was over.
One event of interest that occurred there was when we entered a
team for the Tabloid sports run by Canadian corps troops. Although
we were the only British team out of eight teams, we won the sports
fairly decisively, thus confounding the Canucks who had received
our rather small team with a certain amount of amusement.
Taken all round,
536 Company from D Day to V Day enjoyed
the campaign.
While there were periods when we did no work,
there were short periods when we worked very hard and, further-
more, were nearer the actual fighting than the normal RASC
company usually gets. Yes it was a good campaign!
486 COMPANY (TIPPER)
The company was formed and mobilized in No. 1 Mobilization
Centre, going through all those long, months of preparation and
training.
Quietly
and unobtrusively, in
November, 1943, the
company assumed its first operational duty in the United Kingdom.
Winter passed on into spring, while the company had established
itself,
preparing for the great day which all knew was coming.
One platoon was operating in Scotland, one at Portsmouth, one at
Ipswich and the other at Brentwood.
This point is mentioned to
bring out how great is, and can be, the dispersal of a tipper company:
Then came the long-awaited information; platoons were concen-
trated, pre-loaded and marshalled, waiting, keyed up for the signal
which would throw them into action from D Day to VE Day.
486 COMPANY (TIPPER)
613
A Platoon, loaded and waterproofed, were on board LCTs
landing on the invasion beaches on the second tide of D Day, to be
followed in rapid succession of days by the remaining platoons,
company headquarters and workshops.
By D plus 10 the whole
company was fully established on the beach-head and had taken up
its place in the highly complicated machine of a modern army.
The main function of the tipper platoons was on road construction
working with the Royal Engineers and the Pioneer Corps.
From
the time the first vehicle waded ashore it was almost a 24-hour
day and a seven-day week,
Officers, NCOs and men quickly
settled down to
their new life under active service conditions.
Workshops arranged a system of LADs, one being attached to each
platoon headquarters, the technical vehicles remaining at company
headquarters,
the arrangements
being that the inspections and
emergency repairs should be done in company headquarters'
location.
The first vehicle casualty occurred when an A Platoon vehicle
working on 'Love' Beach struck a mine.
The company was under
command of CRASC, Second Army Troops, and, as army troops,
was made available for various RE formations.
Platoons were
working under RE GHQ Troops, Second Army RE, corps and
divisional RE.
There were many hectic days in the area of Bayeux,
Tilly and Caen, names now famous in the days of the beach-head
fighting.
Wherever one went along the British Second Army front,
the tippers of 486 Company were to be seen.
Caen was a great stumbling block to the armies advance; it was
a strongly fortified and defended town, but it was an obstacle to be
overcome.
At very short notice on July 18th, 1944, B Platoon were
notified to take up a location at Benouville, working under 8 GHQ
Troops with 7o Company RE.
As soon as the RAF had completed
a bombing raid, the RE and the tippers went in to bridge the Caen
canal and the River Orne.
These RE and tippers were at that
time ahead of the infantry and armour,
This was a typical situa-
tion: roads had to be repaired, even remade, bridges had to be
built, before the attack could go in.
It was a hard and tough
experience for unseasoned troops like the drivers of the company.
At the same time, C Platoon were in location at Bronay, some
eight miles west of Caen.
Guns of all calibres were shelling the
town, the naval guns in the bay were also adding extra fire power,
and the RAF were contributing extra weight by aerial bombard.
Throughout all this, the platoons carried on with their vital
task of road construction.
The operations in the beach-head were beginning to expand,
and the expansion meant that tippers were detached by sections
from platoon headquarters, and in many cases single vehices were
