4.04
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
SUPPLIES
THE SYSTEM OF SUPPLY
The preparations which were made by QMG 6 before the war
were necessarily limited in their scope.
The reserves of food which
had been acquired were only sufficient for filling the supply pipeline
to the BEF and for part of the additional reserves required by the
principal commands overseas.
The organization in the commands
at home for supplying the Army and RAF
after mobilization
was only a nucleus, and additional accommodation for holding
War Office reserves was still under construction when war broke
out.
The maintenance of the Army at home and abroad once war was
declared was therefore largely dependent on how quickly pre-war
plans for supply would be effective.
These plans were based on the
Army being able to procure most of the staple commodities wanted
from the Ministry of Food which was to be created if war came and
on dormant contracts, made by the War Office contracts depart-
ments, with selected firms in the food industry for other foodstuffs
requianks to the work of the Food Defence Plans Department the
system of supply, distribution and accounting for the staple foods
which the Government intended to supply
had been settled in
detail.
The department had arranged that certain commodities
would be provided by special agencies which were appointed before
the war to look after the Services' needs and in other cases supply
was to be through trade organizations acting on behalf of the future
Ministry of Food.
The arrangements made worked so well when
the time came that they made normal methods of procurement by
contract unduly cumbrous.
There is no doubt that the success with which ST 6 were able to
feed the peak strength of nearly eight million mouths at the height
of the war was largely due to the help and assistance of the Ministry
in meeting every demand made on them so efficiently and expedi-
tiously.
The home commands had prepared detailed plans for expanding
their organization by setting up new depots and complementary
NAAFI stores.
Some of these depots were to be established in
the anti-aircraft mobilization storest which held the equipment
for the ADGB in peace, and which were to be cleared on mobiliza-
tion.
They were ideal for the purpose.
Other sites
had to be
acquired or requisitioned after war broke out.
But this took time,
and there was some delay before NAAFI were able to man and
stock their new depots as many of their men were reservists and
SUPPLIES
453
were withdrawn from them when war was declared.
This even-
tuality had, however, been foreseen and units which could not be
supplied in kind were given a special rate of cash allowance to
purchase their food from civil shops.
As soon as war was declared, the partly finished depot for holding
War Office reserves (No. 2 SRD at Barry, in- Wales) was taken
into use and construction work hastened, as although the existing
depot at Deptford was adequate for immediate needs, its location
was thought to be so vulnerable that it was to be cleared and shut
down as soon as possible.
Plans for a third SRD,
located at
Taunton, were also hastened, and work on construction began at
once.
The first important war measure was taken by ST 6 two days
before war was declared, when authority was sought for their first
order, for 30,000 tons of food, to be put into production.
seemed to be a large quantity,
but it had soon to be followed by
two further orders, and by early 1940 the total demand had risen
to 100,000 tons, exclusive of the everyday needs of the Army at
home which were being supplied by the Ministry of Food and
NAAFI.
It soon became
clear that the Army's requirements
would have to be forecast for over a year or more ahead, so as to
give the food industry the necessary opportunities for advance
planning and developing their productive capacity. This resultec
in the placing of long term orders for as much as twelve months'
supply at a time.
Although calculating the amount of food which would be required
was theoretically a matter of multiplying so many men by given
scales of food, in practice the business of forecasting depended on
various factors, few of which were necessarily firm, and some only
conjectures, as the course
of the war changed so considerably.
Forecasting was an art and not a science and was one of the most
important duties which had to be
performed by the supply service
both at the War Office and at the headquarters of all the theatres
of war.
Inaccurate or unintelligent forecasting could only lead to a
crisis a crisis of not having
enough or of having too much—to
waste of shipping, and to all the attendant evils of over-provision.
Even if there had been only one ration seale for the whole of the
Army it would have been a dileult matter but account had to
be taken of many basic scales, as it was no uncommon thing for a
single command overseas to have to design and administer up to as
many as 50 different scales to cater for the needs of the many
nations which formed part of the
There was,
however, no known case of loss the through inaccurate was,
casting, although there were some near shaves caused by unexpected
changes in operational plans.
