288
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
December grd. On the same day the 139th Infantry Brigade
(46th Division), began to arrive in Athens by air to reinforce
General Scobie's command.
The Beginning of Civil War
Armed columns of the ELAS began to converge on the city thạt
night, and there were many attacks
on the police, gendarmerie
stations and barracks on December 4th, followed by the first clashes
with our own troops, whose duty it was to maintain law and order.
General Scobie, in his position as Supreme Commander, issued an
ultimatum that all ELAS forces should withdraw from Athens by
midnight of December 6th/7th.
But the situation began to deterior-
ate so rapidly that on the 5th he was compelled to issue orders for
offensive action against the rebels where necessary.
Civil war had
broken out in earnest.
Our small forces were placed in a dangerous predicament as they
barely amounted to the equivalent of a weak division with a small
armoured element, but with little artillery, and they were scattered
over the built-up
areas of the
city.
There was no clear line of
demarcation between them and the enemy.
Their lines of supply
were threatened everywhere, as all their sources of supply
were
surrounded by hostile detachments.
The headquarters of the force
which was formed from HO TIr Coros Cafterwarda designated
Headquarters Land Forces Greece) was situated in the heart of the
city,
with
offices
in the
renowned Metokhikon/Tamion
building, most of the staff officers being billeted in the adjacent
Grand Bretagne Hotel.
Brigadier Arkwright, who had been placed in command of the
available troops, disposed his own formation, 23rd Armoured Brigade,
in the centre of the city.
He allotted the northern area to the
parachute brigade, and entrusted the defence of the Piracus and
Faliron areas to 139th Infantry Brigade.
The Greek Mountain
Brigade, which had been brought over to Greece from Italy,
was
allotted to the south-eastern quarter of Athens.
The 4th Indian
Division was responsible for Salonika and Patras.
A glance at the sketch map of Athens will show that the units of
the RASC were very scattered, as indeed were those of other
Their original dispositions after landing had been entirly
influenced by the understanding that the occupation was a friendly
one, and their location had been wholly conditioned by the desire
In most
to cause the least inconvenience to the civil population.
cases the sites occupied were ones which
had previously
been
occupied by the Germans and were suitable in every way, except
for defence.
RASC units had been allotted to the force on the basis that civil
01505 INDEP. WKSP. PL
U RASC
23 DID
0236 PET. DEP
Faliron
64 BPT. COY. RASC
& 6G LAA REGT. RA
3000 YDS. (APPROX,)
° 1000
Kadamald at
Athens
