436
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
east coast, patrolling estuaries in search of magnetic and acoustic
mines, supplying the Maunsell forts in the Thames estuary and other
island forts round our coasts, and building up a valuable reserve to
skilled men and serviceable craft for use in various theatres, both as
'staff cars' in harbours and as tactical and administrative transport.
One such unit early found itself sent to patrol the Gt. Scarcies River
on the western border of Sierra Leone at a time when a sore and
angry French colonial army, greatly outnumbering the troops in
Sierra Leone, lay in French territory just across the border.
With the development of amphibious warfare the motorboat
companies came into their own.
At the same time (that is soon
after the outbreak of war) the WD Fleet became a greatly expanded,
and expanding, 'RASC Fleet' and a War Office branch,
ST 1,
was expressly created to take over from ST 3 the administration of
the motorboat companies.
The RASC Fleet remained essentially
a sea-going service with ships, steam and diesel engined, varying
from 100 to 2,000 tons burthen, while the motorboat companies
consisted for the most part of launches or passenger cum cargo
ships ranging from quite small craft to vessels capable of transporting
a platoon of infantry with their equipment.
The Fleet was manned
by civilian masters and crews, the companies being wholly military.
For technical maintenance the vessels of the Fleet were looked after
by various dockyards while the motorboats had their first and
second echelon maintenance done by their own artificers and only
had recourse to dockyards for extensive refit and repairs.
A special
motorboat section of the MTSD
was formed at Molesey and in
one guise or another remained in the hands of the Corps until the
end of the war.
Preparations for Norway
The transport commitment in this plan was comparatively small,
the force proceeding with skeleton scales of transport.
taken in the preparation of the RASC contingent to provide light
most part go-cwt and I5-cwt vehicles were used, and great care was
lubricating oils, heavy density electrolyte to avoid the freezing of
batteries, and non-skid chains.
luck, in addition to a good deal of faulty planning, but the 'arcticiz-
The campaign was dogged by ill
ing' of the transport was a useful lesson, applied again when we sent
formation transport and a section of a GT company to Iceland
later. In no other theatres were these precautions found to be
necessary.
The CIMT
The rapid expansion of the RASC at home and overseas led soon.
to a certain falling off in the standards of vehicle maintenance,
TRANSPORT
437
inevitable with new drivers, unfamiliar vehicles and long hours of
work.
Before the war the Corps had adopted the 'sixteen task
system', which was calculated to enable drivers to carry out, with
little supervision, all the essential daily or weekly maintenance tasks
on their vehicles.
This proved a great help, but there was still a
basic need for inspection and reports to the War Office on the
vehicle state.
These duties had been performed in peacetime by
the Inspection Department under the Chief Inspector of Armaments.
On mobilization, unfortunately, the CIA's officers were all required
for full time work under the Ministry of Supply, and the inspection
of unit equipment was left to the RASC (and RAOC, for other arms).
Early in 1940 therefore the DST (Major-General R. T. Snowden-
Smith), on realizing that the CIA's branch could no longer carry
out any inspections of RASC units, directed the formation of a
special 'Chief Inspector of Mechanical Transport' branch for the
RASC. A charter was drawn up at once by ST 3, which was to be
their guide until they were eventually re-modelled in 1942.
important did the DST consider their work that he perused all
their reports in the early stages, and was thus able to raise the
efficiency of RASC units throughout the country.
The Corps was lucky to find ready to hand a Chief Inspector in
the person of Colonel J. C. Mackie, who had been until the previous
gear the Inspector, Colonel Mackie quickly secured a good team
year the Inspector of Mechanized Vehicles under CIA. An
of inspectors, and before the end of the year there were routine
inspections of RASC units.
In France, too, a similar inspectorate
was set up with the result that the RASC transport alone emerged
intact and roadworthy from the very severe winter of 1939-1940.
As the forces in other theatres of war grew, so the system was
extended to them also, and by 1942 a state of '84 per cent efficiency'
was recorded throughout the
Corps.
At that time,
without a
similar organization for other arms, the comparable figure outside
the Corps was 40 per cent.
The institution of an inspectorate for
them in 1942, again under the indefatigable
Colonel Mackie,
raised this by June, 1944, to 65 per cent.
This 'state of efficiency'
figure did not refer solely to mechanical availability of the transport,
but also to such essentials as correct maintenance of fuel and
lubricant stores,
cleanliness of vehicles,
correct maintenance of
records retorable mileage per gallon of fuel, and sles a.
The
savings in premature repair and evacuation of vehicles and the
maintenance of units at full establishment achieved by these means
paid a handsome dividend on the cost of the inspectorates.
In May and June, 1940, little could be done to help the BEF with
transport.
Many relief drivers and vehicles were sent to the nearer
French Channel ports, but they could accomplish little and the
