.S.C. FLEET
and Jump
in English corporal, travelling as a
passenger, dived after him without hesitation, although the waters
were shark-infested, and saved his life.
The NCO was decorated
for his courage.
Although the war was far from the West Indies, strict measures
were taken to guard Kingston harbour, which was a forming-up
point for convoys, and its coastal defences were extensive.
In
addition to a heavy programme of target towing effected by the
small and
somewhat antiquated RASCV
Abercorn-the RASC
Fleet provided craft for the examination service in the harbour
approaches.
An amusing story is told of a visit to the Abercorn by
very senior officer.
The captain, a Jamaican who took an
enormous pride in his vessel, was asked, 'How old is she?'
'About
45 years old, sir', was the answer.
The VIP then remarked, 'She
is about the same age as I am', to which the proud captain replied,
'Yes, but she is good for at least another 1o years' work!'
Alas,
this was not to be, for the Abercorn, although no longer in War
Department service, went to her final rest in the hurricane of
August 17th, 1951.
The third but not least of the company's commitments was the
maintenance of water-borne communications across the harbour
between Fort Clarence, Port Royal, Palisadoes,
Fort Nugent and
Kingston.
Most of the crews were and are recruited from
Port
Royalists, whose families for generations have lived by and on the sea.
In the South, the water transport company did not come into
being until after the end of the war, when, strange as it may seem,
its commitments increased rather than decreased, largely because of
the discontinuation of lease-lend and a new system of supply from
the United Kingdom.
However, even during the war, its water
transport commitments were many.
A second American
Fleet
auxiliary, named the RASCV El Alamein, was allotted for long
distance passages throughout the area, embracing as it did British
Port of Spain,
Barbados, the Windwards,
and the
Leeward Islands.
Trinidad, was the main base, and a service was
operated from the mainland there to the island of Gasper Grande
near by, but one or two craft were also stationed in the Leeward
and Windward Islands for local services.
It is fitting that units of the RASC Fleet, whose early history
may be traced back to the days of sailing ships, should have operated
from two such historical spots as Port Royal and Port of Spain,
and sail again the romantic Caribbean seas.
Conclusion
In one short chapter it is impossible to record in full the diverse,
world-wide activities of the fleet. Bermuda, Gibraltar, India and
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
589
the Faroes too-RASC vessels served them all and each has its
own story.
Thus from small beginnings developed this vast war-time fleet
which at its peak consisted of more than 50 units- water transport
companies, motorboat companies, boat stores depots and training
school-their crews and shore staff, military and civilian, drawn
from almost every Commonwealth nation.
