240
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
Building up the Supply Organization
While steady progress was made during the defensive period in
building up the supply organization, the First Army continued to
be handicapped by having to maintain so many American land and
air force units.
There was also a rise in the strength to be fed in
the theatre as a whole which was accompanied by a decision to
increase the reserves to be held.
By the end of January the strength
was nearly 250,000, which included 45,000 Americans.
Even
SO
only about 87,000 were in the army area forward of the railheads,
the remainder, about 160,000, being engaged at the bases or on the
lines of communication, although of course that figure included a
large number of air force units.
The
French formations in the
army area were fairly well self-contained for supplies and indeed
came to our rescue by producing large quantities of barley and
straw for the newly formed British pack transport units.
Although the general stock position
often lagged behind the
official levels, reserves and working stocks were generally adequate
by the end of February.
The chief problem which exercised the
ADSTs and base provision officers (now called CRASC supplies)
was how to provide sufficient units and accommodation to handle
the stocks which were pouring into the theatre.
Supply had outrun
the pace at which supply units were
being sent from England, so
that any type of unit which could be spared, such as field butcheries
and the composite platoons for anti-aircraft artillery regiments, had
to be diverted to operate DIDs.
Everything possible was done to provide fresh rations.
Fresh
vegetables and fruit were sent forward to Tunisia,
where the soil
was less favourable for cultivation than in Algeria.
Bread produc-
tion had been handicapped by the belated arrival of units' bakery
equipment, much of which was in ships which did not arrive until
a month after the units had landed.
The first two mobile bakeries
were producing
20,000 lb a day each by the New Year, and in
February three mobile bakeries were in operation in the army area,
so that a full ration of bread, 12 oz, was available for all.
Plans
providing
meat were
not so successful.
The cold storage
available was limited and refrigeration
inquiries
about the local sheep
wagons were
few,
and
"harvest', which before
the
war
allowed the export of 800,000 head to France, indicated that the
annual movement of the scattered flocks to the sea would not begin
before March and that local consumption,
because of lack of other
foods, had greatly increased.
There was enough storage accommo-
dation to accept some fresh bacon and cheese, and supplies began
to arrive in February.
In the North African Hills
On the Way to the Front
