166
THE
R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
as they failed to take into account the various differences in condi-
tions of pay, living and other factors of the soldier compared with
the civilian; however the criticism could not be ignored.
In November, 1940, the Ministry of Food represented that the
amount of food purchased by the serviceman
in his canteens,
combined with his ration, exceeded his rightful share of national
resources.
This was followed by a demand for a cut of one quarter
in the Services' meat ration,
which was then 10 oz a day.
This
reduction was accepted, but the War Office again requested that
the loss of meat should be compensated for by an addition to the
cash allowance, by id for men and id for women.
This proposal
once again brought the Treasury into the field.
That department
maintained that to issue cash in place of meat in kind could only
aggravate
the national food situation, that the general situation
called for some reduction in the service ration, and that the possibility
of discriminating between actively employed and sedentary person-
nel should be reconsidered.
The War Office
achieved its aim of offsetting reductions in
rationed foods by additional cash to purchase non-rationed items.
The revised scale of meat and increased ration cash allowance were
promulgated in December, 1940.
Food Consumption in Canteens
The allegations then being, made that the serviceman could
obtain unlimited supplies of food through the many service canteens
brought the supply branch into a field which was normally a Q
staff responsibility.
It was obvious that in the existing food position
there must be some co-ordination between the quantities of food
provided in the soldier's official ration and his private purchases in
canteens.
The Ministry of Food maintained that there were too
many official service and voluntary canteens and that there appeared
to be little or no control over the number of canteens or of the
amount of food which was sold in them.
An immediate investiga-
tion was initiated, and commands were asked to review the number,
type and facilities provided in the various canteens, bearing in mind
the national food situation.
The reports were not received until
some months later, but in the meantime the NAAFI undertook to
provide the MOF with estimates and a note of the purpores of their
requiremente for canteen trade.
The inquiry instituted by the War Office resulted in a more
stringent control being exercised over the number of canteens
operating and the fare they could offer.
The inquiry showed that
many unofficial canteens had been started by civilians who,
while
Lavine the servicemante colfoce at beart. did not subscribe to the
organization (the Council of Voluntary War Workers) which had
SUPPLIES
467
been accepted as the one to operate the various voluntary canteens
under service control. There was a general pruning of all canteens,
and arrangements were made to classify them for food allocations
on similar lines to those established for the civil industrial canteens.
Thus only certain canteens in a given military area were permitted
to serve substantial refreshments; others were permitted to serve
light refreshments only.
Much of the work of control fell on the
NAAFI, which by this time came to be regarded as the organizing
body for the control of canteen food allocations and for maintain-
ing the necessary records required by the Ministry of Food from
corresponding civil organizations.
Ration Situation, Spring, 1941
Although the next great changes were not made in the ration
scale until March, 1941, scarcity of various items involved continuous
adjustments being made to the soldier's ration.
The basic scale of
bread was reduced to 10 oz with the option of drawing a further
2 oz if required.
This arrangement was in deference to those who
maintained that waste was occurring.
Dried fruit had to be
reduced temporarily, and no substitutes could be offered in its place.
To accord with an appeal to the public to reduce consumption of
milk, units were requested to exercise economy in that direction.
In February, 1941, When the national food situation had deterior-
ated appreciably and the outlook for the future appeared to grow
worse, a further request was received from the Ministry of Food
that the service ration scale should be reduced forthwith to the level
then
prevailing for the civil population.
To support this case
the Ministry of Food produced figures of the combined off-take of
food through the official ration and canteens in 1940 to show that
the Serough the ofiei exceptionally favoured position.
As the
Services had recently reduced the meat ration obtainable on service
ration cards, made reductions in the women's scales, and tightened
up the supply of foodstuffs through the canteen supply organization,
this new proposal from the Ministry of Food was regarded as
something, of a bombshell.
When the question was discussed between the principal adminis-
the lestrument for considering service food colicy) and the Ministry
trative officers of the three Services (their standing committee was
of Food, it transpired that even if the service and civilian scales
were not aligned, heavy reductions were being demanded in
practically every staple commodity.
After some compromises the
which could only be made good by including less acceptable foods
in the ration, within te dimite of the financial saving arising from
the cuts in rationed foods.
