650
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
of fact, as will be seen later, their appreciation of the situation was
at fault.
I then withdrew the Arab scouts and drove round the
dune at speed.
I noticed some British corpses being plundered by
Arabs.
Hardly had I drawn Scott's attention to
this when an
armoured car drove up alongside and a French officer in the turret
called to us to surrender.
He was
a really villainous looking
individual with a row of discoloured teeth leering behind a black
beard matted with sand and dust.
My first impulse was to step on the gas and give him a run for
his money, but on second thoughts I realized that if I were pursued
(which was most likely) my action would give away the whole
convoy.
I decided instead to play for time so that my second-in-
command would realize that I had 'bumped' something and could
get busy extricating the vehicles before their
existence was dis-
covered.
I was delighted to learn, three months later, that not a
single vehicle had in fact been captured.
My captor was joined shortly afterwards by a number of satellites
in armoured cars and I wasted time by pretending not to understand
a word of French (which I speak fluently).
However, after some
20 minutes' argument. Scott was taken off in one direction, while I
was made to drive my car under Senegalese escort to the fort.
arrival I was met by a French cavalry colonel who ordered me to
dismount for interrogation.
At this moment I noticed a wounded
British soldier lying in a pool of blood on the floor of a British
3-tonner.
I asked the colonel if any medical assistance was available
and he told me there was a dispenser in the fort, giving me permis-
sion to take the lorry inside under escort.
While the guard was
explaining to the infirmier about the wounded man, I took the
opportunity of dropping my maps and orders down a nearby well.
On returning to my car I found that the Senegalese had ransacked
my valise, helping themselves to my personal belongings.
Shortly afterwards a convoy was formed up and my escort and I
This was
were allotted a position behind a troop-carrying lorry.
possibly the most uncomfortable journey of my life.
I was in
considerable pain from a rectal abscess and I suffered from intense
thirst.
The Senegalese guard threatened my throat with a knife
whenever I attempted to stop the car to get at my waterbottle.
Finally I ran out of petrol and, when the car came to a standstill,
one of the escort (thinking presumably that I was contemplating
escape) made several passes at my head with the butt of his rifle.
Eventually I was permitted to fill my tank from a 4-gallon container.
While I was doing so one of the Senegalese improved the shining
hour by unfastening my wristwatch which, needless to say, I have
not seen since.
We then continued to travel until we arrived at a ruined building,
ROUND TOUR OF EUROPE
651
where I was interrogated by the colonel I had met earlier in the day.
I refused to give any information and eventually pointed to his
medal ribbons and my own, suggesting that at one period we had
fought on the same side.
He merely shrugged his shoulders and
apparently decided that I was wasting his time.
I was accordingly
marched back to my car and ordered to drive on.
Eventually we reached Deir-ez-Zor on the banks of the Euphrates,
where I was taken to the officers' mess of the Camel Corps.
Pre-
sently my black-bearded friend of earlier in the day appeared and
I was able to conclude from his conversation that my own convoy
had not been stopped, since he described his day's adventures, but
made no reference to my command other than to my own unex-
pected arrival.
Later on, Scott came in
accompanied by a
Yeomanry officer whose troops had been compelled to surrender
owing to casualties and shortage of ammunition.
It was these
troops my Arab scouts had seen that same morning, but their
appreciation of the situation had been considerably at fault.
Soon afterwards, Scott, myself, the Yeomanry subaltern and my
two Arab legionaries were bundled into a bus with an escort, and
we started out for Aleppo.
During the journey we discussed several
plans for escape by overpowering the escort and seizing the bus.
However, we rejected them because we were not sure of the petrol
situation and, in any case, we were closely followed by another
vehicle carrying an armed escort.
We arrived in Aleppo late that
night, very tired after our 350-mile journey.
We passed the night
in an unsavoury cell in a French barracks, sleeping on straw
palliasses which had obviously not been de-bugged for many months.
The following day we were transferred to a place called Idlib,
where I greatly irritated a pompous French major by complaining
about the conditions of the latrines, remarking that his race was
notoriously lax towards this aspect of domestic economy.
For the
next few weeks we lived in ramshackle huts surrounded by a barbed
wire perimeter and covered by four machine guns mounted in a
tower. Time hung heavily on our hands, and we relieved the
monotony by playing cards and by reading books kindly provided
by the American consul at Beirut. Just as four of us, after lengthy
reconnaissance, had perfected a plan for escape we were bundled
into a bus and taken to an airfield at Aleppo.
My fellow prisoners
and myself (about 50, all told) were put into four aircraft,
with a
each
gendarme escort.
On taking off we bumped a bomb
crater which had not been filled in and had to land again with a
broken wheel.
We were then transferred to a comfortable Air France aircraft
and set off again.
My mind was not made any easier by the fact
that I could not swim and our captors had neglected to provide us
