SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
The fire in the filling area at Falconara was a day that few will
Apparently it was found out afterwards that an Italian
labourer smuggled a lighter into the area to fill it, and then he
thought he would see if it would light.
Well, he will never need a
lighter again where he has gone.
But to begin at the beginning, some of the workshop men were
at Ancona building a new petrol point when a column of smoke
was seen over Falconara about seven miles away.
This was not
unusual, for the oil fired locomotives often threw up a smoke screen,
but this looked bigger and blacker than usual.
The captain (eng)
telephoned the headquarters to check and was told that Falconara
was alight'.
We jumped into a jeep with the mechanist staff
sergeant and as many bodies as could hang on, and broke all speed
records for the journey, in which we were joined by the AFS tenders
that had been turned out en masse.
When we arrived on the scene, things were pretty grim.
had managed to get the female labour away,
but barrels of spirit
all alight were exploding and flying high in the air like balls of fire.
The fire sections were fighting hard to save the front of the installa-
tion and offices, which had already been set alight in many places.
Suddenly there was a near tragedy; the wind changed direction
and the flames played right on to the front of the building.
evacuation had to be made, for the heat was intense; two fire
tenders had to be abandoned and were burned out.
pumped from the sea, and the flames were fought from the installa-
tion compound itself, and the struggle continued.
During this time, however, an officer with a party of men saved
some 14 rail cars by keeping on the windward side and actually
pushed them through the flames to safety.
Then by good fortune
the wind again changed, and steady progress was made until the
fire was controlled.
Now what did we see?
A large area of smoke
blackened, twisted metal, still sizzling with the heat, wrecked
headers, burned out pumps, and twisted conveyors.
Then came an immediate conference to decide how soon the
filling area could be put back into working order.
There could be
no question of leaving everything untouched until the inevitable
court of inquiry had viewed the 'remains'.
The captain (eng) thought that, with 80 lorries and 200 prisoners
of war available the next day, the site could be cleared in two days.
Every petroleum fitter available in the area, as well as those it
the Petrol Technical Stores Depot, sweated blood from morning to
night; they did not need to be told about the stocks on the ground
steadily decreasing day by day; they could see them! Had the
RASC ever let the front line boys down?
it came to pass that the new facilities were erected, the labour
And so on the tenth day
returned, the valves were turned on, and once more the barrels
and cans began their journeys along the conveyor to go forward
and replenish those dwindling stocks on the ground.
There was a funny side to this story.
The commanding officer,
a real 'oilyboy' of the old school, not afraid of any man, had, just
before the fire, broken a bone in his ankle and had been fitted up
with a plaster cast, from the bottom of which protruded a piece of
When he left the hospital, the matron had warned him that
whatever he did he was not to get it wet.
Of course during the
fire everyone got pretty well soaked, that is with water, and of
course one could hardly tell the commanding officer that he could
not come to the fire, but afterwards that plaster cast was just the
funniest shape that a cast could be; even funnier was the expression
on the commanding officer's face at the thought of taking it back
to the matron to have it done again.
He was not, as it has been
said, afraid of any man, but-
88 DETAIL ISSUE DEPOT
The unit arrived at Algiers on November 12th, 1942, and, after
disembarking, proceeded in full marching order by a circuitous
route to the transit camp at Jardin d'Essai.
On Monday, November
I6th, the unit entrained for Souk Ahras. B Section, commanded
by Lieutenant I. Treleaven, detrained at Setif on the r7th, and
A and C Sections continued the journey to Souk Ahras, arriving
on the evening of the 18th.
On Friday the 2oth C Section, commanded by and Lieutenant
R. C. Roberts, entrained once again for Tebessa.
B Section arrived at Setif at about 1600 hrs on November 17th,
1942, and procured billets and office accommodation on the ground
floor of a block of flats at the entrance to the station.
petrol and compo rations arrived during the night and were stacked
in the station yard.
The function of the section was to supply all
road convoys moving up from Algiers with petrol and rations and
also to feed troops passing through on the trains.
As all the convoys refuelled at night the detachment was split
Two sections of pioneers, supervised by two or three
RASC men, un sadio trains during the day and the remaining
RASC men and one section of pioneers worked at night.
night from about so so tons until see hours the next morning
there was a bout 2000 hours vehicles, many of them American,
passing through the depot, and the average daily issues were
14,000 rations and 30,000 gallons of petrol.
