496
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Some of the major problems of the mobilization centres are set
out in the succeeding paragraphs.
It may be said here that the
quickest in solution took three months to sort out, and the most
obstinate took just over a year.
From the start transport was practically unobtainable.
Many
mobilized units, particularly those destined for the Middle East,
did not receive their transport until they arrived in their theatre of
operations.
How were units to draw rations, ordnance stores and
the hundred and one daily requirements ? What was to be done
about continuation training of drivers straight from training units?
In the end a pool of transport and a workshop element were authorized
for each centre.
This pool was sub-allotted to units and retained
by them until they left the centre or were issued with mobilization
transport. The pool permitted of the allotment of about
vehicles to each unit.
After taking daily
standing details into
account, about five vehicles were available for training.
It is not
surprising, then, that overseas theatres complained that units on
arrival had far too many semi-trained drivers.
It was soon found that the small staff of the headquarters of a
mobilization centre was inadequate
effectively to control and
supervise the training and interior economy of the many units
forming.
Administrative
guidance
was particularly
necessary
because of the almost complete lack of experienced men.
The only
people available not only did not know the answers, l
but were not
in possession of the books, regulations, ete., where the answers might
have been found.
Two increments were therefore added to the
headquarters, one to supervise training and the other administration.
The latter increment began its job by collecting a supply of manuals,
pamphlets, army forms, and such things, most of them
copies of some antiquity with numerous amendments in separato
parcels. Many units conveniently mislaid the amendments and
were, like the Jackdaw of Rheims, not one penny the worse thereby.
Another worry was the erop of absences, sickness and compas
sionate cases which invariably arose on the eve of embarkation.
These deficiencies were at first made good by taking
other units in the centre.
This was not very satisfactory as these
men had often not had their embarkation vave or their inoculations.
The unsettlint effect on the robbed units was also not conducive
to efficiency.
Fach centre was therefore provided with a sub unit,
or "holding unit" of officers and there of al ravis and qualifications,
fully prepared in all respects for overseas, to meet last minute
casualties.
Unfortunately not be of these holding units functioned a
intended. Very soon the men held were a collection
physically lost those awaiting trial by court martial and the
Petrol
Filling
