- LEET
, a keen sailor and motorboat
Vorld War who, from 1940 until
army Council on the WD Fleet.
o valuable services he was made a Commander of the Order
of the British Empire.
New types of jobs constantly came along.
Cargo carrying to the
Faroes Islands Force on which the 500-ton Malplaquet was employed
for some time, servicing the Maunsell anti-aircraft towers located
at Liverpool and in the Thames Estuary, the provision and mainten-
at Liverphe radio controlled Queen Gulls self-propelled targets used
for seaward artillery practices) and, in 1945,
the operation of
T.C 1s for ammunition dumping at sea were but a few. And common
to them all were the dangers faced at sea.
The range patrol launch
Falcon was bombed and destroyed off Harwich Pier in April, 1941,
two of her crew being killed.
For some time the 450-ton Sir Evelyn
Wood carried cargoes of bombs to Northern Ireland, and once a
serious fire broke out in one of the holds while loading was in
progress.
The master,
chief engineer
and crew immediately
entered the hold and fought the
blaze, and their courage and
initiative in so doing averted a serious explosion and loss of life.
Incidentally, in 1944, this ship again narrowly escaped destruction
when carrying a cargo of explosives and rockets for the Normandy
beach-head.
A Vi just missed her mainmast!
Also in that year
Able Seaman-in-Charge R. E. Davey, of the RASC launch Pauletta,
Able Seaman-in-Charge REmire Medal (Civil Division) and the
Lloyds Medal for Bravery at Sea.
Davey saw an incendiary bomb
pierce the engine room roof of the vessel lying alongside which
had a large
quantity of high octane petrol on
board.
immediately clambered down into its engine room, seized the bomb
which had severed the petrol connections and threw it overboard.
These were typical incidents in the story of the Fleet in home waters.
With that rapid survey of its organization and vast expansion,
let us retrace our steps a little and review the history of those RASC
units provided for the field forces the motorboat companies.
Farly in 1012 we had three: No. I emploved in a trainino role,
No. 3 operating in West Africa, and No. 2 engaged on patrols in
east coast estuaries and rivers.
the late summer,
planning of the invasion of North Africa-operation 'Torch' —was
well under way and the order of battle for the force included one
motorboat company, RASC. No. 2 Company was nominated, and
the Admiralty were informed that the unit could no longer be
spared for patrol duties.
The naval authorities, however, made
strong representations to retain its services, and this in itself was a
tribute to the efficient and happy wavice which the unit had done
But it had to go to North Africa nevertheless.
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
North Africa
In November, 1942, the unit, by then renumbered 247 Motor
Boat Company RASC (No. I having become No. 246), landed on
the North African coast with the 'Torch' expeditionary force.
Ten
vessels were shipped in the convoys from the United Kingdom, and
as soon as a base had been established at Algiers steps were taken
to acquire further craft locally.
Some were requisitioned, and
some were 'prize' vessels.
These varied from 40-50 ft launches to
400-ton schooners and coastal craft.
The wide variety of engines—
diesel, petrol and even steam-gave the workshop officer many a
sleepless night, and it says much for the spirit and training of the
men, both deck and engine room staff, that they could take on the
operation of these craft.
In addition to the usual duties which its
small launches performed in all the harbours from Algiers to Tunis,
the coastal cargo carrying vessels of the company did valuable work.
DST, Allied Force Headquarters frequently emphasized the great
weight taken off the overworked general transport companies and
the single railway line by their excellent efforts.
Further craft, too, were sent from home.
In this connection it
is worth digressing a little to tell the story of an unusual voyage,
indicative of the close way in which the water transport and motor-
boat companies of the RASC Fleet worked together.
Additional
craft were urgently required by 247 Company at Algiers and two
drifters, the 100 ft Ocean Breeze and the g2 ft Boy Phillip, were refitted
in this country for despatch.
To give them a sufficient steaming
range for the voyage it was necessary to fill their fish holds with
coal.
When required, the coal had to be loaded by the crew into
baskets, dragged along the deck and shot down into the bunkers a
most difficult and risky business in bad weather, for there was
always the danger of flooding the hold or the bunkers.
Manned
by civilian crews of the RASC Fleet under the Inspector of Shipping,
Mr. G. Sparshatt (later made a Member of the Order of the British
Empire for his distinguished services) they joined a convoy of some
40 ships sailing from Milford Haven on December 4th, 1943-
They
reached Gibraltar on the i3th, meeting heavy seas and strong head
winds for the four last days of the voyage.
After a few days' stay,
they sailed for Oran, where they assisted in the rescue of an 8,000-ton
Greek ship which had broken her moorings in a heavy gale.
the United States Naval Forces at that port.
this they received a signal of appreciation from the commander of
A British hospital
ship arrived while they were there, and on hearing that there was a
a case.
lack of cigarettes aboard, the RASC Fleet civilian crews sent them
Much to their surprise and delight, our men received not
only the thanks of the wounded but also a large turkey and Christmas
