188
THE MIDDLE EAST II
basis.
The supplies section worked a double echelon between road
or railhead and delivery points on the standard RASC system.
Although a superficial glance at the East African Campaign may
give the momentary impression of a 'text book' operation of excep-
tional brilliance, it is as well not to gloss over the facts that the luck
ran largely on the British side and that at no time was the fighting
calibre of the East African forces submitted to a real test.
So far as the supply and transport services were concerned, in
spite of the difficulties encountered and the initial inexperience of
most officers and British NCOs, their enthusiasm and loyalty were
unbounded, and a solid tradition of unselfish work was steadily
built up, which evoked the finest praise that can be given to any
ST Corps, when Lieut-General Sir Alan Cunningham, on saying
farewell to the East
African Command, spoke these tense and
significant words: 'You boast you are a service-and, by
God,
you are!'
With the Ethiopian campaign at an end our main forces were
gradually withdrawn leaving garrisons at strategic points.
only further event of outstanding interest was the mounting of
the expedition to Madagascar.
Madagascar
Madagascar is a large island lying off the east coast of Africa,
from which it is divided by the Mozambique Channel.
It is about
1,000 miles long and 36o miles wide, and has a mountainous central
axis running up to more than 8,000 feet in a few places.
In 1942
there was no through road system, and such roads as existed were
frequently interrupted by mainly unfordable rivers and were little
better than tracks.
Communication was effected usually by air,
so that movement was severely restricted.
The island as a whole
was under-developed.
and ran from Tamatave,
The only useful railway was single track
the modern port on the east coast, up to
Antananarivo, the capital in the centre of the island.
Madagascar is a French possession, and after the capitulation of
France, was governed from Vichy.
Its long coast line and many
creeks and estuaries suitable for lying-up early attracted the Japanes,
whose submarines began to take heavy toll of the Allied shipping
routed round the Cape.
In order to stop this interference with vital
traffic, operation 'Ironclad' mounted from Britain saw Force 121 cam
out an assault landing on May 5th, 1952, and continue to the capture
of Diego Suarez.
harbour at the northern tip of the island.
Diego Suarez lies at the head of a fine large
HQ Royal Marine Division (Major-General R. C. Sturges), zgth
The Force comprised
Independent Infantry Brigade Group, and isth and 17th Infantry
Brigades. CRASC was Lieut-Colonel R. A. E. Dunlop.
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
189
The 2gth Brigade carried out the assault before first light on
May 5th.
Assisted by aircraft from HMS Indomitable and HMS
Ilustrious and supported by HMS Ramillies, cruisers and destroyers,
they reached the outskirts of Diego the same
night.
A dawn
attack by 2gth Brigade on the town on May 6th failed; but a full
scale attack was mounted that night by all available troops, sup-
ported by a party of Royal Marines.
They landed in behind the
enemy from HMS Anthony on the main quay of Diego itself and
brought 'cease fire' in the early hours of May 7th.
This operation was only just in time to forestall a Japanese task
force with a similar mission.
The Japanese achieved some measure
of revenge a few days later when one of their midget submarines
severely damaged the Ramillies and sank an oil tanker.
The midget
submarine and its occupants were destroyed.
RASC support to Force 121 comprised 55 DID with a few addi-
tional bakers and butchers and a transport detachment of 20 I5-
and
30-cwt vehicles, and six ambulances.
The
I3th and 17th
Brigades had their RASC companies, though initially no vehicles
could be landed for them.
During the operation and subsequently
until all vehicles were landed, the available transport was at full
stretch, but was able to meet requirements because of the short
distances.
Ammunition and petrol replenishment proved to be
singularly free from trouble, as also in the first place was that of
supplies.
In the period of consolidation and reorganization for the
advance south to the capital, some difficulty
getting satisfactory bread because of the deterioration of the yeast
in the climatic conditions.
As the first instance of an amphibious assault mounted from a
distance of 10,000 miles, Tronclad provided success and justification
of current methods of planning and training.
Best of all, the
preservation of surprise was achieved beyond highest hopes, although
these were somewhat daised when the leading troops of the Royal
Welch Fusiliers landing on White Beach in Ambararata Bay in the
darkness at 0430 hours on May 5th were welcomed by one old man
clad only in a loin-cloth who, greeting them in good English, said:
"Good-morning, -entle meno
We
expected you last
week!'
transpired that he wisen hoanese who had been a steward in a
British India steam was a had retired to this resort!
The impossibility of making a satisfactory rate of progress south-
ward to the capital wanekinged when the force was only 100 miles
south of Diego Suarez after much strenuous effort over several
By this time, z2nd East Africa Brigade and 7th South
Africa Brigade had me, 2d, and 19th and 17th Brigades had been
moved on to India.
29th Pricade were therefore pulled out to Mombasa to refit and to
Headquarters Royal Marine
Division and
