558
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
The advance of the 4th Indian Division soon reached the vicinity
of the Gothic Line, which was the great natural barrier to any
further advance to the open, fertile plains of the River Po.
The
division's task was to break through the high hills north of Urbino.
Tracks were few and all demolished.
The rocky, bleak country was
burned brown by the mid-summer Italian sun, as hot as in North
Africa; the river reduced to a mere trickle.
The division was
allotted a pack company to each battalion, and it was over this
wild territory that some 4,000 mules and their attendants were to
march fully laden in support of the infantry.
*The real purpose of
the animals was not maintenance in the usual sense, but to relieve
the infantry soldier of his equipment so that he could march lightly
and arrive fit for battle when the fortifications were reached
Feeding the mules was as far as possible to be on the country, and
where an owner of a haystack could be found he was to be given a
receipt for his hay at an agreed price to be settled later.
worked extremely well, and few complaints were received after-
wards.
The grain ration and rations for the men
followed in
jeeps on rough tracks opened up one after another by the sappers
and pioneers.
The division concentrated at Sigillo which was a good five days
march from the Gothic Line,
Each pack company then came
under direct orders of the commander of the battalion to which
it was attached.
As the division approached Urbino that terri-
fying menace, the mine, began to be more and more frequently
encountered.
Corn stacks were heavily booby trapped, and many
men and mules were killed by a mule grabbing at the stacks as it
passed, thereby pulling the trip wire.
Cpl Ali Ben Ali was blown
to pieces in this way, to the great regret of all his company,
The country in front of the enemy positions had been completely
cleared of cover, trees and hedges cut down and all buildings
demolished.
The infantry therefore halted before surmounting the
last hill and the weary and battered mules were unloaded and given
their first rest. The men crept into various little nooks and crannies
overlooking the positions and had a first rate view of dive bombing
by Hurricanes, then a terific artillery barrage, and finally the
assault by the infantry,
Usually a final and successful assault by the infantry meant that
pack transport could be withdrawn to rest, as the enemy retired,
and road communications were reopened.
was not to be.
On this occasion it
Certain armoured units got into difficulties and the
infantry division had to be passed through them to maintain the
momentum of the advance.
This operation was of particular
interest as it entailed leaving, Haly and erating the smallest of the
world's republice San Marino.
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
550
In spite of this theoretical violation of a neutral country, the
advance soon brought the division down to the River Marrechia,
when nature proceeded to alter the course of human plans as the
trickle of water named Marrechia suddenly developed into a
roaring torrent, carrying down shrubs, trees and boulders and
smashing and sweeping away everything in its path.
The little
adjacent tracks broke down completely under the mass of transport
on them, but fortunately some pack transport was already across the
river; so once again the faithful pack animal was there on both
sides of the river to tide over the period before the rains ceased and
the river receded.
'Nina'
With mid-December came the snow, and some 19 to 15 degrees of
frost were registered on the high hills, but as the ground hardened
man and animal began to move freely again.
Nature played its
part by providing the mule with his thick woolly coat, and though
tails were often a solid mass of ice, and icicles hung from the mules'
noses, they kept fit and well.
The right flank company
was
supporting the ist Guards Brigade which took the company into their
own lines.
They soon developed a strong corps of pack 'supporters',
who in all sorts of small ways helped to make the life of their newly
adopted friends tolerable.
The interest of the supporters was to be
repaid in one unexpected instance, by the remarkable feat of Nina.
Nina was an ambulance mule a type specially selected
for
reliability, strength and tractability,
Docile by nature, she had
sufficient animal sense to extract the much prized soldiers' chocolate
ration from her many admirers and, as the result of many other
extra animal tit-bits, she waxed fat and smug.
An attack was to be made by men of the Grst Brigade which formed
part of this force, and with them were to go the ambulance mules
of 4 Pack Transport Company, including Nina.
The attack went
in on Christmas Eve and was successful.
The enemy was pushed
out of Boreo Toenano but feasted extremete not do and some
of our men and mules were cut off.
A day or so later the men of
the ADS were roused by a banging on the door, and there was
Nina with two unconscious soldiers lying on the litters each side
of her.
How it happened no one ever really knew, as the twe men were
to fill to remember anything, They had obviously been loaded
on the mule by the enemy and then turned loose, probably to
save them the trouble of evacuating wounded prisoners of war.
it was, however, an amazing effort on the bart of Nina to get
safely homer
The first part of the trip would be new erotio
her, and the journey of about two miles was over a windine mountain
