410
OTHER THEATRES
sent on to overseas theatres.
Then the War Office began to ask
for small quantities to be despatched direct to these theatres, but
this caused a disproportionate amount of difficulty, since the Ameri-
cans were not interested in the shipment of such small quantities.
Therefore, a depot in the United States was established, to act as a
buffer for small consignments.
With the entry of Japan into the war, and the consequent threat
to the supply lines from the southern dominions to India and the
Middle
East, it became necessary to increase considerably
the
quantities of foodstuffs bought in the United States. A reserve was
also accumulated against
the requirements of an expeditionary
force operating in Europe, amounting to 70,000 tons.
The larger
orders were of more interest to the Americans, and business went
forward much more smoothly.
A RASC officer was sent out to
the United States to supervise the collection, packaging, and storage
of these supplies.
During the latter part of 1942, and the early months of 1943, the
shipping position deteriorated so much that foodstuffs could not be
shipped, and a 'backlog' accumulated which could not be made up.
This proved awkward for those depending
on shipments from
America, especially in the Middle East.
The difficulty was partially
overcome by giving priority of shipment to the items most urgently
needed.
On the petrol side, ST branch was concerned mainly with the
provision of lubricants, and not with bulk supply of liquid fuel,
and much good was done by standardizing types of lubricants.
With the end of hostilities, the activities of the ST portion of the
British Army staff were reduced to the dispersal of stocks already
held, and to the maintenance of liaison with their American counter-
parts at the Pentagon.
In a short time even this ceased, and the
ST branch closed down.
So ended an interesting and important
field of RASC endeavour which did much towards maintaining the
war effort in overseas theatres, saved much shipping space and, as a
side issue, introduced many appreciative officers and men to the
American way of life and (perhaps with less appreciation) to the
vagaries of the Washington climate.
CHAPTER XII
THE R.A.S.C. IN
THE UNITED KINGDOM
GENERAL SURVEY
THE outbreak of war found the RASC fully alert and alive to
the tasks which lay ahead of them, but their resources were
limited.
Scarcity of money and material had restricted the
preparations which could be made before the war to the immediate
requirements in the days after mobilization.
The main task of
building the foundations on which to expand had to await the
declaration of war.
Expansion of the organization for the day to day maintenance
of the Army in the home commands of the United Kingdom had to
go hand in hand with the
procuring the vastly increased quantities of transport, food and
petroleum products which would be needed, and all these activities
depended on the rate at which the thousands of additional officers
and men required could be enrolled, trained and organized.
As the United Kingdom is the strategic and economic centre of
the Commonwealth, the expansion of the Corps and the development
of its several activities were essentially home responsibilities, and
although later in the war they were decentralized to
commands to some extent, they remained the primary responsibility
of the DST at the War Office.
In the War Office in peacetime, branches of the different OMG
directorates had all borne titles prefixed with 'QMG',
Not long
after the outbreak of war however new titles were adopted with the
prefix of the particular director under whom the branches served.
This system facilitated expansion and rapid multiplication
branches.
Old numbers were adhered to where possible, and the
titles of those under DST were ST 1 (Water Transport), ST 2
(Petroleum, Oils and Lubricants), ST 3 (Transport and
Air
Despatch), ST 4 (Catering), ST 6 (Supplies), and ST 7 (Barracks).
It was not until well after the war that minor changes were made
in these nomenclatures.
The three main responsibilities of maintenance, procurement and
training were from time to time to be directly affected by the
