396
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
construction, or bridging, road making and repairing,
and a
thousand and one hard, dirty and vital jobs, sometimes under fire
and close to the enemy, but more often far from the areas which
attracted publicity.
There was certainly no more essential element
of the transport service than the ubiquitous tipper.
Naturally, supply units were hard worked like everyone else in
this phase, and the unexpected calls on their resources and initiative
for prisoners, refugees and starving populations were many.
haps the only aspect of special interest was the 'drill' which was
evolved for GHQ to take over successive roadhead stocks with their
units from Second Army, thus relieving army of unwanted responsi-
bilities for behind their operational area.
DDST Supplies at 21
Army Group kept close touch with ST at Second Army by air, and
arrangements were made during these visits regarding the details
of location, stocks, men,
and the timing of the take-over.
arrangement worked to the beneft of both headquarters and the
It is also interesting to note that by the time of the surrender
in May, GHQ controlled supply units and installations stretched
from Hamburg to Antwero, and that the total feeding strength of
the theatre eventually reached two million.
All the movement used up a lot of petrol, and at the end of the
area alone.
campaign 7.500 tons of petrol a day were being issued in the British
But the supply of fuel never
caused any anxiety.
By March 15th, the pipehead was the source of bulk petrol for both
armies, and this was coming into the theatre at the rate of 15,000
tons a day.
The total quantity of petrol and oil imported for
am Army Group during the campaign in bulk shipments alone
amounted to nearly 1,200 million gallons, and at the end the RASC
was operating 300,000 tons of bulk storage.
jerricans and over 4,500,000 4-gallon tins were sent over.
In addition, 2,500,000
No account of the Corps'
activities in the campaign would be
staffs of formations.
complete without some mention of the contribution it made to the
tive Officer of SHAEF.
Lieut-General Gale was the Chief Administra-
The Brigadier in charge of Q plans at
the planning headquarters for Overlord was Brigadier Buckle.
Brigadier Lymer. who was a staunch memher of the sand Divisional
RASC TA, was Brigadier Q Maintenance at HQ 21 Army Group
and the Brigadier A/Q at HQ Loan for the first part of the
campaign was Brigadier R. T.
There were many other
formation headquarters.
RASC officers on the staff of HQ 21 Army Group and at other
There was also the usual complement of
RASC clerks at the headquarters of all formations, men who are
sometimes forgotten, but who share all the physical stress of the
officers whom they serve and, in lower formations, the same hazards.
After the breakout from the Normandy bridgehead, grd Infantry
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
397
Dision was taken out of the line and grounded in the neighbour-
hood of Les Andelys on the Seine.
The division's second line
transport was taken away to assist VIII Corps in moving petrol
from the maintenance area at Baveux to No 2 Army "Cushion' at
Aras, The headquarters of the divisional RASC and the four
companies were therefore left on the Seine with no men other than
certs and issuers. On September 8th, the division was suddenly
ordered to prepare to move on two davs later, passing round
Brussels and right across Belgium to assault over the Escaut Canal.
This order caused a considerable crisis since. on, account of the
great scarcity of petrol, the divisional RASC held no more than
7.000 gallons on the ground in the location of the petrol companys
and there was no hope of the first and second line transport platoons
being returned to divisional command until the evening before the
It was therefore necessary to mobilize an extraordinary transport
column consisting of stripped-down office lorries, quartermaster
stores vehicles, workshops trucks,
German vehicles and trailers.
and a wide variety of captured
in the space of three or four hours, but it was only possible to find
Some 50 load carriers were collected
20 men who were normally employed as drivers.
The remaining
vehicles were manned by clerks and a few issuers.
The chief clerk
at HO RASC acted as platoon sergeant, and other sergeant and
corporal clerks as section NCOs.
This column was mobilized and
despatched, within soone six hours of the warning
order having
been received, from the Seine back to Bayeux with orders to return
vehicles.
as nickly sa haecible with as much natral de could ha loaded on the
considerable, and it was a remarkable achievement that the whole
The distance from Les
Andelys to
Bayeux is pretty
of this column got hack as an organized unit. with no stragglers,
within 24 hours, and in possession of 40,000 gallons of petrol.
without a single incident.
After the successful conclusion
foray many clerks applied to be re-mustered se drivers.
It was
Perhaps fortunate that while training in England before the invasion
of Normandv. it war andored that every man in the companv. no
matter what his employment, must be trained as a driver:
On September sth, the headquarters of the Guards Armoured
Division reached Brussels and established itself in the Roval Park
immediately in front of the Palace.
A rumour circulated that the
Germans had capitulated. ioyful crowds flocked into the streets and
around the park-
of 'les Anglais'.
-deliriously happy and keen to see the headquarters
However, just after lunch the order to continue to
advance came through, and the GOCs conference was timed for
lamp in the
Barely a half hour before it was due to begin,
a paraffin
'ops room', a tent joining both ACV i and ACV 3,
