firm arrangements with the embryo Ministry of Food that seven
days' fresh meat, flour and sugar would be delivered in given
quantities to each of the 40 depots on the word being given.
The plans for providing reserves for the field force went hand in
hand with the provision of more storage room and facilities for
making large scale shipments of food overseas.
In 1936 the War Office had only one large supply reserve depot—
situated in an unwanted cattle market at Deptford, on the Thames.
The site was highly vulnerable to air attack and fire risk, and space
was so limited that it was impossible to expand the activities there.
A project for a second depot was prepared with the agreement of the
General Staff.
The site selected was at Barry docks which, apart from having good
railway and supply facilities, was expected to be just outside the
range of enemy aircraft as their potentialities were known then.
The greatest care was taken that this depot should be a perfect one
for its purpose, and it was so planned as to provide for a maximum
dispersion of stocks and at the same time every facility for the quick
handling of large tonnages.
Although rearmament was in full
swing, it was no mean feat on the part of Colonel R. T. Snowden-
Smith, by that time the ADST, QMG 6, to steer through what
was a million-pound project.
No. 2 SRD remains a memorial to
Although the depot was still being built at the time of the Munich
crisis, the urgent need for evacuating a portion of the small reserves
held at Deptford, which were then beginning to flow in from the
food industry, led to a hasty decision to transfer part of the Deptford
It is an interesting sidelight on the financial outlook
that within a few hours of the return of Mr Chamberlain and the
(sic) end of the crisis, a demand was made that if any trains were
being loaded at Deptford they must be unloaded at once, as the cost
of transport to Wales was now unnecessary.
A further preparatory measure was taken by QMG 6 by the intro-
duction of a new organization for controlling supply reserve depots,
for undertaking the administration of contracts, and for arranging
all the details for shipments
overseas—work which had hitherto
been done partly at the War Office and partly at No. 1 SRD.
This new office was created with a modest staff of one colonel and
one captain, and it was later named the Chief Provision Office
(Food Supplies).
It was a wise move, as later in the war there were
I5 supply reserve depots, and it was essential to have a central
organization for control.
When war came MG's plans had matured well except for one
the provision of sufficient trained officers and men- but
this unfortunately was beyond their control.
SUPPLIES
39
Development of Catering
The investigation made by Captain Leggatt into the Army's
messing and catering arrangements was followed by an inquiry by
QMG 6 into the general messing arrangements in the Royal Navy
and the RAF.
The inquiry showed that the arrangements in the
other two Services were superior to those in the Army.
catering industry was also consulted about supervision, management
and equipment, and it was evident that the Army's outlook on such
matters fell far short of the standards required.
Sufficient data
had been collected by 1936 to prepare such a strong case for a review
of the Army's catering arrangements that it was agreed that an
official War Office committee should be appointed to examine the
questions of the provision of cooks, their training, pay and con-
ditions of service and certain other aspects of catering.
The verdict of the committee was that a drastic revision of the
Army's outlook on messing and catering was urgently needed.
They maintained that there was a pressing need for providing
skilled advice on catering in each command, and for the early
modernization of cooking equipment and arrangements for the
service of meals.
They advocated more comprehensive training
and enlargement of the School of Cookery, and the abolition of the
sums paid by units towards training expenses was advocated.
considered that the establishment of cooks in each unit should be
increased in order to reduce the working hours, which were in some
cases shown to be no less than 70 a week, and that the more menial
tasks should be performed (in peace) by civilian dining hall orderlies.
The length of initial training courses should be nearly doubled so as
to bring them into line with those of the sister services, and trained
cooks should be officially allowed for officers' and sergeants' messes,
which had not been the case hitherto.
The recommendations for allowing better continuity of employ-
ment and improved prospects and pay and promotion did not go
so far as QMG 6 had hoped.
Unfortunately the majority opinion
of the committee was that the formation of a special corps of cooks
was not warranted on the ground of the lack of flexibility to meet the
varying requirements of units, and of the sudden calls, difficulties in
drafting and posting, and the technical overheads and charges which
must accompany the establishment of a new corps.
The committee
were also unable to recommend that cooks should be even regarded
as regimental tradesmen.
Better rates of additional pay were to be recommended, however,
and for the first time, there was a framework for promotion which
would allow a cook to reach a higher rank than sergeant and
ultimately commissioned rank as a messing inspector.
The report
