172
THE MIDDLE EAST II
area, operations of considerable importance were taking place else-
where, straining still further the limited administrative resources
available.
A force of four companies of the Equatorial Corps SDF
were advancing over the Boma Plateau to occupy Maji and join up
with an East African force advancing from Kenya.
Lack of trans-
port was the main difficulty here since the distance to Maji was
about 450 miles over roads which were impassable from May to
October because of rain.
A Belgian infantry contingent, together
with a force of Sudanese irregulars, were moved 200 miles eastwards
from Malakal to occupy and hold the Akobo-Gambela-Daga line.
A force of Ethiopian patriots had been raised in Khartoum during
1940 with great secrecy, and at the end of the year was moved to
the Roseires area with the object of containing large enemy forces,
fanning the patriot revolt and eventually advancing into Ethiopia
through Kurmuk, leading the way for the re-entry to his kingdom of
Emperor Haile Selassie.
This meant the dumping of huge tonnages
of supplies and stores along the line of advance.
The provision of
sufficient transport was out of the question, and the task was eventually
effected mainly by camel and mule transport, the feeding of which
again added to the problem.
At the peak there were 15,000 camels
and 4,000 mules employed, most of which died for the cause, since it
was quite impossible to maintain both the patriots and the animals.
When Keren was decided upon as the main front it became
operationally necessary to make a large diversion along the Red
Sea littoral.
The force allotted to this task was about 6,000 all
ranks, and again the motor transport available for their maintenance
was totally inadequate.
Supply by sea was the only solution, and
all available native dhows were collected for the purpose.
force was maintained successfully by this method from Port Suda by
the use of small anchorages along the route, but the chief dificully
lay in providing the essential supply detachments.
Apart from
these larger operations minor commitments were
continually arising and adding
to the administrative difficulties.
For
instance the French Tchad Battalion arrived at the Sudan
frontier with French West Africa at only 48 hours' notice, being
conveved in biles under ordars not to do farther than Fasher.
This entailed chartering a civil aircraft to ay rations to the battalion
and hiring civil vehicles at El Obeid to transport it the 375 mills
from Fasher to the railhead at El Obeid.
Again in mid March it was learned that some
1,200 South
Africans with 800 vehicles, which wern urgently required in Egyp,
were arriving at Juba in the southern Sudan and were to mov
by road through the Sudan to Wadi Halfa in the north.
arrangements over the 1,500 miles of rough track were made,
the last convoy successfully reached Wadi Halfa on May 15th.
THE SUDAN AND ERITREA
173
The Main Advance
However, returning to the main area of operations, it had become
clear by the beginning of February that the enemy intended to
stand on the heights of Keen dominating the plain in which our
forces were now deployed.
The position was a formidable one with
no way round.
Its capture would need the full strength of both
divisions.
This required a comprehensive administrative plan.
Both divisions had, within 14 days, advanced some 180 miles
mostly across country.
Vehicles were badly in need of maintenance,
spare parts and tyres were scarce, particularly for the Cape MT
Companies.
Altogether
the
MT
situation
was
so acute that
drastic measures were inevitable if the maintenance of the required
force in the Keren area was to be assured.
It soon became abun-
dantly clear that both divisions could not be maintained so far
forward of railhead and at the same time sufficient ammunition and
other stores dumped for a major and intense action.
It was decided
therefore that 5th Indian Division, less one infantry brigade, should
withdraw to the Tessenei area, whence it could maintain itself with
first line transport from railhead at Kassala.
On completion of this
withdrawal HQ troops Sudan assumed control of the maintenance
of 4th Indian Division and the dumping programme.
The Cape
MT companies, two of the three second line RIASC companies of
5th Indian Division, and one SDF MT company were pooled under
a hastily improvised HQ L of C sub-area.
This ill-staffed and ill-
equipped headquarters arrived at Kassala railhead on February
I5th and the dumping programme began on the next day.
It was planned to establish forward sufficient rations and petrol
for both divisioas for 14 days and enough ammunition for the battle,
The tonnages were: petrol t,340; supplies 840; ammunition 1, 120,đ
total of 3,300 tons.
There were also considerable quantities of
other stores to be moved, and the normal daily requirements of 4th
Indian Division and the brigade of eth Indian Division, some 200
The distance from railhead to the dumping area was 16o miles,
the first 40 miles of which was over rough desert tracks and wadis.
Two pack mule companies which had recently amired from Egypt
were used for the maintenance of troops in forward positions,
only did they release inhicles, bot they were of inestimable value in
the rocky hills where it was impossible to use motor transport.
supplement the total lift available, hired camel convoys were used
to move petrol forward.
These
convoys,
although
slow and
uneconomical, were none the less of value.
Bu the end of Fehrary the units of ith Indian Division were
feeling tha fanta he antinue hard Cohting on the hille and it
became evident that the division must ither be misued or the
