378
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
Ranger battalion were awarded the Military Medal on the recom-
mendation of the United States Army authorities.
The work of
624 (fast launch) Company in shepherding the dukws deserves a
mention, and 626 (harbour launch) Company performed every kind
of task in and about the 'Mulberry', including fire-boat duty with
the petrol and ammunition ships and carriage of barrage balloons
for the RAF.
The British 'Mulberry' and the Great Storm
The great storm which destroyed the American prefabricated
harbour,
and
caused severe damage to the British
'Mulberry',
began on June igth, and blew for three days and nights. Men of
the motorboat companies distinguished themselves in rescue efforts.
In one case, 16o anti-aircraft gunners were marooned on isolated
rocks, swept by huge seas, and the emplacements were breaking up.
The Navy was busy trying to save its own small craft, and the RASC
was asked to do what it could to bring the men off.
Sgt R. J.
Yeabsley and a crew of four of a motor fishing-vessel at once volun-
teered, and fought their way into the teeth of the gale.
It was
unsafe to bring the vessel alongside, and the coxswain approached
bow on.
As the craft neared the rock, Cpl K. Popperwell accom-
plished the difficult and dangerous feat of jumping across the gap
with a line to make fast.
Half the men scrambled on board the
first time, and the rest on a second trip.
Sgt Yeabsley was handling
his craft for five hours in the most difficult conditions of wind and
sea, and brought off the rescue only just in time.
He was awarded
the British Empire Medal for gallantry.
Even without a storm, conditions in and around the 'Mulberry'
were none too good.
The Rear Admiral who was naval officer in
charge wrote: 'We at Arromanches had one object only, to maintain
discharge of stores at the maximum rate.
whole time
shipping lying in a dense mass off the Normandy coast was being
attacked in one way or another.
You had your share of V weapons
in London, but I do not suppose you ever saw a human torpedo
going up in Piccadilly, or a one-man submarine in the Round Pond.
the time we had those wasnish weapons, including E-boats,
explosive motorbonte and circling torpedoes, making a nuisance of
themselves.
night about 3o
to 40 aircraft dropped either
mines or torpedoes?
The Admiral went on to relate how one night
a mine came down in a narrow bottleneck. through which nearly
all the traffic had to pass, and a but was, parto mark the place
until the mine
disposal men could get to work.
A RASC boat
made fhat to the buov. and the crew began to have lunch: they were
told forcefully to move on.
Next morning there was an explosion
and at the site of the huoy there was the plume of a mine, a mound
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
of water some 200 feet high, on the side of which was a dukw.
But that was not the end of the dukw. It slid off, and came ashore
under its own steam.
The Admiral sent a signal to CRASC: 'I am
aware of the many and varied duties which your dukws so efficiently
perform, but until this morning I did not realize that minesweeping
If the crew of the dukw report at Navy House,
they will receive the customary award the Admiralty makes to
anyone who sweeps a mine?
drivers received was a bottle of Scotch.
or not, the
inevitable result was that dukws tended to meander in search of
General Conditions within the Bridgehead
By June yth, 50th Division had captured Bayeux, Caen fell
alter fierce resistance, on July gth, and there followed the crossing
of the Orne by the three armoured divisions of VIII Corps.
Americans broke out of the beach-head in the Cherbourg Peninsula
on July 25th, and the fighting in the Falaise pocket lasted until
August zand, when the next phase of the campaign may be said
to have begun. During that period, the build-up of formation
transport and of GHQ and line of communication corps units
proceeded steadily, the maintenance system gradually developed
and settled down, and divisional units inevitably became closely
involved in the bitter fighting within the bridgehead in the course
of their arduous routine tasks.
But the incidents are too numerous
to quote here and too repetitive to interest the general reader.
The transport driver casting his memory back to those days in
the beach-head must have a picture of long houre, including much
night work, over hard, narrow sunken roads, and his fair share of
shelling, mortar and small arms fire.
The tipper driver will recall,
in particular, his work with the divisional engineers on the bridges
and tank crossings over the Orne and the Odon.
ambulance drivers have
Many of the
proud memories of gallant
work in
collecting wounded under forward battle conditions and of driving
them back through sniper
fire and shelled bottlenecks.
delivery of mines at night to the forward positions in front of Caen
who served with the grd Division.
must form part of the dream repertoire of many a Corps reservist
of th Armoured Division, when delayed south of Caen,
Again the voracity of the guns
probably made a lasting impression on all ranks then concerned in
the delivery to that formation of an average of 62 lorry-loads a day.
Finally, a few significant entries into the theatre during the period
should be recorded.
Two weeks after D Day, bread with special
keeping properties was down in for consumption in hospitals, and
RASC bakeries we was tablished and in production by carly July.
