324
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
with the unit.
When hostilities began none of the Malays were
armed because of the difficulty of weapon training and lack of
weapons.
Yet it is recounted that at least some platoons acquired
rifles and tommy-guns from abandoned stocks and soon trained
themselves by using them in earnest, to such good purpose that they
were allowed to retain them.
Because of the lack of artificers,
many civilians had to be employed in the units' workshops and they
too remained with their units, perhaps because of the ready agree-
ment to the request that their families should accompany them under
the wing of the unit.
Withdrawal to Singapore
By the time our forces in the west had been redeployed on the
Slim River positions, they were in no fit state to continue to oppose
the strong enemy columns which were being reinforced continually.
Weeks of fighting and marching had already taken their toll.
The
situation was extremely serious, as it was considered vital to continue
to hold the enemy on the mainland until the arrival of promised
reinforcements which, with the entry of the United States into the
war, were to be on a scale that had not been possible before.
Information had already been received in December that the 18th
British Infantry Division,
with anti-aircraft and anti-tank units,
and some 50 Hurricane aircraft and crews, were on the high seas
and other immediate reinforcements were on their way from India.
The only
course was to
withdraw to a shorter line.
The two
Indian divisions broke off contact with the enemy and a new line
of defence, Segemat-Muar, was selected about 150 miles to the rear.
It was held by the Australian Division and 45th Indian Infantry
Brigade.
The III Indian Corps was brought back into Johore to
reorganize and, it was hoped, to refit.
During the evacuation from central Malaya, the MT companies
were moved back towards Singapore by stages, 43 and 47 being
placed at the disposal of the Officer Commanding, RASC, who had
been appointed to the Administrative headquarters of Johore and
Malacca, a few miles from Johore Bahru.
The supply depot at
Seremban was successfully evacuated under heavy air bombardment,
and the remaining depot on the mainland at Segamat was reorgan-
ized to supply the increased numbers of troops in that area.
By the
middle of January, arrangements were made to send forward all
formation requirements from the base depots at Bukit Timah on
Singapore Island
various roadheads
where they
collected by formations' own transport.
As our forces were pressed
back after the sanguinary fighting which took place in the battle of
Muar, the depot at Segamat had also to be given up, and from then
onwards all troops were supplied from depots on the mainland or
MALAYA
325
from dumps established near Johore Bahru, distribution being
effected by 43 and 47 Companies, assisted by three Indian brigade
transport companies, to three roadheads in the areas of Yong Peng,
Kluang and Labis (See Fin Estate).
A new depot established at
Rengem had a very short life and had to be evacuated on January
25th.
The work of endeavouring to save as many stores and
material as possible went on apace there; then 140 vehicles a day
had to be found to move ammunition from Johore Bahru to island
sites, and some 50 vehicles were used for removing the equipment
of the British and Australian General Hospitals.
Other transport
had to be found for clearing the Engineer Stores Depot, and this
work was combined with the forward move of defence stores such as
concrete blocks which were urgently wanted in the Johore area for
anti-tank defences.
Heavy attacks on the new line of defence and further landings by
strong enemy forces on both the east and west coasts demonstrated
that there seemed to be little hope of continuing the struggle on
the mainland and that a withdrawal into Singapore was inevitable.
Reinforcements were arriving, but the first to land on January grd
was the 45th Indian Infantry Brigade, consisting of untried troops.
Being soon committed to battle, it suffered grievously in the battle
of Segamat.
The first elements of the 18th British Division, the
53rd Infantry Brigade, also arrived in the middle of January, and
they also sustained heavy losses for the same reason.
The landing of the division, which was only completed at the end
of January, marked the arrival of the first British divisional RASC in
the command.
Originally destined for service in the Persian Gulf,
the RASC had, in common with the rest of this division,
been
embarked in Britain in October, 1941.
The formation went first
to Canada, where it was re-embarked in American ships and set
sail via Trinidad for the Cape, where its destination was altered to
the Middle East.
While on its way to the Middle East, there was
a further change in destination, the convoys being split, two of the
RASC companies being directed to Burma and two to Malaya, but
a further change then brought all four companies to
Singapore.
By the time the CRASC had landed, two companies had already
arrived, the remaining two following about 1o days later, their
convoy being heavily bombed as it passed through the approaches
to Singapore.
Units were equipped with borrowed vehicles until their int
transport could be landed, and all four companies
came into
operation immediately
after landing,
but they
never
function as a divisional RASC, as only one company carried out its
normal role, the others being used for troop carrying, for carrying
bridging material, and for forming an extemporary infantry unit
