630
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
under command of Captain S. Sutherland-Waite to reconnoitre the
area of the forest clearing which was their destination.
This was
in enemy hands.
The remaining glider crews were to rendezvous at a certain
hedge junction with carriers and trailers and to await the signal from
the reconnaissance party that all was clear to proceed. The
trailers would then be offloaded and the work of clearing packed
panniers from the gliders would proceed.
While this was in train,
Lieutenant Campbell and the nine other ranks of 22 Independent
Parachute Company, together with six spotters and as many RASC
men as could be spared for defence, would go to the pre-selected
supply dropping point, ready for marking it out and observing the
supply drop planned for P plus 3.
All available transport from the gliders (with the help of 40 jeeps
and trailers from air landing units which would be available at
P plus 6) would then clear the dropped supplies.
On the arrival
of the air landing, transport, Lieutenant Roberts, RASC, with six
carriers and trailers, would be detached to clear the compo packs
from gliders in the surrounding landing zones so that compo rations
would be ready for issue by 1000 hours on D plus 1.
Finally, when all other tasks had been completed, the company
would set about the collection of any supplies and ammunition
left over from the jettison drop planned to take place over the
dropping zones of grd and gth Parachute Brigades.
This was an ambitious task for such a small force, and nobody
expected any rest for at least 48 hours, but all were full of confidence
and morale was high when they emplaned at Woodbridge, Suffolk,
early on March 24th, 1945•
Take-off was at 0730 hours, and all
went apparently well until the Rhine was reached, when the air
became bumpy and considerable flak was encountered.
Visibility,
hitherto excellent, suddenly closed down owing to smoke and dust
from the arillery barrage, and the ground at the landing zone was
only visible from a height of some 200 feet.
This made the task of
the glider pilots more hazardous than usual, and it is not surprising
that the landings were made on widely dispersed points and not
on the landing, zone covered by the briefing.
Landings took olace between to10 and to6f hours and in ali
cases flak of varying intensity was encountered.
Once on the
ground, gliders came under small arms and mortar fire, which
caused damage to loads and casualties to troops.
As there is a de diad acco eat oathes tate of the individual gliders
given in the Chapter on Airborne RASC (page 535), it must
Mies Lace to eat that one eached LaCes sendeine the Baclich coast
with serious injury to all its occupants, that three crashed well
outside the landing zone with the loss (killed, wounded or missing)
916 COMPANY (AIRBORNE LIGHT)
6gt
of their crews, while eight landed with more or less success, but
with the loss of one glider pilot killed and two officers and it other
ranks wounded.
Three carriers out of the eight landed were put
out of action almost immediately, mainly by enemy mortar and
small arms fire.
One crew, under Set Whittall, landed very near the appointed
render crew, i were on the scene by t10o hours, where they were
alone until Captain Lewenhaupt and his crew, with their carrier
and trailer, arrived.
The captain went at once to reconnoitre
the area, as he realized that the reconnaissance party which had been
briefed for the job had not arrived,
Soon afterwards the crews of
three other gliders arrived.
Captain S. Sutherland-Waite, though
wounded in the arm, pluckily carried on in the absence of the
company commander, and soon things began to take shape.
There were now available for work three carriors and one trailer!
The party, however, captured a German g-ton lorry, loaded with
ammunition, which was quickly unloaded and pressed into service
after minor repairs by the fitter.
The result of all this was that
when the supply drop was effected at 1g00 hours, there was no
transport available to clear the eupply dropping point. The dro
itself was extremely scattered and conducted from so low an altitude
that most parachutes failed to open fully, and much damage was
done to containers and contents,
When the exiguous transport already referred to became available,
containers were emptied where they lay, to save space in the vehicles,
and this was in hand when the company commander, Major
C. P. R. Crane, arrived.
At 16oo hours the situation was tense for the RASC, Both
Sth and 6th Air-landing Brigades were waiting for ammunition,
and there was little available.
There was no storeman present,
and issues were made direct from the containers as demands came in.
The position,
however, gradually improved, and by iBoo hours
there were six carriers and three trailers, plus the German lorry at
work, while a dump had been set up containing most kinds of
ammunition.
No contact had been made with Captain Tuff, CRASCA
representative, so at i8go hours the company commander went
direct to A/Q 6th Airborne Division to advise him of the position,
He then learned that Captain Fuelf had been severely wounded
and evacuated, and that A/O, too, had not arrived, He arranged
with the DAQMG that as many air-landing jeeps and trailers as
were available should report to the landing zone and that, if oppont.
tion were not too intense, eleatance of the zone should continue
all night by moonlight.
In hard fact, of the 40 jeeps and trailers
which were supposed to report for this work, only to arrived, and
