316
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
many calls on India from the Middle East and elsewhere.
The
AIF,
on the other hand, were complete with corps troops and
their Government came to the rescue by despatching two reserve
MT companies to be at the disposal of the RASC.
They were
magnificent companies manned by
veterans of the First
World
War, and they gave invaluable service.
As already mentioned, the only means of providing the number
of companies which were required was by raising MT companies
locally.
When the question of the establishment of locally enlisted
companies was considered, the War Office were naturally anxious
to conserve their resources in British officers and NCOs, and urged
strongly that all NCOs should be locally enlisted Malays.
But the
command were adamant in their view that it was impossible to
produce efficient NCOs above the rank of corporal because of lack
of experience and education.
As the need for expansion became
pressing, the GOC gave authority for raising three companies,
but
in doing so he had to set aside the local demurs that War Office
authority would have to
be obtained first.
The companies were
soon recruited, but only a few of the Malays could drive or had any
mechanical experience, and the number of British officers and other
ranks for providing the requisite cadres was limited.
When the
local transport organizations were built up, the officer reinforce-
ments proved to be first class material and excellently
trained.
It was not long before they showed themselves well fitted for promo-
tion to captain and later for commanding companies.
Some direct
commissions were also given to local residents who brought with
them their knowledge of the country, its inhabitants and languages.
Until vehicles could be supplied by the War Office, units were
equipped with lorries which were purchased locally, as there was a
fairly good supply of both Ford and Chevrolet trucks to be obtained
in Singapore.
As soon as the first two companies-28 and 35-
had been raised, they were allocated to act as second line transport
for Force Emu and the Malaya Brigades, and a third company, 42,
was completed soon afterwards.
To
provide for the number of ambulances which would be
wanted, plans of the standard Flint stretcher gear were obtained
from Britain and, with certain modifications,
this equipment was
manufactured locally so as to equip vehicles improvised for the
purpose.
In 194I
two
motor ambulance convoys were raised
Incally.
While the RASC were exploiting local resources in man-
power to the utmost and had successfully raised three MI com-
panies, it was impossible to get enough skilled MT artificers,;
with the growth of the MT organization it was imperative to provide
the equivalent of the three main maintenance units which were
an essential part of the RASC MT organiation a heavy repair
MALAYA
317
shop, an MT stores depot and a vehicle reserve depot. A call
had therefore to be made on home resources, which was eventually
met by a composite British unit, 28 Combined MT Depot, to fill
all three functions.
The depot arrived just in time to assist with
the uncrating and assembly of Canadian vehicles (4 x 4 Marmon
Herringtons) which were arriving in large numbers.
On arrival
the depot was temporarily established in a large exhibition hall
known as the MAHA Stadium at Kuala Lumpur.
It was aug-
mented by drivers of one of the Australian Reserve MT companies,
many of whom had been employed in peacetime in the Ford works
at Sydney, and part of the work had also to be let out to civilian
garages in Singapore.
The War Office had also begun to send other
vehicles from Britain, principally cars, motorcycles and technical
vehicles, and these, with the vehicles which had been purchased
locally, enabled all the locally raised units to be well equipped
before hostilities began.
There were many vehicles still remaining
to be uncrated and assembled when the first Japanese landings took
place, and the work had to be continued on the dockside, the second
Australian Reserve MT Company undertaking the task.
But towards the end, the supply of suitable men for enlistment
and training as drivers began to fail, and it was decided to extend
recruiting to the Federated Malay States.
In 194I, a Malay Com-
pany, No. 43, was recruited at Kuala Lumpur and was being followed
by a second when hostilities broke out.
But a few weeks before, it
had been possible to break fresh ground when an approach was made
to the influential Chinese in Perak with a view to raising the first
Chinese company.
After a conference lasting three hours in the
Chinese Secretariat at Ipoh, the plan was agreed to on the under-
standing that the unit should be known as a Perak Chinese company.
It was raised in a very short time, as about three quarters of those
enlisted were fully trained drivers,
many of them
having had
experience on the Burma Road.
This unit, 47 (Perak
Chinese)
Reserve MT Company, did excellent work when the time came to
operate a few weeks later, and a special mention must be made of
the loyalty and courage of the two Chinese officers who, although
there was no known form of legal commission which could be given
to them, upheld the tradition of the uniform they wore.
The mobilization plan for impressing and hiring transport was
also expanded and perfected.
Fortunately the RASC had a close
liaison with the central authority for the control of civil transport
in Malaya, the FMS Transport Board.
The head of this board was
Mr. A. L. Stallworthy. and his technical adviser. a former Corps
officer, was Lieut-Colonel Mervyn Cox.
Many lorries and cars
were requisitioned, and on mobilization all vehicles reported to
13 Reserve MT Company, who arranged the delivery of impressed
