CHAPTER III
NORWAY, 1940
S in the First World War, the Scandinavian countries strove
to retain their neutrality at all costs.
Their peoples were
by no means universally in favour of the aims of either the
Allies or the Nazi Powers.
Their governments feared the latter,
especially when allied to the Russians,
but could not trust the
Allies,
who seemed too far off to give adequate defence; their
commercial prosperity demanded free use of the seas and free
exports of their resources; and their armed forces were in no
condition to take an effective part in their own defence.
They had,
in fact, everything to gain, and nothing to lose,
from continued
neutrality.
In retrospect, however, it is quite obvious that Norway
at least could not remain neutral indefinitely.
She was in several
respects of far too great importance to both sides.
From the Alliea
point of view, this importance related to three principal considera-
tions.
A glance at the map shows that off the whole length of Norway's
western coast, which is plentifully endowed with deep sheltered
inlets,
lies a continuous line of rocks and islets.
The channel
between them and the coast, known as 'the Leads', affords a safe
passage in territorial waters from Stavanger to North Cape.
Enemy
shipping, which the Norwegians were powerless to halt, could by
this means proceed from the Baltic to the Arctic Ocean, evading
the British minefields and naval patrols in the North Sea.
This
very serious leak in our blockade could not be allowed to go on
indefinitely; the
Leads must sooner or later be closed by British
mining, with or without the sanction of the Norwegians.
The second factor of great importance was the existence of high-
grade iron ore in North Sweden.
Germany had always been the
biggest customer for this ore, and now that her other supplies were
stopped by
blockade, while her armaments industry
was daily
importance
accelerating its output, the Swedish ore was of the most desperate
ore is exported both from
Sweden, on the Gulf of Bothnia, and from Narvik on the Norwegian
coast, just within the Arctic circle; but whereas Lulea is frozen up
for some months in the winter, Narvik remains ice-free, and handles
the greater part of the exports.
Adherence by Norway to the Allied
NORWAY, 1940
89
cause would therefore deny great quantities of steel to the German
armaments industry.
With the sudden and vicious attack upon Finland by Russia on
November goth, 1939, a third consideration was presented which
made the co-operation of Norway of still greater importance to the
Allies, who were able to supply the Finns with some material aid—
aircraft for example-but could send no forces to fight with them,
except through Norway.
This particularly irritated the French,
who held the opinion that the best way into Germany was from the
north, and that the opening of a Finnish front provided the most
certain way of winning a war which seemed elsewhere at stalemate.
The Norwegians, however,
obstinately continued to refuse all
facilities to the passage of Allied troops, even in civilian guise.
To
them the British guarantee of defence, which had ignominiously
failed to save Poland from disaster, seemed of small value.
Never-
theless, the Allies pressed on with the preparation of a force for
Finland, which in March was to land at Narvik, Trondhjem, Bergen,
and Stavanger, as the forerunner of a much greater army of some
150,000 men.
But Allied counsels were divided, and the excuse for
action vanished when the Finns surrendered on February 12th.
The forces were stood down.
Instead, it was decided to proceed with the operation (thought to
be less objectionable to Norway) of mining the Leads.
taneously a force was to be prepared to occupy Narvik, Bergen,
and Trondhjem, since it was feared-or perhaps hoped-that the
mining might provoke Germany to invade Norway, which would
give the force an excuse to land.
During the long period of Allied indecision,
the Germans, who
did not feel obliged to take any account of Norwegian feelings, and
who moreover had been led by Vidkung Quisling to expect a hearty
welcome from a large part of the people, prepared to the last detail
a plan to invade Norway with six divisions and more than 1,000
aircraft. Their invasion was timed for
March 2oth,
postponed because of persistence of the ice in some ports, until
April gth.
The British mine-laying expedition, fixed for April 5th,
postponed through last-minute Allied disagreements, until the 8th.
The German Invasion
The various naval
evolutions which took
place are
interest, but their place is not in this volume: the official history
of great
deals fully with them.
It is perhaps sufficient to say that the
Germans, having every advantage, seized Oslo, Bergen, Trondhjem
and Narvik on April gth, and thus established themselves firmly
before our land forces could reach the coast.
In particular, they
