336
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
that a ration of 3 lb a day was maintained, and a reserve built up.
From August, 1942, ST were directly responsible for the control
of supplies, the central canteen, wood supply, gardens and the
central piggery.
Help was also given to units in their messing
arrangements, and a Changi cookery book was produced.
The 18th Divisional RASC, which remained as a unit throughout,
maintained a high standard of discipline and so of morale.
May, 1943, a reorganization of the camp by the Japanese resulted
in most of the Corps units being split up, and their men distributed
among those of other units.
But one thing survived which had
already been instrumental in helping RASC men to endure the
conditions and keep their self-respect, and that was what they called
'Corps spirit'.
In face of adversity it proved its reality, not least
in the following way.
To enable the officers to keep in touch with their men, and to
help the sick in hospital, an RASC welfare club was formed.
president and a welfare officer were appointed, and representatives
of the various groups of other ranks were elected.
Fortnightly
meetings
were held for informal talks
and coffee.
Voluntary
subscriptions
met the cost of these, and enabled tobacco and
cigarettes to be sent to Corps men in hospital, where other ranks
only received a nominal rate of pay.
Sometimes the business of
delivering these amenities to the patients was difficult and dangerous,
being contrary to orders, but men were never lacking to undertake
the work.
The welfare officer advised men on family and personal
affairs. Corps Sunday was celebrated with a church parade and a
march past.
Later it was only
possible to provide tobacco and
cheroots for the men in hospital; then these became so costly that
members of the club were asked to give one day's pay a month,
from which 'insurance money' of 5 to 7 cents a day was paid to
hospital patients.
When numbers fell too low, the officers increased
their subscriptions, and the insurance was kept up.
Of the other ranks employed in the ration and fuel service, 19
were from the RASC, with eight from the AASC and one local
capitulation.
The majority of men were so employed from the time of the
The hours of work were long, and
the work was
extremely strenuous on a prisoner of war diet.
In spite of this,
it
is on record that it would be impossible to find a more loyal,
competent, trustworthy, and hard-working staff.
By 1945,
the ration situation became more and more complex,
and a constant watch had to be kept on stocks and scales.
Japanese insisted that the
should stop of pooling the
different classes of rations (heavy duty, light duty and no duty)
for the benefit of the worst off, and that each class should receive
the appropriate ration; this, in the case of the staple item, rice,
Loading a Landing Craft
K66I-7
Carrying a Churchill
54/155
