200
the desert, which proved, on the whole, not difficult.
were not great, navigation did not present a problem.
Habforce, from the beginning of the operations in Iraq in May, 1941,
until the conclusion of the Syrian campaign, always worked with a
forward and rear headquarters.
The CRASC himself was usually
located with AA & QMG at divisional headquarters, and his rear
headquarters controlled loading and despatching of convoys between
roadhead and FSDs.
FSDs for Habforce were located at H3,
Juffa and Qtannia, in that order.
Persia and Iraq, 1942-Aid to Russia
Up to September, 1942, Persia and Iraq bad formed part of the
wide flung responsibilities of GHQ Middle East in Cairo.
Persia and Iraq Command (PAIC) came into existence in Septem-
The territory having been the scene of pro-Axis rebel-
lions, which had been successfully quelled, was now garrisoned by
a force mainly consisting of Indian Army units.
six months it looked as if that
zone might be destined to play
a vital role in the war.
The tide of war then turned and the
command, which continued to exist as such until the end of the
war for other purposes, ceased to be a potential theatre of active
The importance of the area to the Allies was twofold: it contained
important oilfields, including the huge refineries at Abadan, near
Basra, on which the RAF relied for much of its aviation spirit; and
it was one of the few routes through which supplies could reach
South Russia from the outside world.
During the summer of 1942, the German advances in South
Russia were meeting with alarming success, and had almost reached
the Caucasus Mountains, which separate Russia from Persia.
great fortress of Stalingrad, on the north side of the Caucasus, was
heavily besieged, and there were no very solid grounds for expecting
that it would be able to withstand the hammer blows which were
being rained upon it.
The fall of Stalingrad would leave the road
to Persia, the oilfields, and to India wide open; it would also create
a dangerous exposed flank for the Middle East.
The role allotted to the Persia and Iraq Command was to prepare
to prevent the German forces from sweeping into Persia and Iraq if
the Russians failed to hold them, and to develop and maintain a
line of communication from the Persian Gulf to Russia along which
This latter
supplies and material could be sent to the Russians.
role was to be carried out with the aid of the United States Persian
Gulf Service Command which was established some months later.
The former role, that of preventina a victorious German army from
invading Persia and Iraq and controlling the country so that the
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
United States Service Command (which had no combat troops
at all) could operate, was left entirely to the British and Indian
The Indian Army Force HQ, which had been established in
Bagdad, was reorganized into HQ Tenth Army, and moved up to
Persia, to be prepared to fight the battles that might lie ahead.
General Sir H. Maitland Wilson, who had been appointed C-in-C
PAIC, set about establishing a new GHQ in Bagdad.
staff immediately settled down to planning.
narrow neck of land between the Black Sea and the Caspian, about
300 miles across and just south of the Caucasus, was selected as the
line to be held, and plans were based on i divisions being available.
Planning was necessarily on a somewhat broad pattern, for no one
could answer such questions as where the divisions were coming
from, whether they would be British or Indian, armoured or
infantry, what weapons they would have, and many other facts
necessary for detailed planning.
however, was quite
clear-that to maintain a force of i divisions in any kind of action
300 miles in front of a railhead, which itself was the end of a 600-
mile single-track railway from the base, a great deal of development
in the base and line of communication areas would have to be put
in hand without a moment's delay.
When the Tenth Army moved up to Persia and began to expand
into an operational headquarters, it took with it most of the main-
tenance units, which were soon replaced by British Army units; it
was thus that many RASC units found themselves in Iraq or Persia
during the autumn of 1942. Supply, petroleum and
units of all sorts, mostly organized on new war
cvolved as a result of experience gained in the Western Desert,
began to pour in.
One of the divisions which came under command of Paiforce was
the 5th British Division.
tion of a long journey.
Its entry into the theatre was the culmina-
It had been moved by road from
in Johore down to Bombay and thence up the Persian Gulf to Basra
arriving there at the peak of hot season.
From Basra it moved
overland to Bagdad and thence by means of convoys to Qum, just
south of Teheran.
Its exit from the theatre was equally difficult
since it moved in winter and by road from Qum to Bagdad and
thence across Trans-Jordan to Damascus in Syria.
The RIASC was still organized largely as the RASC was before
the war; each transport unit was tailor-made for the role it was
designed to fill, and the broader organization of standard platoons
had not got beyond the GT companies.
was in advance of the RASC; it had already lost its first line repair
In one respect the RIASC
units, and each RIASC unit had attached to it a detachment of the
