Carrying Bridging Material
01601025
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
81
rail and road as quickly as possible, and the CRASC had little
time to make his arrangements for clearing the area and at the same
time maintaining the force (the division had several corps troops
units attached to it) while on its journey. More than 1,000 tons
of ammunition had to be collected, but neither the section of a corps
ammunition company left behind for the purpose nor the ammuni-
tion trains which were loaded were seen again.
The supply com-
pany had to be divided to feed the road parties on a relay system
and to maintain units as they arrived by rail at their new destina-
tion. At one period of the move the petrol company was spread
over 300 miles. They had dumped their normal load of blankets
and anti-gas equipment to make room for more
petrol on the
understanding that the loads they had dumped would be forwarded
later by train.
By the time the division had taken up its new positions at the end
of May, on the River Bresle south of the Somme, the divisional
RASC had already had a gruelling test which makes their subsequent
behaviour in the final days of St. Valéry all the more praiseworthy.
Situation at the end of May
By the end of May the situation was becoming clearer, although
plans, or the future outlook, were by no means firm.
In the area
between the Somme and the Seine the French were deploying their
divisions which later became the French Tenth Army:
The British
had the 51st Division, part of Ist Armoured Division and the
miscellancous units which by May 3ist had been organized into three
nominal brigades and designated the Beauman Division, so that
the immediate security of the British base about Le Havre and
Rouen was no longer in imminent peril. There was also the first
inkling of the hope that it might be possible to reform a new BEF,
when it could be equipped, and transfer it to France to fight again.
The administrative situation was, however,
a peculiar one, as
the base depots had to be prepared on the one hand to carry on,
and on the other to reduce the risk of losing the valuable stocks
which were held to a minimum.
The more northerly depots were
therefore ordered to run down their stocks as soon as possible, and
in the depots to the south preliminary steps were taken to sort and
prepare for the evacuation of the more valuable goods.
were given for all further despatch of maintenance stocks from home
to cease, and in certain cases for material which
was urgently
required at home to build up the home defences, to be shipped back
to England as soon as possible.
The manner in which the RASC was able to fulfil their two
apparently contradictory roles of carrying on and at the same time
being ready to 'go' will be described later.
GI RASC
The only RASC shortage
