18a
THE MIDDLE EAST II
action by June, 1941.
The principal problems confronting the
BAASC were that the MTSD
was exhausted, supply staff and
storage were inadequate to contend with the ever-increasing feeding
strengths, there was a serious lack of trained officers, British NCOs
and
artificers,
and the HRS had no machinery.
The vehicle
situation was gradually improving, but transport was fully extended
in meeting existing demands.
Yet it was required to support tio
additional brigades which were being formed, and to maintain a
line of communication which would lengthen if the advance were
successful.
Finally there were two separate supply and transport
organizations,
East African and South African,
each operating
independently and to some extent duplicating each other's work.
These problems were further aggravated when the Commander
advanced his plans by four months.
There were, however, some assets.
The War Office had under
taken to reinforce the EAASC with drafts of RASC officers and
other ranks.
Shipment was promised of 5,000 g-ton lorries, includ-
ing some of workshop, stores and breakdown vehicles, over a period
of six months.
About s,000 lorries and many smaller vehicles were
bought through local agents.
These
would make possible
formation of 15 new reserve MT companies and three more infantry
brigade group companies.
However, after the arrival of the first
1,500 lorries,
Middle East claimed the remainder, and this los
caused a shortage throughout the campaign.
There was a chronic dearth of MT spares, because of the failure
of the South African forces to
make
provision for
an adequate
reserve.
Thousands of Fords came into the country with the Union
forces, and provision for their
maintenance
was
completely
inadequate.
Important reforms were introduced early in 1941.
It had all
South
along been obvious
that, to have two separate services,
African and East African, was not only
wasteful, but would be
fraught with difficulties if big operations took place.
The endin
supply and transport organization for the campaign was therefor
consolidated under the DDST (Brigadier C. V. Bennett).
Until November, 1940, petrol was controlled by the stal, drough
ADS (petrol, which was unsatisfactory from the ST point of vin.
and arrangements were therefore made for thi service to berne
the responsibility of DDST.
In addition to the oil companies bulk
storage, a reserve stock of nearly eight miltion gallous of pasted
petrol was built up just before the advance.
In the event of the
source of supply from the Middle Basa, Persia and Trang brng cut chi,
mine million gallons were held in Durban, representing abour pher
months supply, of which aue third wasan, ter ready dr andiane
despatch.
Alternative routes by
which petrol could enter
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
183
Africa were planned, one from South Africa either through Broken
Hill by road, or through Dar-es-Salaam or Tanga, and the other from
Leopoldville in the Belgian Congo by road and river.
The northern part of Kenya adjoining the 9o0-mile-long frontier
of the Italian possessions was a desert waste over which the roads
were few and poor, often little more than camel tracks.
All types
of surface were encountered; belts of lava rock sometimes 40 miles
wide consisting of sharp-edged rocks, which tore tyres to pieces
and ruined springs and radiators; fine sand sometimes to feet deep;
and treacherous black cotton soil, which became glutinous after
the least rain.
There was a great scarcity of water.
Fine dust
penetrated carburettors, radiators, clutches and dynamos.
It was
over the roads traversing this country that the transport units worked
between June, 1940, and February, 1941, maintaining the forward
troops, and building up large reserve dumps of food, petrol, ammuni-
tion and other war material.
The distance from our railheads to the frontier averaged about
300 miles.
It was partly these bad conditions that deterred the
Italians from advancing into Kenya, after they had driven back our
advanced troops near the
Sudan frontier in July, 1940.
They
preferred to adopt a containing policy as far as our forces in Kenya
were concerned, and to make a more spectacular conquest of British
Somaliland, from which our small force, hopelessly outnumbered,
was forced to withdraw in August, 1940.
The main dump was at Garissa, about 200 miles east of Nairobi,
and was based on the Thika railhead, go miles from that city.
might have appeared easier and more economical to supply Garissa
by road direct from Mombasa,
but the road connecting the two
places was poor, liable to interruption by flood, and involved ferrying
at two points,
besides passing
through the coastal malarial belt.
It was therefore, more economical in time and labour to avoid
splitting the stores arriving in bulk at Mombasa, and to send them
by rail to the MSD in Nairobi.
From there they were sent to
railhead, where the reserve MT companies loaded and delivered to
refilling points.
South African reserve companies,
with European
drivers, were used for the carriage of water, as it was vital that
there should be no failure of supply in this respect.
The Aduance
In February, 1941, when the advance began, the chief problem
from the supply
and transport point of view was the physical
endurance of the men, especially those of the transport units, who
had been working without respite for nearly nine months in bringing
up stores, and now had to face operational conditions without any
opportunity for rest and
refit.
Simply to drive a lorry on the
