186
THE MIDDLE EAST II
deplorable roads was a test of stamina, and the heat was so intense
that it was difficult to keep awake at the wheel.
The advance was extremely rapid, the Italians offering little
resistance, and the port of Kisimayo, 200 miles from Garissa, was
occupied after only four days.
The unexpected rapidity with which
the lines of communication lengthened, and the consequent heavy
demands on third line transport for troop-carrying, petrol and water
supply meant that second line transport had to go back to roadheads
for supplies.
They worked on a continuous shuttle system, collecting
one week's supplies at a time, and in this way a regular and adequate
stock of all commodities was made available to the fighting troops.
Fortunately the demand for ammunition was small, as there was
little real fighting.
Through scrub so thick that drivers had to hack their way, a
brigade pushed on and crossed the Juba River where the enemy
had hoped to make a stand.
Three days later, on February 25th,
the British entered Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, and the first
stage of the campaign was over.
The transport had been operating
for a fortnight, in an advance of over 600 miles in difficult country.
While the fighting troops rested, transport men were occupied in
re-fuelling, repairing, adjusting loads and re-grouping.
men had had no rest, stocks of spares were diminishing, springs in
particular had suffered and considerable improvisation was necessary
to make good the damage.
A three weeks' rest for overhaul and refit was promised, and it was
sorely needed.
But the chance discovery of an Italian MT petrol
dump at Mogadishu of half-a-million gallons, mostly in 40-gallon
drums, made this unnecessary, which was in some ways unfortunate,
However the advance could be, and was, set in motion again.
to this point petrol had been carried in cased 4-gallon tins, which
naturally did not stand up well to the road conditions, leakage being
about one fifth of the total.
The port of Mogadishu had been mined by British aircrafi, and
was unusable,
away.
so ships were brought to Merca, about 80 miles
They had been loaded in the greatest haste, and food and
explosives were mixed in indescribable confusion.
proper port facilities, and although the whole work of supervising
the off-loading fell on the supply section of an infantry
group company, the transport was loaded and despatched.
Advance into Ethiopia
The Italians were in full retreat with our forces following hot on
their heels,
later, 650 miles from Mogadishu.
reaching and capturing Jigiga in Ethiopia, a fortnight
The first 23o miles of this had
been easy goine. alone the tarmac surface of the Strada Imperiale
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
Then the road degenerated into a flint-strewn track, followed by a
stretch of jagged rocks, laid down as the first stage of metalling;
then, after a sea of dust, the last 40 miles were over a grass plain.
The enemy were again put to flight, and the GOC decided to pursue
them relentlessly.
This threw an enormous burden on
responsible for maintaining the force, as the line from Mogadishu
was already stretched to its limit.
If the force had advanced any
farther it might have become impossible to maintain it.
However, at the critical moment, Berbera, the capital and port of
British Somaliland, was recaptured from
the Italians and the
maintenance of the East African force was rapidly switched to that
port, reducing the road line of communication to the comparatively
short distance of 200 miles.
March 29th,
Diredawa was
captured, which allowed the railway to Addis Ababa to be put into
operation as far as the Ausac gorge.
Here the railway
was in ruins, and a ferry service operated by MT companies was
conducted in difficult conditions for three months, until the bridge
All available transport, including
months before, was sent up from Kenya to keep open the line of
communication from Berbera to Diredawa.
and the roads were seas of mud.
stragglers made the road dangerous for supply convoys, which were
profitable plunder.
many vehicles out of action, but the ingenuity of workshop men and
drivers, in spite of great scarcity of spares, enabled repairs to be
Petrol supply was a crucial factor.
The 500,000 gallons taken in
Mogadishu had lasted 12 days, and many corps troops units were
stranded 400 miles from the port.
Captured petrol dumps again
helped. In the final stages of the campaign, in the drive for Addis
Ababa, petrol was the only limiting factor.
On April 6th less than two months after the start of the campaign,
East African troops entered Addis Ababa.
A total of 1,687 miles
had been covered at an average rate of 76 miles a day for each day
of movement, and of 32 miles for each day of the campaign.
distance was equivalent to that from London to the
Pursuit of the enemy was continued northwards from Addis Ababa,
and the main Italian force finally surrendered on July grd.
campaign was at an end, except for the attack on the last Italian
stronghold at Gondar. the operations for which lasted from October
In the light of experience gained in the operations, a final
reorganization of the infantry brigade group company was effectec
in December, 1941.
Sections were now placed on a commodity
