192
THE MIDDLE EAST II
reached Majunga about the same time.
The 2gth Brigade were
now withdrawn to India, but 22nd Brigade continued the operations
southwards until an armistice was signed at Ambalavao on Novem-
ber 6th.
Seen in retrospect, except that the Majunga landing was so much
slower
than had been expected, the Madagascar assaults were
carried through much as originally planned.
This was only possible
because HQ Royal Marine Division, 2gth Brigade and supporting
arms and services had planned and trained together for many
months.
Transport, equipment and stores of all kinds were neces-
sarily drastically scaled down
for the assaults, and assets were
loyally pooled.
Everyone knew everybody else and was prepared
to co-operate in a party where every man did his best.
Constantly overworked, and always under pressure to do more,
the RASC staff and units remained a cheerful and happy team
throughout, and never failed to produce what was required.
They
were well supported from the United Kingdom.
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
In the early months of 194I General Wavell's Middle East
Command was
being strained to the limit.
Rommel's counter
offensive in Cyrenaica in April had driven our main forces in the
Western Desert almost back to the Egyptian frontier.
Three weeks'
desperate fighting in Greece had ended in evacuation; the battle for
Crete was impending; Ethiopia had still to be conquered and, at the
end of April, rebellion in Iraq produced yet a further commitment.
Every advance which the Germans made in their drive through the
Balkans increased the potency
of the air attacks they could make
against us and if they were allowed to occupy Syria they could
threaten
the Canal Zone and the vital communications between
Palestine and Iraq.
The infiltration of German agents into Vichy-
occupied Syria
was increasing and the German Air Force were
being granted landing facilities there.
The operations which followed at the end of April in Iraq and
in Syria in May were shared by the British and Indian Armies,
and although the short accounts which follow must be restricted so
far as supply and transport are concerned to the part played by the
RASC, the reader is asked to bear in mind the prominent part played
by the RIASC in both operations.
Iraq, 1941
When the lows l covernment of Irag was overthrown in March,
1941, by Rashid Ali and his caucus of adventurers and mutinous
Weasel at Lake Comacchio
In the Arabian Desert
