FINE ANDLE FAST F
ін содо теР ше вониВ сарасу сЕ te Tin fi
MorE to (gand Apped Brigade),
95 2т Атомов рода
GiD
Ене дно дина ним соно сіі зі сі
became oF this.
Germans He they
Early in January, the daysion was facing tha
posion, much go the ill-fated and
measly a year before.
To prake up
for the absen
Asedabia, an saira link had to be
ler traneport passurces, working forward
&g mites from
then 18 Company took oyer, and
naivered 10 the
ino 25 miles fariner ons and it was sitt
40 pie to dai
THIS
demand on the inadequate transport
avatlaste for Eighth
and Beirst by sea t8 meet the armys demands, and a daily convey
had 18 be fun from fathead.
WHICH was suiti back at Mischiefa,
SOUTH gE Sial BarraRi, t9 the El Adem area, south ef Tobruk, a
allance 8t 178 mies:
THIS HEd UP GT companies uraendly needed
in the forward are
ARginst call gA the Lansport Bool was for
me maintenance 8e aa & Corps, which was eneased in clearing the
cheme from the
splum maltaya Bardia
afed:
In this area 75
8твaнy: scona une transport for Ist Armoured Brigade, was
Е ар wE HOw At wet in the forward area, though.
AS YEE BRY I SHAM HUmBErS:
TREFE Was 8A8 egmpany (144) and
there
508a deat 8f uncertainty as to ins manner in which the
S8FRE WEFE Attached in variqua Ordnance
VEFY URNS aRG 18 t98 tank Fini cemEnt unit at Tobruk:
Februk 13
• ARA VALEE 18 ARISTAt: 388 mIES ACEROS tHE BESEFE:
On anita!
tea to toad 8e gead fant. for evacHaton: but at that time the
tHen as the posevery et lane fagates was her lilly doe
THA HE THE HAT CASH 18 AS WAHHE SEE FARE T
Hommeis New Sensive
Guards BReade was Beyond
Aachabla,
with
THE MIDDLE BEST I
Companies
Two days later, these units suffered severely at the
Amids of enemy columne, oy Company had only oy lorries left;
gos Company was split up and reported 8o of its vehicles and a large
percentage of is men missing, though goodd lores found their
way back a fow days later; and gio Company lost all but three
oficers, so men, and 20 vehicles.
The remnants continued to
maintain the division, which was obliged to withdraw before the
enemy thrust, and on February soth it was reorganized to consist
of and Armoured Brigade, ist Motor Brigade, and divisional troops.
The companies remaining with the formation were g03, gro, and
925, 67 Company was withdrawn to join soth Armoured Division,
and to Company went to an L of C transport column,
Meanwhile, 4th Indian Division had counterattacked south from
Benghazi, but had been cut in two, and 7th Indian Brigade was
isolated in that place, together with several RASC companies,
induding 49, 241 and 278,
Major R. Gilmour, officer commanding
49 Company, had won the Military Cross a little earlier, when taking
a convery of iga lorries with petrol to Maus,
On arrival, he found
Mous in enemy hands, but succeeded in extricating the column and
bringing it to safety through 6eo miles of strange country
under
trying conditions,
The same award went to Captain J. F. Dugdale,
the workshep officer of the same company,
When an enemy mobile
column began to shell the company location, he
got away many
yehicles which were under repair and which would otherwise have
had to he abandoned, together with the technical vehicles and
valuable MT stores,
Eventually the officer commanding ordered
him to leave the location, which was by then being shelled from a
Fange of 500 yards.
The slow-moving breakdown lorry with a
noR-Funner in tow soon got into difficulties, and Captain Dugdale
went back te help.
He also aided two officers of another company,
one of them wounded, whe had been forced to abandon their
vehicle, and would otherwise have been captured.
In Benghazi, Bet G, HI, Ackrill, also of 49 Company, won the
immediate award of the Military Medal, when there was a heavy
alf raid after the tawn was cut off,
By his calm and resolute example
he kept his men together and, though wounded, he brought a party
out through the enemy positions under small arms fire,
The brigade in Benghai formed itself into three columns and
broke through to jain the armour at Mekili, 7o miles castward.
In
this operation, many members of the RASC took part, and several
men distinguished themselves
For example, L/Cpl G, L. Rimmer,
of 49 Company, was with a platoon carrying an Indian battalion
when ig two-wheel-drive lories became bogged in soft sand.
The
Fat of the column was disappearing, but although he might well
have been lost of captured, Rimmer, who had a four wheel drive
