460
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
by nature of his calling, required a higher scale of rations than the
civilian was generally accepted, and it was agreed that rationing
could only apply to the forces stationed in the United Kingdom.
There was broad agreement that the service scales in force when war
broke out would not be altered until rationing had to be introduced
for the civil population.
It was not considered possible to discriminate between actively
employed and sedentary troops because of the service system of
communal messing and the difficulty of determining a dividing line
between the two classes.
The serviceman who lived out of barracks
was to be permitted to purchase a scale of rations comparable to
what he would receive if living in barracks.
The Services
undertook to be responsible for the control of
rationing arrangements within their own spheres.
The forms of
ration cards to be provided for those living out and on leave were
approved and supplies of ration cards were already printed by the
time war came.
It seemed to the War Office that rationing was a subject which
had been satisfactorily planned, but later events proved it to be the
most uncertain question that had to be dealt with.
The Food Policy Committee
Contrary to expectations, no steps were taken by the Government
to introduce rationing in the first few weeks of the war.
No doubt
to introd tural tull in operations during 1939 had something to do
with this, and it was not until the newly appointed Minister of Food
urged upon the Government the necessity for taking immediate
steps to ration meat that the subject received any prominence.
National food policy was the responsibility of a special sub-com-
mittee of the Cabinet.
Although the plea of the Minister of Food
was rejected, the Services were invited by the Food Policy Committee
was reamine, how the could reduce their demands on what were
represented as dwindling national meat stocks.
This request was
the beginning of what the supply branch at the War Office later,
referred to as 'the Battle for the Soldier's Ration'.
From September,
1939 until 1941, and indeed after the war was over, the question
devolved into a triangular but unequal contest, with the Services
on the one side endeavouring to maintain the standards which they
considered essentiol and on the other the Govemment wba urged
that ration scales should be reduced, and especially the Treasury,
who sought to reduce the mounting cost of feeding the forces.
The serviceman's ration was a matter of considerable importance
to all three services. It was the direct concern of the three chief
administrative officers, the Fourth Sea Lord, the Quarter-Master-
emiral and heir M, emb forth pty and Organization, to make
SUPPLIES
46 г
certain that their men were as well fed and contented as possible
and that morale was maintained at the highest level.
The brunt of the detailed work which arose from rationing and
ration scales fell naturally on the supply branch at the War Office,
who had to provide for the largest body and also provided the food
required by the Royal Air Force.
The supply branch acted as the
co-ordinating branch from a service angle.
As will be seen later
the means of co-ordination was considerably strengthened by the
institution of a special Service/MOF committee to deal with all
matters of service food policy.
The War Office were seriously handicapped from the outset of
the discussions by being unable to offer any complete basic scale of
rations as a bargaining point on which to support a case, and they
were also unable to put forward any acceptable scientific opinion
on the nutritional requirements of a service man, under the condi-
tions which then prevailed in the
United Kingdom-conditions
which altered radically as the war continued. When the war broke
out there was no fixed home ration scale.
The soldiers' messing
was arranged on a cash basis, that is to say, units were free to purchase
what they required so long as the total amount expended was
within the value of a daily messing cash allowance.
This allowance
was assessed by costing a scale of a limited number of staple foods,
which bore little relation to actual usage, and then adding a further
sum which could not be directly identified with any given quantities
of food, but was nominally varied with the Ministry of Labour cost
of living food index figure.
The partial scale of rations used for
assessing the messing
allowance,
although shown in Allowance
Regulations as a standard ration, was obviously a relic of the days
when a substantial quantity of meat and bread formed the basic
diet of a soldier.
of bread, but only th oz of sugar.
For example, it included 12 oz of meat and 16 oz.
There was good reason to believe that the average unit did not
purchase these quantities of meat or bread; on the other hand they
probably purchased considerably more sugar.
It was difficult to
convince a busy Cabinet Minister that, although there was a service
Male of rationy, Cabinst Min obsolete, and incomplete, and yet at
the same time to explain that any alteration in the scale was bound
to have a direct effect on the purchasing power and consequently
on the nutritional value of the food which could be obtained with
the daily messing allowance.
The additional absence of firm scientific data to support thi
Services' claims led ultimately to the whole question of nutrition
being reviewed. but even when there was agreement on nutritional
requirements, there was still ample scope for differences of opinion
about how those recuirements could he hest translated into a scale
