304
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Lieutenant Tresidder, RASC, took over as second-in-command of
the
small detachment of bluejackets and men of the Middlesex
Regiment who were defending the hotel.
On the same day, Major
Dewar was one of a party which was ambushed, but he collected
some stragglers, and engaged the enemy patrols which he came
across and got away across country.
He then collected a party of
20 naval ratings and organized a defensive position at Little Hong
Kong to prevent the enemy from reaching the ammunition magazine
which was so vital to the garrison.
Ammunition continued to be
supplied through a narrow corridor which was at times cut by the
Japanese, but final deliveries were made up to the night of December
24th, although the Japanese were within 150 yards of the loading
point.
The Last Stand
On the evening of the 2ist, the small party of RASC and RAOC,
now about 100 strong, still held out on the Ridge, but after gallant
fighting it was decided to evacuate the position.
The party was
intended to withdraw to the south, but was cut off by heavy enemy
machine gun fire, so made its way to Deep Water Bay, where it
sheltered for the night.
In contact with the enemy for the whole
of the next day, they set out in the evening to try to join the small
garrison at Repulse Bay. Most of them succeeded in getting past
the enemy.
Major Dewar and his small party continued to hold out to the
last, the action being best described in the words of the official
despatch: "This island of defence
resisted all attacks from the
zoth to the afternoon of the 25th of December, and fought very
gallantly?
For his bravery on this and other occasions throughout
the defence Major Dewar was made a member of the Distinguished
Service Order.
Hill until the afternoon of the 25th.
By Christmas Eve there was little hope of continuing the defence.
All units had suffered severe casualties and every man who could
bear a rifle had been called into the fray.
The Japanese were in
possession of the main reservoirs and the city of Victoria,
with its
destruction.
teeming Chinese population, was the scene of innumerable fires and
Christmas Day it had to be accepted that no
further useful military resistance was possible, and capitulation of
the Colony followed.
Dukws at Work
