470
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
required for the landing of supplies in balanced form, for setting up
supply depots, and for movement and distribution, could not keep
pace with the rate at which the troops were being landed.
This
led to a suggestion that the
RASC should
provide the
initial
requirements for a force in such a form that each box or case would
contain an equal amount of food for so many men for one day, and
packed in such a manner that the cases could be easily recognized,
handled, distributed and accounted for without the aid of skilled
supply men.
Plans for aid to Finland were already
being made when this
suggestion was made, and no time was lost in putting it into effect.
There was already a fairly comprehensive range of tinned foods in
the normal field scale for issue when fresh food was unobtainable.
The size
of these tins was,
however, regulated by commercial
practice, and the contents did not generally relate to any particular
ration scale of food.
There was no time to undertake packing into
tins of special size, as any departure from the standard sizes in use
would have considerably reduced the output of can manufacturers,
who were fully engaged in meeting demands for containers required
for the normal ration.
Other goods of a non-perishable nature
were also packed in bulk in standard commercial packs (i.e. sacks,
bags,
wooden cases and
cartons).
Repacking into smaller sizes
would have involved
many technical difficulties which were not
overcome until later in the war.
It was decided, therefore,
to provide a ration for 50 men that
could be assembled in three different cases.
The ration, a simple
one for packing, consisted of a case of corned beef, holding 48 12 0z
cans, a case of biscuits, containing two 27 Ib tins, and a case filled
with other available tinned foods.
Tea and sugar, however, were
repacked by hand into separate tins provided for the purpose.
The
ration was by no means a really
balanced one, but it provided
rather more of the staple foods than in a normal scale.
In addition to the normal supply identification signs, the three
cases were marked respectively with blue, yellow, and white circles.
Provided that those responsible for handling consignments ensured
that the same number of each colour was included, a complete
ration was provided.
This arrangement was, of course, rough and
ready and far from ideal, but it was a start.
The first consignments
were packed at the SRD at Deptford for the "Aid to Finland"
project.
They were never taken into use but owing to continued
changes in operational plans they had many travels.
When they
were finally returned to Deptford to be broken down they were so
covered with force code and shipping marks that their coloured
circles were barely recognizable.
From the limited experience gained from the 'three case compo',
SUPPLIES
471
the supply branch then pursued the production of a complete
ration in a single case, resulting in the '12-men ration pack'.
This
also was a fairly rough and ready ration, as the number of commodi-
ties to be specially packed into tins had to be kept down to a
minimum, and tins of standard size had to be used as far as possible.
The tins varied a good deal in size and shape, and this made it
difficult to pack them into cases, but with the aid of packing
material the ration stood up well to the rough handling which is
inevitable under active service conditions.
Two different varieties
of pack were provided to allow for two separate diets.
All the
work of assembly and packing these rations was done by an impro-
vised organization at No. I
SRD, Deptford, and the experience
gained in the type of organization required for this work proved
to be of value later in the war when huge packing contracts were
fulfilled commercially. The small section at the SRD reached a peak
output of 500 cases a day, and before the pack was finally replaced by
the 14-men ration they had completed more than 100,000 cases.
The first practical test of this new ration was during early 1940,
when the several expeditions hastily despatched to Norway found
it to be an instant success.
One of the first supply signals received
from Narvik was to the effect that the ration was an absolute boon
and to 'please send as many more as possible.
The withdrawal of
all our forces from Europe in 1940 brought a temporary halt to
the demand for the new pack.
At the end of 1940, to meet the threat of invasion, there was an
urgent demand for a ration for the Home Guard which could be
hidden in 'caches' as a last resource.
It was to be impervious to
the effects of earth and damp.
The ration had to be a simple one,
and to consist of goods which were fairly plentiful and could be
spared from the nation's larder at the time.
To avoid the special
packing of any of the perishable commodities, such as biscuits, and
at the same time to provide complete protection from all weathers,
the ration, sufficient for 10 men, was packed in a 4-gallon tin of
the same type used for petrol.
The sugar in this ration was provided
for the first time in the form of solid plaquettes.
About 350,000
of these packs were produced by No. 4 SRD at Swindon between
February and April,
194I,
and were eventually distributed to
various commands in the United Kingdom.
As soon as the Home
Guard commitment had been met, the Supply branch turned its
attention from the work of reorganizing and fortifying the home
supply organization to meet the threat of invasion to that of
examining the whole question of the types of packs that would be
required to meet operational conditions in the future,
and after
extensive study bo pee stall and planning branches, production
proceeded as described below.
