H.M. King George VI with Lieut.-General Sir Humfrey Gale
NORTH AFRICA
241
Developing the Petroleum Organization
The gradual transfer of American troops from the central and
western to the eastern forces considerably increased the rate of petrol
consumption in the First Army area until, in February,
about
I,000 tons a day were being used.
The intermingling of so many
British and American formations made it imperative to co-ordinate
supply, and a petroleum section was set up at AFHQ for the purpose
with the rather wide charter of 'controlling and co-ordinating all
problems of petroleum products brought to and stored in and
distributed to naval, military, air force and civil agencies.
Each
service prepared its own claims for its requirements which were
co-ordinated by what became known as the Oil Slate Committee,
and this in turn placed a consolidated demand on the two bodies
in London and Washington which were jointly responsible for
supplies to all Allied countries.
Although each army was to pre-
serve its responsibility for the intake and storage of its supplies,
the planning and development of all main pipelines became an
integrated responsibility of the new petroleum section.
In the meantime RASC units in the forward areas carried the
main burden of filling and distribution, but they had the help of
an American gasoline company and 100 men lent by the French.
It fell to a petrol unit to make the first contact with Eighth Army
when supplies were sent down to the oasis at Toggourt for the Long
Range Desert Group at the end of long sorties which it had made
behind the enemy's lines.
By January the reserves to be held were assessed at 220,000 tons,
of which about half would have to he stored in bulk and about half
in packed form.
The development of bulk storage arrangements
proceeded steadily but involved a great deal of ingenuity and was
accompanied by various problems which had to be overcome as
and the
Ocean-going tankers
began to arrive
at Algiers
RASC men responsible for
became experts at the task.
discharging
them
soon
But even then their
'drill' was
not yet foolproof, for it was once discovered that part of a cargo
of aviation spirit was it was oncsdisance being pumped hard for
nearly half an hour, not into the storage place but into the harbour.
Every possible step was taken to reduce the consequent fire risk,
and providentially an enemy air raid that evening missed what
conflagration in the harbour.
would have been an ideal opportunity of producing a general
There was a general lack of equipment which had to be made good
by improvisation, a small civil foundry and workshop
being taken
for the production of moulded and machine-cut special spare parts.
R RASa
The createst difficulty was in leening up the required flow in
