438
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
War Office was, in fact, requested to stop sending reinforcements
which promised only to become an embarrassment.
Finally, Rear
GHQ went off the air altogether.
Later they established telephone
contact (with ST 3, War Office) from La Panne at midday on May
goth, asking again for no more men or ammunition, but for water
for the troops at Dunkirk.
Operation 'Dynamo' for the evacuation of the BEF and its allies
from Dunkirk was not primarily a transport commitment for the
Corps, but there was a call for the carriage of foodstuffs, water and
stores to the ports of disembarkation, and for the provision of
reserves of troop-carrying transport in
this case
hired motor
coaches) at certain centres.
In the event, most of the returning
troops were moved by rail and the transport service was not stretched.
The Corps could then take stock of its losses.
In men these were
grievous enough but not, all things considered, unduly high.
In
vehicles, however, nearly the whole of the Army's equipment had
been left behind, most of it having been immobilized or destroyed
first. Similarly, all mobile and heavy workshop equipment was lost.
The Threat of Invasion
The next and most pressing tasks were to equip the troops deployed
along our coasts to repel the now expected invasion, particularly in
the south and south-cast, and to render mobile such fighting forma-
tions of the former BEF as could be equipped.
The first task called for the employment of every available armed
man and of the few guns left in this country.
As far as the Corps
was concerned, the newly formed mobilization centres and the
training brigades and Officer Producing Unit assumed an opera-
tional role in their localities, the most important of which were in
the Isle of Thanet, at Bournemouth and in the possible paratroop
dropping areas of Aldershot and Salisbury Plain.
The troops were
eager and willing, and they were reasonably well supplied with small
arms, including
light automatics, but ammunition
was
scarce
throughout the country,
Similarly, in the case of artillery, ST 3 equipped a number of
Royal Marine detachments with bion lorries hurriedly adapted
for the carriage of 12-pounder guns.
They also helped Western
Command in its task of defending some 250 miles of coastline by
giving them lorries adapted for the drawing of their seven field guns,
But more practical measures were taking shape.
The defence
plan was based on a thin screen holding, the coast line, with a mobile
and fairly hard hitting reserve held at strategical points, ready to
rush to any threatened spot.
These reserves were composed of the
less disoryanized and depleted divisions from the BEF, who were
given high priority in the replacement of equipment.
Re-equipment
TRANSPORT
439
was by no means complete, especially in artillery, but some sort of
fighting force was scraped together.
The fiat then went forth, from the Prime Minister himself, that a
sufficient lift in motor transport for some 70,000 infantryhis led to
be forthcoming in a fortnight from about June 1oth.
the impressment of coaches, already referred to in the General
survey.
There were several interesting features in this hurried
operation.
First, the order came on a Friday, when the
War
Office 'Financial Authority' concerned was enjoying a long week-end
off. Nobody could be found to agree to the expenditure of the
necessary money, and the 'Financial Authority' was duly shocked on
the following Monday to learn that he would have to foot a bill of
€2,500,000 odd.
But he played up nobly.
So, too,
did the
Ministry of Transport and, even more so, the teams of inspectors
and impresment officers.
The War
Establishment Committee
passed a special establishment for a Motor Coach Company,
RASC', with a headquarters and three sections, each of 3o 32-seater
coaches, providing a lift, per section, of the marching personnel for
an infantry battalion.
A 10 per cent reserve of coaches was pro-
vided in each company and instead of a workshop section there was
a small complement of fitters with hand tools.
Although many coaches of dubious age and fitness were to be
found in the total complement (there is more than a suspicion that
large numbers of first class up-to-date machines were withheld from
inspection),
the
establishments were passed, the vehicles were
collected, the companies were formed and in their locations, and the
reserve force was mobile in it days a striking effort sometimes
overlooked by those who had to sit in, or, worse still, operate the
coaches.
Meanwhile the overworked CIST and his staff were also impress-
ing vehicles for the re-equipment of the rest of the Army, and the
Ministry of Supply was striving to step up new production for the
same purpose,
This new production came from factories both in
the United Kingdom and, in increasing numbers, in Canada and
the United States.
North America sent a quota direct to the
Middle East, and the large vehicle assembly plant at Ataka, near
Suez, came into being.
At first vehicles
were shipped singly,
"knocked down' in crates.
Later, as the need to conserve tonnage
grew and the skill of the assembly gangs increased, multiple unit
packs were used, components for four complete vehicles being in
many cases shipped in a group of crates with a great saving in
shipping space.
While the anti-invasion measures were being completed on the
ground as far as resources permitted, the threat of attack from the
air, which would precede any landing of ground troops, had to be
