158
THE MIDDLE EAST I
with only one casualty the donkeys were returned to their correct
and rewarded owners.
The Mareth Line
But to return to the more serious operations and the attack on the
Mareth Line.
The attempt to pierce the line between the sea and
the road on the northern flank failed in spite of the tremendous
efforts of the gallant 50th Division.
As at El Alamein, this attack on
a strongly defended position provided the ambulance drivers with
the opportunity to distinguish themselves.
Drivers G. Houghton,
S. Crompton and S. Francis all won the Military Medal.
It once
more fell to the lot of and New Zealand Division to carry out
another and possibly their most difficult 'left hook' in a wide sweep
through the difficult mountainous terrain south of the main position.
The division, supported by additional armour under the command
of General Freyberg, moved south followed by
Army, which
"Crump's Private
was
reinforced by additional RASC companies.
They carried four days' maintenance for the force.
And here a
lesson might be learned.
The operation was estimated to last three
or four days.
Stocks were carried for consumption
during that
period and during that time only wireless communication would be
functioning continually.
There was no question of 'mobile reserves
on wheels
just
in case'-there was no over insurance.
As the
operation proceeded stocks were consumed, and the empty vehicles
returned in convoy under escort.
After much hard fighting they
were in the rear of the Mareth Line, the Germans pulled out and
the force once again resumed maintenance from the normal lines
of communication along the north coast.
If ever over insurance
might have been justified, here was a case; but it was never advo-
cated.
If need be further stocks coad have been demanded and
despatched round the long circuitous southern route, but transport
was conserved and the
build-up
of army
roadhead for further
advance was continued uninterrupted.
The widespread nets of First and Bighth Army were now dosing
in on the Afrika Corps.
Included in this was General Le Cler's
Free French force which had struggled from West Africa northwards
across the Sahara.
At about
the time of Medenine, news vas
received of the location of this force, and it was also reported that
The honour
food, petrol, ammunition and other stores were scarce.
It is doubtful
of being sent to the rescue was given to 385 Company.
This smal
whether any
company ever had such a mixed load.
French force had in its travels collected a variety of armaments
nationalities.
The company
had far greater
finding its commodities than finding the consignees and delivering
the goods.
THE MIDDLE EAST I
159
The Final Stages
With the fall of the Mareth Line the back of the campaign was
broken as far as the Eighth Army was concerned.
The advance
• continued via Sfax and Sousse up to the mountains in the Enfidaville
area.
Once more the lines of communications grew longer and
longer, and were now based on Tripoli.
Once more the MT
companies were strained to the limit, but the old and well used
vehicles, most of which had started from Alamein, stood up to it
and kept
going.
Some
divisional RASC
indeed
accompanied
their divisions in a southern sweep to join the First Army and to
take part in the
final break through to Tunisia.
The greatest
distance L of C units went to maintain these divisions was as far
as el Krib on the road running south-west from Medjez el Bab.
It was during these final stages of the advance that 385 Company
(MT), under command of Major K. Newton, was pulled out at
Sfax to be re-equipped and trained as a dukw company in prepara-
tion for the invasion of Sicily.
Invaluable help was given to the
unit by Captain Spears, of the United States Army, in both the
handling and technical peculiarities of this new, strange vehiclien
Thus ended a long,
trying and finally victorious
throughout which the RASC driver had played a not only decisive
but determined and at times gallant part.
The next act for which most of the veteran desert units were to
plan was the invasion of Sicily.
To one and all at the
appeared a tremendous undertaking, and so in many ways it was.
There were many advantages: all the Eighth Army MT units were
• trained and battle-worthy: divisions knew what they would want;
staffs knew each other and everyone was full of confidence.
There were likewise disadvantages.
The attacking force would
embark from places as far distant as Alexandria, Sousse,
Malta, while a Casadian division would embark in Britain and
join the army for the first time off shore from Sicily.
panies had to be trained; they were a completely new and exciting
baby. Would t trained of the desert work in mountainous Sicily?
Many pundits denied its value.
Did water-proofing vehicles really
work?
How would the desert driver compete with the mountain
tracks of Sicily?
Chapter VII provides the answer.
