30
PRELUDE
machine tools and equipment in workshop lorries destined for the
workshop sections of RASC companies.
This particular task might
well have been seriously handicapped by the extremely
limited
machine tool capacity available in the United Kingdom for the
needs of the Army.
In the case of lathes, the key machine tool of
the workshop section, only four or five firms could be induced to
tender for supplies, and the best delivery offered was 1o months from
date of order,
and the delivery rate two lathes a month!
Once again the General Motors Corporation came to the rescue
at the request of MG 3.
The parent corporation in the United
States made 250 7}-inch lathes available at once, meeting all
immediate requirements of the Corps.
As a direct result, no RASC
unit went overseas without having the workshop capacity to maintain
its fleet of vehicles.
Welding together Men and Materials
All this planning and all these technical labours could be of no
avail, however, if the people into whose hands the equipment and
plant was put proved unworthy of the confidence placed in them.
Mention has already been made of the recruitment, training and
preparation for active service of officers and men of the Corps.
far as the transport side was concerned, it is no exaggeration to say
that our successes in the field were due as much to the far-sighted
policy initiated when the training of the Corps was put under the
General Staff, and when Colonel Cameron's vision of an operational
RASC in all formations in peacetime was realized, as to the devoted
work of those who laid the plans for the provision of the material
and for the framework of mechanical maintenance.
It was the
integration of these two aspects of planning, carried out by officers
trained
equally as regimental soldiers and as transport operators
and maintainers, that built up the whole edifice of RASC transport.
Individual training, company training, divisional training, manceu-
technical courses and war courses, already referred to all
played a vital part.
Nor must we lose sight of the horse transport
side, which was kept in being by those with vision enough to foresee
the problems of mountain and jungle warfare which might confront
us and which might severely strain, if not completely overcome, the
best of mechanized units.
by both the pASh and the PlAS was only accomplished by the
The growth of pack transport operated
oetention against considerable opposition (mainly from the Treasury)
of one animal transport company in the RASC Training Centre,
Allied to the transport branch, too, was the War Department
Fleet, operated by civilian masters atod, was under RASC control.
The story of the War Denaument Plast and of the RASP manned
motor boat and water transnort companies, as well as that of the
SUPPLIES
pack transport companies, is told in greater detail in later chapters.
In this summary of RASC transport between the two world wars,
enough, it is hoped, has been written to show that, for the Corps at
least, the years 1919 to 1939 were not wasted ones.
Those at that
time who strove to overcome obstacles and difficulties in their
endeavour to improve the body of the Corps had their reward when
they saw in 1939 how smooth was the transition from a peace to a
war footing, and how sound the organization was under active
service conditions.
The Position after the First World War
When the First World War ended, the RASC had the satisfaction
of knowing that the slogan of "The best fed army in the world' was
substantially true.
To have supplied an army of several million
men was a considerable achievement.
But there was not the same
acute shortage of food which existed between 1939 and 1945, and the
rations which were provided in the first war, although consisting of
The armies of those days moved com-
paratively slowly, so that it was rarely that the daily ration for man
or horse failed to arrive.
When it did not arrive,
the soldier was
content to fall back on the unit's reserve of 'hard' fare, which he
The food provided was plentiful, perhaps
too much so, so that stories of trenches being 'paved' with boxes of
rations were not unfounded.
Of course there were 'grouses' and grumbles about too much
plum and apple jam, and jokes made about the service biscuit by
the divisional concert party were always sure to draw a ready laugh.
But the general feeling of the Army was probably more faithfully
expressed by Punch in a cartoon picturing two soldiers eating their
ration under the caption " Sinews of War'-
_‹Private Atkins,
"For what
we have received and are going to receive, here's to the ASC"?
The RASC organization which had been employed on supplies
for maintaining the armies in the First World War was a small and
simple one.
Barely one tenth of the Corps were engaged on supply
duties and the fold units consisted of a relatively small number of
large depots at the base and on the lines of communication which
held the main reserves.
Train loads of food (pack trains) were
forwarded from these depots daily to railheads which were situated
in the rear of the battle zone.
then
The supplies for each division were
collected
divisional supply
columns,
which
were
mechanized, and carried forward to refilling points, where the food
was taken over for the last stage of its journey by the companies of
