190
THE MIDDLE EAST II
plan another assault, farther south down the coast, and so to reach
Antananarivo, the capital.
Operation
'Stream-Line-Jane-Esme' (a favourite expression of
Force Commander, and qualified by the South African Brigade) was
therefore mounted with 2gth Brigade assaulting at Majunga nearly
halfway down the west coast on September roth.
This was 'Stream'.
The 22nd East Africa Brigade followed up, and with four East
Africa Army Service Corps reserve MT companies and small supply
detachments additionally in support, struck out for Antananarivo.
There had been negligible opposition to the assault, but the landing
of the follow-up troops was much delayed by difficulties in working
unfamiliar ships not wholly suitable for the purpose, and because
contrary to intelligence the so-called harbour at Majunga dried out
for 16 out of the
24 hours.
In consequence the leading troops
found the quarter-mile-long Kamoro
bridge over the Betsiboka
River, 120 miles inland,
blown over its whole length,
and the
advance was much handicapped.
This was 'Line'.
Majunga was developed as the base for operations until Tamatave
and the railway line to Antananarivo had been cleared.
A main
supply depot, three DIDs and seven POL sections were supplied
from East Africa and maintained their role under difficult conditions.
In the meantime, 7th South Africa Brigade had resumed the attempt
to advance south from Diego.
This time the west coast route was
tried in an effort to link up with 22nd East Africa Brigade through
Majunga,
and to back them up in their advance in the capital.
This was 'Esme'.
Having seen 22nd Brigade started on their long trek to Antana-
narivo, 2gth Brigade re-embarked and sailed for Tamatave on the
east coast.
Here they assaulted again on September I8th, and after
a show of resistance the town fell without fighting.
This was 'Jane'.
While the island of Dzaoud-zi in the Comores had already been
captured in July, successful diversions were now also staged simul-
taneously at Morondava and Tulear.
For this operation, because of the preponderance of East Africa
troops, Lieut-Colonel J. HI. Hawtin was brought in from Nairobi
as CRASC, Lieut-Colonel Dunlop remaining at Diego Suarez.
breakdown in the maintenance of RASC services was experienced,
The issue
although necessarily at times there was nothing to spare.
of cash to officers of all arms to enable them to purchase require-
ments, with a minimum of reasonable accounting to be observed,
proved of great value in helping to maintain the momentum of the
advance.
In one skirmish the opposition was bought over!
22nd East Africa Brigade finally reached Antananarivo on Septem-
ber agrd, beating elements of the 29th Brigade from Tamatave, by
only a few hours.
The 7th South Africa Brigade from Diego
1 Comores
IRONCLAD
Ambararata
Diego Suarez
Dzaoudzi
MOZAMBIQUE
CHANNEL
LINE STREAM
R.Sofia
1n Majunga
KAMORO BRIDGE
Andreba
Tamatave
Antananarivo
ma. Mania
• Morondava
Antsirabe
R. MangokoK
Fianarantsoa
Ambalavão
Manakara
o Tulear
INDIAN
OCEAN
Fort Dauphin
Operations in 1942 →
100 200 MILES
MADAG
AS CAR
