454
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Sources of Supply
Although the first war demands made by the services were fulfilled
smoothly, the outbreak of war was followed by a violent dislocation
of world shipping routes and many normal sources of supply dried
up almost immediately.
Some neutral countries were cut off owing
to their proximity to enemy territory, others adopted an unfriendly
attitude through fear or leaning towards the future Axis, and the
unexpected
need for
conserving certain currency barred
other
countries which were a fruitful source of supply.
At the same time
strong pressure was brought to divert exports from neutral countries
which were normally drawn upon by the enemy.
Source of supply was primarily a national
question, but the
Army had to play its part by helping in exploiting sources which
had hitherto been untapped because of economic or other reasons,
particularly in connection with the maintenance of the Middle
East and Far East.
The southern Dominions, with their vast resources in agricultural
and dairy produce, had, of course, always been drawn on for such
commodities as meat and grain, but their capacity for producing
manufactured foods, and especially the types of packing needed for
service use, was limited.
India, with its huge population, had its
own problems and could contribute little more than the special
foods which were required for the Indian formations which had
begun to land in the Middle East and Malaya.
The first call on
South Africa was to be the maintenance of the army which was to
be employed in East Africa.
Canada could not be drawn upon to
any extent owing to its geographical position and currency.
The
resources of the Middle East countries,
although extensive, were
limited to certain foods, and industrial capacity was low.
All commands abroad were fully aware of the need for developing
their own local resources and reducing the demands on home to a
minimum.
But time was required before the situation could be
fully explored and countries encouraged to acquire the requisite
skill and plant needed,
and the necessary arrangements made to
switch imports to countries which had productive capacity but which
lacked the raw materials required.
Thus the United Kingdom
remained the main source of supply of certain commodities for the
Midle and Far Past and was the main base for supolving most o
the requirements for North Africa, Italy and North-West Europe.
The food industry at home had developed considerably since the
First World War,
but even at the outbreak of the Second World
War it was in some respects a young industry when compared, for
example, with that of the United States.
No doubt it was the
outcome of the notable British preference for 'fresh' food, so that
SUPPLIES
455
the Services' huge demands for manufactured foods placed a
considerable strain on productive capacity and on the industries
which provided the cans and packages required.
Thanks to the
foresight of the largest firm of tin box makers, extra plant had been
installed for can production before the war, but still was scarce
and with the fall of Malaya tin plate had to be replaced by untinned
(black plate') for anything which could be safely packed in that
type of can.
The capacity for producing outer packages, mostly
wood, was great, but supplies of seasoned timber became scarce.
Eventually timber cases had to be replaced by fibre for which
materials were also 'short'.
The adoption of fibre package con-
siderably increased because of the high rate of breakage which
succuared a theassult of shipping and handling under war conditions.
Even nails at one time were scarce, and there were few materials
which were not subject to complicated systems of determining
priorities
and
allocating supplies accordingly.
It was often
question of having to replace one material by another only to find
that the alternative also came into 'short supply'.
The development of the food manufacturing industry abroad was
also naturally accompanied by similar difficulties to those at home.
The extent to which commands could develop resources in their
immediate vicinity varied greatly.
Stations such as Hong Kong,
Gibraltar and Malta were almost entirely dependent on imports
and were denied any resources which were available in neighbouring
countries.
Gibraltar was able to obtain some fresh produce but
little else, and at one period in the war all supplies sent from home
had to be packed in special damp-proof packing to withstand the
humid conditions of the storage places in the Rock,
There
little surplus over the needs of the civil population in Malta, and
when the siege was intensified supplies from home had to be sent
in such a form that they occupied the smallest amount of freight
consonant with a high food value.
Malaya, owing to its relative
proximity to Australia and the presence of Australian troops in
the country, was able to obtain a high proportion of its requirements
from Australya until Singapore fell in February, 1912.
The Middle Fast had the greatest problem, as it covered so many
countries and had the biggest feeding strength.
The DST (General
Goldney) made every effort to make the command nearly self-
supporting.
the war was only about 25.000 and rose to over a million.
It was a big task, as the strength at the beginning of
Long
term
contracts were made to encourage the local production of
foods grown in the Nile Delta and adjoining countries for 12-monthly
perr da, The War Of i be shipped from Australia a nhe Middle
The War Office arranged for other goods such as meat,
Ceylon. The creation of the organization known as the Middle
