BURMA AND CEYLON
350
relief of Kohima, and subsequently for the opening of the Imphal
Road.'
Meanwhile, IV Corps had been maintained by air for over two
months.
The main problem had not been that of transporting
sufficient supplies to keep the troops alive-they never fell below a
two-thirds ration-but rather of maintaining an even flow of the
stores required for battle.
Air supply in the monsoon was difficult;
the clouds were sometimes 30,000 feet thick, and very dangerous for
aircraft.
Weather prevented flying for days on end, and operations
had to be concentrated in the fair periods.
This involved additional
strain on the air despatch men both at the base airfields and at
the receiving end.
While 2nd Division was resting, its RASC underwent reorganiza-
tion on to what was known as the 'standard' basis.
This meant
that the four transport companies, each of two platoons, became
two companies each of four platoons, which were equipped half
with lorries and half with jeeps or 15-cwt trucks.
In the process,
24 Company ceased to exist, and 387 Company went back to its
amphibious role, being equipped with 40 dukws organized in two
platoons.
The East Africans
In this capacity, 387 Company was kept busy.
Its first job was
to provide 12 dukws as a water link for Iith East African Division,
which was now a few miles within Burma, on the River Yu, all
bridges on the road having been swept away by the floods.
river was only just navigable, with a current of four to five knots,
and the trip downstream took four hours for 3o-odd miles, but going
back took 16 to 19 hours.
The heavy logs and other debris floating
down river continually damaged propellers and shafts.
Dukws
that had broken down could only be brought ashore at a few places,
and so the expedient was adopted of fitting out a dukw as a machinery
lorry.
This proved invaluable later, when detachments of the
company were widely separated, and the absence of roads prevented
communication by land with
company headquarters and the
workshops.
Mention of the East African Division makes it necessary to recall
that the British element rican Divistrican ASC was drawn entirely
from the Corps.
The division joined XXXIII Indian Corps in
July, 1944, and took over the advance from 23rd Indian Division
(after that formation had captured Tamu on August 4th) and
began with the task of clearing the road to Kalewa.
The route
down to the track to Sittaung was passable for four-wheeled drive
lorries only as far as the Yu river, 1o miles from Tamu; after that
jeeps could go for another sir miles and then nack or porter transport
BURMA
351
had to be used. The road southwards from Tamu down the
Kabaw valley was a road only in name, being in fact a sea of mud.
Corduroy tracks were laid, down which jeeps and 30-cwt six-wheeled
lorries bumped their way.
Because of these difficult communica-
tions the division was maintained very largely by air during its
slow advance, but it eventually took Kalewa on December 2nd.
More maintenance problems
The rest of XXXIII Indian Corps, of which Colonel Luff was
now DDST, was meanwhile concentrating in the Yazagyo area.
It consisted of 2nd Division, 2oth Indian Division, and 254th Indian
Tank Brigade,
"Tank Transporter Company.
claimed by XXXIII Indian Corps, not without justification, that
never before had a corps been committed over 170 miles of such
bad roads with such inadequate resources.
allotted to the formation was insufficient to maintain the troops and
at the same time enable reserves to be built up against the crossing
The air lift was supplemented by the corps
transport working from Moreh and Imphal, while 2nd Division
and the tank brigade drew their own petrol from Moreh.
L of C transport that could be spared,
only 100 tons a day, was
allotted to help.
Then 50 Dakotas were withdrawn from the air
lift to go to China, and finally
Yazagyo airstrip was put out of
commission by rain.
In such circumstances, it said much for the
services that there was no real breakdown, though the troops were
on half rations and had no cigarettes.
Matters improved when the
Supreme Allied Commander arranged for the air lift to be restored.
Some idea of the polyglot nature of the ST set-up in this theatre
may be gained from the following facts.
The field maintenance
area at Khongkhang was manned by 78 DID RASG.
up the road to relieve a composite platoon of the EAASC, when a
new MA had been opened at Moreh by sections of the Burma
Near the FMA, an East African bakery pro-
duced its brepany. der the supervision of RASC bakers.
The West Africans
Farther west, yet another offshoot of the RASC was working, the
West African ASC of 8rst West African Division, which in October
had crosscan A SC of rom Arakan into the Kaladan valley.
It had
begun its advance, down the river,
which continued until the
division was withdrawn in March, 1945, when 82nd West African
Division relieved it.
The officers and British other ranks of the
WAASC were also all drawn from the RASC, and so were many of
the Britis were sonnel of the West African Auxiliary Groups.
units were composed of enlisted African porters, trained as soldiers,
