Both
sea from fishing boats, of
which mu
ent hire working under the
transportation branem
Detachments from the supply personnel
company were sent to establish DIDs.
By this time the supply depot was firmly established, prodigious
efforts having been made by the RASC supply men who, working
with little sleep in foul weather, managed in one period of four
days to unload 350 tons of supplies without outside help.
The field bakery had to clear three feet of frozen snow before it
could erect its Aldershot ovens, but it came into action within
three days and rapidly attained an output of 5,000 lb of bread a
day,
backed up by a further 3,000 lb daily from local resources.
Fuel for the Aldershot ovens was a constant worry, wood being
scarce and of poor quality.
The petrol depot had to abandon its first location after the blizzard
as the site was unworkable while the land was under snow.
moved to the Anglo-American Oil Company's jetty, on which a
packed petrol and oil depot was opened when the first shipment of
cased petrol (I4,000 gallons), arrived on April 26th.
was unsuitable in that it did not allow of any dispersion and, in
consequence, late in May the packed stocks were destroyed during
one of the air raids.
Luckily local bulk stocks were untouched and
proved to be adequate for all purposes.
Air raids occurred daily, and for some time the only anti-aircraft
protection were the guns in his Majesty's ships lying in the fjord
together with units' Bren guns.
Meanwhile in the south of Norway the British forces landed at
Namsos and Andalsnes had been driven back by the Germans, and
had re-embarked and returned home.
This left NWEF alone in
their assault against Narvik.
To contain the Germans in the south
it was decided to despatch the Irish Guards south to hold a defensive
position in the region of Bodo, with its air-strip, and Mosjoon.
supply section was embarked with the battalion in the Polish liner
Chrobry.
This expedition was doomed to failure, as the liner was
bombed two nights later while at anchor in the Solangen fjord.
Casualties to officers were heavy, as the bomb went through the
The troops were taken off the sinking ship by escorting
destroyers and returned to Harstad. A second force, consisting of
the ist Battalion, Scots
Guards, with supporting troops, was then
embarked in
HMS Efingham.
Again disaster overtook the project
as, on entering Bodo, the ship struck a rock and foundered.
The
troops were once again returned to Harstad by destroyer.
At the
third attempt the Scots Guards were landed, but they too eventually
had to be taken off by sea and returned to the Narvik area.
Early in May further reinforcements arrived, including a Polish
NORWAY, 1940
95
brigade which was landed on the mainland north of Narvik and
passed straight on to join up with the Norwegian 5th Division which
was advancing south on Narvik through the mountains.
A heavy
mobile anti-aircraft regiment and a mobile light anti-aircraft
regiment arrived with their attached RASC sections.
The former
section was fully employed with its parent unit, but the latter was
able to contribute daily to the transport pool and greatly eased the
situation.
A welcome addition was a reserve MT company, but by
a staff decision only the men were landed, the MT ship being held
at Tromsö until the roads were more free of snow, which did not
Lieutenant-General Auchinleck (Commander IV Corps) arrived
early in May with a small staff drawn from IV Corps which included
an AQMG Lieut-Colonel (now Major-General Sir) Reginald Kerr,
and a DDST (Colonel W. Warren).
General Auchinleck took
over command of NWEF from General Mackesy, and the service
elements of the original headquarters were transferred to the base
Early in May a reconnaissance party comprising representatives
of services was sent up by 'puffer' to Tromsö to plan the establish-
ment of a medical and services base in that area in order to afford
some relief to Harstad, which was highly congested.
Back at Harstad reorganization of the base was taking shape.
Bombing was becoming more frequent with the lengthening days,
but some relief was obtained with the arrival at Soreise of one
Gladiator and one Hurricane squadron, which had been flown in
from HMS Glorious.
The supply depot was hit, but not put out of
action, and a direct hit on the oil jetty destroyed almost all our
packed petrol. With the expansion of the area of operation, for
the most part supplied by sea, requests were made to the War Office
for the provision of larger launches with military crews who would
be more reliable than some of the local ones.
Towards the end of May Narvik was captured, but it became
evident that with the turn of events in France, no further troops
could be sent to Norway and that the maintenance of the forces
already there would be an unwarrantable drain on our naval
Accordingly evacuation was planned.
shore and coal handling installations were destroyed, and as part of
the cover plan to deceive the many local spies, a small advance
party from the base sub-area proceeded to Tromso for the ostensible
purpose of opening up the secondary base on the lines of the plan
suggested by the original reconnaissance.
miring, clearing and preparing warehonce accommodation
This took the form of
labour was hired, and a battery of heavy and light anti-aircraft guns
was brought into position.
