436
THE R.A.S.C, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
East Supply Centre in Cairo, which was set up to meet the needs of
local consumers and to exploit the export of surplus foods, allowed
wider fields to be tapped and enabled the Army to obtain such
foods as dried fruits, sugar, cereals and coffee in quantity.
The
large number of colonial troops of one nation and another which
were employed in the command involved the importation or local
procurement of all sorts of food which were peculiar to their tastes
so that supply depots became veritable emporia.
With the advent
of Lease-Lend shipments of other foods were made from America,
but even with these various sources of supply it was still necemary
to draw on home resources to some extent.
The high proportion of West Africans in the forces in West
Africa eased the supply position, as the greater part of their rations
could be obtained on the spot, but the requirements of the British
troops had to be imported from home, and the supply organization
also had to cater for the Free French forces in the Chad and
Cameroons arcas.
St. Helena was victualled from Royal Naval
sources at Simonstown in South Africa, but the maintenance of
such places as the Faroes, Iceland, the Falklands and many other
small stations too numerous to mention had to rely on the United
Kingdom for most of their needs.
With a return to the offensive and the planning of the main
operations of the war, which were to be conducted in North Africa,
Italy and North-West Europe, ST 6 became engaged in planning on
an unprecedented scale.
Where
possible these plans
took into
account the feasability of arranging large shipments of supplies in
bulk from other sources, but for the first period of the campaign all
supplies had to be shipped from home, as the type of rations required
(a mess tin ration and composite rations) had to be specially amem-
bled and packed and shipped in accordance with tactical require-
ments. Reference is made in more detail later in this chapter to the
effort involved in the desoning and production of these special
rations, but also vast quantities of commodities for the field ration
required for the subsequent maintenance of the forces had to be
built up.
Thus over half a million tons of food were eventually
shipped to North Africa, and the quantity handled and despatched
for the operations which followed operation 'Overlord' amounted
to 1,100,000 tons.
The Supply Reserve Depots
The physical effort of collecting, storing, and despatching these
large quantities of food rested largely on the War Office controlled
depots, the SRDs, which were grouped under the CPO.
It has
already been stated that the original depot at Deptford on the
Thames was scheduled for evacuation when the war broke out, but
SUPPLIES
457
because of lack of accommodation elsewhere it had to be kept in
being until September,
1940,
when it was repeatedly bombed.
There was little actual loss of stock by fire and destruction,
although the old site (a former cattle market) was congested it
seemed to bear a charmed life.
By this time a third depot had
been completed at Taunton and a fourth depot, adapted from some
existing accommodation at Swindon, had been opened. A new
site was found at Glasgow, and the loyal civilian staff of Deptford
volunteered to serve there.
The four big depots were sufficient for their purpose until 1941,
when there was a complete upheaval caused by having to hand
over the two specially designed depots at Barry and Taunton to
the Americans under plan 'Bolero', and having to find alternative
accommodation for the new reserves which were to be laid in for
operations
"Torch' and 'Overlord'.
This entailed a complete
survey of all possible sites in the country, which was conducted
with the aid of the storage and factory control department of the
Board of Trade which, among other duties, was responsible for the
concentration of non-emential industries to free accommodation for
the war effort.
One site after another was found, but it was a race
against time, and at one stage it looked as if the production which
was flowing from the food factories would outpace the rate at which
storage accommodation was being made ready, as in many cases
plant and machinery of the industrial sites which were being taken
over had to be stripped and moved and various other alterations
made before the sites could be occupied.
New depots
were opened at Lancaster,
Leeds, Purfleet and
Osterley, and in some cases subsidiary accommodation was taken
over for use as sub-depots in the vicinity.
Another large depot
was constructed at Steventon, and in 1944 the last to be opened
was at Barby in the Midlands.
It was a considerable achievement,
as by the end of the war accommodation was provided for
360,000 tons.
Other Activities
The maintenance of North Africa and later Italy and North-West
Europe went on the whole very smoothly, as by that time the tech-
nique of demand and supply between ST 6 at the War Office and
their opposite numbers at the headquarters of the theatres of war
had been highly developed and mutually understood.
Supply for
the operations contemplated by the South-Fast Asia Command
was to be the responsibility of CHQ India, but in October, in 8,
the DST India arrived home with a request for the provision
half a million 'a-hour rations in December and a quarter of a
million monthly from January onwards. As the standard pack for
