Caique
under
Sail
The Helmsman
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
65
and fifth column activities had been learned.
One instance of the
uncertainty which existed is given in the following extract from the
personal diary of the officer commanding an ammunition park.
'I have been held up for hours on end on the way back from
Headquarters to my unit.
About 21.00 we received an urgent
message to be prepared to repel enemy AFVs from any direction.
This meant double blocking I4 roads and finding inlying picquets
with double blocks of lorries from men who had been all day at the
wheel and were dog tired.
We mounted every AA and AT gun,
30 in all, and then spent the whole night trying to sort out who
should and should not be allowed in from the mass of refugees and
Belgian soldiers who wanted to pass through?
Such instances were, however, accepted as being all in the day's
work and helped to make all ranks believe that they were becoming
seasoned veterans and ready to meet any new situation as it arose.
When the withdrawal from the Dyle began on the I7th it is
probable that few of those who took part in it realized that their
Commander-in-Chief, Lord Gort, was being faced on that day
with having to make many decisions to counter the serious situation
which had developed on his right flank and what appeared to be a
direct threat to the security of his communications.
know that by the time they reached the Escaut the BEF would have
been cut off from its bases.
The Threat to the BEF's Communications
From the first day that news was received that the French lines
had been overrun on the Meuse, Lord Gort had received little
positive information of the situation in the gap which was developing
on the right of the French First Army, but it was obvious to him that
the direction of the advance of the German forces in that area was
a direct threat to his communications with his bases.
His own
rear headquarters at Arras stood right in the path of the German
advance as also did the main railway link with his bases which ran
through Amiens.
All his divisions were already fully committed in
the withdrawal on his main front, but he considered it vital to
provide protection for his right flank although part of the area was
nominally
outside his jurisdiction.
The only formed bodies
troops which were not engaged in the main battle were the three
Territorial divisions, the tath, a3rd and 46th, which were employed
on the lines of communication on labour and guard duties.
A general alert had already been sounded on the British L, of C,
and defence schemes, to counter sabotage and the landing
parachute troops, had been put into action.
FRASO
In the days which
