178
THE MIDDLE EAST II
no previous experience of native troops, but they adapted and
acclimatized themselves well and helped to establish the reputation
of the EAASC in accordance with the traditions of the parent Corps.
There are four phases in
the story of the war in this theatre:
first, from September, 1939, to June, 1940, mobilization and adjust-
ment to war conditions; second, from June, 1940, to February, 1941,
preparation for offensive operations; third, from February, 1941, to
December, 1941, active operations in Somalia and Ethiopia; and,
fourth, occupation of those territories and the mounting of the
invasion of Madagascar during the period to the middle of 1943.
Until 1938, the administration of supplies and transport services
in British East Africa was the responsibility of the ST Corps of the
King's African Rifles.
Supplies were then divorced from transport
on the grounds of economy, and became, with petrol, the responsi-
bility of the brigade staff quartermaster, supplies being delivered to
railhead under contract.
The transport part of the Corps continued as the Transport Corps,
King's African Rifles, comprising in peacetime four officers, nine
Asians,
and 105 Africans, with 58 lorries.
This strength must be
compared with a mobilization requirement of about 3,000 all ranks
and 1,900 vehicles.
The general East African mobilization scheme, which was drawn
up in May, 1939, provided for the formation of an East African
Army Service Corps, which would assume responsibility for both
supply and transport services; this took effect on the outbreak of war.
The general organization of the EAASC was based on the pre-war
system designed to meet
the operational needs of the KAR,
foundation of which was the 'group' intended to serve one battalion,
and maintain it at a distance of 80 to 100 miles from railhead.
The new Corps, therefore, comprised a headquarters, three operating
groups and base units.
Each group consisted of a headquarters and
repair shop wing, a field supply depot, a bus company, two supply
companies,
convoy.
two ammunition companies and a motor ambulance
The bus companies were designed to carry one battalion,
and were later re-designated reserve MT companies.
The existence of the Transport Corps naturally
facilitated the
introduction of the new system,
but there was nothing on which to
build a supply branch.
However, accommodation for a main supply
depot was obtained and, although nobody employed there had any
previous experience of supply work, the depot was ready to operate
by September 4th, 1939, when the staff quartermaster ceased to
control the rationing of the forces.
The transport base installations included a vehicle reserve depot,
to deal with the receipt, inspection, registration and allotment of
impressed civilian vehicles; a heavy repair shop which was formed
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
179
by taking over civilian workshops complete, until workshop machin-
ery arrived; and a main MT technical stores (later MT stores
depot), the existence of which was only made possible by a firm
placing its entire accommodation and staff at the disposal of the
number of supply and transport
units required by the
battalion group system was found to be uneconomical when the
force was concentrated and battalions were brigaded.
organization for a brigade group was therefore designed, consisting
of headquarters with a workshop wing, two transport companies for
the carriage of supplies, two ammunition companies, two field supply
depots and one reserve MT company.
There had previously been
no provision for divisional troops' second line, so
organized as a divisional troops group, consisting of a transport
company, an ammunition company and a field supply depot.
The theory of operation of transport was the
system between rail and roadhead and delivery point.
group had a range of about 80 miles, but the divisional troops group
had a good deal less, and the gap was made up by reserve MT
companies acting as third line transport.
The function of the two
FSDs in each group was that one should be located at railhead as a
railhead supply detachment, and one at roadhead or intermediately,
to break bulk, or hold a reserve stock in front of a possible break in
the line of communication.
This organization was inflexible and uneconomical.
of small units tended to an extravagant use of officers and British
NCOs, while the small size of the units themselves led to an unecono-
mical allotment of workshop sections, which aggravated the already
serious lack of maintenance facilities.
Supplies and petrol were
both carried by the transport companies, the former in detail over
Finally the existing organization of the divi-
sional troops made it difficult to detach the appropriate second line
vehicles for units of divisional troops which had to operate over long
distances in support of one brigade.
the group system was abolished,
organization substituted.
The basis of this was a brigade RASC
company, divided into a supply section, a petrol section and an
ammunition section, and a divisional troops company organized on
These companies were to carry one day's require-
ments of all commodities for the troops they served.
The remaining
transport was organized into three troop-carrying companies, each
capable of transporting one battalion, the remainder to form reserve
