314
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
relative proximity of Australia meant that supplies of frozen beef
and mutton could be easily procured,
but cold storage was not
available for the large tonnage which would have to be stored, and
the inroads which could be made on civil storage were limited
because of the large European civil population.
There were few cattle in Malaya.
There was an experimental
herd in Malacca, but it was insufficient to meet the Army's needs
even if the
climate and local conditions had been suitable for
distributing fresh meat; so any question of maintaining a reserve
on the hoof could not enter the DDST's plans.
Taking into account
the amount of extra storage that could be hired, additional space for
1,000
tons of cold storage
accordingly:
was required, and plans were made
After months of delay and disappointments due to
lack of local experience in cold storage construction, and the non-
arrival of certain essential plants, the project was not completed
when operations began in December, 1941.*
The short-lived campaign meant that the full reserve was not to
be needed, and in the operational period distribution of frozen
produce was
successfully arranged
by means of special small
containers, each holding 250 rations, and several 3-ton lorries each
of which, after being fitted out on the spot with insulating material,
could carry two tons of meat.
Although the meat ration required by the Indian and other
troops was small, the influx of about 50,000 men of the Indian Army
meant that their aggregated needs could not be met from local
resources.
There was no lack of meat in Malaya suited to the taste
of the Indian troops, as there was a large goat population, but as
they were owned in ones or twos by the local inhabitants, and were
the principal providers of fresh milk, they could not be purchased
in sufficient quantity for meeting the needs of the Indian formation.
India was first drawn upon and a large goat farm established at
Blakang Mati, but the removal of the animals from their local
pastures to new fields and the sea journeys imals fed led to heary
Although some fine and healthy animals were received
from Afghanistan, most of them were soon found to be suffering
from one complaint or another, and, in spite of segregation and the
efforts of the civil Veterinary Department, were dying daily in
large numbers, and the civil government had to prohibit any
further imports.
It was a discouraging start.
Later this ban was
removed,
and supplies were obtained partly from India under
contract, partly from the Netherlands Bast Indies, and the rest in
the form of live sheep from Australia.
These new arrangements
were not long in force when once again disaster overtook the goals
from India, which were found to be arriving with rinderpest.
* It is of interest to know that the store was finally completed to years later,
MALAYA
315
further imports had again to be banned while the problem was
re-examined.
On this occasion the veterinary authorities in India
were asked to arrange for special inspection and quarantine before
despatch and for veterinary supervision on the voyage and inspection
again before issue. Quarantine stations were set up in Singapore
and at Butterworth on the mainland opposite Penang, but in the
meantime the Dutch islands had to be drawn upon and limited
purchases made through state veterinary officers.
In practice the
problem of supply was never overcome, and a plan to provide tinned
curried chicken so prepared that it would meet the various religious
requirements came to nought at the last moment because of the fear
of future doubts which might lead to a political issue in India.
Many other difficulties which arose in the endeavour to provide
fresh produce such as vegetables and fruit were overcome in due
course, but as it was evident that an outbreak of hostilities would
interfere with certain sources of supply, considerable stocks of tinned
and dehydrated produce had to be built up in case of need.
The storage space in the existing supply depot at Alexandra was
insufficient for the many thousands of tons of food that were required
as reserves, and further accommodation had to be sought for both
food and petrol.
The choice rested on a large rubber factory at
Bukit Timah and the adjoining area where stacks could be well
dispersed as protection against air attack.
Advanced base supply
and petrol depots were established at Kuala Lumpur and smaller
depots at other suitable places.
The siting of all these various types
of depots and the stocks held in them was a matter of some import-
ance, as it had to be carefully related both to the nature of the
operations that were expected when hostilities broke out and to
the efficient distribution of stocks.
The supply of bread did not offer any special problems.
The
modern bakery in Singapore was adequate to meet the needs of the
troops in the island. In Malaya, units were supplied from military
bakeries at Kuala Lumpur, from civilian bakeries, and by sections
of the RIASC with their simple but effective beehive ovens.
These ovens, fired with fuel wood, produced excellent bread and
had the great advantage that they could be easily moved and quickly
set up again.
Men and Transport
There had been no particular difficulty in providing the number
of supply units required, as India was a fruitful source.
problem was the
The main
provision of transport units.
India could not
spare any apart from those which formed an integral part of the
formations she was providing, and could not produce any transport
units for corps troops. It will be appreciated that there were
