274
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
daily with a supply of fresh produce.
The allotment of tonnage
between the American divisions and the British divisions was made
at Headquarters VI Corps, where there was a small British increment
to look after the requirements of the British formations.
On several occasions in Anzio the RASC provided platoons to
act as infantry.
After the German attempts to wipe out the beach-
head had failed, the morale of all units in the beach-head remained
very high and many diversions were improvised.
Highly organized
race meetings were arranged, at which local Anzio beetles com-
peted.*
On one occasion three bookmakers clubbed together to
buy one over-successful beetle for the extravagant sum of £40.
A first-class concert party staged by the 5th Divisional Column
RASC provided excellent entertainment for most of the units of
the division, and was much appreciated by all those who had an
opportunity of seeing the show.
The Capture of Rome
General Alexander's final offensive against the Gustav Line
opened on May IIth, 1944.
The regrouping of formations in the
Fifth and the Eighth Armies, which had been effected with the utmost
secrecy, gave us a large local superiority in the critical area of
Cassino and the Liri valley, and the enemy was completely surprised.
After several days of strenuous fighting, a break-through by the
French
Expeditionary
Corps in the Fifth Army sector was the
prelude to victory.
Cassino at last fell to the Polish Corps on
May 18th, and the pursuit to Rome and the north began.
On
May z3rd the break-out from the Anzio beach-head at last took
place and threatened to cut the Germans' line of retreat.
Finally,
on the evening of June 4th, the leading troops of the Fifth Army
entered Rome, hot on the heels of the last Germans hurriedly
withdrawing to the north without waiting to demolish the bridges
over the Tiber.
This great success was not achieved without the great efforts of
the administrative services.
Frequent regrouping of formations
entailed an enormous amount of organization.
For the final battle
of Cassino, almost every division was moved to a different corps.
In many cases this involved moves across the winding mountain
roads of the snow covered Apennines, with all the maintenance
difficulties that such moves bring about.
Because of the need for secrecy, stores dumps in maintenance
* The beetle races took place in circular arenas constructed like cockpits.
A number
of concentric circles were painted in the area and the betes, which carried the colours
of their owners, were placed in the centre under glass jars.
Races of different lengths
Units
were included in the programme by selecting different circles as the winning line.
vied with one another in trying to make their own at cia cies amatest in the beach-head
and their meetings as well organized and 'professional' as possible.
ITALY
275
areas had to be carefully camouflaged, and in many cases
the
movement of vehicles building up these dumps had to be restricted
to the hours of darkness.
Up to the capture of Rome the armies were based for their
maintenance on the port of Naples for formations operating on the
west side of the Apennines, and on the ports of Taranto, Brindisi
and Bari for those operating on the east coast.
From the ports the
greatest possible use was made of the railways following the coastal
plains on the east and west coasts and of the arterial roads, Highways
6 and 7, which converge on Rome.
Corps maintenance
areas were established as far forward as
possible, and during the period of static warfare on the Gustav Line
were only a few miles behind the forward positions, with an army
roadhead (or maintenance area) not far in rear.
The stocks in
these maintenance areas proved invaluable once the pursuit began,
while the reserves laboriously built up in the Anzio beach-head,
which were located some 8o miles nearer Rome, helped to sustain
the rapid advance beyond Rome,
without the inevitable delay
usually involved in moving stocks forward.
Petroleum pipelines
were constructed for the first time as far forward as corps mainten-
ance areas, and mobile petrol filling centres were set up under
corps control.
Right up to the fall of Cassino great reliance was placed on supply
by jeeps, mules and
porters, and the French Expeditionary Force
showed how even the apparently most inaccessible mountains can
be crossed by troops who are sufficiently flexible in their system of
supply.
The crossing of the Gargliano by the 5th Division gave a good
example of the alternative methods of supply which can be planned
when there is a possibility of considerable forces being cut off from
their usual system of supply.
In this operation it had been estimated
that it would take the Royal Engineers 48 hours to build bridges
over the river to take maintenance traffic.
All assaulting units
were therefore made self-contained for this period, and arrangements
were made to pass a maintenance convoy consisting either of trucks
or jeeps and trailers over the river, as soon as the bridges were
complete. However, the Germans ware likely to retain control of
the upper reaches of the river for some time and would be in a
position to flood the lower Gargliano and perhaps to carry away
the bridges.
The bridges would also be within artillery range
of the German guns and indon shaamention from sheeration nocto i
the mountains beyond the river.
An alternative system for main-
taining the troops in the bridgehead was therefore arranged by
using the dukws of a detachment of 53 (US) Quartermaster Battalion
and LCTs to ferry stores by sea from Mondragone to an advanced
