422
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
understanding that the owner or driver would drive his own lorry
when
called
out
for
active service.
About 17,000 men were
enrolled out of the 20,000 wanted for these columns.
This Home Guard organization was, however, solely an 'invasion'
reserve and was destined never to
be
embodied.
It did not,
therefore, ease the general transport situation in the country, which
was one of increasing requirements accompanied by demands for
economy in effort and savings in manpower.
To meet the many different circumstances which had arisen the
general growth of the body of military transport for performing
the duties proper to the Corps had of necessity been on rather
haphazard lines.
Thus there were a large number of vehicles for
which the RASC were responsible but over which they had not
complete control.
Notable cases in point were the ATS companies
and a large ambulance pool, manned partly by the ATS and partly
by the Corps.
By custom the RASC were charged with offering
technical assistance and advice to ATS units, and this was readily
accepted.
In 1942 a War Office committee, appointed to examine the home
transport organization, recommended that all RASC vehicles (i.e.
those maintained by the RASC) should form part of an RASC
unit and that the officer commanding the RASC unit should be
responsible for all aspects of operation, administration and main-
tenance of the vehicles, and for administration of the drivers.
The
effect of these recommendations was that the separate ATS com-
panies and the groups into which they were formed were abolished,
and the pools and various vehicles attached to other units such as
headquarters of commands and districts were drawn into RASC
units.
At the same time the opportunity was taken to rationalize the
transport organization by the formation of command mixed trans-
port companies to replace the existing ATS transport and RASC
station transport companies.
These new units were commanded
by an RASC officer with ATS officers to assist him, and were made
up of separate RASC and ATS platoons in proportions suited to
local conditions.
Initially these companies numbered 51, and the
immediate effect was a considerable saving in RASC manpower.
By the end of 1942 the proportion of RASC to ATS platoons was
128 to 102, as there were few normal duties which could not be
satisfactorily performed by the ATS driver.
On the whole the
system of mixed companies worked well and, where minor differences
of opinion arose between the senior ATS officer and the officer
commanding, they could usually be smoothed out by the DDsST
of commands through their 'DADST ATS',
who were specially
selected ladies and appeared to combine the art of diplomacy with
that intangible feminine intuition which produces the right answer.
No attempt can be made here to give a detailed account of the
work which fell on the RASC transport units during the years of
endurance and preparation between 1940 and 1944 beyond record-
ing that, when both civilian and soldier were sharing equally the
hazards of the enemy's heavy and continuous air attacks on this
country, army transport took its full share of special duties.
from help in connection with air raids, there were many calls for
assistance by military transport, so much so that all requests had
to be referred to the regional transport commissioners and the War
RASC transport had to be freely used for carrying troops
to work on the farms, to carry munition and factory workers during
transport strikes, and to assist in dock clearance during dock strikes.
During the London bus strike of the war years they ran an extempore
bus service, and at Christmas they helped the GPO in the delivery
To revert somewhat in dates, in the later months of 1940 several
units were permanently employed in assisting the Civil Defence
service in the clearance of debris, carrying casualties, and distribut-
ing water, and in 194I a special company (known as the
Incident Company, RASC') was formed to work for the Admiralty
on land mine disposal work. Many of the men of this unit shared
in the hazardous duty of mine disposal.
A. I. Evans, J. S. Coates, H. Kaye and C. S. Ridge, who were
awarded the British Empire Medal, Evans later being awarded a
There were many other awards to RASC men
who were engaged in other rescue work.
The first George Medal
to be won by an RASC man was that awarded to Dvr E. O. Gurn-
ham who, in company with an RAF sergeant, rescued a pilot from
a burning aircraft.
Another George Medal was awarded to Cpl
A. M. W. Keddie for an action which was perhaps more in the
traditional role of the Corps, that is driving away a blazing lorry
loaded with ammunition and petrol, thereby saving a lorry park and
its occupants from disaster.
As the number and type of RASC road transport units was
increased in the carly years, there had to be a corresponding
development in the three main types of RASC MT maintenance
units on which the transport companies were so dependent for the
replacement of vehicles and spares, the provision of stores, and for
the execution of repairs be sond she resources of unit workshops.
The three units concerned yond the reshicle Reserve Depot, the
MT Stores Depot and the Heavy Repair Shop, all sited before the
war at Feltham, Middlesex.
By October, 1939, two new VRDs
and an MTSD had been opened in accommodation taken over in
the Slough Trading Estate.
The completion in 1940 of a new
