Dukw Casualty
About to Land
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
385
The bridging companies were stretched from divisional areas
right back along the line of communication, assisting in the building
of bridges, from the 'Baileys' in the forward areas, to the heavy
railway bridge across the Seine.
The first operational move of the
tank transporters was to move 4th Armoured Brigade from Le Beny
Bocage to Evrecy.
But these units were delivering and evacuating
tanks steadily, and 372 Tank Transporter Company carried heavy
equipment for the Royal Engineers throughout this phase of the
campaign.
There are two stories of special transport operations during this
phase of the operations which are worth recounting.
The first
story concerns two British transport units working in II Canadian
Corps during the operations for clearing the approaches to Antwerp.
There were three islands' to be cleared: the Brachems area south
of the Scheldt, South Beveland and Walcheren to the north of it.
Large tracts of the countryside were flooded and vehicles
could
only move on the dyke roads.
The country offered almost no
cover, and the land above
water level had
been heavily mined.
No. 147 Bridge Company had a strenuous time in support of the
Canadians.
After building up dumps of bridging equipment, four
platoons of the company were located on South Beveland for the
assault on Walcheren.
The causeway connecting these two islands
was, throughout the assault, under enemy artillery, mortar and small
arms fire.
This bridge company delivered, salvaged, repaired and
re-delivered large numbers of assault and storm boats under con-
tinuous and heavy fire.
Sgt R. F. Hughes remained at a bridge
site under constant observed shell fire for 15 hours, and was awarded
an immediate Military Medal.
amphibian
vehicles)
A platoon of 'weasels' (tracked
formed part of 529 Company of 5and
Division.
The platoon maintained
units which
could not be
supplied by normal first line transport.
It maintained a succession
of battalions which were relieved at regular intervals and evacuated
their casualties.
The 'weasels' route lay across extensive minefields
and under heavy spasmodic small arms fire.
Cpl J. Lynch of the
platoon won a Military Medal for completing his task in these
conditions while suffering from severe wounds.
The second story concerns the only two dukw companies which
had been retained in the order of battle at the time of the Battle of
the Rhineland (operation Veritable and were used for second
line maintenance and evacuation of casualties in the flooded areas
between the rivers.
have been supported without them.
The operations in the Cleve area could not
Strengthened by the drivers
of two platoons from other companies, these dukws worked 24 hours
a day for five consecutive days.
three feet deep and only passable for amphibians.
The water on the main road was
Many were put
BI RASC
