400
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
The Second Army was disbanded very early,
and the DDST
found himself starting up the RASC Training Centre BAOR, while
a transport column headquarters was selected to organize a RASC
demobilization centre close to HQ 21 Army Group, soon to become
HQ BAOR.
Those who knew they had to stay and see things through had to
exercise a tight hold on themselves to maintain their enthusiasm,
self-control, sense of humour and sense of proportion in the face of
an inevitable and almost overpowering reaction caused by the end
of hostilities and the expectation of release.
As the release machinery
got properly into its rhythm, endless celebrations marked each batch
of departures, and the end of one overlapped the beginning of the
The term 'release happy' became an accepted and under-
standable write-off' of three-quarters of those who had been given
their date. Here once again,
the pre-war Regular Corps officer
and NCO came into their own and showed their mettle.
Armies and corps were replaced by divisional districts.
The
barracks services came back,
and German ex-soldier
transport
NCOs, made their appearance.
companies, with small cadres of Corps officers, warrant officers and
The policy was to garrison the
British Zone with the minimum military expenditure,
thus setting
tree our much reduced forces for service at first in the Far East, and
later in all the places overseas where immediate post-war crises
Almost immediately the trouble with our Russian Allies began,
and the endless battle over the Berlin autobahn traffic had been
joined long before the end of 1945•
that the war in Germany never did end.
It is no exaggeration to say
It slid imperceptibly
from battle conditions into police control of our
past enemies,
combined with a clearance of the horrors and muddle of war and
growing tension with
isolation of Berlin, and the renowned Berlin airlift, in which the
our Allies in the east.
In 1948 came the
RASOs and FASO earned further laurels for the Corps.
Now, in 1955, the direct successors of 21 Army Group in BAOR
comprise what is almost certainly the most highly trained field army
that Great Britain has ever possessed in
divisions in Germany are all imbues with the traditions of 21 Army
peace time.
The four
Group and of the campain for the Fberation of Europe, whose
continued freedom
efficiency.
they
are defending
by their presence
This is the nursery in which most young officers in
the Coros now hold their first position of responsibility in command
of troot. It is a fitting and inspiring background for their initiation.
After launching
Dukws in a flooded Street
