On November 23rd, 1942, a French troop train was derailed four
stations down the line and the wounded were brought up by train
Many were in a bad way, not having had any medical
attention, and all ranks of the section helped the French to get the
injured to hospital. No ambulances were available, and any car
or cart that could be obtained was used to transport the injured.
As far as could be ascertained, the casualties were 22 killed and
On November 2gth a section of 95 DID arrived to take over and
all stocks were duly handed over to them.
The same evening the
section entrained for Tebessa to join C section.
A and C sections
arrived at Souk Ahras at about 2300 hours on November 18th and
at dawn next morning took over all stocks of petrol and rations at
They requisitioned the local cattle market for the depot and the
local school for billets.
There was no transport to clear stocks from
the railhead to the depot, so use had to be made of local resources,
which consisted of Arab carts.
The price of hiring one of these
carts was one packet of biscuits a load, and at this rate many carts
were obtained and the transport problem overcome.
money available was BMA, which the Arabs refused to accept.
On the 20th C Section entrained for Tebessa.
Three days later
A Section handed over stocks to 57 DID and 204 Petrol Depot and
entrained for Constantine.
There they opened a depot at the
station, warehouses
excellent accommodation for the purpose, as trains could be shunted
right into the store-sheds. A petrol depot was also opened at the
stadium.
Once again, the transport problem was acute, and Arab transport
had to be hired. By this time, however, some francs were available,
and the transport was paid for in cash.
a man angin
Early in December, A Section handed over to two sections of
95 DID and moved to Canrobert.
On arrival there they found
that the RAP had dumped all their supplies and equipment at
Ain Beda, 18 kilometres away.
Transport attached to the unit
from 239 GT Company, RASC, was used to transfer all these
supplies to Canrobert.
On December 6th A Section moved to Tebessa and were replaced
at Canrobert by B Section.
local Salle des Fêtes. and the rations were stacked in the vard of
The section was well billeted in the
the local school. A small netrol dumn was opened in the school
The job of the section was to supply the RAF aerodrome
here with all their requirements of rations, M'T petrol, aviation
petrol, and bombs.
The average daily consumption of 100 octane petrol was 7,000
88 DETAIL ISSUE DEPOT
641
gallons, and when the section moved out they had kept the RAF
continually supplied and built up a reserve for them of over 100,000
The airfield at Canrobert was paid spasmodic visits by German
aircraft which, however,
occasion when three German aircraft gave their attention to the
airfield the unit Bren gunner could not restrain his enthusiasm and
opened fire with his gun, although the Germans were flying too
high for LMG fire to reach them.
Immediately every other Bren
gunner in the vicinity joined in, and for several minutes there was
a fireworks display worthy of the Crystal Palace.
Although this
may seem a needless waste of ammunition, the effect on the morale
of the Bren gunners was remarkable.
They felt that they had been
'in action' for the first time, and were as keen as mustard ever after
Christmas Day was a great success, as we were able to purchase
(at exorbitant prices) some excellent turkeys which were cooked in
the ovens at the local bakery.
The highlight of the festivities was
a conjuring show given by a famous French illusionist called Minar
who was a refugee from Bone.
At the beginning of the New Year, bulk rations took the place
of compo, and new and larger stores were obtained.
The change-
over entailed a great deal more clerical work,
but things went
very smoothly, thanks to excellent work by the supply sergeant,
Sgt W. J. C. Leese.
On the night of January 18th, 1943, the RASC men and attached
pioncers went out to attempt to salve a trainload of supplies, petrol
and ammunition which had been sabotaged at a point 15 miles
away and was burning fiercely. Trucks not yet alight were uncoupled
and pushed out of danger, and then the trucks already alight were
of this unit, and Sgt Elrick, RAOC,
mounted a blazing truck of bombs and rolled them off on to the
For this exploit Pte Jones has been mentioned in des-
patches. Meanwhile,
S. A. Green, of the Pioneer
Corps, and some men had elenant another blazing truck of compo
For this work, Lieutenant Green was later awarded the
later transferred to the depot.
All salved stocks were placed under guard and
Apart from the people mentioned
by name, all RASC and pioneers worked magnificenty and, thanks
to their efforts, many valuable supplies were saved.
On January 26th, 1943, B Section rejoined the remainder of the
Two days after arriving at Tebessa on November 21st, and
Lieutenant Roberts was admited to she French Military hospital
suffering from dysentery. Command of & Section was assumed
