362
BURMA AND CEYLON
194I.
The formation of 'movements' relieved the RASC of all
embarkation and disembarkation duties,
but also took away the
only Regular RASC officer then in the island!
Ceylon is Transformed
The entry of Japan into the war at the end of 1941 put a com-
pletely different complexion on activities in Ceylon.
ments poured into the island.
First came 34th Indian Division (of
two brigades) at the end of 1941, followed by 23rd East African
Brigade and 16th British Infantry Brigade early in 1942.
these brigades came under command of 34th Indian Division which
thus became unique with one British, one East African and two
Indian brigades.
16th Brigade was closely followed by two brigades
of 6th Australian Division which had originally been destined for
brigades were ultimately replaced by 20th Indian Division later in
Headquarters,
Ceylon Army
March, 1942, and
was located at the Colombo Museum.
Lieut-General Pownall; and Brigadier
Davis, who had been DDST Malaya, became DDST Ceylon.
The staff hailed mainly from Singapore and the Dutch East Indies,
Such a rapid expansion obviously put a great strain on the
existing Corps establishment until such time as the CASC and
The Ceylon Army
Service Corps units consisted of two transport companies, a base
supply depot and a detail issue depot. The Indian division had
general transport companies and had provided an advanced base
supply depot at Kurunegala.
The British, Australian
African Brigades brought their own ST units, the RASC being
represented by 6r Company which later pioneered air despatch in
The supply situation was complicated at the outset.
were several types of ration scales to cope with
-British,
African, Ceylonese, to quote the main ones.
The responsibility for
supply was transferred from the War Office to GHQ (India) in
November, 1942, and it took some time before the system worked
smoothly.
The supply of meat presented difficulties.
Most of it
was carried by the Royal Navy, and it included goats which had to
be imported from India for Indian troops.
Fresh vegetables were
also a problem.
The resources of Ceylon were inadequate to meet
the increased demand, and an organization was set up to import
from southern India
direct to a
vegetable reception
depot in
Colombo.
This importation of vast quantities of vegetables took
place every day once the organization art going, and was most
successful.
CEYLON
363
A point worth mentioning in connection with the fresh vegetable
supply is the fact that it was necessary to supply
Trincomalee by
road from Kandy.
The vegetables were supplied under local
contract, and road transport was the only satisfactory method of
despatch to Trincomalee,
rail facilities
being poor.
one
occasion the vegetable convoy was delayed by a rogue elephant on
the jungle road.
One lorry was overturned, and the vegetables
were promptly devoured by the animal.
Eggs were also supplied under local contract, and were routed
by road from southern India to the same depot in
Colombo for
redistribution throughout the island.
Local contracts were made
wherever possible to supplement the vegetable supply, and in 1943
a project was started by the DDST with a view to increasing the
local supply.
Labour was specially imported from Cochin State.
About 40 acres of jungle near Nuwara Eliya were cleared and
terraced, and a really
first class vegetable garden
established.
was quickly
The products of this garden were first used to meet
the needs of hospitals, the rest going to the general vegetable pool.
The supply of fresh meat on hoof for Indian troops,
to which
reference has been made, was another difficult problem.
The goats
were shipped from Cochin to Colombo in batches of approximately
500.
Voyage casualties were high,
and reception
facilities in
Colombo poor.
To overcome these difficulties a goat farm manned
by Indians was established at Kurunegala.
All goats arriving in
the island were sent to this farm and conditioned before issue.
Breeding was carried on, together with attendant clinical facilities.
In this way the main difficulties were resolved.
Another venture,
which was not as successful, was the establishment of a cattle farm
near Colombo.
Live oxen were imported from southern India and
kept at this farm, but their quality was poor, disease incidence high
and the climatic conditions far from ideal.
The experiment was
eventually abandoned,
together with a similar one
of importing
cattle from Australia and grazing them in the hill country.
The
climate did not appear to suit these animals, and they were quickly
prone to disease.
In 1944, in a further effort to increase the fresh
meat supply for hospitals and convalescent depots up-country, a
War Department stock far anas started in the hills.
This was run
by members of RASC and the CASC, under the guidance of an
officer of the CASC who was a former planter.
Pigs, poultry and
rabbits were bred, and a cowherd maintained to provide milk for
hospitals.
This was a most successful venture, although lack of
refrigerator rolling stock limited issues to up-country stations.
The supply organization consisted of a CRASC Supply Units in
Colombo, with basi stion depots at Colombo,
Kurunegala and
Trincomalce, manned by the RASC, and a base depot in Colombo
