322
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
River two brigades had to be amalgamated into one before the
formation was pressed back again to the relatively strong positions
which were taken up behind the Perak
River about
Kampar.
By December z3rd this gallant division had been driven back no
less than 160 miles, and the 12th Indian Brigade which had been
brought up from GH reserve to reinforce the division, had already
been engaged for 14 days and was called upon to make yet a further
stand against ever increasing odds.
Fresh threats then developed
from seaborne landings at the mouth of the Perak River and to the
south, and orders were given to break off contact for a further
withdrawal to the next natural obstacle, the Slim River.
During the withdrawal the stocks at Taiping had to be abandoned,
although partially destroyed, but the supply depot at Ipoh was
successfully evacuated, two days' rations being left to be collected
by the lIth Division on its way to the south.
The two MT com-
panies at Ipoh were withdrawn to Kuala Lumpur.
They were a
useful reinforcement, as there was a great deal to be done in the
way of forming dumps behind the Perak and the Slim Rivers (many
of which had to be retrieved soon after), carrying RE demolition
parties and collecting and backloading of stores of all kinds as part
of the scorched earth policy, on which directions had been received
from the home Government in mid-December.
involved the denial of anything in the wake of the withdrawing
army that might be useful to an enemy, had been successfully applied
by the Axis powers in Europe, but obviously required some modifica-
tion in a withdrawal in a friendly country where the inhabitants
left behind were so reliant on local produce and facilities for their
livelihood.
The scorched earth scheme was obviously one which
required careful co-ordination between the civil Government and
the military, but there was neither time nor the organization for
carrying it out.
The attempts to put it into force reacted most
adversely on the arrangements for backloading essential military
stores, caused a great waste of transport, and led to such dispersion
that many RASC detachments were not seen again for long periods.
The general transport situation was serious enough, as before long
railways became congested with
some military stores being sent
back, and others, more urgent and essential ones, being sent forward;
and the sudden additional load of civil material made for a hopeless
traffic jam.
It is credibly reported that in one instance the urgent
civil stores that had to be carried by RASC transport turned out to
be the private furniture of a civil official.
Kuala Lumpur evacuated
Since the even, fter Bir a he wit ma in hoc
MALAYA
323
the main advance base, became imperative. No. 28 Combined
MT Depot, which fulfilled the triple function of MT repairs, stock-
holding MT spares and maintaining a reserve of vehicles, was
evacuated to Singapore, the new vehicles which the unit was
engaged in erecting being used to backload the more attractive and
less plentiful supplies from the advanced base supply depot.
A daily
allotment of railway trucks enabled the supply depot to be cleared
of all but 200 tons of wheat before the advanced base was finally
evacuated, but a stock of 800 tons of frozen meat had to be destroyed
through lack of refrigerator transport.
Petrol was less easy to dispose of, as the heavy 6o-gallon barrels
proved to be too cumbersome to be handled at any speed by
the
locally employed labour.
About half of the stock had to be left,
and attempts by the Royal Engineers to destroy them were not very
successful.
Three days' stocks of rations were left for the oncoming
troops, and when the last train left the party on board saw the
railway tunnel blown up behind them.
In the east, although the enemy did not effect any landings at
Kuantan until the end of December, heavy air attacks on the airfield
had put it out of action, and Japanese columns which started to
infiltrate through the jungle from Kota Bahru began on December
2oth to come into contact with the small garrison found by the 22nd
Indian Infantry Brigade.
After various engagements and the loss
of the airfield, the garrison was withdrawn from this remote area,
the MT platoons engaged in the operation playing a staunch part.
One of them was heavily ambushed, but drove straight on and
gained its objective after suffering some casualties.
So far the RASC had been able to keep pace with their task.
The plan of distributing stocks at strategical points had on the whole
worked well, although some losses had been sustained,
especially
through constant demands as the situation altered to form fresh
dumps of about seven days' food here and there.
In many cases
it was found impossible to move the food, as units' vehicles were
already fully loaded.
Had the technique of air supply been then
developed, the situation might have been easier, but even if it had
been there seems to be no doubt that aircraft could not be found for
the purpose.
One or two attempts were made to carry out free
dropping, but in consequence of lack of skill and organization the
supplies were never retrieved.
The locally enlisted transport units had also done
well and,
although operations had parted many of the men from their homes
or smallholdings, there were a negligible number of desertions.
For example when the 45 (FMSVF) Reserve MT Company had to
withdraw from the State in which they were raised and were given
the option of returning to their homes, 85 per cent agreed to remain
