246
THE WESTERN
MEDITERRANEAN
were employed on the task and were made self-contained with food
and petrol for a week.
Convoys left at intervals, the first convoy
setting off before the town had been captured.
business of discharging the loads, fighting was never far away, and
sometimes the RASC drivers had a 'grandstand' view of the battle
around them.
On March 20/2ist the Eighth Army began its famous onslaught
on the Mareth line which forced the enemy under the Italian Marshal
Messe to fall back to the Wadi Akarit.
The month closed with the
46th Division and French troops of the Corps d'Afrique pushing
back the enemy in the north to beyond Jebel Abiod.
The surrounding hills in the Sedjenane area were impassable to
motor transport and consequently the whole operation had to be
supported by
pack transport.
The mules, advancing with the
infantry, carried up ammunition, rations, water and even OPs, as
well as weapons and tools.
The two RASC companies engaged
had casualties both in men and animals, but acquitted themselves
with distinction.
The Axis forces were given no time to rest. In the south the
Eighth Army forced the passage of the Wadi Akarit on April 6th,
and on the same day forward
patrols of the American II Corps
made contact with men of the Eighth Army.
A second attack was made by IX Corps, which had been brought
up from reserve, to force the Fondouk Gap, and on April gth contact
was made with the Eighth Army near Sfax.
There were no rail communications in the IX Corps area of
operations, and a road line of communication of over 100 miles
had to be organized.
The roads were little more than tracks and
soon deteriorated to rock protruding through a thick carpet of
dust, and the going was so rough
that an alternative line via
Maktar was taken into use; but before long this route also was
almost impassable.
The surface was too rough for the passage
of tank transporters and the tanks which had been employed in
the operation had to return on their own tracks.
In the meantime V Corps launched an attack in the Medjez el
Bab sector and, after a fortnight's continuous fighting,
advanced
some 20 miles, a first step towards clearing the entrance to the Tunis
It was also a period of great air activity, for operation
'Flax' accounted for a bag of more than 400 enemy aircraft, a blow
from which the Axis forces never recovered.
This last of the lesser operations which were preparatory to the
final offensives was marked by a tremendous expenditure
of 25*
pounder ammunition which could only be met by keeping the second
line transport continuously on the road with relays of drivers,
butchers and
being
cooks-anyone who could
NORTH AFRICA
247
impressed for the purpose.
At one period 20,000 rounds were
lifted forward by 3o lorries in 24 hours.
The enemy had by this time withdrawn into his predetermined
stronghold behind the hills running
north from
Enfidaville to
Bizerta and had reduced his frontage to about 1oo miles, so a
redistribution of our forces became necessary.
The American II
Corps was switched to the north, and the First Army was joined by
the ist Armoured Division from the Eighth Army.
Railheads
were moved forward, and forward reserves were replenished in
preparation for the first onslaught against the enemy's new positions,
which took place on the night of April r9th/zoth, when the Eighth
Army attacked and captured Enfidaville.
with the ist and >8th Divisions and 4th (Mixed Division) under com-
mand, stormed the enemy's strong positions of Longstop Hill and
the hills to the north, and the ,8th Division made history by finally
capturing the hill in their third gallant attempt. Fighting was
bitter and progress was slow. Meanwhile IX Corps, with the ist
and 6th Armoured Divisions and 46th Division,
over the hills curecards soon the road Bou Arada-Goubellat, and
the American II Corps and French troops in the north had advanced
to within 15 miles of Mateur.
General Alexander then decided on April 27th to change his
plan for the capture of Tunis by concentrating all his strength in a
mighty drive from the Mediez-el-Bab sector direct for Tunis and to
cleave the enemy forces in two.
The final great offensive began on May 5th with V Corps gaining
the hills which dominated the Tunis plain and IX Corps advancing
in bright starlight on the morning of May 6th.
their infantry had gained their objective, and the 6th and 7th
Armoured Divisions (the latter from the Eighth Army), swept
forward and entered Tunis on May 7th.
American II Corps and Corps d'Afrique gained Bizerta.
enemy had not been finally defeated, but his two armies had been
cut in two at last.
By May 9th the Axis forces in the northern pocket had been
completely mopped up, while the divisions of the First Army then
turned to assist in the encirclement of the southern force, which
they achieved between May irth and 13th.
The strategy designed in London less than a year before had been
developed according to plan.
The Axis forces had been cast out of
Africa, and the Medito rancan was free to our ships.
The way was
dear for the final phase in the invasion of Europe from the south.
The Aftermath
Although the battle was over, the surge forward of the First and
