Men of the B.E.F.
At an O.C.T.U.
GENERAL
SURVEY
17
RASC units required in war had no counterparts in peace, and
many of them were vital to the successful operation of the mainten-
ance system for supplies, fuel and transport.
By this time the staff
outlook on Corps needs was sympathetic and appreciative, one of
the benefits accruing from the reforms in Corps direction, training
and operation.
Even before
the nature of the field
force was
definite,
it was clear that the number of units in
peace must be
increased, and authority was now given for the formation of I4
new RASC companies.
With this, a permanent increase in
peace establishment of the Corps was also sanctioned, but of course
the new vacancies created by this increase had to be filled, and
officers and men trained for the purpose.
As far as other ranks were concerned, when national service was
introduced the Corps was given special priority in men who possessed
the technical qualifications required by the RASC, mostly in respect
of MT drivers.
By the end of August, 1939, the first two intakes had
been received, yielding some 2,000 men.
Even so, soon after war
was declared another 3,000 had to be transferred from other arms,
mainly from the Royal Artillery,
to try to make up
outstanding
requirements.
A scarcity of men still remained, and this was made
up by opening voluntary recruitment for drivers and artificers.
In
all, some 29,000 men passed
through the depot and training
battalions
between
September 3rd and November 15th,
1939,
compared with a planned intake of 8,000 Regular reservists in the
first fortnight and 1,600 recruits in October.
The Regular reservists were quite insufficient even though they
were to be augmented by a small Supplementary Reserve of tech-
nically skilled but militarily untrained civilian tradesmen who, in
return for a small annual bounty, undertook to answer the call on
mobilization.
For a Corps of such varied activities the officer problem was even
more serious.
The only available reserves were the Regular Army
Reserve of Officers, the Territorial Army Reserve of Officers,
and
the small Supplementary Reserve of Officers, whose highest admis-
sible rank was that of lieutenant.
Many of the officers in the first
two categories had, of course, aged since they last saw active service
and had received no refresher training.
The number of Regular
officers would barely permit of more than one or two being allotted
to each unit, and there would also be calls for them to fill staff and
ST appointments at various headquarters.
In an attempt to make
good the deficit on peace establishments, several expedients were
resorted to in the months before the outbreak of war.
Officers of
the Regular Reserve (and some retired officers of the Indian Army)
were invited to return on short term engagements, short service
commissions were offered to likely young men,
and temporary
C RASC
