SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
strong recommendation from CRE, 8 GHQ Troops. On July 18th,
1944, this platoon took part in the crossing of the Caen Canal and
the River Orne.
Cpl Harris, a section corporal of this platoon,
was recommended for the Commander-in-Chief's certificate for
devotion to duty, disregard of personal safety, and setting a fine
example of leadership to his men.
Lieutenant De Neuville was
also recommended by the CRE for his leadership and his complete
disregard of personal safety. Cpl Hinton of A
Platoon, who was
the first man of the company to set foot ashore, was also awarded
the C-in-C's Certificate.
He began work as soon as he landed,
taking command of other vehicles as they waded ashore and con-
tinued to do so until his officer disembarked some hours later.
L/Cpl L. Fry, Workshops Platoon, was recommended for devotion
As NCO in charge of B Platoon's LAD, he disembarked
on D plus 2 and, through his enthusiastic and untiring efforts,
the vehicles of B Platoon were kept constantly on the road.
NCO was also awarded the C-in-C's certificate.
The company
chief clerk was awarded the C-in-C's certificate for his devotion to
duty and the cheerful manner in which he performed the many
and difficult tasks of chief clerk.
The crossing of the Rhine was in preparation, and Cpl L. Smith,
of A Platoon,
was strongly recommended by the company com-
mander for the Military Medal, which was granted.
Working with
his section attached to 503 Company, RE, who were building the
bridge at Xanten, before the crossing of the Rhine, and subjected
to heavy fire from shells and mortars, he displayed great devotion
to duty, driving a tipper himself throughout the night, and encourag-
ing the other drivers by his leadership and example.
same period Cpl Gardner, section corporal of D Platoon,
awarded the Military Medal on the recommendation of his platoon
officer.
His section were working on a bridge approach.
from being under constant shell and mortar fire, they had to traverse
a cutting in the flood bank which meant that vehicles were sil-
houetted against the sky.
This cutting was under fire by enemy
Spandau guns on the opposite bank.
Ignoring cover and casualties
among the sappers and pioneers, Cpl Gardner stood in the cutting,
directing
and supervising his section.
When one of the drivers
faltered, he took over his truck and kept the vital supply of road-
making materials flowing smoothly.
To sum up the history of this company from D Day to VE Day,
it will be seen that it called for initiative and responsibility from
platoon officers and section corporals in particular.
Platoons had
at all times been detached from this company headquarters, sections
had been detached for considerable periods from platoon head-
quarters, and section corporals had to hold their own with RE
146 COMPANY (MOTOR AMBULANCE CONVOY)
619
officers.
These
sections worked under arduous and dangerous
conditions, being assault troops operating with assault RE.
was little or no convoy work, each vehicle quickly tipping its load
and returning for further loads.
often a slow and difficult task, the channels of communication
between company headquarters and platoons
being long
and
extremely elastic, and the workshops platoon had at all times been
worked to its fullest capacity, but by close co-operation with RAOC
and REME services they had been able to fulfil their commitments.
An officer commanding a tipper company must at all times think,
not in terms of a compact company area, but in terms of wide
dispersal, which throughout this campaign has often meant thinking
in terms of the whole of the British Army second front.
And now
that VE Day has come and gone, the tippers continue to give of
their best towards the repair and maintenance of supply routes.
146 COMPANY (MOTOR AMBULANCE CONVOY)
This unit left Liverpool on November gth, 194t, for Bombay,
where it arrived in January, 1942.
Its officers and men were
then re-embarked on a refloated hulk, HMT Nevasa, more popularly
known as 'the Hellship' or
'the Altmark's Sister', and sailed to
Ma'Gil, disembarking there to join the MEF on January 17th,
Camp was set up at Zubair nearby, vehicles and equipment
being drawn from Shaiba.
The establishment of the unit was
75 ambulance cars (all of the excellent Austin 2-ton type) and 18
other vehicles.
Later four load carrying vehicles were added.
Thus equipped, the unit left MEF for India, leaving behind
C Section of 25 ambulance cars.
It embarked at Ma'Gil on March
8th, 1942, in a Free French ship, the Cap St. Jacques, to land at
Bombay once again on March 15th.
It went thence to Ahmed-
nagar, where the RASC did further training and the RAMG
complement were attached to a hospital.
Leaving Ahmednagar on April goth, 1942, the company moved
by road to Bangalore, where it was pleasantly located in the grounds
of the Residency.
Training continued, some evacuation of sick to
hospital trains was done and, during disturbances instigated by
Gandhi's supporters, many of the vehicles were stoned.
On September 19th, 1942, the unit was sent by train to Bombay
for transfer back to the MEE, the larger vehicles having to be party
dismantled for the journey to meet the requirements of the loading
The journey took four days, and was so slow that tea was
frequently brewed beside the line during the passing of the length
of the train.
