12
PRELUDE
in performing the general transport duties of the station,
except
during company, divisional and collective training.
Their identi-
fication with
their
formations and their appearance
with the
fighting arms on collective training provided a new opportunity for
the staff to make a practical study of their operation and capabilities.
In the early part of the period under immediate review (1929 to
1937) there was still no armoured force of the nature foreseen some
years
before,
and
infantry transport was not yet
mechanized.
Mechanization of second line transport,
however (which was the
generic title for RASC transport of divisions), was shown to bestow
a new degree of mobility and flexibility.
This flexibility was well
illustrated when occasions arose to divert RASC units to the tactical
movement of troops, a definite technique being worked out for the
purpose.
This
technique eventually led to the introduction of
special companies for
troop
division and
carrying as part of the armoured
as a pool for general allocation as required.
So
important did this role become that, at a much later date, when the
Corps was reorganized on a basis comparable to that of the infantry,
the transport platoon,
RASC, was designed, not only to equal the
infantry platoon in numbers but also, on a e-tonner basis, to lift
the 'foot sloggers' of an infantry battalion.
Divisionalization also helped to test the principles of training
which had
been laid down officially in 1933 in the first RASC
training manuals to be published since some years before the Pist
World War.
Before 1933 the only available data upon which to
base training had been of a semi-official nature, resulting from the
studies at the RASC Training Centre and recorded in the RASC
Quarterly.
This was a professional magazine published by the
Training Centre and financed entirely by the officers of the Corps
Indeed, even after the publication of the official manuals, limited
by necessity to the
declaration of basic principles, the Quartery
remained the medium for disseminating more detailed information,
especially in canention cith the handling of tactical situations by
divisional and corps unit officers, and with the siting and operation
of base and lines of communication units (which had no existence
as such in peace).
The latter information in particular proved of
reat value to many officers who suddenly found themselves respon
sible for their organization on mobilization.
Horse transport was not overlooked in this reorientation of idea
but its use was not provided for as a normal course, and the ont
animal transport company, embodied in the Training Battalion,
be needed
RASC, remained the potential core of whatever horsed units might
outcome of the reforms and plaved a most important part in the
The training battalion itself was the
preliminary military training of all ranks.
It was also
GENERAL SURVEY
13
responsible for the fitting out and posting of all Regular and certain
Supplementary Reservists.
The Territorial Army again
While these reforms were in progress the RASC TA units were
still organized in divisional trains, with a headquarters and four HT
companies.
Steps were now taken to bring them into line with
the Regulars, and although an extremely slender establishment of
Il officers and 99 other ranks only was allotted, the units were
reorganized on the basis of a headquarters and three companies.
They now felt themselves 'not forgotten',
and the mere act of re-
organization acted as an incentive to fresh interest and endeavour.
Arrangements were also made at this time by the Training Centre
for a wider distribution of training data, to include TA units among
the recipients, and by the organization at the
Centre of special
courses for TA officers and senior other ranks to keep them abreast
of developments.
The number of vehicles at the permanent call of
TA units remained extremely small, but the enthusiasm of all ranks,
the running of week-end exercises and TEWTs* and the additional
vehicles made available to them during annual training camps
served to build up an informed nucleus of officers and other ranks.
This proved an invaluable foundation on which to build up efficient
units on mobilization.
The TA insurance, in fact, amply repaid
the slender
premium which was apparently all that the country
could afford in peacetime.
No further change in the position of the Territorial Army took
place until 1935, when the need for an air defence organization,
which could be called out and deployed at short notice, unrestricted
by the legislation involved in official mobilization, became so urgent
that the Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB) was
brought into
being.
It was based on the formation of two anti-aircraft divisions,
TA, raised for this purpose.
The small cadre adopted for the
RASC of TA infantry divisions was soon found to be inappropriate
to these new AA divisions, and by 1938 it was established that the
RASC of an AA division must not only be of sufficient strength to
fulfil its role at a few hours' notice, but must also be completely
self-contained.
Also it has to be; in certain respects, independent
of the existing general ST lay-out of the Army Command in which
it might happen to be deployed.
This new organization and system
had a trial in consequence of 'Munich' and proved itself to be sound.
Planning for War
For reasons apart from Mussolini's threat to Egypt and the open
rebellion of the Arabs in Palestine, 1936 and 1937 were busy years
* Tactical exercises without troops.
