176
THE MIDDLE EAST II
children, and it was only through the usual ready 'co-operation'
after their defeat by the Italian authorities themselves in repairing
the Eritrean railways that wholesale civilian starvation was averted.
Massawa, about 6o miles down a steep incline from Asmara, was
captured on April 8th, but owing to the damage to the harbour it
was not until the end of April that anything but small coaster ships
could use the port, and the main line of communication was switched
to the route from Port Sudan.
The intensity of the administrative activities during the month of
April can be well imagined, and to add to them orders had been
received for the Sudan to undertake the responsibility from May ist
for the maintenance of the Free French garrison at the oasis of
Kufra, some 650 miles from Wadi Halfa, from which it was separated
by trackless and waterless desert.
To meet this commitment a
platoon of the SDF MT Company which had been employed on
the Tessenei-Asmara route was withdrawn.
In the meantime the
Italian forces which had retreated south from Asmara had still to
be dealt with.
They eventually stood for the last time under the
personal command of the Governor and Commander in Chief of
Eritrea, the Duke of Aosta, on the heights of Amba Alagi, a position
of even greater natural strength than Keren.
It soon became
evident that nothing short of a set piece attack would dislodge the
Italians,
and the tedious task of dumping the essential reserves of
ammunition, supplies and petrol had once more to be undertaken,
the main difficulty again being lack of transport.
However, just
as before, by improvisation, sweat and administrative juggling the
dumping programme was completed, and the final attack launched,
which resulted in the capitulation of the enemy garrison at Amba
Thus the campaign was ended.
Immense administrative prob-
lems involving the services, especially supplies and transport,
remained in the evacuation of the forces now freed for service in
Egypt, and in the organization of the maintenance of the forces lef
to occupy the former enemy territory.
However,
the operational
urgency had gone and by now also the supply of Corps units and
men, so much needed throughout the previous arduous months, had
greatly improved.
So the work of reorganization and tidying up
generally filled the following months as gradually the Sudan asum
a position of minor importance as a transit centre for stores and
aircraft on the route from Accra to Cairo.
the control of Eritrea, and, as far as the Corps was concerned, for
It was also the base for
the continued expansion of the Sudan Service Corps, which was th
among other commitments, responsible for the maintenance of the
This Corps,
Oasis, now occupied by British forces.
RASC •Ficers reached a strength of 5.000 in 1949 and provided
R.A.S.C. Motor Vessel (M.V.)
Launch helping to place Pontoons
