BURMA AND CEYLON
officers were needed for the many motor transport companies being
raised in India, and the resources of that country in respect of
officer material were inadequate.
Many junior
officers of the
Royal Armoured Corps and infantry sent out as reinforcements for
those arms and surplus to their requirements, were attached to the
RIASC, but the arrangement was unsatisfactory, and did not meet
need for properly trained MT officers.
So
"middle-piece'
RASC officers, majors and captains, and other ranks suitable for
commissions, were sent out to give balance to the RIASC.
They
did this effectively, and their influence on the standards of vehicle
maintenance and road discipline was marked.
Apart from these, there was no great number of RASC in India
and SEAd during the war.
The largest bodies were the divisional
RASC of 2nd Division and 70th Division.
There was also the
RASC component of HQ IV Corps: the ST staff, the staff clerks,
and the staff car and other drivers.
This formation had originally
been sent to Persia, but it eventually arrived in India, and in Maye
I942, it took over in Assam the organization of the reception of the
retreating Burma Army, and the defence of that frontier.
Gradu-
ally, the RASCi officers in it were replaced by those of the Indian
Army, and were absorbed into the general pool of RASC/RIASC
office, but the ors to nil tetaining its RASC other ranks, was
to see the campaign through to the end.
communication also found their way to India, as did others which
Some of the RASC companies intended for the Persian lines of
were too late for the campaign in Malaya.
A motor ambulance
convoy (No. 928) worked for over three years in East Bengal on
casualty clearing duties far behind the line, but it was specially
valuable for work in connection with the evacuation of patients by
A higher standard of driving was required for the specialized
work with aircraft than could venerally be found at this stage among
the Indian drivers, most of the experienced ones being in the Middle
At the end of 1042, two artillery companies. 02 /Northern
Ireland) and 169, and 102 GT Company, were used to form four
Red tank transporter companies, 553, 554, 589 and 590 Companies,
RASC mixed, because the headquarters and workshops
British, half the drivers British and half Indian.
This worked well.
Three of these units were to do excellent work with Fourteenth
Army, while the fourth, 554, did equally valuable service,
of a more humdrum nature on heavy goods lifts in the docks of
Bombay and Calcutta, its workshops maintaining far more than its
own vehicles.
A small but important RASC contingent was the cadre of some
20 all ranks sent out from the Amphibian
Training
Centre in
England to organize the Indian Amphibian School at Cocanada
BURMA
341
on the east coast of India.
There, several Indian transport com-
panies learnt to handle dukws and tracked amphibians, and one of
these units successfully effected the ship-to-shore transfer of supplies
as XV Indian Corps worked its way down the coast of Arakan.
The Corps in Burma, 1942
Operations began in the area when the Japanese invaded Burma
in the extreme south in January, 1942, and were opposed by 17th
Indian Division and the Burma Division.
independent of India in 1937, when its small army was organized
only for internal security.
In the autumn of 1941 the Army in
Burma, although larger, was gravely deficient in ancillary
the Burma Army Service Corps being still in
Our forces were driven back, in spite of the arrival of
reinforcements.
Among these was 7th Armoured Brigade, accom-
panied by 65 Company RASC.
This was the only RASC unit
engaged in the campaign; but there were some RASC officers in
the RIASC units.
The brigade arrived at Rangoon on Februaly zist.
no labour or dock staff working at the port,
and the fact that
2nd Royal Tank Regiment was able to take part in the operations
in the Pegu area was due in no small degree to the efforts of four
sergeants of 65 Company, who operated winches, etc., while the
strives ts hose lorries had not been disembarked worked as stevedores
until the off-loading had been completed. About 1,500 vehicles
were discharged, with only one casualty.
Maintenance of the brigade could only be done under armed
Orders on maintenance arrangements failed to come through, and
escort, and even so the company sustained losses in an ambush.
the company carried on without.
It loaded up all the 25-pounder
and tank-gun ammunition it could carry, even at the expense of
other items, and up to six or seven tons was carried in a g-ton lorry.
What could not be lifted was destroyed.
The retreat from Rangoon began on March 7th, and it soon
became the practice for units to find their own rations, while 65
Company concentrated on the supply of ammunition and fuel to
the brigade.
occasion.
It also helped out i7th Division on more than one
After the Irrawaddy had been crossed, a platoon of the company
went back to Mandalay to try and collect high octane fuel for the
tanks; but the dump had been set on fire io minutes before the
lorries arrived, and it was then a race against time to cross the river
again before the Ava bridge was blown.
The last vehicle over was
one of 65 Company's.
Meanwhile an RASC officer in charge of the BSD at Mandalay,
