52
THE BRITTon
UNARY FORCE, 1939/1940
It was a plan which was dependent on the railway facilities in
France being adequate, and on the labour available for handling and
unloading the ships which were to arrive with clockwork regularity
according to planned programmes.
It also depended on the speed
with which depot sites in France could be selected and organized to
perform the dual act of taking in large stocks as they arrived from
ports and at the same time issuing sufficient stocks to the smaller dis-
tribution depots which had to be set up on the long line of com-
munication extending to the north.
The arrangements for providing food, in the initial period after
landing, appeared to be well insured.
All units had instructions to
draw three days' landing rations from their place of mobilization
for use while the supply service were landing their stocks and opening
up detail issue depots.
Special embarkation depots were established
at each main home port to issue each unit with one day's emergency
ration and to provide rations for the voyage if required, as ships
were not equipped to feed the men while on board.
In the event
of any small parties finding themselves temporarily out of reach of a
supply depot, authority was given to make agreements with local
cafés for the supply of meals.
Although men and stores were to be
embarked in separate ships, the first ship destined for Cherbourg
was to carry a small supply detachment and sufficient food for
200,000 men.
Bulk shipments of food, which were to follow, were to
be
matched
with the
numbers landed day by
day plus an extra
quantity in increasing proportions so as to build up the necessary
recerves.
Somewhat similar arrangements
were made for initial petrol
supplies.
As the tanks of all vehicles had to be emptied, because of
Board of Trade regulations against fire risks, at the ports of em-
barkation in England, small amounts of petrol in tins were carried
as deck cargo.
The emptying and collection of petrol from tanks
were among the duties of the embarkation supply depots.
Bulk shipment of filled tins followed in separate ships, the des-
patches being related to the number of vehicles which were shipped
to France each day.
Mobilization
The order to mobilize was given on September ist. two days
before war was declared, and on September 4th Brigadier G. K.
Archibald, the newly appointed DST for the BEF, left for France
in company with the heads of other services and the first reconnais-
sance parties.
The business of mobilization went well on the whole, but in some
cases commanding officers found that the mobilization schemes,
BULO STROY DEPOT
Channel
Fecamp
OF C TO SAAR
AND THE AASF
Morlaix
100 MILES
The B.E.F. main lines of communication
a Redon!
DoBlain
ERVE DEPO
Louvain
