46
recommendations led to
construcu
installations in Egypt at Jebel Dave and Agr
ulk storage
point on the Bitter Lake.
a new intake
the end of the war,
capacity in
underground storage had been increased by no less than 175,000
tons.
There is little doubt that the speedy action taken to put
these recommendations into effect had a most important bearing on
the subsequent operations which were to lead eventually to victory
in that region.
Here it may be of interest to record that, at the request of the
mobile force (the Mobile Division in Egypt), for some returnable
cans which would withstand rough usage and could be
refilled, a prototype was designed in the RASC Heavy Repair
Shop at Feltham and 250,000 tins were despatched to the Middle
East just before the war.
The problems in Malta and Gibraltar were
mainly ones of security of stocks from air attack.
For reasons which
are difficult to trace, action on recommendations for Malta seems
to have been deferred, but in the case of Gibraltar recommendations
were adopted, and well protected storage was duly provided.
A Reserve built in France
By early 1939, the ST Directorate at the War Office were able to
look forward to the future of petrol supply with some confidence, as
plans had been laid and made, and work on them was progressing
as fast as possible.
Although the requirements of the BEF were
thought to be well insured, there was a possibility that the despatch
of initial stocks might be interrupted temporarily by enemy sub-
marine action in the English Channel.
As war appeared to be imminent, and in French military circles
it was considered only a matter of time before the two armies would
be fighting side by side, conversations took place with the French
It was agreed inter alia that a small stock of British
motor spirit should be built up in France as soon as possible.
would have to be done without arousing the suspicions of potential
enemy agents or exciting undue curiosity from local inhabitants.
false step might
serious consequences.
controlled oil interests in Paris were consulted in secrecy, and it
was agreed that some 20,000 tons of spirit packed in 2-gallon cans,
the only type available at the time, in unmarked but sealed cases
would be 'imported' into France under the guise of a commercial
They were to be stored at Donges in the area which
was to be allotted to the British Army in the event of war.
Fuller, * assisted by Mr.
of the plan were carefully prepared and worked out by Mr. Narman
K. Joseph,* of the Anglo-Iranian Oil
Company.
* Both were to serve with the Corps: Col. A. K. Joseph, Col. N. B. Fuller.
PETROLEUM
The plan involved money, but it is of interest to record that the
imminence of war led to financial sanction for the
project being
given in the time of 20 minutes. By August ist the stock was
safely housed in France, together with a complement of filling
The course of the war was fully to justify this last step.
The onus of all planning and arrangements for supply fell on the
same branch (QMG 6) at the War Office, which was staffed by three
officers. Although the work connected with POL constituted a
completely new and wide range of activity, no permanent increase
the numbers employed could be allowed.
however, given to employ one regimental officer, a captain (Captain
D. H. Bond*), and later to obtain the loan of a Reserve officer from
the oil industry to provide expert advice and liaison (Captain
A. M. Macintosh†).
Names are invidious perhaps, but it was
these two officers who laid the foundation of the organization which
developed upon a world wide scale before the war came to a close.
Thus when the war began the policy persisted that petrol should
continue to be provided by the supply organization.
not a single unit in the order of battle specifically allotted for
petroleum supply, although each base supply depot had one section
nominated for the storage of canned petrol, and each division and
corps troops had transport companies allotted for the carriage of
packed petroleum supplies.
To QMG 6 it was only too evident
that the complexities of supply were bound to lead to a separate
organization for fuel and lubricants, and the nature of the
units
which would be required was already in their minds.
But any
attempt to advocate a separate organization would have been fruit-
less because of restrictions on manpower and the changes which
would be needed in the administrative framework for maintenance.
It only took a few weeks of war to show that such an organization
would have to be set up, as speedily as possible, and a heavy call
had to be made on the members of the oil industry to set it on its
feet—a call to which there was a ready response.
* Brigadier D. H. Bond, C.B.E., M.V.O.
† Colonel A. M. Macintosh, O.B.E., M.C.
