616
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
Montgomery pushed in XXX Corps and, with the corps,
went
A Platoon to Namur. Wherever the British Second Army were
making a drive, the tippers of 486 Company were always to be seen
in the forward sectors.
Throughout the remaining winter months, the company continued
to carry on with road maintenance.
There was no glamour in the
job, but it was of the utmost importance to keep open the vital
supply routes.
During the hard frost, tippers were used for spread-
ing sand over the roads, a difficult and dangerous job.
drivers had hair-raising experiences with their vehicles.
came the thaw of February.
Roads began to collapse, and the
tippers were operating night and day; a most unfortunate time for
the company, as we were due for a visit by the MT Inspectorate.
But everyone worked hard and conscientiously, and the company
earned a good technical report.
Preparations were made at this period for the crossing of the Maas.
C Platoon were moved north to a small village named Beugen,
south-west of Gennep.
The enemy had only been pushed out of
this sector a short time before, the whole location was bristling with
field artillery.
Sleep was impossible,
but the platoons worked
cheerfully under these difficult conditions on the bridge at Gennep.
The bridge
was a magnificent feat of engineering both in its
construction and in the time taken to erect it.
And now the armies were ready to make preparatory attacks.
The st nowarfare of winter was over, and all formations were in
their allotted places ready to drive over the Maas.
The crossing
was effected, and the platoons-A, B, C and D took up locations
between the Maas and the Rhine.
From that period until the
Rhine crossing was effected, information was difficult to get.
The
whole operation
was shrouded in secrecy, but once again 486
Company operated on another D Day-D Day of the Rhine.
A and Platoons Were operating at Xanten, and C and D Platoons
at Rees.
A and B Platoons came under command XII Corps, and
C and D Platoons came under command XXX Corps.
A Platoon
reverted to VIII Corps and were left behind on the long glorious
push across the plains of Germany.
B Platoon continued to operate under command XII Corps,
working with thetinu A toured Division, 15th (Scottish) Division,
and 53rd (Welsh) Division.
Their drive was towards Hamburg,
and as the platoon pushed onwards dispersals again became a big
factor.
It is interesting to note that on April 22nd/23rd, 1945,
No. 6 Section of B Platoon transported 171 loads of rubble, weighing
some 500 tons.
This gives some idea of how badly roads were
damaged, mostly by enemy mines.
Drivers were working day in
and day out.
No. g Section of B Platoon, between April 25th/28th,
486 COMPANY (TIPPER)
617
1945, carried on for 72 hours without rest.
No. 10 Section detached
three vehicles under command of a RE officer.
Their small party
was ambushed by SS troops, and their officer was killed, but the
three drivers evaded the enemy and continued work.
From April
28th the whole of B Platoon were concentrated and were engaged
bridging of the Elbe,
and on the goth the platoon was
'strafed' by enemy aircraft, but without damage or casualties.
Meanwhile C and D Platoons, operating under command XXX
Corps, were working for 43rd (Wessex) Division, Guards Armoured
Division and 5Ist (Highland) Division, their objective being Bremen.
It was a month of action and a few casualties for these platoons.
On April 13th, 1945, C Platoon had one vehicle blown up on a
heavy road mine, and Dvr Barton was killed, the first fatal casualty
of the company throughout its many months of hard campaigning.
The vehicle immediately behind was blown off the road by the
force of the explosion, but continued to work later. D Platoon
experienced mined roads; two tippers were blown up, and three
drivers wounded.
On
the 24th,
two D Platoon
tippers were
damaged by shell fire, but there were no casualties, and throughout
it was move, change of location and move again.
The advance
was going on rapidly.
A Platoon still remained behind, now being
transferred to I Corps for maintenance of roads in the rear area.
At the beginning of May B Platoon, working as a whole platoon,
were still operating under the command XII Corps
and were
engaged on the Mote Bridge.
This bridge, 1,040 ft in length, was
constructed in 29 hours.
During this time the platoon were
subjected to strafing and dive bombing. Just before the official
cease fire, the platoon moved into Hamburg area for work on the
approaches to Hamburg.
C and D Platoons were now striking north to Bremen, Zevan,
Bremervorde, and Bremerhaven, and then came that long-awaited
signal to cease fire.
During the last long flog from the Rhine to the time "cease fire'
was given, company headquarters and workshops had endeavoured
to keep as near geographically central to the platoons as was possible.
For one period, A Platoon were left a long way in the rear, and it
was decided to leave with them a small LAD to do workshops
inspections and repairs.
In fact at this period A Platoon location
was Xanten, west of the Rhine, and B Platoon were located at
Nienburg, some 200 miles away, east of the Rhine.
Once again it
may be noted how widely scattered are the platoons of a tipper
company.
Recommendations for honours and awards were passed on to
company headquarters from platoon officens and other unit and
formation officers.
The first came through from B Platoon with a
