Left:
'Aid to Russia'
Below :
In the Chindwin
Hills
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
193
army officers, the only British forces in the country were the RAF
at Shaiba, a few miles from Basra, and at Habbaniya.
They were
maintained from India via the Persian Gulf.
Fostered by the
Germans whose agents had been relentlessly spreading their propa-
ganda against the Allies, the rebels soon showed their real intentions
by despatching, at the end of April, a force of an infantry brigade
with artillery
and tanks to the plateau overlooking the RAF
cantonment at Habbaniya.
Thanks to the prompt action of our Ambassador an Indian infantry
brigade had already been diverted from its destination, Malaya, to
Basra and a second brigade also from India was on its way.
But the
only reinforcement which could be sent at once to Habbaniya was
about 350 men, of the King's Own Royal Regiment, who were
hastily bundled into Valencia aircraft and deposited there on the
last day of April.
The Indian brigade was not equipped for desert
operations, nor had it been loaded tactically and the 400 inter-
vening miles to Habbaniya, owing to annual flooding, made the
movement of armed forces by land to the north impossible.
Action had, however, also been taken to draw on the ist Cavalry
Division then in Palestine and to assemble a force which was to
secure the communications across the desert to Habbaniya, relieve
the beleaguered RAF station there and then strike at the rebels and
restore the situation around Bagdad.
Units which were horsed
had to be quickly mechanized for the purpose, but by the evening
of May 13th 'Kingcol', a column made up of the headquarters,
4th Cavalry Brigade, the Household Cavalry Regiment, a company
of infantry, and some artillery, engineers and signals, with 5t and
552 Companies RASC, was assembled at H4 on the oil pipeline.
The remainder of the force, which included the divisional head-
quarters and their CRASC headquarters and 543 Company, was
to follow and to open up the new long line of communication which
was to stretch from the Haifa base to Habbaniya.
of the i4th 'Kinecol", with its 1 800 men and 500 vehicles, of whi h
On the morning
300 were of the RASC, reached Rutba, which had been cleared of
its rebel garrison the day before by the Arab Legion.
From Rutba
the force had then to leave the oil pipeline and negotiate a desert
track until it joined the tarmac road about zo kilometres from
Ramadi. The road trom Ramadi to Habbaniya was impassable
because of floods so that the force had again to make its way over
the desert and to skirt Lake Habbaniya.
day, and the move was at of considerable physical endurancen
the air and the attention of querillas had to he brushed off on the
Some feeble attacks from
As most of the driver had no experience of desert work, and most
vehicles had normal home service tyres, many lorries were soon
stuck in soft sand. Ater mur effort all were extricated in a
