THE MIDDLE EAST I
Even to the old desert warriors this was something new; they had
never been as far as this before.
To the New Zealanders it was
even newer, since to them fell the lot of doing the first
something eva widen circling movement from the south through
unknown desert.
This division was not on a British establishment
and was more generously provided with vehicles.
second line included at least one authorized reserve MT company,
and the quantities which could be carried by the divisional second
line seemed unlimited.
It was during this pause in active operations that a new RASC
'baby' arrived, a mobile bakery, and the credit must go to Lieut-
Colonel (subsequently Brigadier) S. H. Crump commanding the
New Zealand Division Army Service Corps.
It consisted of oil-
fired Baker Perkins ovens mounted in 3-tonners, together with a
variety of canvas in the form of tents and shelters to provide cover
for the kneading and proving.
The experiment was to be a great
It was a very mobile unit and, apart from providing bread
for its own division, it was able to supply some of the ration for the
rest of XXX Corps.
The Air Arm
From the battle of El Alamein onwards one of the greatest
contrasts to the previous periods of the campaign was the situation
in
the air.
Superiority had gradually
been wrested from the
enemy, with obvious advantages to the RASC transport units.
They were subject to occasional bombing and low level sneak raids,
but that solitary ribbon road along the north coast was no longer a
death trap, and with consequently decreased dispersion, the indivi-
dual driver no longer had to walk anything from a quarter to half
a mile to collect his cup of tea at halts.
During these latter
stages of the campaign a high degree of
co-operation was developed between the fighter wings and squadrons
and the RASC.
The Desert Air Force provided fighter squadrons
operating far behind the enemy lines.
To obtain the range it was
necessary that these fighter squadrons should be based as far forward
as possible.
In the carly stages all the RAF were maintained at
army level, but immediately after an advance some RAF formations
would suddenly appear on improvised landing grounds as far for
ward as the divisional areas.
From the army point of view this
meant unexpected and heavy demands on corps FMCs: from the
RAF point of view the FMCs could never provide for all their wants.
The solution lau in the maintenance of these squadrons being made
a corps responsibility.
A corps troops RASC liaison oficer was
attached to the pAf and a firm friendship was formed between
members of the two services.
The RAF had a limited amount of
THE MIDDLE EAST I
153
transport of their own, and soon this transport was co-operating with
the corps third line from which great mutual assistance developed.
When sufficient stocks had been built up, the attack on the
Agheila position was launched with, as previously mentioned, the
New Zealand Division doing their first wide left hook.
eminently successful and once more the Afrika Corps was in retreat
with the Eighth Army in full pursuit.
The achievements of all
transport units from the divisional second line back along the lines
of communication towards the advance base are difficult to appre-
At each pause they were called upon to redouble their
efforts to build up the stocks in the minimum of time for the next
advance, but such was the tempo of the campaign that the next
attack was launched when the reserves had reached the bare mini-
mum required, and all these transport units were being called upon
for yet another effort to cover greater distances.
This could not
have been achieved without the determination of the
driver not to be 'out of the hunt'.
It was largely this urge in the
individual which was responsible for the high standard of vehicle
maintenance.
Each driver 'nursed' his vehicle,
ment of individual improvisations was quite remarkable.
Wadi Zem Zem
The next pause came in the area of Buerat on the Wadi Zem
Zem, now a distance of 300 miles from Benghazi and 950 miles
from the far distant point'of El Alamein.
A big goal was in sight
-Tripoli-and everybody knew it, including
But the terrain was changing.
The coast line was more developed,
and it was obvious from the map that units would be unable, as in
the past, to leave the coast road at any moment for the wide open
spaces of the desert. To the south of Tripoli lay foothills passable
only by road and track.
These new features called for careful
study and planning by all RASC transport units and particularly by
the divisional second line.
In the well-developed drill in the maintenance projects established
between army and corps staffs, if the expected distance of the for-
ward jump did not warrant a new army base, corps FMC stocks
were maintained at a minimum and when the jump took place they
were already eaten down, leaving no great transport problem.
When a new army base was envisaged the FMC was built up as far
as time permitted.
On the corps going forward, taking with them
their requirements, the FMC was handed over to the army.
It was
already stocked to a varying degree and the layout took this expan-
sion into account.
The army roadhead for
the final attack on
