498
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM
training of all ranks and
with the specialist training of clerks,
storemen, animal transport men, and cooks for all arms.
time the Army Catering Corps was not yet in being.
At that
Potential
cooks were selected by commanding officers of units of all arms.
On completion of training at the Army School of Cookery, Aldershot,
they were returned to their units for employment as cooks.
At Feltham drivers and MT artificers were given their specialist
training at the Driving
Shop,
RASC,
School, RASC, and the Heavy Repair
respectively.
The
whole
organization
was just
adequate to deal with the flow of voluntary enlistments in peace,
and consequently the advent of the Militia necessitated the provision
of further training facilities, and a Militia Training Battalion was
formed at Boyce Barracks, Crookham, near Aldershot.
The plan on mobilization was to expand each training company
of No. i Training Battalion, RASC, Aldershot, into a battalion and
to expand the depot company of that battalion into a depot battalion,
RASC.
Further, the RASC Training Centre at Aldershot was to
form a company to train selected cadets to become officers.
Within a week of mobilization being ordered, it became abun-
dantly
clear that even the expanded training organization was
totally inadequate to cope with the tremendous influx of recruits.
Plans were therefore made to form another 12 training battalions
as soon as suitable locations could be found for them.
The main
problem,
however,
administrative staffs to be found?
was where were the officers, instructors and
As has already been pointed
out, the greatest difficulty was being experienced in finding even
the small cadres wanted for the many new units in process of
formation.
The Director of Recruiting and Organization called a conference
at the War Office to discuss ways and means.
It was agreed that,
on the administrative and military training side, men of any arm
would be quite suitable, but that specialists were essential for the
driver. clerical and artificer training. and that none were availabl
in the Corps at home.
The ascete armilable were many olderly retired officers of the
British and Indian service. greater numbers of officers and men o
infantry training groups, which now had little or no training to do,
in addition to any specialists we could get from civil life.
provision of these last did not prove an
insuperable
difficulty.
Mr. Frank Pick, Vice-Chairman of the London
Passenger Trans-
port Board, agreed to encourage the voluntary enlistment of his
experienced drivers, while the editor of the Motor Cyele gave an
assurance that he could produce all the motorcycle instructors we
Clerical instructors were found by enlisting the aid of Pitman's
MANPOWER
499
Commercial College and various other secretarial training colleges
throughout the country.
Artificer instructors presented a harder
problem, in view of the variety of trades in the Corps and of the
operation of the Schedule of Reserved Occupations.
Luckily,
two of our senior retired officers (one of whom was nominated to
command the Artificer Training Battalion) were directors of large
engineering undertakings, and they guaranteed to produce our
requirements if given a free hand.
They succeeded, but some of
their methods would hardly have recommended themselves to the
Ministry of Labour.
With this miscellaneous collection,
the new battalions were
formed and scattered far and wide over England.
For convenience
of administration they were grouped into three brigades, No. t at
Aldershot, No. 2 at Bulford (later Carlisle) and No. 3 at Mansfield.
There were teething troubles, but the battalions soon settled down
to do a first class job of work.
Most of the credit for this must go
to those elderly officers in command, almost none of whom had any
RASC experience but who all had a sound regimental and adminis-
trative background, based on many years of service.
Man manage-
ment was good, and the units were happy and hard working.
In the early days of the war many of the recruits who came into
the Gorps had varying degrees of proficiency at their military trades,
and in consequence the output of training units varied from week
to week.
Later, as the young national servicemen provided most
of the intake, this state of affairs ceased and a standard regular
output was achieved.
There were, however, occasions when trades-
men with previous civilian experience were required at short notice.
A special demand on the Ministry of Labour, with which the War
Office liaison was exceptionally good, usually produced requires
The results were at times amusing, for instance on one
occasion the Artificer Training Battalion found itself with 20 coal
trimmers for conversion into coach trimmers, while a field force
unit workshop found itself embarrassed with a corset fitter, who had,
moreover, by some mysterious means risen to the rank of sergeant.
With the passage of time and the introduction of new equipments
and techniques, further specialist training units became essential.
Thus, in August, 1940, the War Office decided that global war
demanded the provision of water transport units.
Accordingly, a
motor boat company was formed in Devon and another in Cornwall.
Sections were detay has to me Royal Navy and the Royal Air
Force for training:
Two years later the units,
combined,
were moved to Mersea in Essex and renamed the Waterborne
Training Wing, which, together with the Amphibian
Training
Wing, formed the Waterborne Training Centre.
As larger craft
came into service, a ater water anchorage became essential, and
