476
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
and the tins were fully camouflaged with a dark drab colour.
A Pacifie 24 hour ration was provided in the form of three
hermetically sealed
aluminium
containers,
one
for
breakfast,
another for a midday snack, and one for supper.
The ration
consisted of 24 items, spread over three meals and varying from
ham and egg, fruit bars and oatmeal block to cigarettes and walt
tablets.
An emergency ration pack was alo provided in a single aluminium
container similar to that used for the 24-hour ration.
It included
biscuits, oatmeal block, chocolate, meat bar, walt tablets and sweets,
and was purely for use as its name implies. Altogether some 15
million packs for the Pacific were produced from November, 1944,
to October, 1945*
Before concluding it is desired to pay a special tribute to the co-
operation of the various members of the food industry who amisted
in designing and producing the Army's special packs. Both the
management and operatives in all the firms which were engaged on
production seemed to enter into the spirit of the day and often
worked long hours to make certain that their contracts would be
completed in good time in the knowledge that so much depended
upon them,
PETROLEUM
Introduction
Although this chapter is intended to be devoted to a description
of the work of the RASC in the United Kingdom, it includes wome
detailed references to the growth of the petroleum organization
This is because the development of the organization in the laryer
commands abroad was directly influenced by the gradual evolution
Of the petroleum organization and supply and distribution poley
which originated at the War Office,
The supply of spirit, other
liquid fuels, and lubricants was a War Office responsibility through
out the war, as was providing the means of producing containers and
the supply of plant and material required for the growth of the
organizations overseas,
Thus the petroleum branches at the ST
hectorates at cemens commande had to rely more closely on the
activity of the War man did the Transport and tupply
branches.
Space does not allow the full story of the growth of the petroleum
on anization in the war being told in these pages, but it was a yest
achievement, No particulars are available yehe unal quantity o
PETROLEUM
477
petroleum products that were used. It can only be said that they
were enormous.
The ST Directorates at home and abroad could not, however,
have achieved their purpose without the co-operation of the Oil
Industry, Many members of the industry served with the Corps.
But those who did not also made their contribution in many parts
of the world.
New Organization
QMG 6s immediate concern, when war broke out, was for the
arrangements for supplying the BEN because they depended almost
solely on the production of new tin-making and filling plants, which
had still to be fully tested when war was declared.
When planning
to meet the estimated requirements for the future BEF, for the first
months of the war, QMC 6 had only reckoned on obtaining a
$ per cent output from the factories to start with.
They had
provided a small cover against any powible failure by placing 5,000
tons of spirit in France just before war was declared.
But it only
took a few weeks working, to show that even the predicted output
from the factories was not being attained because of unexpected
mechanical troubles.
Shipping placed at Avonmouth and Swansea
to load supplies was woon lying idle and CHQ BEY began to express
some apprehension about their petrol stock situation.
Fortunately the consumption of M'T spirit in France did not
teach the expected level and the movement of the forces was not
unpaired for lack of petrol, but the passing shortage and pre-
liminary adverse reports on the utility of the A-gallon tin both
served to precipitate the development of a new petrol supply
organization,
Prom a War Office point of view the supply arrangements made
Her her petential operate at view the eup pay strary,
The civil
Walk plans and tin-iling, factories in Kuypt and Palestine
mine, uncerns and work on peoviding miktary protected bulk
strage and filing apparatus in waypt was already proceeding.
Inappose had adequate bulk supplies and tin making plant and the
supply situation in Hong Kong was also catiefactory.
Work was in
hand at Cibraltar to provide protected storage accommodation for
tries Kquid fuchs and athough sinilar plans for Malta had hung,
Site neveased yacked testes and a small filing plant had been
established there,
The plan for keeping the BE supplied, by using allon (Hiny?
tina, was an expedient for the reasons
which are explained in
Chapter I, The arrangement was, however, only to hold good
anyhow until permanent bases were established and the militars
statom permitted of any form of bulk installation being utilized
