Dukws
Wood
MANPOWER
497
occasional malingerer.
In one mobilization centre the holding
company at one time held 40 officers and nearly 1,000 men, only
about five per cent of whom were immediately available.
The expansion of the Army as a whole was so rapid that army
and command schools were unable to turn out instructors and
specialists fast enough to meet the demand.
To provide for RASC
requirements the necessary courses of instruction were arranged in
mobilization centres, no fewer than 12 different types running
concurrently.
Trained cooks for units were provided by establishing
a cookery instruction unit near each centre.
This system worked
well but it absorbed, at its peak, 120 officers and 1,800 other ranks
in the whole four mobilization centres.
The mobilization of units now went on with reasonable smooth-
ness.
As soon as a cadre arrived in a centre the senior officer was
handed a brochure which,
if it did not answer all his possible
questions, did tell him where the answers were to be found.
Among
other things the brochure contained the war establishment and the
mobilization store table of the unit, details of accommodation, an
outline training programme, outline unit standing orders, training
pamphlets and necessary books of regulations, a map of the locality
showing neighbouring units,
supply and ordnance depots, local
police and fire services, and so on-altogether a company com-
mander's vade mecum.
About a month before a unit was due to complete mobilization it
was inspected by the Assistant Inspector of the RASC, Brigadier E. S.
Hacker, who reported on its fitness for its war role.
Backward units
were given intensive training to bring them to the required pitch
of efficiency.
In spite of this some units did embark when only
partially trained, in order that shipping space should not be wasted.
When this occurred overseas theatres were warned and they arranged
completion of training after the unit's arrival.
The story of the mobilization centres must be left here. That
they met a definite want was manifest, and there is little question
that a future emergency of the same proportions would call for
some similar
organization.
The points to watch are that the
permanent cadre is adequate and capable, that the medical category
of this cadre is the lowest compatible with efficiency under home
service conditions, and that the overlap between the functions of
mobilization centres, training units and army schools is kept to
negligible proportions.
Itis time now to turn to the development in war. of the trainine
organization of the Corps.
Aldershot and Feltham.
That existing in peace was split between
dealt with the ab initio training of officers,
Briefly, the Training Centre at Aldershot
and their advanced
training in all spheres of Corps work.
It dealt with the military
IL RASC
