Field Ambulance Transport
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
177
several MT companies for duty in the Western Desert, where they
loyally and efficiently fulfilled their purpose.
No account of the Sudan-Eritrean campaign would be complete
without a tribute to the Sudan Government and the Sudanese.
Throughout the campaign
the services of all the
government
departments were unstintingly placed at the disposal of the GOG,
General Sir William Platt.
Inestimable help,
both material and
administrative, was given by all these departments especially the
railway, agriculture, survey and medical.
Both Sudanese and
British Government officials, many of whom took an active part in
the operations, did their utmost in helping the fighting forces.
The
Sudanese soldiers, who in peacetime were recruited only for internal
security duties, lived up
to their highest
traditions and proved
themselves brave and efficient and fully able to fight beside their
British and Indian comrades.
At a Field Dressing Station
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
Introduction
Before the war, British East Africa, in which were included Kenya
Colony, the Uganda and Nyasaland Protectorates and the mandated
territory of Tanganyika, was under Colonial Office administration
and no British troops were stationed there.
The garrison consisted
of two brigades of the King's African Rifles.
A small number of
RASC officers and other ranks were seconded for duty with the
Supply and Transport Corps, KAR, but there was no actual RASC
organization for the operation of supply,
transport and barrack
services.
From this small beginning grew a command, which was to mount
and support the invasion
and capture
of Italian
Somaliland,
Ethiopia, and Madagascar, and of which the feeding
strength
reached a peak of nearly a quarter of a million.
In addition the
TIth East African Divisiona was sent to take part in the re-conquest
of Burma.
From the outbreak of war until the summer of 1941,
East Africa
was under the Commander-in-Chief, Middle
but it subse-
quently became an independent command under the direct control
of War Office.
At its zenith,
besides the original territories,
included Northern Rhod sia, Madagascar, the Seychelles, Mauritius,
Ethiopia, British Somaliland, and the former Italian SomalilAtri
Although no RASC unit served on the mainland of East Africa
during the war, there unit sta single unit of the East Africa Army
Service Corps
from 194I onwards
that did
not contain a high
proportion of RASC officers and other ranks.
Most of these had
