Diamond T
in the
Desert
SUPPLIES
33
commanding the unit was allowed to compensate him with a small
sum from any funds which accrued from the sale of cookhouse
refuse.
Usually the potential cook, often detailed for the task on
the grounds, 'he's only fit for the cookhouse, sir', had to be trained in
the unit.
There was a small Army School of Cookery at home for
which the DST was made responsible, but the number that could be
trained there was limited, and it is noteworthy that units were
expected to contribute to
the cost of training.
No cooks were
officially allowed on
the establishment for officers' or sergeants'
messes, although courses for officers' cooks were held at the school.
Messing Reforms
The supply branch at the War Office, then called QMG 6, sensed
that all was not well with either the systems of messing or the pro-
vision of trained cooks, but in the absence of any collective repre-
sentation from the headquarters
of commands,
the branch was
prevented from seeking their official opinion, as it was against
financial policy to 'invite criticism'.
It was a case of letting sleeping
dogs lie'.
QMG 6 were, however, not content with the situation
and took the opportunity of sending their Inspector of Catering, who
was the only one for the whole Army, on an extended tour of the
principal home and Middle East stations.
He was specially briefed
to collect detailed information at first hand on specific points on
which a case could be built to review both questions of messing and
cooks.
The Inspector, Captain R. G. Leggatt, was a retired officer
of the RAMC re-employed at a small salary, which was indicative
of the lack of importance attributed to his duties.
He performed his
task thoroughly, and his reports, which were supported by extensive
statistics, revealed a sorry situation.
There was ample evidence
that many units were being forced to subsidize their messing from
unit funds, and some from small sums paid in voluntarily by the men
to maintain the desired standard.
Even so the soldiers' last meal
of the day, and a not very substantial one, was served at about five
o'clock in the evening.
Small units found it especially difficult to
make both (messing)
ends meet.
Most of the
'cooks' employed
were only partly trained.
They had no incentive,
and many
worked for as much as 70 hours a week.
The report included a host
of other points which invited attention, and an analysis of the rates
and conditions of the ration allowance issued to those living out of
barracks showed that this question also required review.
The officers at QMG 6 who had to deal with the matter and were
directly responsible for preparing the cases for the reforms which
followed were Major R.
T. Snowden-Smith (a future DST) and
Major T. W. Richardson (a future IRASC), both of whom had,
among other attributes, a special flair for anything which was likely
