Jerricans
Refuelling the Navy
ITALY
273
January 22nd by the landings at Anzio. At first everything went
reasonably well.
Strong
German resistance
was
met on the
Gargliano and the Rapido, but this only showed that the German
reserves were committed.
The sea-borne attack took the enemy
completely by surprise and for 48 hours was almost unopposed.
Thereafter, however, the German reaction was swift, and enemy
formations and units hurried piecemeal from all over Italy soon
succeeded in containing our beachhead before we could break
through the Gustav Line.
X Corps had succeeded in making a
substantial bridgehead over the River Garigliano, but had insuffi-
cient reserves to effect a break-through, while further east the
American II Corps had broken through the Gustav Line only to
be defeated by formidable German positions at Cassino.
During February and March, 1944, two more attempts were
made to capture Cassino, this time by the New Zealand Corps,
consisting of the 2nd New Zealand Division, the 4th Indian Division
and the 78th British Division.
But still the enemy resisted stub-
bornly, in spite of the stunning effect of probably the heaviest aerial
and artillery bombardment that any troops endured during the
war.
General Alexander now decided on a wholesale regrouping
of his armies in order to achieve sufficient local superiority to make
a final successful assault on the Gustav Line.
Meanwhile at Anzio the unfulfilled promise of the early stages of
the assault had been succeeded by a critical situation as the Germans
attempted desperately to drive our troops back to the sea.
The
assaulting divisions were reinforced by the American ist Armoured
Division
and the 45th Division,
and
soon afterwards by the
56th Division from X Corps in the middle of February:
The
56th Division was in turn relieved by the 5th Division during the
first week of March, and the ist and 5th Divisions continued to be
the British component of the American VI Corps until the break-
out from the beach-head at the end of May.
Owing to the congested area of the beach-head, only a portion of
the administrative units of the divisions were required.
case of the RASC, five transport platoons were sufficient to meet all
the commitments of a division.
remained in a rear area south of Naples.
The rest of the divisional column
Vehicles and dumps of
stores were dispersed as widely as possible and all vehicles were
dug in, to avoid damage from shelling.
The maintenance arrangements for the beach-head were of a
novel character.
LSTs sailed nightly from Pozzuoli, a small port
north of Naples, to Anzio, each carrying 50 loaded g-ton lorries.
They arrived at Anzio in the early morning; the loaded lorries
drove ashore and were replaced by an equal number.
lorries which had been landed the day before.
of empty
An LCI sailed
