544
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
of the famous Calpe Hunt until he took the company to North
Africa a year later.
In 1943 pack transport (a cadre) figured for the first time in the
initial order of battle for an expeditionary force for North Africa;
but it was not until the opening of the campaign in Italy that it was
required on a really
extensive scale.
The Italian
battleground
was, until the armies finally reached the plains in the north, one
of mountains and rivers and although bull-dozers, power tools
and Bailey bridge tracks were used to the fullest advantage in
making the impassable into the passable, there was usually a gap
which could only be filled by the pack animal in the first instance.
Thus the pack units in Italy were very much front line troops.
Towards the end of the campaign no fewer than 30,000 animals were
being employed by the Allied armies.
All the pack units employed
by our own army were led by British officers and NCOs but for
convenience were designated by the nationality of the men in the
unit.
Thus references will be seen later in this account to Cypriot,
North African (mostly Algerians and Tunisians) and Italian groups
or companies.
The RIASC units consisted of the usual proportions
of British and Indian officers and other ranks.
The accounts which follow have been selected from the campaign
in Italy because they are typical of the work of pack units and
because they illustrate well the qualities which are needed by these
units on active service.
The mention of names in a regimental history always calls for
judicious care, but those of four pack group commanders in Italy
cannot be omitted.
They were Lieut-Colonels J. Hume Dudgeon,
the Royal Scots Greys, R. B. Adderley, R. Fleming and C.
Berridge. As Colonel Dudgeon was the first non-RASC officer to
volunteer to raise a pack company in the United Kingdom and
eventually came to be regarded as paternal adviser to the less
experienced units, the Corps owe him a special debt of gratitude
which can be most aptly expressed by saying that his reputation
as a leader of pack transport rivalled his reputation in the inter-
national jumping world.
No account of pack transport would be complete without mention
of the close liaison between the Corps and the officers and men of
the Royal Army Veterinary Corps who tend and care for animal
casualties.
A special tribute is paid also to those officers and men
from other corps of the armed forces who,
when the need for
expansion arrived, willingly joined the ranks of the Corps and played
such a large part in the success of pack transport.
Nursery Slopes
Thanks to some far-sighted planner who sat in Norfolk House,
In the Italian Mountains
