562
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
crossing the River Po.
The end was at hand. On May and the
war in Italy was ended.
The group
commanders collected their
scattered companies
and marched
them back over those
hard
fought mountains to the Florence area.
There, one by one, they
were disbanded and the men returned to their equitation establish-
ments, training stables, farms, saddler's shops, blacksmith's shops,
and all the other rural trades from which they had been drawn.
CHAPTER XVI
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
10 the world at large indeed, to many who served in the
To the on this he, a yet eatin in thie
unknown,
Here then is the story of that specialized
organization which, starting with a modest 7o veels at the
outbreak of war, numbered more than 1,400 by 1945-
In 1939, before war broke out, the War Department Fleet, as it
was then known, consisted of coastal and harbour craft, target
towing vewels and a few specially built Governor's barges at such
stations as Jamaica, Gibraltar, Malta and Singapore.
Most of
these vewels were used in home waters for routine peacetime tasks.
The coasters carried military cargoes between the main ports and
moved gun equipments to shipbuilding yards and emplacements.
The harbour craft ferried men and carried fresh water to various
sea forts, while the steam tugs and high speed launches towed
targets off shore for coast artillery practices.
There were also fast
range launches to ensure the safety of other craft during shoots.
All were manned by civilians.
The Fleet had its own distinguishing ensign to quote Queen's
Regulations, ta blue ension with crossed swords
and was con-
trolled centrally by the Assistant Director of Military Transport,
Woolwich, His establishment included a technical staff to supervise
overhauls and maintenance. (Local control was exercised by
RASC officers in charge of transport.)
With the impact of war, the meagre resources of the Fleet became
heavily strained, and additional Craft, mostly of the launch and
cabin cruiser type, were quickly requisitioned,
Rapid expansion
demanded a greater decentralization of control, and in January,
1940, the first 'water transport companies, RASC were formed at
Woolwich, Barry Docks, Leith, Portsmouth and Singapore under
the command of selected RASC officers.
These soon became well
established in spite of the occasional false impression that they
operated water-carrying vehicles.
About this time, too, the far-seeing decision was made to form
RASC waterhome, w, she ta crain manned entirely by masary.
Crews. They were to be called "motorboat companies,
Their job was to provide essential RASC water transport services in
future field force formations and their role, broadly speaking, was to
