166
THE MIDDLE EAST II
met with a total response, and the convoy went off inland led by
the CNZASC.
This party was evacuated with the New Zealand
rearguard.
A considerable number of RASC embarked in SS
Slammat that day, but the ship
was sunk on the way to Crete.
Survivors were picked up by HM destroyers Wryneck and Diamond,
but these too were both sunk before reaching Crete.
It is believed
that there was only one RASC survivor from all those who embarked
in the Slammat.
At Kalamata on the 28th, Lieut-Colonel H. H. E. Geddes, when
the enemy were trying to prevent the embarkation, organized a
counterattack with 300 men of different regiments and corps, who
were on their way to the pier, and directed operations which were
successful in clearing the town and harbour.
This led to the
capture of 120 prisoners, two guns, and five machine guns, and
enabled the embarkation of many troops, mostly wounded, to be
completed. Colonel Geddes was awarded a Distinguished Service
Order, and the immediate award of a Military Cross went to
2nd Lieutenant P. W. Valentine, of 285 Company, for his part in
the action.
He led a detachment of the unit down a street covered
by a German machine gun and by troops in a house.
He took the
gun and captured the house.
This was yet another example of the
fact that RÄSC units, even those with a nominal line of communi-
cation role, have to be prepared for any eventuality.
It cannot be
assumed that they will not be involved in fighting.
Incidentally,
Valentine is said to have
shot down a German aircraft a few
days before, when it was flying low over the unit location, and he
happened to be standing by the anti-aircraft gun.
Undoubtedly, the conduct of all ranks of the RASC throughout
this disastrous campaign called for the highest praise.
During the
latter period,
their work
was ceaseless,
they
were continually
driving under air attack and suffered many casualties.
Even when
they had destroyed their vehicles and were assembled near the
beaches awaiting evacuation, there was an immediate response to
any appeal for volunteers to take over other vehicles and drive
inland again.
Finally, when faced with the bitter disappointment
of repeated unsuccessful attempts at evacuation, their morale and
discipline remained
good.
It need hardly be added that the
conduct of the AASC and NZASC was equally excellent.
Many of the troops evacuated from Greece went direct to Egypt,
but others were taken across to Crete, to continue the fight there.
For some months after the campaign, odd parties of officers and men
escaped and made their way back by various "underground" chan-
nels: and several who remained hidden eventually joined British
special service missions and did good work.
L/Cipl S. Rochberg,
28- Company who heined with sabotage and later escaped, was
awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal; and the Military Medal
went to Private E.
S. Buhayar, who helped two officers to attack
a strongly held German airfield and to destroy three aircraft.
Perhaps this campaign would serve to illustrate a point which is
often lost sight of.
When we think and write of the RASC in the
field we naturally think in terms of formed units, such as MT
companies and supply depots.
It is easy to forget that there are
probably a greater number of RASC men detached in small numbers
to units of other arms and services than is the case of any other
corps except REME, the present duties of which corps were of
course still being performed by the RAOC in Greece.
An examination of the order of battle in Greece reveals the fact
that whereas there were about 3o RASC units or formed detach-
ments of units, there were about the same number of units to which
RASC men were attached in numbers varying from 66 with a light
field ambulance, RAMC, to one with an advance depot of medical
stores. Only very few of these attached men seem to have returned
eventually to Egypt.
Of the RASC from all units who escaped, most were taken to
Egypt but some were to go through a further series of adventures
in Crete from which, in their turn, only a few escaped.
CRETE
British troops were sent to Crete in November, 1940, and by
carly 1941 the garrison consisted of a brigade whose commander
was instructed to prepare a base for one division.
During operations
in Greece the island was of importance to the Navy, and a Mobile
Naval Base Defence Organization (MNBDO) arrived to improve
the defences of Suda Bay.
The garrison was much increased by
troops evacuated from
Greece, but this reinforcement
was,
course, not in accordance with any plan.
The result was that with
the exceptions of the units which were already in the garrison the
force in occupation when the Germans attacked was unbalanced,
ill-armed and ill-equipped for its task.
There were many useless
mouths, including a collection of unarmed and unorganized men,
mainly belonging to the administrative corps, who were an embar-
rassment rather than an assistance to the defence.
Unorganized
bodies, which occupied four sectors (Iraklion,
Retimo, Suda Bay
and Maleme), consisted, in addition to the regional garrison, of the
remains of 4th and and New Zealand Brigades, a composite brigade
formed from various New Zealand details, six Australian battalions,
about 2,000 riflemen (British, Australian and some Royal Horse
Artillery armed aa infantru) and 14 Greek battalions of which two
