284
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
Other Activities
As already
mentioned the
campaign, largely because of the
geography and climate of the Italian peninsula, involved RASC
units in a greater diversity of roles than probably any other theatre,
We have already seen how motor transport units were compelled
to convert themselves overnight into extempore pack transport
units in Sicily; how, in deep snow, a composite platoon was forced
to take to skis to collect supplies dropped from the air on a scarcely
defined dropping zone; and how at Anzio, the RASC took their
place with infantry in
the defence of the beach-head perimeter.
On many other occasions RASC units found themselves employed
in unusual roles.
One dukw
company, after playing a considerable part in the
battle of the Sangro, took part in air-sea rescue work, saving pilots
and salvaging aircraft,
and also collaborated with a field security
section in picking up escaped prisoners of war, refugees and enemy
agents moving down the coast from behind the enemy lines.
Early in April, 1944, when the ist Guards Brigade of the 6th
Armoured Division took over a sector in front of Cassino, 477
Company was made responsible for providing a continuous smoke-
screen for nearly a fortnight to prevent enemy observation on the
approaches to Cassino.
This involved about 150 men remaining
in slit trenches all day within 1,000 yards of the enemy and crawling
out intermittently
to light
the smoke canisters.
At night the
replenishment of the pits with 1,600 canisters under enemy harasing
action involved the use of eight g-ton lorries, seven jeeps and trailers
and 50 porters.
No. 352 General Transport Company was selected for training in
air despatch, and in March, 1944, a detachment from this company
was attached for duty with an organization called SOMTO (Spoil
Operations Mediterranean
Theatre of Operations).
This detach-
ment made many operational flights over Italy and Yugoslavi,
dropping supplies to Allied prisoners of war, helping to maintain
partisans in Yugoslavia,
and supervising the dropping of liaison
officers and agents behind the enemy lines.
Between October tith and roth, you, this company took par
in the air sunoly of the ond Independent Parachute Brigade Gro
chich do t the creas the scene a te Britis
occupational force in Greece.
During the winter of 1944/45, when the armies were still delayed
in the Apennines short of Bologna, a detachment of the sam
company succeeded in dropping an average
month of arms and equipment to partisans in Norther Italy.
of over 300 tons a
Full advantage was taken of onod Aving weather and on one da
ITALY
daylight. The work of this detachment continued to the end of
one on to an eat, Bra of the ditcaty f
No. 514 Company, which had been one of the divisional transport
companies of the 56th Division, was given the interesting task of
supporting the Yugoslav forces in their resistance to the German
Mountain Corps.
The company left Bari in November, 1944, and
landed at Gruz in Yugoslavia.
Consisting of two
performed various tasks, including dock clearance, normal main-
tenance of supplies, petrol and ammunition,
and troop and mule
The company was based
on Dubrovnik and worked
as far as Cetinje, 140 miles away, on a double echelon system.
An artillery platoon RASC, complete with A section of a composite
platoon, found itself employed as a forage depot in the Foggia plain.
Its task was to exploit this valuable source of forage to the full (in
conjunction with the Allied Military Government), to arrange for
the loading of pack trains to the army areas and to western Italy,
and to maintain a reserve in its own depot.
Two ambulance units (Nos. 485 and 567 Car Companies) were
manned by the American Field Service, a volunteer organisation
of United States citizens.
We owe them a debt of gratitude for
providing these units.
Although a para military body they had a
self-imposed condition of service that they should be employed as
close to the battle front as possible, a condition they fulfilled nobly
with the army in the desert campaign and with the Eighth Army
in Italy.
Finally it should be placed on record that many
RASC men
volunteered and were accepted for service with 'Popski's Private
Army, the organization built up and trained by Lieut-Colonel
Peniakofl to carry out demolitions and create havoc deep behind
the enemy's lines.
Three of them, Cpl D. Galloway and Dvrs E. G.
Burrows and A. D. Cahill, were awarded the Military Medal for
the parts which they played in these adventurous exploits.
Because of the nature of the campaign, many RÁSC units were
constantly engaged on work with the Royal Engineers.
Their
main tasks were the carriage of bridging materials and assistance in
road repair and construction. As early as December, 1943, the Chief
Engineer of the Bighth Army had under his control four general
transport companies, two tipper companies and five bridge platoons.
By the end of the campaign these had been increased in number to
seven tipper companies and two bridge companies.
The command
Royal Engineers was given to the CRASC of a transport column
of these units and any veneral transport commanies allotted to the
who came under the operational command of the Chief Engineer
