54
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE,
1939/1940
which had been prepared in peacetime, had to be scrapped and
completely remodelled.
Officers, men and stores began to flow in to their appointed places
and vehicles began to arrive from the four vehicle collecting centres
which had been set up to receive, register, inspect, equip and repaint
the thousands of vehicles which
had been collected under the
impressment scheme.
centres were key units,
as much
depended on the speed at which they worked.
The vehicles were
brought in to the centres by their civilian drivers, many of whom
wished to take the opportunity of enlisting, thus creating an unex-
pected problem.
All vehicles had to be passed fit for service and
deficiencies in equipment made good, and the final act was to spray
them with the standard service colour.
The units worked at high
pressure so much so that an unwary visiting officer who left his
private car while at lunch returned just in time to find it already
repainted and about to be driven away with a departing convoy.
All units were ready to embark at the allotted times and all were in
good heart, especially those which had the honour of receiving a short
visit from his late Majesty King George VI before their departure.
The Landing in France
The first body of troops were due to arrive in France on September
loth, and the main flow to start on the i2th, so that the reconnais-
sance and advance parties were given little time to reconnoitre the
tentative sites which had been selected for depots and other centres
of activity in the administrative scheme. In many cases sites proved
to be unsuitable or accommodation and transit facilities inadequate
and the choice of alternative sites was found to be extremely limited.
The headauarton of the T. of Clarea to which Colonel C! T. St..I
From the outset the staff were handicapped by the wide dispersion
Tudor had been appointed as DDST, was established at Le Mans.
of the base areas, imposed by the fear of air attack, and difficulty
of communications.
Distances to be covered were great, and trans-
port was scarce.
The French telephone system was unreliable, and
its use restricted for security reasons.
Countryside and language
were unfamiliar to despatch riders.
Unexpected conditions also
arose at the ports.
There was considerable difficulty in finding
enough labour; and the port facilities provided by the French were,
owing to some misunderstanding, inadequate, while the railway
facilities also proved to fall below the expected standard.
immediate result was that delavs began to occur in the turn-round of
ships and there was considerable congestion at the docks.
of rations also went awry, as it transpired that consignments were
The plans made at home for the shipment of balanced train loads
considerably split up over different ships.
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
The arrangement whereby each unit was expected to be self
sufficient for the first few days by bringing three days' landing
rations with them was not fulfilled, as some units packed their
rations in their transport, which they were not to see until some days
after landing, and others ate part of them on the sea voyage on the
grounds that the voyage ration was an 'untouchable' reserve.
combination of unfortunate circumstances nearly led to a crisis but
no one starved, thanks to wholesale local purchases and the aid of the
French Service d'Intendance, which provided food from their
reserves; but this unfortunate miscarriage in plans caused considerable
concern, and it took some weeks before the supply organization was
working properly.
The War Office remained unaware of this situation until an urgent
request was received from the Air Ministry for some rations to be
flown at once to the Advanced Air Striking Force which, it was said,
was living on the charity of the French.
A hasty telephone call to
the BEF confirmed that all was not well, and an ADST left the next
day by air to investigate the position.
He found that it was impos-
sible to judge the real stock position or to relate the quantities which
left the home depots with those which had actually arrived and been
unloaded in France.
Even where there was no physical lack of
food, the inexperienced supply units found difficulty in handling the
field service scale which, to provide variety, included a great choice
There was no doubt that the force was living from hand
of these factors were or should have been within the
control of the DST BEF, but many were not.
Movement was not
an RASC responsibility, and the organization for the control of
movement had still to be built up into the efficient machine which
it became later in the war.
The administrative plan as a whole was so shrouded in secrecy
that, for example, the maintenance project for the force was not
revealed to the DST at the War Office until after the disturbing
news of the supply situation was received. When the project was
examined it appeared from an ST aspect to be an unrealistic docu-
ment.
An equally striking example of the anxiety to preserve
secrecy was the fact that the ST representatives who took part in a
reconnaissance in France well before the war were not permitted
to acquaint their own ST staff at the War Office of where they had
been or what they had seen.
The arrangements for shipping RASC transport also seemed to
be open to question and there were many delays before units could
come into operation.
were split up by being loaded in 10 different ships.
In one instance the 220 vehicles of a company
general transport company maa not an old to load until coveral
