632
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
these came so late that they were of little use till first light on
D plus 1.
The job of clearing the supply dropping point was continued
after darkness had fallen,
infiltrated into the woods and were crossing the dropping point
itself. Clearance operations were therefore suspended, and all
ranks stood to, ready for any eventuality.
experience, but all ranks behaved splendidly and complete silence
was maintained while the stand to was in progress.
on D plus i half of the company stood down and snatched a few
hours' sleep.
There was spasmodic fire across the dump area and
a certain amount of enemy movement could be heard.
was no organized attack, and at first light, after the morning stand
to, roll-call was held and the work of collection resumed.
The roll-call revealed that Lieutenant Roberts and four other
ranks were missing.
with the German lorry to evacuate wounded from divisional head-
quarters to the main dressing station and had not been seen since,
while Lieutenant Roberts and one other rank had not returned
from 6th Air-landing Brigade HQ, which they were known to have
left after delivering an urgent supply of ammunition.
The three men with the German vehicle had been surrounded
by the enemy and taken prisoner just outside the dump area.
They
had been put in charge of a party of wounded Germans and had
moved off with about 200 of the enemy across the supply dropping
point towards Hamaenkeln.
panion were returning in their jeep when this party opened fire
on them, damaged the jeep, and took them both prisoner.
Then followed a long walk round the inside of the divisional
perimeter during which the party disintegrated and was eventually
reduced to some 50 or 6o men, mostly wounded.
They were fired
on periodically by our troops and the morale of the Germans was
clearly weakening.
Lieutenant Roberts, seeing this state of affairs,
began talking to the Germans and persuaded them finally that their
position was quite hopeless, for they could certainly be shot at first
light, but if they gave themselves up to him at once he would
guarantee a safe conduct to a prisoner of war cage.
After a little
persuasion, the whole party laid down their arms and he marched
them off to Hamaenkeln, where they were handed over to the cage.
Lieutenant Roberts and his four doughty men then returned to duty.
The strength of the company on the morning of D plus 1 was
four officers (including one wounded and waiting evacuation) and
44 other ranks, including three wounded.
This left a total of two
officers and 33 other ranks missing, known killed, or wounded and
evacuated.
6 BASE PETROL STORAGE COMPANY
633
Lieutenant Roberts,
with two carriers, then went to the Air-
landing Brigade's landing zones to clear compo rations, and the
remaining vehicles were employed in collecting the ammunition
from the first supply drop till 1200 hours.
The supply drop fixed
for 1300 hours was cancelled, and at 1400 hours CRAS arrived,
having made the journey from the Rhine by road.
At 1800 hours, Captain Ballard and the platoon left in BLA
arrived to reinforce the company,
but they were immediately
detached for other duty, and so the clearance of the dropping point
had still to be done by the weary survivors of the first landing.
This work continued till darkness fell, when all ranks of the airborne
party turned in, under the protection of guards furnished by the
land element which had just arrived.
On D plus 2 the work of salving containers, parachutes and other
equipment was begun and the collection of outlying containers and
At 190o hours on that day, the remainder
of 716 Company, RASC, under Captain H. E. Cubley, came into
location, workshops were established in some farm buildings, and
the remaining vehicles of HQ and C platoons were parked under
trees for the night.
On D plus 3 all vehicles were put on to the collection of salvage,
the Company losing one other rank killed and one officer and one
other rank wounded when a jeep struck a mine.
On D plus 4 and
D plus 5 all cased ammunition and all ammunition left in Pegasus
dump was cleared to the
FMC and an urgent petrol detail was
executed. Ammunition clearance went on throughout D plus 6,
and on D plus 7 (March gist) the company
Coesfeld, rejoining the rest of the divisional RASC and resuming
its normal land' functions.
6 BASE PETROL STORAGE COMPANY
The company was raised in Yorkshire and, after training at the
National Oil Refines ca landarcy, soon found itself at Alexandria
amid the preparations for the invasion of Sicily.
In due course the company arrived at Syracuse with the official
object of taking over the italian installations in that town and
those at Catania, Mesina and Augusta, and putting them into
working order to await the arrival of the first tankers, which were
said to be already on their way.
Each installation was of different
desion and each presented its own problems, but that at Catania
is perhaps the most interesting as being an admirable first test of
the ingenuity of the two sections employed there.
There was storage at Catania for spirit. kerosene. fuel all and,
