SOUTH-EAST ASIA
nearest godown.
There was still a large quantity of meat in the
Government cold storage at Orchard Road and there were suffi-
cient other commodities to have provided a modified form of ration
if the general conditions had allowed.
It is also recorded that
there was some petrol remaining at a dump at Balestier Road formed
from stock which had been backloaded from more forward dumps
and from supplies obtained by draining the tanks of unwanted
vehicles which had been directed there for the purpose.
Because
of a shortage of water transport, it had been almost impossible to
maintain a supply of petrol from Pulau Bukum.
One lighter load
had been brought over to Keppel Harbour, but it was bombed while
being unloaded and only a little was saved.
No doubt there were
also stocks of petrol in the many civilian pumps which might have
On February 15th the Commander-in-Chief had no option but
to order the cease fire.
Capitulation followed and our officers
and men passed into captivity.
The RASC were required, as
prisoners of war, to perform some of their duties and a short account
of the period is given at the end of this chapter.
It was prepared
by an officer who was a prisoner in Changi camp.
There are few official records of the last days in Singapore but it
is thought that the following first hand account of an RASC company
employed on general duties may be of interest to supplement the
short general description of the last battle.
Narrative of an Officer of 28 L of C Brigade Company
Two days before the initial attack by the Japanese,
Brigade Company RASC located within Singapore Fortress, moved
from Ulu Pandau camp to Adam Camp, Adam Road.
The unit, though formed to operate with ist Malaya Infantry
Brigade, remained under command of the officer commanding
RASC Singapore Fortress.
I, as the company commander,
also appointed OC Troops of Adam Camp, in which was located
29 CMTD, 36 Field Company RE and an Indian supply section.
The administration of the camp placed a heavy load on the unit
organization, although later,
when the officer commanding 29
CMTD became OC Troops,
the company was relieved of some
28 L of C Brigade
provided guards for the water transport company at Pulau Brani
and the command petrol dump at Buller Camp, which was subse-
quently bombed and destroyed by Japanese aircraft.
In addition to these
duties the company was responsible for
passive air defence within the Adam Camp/Samawah Camp area
and also the operation of the fortress reserve petrol dump, including
a petrol point.
Within the organization of 28 Company a training section had
been formed and apart from normal driver and
DR training
I was required to recruit, equip and train Malays to form fire
brigades for five different areas in Singapore.
On December 10th, 1941, a Chinese transport section was formed
and placed under my command.
It consisted of 60 vehicles of all
types, and drivers were supplied by the contractors or owners of
The drivers were local Chinese who were given a
daily ration allowance of 40 cents, their wages being included in the
cost of hiring the vehicles.
The maintenance of these lorries was
undertaken by the company workshop section.
The workshop section was heavily committed and worked well
throughout the operations.
When regular maintenance and in-
spection became impracticable the VOR
minimum. Apart from the normal repair commitments of the
company, the workshops maintained the vehicles of 85 Anti-Tank
Regiment RA, 1 Malaya Field Ambulance and a hygiene section,
in all some 277 vehicle units.
At that time the unit was dispersed throughout Singapore with
detachments at Changi, the Botanical Gardens, Raffles College,
Caldicott Estate and Lake House, at which the fortress ammunition
reserve was located.
During this period 28 L of C Brigade Company
upon to give assistance to newly arrived units, which
4th Australian Reserve MT Company, 44th Brigade Transport
Company, and 18 Divisional RASC Companies.
Our supply section, later to become 151 SPS, was detailed and
operated as a SIS under the control of the fortress supply officer.
The Chinese section was located at Watten Estate,
remained until the area wasso badly shelled that it became impossible
to operate from it.
The Chinese drivers behaved well throughout
the operations and were later allowed to return to their homes.
In the course of the Japanese offensive it became likely that food
supplies left at the naval base would fal into enemy hands.
February grd, 1942, up to and including the morning of February
gth, 28 L of C Bricade Company was enraged in the removal of
necessary to effect this operation under cover of darkness.
As the base was under enemy observation it was
The approaches to the naval base were often under shell fire, but
the base itself was almost completely deserted.
The Japanese had
captured the entire mainland of Malaya, and they were preparing
for the final assault on Singapore Island.
On the first and second nighte of the company's operations within
the naval base the docks were a circle of fire from end to end.
Oil tanks blazed continuously during the whole period and towards
