110
THE MIDDLE EAST I
designed in peace), and many of the cans leaked, if stored in the
open for any length of time.
A great number of cans were saved
by the early development of bulk distribution in base areas.
At
first, lack of equipment was the limiting factor, as the ordinary
roadside filling stations, so common in Britain, were almost non-
existent in the Middle East; hence much improvisation was called
for.
Use was made of tanks of all sizes, barrels, drums captured in
large numbers from the Italians, and every sort of container that
could be found.
There were three forms of bulk distribution: first,
main road refuelling points for filling up convoys; secondly,
bulk
outfits in camps and unit lines; and thirdly, semi-bulk, i.e., barrels
and drums located with units, and filled from road tankers.
By the
end of 194I, refuelling points were established as far forward as Sidi
Barrani, and later at Tobruk and Capuzzo, but they had to be
abandoned or destroyed in the retreat of 1942.
At a time when can
factories were barely keeping pace with demands, these somewhat
primitive makeshifts helped to save the situation.
Later stocks of
orthodox
equipment started coming through from Britain,
and
eventually bulk distribution became the normal system of supply in
all base areas, where well over nine-tenths of the petrol was issued
by this means.
This did not, of course,
solve the more important problem of
distribution in the field, where the 'flimsy' remained the normal
means.
Its one merit was easy local production.
While adequate
for normal commercial purposes in peace-time,
the 'flimsy', as
mentioned above, was not strong enough to stand up to constant
handling and rough usage under war conditions.
Canned petrol
had to be sent by rail and ship to advanced bases, and carried in
lorries
for long
distances over rough tracks and open
desert.
Whether packed in fibre cartons or wooden crates, or transported
'naked', enormous losses occurred through leakage, the amount of
loss depending on the number of handlings,
the type of transport
used, and the distance carried.
Under the worst conditions, losses
reached 30 per cent or even more.
Also,
'flimsies' could only be
moved by sea in ships specially adapted for the purpose, and even
then a considerable fire risk had to be accepted.
As consumption
increased, many additional can-making plants became available
from Abadan and elsewhere, but even so all plants had to be worked
night and day in continuous shifts in order to meet demands.
the peak, the factories were producing at the rate of more than four
million cans a month.
Many difficulties arose in connection with
the operation of these plants.
Tin-plate was scarce, particularly
after Japan entered the war, and the maintenance
of adequate
stocks was often a cause for anxiety.
Some of the plants were old,
and needed constant maintenance, or the quality of the container
THE MIDDLE EAST I
suffered. Native labour for the operation of the plants was unreli-
able, and comparatively small air raids resulted in an exodus, which
seriously affected production, so tin factory operating companies
had to be formed, with a nucleus of British personnel.
It was at
this time that petrol inspectors had to be appointed, one of their
duties being to supervise the loading of ships and trains to see that
canned petrol was properly dunnaged, and carefully handled.
But
in spite of every effort, the waste through leakage continued to be
enormous, and the shortcomings of the 'flimsy' tin, only too apparent
for all to see, became a great operational problem.
In 1941, when the German forces arrived in the Western Desert,
they brought with them a petrol container superior to any other
type, the existence of which was known in the
United Kingdom
before the war.
This was the German 20-litre steel welded can,
which became known universally as the 'jerrican'.
Its superior
qualities were immediately if belatedly recognized, and a captured
jerrican was sent at once by air to the War Office, with an urgent
request that it should be adopted for use in the Middle East.
It was
produced eventually on a world wide scale for the Allied Armies,
but only after all operations in the Middle East were over.
Luckily, large numbers of jerricans fell into British hands from
time to time, and were invaluable in supplementing our supplies of
'flimsies'.
Other forms of strong container were manufactured in
comparatively small quantities by the Director of Works,
who
assumed responsibility for the manufacture of returnable containers,
while the RASC
continued to operate
the tin factories.
The
Director of Works produced the 'tucan', a 2-gallon welded container,
and also numbers of 40/44-gallon drums made of steel plate, after
drum plants had been obtained from America.
The drums were
used chiefly for the distribution of aviation petrol to airfields, thus
minimizing loss of this valuable spirit through leakage.
At a later
date, a number of merricans', the rather inferior counterpart of
the jerrican, were sent to Middle East from America, but there were
never enough strong
containers,
and the 'flimsy'
remained the
principal method of distribution to the end.
At the beginning of the war and for some time afterwards, the
engineers and staff of the Shell Oil Company were able to undertake
much engineering work on behalf of the DST, but, as the war pro-
gressed, the company's resources diminished, and it could no longer
provide engineers and resourial.
Consequently, as DST did not
command the technical resources necessary for such work, it was
decided that the Director of Works should build and repair bulk
tankage, lay pipelines, ond maintain bulk installations, while the
RASC
continued to work
the installations.
This arrangement
*worked well, and he wick co-operation in all petroleum projects
