106
MIDDLE EAST I
The exploitation of local resources, which began in quite a small
way in 1940, gradually assumed large proportions, and it is estimated
that in the year ending March, 1943, over a million tons of shipping
were saved by this means.
Perhaps the most important of these
schemes was the growing, in Egypt and Syria, of potatoes, without
which the British soldier does not consider himself properly fed.
Other undertakings included the production of cooking oil, oil cake
and soap from cotton seed and ground nuts, the administration of
dairy
farms, a fishery
scheme in the Port Said area, fish curing
establishments, the making of jam and marmalade, and the dehydra-
tion and canning of vegetables.
Quantities of forage were grown
under contract, and pig
farms were formed, managed by the
Veterinary and Remount services, the product being handed over
to the RASC for slaughter and
distribution.
Live cattle were
imported in large numbers from the Sudan, thus saving valuable
refrigeration shipping.
There was insufficient cold storage at the beginning of the war to
meet war-time needs, and a large cold storage project was carried
through between 1940 and 1943.
This met the requirements of the
theatre.
At no time did stocks of frozen meat run out at the base,
and its issue to troops in the base area, supplemented by fresh meat
from the Sudan,
was the normal procedure.
Supply to troops
fighting in the Western Desert was a different matter, and the
fluidity of the operations, the lack of rail communications and other
factors, made the supply of all fresh food a tremendous problem.
The aim was always to provide fresh food, particularly meat and
bread, to as many troops as possible, as far forward as possible.
The supply of both meat and bread required special equipment.
Frozen meat needed cold storage at the advanced base, and special
refrigeration
facilities for movement by
ship or rail, while field
bakeries had to be located well forward.
Naturally, much depended
on the length of the lines of communication.
After the withdrawal
to the Alamein positions in 1942, the short distance from the base
made the issue of a full fresh ration comparatively easy, whereas
during the final advance in 1942/43 the difficulties increased as the
troops moved beyond the range of the Western Desert railway.
After the ports of Benghazi and Tripoli had been opened, a small
quantity of cold storage was made available, but because of insuffi-
cient refrigeration shipping, only a few consignments of meat could
be sent.
Fresh fruit and potatoes were shipped successfully to these
ports,
but it was impossible
to ship
fresh
vegetables
without
deterioration.
However, there were some small local supplies at
Benghazi and Tripoli.
During the siege of Tobruk in 1941, it was difficult to supply
fresh food, which is more important than ever in siege conditions.
THE MIDDLE EAST I
107
Bread was produced throughout by the existing bakery,
and
dehydrated vegetables were
The normal ration was
modified to meet the special conditions, and such items as chocolate
and lime juice were introduced.
The only vessel available for
carrying frozen meat was unreliable, and could only accomplish
one delivery.
The lack of fresh meat was a great trial to Indian
troops locked up in Tobruk, and it was difficult to provide a suitable
substitute, but on two occasions live sheep for them were conveyed
When the ship reached the entrance of
Tobruk harbour, the sheep were thrown overboard, and those that
managed to swim ashore had their throats cut by the cheering
Malta convoys were sent at irregular intervals, and at moonless
periods, when fast shipping became available.
Each time elaborate
cover plans were made in an attempt to disguise the destination of
these vessels from enemy agents at the port. Supplies were restricted
by the amount of space available in the convoy, and the most
nourishing food was sent within the space allotted.
Every ship was
loaded 'balanced', so that ships which arrived safely carried a com-
plete ration, however meagre in quantity.
Until command of the
Mediterranean was regained, no convoy ever reached Malta without
serious losses.
The field service ration scale. as issued in the Middle East. proved
adequate throughout the war. and when fresh items could not be
issued tinned equivalents were provided.
This ration had, however,
the disadvantage of being bulky, and therefore uneconomical in
the desert, where transport was always scarce.
Accordingly, in
1941, a simplified form of ration was devised, known as the
'battle
diet. but the easier handling made it useful in actual fighting.
Consisting of fewer commodities, it provided a less varied
During the Gnal Pensive in 1042/a9, successful efforts were made
to keep the rations up to the full Middle East field scale throughout
the whole advance, with fresh food whenever possible.
Naturally
commanders in the forward area were equally anxious to have a
fresh ration when possible.
But there were
many snags.
meat could be despatched to railhead on bu sea 'but ite onward
despatch to the troops through several echelons of transport pre-
sented difficulties in warm weather.
True, methods of keeping it
fresh by the use of wain weat devised, but its cooking presented
another problem.
Most of the troops in the desert were widely
dispersed, and any form of central cooking was disliked both for the
congestion it caused and the distances which had to be walked to
get food.
with the troops themselves, was to cook on a 'vehicle' basis.
The method most popular, both for tactical reasons and
meant in, say, the case of a tank. the tank crew of three or four, but
