266
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
These vessels carried nearly 200,000 tons in 12 months, and not only
plied along the coast, but went farther afield to Corsica, Sardinia,
Sicily, Malta, and to the island of Vis, which served as a base for
assistance to the partisans in Yugoslavia.
They were a valuable
contribution towards the general transport problem,
and it is
pleasing to record that the RASC ensign was usually the first to be
seen at each coastal port as soon as the 'all clear' to enter had been
given by the Navy.
Another main
contribution, which
the RASC were
able to
provide,
was pack transport, although it only had a limited use
under conditions when other forms of transport could not be used.
But by the end of the campaign nearly 40,000 mules and horses
were being employed, and unquestionably the campaign could not
have been fought without them.
The methods adopted for supplying petroleum also helped con-
siderably to reduce the load on rail and road.
Pipelines were laid
wherever practicable, and supply in bulk was used to the greatest
possible extent.
The speed with which bulk supply could be
arranged depended on how soon the existing civil installations, both
coastal and inland, could be taken into use and large scale filling
points and filling centres set up in the forward areas.
As the
army
advanced
reconnaissance parties
from
the
HQ CRASC
petroleum installations were among the first to arrive as each main
town or port was taken, when they made an immediate survey of
the means of intake and storage facilities available and assessed the
labour and material wanted for any repair or rehabilitation.
this means no time was lost, and the work of repair was put in
hand at once.
Considerable ingenuity was displayed in the provi-
sion of filling points and extemporary filling places.
Although the
constructional
work
was nominally
engineer responsibility,
many of the points were set up by the petroleum unit's own men,
who vied with one another in attaining that 'oil man's' objective,
the right bend in the pipe.
The main pipeline which was used in support of the armics in
their advance
from Cassino to Rome started at Naples and was
then built up as the army advanced.
It followed the line of advance
approximately along
the
main national road,
Route 6.
When
Ancona was captured main lines were laid from there via Senegalia
On the
to Forli and as far north as Ferrara on the eastern coast.
west coast lines were laid from Leghorn up to Bologna.
Another comprehensive
system of pipelines
was
provided for
supplying the many airfields in the Foggia Plains,
bulk supplies
being drawn from Taranto and Manfredonia.
An account of the other special features which marked the work
of the RASC in Italy can be more appropriately reserved until the
ITALY
267
end of the general narrative which follows of the work of the Corps
in the advance to Rome and after.
Preparations for the Capture of Rome
After the capture of Naples and Foggia and the evacuation,
at
the end of September, of Corsica by the Germans, it appeared that
the German intention was to withdraw gradually to the north of
Italy, delaying our advance as much as possible on a succession
of natural defensive positions.
But by the end of the first week of
October it was clear that the enemy was determined to defend the
capital.
Considerable reinforcement of German troops south of
Rome became apparent, and it was clear that with the assistance of
the winter rains and by making full use of the natural obstacles in
the way of an Allied advance, the Germans could make the capture
of Rome a hard and difficult task.
And so it turned out.
The
Allies had hoped to be in Rome before Christmas, 1943,
but it
was nearly six months before the first European capital was liberated
on June 4th, 1944•
The series of positions on which the Germans based their defence
was known as the Winter Line, which included both the notorious
Gustav and Hitler Lines and the key position of Monte Cassino.
This part of the campaign falls into two distinct phases;
advance of the Allied armies to the Winter Line, and the series of
battles for Cassino, culminating in the capture of Rome.
The first phase in the battle for Rome consisted of hard and
bitter fighting in steadily worsening weather as the Fifth and Eighth
Armies slowly drove in the outposts of the Winter Line and prepared
for the assault on the stronout defended main German positions.
The Fifth Army, after crossing the River Volturno in the face of
stubborn resistance, found on their western flank a level plain inter-
sected with irrigation canals and weserlooked by
the formidable
Monte Massico, and on their eastern flank a series of strong moun-
tains which had to be storm eastern a kease the advance could
At the end of October the assault on
was launched by the th A Octobed Die ass and by November and
patrols of the 7th Armoured and the sion Divisions reached the
River Garigliano. Meanwhile, to the north-east, the 56th Division
and the 201st Guards Brigade were pushing ahead through the
mountains.
Difensa and Monte Maggiore,
On November 5th the mountain mass of Camino, La
dominating
road
Rome
through Cassino, was attacked by X Corps while the United States
VI Corps attempted to force its way through the Mignano Gap.
fortnicht's bitter fiohting iuet foiled to secure these obiectives,
on November 15th the advance was halted.
and
After a period of regrouping (the 7th Armoured Division had
