44
DE
bunding to localize the enect of any spillage from tanks which
might be damaged through enemy action.
At a later stage fully
protected storage room was to be constructed.
To reduce the cost
of overheads and the time required for new construction, it was
agreed that this additional strategic storage should be sited at or
near existing installations and, in Great Britain, should be at points
close to ports or to the can filling plants.
Requirements in the
Middle East and other potential areas of operations were also
considered and will be referred to later.
The provision of extra storage was, of course, mainly a matter of
money, material and labour,
but the production of containers and
the means of filling them raised a very different question.
Even if
war did not occur,
the extra storage provided would have some
commercial value, but the provision of cans in the numbers required
was a different matter, as the can was rapidly dying out of commer-
cial use.
In Europe and in the more populated centres of the East,
the kerbside pump was the accepted means of distribution to the
civilian customer, although in the Middle East the 4-gallon light
metal tin (the 'flimsy') was still in general use, particularly for the
large trade in kerosene still the standard fuel in countries where
wood and coal were scarce or expensive.
An unofficial census for
the War Office showed that the number of 2-gallon cans, the standard
container in the United Kingdom, was only a fraction of the number
needed, and productive capacity was limited.
To make good the
deficiency, a huge programme of stockpiling would have to be
started.
In any case the little 2-gallon can was costly, it was made
only in the Midlands, and would have to be transported for storage
to the main installations for filling before shipment overseas.
France the standard container was the bidon, which was thought to be
difficult to handle and especially to store.
The only other alterna-
tive commercial containers in existence were the heavy and costly
40-gallon barrels which were also much in demand for other pur-
poses than the carrying of spirit.
The adoption of the 4-gallon 'flimsy'
It was decided that the standard container to be adopted for
service would be the light ('flimsy') 4-gallon tin.
It was hoped that
risk of leakage by damage in shipment or by rough handling would
be reduced by clothing the tins in wooden shooks, the tins being
boxed two to a case.
The plan only involved the provision of plant
for tin-making, and filling, and securing supplies of tin-plate.
type of plant required was obtainable from the United States, and
was already in use in the Middle and Far East.
The plan avoided
any question of stockpiling cans in peacetime, and the capital expen-
diture was small compared to the rather futile expenditure which
PETROLEUM
45
would arise in the same period if the 2-gallon or other form of
strong returnable container had been adopted.
The use of the 4-gallon tins also seemed to meet the difficulty of
having to ship petrol in quantity to a field force and making the
force independent of any local facilities which might be put out of
action from the outset in consequence of enemy air attacks or
Four plants were to be purchased and erected on an agency
basis by the Shell and Anglo-Iranian Oil Companies.
to be located at Llandarcy and Avonmouth (considered to be safe
areas at the time) were allocated to the Army and two, at Stanlow
and Ardrossan, to the RAF, on the understanding that the capacity
for production would be at the general disposal of both services if
When the plant was ready, men were to be trained in
the use of the plant for a short period each year, and the output was
to be used during the normal Territorial Army training period in
the summer. As soon as production started stoppages which are
common to new plants occurred and it took some time to reach the
full output, but the main objective of keeping the BEF supplied was
As there must have been few items of equipment which were
cursed so much as the 'flimsy', it is important that the reasons which
led to the adoption of this form of container should be made clear.
It was, of course, fully recognized that these tins were far from ideal,
and even though they were packed in wooden boxes, they were
inferior to the stout so-called returnable cans.
However, it was the
only practical method of producing and placing
petrol in the
quantity required at any point, so that it could be distributed easily
and speedily in the circumstances which were foreseen at the time.
As will be seen later, the use of returnable cans was not entirely
discounted, but even when the decision to adopt a returnable can
as the normal means of distribution was made, it was recognized
that the tin-making plants which were available both at home and
later in Africa formed a useful reserve to make good any deficiencies
in the number of returnables needed.
replace the flimsy by the newly found jerrican type was unduly
deferred or not is a matter which perhaps can be judged by the
reader from the information given in later chapters of this volume.
Reserve storage in the Middle East and Mediterranean
A survey of the position in the Middle East and other garrisons
overseas showed that supply would have to be developed in various
directions to meet war requirements.
The situation in the Middle
East, Malta and Gibraltar was examined at first hand by a party of
representatives of the Army, RAF and the oil industry.
Their
