530
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
perimeter of the dump, and the peculiar situation existed whereby
ammunition was issued direct from stacks to guns. Hardly less
strangely, a little later the battery was withdrawn to the line of the
River Orne, and the ammunition was issued to the rear.
these situations caused some misgivings, since in the former counter-
fire was directed straight on to the DiMA, and in the latter case the
dumps received the
enemy's 'shorts'.
Mortaring was constant,
although the enemy did not seem to have discovered the dump;
but it was revealed a week or two later when a shell set a vehicle in
the ammunition depot on fire, and the resulting blaze attracted
concentrated bombardment.
explode.
The stacks were hit and began to
The first was promptly extinguished by the composite
platoon, but another direct hit on the howitzer ammunition started
a blaze which could not be controlled.
The platoon did its best,
but after two men had been killed, it was withdrawn, and the
dump
went on burning
exploding for 12 hours.
It was
subsequently found that the total loss was only about a quarter of
the stocks.
The method of stacking had been such that the
remainder were 'balanced', and there was consequently no serious
shortage.
By the sixth day, all vehicles of the heavy company had joined,
and replenishment could be done direct from beach depots.
The airborne phase gradually lessened. the division becomin
practically an infantry formation for the ensuing operations,
Belgian and a Netherlands brigade came under command, presenting
certain ration problems, which were solved, but bringing some
second-line transport with them which was a great help, particularly
when, without warning, the RASC was called on to provide trop
carrying transport for the first break-out from the beach-head.
By off-loading everthing and working 24 hours without a stop,
they did it. and set off for Troamn, Pont l'Evêque, and Pont Audeme
This move was like that of any other column advancing from th
beach-head: the RASC captured some Germans and killed other,
and liberated various villages as a sideline to its more norma
functions.
wounded, and 14 missing.
The heavy
mained in England to carry out the air despatch suffered no louth
company which
as far as is known: they performed the same duties later, homent,
on behalf of the Ist Airborne Division at Arnher,
casualties numbered 44-
The Ist Airborne Division had during all this time been chang
in Ensland at the delay in finding them a suitable operati
The break-out from the bridgehead in Normandy scemed at lat
531
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
to promise one; indeed, it promised more, for in the 15 weeks after
the initial landings, 17 operations were planned, only to be abandoned
in succession as the objectives were taken by ground forces.
The
effect on morale of all these cancellations, some not notified until
after the division was already emplaned, began to be felt: but at
last came operation 'Market Garden'.
The Allies' Task
In brief, the task given to the First Allied Airborne Army, which
now comprised two British and three United States divisions, was
to seize the bridges over the Maas, the canal at Graves, the Waal,
and the Neder Rijn, all of which were big obstacles, and hold them
until XXX. Corps could crows them all and debouch into the Fastern
Netherlands and the North German plain,
The seizure of the
Neder Rijn bridge at Arnhem, which was the northemmost, and
some 6o miles in advance of the forward troops of Y%.% Corps,
was allotted to ist Airborne Division, the other bridges being, the
responsibility of 82nd and 10rst United States Airborne Divisiona,
The CRASC's plan was for one parachute platoon to fly in with
each of the three brigades of the first air-lift, collect the large
quantities of ammunition which were to go in simultaneously in
gliders and, after delivering it to their brigades, return to the pres
selected supply dropping point which would by that time have freen
captured.
This they were to lay out and prepare, at the wame time
vizing any German and Netherlands transport which they codd
lay hands on. In the second lift on the follering day, CRAS/»
headquarters and the remainder of the light company world arive,
their jeeps and trailers fully loaded, and bezin fempos, mysies
from the abandoned gliders and from contamers of the jolien
drop to the divisional maintenance area, which world be completely
under RASC control.
On the third day would come the first
supply drop, followed by further daily missions to wantin the
force until XXX. Corps reached them.
From then onwards, the
two heavy companies one of which had been on the Continent,
loaded, for a considerable time, awaiting, any operation whieh
might oxcur would catty on normal suface wantenance,
The plan miscarried.
Not being able to bene, we wache force
in a single airsit, Ceneral Urguhant, the diven commander,
found himself compelled to engage, an unexpect re H
donce piecemeal. In spite of this, the bridge was held for tennet
than was planned, but Y.V.%. Conga was unable to reach i aid i
had to be given up.
The RASC contingents landed as planned, tout tre if the
parachute platoons was cut oft with he brights at the Pathet
bride, could not tease the SDP, and all ha men beate
