204
THE MIDDLE EAST II
These "aid to Russia' convoys provided a wonderful training
ground for junior officers and NCOs, who afterwards went to more
active theatres.
Staging,
medical, repair and recovery facilities
were in time provided throughout the route, but the job of getting
the convoy through complete and to time, in spite of all the hazards,
always remained with the platoon officer.
The method of convoy operation used by the column was that
laid down in the British Army, with slight modifications to suit local
conditions.
At first these convoys came in for some criticism by the
Americans and the Russians on the grounds that they were too slow.
The Americans were using what
became known as the 'red ball
route' system, with each vehicle proceeding independently, and the
Russians moved their vehicles in large numbers and at high speed
without much regard to spacing.
It is interesting to note that in
quite a short time the British way had proved itself much more
economical by preventing avoidable accidents and unnecessary wear
to engines, transmissions and tyres, and in the end both our Allies
were operating in accordance with our well-tried methods.
The refuelling of our convoys, which at the beginning was effected
by means of pumps and non-returnable tins at the highly efficient
stations of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, was later developed to
something of a fine art by well laid out petrol points where 100 or
more vehicles could be refuelled simultaneously.
In spite of our best efforts to supply our Allies, who were engaged
so heavily with the common enemy, our relations with the Russians
remained formal.
It was only with
difficulty that permission was
obtained for our officers to visit their railhead at Tabriz, at which
convoys were delivering hundreds of tons a day.
Minor
irritations were frequently caused by the high-handed action of
junior, and sometimes not so junior, Russian officers and officials,
but it was soon apparent that the problem could be solved by an
equally high-handed threat of immediate action at the highest level.
Altogether, the British and American 'aid to Russia' organizations,
both military and civil, by road, rail, water and air delivered some
five million tons to Russia-
-aircraft, tanks, guns, lorries, ammunition,
food, petrol, clothing and raw materials of all kinds.
Another task of great importance which fell to PAIC was mobiliz-
ing and training a corps of Polish troops.
These Poles had been
had ners in Russia, but from the Russian point of view their stans
when Russia
was attacked by
Germany and thus
became one of the Allies.
They were released from Russia,
brought via Persia to Irag; there they were formed up into units of
British war establishments, and were finally moulded into
Polish
Corps which,
under General Anders,
fought with such
distinction in Italy and elsewhere.
A British military mission, on
which the RASC was strongly represented, supervised the formation
and training of the Polish Corps.
columns, plus a number of supporting units including GT companies
with women, were raised and trained under the guidance of the
RASC members of the military mission.
It was not long before
these Polish ASC units were in operation, and they rapidly became
absorbed into the general administrative organization of the com-
mand, so much so that the customary expression 'RASC/RIASC
units' had to be expanded to 'RASC/RIASC/PASC'.
In addition to attending to its own affairs, PAIC found itself
involved in the purchase and despatch to Syria and Palestine of large
numbers of cattle on hoof.
These were assembled at Mosul, from
where they were taken by rail, through part of Turkey, to Aleppo,
This involved quite a considerable organization
of a type for which the RIASC was well equipped, and in which
they had much experience. Units such as
sections' and 'cattle collecting centres', manned by experts in this
kind of traffic, were gradually produced.
The resounding Russian victory at Stalingrad in February, 1943,
removed any serious threat to Persia and Iraq; but the territory
continued to be one of the main lines of communication to Russia
till the westward advance of the Russian armies opened up other
required elsewhere, and 1944 saw the run down of Paiforce, which
gradually handed over its responsibilities for 'aid to Russia' to the
United States Persian Gulf Command.
THE DODECANESE
Refer to Map at p. 162
Plans to deny the use of the naval and air bases in the Italian
islands of the Dodecanese had long attracted the attention of the
planning staff in the Middle East.
When the collapse of Italy appeared to be imminent in August,
1943, the project was revived, and a division and shipping were
collected for the capture of Rhodes; but the plan had to be aban-
doned at the last moment when both troops and ships were needed
elsewhere.
It was only when the Italian armistice was announced
in September that it was decided to make an attempt to stiffen
the resistance of the italian garrisons in the Dodecanese to their
late allies. the Germans. bu sendine British troone to the islands of
Castelrosso, Cos, Leros and Samos.
The operation was effected by an infantry brigade,
and the
