506
THE R.A.S.C, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
British and American requirements, from 1940 to 1945-
Supply
was made to the garrison in the Azores, and a small amount was
sent for Force Burglar in the Faroe Islands.
The Falkland Islands
were supplied at first from home, and later by shipments from
South Africa, A supply was even sent to Persia under the 'Aid to
Russia' scheme, when 10,000 tons of coal were included in the
cargoes of ships carrying 46 coal burning locomotives.
the first requirements of the Channel Islands, when
To meet
their relief
could be effected, arrangements were made for 1,000 tons of coal
to be put in bags and held in readiness at Southampton.
Requirements of coal in the Middle East were at first obtained
from the Egyptian State Railways, but in 1940 the source of supply
was switched
to India.
Because of constant increases
demand, it never became
possible to build
up any substantial
stocks, and by May, 1942, the holdings were down to a dangerously
low level.
Arrangements were made to ship 75,000 tons from the
United Kingdom and 25,000 tons from the United States.
then until the end of the war supply was made from South Africa,
the coal being shipped by civilian agents from Lourenço Marques
or Durban to Suez.
During the early stages of operation 'Overlord' it was necessary
to manhandle coal over the beaches.
About 18,000
tons was
bagged in 8o lb sacks, a sack being the equivalent of a one-man
load, and for this purpose 250,000 rot-proofed sacks were obtained
under Ministry of Supply arrangements. A buffer stock of 5,000
tons in bulk was laid down at Swansea, and was subsequently
shipped.
The War Office was responsible for all further supplies
of solid fuel both for the British and the American forces from then
until May, 1945, after which part of the coal required came from
the United States.
Demands were passed by SHAEF to STy and
these rose from 60,000 tons in September, 1944, at which time bulk
shipments began, to 250,000 tons monthly in the carly part of
months of 1945-
Some 140,000 tons of pitch were also sent in the first four
During the period from D Day to the end of
July, 1945, a total of over two million tons of solid fuel and pitch
was supplied from the United Kingdom against SHAEF demands,
In reviewing barrack services during the war it is apparent
that ample proof was riven of the value of the system of co-ordinating
the domestic services for static accommodation within one depart-
Possibly the greatest deficiency was that caused in the earlier
part of the war by the lack of experienced statt; But this, of count,
was a factor that affected more than
The larger measure of "civilianization' of barrack staffs introduced
only the barrack services,
since the war will, however, help to combat this in future,
far as possible mobiliation plans should make provision for the
BARRACKS
507
selection in advance of qualified warrant officers for immediate
promotion to quartermaster rank to take
over barrack charges
from those officers who are required for field force duties.
Finally,
it may be confidently said that the organization for barrack services
that emerged under wartime conditions, providing unified control
within the War Office and a proper chain of responsibility throughout
the lower levels, undoubtedly resulted in a considerable increase in
efficiency, and is a feature that has come to stay.
