552
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
route to Rome, and the effective natural barriers formed by the
Liri and Rapido rivers, provided the group with many opportunities
to show their worth.
After weeks of intensive fighting and several abortive attempts to
take the position, 24th Guards Brigade held half the town of Cosino,
and the enemy the other half at the foot of Monastery Hill.
right the 78th British Division hung on precariously halfway up
the mountainside, and further still to the right, towards the top of
Monte Cairo, the 2nd New Zealand Division almost looked down
on the monastery.
The first supply dump was located a few miles
south of the village of Acquafondata and called 'Brighton'.
From
there all requirements were brought up to Acquafondata by motor
transport in daylight.
From Acquafondata to Portella, a hamlet
almost facing the monastery, ran a small river winding its way
between steep banks until, near Portella, it broadened out into a
basin just hidden from
the enemy.
The sappers dammed this
river and converted it into a usable track by laying wire netting on
the river bed. The basin before Portella was converted into the
forward supply dump called 'Hove'.
Very little traffic was allowed
on this track (called Inferno') in daylight, as much of it was in view
of the enemy, and a pass was issued to those who had to use it.
'Hove' was a hive of activity.
Round it were grouped Indian,
Cypriot, Arab and Italian mule companies.
A long water trough
of canvas had been erected, filled by a little stream.
All require-
ments for the infantry were brought to 'Hove' by motor transport at
night, sorted into mule loads by day and taken forward by mule
the next night.
The 24th Guards Brigade and 78th Division were
supplied direct across the short valley, but the carry to the New
Zealanders half way up Monte Cairo proved too long to get there
and back in darkness.
This meant placing mules across the valley
at the foot of the mountains and supplying them by jeep and trailer,
and it is this operation which is now described.
The first to try to carry it out was an Italian pack company, but
they suffered such severe casualties through faulty siting of their
locations that they had to be relieved at once.
The officer com-
manding the relieving company, after a thorough reconnaissance,
decided to make Portella his advanced headquarters and to site IB
Troop one third of the way up Monte Cairo.
All grey mules of this
troop had to be dyed with permanganate of potash to blend with the
landscape; A Troop on the right was in a disused paper factory at St,
Elia; C' Troop in the village of Valerotonda was located on a small
hill surrounded by large ones with the enemy on the highest looking
down on them, and i Troop was back at Acquafondata to look
after some South Africans who were on the right of the and New
Zealand Division. It was estimated that it would be dark enough
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
553
for C and D Troops to march from 'Brighton' direct to their sites in
one night, and this was proved right.
C Troop stabled their mules
in the empty houses on the south side of the deserted village, and
D Troop
found good, well hidden standings at Acquafondata.
They had a long but fairly safe carry, but A and B Troops had to
make two nights of it. Marching the first night to Portella, they
then had to lie up all day.
This in itself was a nerve racking ordeal
for the men, who knew that, should the enemy suspect any new
movement, a 'stonk' would come down which could not fail to do
damage.
Nothing, however, happened and the two troops safely
reached their locations on the second night and carried out their
lift forward that same night.
The sorting and tying of the jeep loads at 'Hove' was a most
important factor in this operation, as too was the timing of the
jeep convoys.
Specified loads for specified units were sent off
together, and the drivers were well briefed as to their contents.
On arrival at mule-head, halfway up Monte Cairo or outside the
St Elia paper factory, they were met by the pack troop leader.
On learning the contents of the loads and intended recipients, he
sent for the exact number of mules, the load was transferred from
jeep to mule, the next jeep pulled in, and the process was repeated.
Absolute silence was essential, and not a man or mule would linger
in that danger spot for a second longer than necessary.
Neverthe-
less, B troop suffered heavy casualties. At the end of three weeks
only 16 of the original troop of 75 mules were left.
The men too
had a rough time.
They lived in holes dug in the side of the
mountain and could not move in daylight.
A Troop in their paper factory could also move only at night.
They were shelled nearly every day, but fortunately the factory
was well built and the shells exploded harmlessly on the walls and
roof. The Boche, however, was not to be frustrated and started
sending over unfused shells which crashed through the roof, killing
mules the bodies of which could not be disposed of.
Quick-lime
was sent up, but those rotting mules did not add to the amenities
of the area.
C Troop was well organized. Horses and mules were well
bedded in the houses, and each man managed to borrow a bed
from the evacuated village.
The only trouble was drinking water,
as the only village well was in view of the enemy, but the resourceful
troop leader rounded up some stray donkeys, saddled them with
water barrels, and sent the litle herd with two muleteers to the
well daily.
Not once did the enemy interfere.
At Portella the officer commanding and the veterinary officer
lived in an extraordinary house built up the side of a bank.
The
top floor was entered by the front door, which faced the monastery.
