444
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
so, the time had come when separate RASC and RAOC (and to a
lesser extent RE) workshops doing much work of a similar nature
on three separate systems could no longer be tolerated (the RE with
two echelons of repair, the unit and workshop, the RASC with
three, the sub-unit, the company workshop and the heavy repair
shop, and the RAOC with four, the unit, divisional workshop, the
third echelon shop and the base workshop).
The Beveridge Com-
mittee, while leaving the Royal Navy and the
Royal Air Force
comparatively free from criticism, were strong in recommending
the rationalization of the Army's system, to bring provision and
maintenance of spares stocks and repair under one head.
The Army Council lost little time in appointing a strong com-
mittee to make detailed proposals for the implementation of the
Beveridge Committee's plans.
The members of the committee
were Lieut-General Sir Ronald Weeks, a Territorial officer who
had been DQMG(AE) at the War Office before advancement to
the post of Deputy Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Sir Robert
Sinclair a high executive and later chairman of the Imperial
Tobacco Company, who had been lent to the War Office to be
Director General of Army Requirements, and Mr. A. W. Dunkley,
a dictor of the At ouTy aguire Cotspany and a member of the
Petroleum Board.
They produced a scheme whereby the RE
workshops were to confine themselves to processes connected with
their civil engineering role, the repair and maintenance of electrical
and mechanical equipment leaving their hands, the RASC were to
give up the provision, storage and issue of their own vehicles and
spare parts, and the heavy repair (outside their workshops platoons
which arts, wet the heavy reptie touchides, and the RAOC, while,
acquiring full responsibility
for vehicle and spare part provision,
storage and issue, were to give up the whole of their engineering
side and to cease to be responsible for the repair of their own or
other arms' equipment, from guns to bicycles.
To bear
immense combined inspection and repair load for all arms, a new
corps was to be formed, combining the technical elements of the
RE, RASC and RAOC.
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.
This was to be called the Corps of Royal
For the present, the RAG,
RA, RE and R Sigs would retain their technical men engaged on
maintenance within their units and the RASC would retain the men
in their transport and workshop platoons.
opportunity offered, the whole of the remaining technicians and
As a second phase, when
their functions would pass to the new corps.
Naturally,
the Corps were
dismayed.
They had provided,
maintained and repaired their own hayt of vehicles almost without
a break from the earliest davs of motor transport 40 vears before,
and had built up a sound, well tried oor anization which had never
failed. They had seen failure or partial failure in other organiza-
and now they were to be called upon to break up
organization, intimately interwoven in the fabric of the Corps, and
depend on other corps for the provision and repair of their
primary "weapon', the vehicle.
(That other arms had been so
dependent for years was very little consolation.) They would lose
a considerable, though not a preponderant, part of their organiza-
tion, and the future seemed black.
The Army Council adopted the report in toto, and ordered its
immediate implementation, in essence as from May, 1942, and in
fact from October ist, 1942, when the new repairing corps would
officially come into being.
By this decision the RE lost a handful of technicians, the RASC
lost the 'provision' sub-branch of ST 3, all its VRDs and its MTSDs
to the RAOC and all its HRSs to the REME, altogether perhaps
about one tenth of its strength.
engineering branch, some 60 per cent of its strength, to the REME,
whose initial make-up was about 1 per cent ex-RE, 4 per cent ex-
RASC and 95 per cent ex-RAOC.
To form and direct the new corps, Brigadier E. B. Rowcroft,
DDST in charge of ST 3, was promoted major-general and ordered
to assume his new duties in a week's time.
He took with him from
ST 3 such staff as were employed on heavy repair or workshop
The remainder of the technical portion of ST 3 were
transferred to the Directorate of Warlike Stores, where
Colonel
H. C. Goodfellow became the head of WS 6 branch.
He took
with him about i2 officers and 3o other ranks and, with those of
the RAOC already on the job, became responsible for the vehicle
and MT stores activities relating to the whole Army.
It is interesting
to recall that the reliefs for both General Rowcroft, as DME, and
for Colonel Goodfellow, as DDWS in WS 6, were also RASC
officers.
the world were handed over, together with their men, to the RAOC
Outside the War Office, all VRDs, MTSDs and HRSs throughout
for vehicle and stores work or to the REME for repair work.
number of officers and men who had to change their cap badges
may not have appeared great, but there was a great change in the
RASC outlook, and it is a matter of great credit to those who took
part that the transfer was effected smoothly and loyally.
Contrary to the
expectations of the more gloomy,
the new
division of responsibilities amongst the RE, RASC,
RAOC and
REME did not spell disaster.
All the older corps were co-operative
in their attitude to the newcomer, and with this co-operation came
vigorous growth for the REME.
But the RASC suffered neverthe-
less, because in its original form it had enjoyed what was, in effect,
