in peacetime, even on a limited scale.
If there had been small
peacetime cadres, the standard of training to make units ready for
an operational role could then have been reached much sooner.
Another difficulty was that the routine supply and transport duties
had to be performed at the same time as, and in conjunction with,
the training of the men of the WAASC.
The first RASC supply units arrived in the command in Septem-
ber, 1940, as cadres for West African units; a BSD each for Nigeria,
the Gold Coast, and Sierra Leone, detail issue sections, and field
bakery and butchery detachments.
But many in these cadres had
themselves but a scanty knowledge of supply duties, and European
supply men were so scarce that quite often driver sergeants,
even fitters, had to be used for supply work.
And the troops had
to be maintained, so the Africans had to learn as they went along,
by repetition of the same type of work.
Close and constant super-
vision had to be exercised by British soldiers, to prevent defalcations.
On the provision side there were many difficulties.
the pride of the Fulani and the tribes of Mauretania in the possession
of cattle was such that they were loth to part with them for money.
In due course they were persuaded to trade cattle for lengths of
blue savannah cloth, but the nature of a contract never became
Cold storage for meat only existed in the larger towns and was
insufficient to meet the Army needs.
The 'bush cow', though not
up to the standards of European cattle,
nevertheless provided
reasonably good meat.
The problem was how to bring it to the
slaughter-house in fair condition.
The cattle-rearing areas were
up to 1,000 miles from the consumption areas, and except in
Nigeria, there was no railway.
In the Gold Coast for example the
cattle had to trek from water hole to water hole.
Much time and
money would have been saved had there been in the West African
colonies a peacetime nucleus however small, of an ST organization,
but then West Africa had never really seemed a likely theatre of
war, as France was our close ally.
As time passed and experience grew, useful experiments in the
production of local resources were made.
A vegetable farm
1,000 acres was set up at Media, in the Gold Coast, which in due
course supplied
the fresh vegetables requirements.
factory was also set up.
Africans, staffed by
Schools of cookery were organized for the
"mammies', and were completely successful.
On the other hand a fish-curing industry was a total failure, defeated,
Anothe" difficult on the sunnly side was lack of storage accom
modation in every colony, which ledito a high rate of pilferage and
There was a lack of lateral communications,
WEST AFRICA
403
that reserves built up in up-country areas to meet specific threats
could not be rapidly transferred to other colonies as the troop
dispositions altered, and could not be turned over correctly or
eaten down according to programme.
There were thus consider-
able losses through waste.
Petroses through wasts handled by supply units) was purchased
from the civilian installations in each colony.
packed the spirit into 4-gallon non-returnable containers for the
The history of petroleum in West Africa is one, therefore,
with that of other theatres: a tale of leakage and loss.
The first RASC mattesical transport men reached West Africa
in August, 1940, and until the middle of 1941, the story of transport
there was one of a constant struggle against odds.
troubles were the lack of equipment, of accommodation, of military
vehicles, and perhaps most important of all, of sufficient British
Africans were available to be trained as drivers and artificers,
but the necessary vehicles and tools were not present.
pany had a few impressed vehicles, but these could not all be used
for training, as there were routine transport duties to be performed,
and the WAAS he dare oo assist other arms in driver and other
Training was not a simple process.
The raw African
had no idea of the necessity for lubrication, tore inflation, and so
on, and the whole business of driving had to be explained to him in
ways which he could understand.
He was quite without fear, and
drove accordingly, which resulted in an alarming accident rate.
Because of the almost complete deficiency of military vehicles
until 1941, all transport had to be requisitioned.
largely ofercke whit Lad already been driven by AGican civilian:
and were not in good condition.
Even when the flow of new
vehicles from overseas began, large numbers of them were lost on the
way through submarine activity.
The working life of the vehicles
which did arrive was restricted because of acute shortage of M'T
spare parts, due again to sinkings.
Besides this, West Africa was
on a low priority for its requirements in the earlier days, compared
with the urgent needs of other theatres.
In the face of heavy repair commitments, caused mainly by
accidents, the WAASC
difficulties.
workshop organization operated under
Workshops were set up in clearings in the bush under
matting shelters, with improvised benches, inspection pits dug in
the ground and no tole arrant those borrowed from civil garages.
(except the Gambia) but they could do no more than help with
A section of an HRS was eventually established in each colony
second line repairs, because of lack of equipment.
On top of its normal commitments,
the WAASC workshop
