564
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
be analogous to that of general transport companies.
Making up
the crews was the problem.
A call was made to all arms of the
service for volunteers with experience as deep sea sailors, fishermen,
longshoremen and yachtsmen.
As was expected, this met with
good response.
Nos. 1 and 2 Motor
Boat Companies,
RASC,
were formed in August, 1940, and located at Salcombe and Fal-
mouth, providing for the operation of 40 launches, in four sections
each of 10 craft.
Thus, within one year from the outbreak of war,
the two sister formations of the RASC Fleet, the old and the new,
were in being.
Dunkirk
The first big operation in which the RASC Fleet took part was
the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk in
June, 1940.
Eight of the fastest launches in the water transport
companies the 45 ft range launches Grouse, Kestrel, Pigeon, Swallow,
and Vulture, the RASC high speed launch Wolfe, and the 57 ft
target towing launches Haig and Marlborough-were diverted to the
task and did valiant work, as the following letter* from General Sir
Walter Venning, then Quarter-Master-General to the Forces, to
each of the masters records:—
I wish to thank you, your engineer and crew for the very fine
part which you played in the recent evacuation of the BEF.
In particular I wish to convey my admiration for the way in
which the personnel of the WD vessels participating volunteered to
perform a dangerous task quite outside their normal duties.
"To have been successful in saving the lives of over 1.200 British
and Allied coldiers is a feat of which all of you concerned may well
feel proud.
The damage done to so many of the craft engaged is
a testimony to the dangers which you and those serving under you
faced with cheerfulness and gallantry.
I am proud to think that, as Quarter-Master-General to the
Forces, the War Department Fleet comes within my sphere?
The RASC coasting vessel Sir Evelyn Wood evacuated many more
from the beaches of St. Valéry.
In the process, she 'salved' the
beach-master and his party after their small craft had been damaged
by shell-fire from a German tank, an incident recalled several years
later in correspondence published in the nautical journal Sea Breezes.
These tasks were not completed without cost, for considerable
damage was sustained by the craft.
A typical example is that of
the Swallow, which remained continuously in service for 24 hours
after she had been badly damaged, working on only one of her
three propellers, ferrying men from the beaches to the transports.
The skipper, Mr. W. R. Clark, although fortunate on that occasion,
* Extract from Special Fleet Order No. 1 dated June 8, 1940.
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
565
was later to lose his life in the sister launch Falcon when she was
destroyed by an enemy bomb while lying alongside Harwich Pier
in April, 1941.
The Disbandment of Assistant Director of Military Transport
In July, 1940, there was a break with the past.
The office of
the ADMT, with his
'home port' at Woolwich, was disbanded,
and a separate War Office branch known as STI was formed within
the Directorate of Supplies and Transport.
It took over not only
the ADMT's responsibilities for RASC craft and civilians but also
became the War Office co-ordinating branch for all Army demands
for
Admiralty controlled craft.
Departmental liaison was also
established with the Ministry of Shipping, later to be embodied in
the Ministry of War Transport.
In effect, STI became a miniature
Admiralty for the RASC Fleet, complete with its
own team of
naval constructors and overseers under the Superintending Engineer
and Constructor of Shipping.
The Expansion of the RASC Fleet and its work in Home and Northern Waters
volunteers for duty with the
companies continued to flow in and selection and training afloat
Unfortunately standard RASC craft were not
then available for these two first operational units, and they were
provided with requisitioned launches.
A strong spirit of pride in
their unit developed, and it was most noticeable to all how every
subsequent unit became imbued with it.
The evacuation of the BEF and the threat of German invasion
brought in their train
many problems for the
Intensified defence measures on the east, south-east and south
coasts created additional transport and ferry commitments for our
units and gave birth to a host of launch patrols on estuaries, rivers
and any stretches of water suitable for seaplane landings,
patrol craft a most motley array of cabin cruisers and launches of
all types and condition were operated by sundry units, both of
the Regular Army and of the pirated by sur
they had been 'requisitioned' locally by their operators. Naturally,
as one would expect, claims for compensation, use of craft and so
on began to filter back to the War Office in increasing volume.
It soon became evident that STI and the RASC water transport
organization alone had the facilities to investigate these.
it was that the inspection of many non P ACCe and investiontion
into their use, fell to the lot of the STI technical overseers and the
officers and staff of water transport companies.
by no means limited only to such administrative assistance.
The activities of the RASC Fleet in this direction, however, were
No. 2
