606
UNIT NARRATIVES
was cut off by the enemy,
One breakdown vehicle and a captured
3-ton vehicle with a total of nine men were missing.
The vehicles
were afterwards found burned out, and the men, all from the
workshops except one, were heard to be prisoners of war.
One
man, Dvr G. Ferguson, of C Platoon, escaped, having spent an
exciting few days.
This man, while acting as a despatch rider
with the convoy, was shot off his motorcycle.
He got away and
spent three days in the loft of a house in which the enemy set up a
headquarters,
and he and an NCO from another company were
able to hide themselves by burrowing into a pile of wheat sacks.
One night German soldiers slept next to Dvr Ferguson in the loft,
but the latter was not discovered.
After three days,
American
airborne troops surrounded the house, and Ferguson and the NGO
with him assisted in mopping up the enemy with a Bren,
During
the three days they had no food or drink.
From September 28th we stood by in our locations between Grave
and Nijmegen in case either of the bridges across the Waal was
destroyed.
A reconnaissance had been made of a crossing just
north of the road bridge at Nijmegen.
On September 29th the
bridge was damaged, and we had to take stuff across the Waal.
This was not a good crossing, chiefly because of the steepness of
the ramp on the south bank, and also because of the extremely
strong current.
We only had to work this crossing for one day, as
by the following day the bridge was repaired.
The next small job we did was to carry 12gth and 214th Infantry
Brigades across the Waal from the north side about one and a half
miles downstream from Nijmegen.
Because of the softness of the
banks, it was not possible for the dukws to get ashore to pick up or
to land troops.
This difficulty was overcome by the use of two
extra dukws anchored to the bank, one each side of the river, and
jutting out from the bank, thus forming a sort of quay against
which ferrying dukws were able to berth and take on or land troops.
In this way, six dukws of A Platoon were able to ferry about 1,300
troops across the river during one night,
Another job we did at this time was to have some dukws patrolling
the river between the road bridge and the broken railway bridge
with headlamps on at night.
The job of these dukws was to ensure
that no more enemy swam downstream with explosives, as they
had done previously when they blew up the railway bridge,
Apart
from this, we were used only occasionally for ordinary GT work,
our value lying in our potential capacity should the Germans blow
the dykes and flood the island.
Oye of the mode the islal of these CT jobs was when all three
platoons collected the civilians from certain areas on the island
and evacuated them to Grave and Nistelrode,
The amount of
596 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
607
furniture, etc., brought along by the civilians was amazing, and
they quite hopefully tried to put beds and even wardrobes on the
dukws.
The dukws positively bristled with bicycles as they went
along the road.
This job occupied the whole of one day; but worse
was to follow.
For political reasons we had to return the whole
lot the next day: 'Go along to the two refugee camps at Grave and
Nisterode, pick up the same people and take them where possible
to their own houses.'
Curiously enough,
be returning to their homes,
they were overjoyed to
One would have thought that, with
all the shells and the fighting that went on on the island, they
would have been only too pleased to get to some safe place, but no,
they just sat stolidly in their houses and took no notice of what
went on.
We also carried some American airborne troops to the island to
take over from the British troops there,
For the next few weeks we just sat in our location doing masses of
maintenance and even a little training,
We all saw plenty of films
and one or two ENSA shows.
Enjoyment was added to these
shows by the thought that a bomb or shell was liable to fall on one
at any time.
On one occasion a woman mind reader was doing
an act at Nijmegen when a bomb fell nearby,
About half the
audience immediately remarked that although she was able to
forecast people's domestic affairs, she had not forecast the bomb,
The next event from our point of view was an inspection by
Lieutenant-General Horrocks, GOG XXX Corps.
He inspected A
and C Platoons and then spoke to us,
He praised our turnout
and the work we had been doing, and made everyone feel rather
important and useful.
This was on November grd.
On November 4th we moved to Vucht, just north of Maastricht,
the platoons backloading some empty jerricans on the way,
taking petrol and ammunition from army roadhead to s6g FMC at
Eisden.
At Vucht we were all put in civilian billets, a rather
necessary move on account of the weather,
From November oth onwards we were used as ordinary transport
on road journeys between the Second Army roadhead at Hechtel
and 16g FMC at Eisden, or else 164 FMC at Sittard, There were
some bad floods a few weeks later, and the river Maas rose consider-
ably, so much so that the bridges across, with the exception of one
American one, were put out of action,
The current was so strom
(about five or six knots) that the dukws could not possibly be used
on the river, although some experiments were conducted with
dukws attached to cables.
The whole idea, however, was unsatie-
factory as even if the cable did hold, while the dakw got across,
only one could cross at a time, and this method would have been so
slow as to be ludicrous,
