196
THE MIDDLE GAST II
temperature of 127 degrees in the shade-of which there was none—
and withdrawn to laager.
May 17th was spent in the reconnais-
sance of a better route, and this was eventually found by way of a
number of wadis (dry water courses). On the 18th
'Kingcol'
reached Habbaniya from Majara Bridge, the only way across the
flooded area.
The comparatively large number of vehicles appa-
rently created a great impression among the local tribes, and from
intelligence reports afterwards received it was clear that the Iraqis
must have had exaggerated ideas of the number of British troops
advancing against them.
No doubt the early collapse of the rebels
was partly due to this cause.
The dust cloud created by such a
column was undoubtedly impressive at this stage in the war.
The defence of Habbaniya by the RAF, by the companies of the
King's Own Royal Regiment and by the loyal Arab levies was an
excellent example of how determination, improvisation and the will
to win brings success, but space does not allow of a description of
it here.
Habbaniya being secured, Habforce was ordered to advance on
Bagdad, while containing a small enemy force based on Ramadi.
Many actions were fought towards the end of May, the heaviest
being in Falluja.
The rebels capitulated on May 3Ist when,
however, Bagdad was threatened by two columns advancing from
the west and north-west.
'Kingcol' then marched into Bagdad and
the Regent Abdullahi, who had taken refuge at Habbaniya, once
more became ruler of Iraq.
The new line of communication was soon firmly established and
supply depots set up at H4,
H3 and Rutba Wells, from which
maintenance
forward to Habbaniya.
enemy activity these were invariably escorted by fighting troops.
The Arab Legion was employed, as it had been on the advance, as a
cavalry screen.
This force was also of great value in obtaining
information about the enemy.
The maintenance columns consisted
of not less than two platoons ('sections' at this period).
found that the round trip took seven days: the distance from Ha
to Habbaniya was 400 miles.
As a rule two convoys a week operated
over the desert most of which was poor going.
In this task 51 and
552 Companies were reinforced by 543 Company.
end, the direct road through Ramadi was cleared of the enemy and
secured against floods.
the turn-round time by
lessening the distance and reducing the element of fatigue.
Supplies and petrol received at Habbaniya from incoming con-
voys were taken over by a small supply depot which was a combined
The RAF had run short of many commodi-
ties before the arrival of "Kingcol and had had to devise their own
ration scale based entirely on what they had available.
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
arrival of 'Kingcol' a normal balanced ration was restored. From
this supply depot local units drew their rations, petrol and oil.
Petrol was at that time issued in 4-gallon 'flimsies'.
The troops forward of Habbaniya were maintained by sections
of transport loaded at the supply depot and taken by unit guides to
various points notified by HQ Habforce.
After the fall of Bagdad,
supplies were obtained by local purchase.
columns of Habforce were at that time employed to
establish control of vital points farther north such as the airfield and
oil installation at Mosul and the pipeline station at Haditha.
Early in June Habforce was withdrawn for further work in Syria
and Persia, as by that time the roth Indian Division had been landed,
the rebellion had fizzled out and the Regent of Iraq had been
restored to his rightful position on June Ist.
In a special order of the day dated June 7th, 1941, Major-General
J. Clarke, the GOC, Ist Cavalry Division, after congratulating all
ranks on the successful outcome of the task, said: 'I would specially
single out for mention the units of the RASC whose efforts in keeping
the force supplied over a hot and arid desert have been beyond
The increasing infiltration of German aircraft into Syria has been
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. In May, 194I, the
British Government decided that this threat to the Middle
must be eliminated although it involved the distasteful task of
entering into armed conflict with our former ally, France.
The Free French forces available in Palestine were judged
inadequate in strength and equipment to perform the task on their
own and the barrel had to be scraped to find troops to assist them.
Eventually Habforce, two Australian brigades and one Indian
infantry brigade took part.
Elements of 6th Division (afterwards
to become 7oth Division) arrived too late to take any part in
The General Staff plan provided for the invasion of Syria with a
force consisting, broadly, of zist and 25th Australian
Brigade
Groups, the 5th Indian Infantry Brigade Group, with certain Free
French forces in Palestine, and that part of the ist Cavalry Division
(Habforce) which had completed its task at Habbaniya and Bagdad.
These columns were deploved from the coast to the desert in the
order named. Habforce, having been withdrawn from Iraq to
Hs and Ha, pumping stations on the oil pipeline throuch Trans-
jordan from Kirkuk to Hails, was to operate on the right flank,
with Palmyra as its tirst obictive and Aleppo and Deraa as its
second objective. Headquarters at Jerusalem were responsible for
