532
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
casualties.
The SDP itself was never captured.
Signals sent to
divert the supply drop on D plus z failed to get through, and in
consequence the armada of Stirling and Dakota aircraft sailed
through murderous fire right over the now restricted divisional
perimeter and dropped their cargoes to the enemy, A second
parachute platoon which made a fighting sortie to recover some of
the supplies fell into an ambush and half of them were lost, only
the personal gallantry of their officer, Captain D. T. Kavanazy,
who lost his life charging a machine-gun post single-handed with a
Bren gun, enabling the remnants to escape.
During the next few days, the rest of the RASC did what lite
could be done.
Under continual mortaring and sniping, jeeps
chased about recovering panniers and containers dropped both
inside and outside the perimeter,
new SDP marked out with improvised panels.
A new DMA was formed and a
For a brief period
a fairly normal supply of ammunition could be maintained, but
what little tood srrived was reserved for the hospital,
On sorne
days the weather was foggy and no supply drop could be made.
On others the drop took place, in face of an ever-increasing intensity
of anti-aircraft fire and in spite of attacks by German fighter aircraft
There were many acts of great heroism on the part of the RASC air
despatch crews and their RAF colleagues.
one only, written by an infantry officer, need be quoted as example:
Of scores of accounts,
'It was with excited hopefulness and an almost painful admiration
that those on the ground watched these aircrait day by day, Aying
in to drop their loads.
flew on unwaveringly and very slowly-
Through a continuous curtain of fire they
wonderful that more of them were not destroyed to drop Many
and so low that it seemed
loads which floated down mostly behind the enemy lines,
were hit and set on fire, but continued to despatch their panniers
Whit they fell from view; one unknown air ratt was already on fire
when it arrived over the target, but drooned half its load, circled
main losing height the while, a bad droppe the remainder on the
second run until it went down in a sheet of flame.
There were
asual dets of great gallantry in the air, and there were fairly heavy
casualties among the RASC despatchers.
know that the small proportion of the
But it is consoling to
hundreds of tons
dropped which did reach our lines enabled hungry men to have
some sort of a meal on the fifth day, and also provided sufficient
Amunition of all kinds to keep weapons firing and to keep the
RASC dump "in issue" right up to the withdrawal'
Of all aircraft taking
were lost,
part in
Many of their RAF and
abandoned their mission and saved their lives.
It was not all in
vain: although only 7k per cent of the teal drops could be collected,
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
533
place, instead of a total surrender.
On the ground, the situation steadily became worse,
defended area
progressively smaller.
Mortaring
and
shelling,
always continuous, increased to tremendous intensity
supply drop.
put out several times with great difficulty.
CRASC had a personal
3inch mortar stack and the small arms fire.
The jeeps
knocked out one by one.
any sort, nor a single vehicle left.
By the end, there were no supplies of
fully to the end.
some by swimming.
flown in to Arnhem.
Five officers and 83 other ranks came out.
Of those who did not, two officers and g6 other ranks were killed,
and many more were wounded.
Some 10 mile were wouldnhem lies Nijmegen, the location of
Airborne Corps HQ all this time.
Although cut off for varying
lengths of time on several occasions, Corps HQ had managed ta
secure fairly adequate supplies by setting up an improvised airfield
at Grave, where one considerable Dakota lift, together with a jeep
company, was landed.
Stocks of excellent German food and less
source being a huge depot 12 miles away in enemy territory at Oss,
from which for a time Corps HQ drew by day and the Germans be
This enabled the headquarters and several hospitals to be
supplied, while the rations of and United State Airborne Division
near by could be supplemented, and a significant contribution was
made to the resources of the beleaguered town.
It was not long before the road to Nijmegen was consolidated by
XXX Corps, which
established a front running
through
halfway to Arnhem.
followed not long after by Corps headquarters.
Assault on the Rhine
The failure of operation 'Market Garden' to secure a bridgehead
across the Rhine through which the main forces could enter Germany
meant that a full-scale assault of the river would have to be mounted,
