THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
British beer made its first appearance in the beach-head in July.
The first bulk petrol transport company (252 Company of 37 Trans-
port Column) landed on June 23rd, and on June goth the first cargo
of bulk petrol was discharged from a coastal tanker to prefabricated
Port-en-Bessin.
It was during the final phase of the
Falaise fighting on August 20th that the Air Despatch Group in
first appearance over
dropped 6o tons of ammunition to a Polish armoured brigade.
late August, the RASC content of the rear maintenance area was
eight BSDs, eight DIDs, 13 field bakeries, two field butcheries,
I4 petrol depots, and six mobile filling centres.
The Advance to the Rhine: Outline of Operations
The Seine was crossed by the Third United States Army, while
the battle of the Falaise pocket was still in progress, and this initial
American success was swiftly
exploited by First Canadian Army.
The immediate tasks for 21 Army Group after crossing the Seine
(a) The destruction of the enemy in North-East France;
(b) the clearance of the Pas de Calais and the elimination of
(c) the capture of airfields in Belgium; and
(d) the capture of Antwerp.
The axis of Second Army advance was north-east, that is towards
central Belgium.
The First Canadian
Army was given the task
of advancing up the Channel coast with its series of heavily fortified
the spearhead of the
Amiens was entered on August 3ist, Brussels on Septem-
ber grd, and Antwerp the following day.
On September 6th the
Commander-in-Chief 21 Army Group
ordered the resumption of the advance of Second Army towards
the Rhine, and by September 17th a bridgehead over the Meuse-
Escaut Canal had been secured.
The plan for the Battle of Arnhem,
which began on September
was to secure with airborne
troops and hold for a limited period the road through Eindhoven-
Uden-Grave-Nijmegen
was to advance along this 'airborne carpet, as the
Commander-in-Chief termed it, and establish itself north of the
Neder Rijn with bridgeheads over
the Ijssel, facing
plan failed because of rapid enemy concentration to oppose these
moves and because of bad weather, which prevented the build-up of
adequate forces in the vital area.
On September 26th, the gallant
Arnhem bridgehead forces were withdrawn.
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
The task of clearing the Scheldt Estuary was a hard one, and
these operations by the First Canadian Army lasted from early
October to the end of the first week in November.
operations were in progress, C-in-C 21 Army Group began to
regroup his forces and, when this had been done, First Canadian
Army assumed responsibility for the Nijmegen bridgehead.
carly December, Second Army was lined up along the Meuse, its
right in touch with the Ninth United States Army at Marseyck.
Plans for the battle of the Rhineland were well advanced by that
time, but their implementation was postponed by the unexpected
German counter-offensive in the Ardennes.
The British part in the Anglo-American pincer movement which
constituted the battle of the Rhineland began on February 8th,
1945, when XXX Corps, under command of First Canadian Army,
launched its attack into the Reichwald Forest and the northern
extension of the West Wall on a front of five divisions, supported by
more than 1,000 guns and strong air forces.
was fanatical, and the weather was terrible.
German opposition
On the northern
lank, the Reichwald operations were conducted mainly in the
various types of amphibious vehicles in deep mud and slush,
through heavily wooded roadless country.
On March grd, how-
ever, the British and American pincer movements had linked up,
and a1 Army Group was lined up on the western banks of the
Rhine as far south as Düsseldorf.
The Transport Units
This brief account of operations from Falaise to the Rhineland
is sufficient to accentuate to any military reader the
problem which they created.
During this phase, every artifice had
to be emploved to make the limited resources keep pace with the
advance; the range of all echelons was extended to the limit.
emergencies, first line transport drew from FMAs, and second line
from army roadheads.
VIII Corps and two independent brigades
ferrying between RMA and roadheads.
were grounded, and their transport thrown into the general pool
Fortunately the capture
of many bridges intact allowed the bridge companies to be released
for general transport purposes, and anti-aircraft and tank transporter
units were also made available for similar work.
War Office, which still controlled the main base and kept in closest
touch with the administrative plane of O et Army Groun bu
constant liaison visits, improvised a total of 18 transport units from
Anti-Aircraft Command rod Driver Training Brigade sources and
despatched them to France to fill gaps in the ever lengthening lines
In fact, plans for this improvisation had been
made by the DST War actice long before the need for it arose,
