THE MIDDLE EAST II
The second line companies were designed to operate a double
echelon of 80 miles, and their workshop sections were intended to
maintain the brigade group B vehicles as well as their own.
The four brigades now available (two East African and two West
African were at the same time organized into two
the allotment of the four brigade companies followed suit.
reorganization made men and vehicles available from which were
formed 16 reserve MT companies, each able to carry four days'
supplies in bulk for one brigade, from railhead to refilling points.
The supplies system was also reorganized, the field supply depots
being changed into sections of a supply personnel company, which
were allocated to divisional groups as required.
Each section was
able to maintain 7,500 men.
Another supply personnel company
was formed from existing supply units, and took over the railhead
supply depots and detail issue depots on the line of communication.
The vehicle situation was far from satisfactory.
the EAASC units to be equipped, but also first line transport had
to be provided for West African troops coming into the Command.
The vehicles required on mobilization had been obtained by hasty
requisitioning without inspection, and large numbers
into VRD were unsuitable.
Many of those accepted had covered
30,000 to 40,000 miles and all had suffered from rough usage and
poor maintenance; consequently a heavy strain was placed on the
semi-trained workshop staffs in keeping the vehicles on the road.
Another unfortunate result of the poor condition of these vehicles
was that the first consignments of spare parts from abroad were
exhausted soon after they were received, in meeting the continuous
demands for replacements on impressed vehicles.
Small consignments of new vehicles came from South Africa, but
in general neither the quality nor the quantity was suficient for
operations against the Italians, who were numerically superior and
better equipped.
A contributory factor to the unsatisfactory situation was the
inadequacy
of workshop equipment.
In June,
1940,
with the
exception of a few made locally, the EAASC had no mobile workshop
sets.
It was represented to the War Office that 1,100 g-ton lories must
be provided to meet operational needs involving the maintenance
of two brigade groups for 500 miles, one brigade group for 26o miles
and one for 300 miles beyond railhead.
The War Office agreed to
this and planned to ship 250 lorries at once, with instructions to
Bast Africa Command to report the stages at which the remainder
There still
could be accepted when trained men were available.
remained a large deficiency of technical stores lorries, breakdown
lorries and ambulances.
EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR
TAT
Besides a West African reinforcement of 600 trained drivers, the
Mobile Field Force of the South African Union Defence Force began
to arrive in May, 1940.
The first ST elements included a base
supply depot, which was set up at Mombasa, an advanced supply
depot, and a detail issue depot.
While the supply men of the
Mobile Field Force came by sea, the MT came overland.
were railed as far as Broken Hill in Northern Rhodesia and thence
driven 1,500 miles to Nairobi, along what was known as the Great
In all, about 13,000 out of 15,500 vehicles passed
along this route, and in spite of the difficulties of the road and the
inexperience of many of the drivers, not a single vehicle was left
derelict on the road.
South Africans brought their own
mobile general workshops, so that they were self-contained in this
The influx of all these troops placed a strain on the East African
supply system which it had never been designed to carry.
end of January, 1941, the feeding strength reached 122,000, com-
prising a heterogeneous collection of races, which required six main
and numerous subsidiary ration scales.
It was at first suggested
that the South African troops should be maintained from the Union,
but eventually it was decided that as much use as possible should
be made of local resources.
Until May, 1940, petrol and its associated oils for the Army and
RAF were obtained, under Government contract direct from the oil
companies. With the arrival of the Union army and air force
units, it was estimated that monthly consumption of MT and
aviation spirit would increase from 60,000 to three million gallons
and from 40,000 to 500,000 gallons respectively.
A petrol section so, on ADS (petrol) was therefore formed to
undertake provisioning, supply and distribution of all MT and
aviation spirits for the combined forces,
and the oil companies
agreed to increase and re-distribute their bulk storage to meet army
MT spirit tankage was increased by 8,000 tons to
22,000 tons and aviation by 6,000 tons to 8,000 tons.
In July, r940, the only container in use was the 4-gallon non-
The plants for can-making in
belonged to the oil companies.
Of these, two in Mombasa could
produce 25,000 a day between them, while there was also a small
plant in Zanzibar.
Preparation for the Offensive
Such then was the general situation of the EAASC in June, 1940,
when Italy entered the war.
It had not altered greatly by Novem-
ber that year when General Cunningham assumed command, and
announced that his forces would be thoroughly prepared for offensive
