356
BURMA AND CEYLON
four times as wide as the Rhine, while the Japanese soldier in well-
prepared positions is no less formidable than the German.
It is the
greatest tribute to the Commander, officers and men, of Fourteenth
Army that such a hazardous and exacting operation was crowned
with success.'
Meiktila fell to 17th Indian Division on March 5th, 1945,
and
Mandalay to 19th Indian Division on March 20th, after stubborn
resistance.
The Japanese suffered a crushing defeat in this area,
and began to withdraw.
The 2nd Division took part in the clearing-
up operation until it was withdrawn in April in order to prepare
to take part in the campaign for the reoccupation of Malaya.
Tank Transporters
The RASC interest in this theatre now turns to the tank transporter
companies, three of which were with Fourteenth Army.
One of
them, 553, was engaged in an unspectacular but necessary role on
the Lof C.
The conveyance of replacement tanks over the very
long line, 300-400 miles, with the limited number of rather worn out
transporters available,
was a great problem, which
called for
herculean efforts from the company, which were on the whole
successful.
The unit had also to cope with other heavy loads,
such as six 21-ton locomotives, and large craft for use by IWT.
The movement of these awkward loads over the difficult roads of
the already congested L of C presented many problems.
It had been doubted at first whether loaded transporters could
negotiate the tremendous hills and sharp corners of the
Manipur
road.
So, in 1943, a transporter of 589 Company went up on a
trial trip, which proved that the route was passable,
though with
great difficulty.
The last six miles into Kohima took a transporter
with a 28-ton tank on the trailer over two hours to traverse.
The
tractors slowly ground their way up
the gradients with engines
running at 1,500 rpm, in second gear on the main box, and the
auxiliary gear in direct or under-drive.
In January, 1944, a squadron of tanks had to be moved to Tamu.
The 45 miles of mountain road to that place from
Palel were
appreciably more severe and difficult than any part of the Manipur
road, and it was by no means certain that loaded transporters would
be able to climb the hills.
that the tanks should not be off-loaded, as was
For security reasons, it was imperative
invariable
practice on the steepest climbs in later days, and the squadron had
to be carried through in the time allowed.
On the second day out,
the climbing began with the long pull up to the saddle at Shenam,
10 miles up a steep winding mountain road, only just wide enough
for transporters.
The first five miles took 22, 19,
15, 14 and 12
minutes respectively. The next section of three miles took three
BURMA
357
and a half hours.
Then came the descent from the saddle to
Khongkhang down the staircase, a fearsome zigzagging drop of
some hundreds of feet. Next day's task included the climb from
Lokchau to Sibong, in which an extremely sharp rising corner gave
great difficulty, reversing being necessary in most cases.
Then the
surface went to pieces, and the transporters could not get up with
their 40-ton loads, so double-heading had to be resorted to.
Half
the tractors were coupled to the other half, two tractors taking up
each trailer.
The whole convoy covered five miles that day.
After Sibong, the route was mainly downhill, but short steep rises
gave much trouble because of slipping, and it was only by 'boosting'
that thuch trotions could be negotiated without off-loading.
transporters were closed up so that each one was pushed so far by
the one immediately behind, and the final stretch was overcome by
a third transporter, giving the required boost to the two in front.
The breakdown lorry pushed at the end of the column.
The journey
was completed in four and a half days instead of the scheduled three.
When the Japanese invaded Assam in March, 1944, 58g Company
joined 254th Indian Tank Brigade in a 'box' or defended area, on
the Imphal Plain, and went on ferrying tanks and stores and
bridging material.
Then, when the enemy was retreating again, it
moved tanks to Nanhanwe, a round trip of goo miles.
it reached
the Chindwin at Kalewa on Tanuary teth, 1945, and while some
transporters crowed by the bridge, others were towed on pontoons
by dukws to Shwegyin.
Thence the unit went forward, by way of
Shwebo, to Myittha, and eventually by way of Taungtha to Prome;
this was virtually the end of the company's active role.
The other transporter company, 590, served 255th Indian Tank
Brigade, and probably had the hardest task of them all.
In order
to effect a surprise crossing of the Irrawaddy at Pakokku, and from
there make a dash for Meiktila, IV Corps, which included this tank
brigade, was switched from the left flank of Fourteenth Army to
the right, and sent down by way of the Kabaw and Gangaw valleys.
The route was dificult; it was 400 miles long, of which 11o through
the Kabaw valley were over a fair-weather road, already the main
L of C of XXXIII Indian
Corps, and deep in dust.
After that,
re-making throughout its length to enable it to take transporters
there was only an indifferent fair-weather road, which required
In one section of it, the dust was three feet deep, and proved a
barrier even to jeeps.
The difficulties encountered by 590 Company
in moving the tank brigade over the last 200 miles, without using
much track mileage,
were immense.
The whole move took
eight weeks to complete, because of the arduous nature of the route
and the lack of transport.
Throughout this period the company
worked extremely hard in terrible conditions.
