334
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
the end we came directly under shell fire.
occurred regularly and added to the hazards of our tasks.
I cannot speak too highly of our Malay drivers and British other
ranks; their behaviour was beyond praise.
journeys each night to and from the base, and it was often difficult
to get
demanded.
what seems to be a natural road sense.
fire was good considering their limited military training.
the end it was inevitable that all Malay units would have some
deserters, chiefly because of our reverses and because it was so easy
for them to return to civil life without fear of detection either in
the FMS or in Singapore.
During the seven nights the company moved 2,000 tons of
supplies and 18 tons of sail cloth.
stored in the outer base were cleared to Singapore.
casualties to men or vehicles, and throughout the operation almost
perfect speed and distance were maintained by the drivers under
the most appalling traffic conditions which existed on the main road.
Early in the morning of Monday February gth, 1942, heavy fire
in the vicinity of our rear indicated an enemy landing on the island.
As conditions deteriorated further operations became impossible.
Much credit is due to Captain Gibbs who accompanied me
throughout our tasks in the naval base.
courage, and his energy and drive was of the greatest help.
On February tith heavy shelling of Adam Camp necessitated
the withdrawal of the company to
During two days at this new location our duties were mainly
confined to troop carrying.
from both the ground and air, and we suffered five casualties and
the lom of many vehicles.
This location became untenable on Friday February rgth, and
the unit moved to River Valley Road.
The ammunition section
was dispersed to the docks and Teang Bahru Road where the
vehicles were hit in an air raid and all destroyed.
The unit remained at River Valley Road until the capitulation.
Before marching out to Changi prison, where the company ceased
to exist, the balance of the Malay drivers, who had not already left,
were paraded and ordered to return to civil life.
Narrative of an Officer in Changi POW Camp
On the surrender, we were all ordered to move to Changi, at
the extreme end of the island.
Units were given a small amount
of transport to enable them to move, and with this some took food,
and some personal comforts.
The DDST was authorized to take
MALAYA
335
Io days' rations for the 50,000 in the camp, but no lorries were
forthcoming to move this.
The food brought by units was collected
in supply depots and issued from there.
Thus, from the very
beginning, normal army principles were in force.
From the
Royal Army Service Corps point of view, that meant that the
supply and transport services were controlled by the DDST, and
under him Commanders RASC, AASC or RIASC, in each of the
areas into which the camp was divided.
Although the normal
duties ceased for those prisoners of war who belonged to units of
fighting arms, yet the troops had still to be fed, and so for some of
the RASC the work of the Corps went on even in captivity.
The first drawing of rations under Japanese arrangements did
not take place for a week after the surrender.
The scale laid down
was most inadequate, and it was brought to the notice of the Japanese
authorities that it did not compare in any respect with the field
service scale for British troops; but they refused to consider any
increase, their attitude being that prisoners of war had no right to
anything but bare rations,
they called luxuries coming into the camp:
and they were adamant against what
The original daily ration scale they laid down consisted of:-
rice, about 17k oz; fresh or tinned meat, 1} oz; flour, 1} oz; fresh
or tinned vegetables, 34 oz; milk, $ oz; sugar, & oz; and salt, tea
and oil, & oz; with 40 cigarettes and 7 oz of poor quality soap a
month.
No fresh meat was issued until March, and there were
no fresh vegetables until May.
In such circumstances, it is not surprising that a black market
sprang up, especially in tinned goods.
The Japanese punished
many officers and men for taking part in this activity,
but after a
time canteens were permitted, and local purchase officers, working
under the DDST, did good work, which resulted in breaking the
black market.
The quantities which could be bought were small,
however, and at first were only sufficient to produce fresh vegetables,
fish and
eggs for the hospital.
When fresh meat appeared at
sporadic intervals it was in the form of very poor quality cattle.
Frozen mutton was issued until the end of 1942, and after that
very poor quality fish took its place, including shark.
When beri-
beri appeared in consequence of vitamin deficiency, rice polishings
and palm oil were allowed to be purchased.
Later even this limited ration purchas, and at one time the rice
ration was down to 8 oz.
parcels helped to supplement the ration,
Four small consignments of Red Cross
but on the other hand
numbers of other prisoners of war were brought in, and they had
to share the slender food resources.
Fuel control was vested in
the DDST, and considerable credit is due to the RASC officers
in charge of this work who ensured in spite of great difficulties
