114
THE MIDDLE EAST I
period of preparation for a fresh offensive when the retreat in the
summer of 1942 had been stopped on the Alamein line.
By this
time, many RASC units with the Army had sustained heavy losses of
vehicles, and nearly all the remaining vehicles required overhaul or
replacement after hard service in the desert.
The problem was to
provide the greatest amount of transport for the offensive in October,
and the target agreed upon with the Eighth Army for third line
transport was the equivalent of 36 3-ton GT companies, nine water
tank companies, six tank transporter companies and one bulk petrol
transport company. The refitting of existing companies, and the
provision of new
ones, was a heavy task, and
required
much
ingenuity, but by October 23rd, when the battle began, the target
had been
reached,
and seven
other GT companies
were also
available in GHQ reserve.
Later, as the advance progressed,
yet another three and a half companies were made available from
the Delta, by depleting base transport, and a Sudan Defence Force
GT company was moved to the Army from the Sudan, via the oasis
of Kufra.
A further
To-ton company was produced from the
members of a tank transporter company for which no transporters
were available.
This improvisation was only made possible by the
arrival of more 10-tonners from overseas.
Even so, it was necessary
for
Eighth Army to retain second line transport from
divisions
withdrawn from the battle, raising the number of third line com-
panies to 58, which was just sufficient to maintain the Eighth Army
to Tripoli, which was entered on January 23rd, 1943.
After the capture of Tripoli,
the administrative organization
changed.
Hitherto
RASC
matters had
been
managed direct
between ST, GHQ and Eighth Army, but with the Army 1,000
miles distant from Tobruk, the nearest railhead, maintenance by
direct contact on a day-to-day basis was no longer possible.
More-
over, the situation was eased when the port of Tripoli was opened
to ocean-going ships.
A complete Base and L of C Staff was formed
at Tripoli, under the control of the Army, and demands were met
through this headquarters.
However, requests for transport con-
tinued to be received, and seven more platoons of 1o-tonners were
produced, bringing the transport provided to a total of the equivalent
of 63 3-ton GT companies.
Middle East depended largely on the United States for its supply
of vehicles, and as a rule transport units from Britain arrived with
men and headquarters vehicles only, and were equipped with load
carriers on arrival.
In 1940, 4,000 Chevrolets (with an agreed
proportion of spare parts) were shipped from the United States to
the Middle East for the equipment of RASC and Dominion ASC
transport units.
Requirements of RASC vehicles for 1941
were
estimated at 14,000 but deliveries did not reach this figure, and the
THE MIDDLE EAST I
115
deficiency was made worse by heavy losses in Greece. Up to May,
I941, vehicles were received assembled, and this was heavy on
shipping space, but, on arrival of assembly plants, vehicles came in
cased, and 'completely knocked down'.
The first assembly plant began to operate at Ataka, near Suez, in
194I, and was an RASC
being originally
manned mainly by the members of 36 Company RASC.
the year, a South African workshop unit did the assembly work,
while the company was responsible for the workshop and inspection
sections, and did the ferrying to vehicle reception depots.
There
were considerable difficulties at first, and production was slow,
because of lack of previous experience, but soon vehicles were coming
fast off the line, and when REME took over in October, 1942, the
total output under RASC control had been some 45,000 vehicles of
Meanwhile, three other assembly plants had
been installed (not operated by RASC), and the four plants had an
average output of 180 vehicles a day in August, 1942.
This big
intake made possible the equipping of Eighth Army for the offensive
It was at this time that responsibility for the provision of RASC
vehicles passed to the RAOC, and vehicle repair depots ceased to
be RASC units.
This loss was felt acutely, as having complete
control over the issue of RASC vehicles and their equipment had
meant much to the Corps, and the VRDs had done splendidly in
equipping RASC units and replacing vehicle casualties in the field.
Now the RASC was only one of many regiments and corps competing
for vehicles from the RAOG.
But the new system had to be accepted
loyally and made to work.
The actual handing over was delayed
for a few weeks, by local arrangement, until the equipping of the
transport for Eighth Army had been completed.
As the amount of transport began to increase in Middle East, the
small peace-time detachments forming
39
Company,
RASC,
Abbassia when the war began, were soon found inadequate.
More-
over, the type of warfare which developed in the Western Desert
threw a great load on this one and only
workshop
and stores
organization at the base.
Therefore,
August,
1940,
it was
expanded to a full scale heavy repair shop, MT stores depot, and
vehicle reception depot, and a short time later a similar group of
installations came out from Britain,
and was located at
Tel-el-
Kebir.
In 1941, a third group arrived,
and
was
installed at
Alexandria.
The constant movement of RASC units in the desert
limited the extent to which repairs could be done in the field, and
great delay occurred if vehicles were evacuated to the base whenever
they needed extensive repairs.
Therefore, it was realized that the
best policy was replacement of complete assemblies from the base,
