306
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
would be allowed to leave home waters as originally planned and
concluded that the potential enemy, the Japanese, would have time
to mount a more deliberate
attack than had been previously
supposed.
The appreciation
foresaw Japanese infringement
of
Siam's neutrality and an attack down the west coast supported by
landings in the east.
These views were not accepted officially until war was imminent,
although agreement had been given to the construction of a defence
line on the mainland in the state of Johore at Khota Tinghi on the
Johore River, in addition to the defences which had already been
constructed at Mersing on the east coast.
Thus before the war the RASC had a distinctly limited liability—
a liability restricted to maintaining the small garrison in Singapore,
an Indian battalion stationed at Taiping (in Perak) and a small
body of troops which garrisoned the island of Penang.
In the early summer of 1939 there was a critical change in defence
policy by the acceptance of the view that it might not be possible
to relieve the garrison within 70 days, and the period was extended
to 180 days,
but the general defence task still remained one of
guarding against attacks on Singapore.
This decision, coinciding
with the imminence of war, led to the immediate despatch of the
I2th Infantry Brigade Group of the Indian Army which, arriving in
August, 1939, brought the strength of the garrison up to about 10,000.
Looking back at the position of the RASC in the command just
before the war, it is difficult to realize that the transport available
to the Officer Commanding RASC was 52 MT Company and a small
water transport detachment, the only British members of the com-
pany being one officer and 12 other ranks.
The 25 lorries and 10
ambulances in the
unit were manned by Malay civilians.
The
water detachment also had Malay crews, but was supervised by a
British master mariner.
There was a plan for providing civil road
transport in the event of war,
but not for the RASC.
A total of
500 civil vehicles were to be impressed to bring units' first line
transport up to their higher scale, but the movement of their stores
and equipment to their places of deployment was to be effected by
hired civilian vehicles.
This plan was no doubt actuated by the
current War Office policy that commands overseas should draw as
It was
far as possible for expansion on the peoples of the colonies.
a sound policy so long as suitable material and facilities for training
could be provided, but it was one which was often accompanied by
sharp difference of opinion between those on the spot and the
legislators of Whitehall on such matters as pay and conditions of
service.
It will be seen later that the RASC was forced to rely
entirely for the additional MT companies required on locally raised
companies backed by small cadres of British officers and NCOs,
MALAYA
307
Political considerations debarred the use of the vast Chinese popula-
tion of the Peninsula, so the field of recruiting was confined to
Malays and local Indians.
The bar was not lifted until just before
the outbreak of hostilities, but the first Perak Chinese MT company
which was formed gave a good account of itself, as did the several
locally enlisted RASC Malay and Indian units.
There was a potential RASC reserve of personnel in the form of
the small element of ASC in the Singapore Volunteer Corps.
This
old established corps included Europeans, Eurasians and Malays.
Most of the ASC were Europeans and excellent material, but they
had had little training and seemed to have no specific war role.
There were no ASC echelons in the other volunteer forces in the
Malay States, although four infantry battalions of the Federated
Malay States volunteers had the equivalent of a transport platoon
for performing both first and second line transport duties.
The Officer Commanding RASC was more favoured in his
supply arrangements, as a new supply depot, modern bakery and
small cold storage had just been completed at Alexandra in
Singa-
pore, the bakery being a model of its kind.
But, as is usually the
way in peace time, financial stringency restricted the site acquired
to one which was only sufficient for the day, and left no spare
ground for the inevitable expansion needed in war.
The supplies
commitment was mainly a British one, as a large part of the food
eaten by the few Indian troops and the Malay Regiment was
indigenous to the country and was procured from contractors who
were also nominally responsible for holding reserves.
Contractors
also provided all fresh vegetables and fruit, most of which had to
be imported from Australia or Palestine, as the local supply was
confined to the small areas of the highlands at Frasers Hill and the
Cameron Highlands, the 'hill' stations of Malaya which were soon
overrun when the Japanese invaded the country.
were
plenty of local types of vegetables grown in quantity but although
possessing such delicate names as Ladies' Fingers, Chinese Radish,
etc., they were not acceptable to European tastes.
There were no special military reserves of petrol because units
normally refuelled their vehicles from kerb-side pumps installed in
their barracks, which were kept refilled under contract by the civil
oil companies.
Preparations for War
When war was declared in September, 1939, the command at
once took certain preparatory steps in connection with the defensive
plans, but distance from Europe and from the territories of the
potential enemy, and a seeming lack of any immediate concern in
what the future might hold in the Far East, tended to produce an
