56
THE BRITISH RATIO
UNARY FORCE, 1939/1940
days after the force was arriving in some strength, and divisional
ammunition and petrol companies were landed before supply com-
panies.
This led to the caustic comment by a very senior officer
that 'he always liked his breakfast first before going out shooting'.
However these temporary setbacks did not prevent I and II
Corps from moving forward from the assembly area and occupying
their positions close to the Belgian frontier thus fulfilling our promise
to the French that the BEF would be in position by October 12th.
It was evident, however, within the first few weeks after the BEF
had landed in France that the original maintenance project would
have to be completely revised.
More administrative units were
wanted to operate such extended lines of communication, and the
number of administrative units provided for the maintenance of the
Advanced Air Striking Force increased. Two new subsidiary lines
of communication would have to be opened, one for the maintenance
of a British brigade which was to be stationed in the French army
sector of the Saar, and the other to Marseilles for the transit of men
and material to the Mediterranean.
The general lack of storage and other accommodation would have
to be made good by new construction, and the decision to start work
on a new defence line along the frontier, on the sector held by the
BEF, also meant that additional labour and vast quantities of
materials would have to be provided.
Extra transport would also
be wanted for all these new commitments, for the carriage of
material and for moving labourers from their camps to their place
It had also to be remembered that the BEF would be reinforced
from the end of the year by the arrival of Territorial divisions which
were completing their training at home.
The original decision to maintain the force through the southern
Normandy had also to be revised, as the
Admiralty were emphatic that more ports should be opened to the
north, to reduce the turn-round of ships plying between England
and the base ports.
In consequence it was decided to open a new base in the area of
Le Havre and Rouen and to take into use all the available ports
as far north as Calais.
So far as the RASC were concerned, these decisions led to an
immediate demand being made on the War Office for the extra
supply and transport units which would be needed to keep pace with
this considerable expansion of effort.
The Supply Organization
A request by the BEF for the temporary cessation of despatches
of supplies from home ports in October gave the opportunity for a
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
general 'stocktaking' of the position, and by the end of the month it
was estimated that about 3o days' food for 250,000 men had been
safely landed and stored, but the two base supply depots which had
been sited at Redon and near Brest could barely keep pace with the
A request for increased establishments and for a third
depot, which was established at Le Havre, was met quickly, but few
men in these new units had any practical knowledge or training for
All three sites which had been chosen for the base
supply depots were really unsuited for the purpose, and it was de-
cided to design and construct three new depots. Only one of these,
near Abancourt, was partially completed when operations began in
May the following year.
The original supply personnel company had been followed by a
second company, but this also consisted almost entirely of untrained
A third field bakery was also asked for. Two
bakeries were established north of the Seine at Bolbec, a third
being split up over the L of C area.
For reasons which are difficult
to ascertain, the calculated output of the bakeries never seemed to
be achieved, and as late as April, 1940, it was still necessary to have
about 100,000 loaves a day baked in civil bakeries.
to construct a new static bakery at Abancourt, with an output of
350,000 lb a day, and when operations began in May the machinery
had arrived but had not been fully installed.
As the strength of the force increased it was found necessary to
centralize arrangements for the procurement of fresh produce and
coal which were required in considerable quantities, so as to prevent
competitive buying and to co-ordinate arrangements with the
French civil and military authorities.
A Central Purchase Board
was set up for the purpose.
The headquarters of the board was
established in Paris, with sections operating over the lines of com-
munication which arranged for the collection
and forwarding
of vegetables to formations and the collection of coal in military
transport direct from the mines.
Another central organization, the Supply Investigation Depart-
ment, was introduced to assist in accounting for food and petrol
and to devise methods of stock control.
It did useful work in
initiating methods of accounting and in helping the many inex-
perienced supply officers in their unaccustomed tasks.
Transport Organization
It is rare that an army in the field admits to having sufficient
transport, but there is no doubt that the BEF were hard pressed
to find enough to fulfil all the demands made on the RASC.
Requests for more transport placed the War Office in the difficult
position of having to rob Peter to pay Paul, as their resources were
