374
THE INVASION
OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
were to be partially maintained and supported direct from the United
States through
Cherbourg.
Airborne forces were used on
both
flanks; the 6th British Airborne Division was given the task of seizing
the crossings over the Caen Canal and operated on the British left.
General Montgomery commanded all the land forces for the assault,
for which task he had an American increment attached to his head-
quarters.
The administrative plan entailed the shipment of a community
the size of the population of Birmingham across the Channel and
over beaches, and the wherewithal to support it in a great static
battle with the prospect of an early break-out and advance.
han 287,000 men and 37,000 vehicles were pre-loaded before the
assault, and 1,100,000 troops were landed in Normandy in the first
30 days of operations.
The part played by the RASC during the assault and within the
bridgehead can best be presented as a coherent story by breaking it
down into headings related to the operations, and giving suitable
examples of Corps units under those headings selected, which are:—
The airborne assault
The seaborne assault
Beach maintenance
The British 'Mulberry' and the 'great storm'
General conditions within the bridgehead
The Airborne Assault
The honour of being the first RASC unit to land in France on
D Day, June 6th, 1944, belongs to the light composite company of
6th Airborne
Division (716
Company)•
Two platoons
of this
company parachuted down among the earliest, some hours before
the beach landings.
The company's task was to organize themselves
for
the
supply
of the
division
and
collect
the containers
which had been jettisoned by the aircraft from which the men had
jumped.
By 6 a.m. a dump
had been formed in a quarry north
of Ranville, from which units were drawing direct.
The company
commander was wounded soon after landing, leaving Lieutenant
F. J. Bland in command for that day.
The jettison drop had fallen
over a wide area occupied by the enemy, but in spite of this dificulty,
which entailed working under fire most of the time, with very
slender resources, Bland kept the fighting troops supplied with
ammunition.
He was awarded the Military Cross and Sgt Wilson
received the Military Medal for collecting mines and delivering
them to the
constant mortar fire.
Royal Engineers in a captured lorry while under
The men of the 224 Para Field Ambulance were widely dispersed
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
375
after the drop.
Lieutenant G. C. G. Phile, the unit transport
officer, rallied them and led them through enemy occupied territory.
That same night the main dressing station at Le Mesnil was crowded
with wounded, and there was no transport available.
Lieutenant
Phile, with four men, forced 63 Germans to surrender, and captured
their five vehicles and a motorcycle.
This transport made possible
the rapid collection of wounded all over the brigade area and saved
many lives.
Lieutenant Phile also received the immediate award
of the Military Cross.
The Seaborne Assault
On the extreme left of the British assault was grd Division (I Corps)
supported by an armoured brigade.
The RASC of these formations
had the additional task of maintaining 6th Airborne Division for
the first 10 days of the operations.
The bridges leading to the
Ranville dumps were bottlenecks and naturally received attention
from enemy aircraft as well as intermittent shell, mortar and small
arms fire.
Major J. R. Cuthbertson, commanding 27th Armoured
Brigade Company (90 Company), was responsible for the task of
maintaining the division and was awarded the Military Cross for
his part in its successful accomplishment.
The first RASC units
ashore in this sector were two assault platoons of 172 Company,
with one platoon of go Company
attached.
The story of grd
Division's part in the invasion says of these early days: 'These were
days of effort and danger, in which none could fail to feel proud of
his job; there was glory in driving a lorry load of ammunition or
petrol down to the Pegasus bridge at Benouville and over to the
ground held by the airborne division'.
The platoons of 172
Com-
pany made a good landing, and ammunition points were established
in the brigade assembly areas.
When two battalions were almost
isolated near Cambes, all available ammunition was dumped in
forward positions. B Platoon of go Company carried out an urgent
troop-carrying detail on June 7th by lifting the 2nd Battalion the
Lincolnshire Regiment to St Aubin d'Arquenay.
For the first
three days, both divisions had to be supplied from beach sector
dumps because the ground intended for the beach maintenance area
was still partly in enemy hands.
Throughout the operations
described above men of the RASC were often in action and under
In the right sector of the British area XXX. Corps assaulted on a
one divisional front.
The 50th Division was supported by
8th
Armoured Brigade, and was followed up immediately
by yth
Armoured Division.
No. 522 Company was the first of the goth
Division RASC to land with detachments of 346 and 552 Companies.
The latter company served 8th Armoured Brigade.
One of the
