CHAPTER VIII
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
HONG KONG
The China Command
T the outbreak of war, the China Command consisted of the
forces stationed at Hong Kong, and small garrisons for the
protection of British interests at the former treaty ports of
Shanghai and Tientsin.
The regiment at Tientsin provided the
guard for the British Embassy in Peking.
The attitude of Japan was unfriendly, but over two years were to
elapse before she sided openly with the Axis powers by
declaring
war on December 8th, 1941.
In the event of a war with Japan
the small garrisons at Shanghai and Tientsin would be completely
isolated.
They were, therefore, withdrawn in the preceding August.
However, it was part of our general strategic policy to deny the use
of the harbour and other facilities at Hong Kong to an enemy.
Undoubtedly, the island was not easy to defend.
Even if it were
possible to keep the enemy at bay on the leased territory on the
mainland, which formed part of the Colony, the necessary air power
could not be provided because of the lack of aircraft and adequate
airfields.
Victoria, the main centre of population, with its harbour,
was overlooked by the mainland, barely a quarter of a mile away.
There were numerous bavs and inlets open to sea-borne landings
and there was a difficult problem of civil defence because of the
presence of nearly a million Chinese who were permanent inhabitants
of the Colony.
There were only 207 men from the Corps in the garrison who
provided the small MT Company (No. 12), a supply depot and a
bakery, and the usual barrack and transport office.
There were a
few WD vessels, most of their crews being locally enrolled Chinese,
and there was also one Indian Army unit, the Hong Kong Mule
Corps, equipped with small (AT) carts and pack equipment.
In spite of this small number, and the short lived nature of the
campaign, the Corps were to give good account of themselves, but
in doing so they sustained 25 per cent casualties.
Up to November, 1941, it was considered that with the forces
available it was not possible to defend the Colony from the mainland.
However, with the arrival of two Canadian battalions to reinforce
HONG KONG
299
the two brun and two Indian Army battalions, the Commander
decided to defend the mainland from the general line known as
the Gindrinkers Line which had been reconnoitred and partly
prepared before the war.
In making this decision, he considered
that there was a good chance of achieving his purpose, and that
even if he had to meet a powerful and sustained enemy offensive
there would be time to destroy the many facilities at Kowloon before
being compelled to retire to the island.
These hopes were not to be
fulfilled, as after 17 days the little garrison had been fought to a
standstill, and with starvation in sight and the only water supply
in the hands of the enemy, the Colony was forced to capitulate on
War Preparations
All the RASC installations were located in the town of Victoria,
on the north side of the island.
A scheme prepared some years
before the war for providing new barracks and buildings for the
RASC had come to nothing because of lack of money,
Corps were consequently working under the most primitive condi-
When war became imminent, however, plans were made for
the dispersal of supplies held in the supply depot, and for their
storage in buildings to be erected in various parts of the island.
This was not done until September, 1939•
measures had been taken, however, such as the establishment of a
breeding farm for goats to supply fresh meat for the Indian troops
and the importation of a shipload of firewood from Malaya for the
There was a scheme for the impressment of vehicles, and
an arrangement whereby 12 Company would be augmented in the
event of war by the ASC Company of the Hong Kong Volunteer
Defence Corps, comprising about 30 Europeans, as well as Chinese
civilian drivers and impressed vehicles.
During the first six months of the war, the new storehouses were
built and the supplies were moved into them, but otherwise the
RASC, like the rest of the garrison, remained on a peace footing.
Reserves of supplies were only enough for two months and did not
include provision for the Indian troops or local forces,
for the animals, while petrol was held by contractors.
scheme for mobilization called for drivers for 6oo vehicles.
were insufficient RASC and local European drivers and Chinese
had to be hired by the day.
This was obviously an unsatisfactory
solution as they might be liable to disappear if things became
and this, in fact, happened.
hostilities broke out, the raising of a Chinese transport corps on
Territorial Army lines was approved but the wit was not ready
in time to be of use.
