628
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
battalions supported by tanks.
The brigade major of our tank
brigade had a lucky escape.
He was taken prisoner with the
others, and the 'gentlemen' put them all against a wall and shot
them with a Tommy gun.
He was not hit but fell and pretended
to be dead.
The Huns searched his 'body' and went away, leaving
him to walk home,
That night I took my bedding to divisional headquarters, intend-
ing to sleep there, but had to go off to find more ammunition
instead, finishing at four o'clock the next morning.
By April a2nd the enemy had been driven back to his starting
line, but we had fired all the ammunition we had been so busy
dumping for our own attack.
that night we had to dump
another 19,000 rounds of 25-pounder, and I got back to my night's
rest at six o'clock on the morning of the 23rd. I must have been
rather irritable after my third night out for, when Harvey Jones
came to see me later in the morning and asked Woolnough where
I was, the answer was, 'He's over there; don't go near him, he's in
a bloody awful temper. If he don't get some sleep soon I'm going
to pack in this
- job when we get to Tunis.'
On this same day, which was Good Friday, we moved to an
indifferent location at Testour, where we stayed over Easter,
Easter Sunday afternoon, after a grand church parade in an olive
grove in the morning, I was starting for corps headquarters, after a
small amount of aerial bombing, when I noticed a small fire burning
some distance away, I told Bill Beeston to go over and see if it
was near any of our companies, and went on my way,
When we were about half way to corps, Woolnough looked in
his driving mirror and said, "There's the very devil of a fire burning
behind us, and so there was. The whole sky was red and explosions
repeatedly lit up the country round,
I immediately guessed it was
ammunition burning and thought of my companies,
Arrived at
corps, I reported myself and immediately asked for, and got,
permission to return and investigate the fire,
At Testour bridge we were told that our location had been hit,
but that most of the lorries had been got away,
At the company
location I found a terrific blaze in 21 Company's area,
Only two
bombs had been dropped, one a direct hit on an ammunition lorry
and the other between two other lorries,
The fire had been burning
for at least one and a half hours when i got there and was as strong
By great good fortune, there were only three vehicle
casualties. all the rest of or Company's vehicles, as well as those of
the other companies, having been driven away to safety:
There was no possibility of salving the burning lorries and as
ammunition was going off all over the place, I gave orders for all
the men to get clear,
There was a small amount of ammunition
716 COMPANY (AIRBORNE LIGHT)
629
on the ground very near the fire and, as I arrived, Charles Sharp
was organizing a band of volunteers to go in and try to move it out.
One of the "volunteers', on hearing my orders to clear the area,
remarked in a loud voice,
On reflection, I am glad I gave that order.
"Thank God the Colonel has come!'
I felt at the time
it looked like taking the line of least resistance but I argued to my-
self that ammunition could easily be replaced, that there was not
much involved, and that it was not worth risking men's lives to
save a few rounds. In fact. the fire never reached the stacks on the
ground.
While these thoughts were passing through my mind, there was a
loud explosion and Charles Sharp yelled 'Duck', so we both fell
flat on our faces.
A great lump of metal flew through the air and
landed near us, but nothing else happened, so I got up again saying,
'Come on, it's all over', but a voice at my feet said, 'I can't get up',
I thought, 'Gosh, he's been hit', but it transpired that he had slipped
the cartilage in his knee,
I yelled for the doctor, who came and
forced it back by the light of the fire.
It must have hurt like hell.
After putting Charles to bed and seeing the fit vehicles collected,
I returned in my car to the fire. We were approaching it up a
narrow lane when a motorcyclist came hurtling down towards us,
bouncing off the front of my car into a cactus hedge,
Getting out
we found "Yorky' Smith, lying in the prickly cactus and using the
most horrible language.
The motorcycle was not damaged and
he was not seriously hurt.
When we had stopped laughing we
pulled him out,
This set him off again.
He was as full of prickles
as a hedgehog, and his language was magnificent.
By the time I left the company location the fire was nearly out,
so we left a picket to watch it and went to bed.
Next day, we
moved again,
716 COMPANY (AIRBORNE LIGHT)
in the crossing of the Rhine
The air operational party consisted of six officers and 77 other
ranks of the RASC with one officer and nine other ranks of a?
Independent Parachute Company, three other ranks of the REME,
two other ranks of the RAOC, and a party of 1o from "Public
Relations',
preloaded,
The party was equipped with carriers and trailen,
(Nos. 267 to 278),
The plan was for the force to fly in 12 Hamilcar gliden
On landing cast of the Rhine the crews of gliders aty and 269,
with carriers and all available fire power, were to proceed at once
