60
FORCE, 1939/1940
again strengthened by a third supply personnel company and a
fourth bakery and cold storage units.
The increase in commit-
ments and strength of the BEF in France had in the meantime
led to splitting responsibility at GHQ for supplies and transport.
Brigadier Archibald, the DST, remained responsible for transport
and Brigadier G. C. G. Blunt was appointed Director of Supplies
(and petrol) in December.
This arrangement followed the pre-
cedent in France in the First World War, but it was not introduced in
any of the later campaigns.
The Campaign opens
Soon after 5 o'clock on the morning of May 1oth, 1940, the
German armies began their invasion of France,
Luxembourg,
Belgium and the Netherlands.
The first intimation
that thẻ
officers and men of the BEF received that the war had begun was
from widespread and heavy air attacks on the hitherto peaceful area
which they occupied behind the line of the Franco-Belgian frontier
from about Halluin to Maulde.
The German challenge was met
at once by orders being issued a few hours later for the French and
British armies to put Plan D into action.
This entailed the French
Ninth and First Armies and the BEF executing a vast wheel to
the right, to stem the enemy advance, along a line running from
the River Meuse to the open country beyond Namur, and thence
along the line of the River Dyle.
The plan assumed that Belgium,
which up to an hour or so before the German invasion began, had
maintained a strictly neutral attitude, would join the Allies and the
resistance of their frontier guards would give the Allied force time to
get into its new position.
The strategy of the plan rested on the
assumption that the strength of the Maginot line and the difficult
country presented by any enemy attempt to advance through the
Ardennes would force the Germans to make their main thrust
through the plains of Belgium.
For this reason the French had allotted their best equipped and
trained army, the First, to the defence of the open country between
Namur and Louvain and their Ninth Army and the Second on their
right, which were not so well equipped and had a high proportion of
reservists, to the defence of the Meuse and the Ardennes country.
The French Seventh Army,
which was of similar quality to
First, was given a role of moving forward in general support of the
Allied left.
Plan D had been carefully prepared, and by 1 p.m. on May Loth
the Iath Lancers, who were to cover the move forward of the BEF,
crossed the Belgian frontier by nightfall and gained the line of the
River Dyle, 6o miles ahead.
That afternoon the four RASC troop-
carrying companies, which had the distinction of being the first
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
61
RASC companies to be engaged, were hard on the heels of the 12th
Lancers, carrying forward the leading brigades of the ist, 2nd and
3rd Divisions,
which were in their new positions the next day.
By May I4th the three divisions which held the main front on
the Dyle, with the 4th and 48th divisions in support, were in contact
with the enemy along the whole front.
The remaining divisions of
the BEF were disposed in depth behind them.
But on the previous
day news had been received that the enemy, advancing in unexpected
strength against the French Ninth Army and part of the Second,
had been able to reach the Meuse and had established small
bridgeheads early that morning.
The Administrative Plan
The administrative instructions for Plan D provided for all
formations moving forward with full echelons of petrol, ammunition
and food and for railheads to be moved forward into Belgium in
conformity with the advance.
Stations for these new railheads
had been selected in advance, but owing to the neutrality of Belgium
it had not been possible to confirm their suitability by a reconnais-
Mobile reserves were to be provided on rail en cas mobile, and
in the two RASC Lof C railhead companies which normally
carried reserves of anti-gas equipment and other stores.
trains of food and three of petrol, holding supplies for two or three
days, were to be loaded at the main depots on the Seine and ordered
forward as required.
The Lof C companies
were to dump their
loads and pick up another two days' supply of food and petrol for
The only static reserve of food forward of the Seine was
a field supply depot at Doullens, which held six days' preserved
Static reserves of petrol were held in the large petrol
depot at Vignacourt, just north of the Somme, near Amiens, and
other reserves were available in the newly established petrol filling
centre at Lomme, near Lille.
All went well with the divisional and corps RASC as they moved
forward to replenish their formations, although there were minor
hindrances caused by some enemy air activity,
strange country heavily intersected with small bridges and level
crossings, and by refugees appearing in some numbers on the three
main routes of advance.
Some of the sites selected for the new
railheads had, however, to be changed at the last moment, as many
were found to be in unduly congested areas and the alternative sites
which had been selected at smaller stations had poor facilities which
tended to cause delays in the work of clearing supply trains.
Demands for petrol and ammunition soon began to arrive.
The
first demand received in earnest for ammunition was one for 200
