144
THE MIDDLE EAST 1
The Fall of Tobruk
The pros and cons of holding Tobruk a second time and the
whys and wherefores of its fall have been discussed in many other
volumes. We are only concerned with the disastrous results to the
RASC.
As many ancillary units as could be spared were evacuated
before June 17th but, unfortunately as it turned out, it was decided
that the garrison should be completely mobile.
As and South
African Division was very short of transport, this meant a consider-
able RASC commitment.
Moreover, the town was stocked for a
siege in supplies and petrol.
In consequence of the decision regard-
ing mobility, not only were the second line units of 201st Guards
Brigade and zand Army Tank Brigade, one RIASC company, and
certain Q service units of and
South African Division incarcer-
ated, but with them was an RASC column headquarters and 31,
49, 129, 278, 903 and g06 Companies, together with a BSD and
sundry minor supply and petrol units.
The total lom of troops in
Tobruk was severe.
To the RASC the low was extremely heavy-
more than 2,000 highly trained, desert-worthy officers, NCOs and
men.
It was a wad blow. There were not lacking those who had the
initiative, wits and good fortune to effect their escape, but they were
very few.
In the confused conditions which prevailed in the last
hours of the place, some members of the RASC, including men of
906 Company, were still resisting after the official surrender,
which they had not been informed, but they eventually surrendered
to enemy tanks.
Destruction of vehicles,
rations and petrol was
only partially successful.
Tinned food is difficult to destroy in bulk,
The cases can be burnt off, but the contents of the cans remain
edible.
Cased petrol is easier to dispose of, but a lot was left for
the enemy, and Rommel was very glad to get it.
The Retreat to the Alamein Line
While this was going on in Tobruk, the forces outside, which
were intended to remain mobile and to act as a threat to the rear
of the enemy should he turn aside to attack the town, were steadily
ves a back on the frontier and had no relieving effect on the short
When additional enemy forces were made available
by the fall of the fortress the retreat was continued and, apart from
certain rather unfortunate clashes in the area south of Matruh, was
not stopped until the Alamein Line was reached.
The disengage
ment from the battle around Mersa Matrch and the exit from the
defences of that place of troops detailed for its defence was not
achieved without difficulty and low.
As usual in such circumstance
from the KASS coint of view it was the transport on troop carrying
which drew most of the limelight.
Desert Convoy
