RITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
detachments of bulk tank petrol companies which had been pushed
forward from the lines of communication when operations began,
and there were still small civil stocks in the area.
The depot at Lomme (No. 3 Base Petrol Filling Centre) faced no
fewer than 70 air raid warnings in the first three days of the opera-
tions, but continued to work to its utmost capacity.
the officer commanding the depot was informed by the managers
of the local civil installations on which the depot was dependent that
French Army headquarters had given orders that they were to be
The officer adopted the well worn means of delaying
the issue by politely telling the managers that he must refer the
matter to his corps headquarters.
On the 2ist the situation had so
deteriorated that it was planned to dismantle the permanent plant
in the depot and resume operations elsewhere, with mobile filling
apparatus, using road tankers to draw off supplies from such civil
installations as remained in the neighbourhood.
tanks were dry the unit moved out, only to be ordered back again
to the site on the 24th.
On that date they resumed work with their
mobile plant and drew bulk supplies by RTWs.
They also erected
three of their filling
machines and, working four shifts a day,
carried on until the z6th, when once again they were ordered to
evacuate the site.
The search for ammunition was also continuous.
units had to eke out the reserves they carried while the RASC tried
to replenish their wagon' lines from the stock remaining in the
divisional and corps troops companies.
There also had to be a
wide search for abandoned dumps, trains or trucks.
The provision
of ammunition was not, of course, an RASC responsibility, but it was
their task to carry it forward and distribute it to units,
their task to find it.
One notable case of the will to deliver the
goods' is that of Captain R. S. Wicks who, finding a train on fire,
detached the burning portion, collected a French engine driver and
engine and set out for Hazebrouck.
In spite of being badly bombed
he brought the train safely to its destination.
Military Cross awarded to Wicke was only one of several award
made for devotion to duty in connection with ammunition supply.
2nd Lieutenant M.
Mann, 56 Company, received a similar
award, as did and Lieutenant J. K. Mansfield, 522 Company,
keeping his ammunition point open under heavy fire.
Rushby, 42 Company, was given a Military Medal for keeping his
artillery unit supplied under continuous enemy fire.
The Transport situation
As the withdrawal to the coast went on, the rear area of the BEF
became smaller. and uncertainty regarding the proximity of the
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
enemy to the region where RASC transport was operating in-
creased. The officers commanding companies had some difficulty
in keeping their commands together, as empty vehicles returning
to their unit were apt to be ordered here or there to do some immedi-
ate job, and detachments often found that their return route was
reported to be held by the enemy.
There were, consequently,
many brushes with the enemy and some pitched battles.
the two railhead companies had a series of encounters and, although
they fought off enemy tanks with the aid of their few weapons, they
eventually suffered severe casualties. Major C. B. Langdon was
awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his part in one of these
In another instance Dvr A. N. Sanson, a motorcyclist
of 4 Company, was awarded the Military Medal for repeated
reconnaissance and message carrying through the enemy lines.
troop-carrying company which landed in France after the battle had
begun was on the road continuously and, owing to casualties, had
lost most of its effective strength by the time it was called in for
evacuation. In one case the survivors of an RASC unit about 100
strong held a position on the Nieuport canal for 48 hours.
per cent became casualties but the remainder made their way to La
Panne where they at once volunteered to help to unload some
ammunition which had arrived just off the beaches.
actions were fought, such as that of a section of 99 Company, when
and Lieutenant G. C. H. Witchell and a few drivers beat off five
enemy tanks, Witchell being awarded the Military Cross.
There were also many cases of individual gallantry and determina-
tion like that of Cpl Merrivale of No. 7 Motor Ambulance Convoy,
who, in charge of two ambulances, found all canal bridges on his
route were destroyed. Nothing daunted, he found a small boat and
ferried his patients across.
After destroying his ambulances he
returned to the other bank. then searched for two more vehicles and
finally delivered his charges to a neighbouring hospital.
other ambulance drivers who were decorated for
their gallantry
Were Dvr I. Lilley, 150 Field Ambulance, and Dvr N. Burrows,
A Final Endeavour-at Dunkirk
The small band of officers of the ST directorate who managed to
reach Dunkirk were under the leadership of Colonels A de B.
Jenkins and A. F. St. C. Collins, who were assistant directors for
upplies and transport respectively.
Chey were soon enraced in pedistina tha that of in truing tr
produce order out of what appeared to be chaos arainst an increasing
measure of uncertainty and destruction resulting from continuous
enemy air attacks. Colonel Jenkins busied himself with the task of
