472
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
The One-Man Pack
The first requirement was for a ration for one man to meet the
many occasions when the soldier had to be made self-supporting for
the day.
Hitherto each man was given some hard fare, usually in
the form of a tin of meat, a packet of biscuits and a portion of
cheese, or other food which could be carried loose in the haversack.
The aim was to produce a ration which would not only provide
enough for a full day, but was also light in weight, readily acceptable
under conditions of stress, and completely unaffected by handling
and weather.
It was also required to have a specific food value and
to be equally useful to the new commando parties for large scale
amphibious operations when there was a general return to the offen-
sive.
The first problem was to explode the theory that a full day's
diet could be produced in the form of a few tablets or the like, and to
remember that however
nutritious some patent foods may be,
their acceptability to the soldier must be the ruling factor.
was an important principle, for it was reported that later in the
war, when the British soldier was provided with an Allied ration of
high nutritional value which was not to his liking, he preferred to
go hungry.
It was necessary to convince the enthusiast that there was a
limit to the extent to which a normal food can be compressed and
at the same time retain its food value.
The staff agreed that the
new ration should be restricted to the size of the mess tin, which
was made in two halves of oblong shape.
It was obvious that
several foods would have to be specially canned or packed for the
purpose, and an appeal to the can box makers met with a ready
response.
There were many technical problems to be overcome.
For example, it was found that a certain type of flat tin used for
tobacco could be adapted for packing the newly introduced tea,
sugar and milk powder, and that what appeared to be an outsize
sardine tin (used for packing semi-perishable items, such as biscuit,
sweets and chocolate), just fitted neatly into one half of the mess tin.
The other foods, such as cheese, were packed in small tins and
carried in the other half of the mess tin.
The ration produced was
sufficient for one man for two days, hence its official name, the
48-hour ration pack.
A practical trial of this new ration by an airborne unit confirmed
that it was generally suitable for its purpose.
The report recom-
matches.
mended certain modifications in the contess, and the inclusion of
ration was
then improved by the
replacement
of the less accentable items in it, and an improved lighter type of
"tommy' cooker, which was issued separately with the ration,
introduced.
It was also recommended that some cigarettes should
SUPPLIES
473
be provided in such a form that the contents of the packet would
not get wet if it were opened in the rain.
Once again the can box
industry produced what was wanted: a tin, not normally used in
this country, which held a packet of 20 cigarettes with the opening
at one end.
When emptied of its original contents, this little tin
could be used as a cigarette case.
The improved 48-hour pack was introduced just in time to
supply the 250,000 packs required for the North African campaign,
but in the meantime, the whole question of reducing the weight of
the rations by eliminating the use of tins was being investigated.
At the beginning of the war, the tin container was the only satis-
factory means of preserving food for any length of time and protecting
it from damage.
The use of plastic coverings was then in its infancy.
After many experiments it was found possible to eliminate the use
of all tins by using compressed meat, oatmeal, and tea and sugar
blocks, and protecting
biscuits, chocolate and sweets with
improved type of covering.
By this means it was possible to provide
a ration of about 4,000 calories weighing only 2 Ib 3 oz including a
small weatherproof carton in
which
each ration was packed.
Some new items were included in the pack in the form of chewing
gum, as an aid to the saliva, salt tablets to counter the effects of
excessive sweating, and sugar tablets for those who liked a sweeter
"brew' than that provided in the 'tea and sugar' blocks.
The
ration was for 24 hours, and after it was accepted, as meeting staff
requirements, some 7,500,000 packs were produced.
In April, 1941, a request was made for rations designed for the
crews of armoured fighting vehicles, and the work of providing
special packs for the needs of these crews ran concurrently with the
production of the 48-hour ration.
The packs were designed to
provide a full day's diet for crews of two, three and five men
respectively.
The weight of the
ration was not of particular
importance, and it was possible to use the normal components of
the field service ration specially packed into small tins the whole
being enclosed in a weatherproof fibreboard carton, and finally in a
specially made tin with a shaped handle for easy carriage.
million of these packs were produced, and later in the war an
improved type of pack was issued.
The production of a special pack for use in the Arctic was in
progress at the time the experiments for the provision of the 48-hour
one-man' ration were being held.
It was also a 48-hour ration,
but all commodities were packed in a circular shaped tin.
The
constituents had to be specially selected from those acceptable under
extreme cold and had to provide for a high food value of a little
over 5,000 calories (approximately 1,000 more than were required
for temperate climates).
Pemmican had to be specially made to
