652
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
with any Mae Wests. However, we safely reached Eleusis aero-
drome in Greece, where after a long wait we were transferred to
some ancient French military aircraft and taken to Salonika, where
we were incarcerated in a loft over a warehouse.
We were strictly
ordered not to smoke, this injunction being followed by a warning
that if the building did catch fire our guards had instructions to
lock the doors and leave us to it.
While in this place we saw
pitiful scenes through the window of our garret: children scrambling
for the crusts of bread we threw them, old women dropping in the
street and unable to rise again owing to disease and starvation, and
horses which should have been shot long before they reached their
present wasted condition.
We also noticed large numbers of British
captured lorries being driven by the Hun.
Eventually we were embarked in a Memageries Maritime liner of
some 13,000 tons, the Théophile Gautier.
We were locked up in the
fo'e'sle (though all the pasenger accommodation was empty) and
only allowed on deck for two half-hour periods daily.
The ship's
captain adopted a very hostile attitude, and, when we asked for
better accommodation, he spat on the deck and said, 'Don't talk
to me about lack of comfort.
How have you treated members of
the French Navy at Aintree after Dunkirk, and what about Dakar
and Oran?'
Eventually he retracted a little and moved us to the
third class accommodation, but how far he was influenced by the
news of the British capture of Palmyra we did not know.
Not long
afterwards we heard that General Dentz had sued for an armistice.
We eventually disembarked and took a very interesting journey
by train through Yugoslavia, Austria and Germany to
France.
We were very cold as, of course, we only had khaki drill shirts and
shorts and some thin overcoats issued to us before entraining.
German escort went out of their way to point out places of interest
such as Berchtesgaden.
We saw large numbers of British and
Empire prisoners of war working on the new autobahn roads under
construction in Austria and Germany.
They were very surprised as
our train passed slowly by and they recognized British prisoner of
war wearing French overcoats.
We threw them Greek cigarettes
and it was pleasing, to see them so cheerful.
One man in a glengarry
started to sing, "There'll always be an England'.
We pawed through Munich, where German Red Cross nurses
gave us chocolate and some ersatz, coffee,
The frontier into France
was crowed at Besangon, and at Dijon we were allowed to detrain
and to walk up and down the platform.
Our next halt was at
Here I
Lyons, where we were given a meal in a station restaurant.
as he had lived in England for
some time.
the same he added that he could not forgive
ROUND TOUR OF EUROPE
653
England for having, abandoned France after Dunkirk. His outlook
was completely defeatist; he said we were only prolonging the agony
for France, he had no confidence in Russia, and asserted that the
German armies were unbeatable, as had been proved in France,
Greece and the Western Desert.
From Lyons we went to Marseilles and thence to a fort at Toulon,
The French wailors were very hostile and doubtless bore us a grudge
over Oran and Dakar. A short time afterwards we were re-embarked
in the SS Champollion and put to sea, passing large ships of the
French fleet in the roads.
This time we were given first class
accommodation, but the ship's officers were taciturn and refused to
acknowledge our salutes in the morning.
We were bound for
Beirut and were accompanied by two other ships which were going
to Syria to evacuate those soldiers and civilians who had elected to
return to France after the armistice.
The names of the ships were
painted in large letters, which were illuminated at night.
At the approach to the Straits of Messies we were picked up by
an Italian warship and escorted through the mined channels.
British naval officer prisoner in our party improved the occasion
by taking bearings of the minefields with a prismatic compass,
guessing the speed of the ship.
This information, together with
any other data we had collected, was duly passed on to the Intelli-
gence people on our arrival at Beirut.
We docked early one morning and came ashore shortly afterwards,
to be greeted by a battery of cinema cameras.
We were welcomed
by Brigadier C. I, Chrystal, together with a representative
of
(The latter was unable to be present in person as
he was under 'protective custody' pending our safe return.) Our
adventures finally terminated with a lengthy interview with the
Intelligence authorities, And so back to duty with the Corps.
With this the series of unit stories must be brought to a close,
Many types of unit have not been included for reasons of space and
not, be it understood, on account of any lack of comparitive
effort everywhere.
