00
Carrying Captured 15-cm. Gun
Carrying Cruiser Tanks
594 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
and the Isle of Wight.
593
Coming back from the Ide of Wight, one
of the transporters tried to swim ashore from a landing craft.
Workshops had a happy time getting the salt water out.
In due course, when deemed fit for service, we were warned for
North Africa.
Before the end of January, 1949, embarkation leave
was over and vehicles had had their baptism of snow on the moun-
tains en route for the ports.
We duly embarked and on February ist had our first glimpse of
Africa-Algiers looking white and attractive in the sunlight.
When
we arrived at Philippeville, agth Tank Brigade commander came
on board to see us.
It was not just a visit to the commanding
officer's cabin, but a real unit visit including talke to the men in
mess deck.
It was but a little gesture, but it meant a lot when
those same men were keeping going, brushing the sleep from their
eyes, some weeks later.
After disembarkation we marched through
the night out to Sidi Moussa, our feet soft from weeks on board
ship, and our language correspondingly lurid.
Some of us embarked early on a reconnaissance of the course we
were to come to know so well: Philippeville-
-Bone Laverdure-
Souk Ahras Chardimaou-Le Kef.
Meanwhile most of us were
busy off-loading the transporters at Philippeville,
There was some
excitement when a sling broke and seven tons of ballast blocks
spewed on to the quayside.
Who said Arabs cannot move!
There followed arrangements for the night's work, tank regiment
and transporter company commanders walking up and down the
quayside in the rain.
'How many transporters can you get ashore
by 0400?'- Plenty
how many tanks will you have?"
Oh.
dozen and a half.'
Well, we had only six transporters ashore and
only eight hours to go, but we would make it.
Later the company commander scrambled down a gang plank at
midnight, all bluffs called.
How many tanks?
Twelve; thank
God, we had got 14 transporters ashore, more than a mount for
every tank, by 0400.
The crews were briefed and warned of the
mountains,
the treacherous verges.
Not a tractor or a trailer
wheel must leave the metalling.
Above all, we must keep moving,
Punctually at o400 the first convey moved out on the fist long
pull up from Philippeville to Bone,
We were over the crest with a
flat road now to lone, harbouring at Mondovi, the first North
African mountain conquered.
Now the rest could be brought on.
Our first party went back to Philippeville with the dawn.
In
a4 hours the next bunch pulled out, and again, and three convoys
were on the road,
No, not three platoons, but groups, just as the
vehicles came off the ships, so we called them the Cheltenham Flier,
the Cornish Riviera, and the Flying Scot respectively,
It took a
long time to get out of the habit of calling platoon officers 'guarde,
PI RASO
