312
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
and a reconnaissance regiment arrived from India and the United
Kingdom in November and December.
By September,
1941,
the DDST had become responsible for
supplying, in round figures, 55,000 Indian, 21,000 British, 15,000
Dominion troops, 3,400 Malayan enlistments and 1,400 Chinese,
each of which had their different ration scales.
The growing strength of the command and increased transport
commitments entailed new plans being made to build up reserves
of food and petrol and the setting up of a supply organization to
cover the whole of the Malayan Peninsula and the expansion of the
arrangements for providing transport.
The Malayan Peninsula covered an area approximately equal to
that of England and Wales.
Served by a railway and main road
roughly running parallel to the west coast, there were few lateral
communications with the east, because of the extensive mountain
ranges that divided the western and eastern territories.
A branch
railway line ran to the north and east, but did not join the east
coast until some 400 miles from Singapore, when it reached Kota
Bharu.
Unfortunately the last stretch of 30 miles of railway from
Kuala Kry to Kota Bahru could not be used when operations began
owing to the presence of two viaducts which could be shelled from
the sea and were vulnerable from air attack, and there was no road
between the two towns although the gap in the supply line had to be
filled by road transport.
The terrain of the country was mostly
thick jungle or vegetation except where the land was cultivated,
most of the cultivated areas being rubber plantations or paddy
fields.
Early in 1941, there was to be further development in defence
policy that tended to increase
the
transport commitment even
further by the
" Matador'.
acceptance
in
principle of the plan
known as
Put broadly, the plan was one of taking a leaf out of
the enemy's book by invading Siam and getting there first to deny
its use as a base to the enemy.
It was a logical plan,
but was
accompanied by some military risk. As it involved the infringe-
ment of the neutrality of Siam, it was not to be put into cffect
without the authority of the Cabinet.
But arrangements had to
be made to put it into action if required.
It was on this genera!
background that the RASh had to develop its defence organization.
Amassing Stocks
The decision made to raise the command's reserves from to to 180
days and the stream of reinforcements which began to amive in
1940 presented a great supply problem.
Given time it was mainly
a matter of amassing stocks of tinned and preserved foods acceptable
to British tastes, but many of the staple commodities required for
MALAYA
313
the growing number of non-European ration scales had no equi-
valents in canned or preserved form.
At the same time it was vital
to provide a high proportion of reserves in fresh form if health and
well being were to be maintained in the hot and humid climate of
Malaya.
It was also necessary to try to reduce the calls for food
on the United Kingdom to a minimum and to save every ton of
shipping freight which was possible.
Australia was the obvious
source to be explored, but that country was still primarily an
exporter of fresh or frozen agricultural and dairy produce. It was
developing its industry for the production of manufactured (e.g.
tinned) commodities in the variety required for field service rations.
The provision and storage of each main commodity offered a
different problem, and many of the main items such as meat and
flour (wheat) were required in different form by the European and
non-European. Atta was the largest single commodity needed for
the Indian and native troops but, although obtainable from India,
it could not be stored with any safety for more than three months
unless air conditioned storage, which was out of the question, could
be constructed for the purpose.
There were wheat mills in both
Singapore and in the FMS, so it was decided to import wheat from
Australia and
then mill it as required.
But what is generally
referred to as infestation had not been reckoned with, and the pest
Calandra granaria better known as the weevil-soon
made his
appearance.
The need for shipping wheat that was 'clean, sound
and new season' was represented to Australia and produced better
shipments, the difference being markedly noticeable on arrival, but
this did not stop the insects breeding, although the sprinkling of
slaked lime between bags stopped the carrying of infestation to
some extent.
Storage of this wheat in the main supply storage
places was also accompanied by the risk of infestation of other
commodities, so that it was decided to construct simple silos made
of wood and lined with corrugated sheeting.
Twelve of these
silos were made in the supply depot in Singapore (Bukit Timah).
Before the grain was fed into them it was passed through a cleaning
machine to remove the extraneous matter and various impurities
that are always to be found.
was again cleaned before being milled.
When required for milling, the wheat
The provision of reserves of meat presented what were really two
separate problems because of racial differences.
Fresh or frozen
beef was wanted for the British troops, and it was, of course, known
that the expected arrival ofishe Aps would considerably increase
the amount to be provided, as meat was regarded as being one of
the most important parts of their ration-they even ate stents for
Sheep or goat on hoof was required by the units of
the Indian Army and by most other non-European troops.
The
