ANIMAL TRANSPORT
They used to leave their jeep in the basin or bowl, as it was called,
at 'Hove', creep round to the front door and then dive in.
descending the stairs they reached the living room on ground floor
This backed into the bank, looking away from the dreaded
monastery, and here they felt and were as safe as could be.
a week the CQMS would arrive with NAAFI stores.
have been one of his most dreaded days, as the visit to the troops
was rather an ordeal.
The tracks were steep and narrow and
shelled or mortared.
appear from nowhere.
Other jeeps would
was inky darkness,
always the danger of new shell holes to drive into.
Sometimes the officer commanding would visit his troops on foot
Only one troop could be reached in a day, as it
meant a round walk of some six miles.
The trek to B troop on
Monte Cairo was full of hazards.
The valley, which in peacetime
is one of the prettiest in southern Italy, was pitted with shell and
bomb holes filled with dirty, green water.
The little roads were
also feet deep in water in consequence of damage to the river banks.
The shattered olive groves were littered with knocked-out tanks, in
some cases with the dead crews still inside them.
occasional whine of a shell, there was a deathly silence.
world apart, as only those who lived in it can possibly visualize.
The track to the paper factory led past the dead mules of the Italian
company lying with their heads pulled up to the breast lines to
which they were still tied. On approaching the factory the track
topped a hill.
The enemy was most sensitive about visitors to
St. Elia and would shell even a single caller, to the ill-concealed
amusement of the troop.
To reach C Troop the officer commanding drove to Acquafondata
and then walked past our gun sites to reach a point where large
notices proclaimed 'YOU CAN NOW BE SEEN'.
Having climbed
a brick wall, he descended into the enormous bowl, two miles wide,
with the enemy on the far side.
At the foot of the bowl he crossed
a small river, and then climbed up the miniature mountain in the
hollow of the bowl, on the top of which was Vallerotonda.
After his
tenth visit he said he was so conscious of being watched that he could
hardly keep his eyes forward as he came down the mountainside.
After about three weeks of this work rumours of changes and
relief started, and advance units of the Polish Corps began to
arrive.
The officer commanding was worried about B Troop on
Monte Cairo, where lack of sleep and of hot food was beginning to
tell, and he decided that D Troop should relieve them.
decided not to relieve the mules,
and some 15-cwt trucks were
borrowed for the change-over.
This operation had to be timed
carefully in order not to clash with any movement on the tracks,
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
which had not before been regularly used.
The convoy formed up
at Acquafondata in the afternoon and the officer commanding went
down
'Inferno' to make final arrangements.
Unfortunately, just
before he reached 'Hove', the enemy lobbed a shell into the ravine
and set a bale of tibbin on fire.
Within an hour all had been destroyed.
men of B Troop arriving safely back just as dawn was breaking.
As they were watering and feeding D Troop's mules before turning
cheered by a few encouraging words of thanks by the DDST Corps,
Colonel (now Brigadier) F. A. Shaw, who had made a special and
difficult journey to welcome them.
operation on Monte Cairo. So too was Dvr Warrington
trucks destroyed by shell fire.
This meant filling his truck from
the River Rapido at a spot which, even at night, was subject to
constant and accurate shell fire, and then
driving up three miles
of hairpin bends on a narrow track without protection on the
outside edge-
At last the final battle broke. When the pall of smoke finally
floated from the valley and they spied the British and Polish flags
fluttering from the now ruined monastery, the pack group knew
that their immediate task was over.
So ended their second main
phase of operations.
This was followed by a short rest near Rome
—a rest which allowed at last some uninterrupted sleep and the
opportunity to make and mend.
With the 4th Indian Division
It was not long before the group were once again following hard
on the heels of the advancing army.
For three consecutive days the
daily marches were no less than 32, 36 and 42 miles.
After a short
respite on the upper reaches of the Tiber, the group were assigned
to the support of the 4th Indian Division, which was already engaged
in the hills north of the little mediesnown of Perugia.
tide.
The division did not call for mule support until the fall of Umber-
The line of advance marked by the usual dried up river and
dusty 'road' winding to the morte lay thre su a series of mountains
which ran from west to east across the axis of advance, and the
