INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
ma area or sub-area or the t. or C.l
ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Oficer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
r suhaunit will ka
iv) Detailed account of operations.
perations, topographical and climatic
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
wicers and the
mber of other ranks or followers and ofe
(vii) Meteorological notes.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
animals should be noted.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
and to
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ganisation a data stratich to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
Appendices wint be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.mming the author. References
(See SA. A diaies will conform to the regulationsfor drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
TOTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande:
r other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3. Omitted.
PArA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(*) Ind decist os tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
) at ate in the ente the pot trent s hour as present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the unit concerned.
PERA NOT The the tone entered should be the time the ive in the text, it eod
Iso be given in the text, if knot
lace
Month and Year. Jettery, 19W.
our
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C
Unit. 4 Port Ammuni bion- Detachment.
2118.
A. 0. C.
Commanding Officer. Lieut.D.G. Bray.
References to Appendices
Edinburgh. 1-1-4
14-1-41.
Donnington. 14-1-21
Donning ton. 17-1-44
26-1-14
Donnington. 27-1-ls
31-1-42.
Continued work on Ikith Docks completing exercise "Roundabout.2) and
preparing for "Roundabout. 3." As a result of the exercise much veluable
experience of the work on the Queyside was gained by all ranks, but all
documentation was done by the RE's
The Unit returned to Dinnington being replaced at Bainburgh by 45 P.A.D.
under Authority of Brodness. one Secret T. P.M. gol2, of 11th Jan W.
s/Sgt Steen was laft to hand ower to 45 P.A.D. who had not arrived when.
the #Unit left.
The whole Unit with the exeption of one man proceeded on leave for
10 days.
Regimental Training was resumed advantage being taken of the presence
of 16 F.T.S. who had an interesting training programme in operation.
Owing to the small nimber of this Unit we were allowed to participate in
in this training and so abtained an opportunity for some field training.
Wt,34859 1676 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 51-7676
26/W.D./ A.
(*17998) Wt.12725/810 250,000 5/41 A.& E.W.Ltd. Gp.698
cuments in your Bulk O
e you have requested
more of your doc
lents - Enquire at
documents
documents are in u
Desk for full details
