PART IV
SUMMARY OF MAIN LESSONS
Note.— This Part summarizes the main conclusions recorded at the end of
maroid the reing chapters are this do luder he tol duplication of text is
The conclusions are listed under the following headings :—
Equipment
(a) Effect of major changes of plan.
(b) Storage of mobilization equipment.
(c) Distribution of war stores.
(d) Overseas reserves.
(e) Peace plans for expansion and replenishment in war.
(!) Need for provision of funds in peace-time to enable mobilization plans
to be laid down in outline.
(8) Stocks and output of instruments required on mobilization for military
purposes.
(h) Need for early decisions as regards Orders of Battle, War Establish-
ments, introduction of new weapons, scale of clothing, etc.
(i) Functions of Command Ordnance Depots in war.
(j) Value of S.I.B. (inability to supply) lists.
(k) System of despatch of mobilization stores to units under orders to
mobilize.
Clothing
(l) No major problems so long as system of mobilization is fluid and
adaptable.
Organization-War Office
(a) Mobilization branch to work in close association with General Staff
(S.D.).
(b) Person vil and gration branches to be in close touch and communi-
General Headquarters, Home Forces
(a) Relative responsibility and control with War Office.
(b) Movements of units during mobilization to be avoided except in
emergency.
Headquarters of Commands
(a) Essential duties in supervising units' mobilization.
(b) Need for provision of adequate staff for mobilization duties.
Mobilization Centres
(a) Importance in war.
(b) Importance of adequate and suitable staff.
(c) Importance of provision of transport.
WO217
Personnel
(a) Avoidance of delays on general mobilization.
(b) Nominations in peace-time for mobilization
appointments to be
adhered to.
(c) No drastic changes to be made in establishments on mobilization.
(d) Provision of staff for H.Q.s of Commands on mobilization.
(e) Relation between Peace and War Establishments.
(f) Units to be raised on mobilization.
(g) Co-ordination of action between personnel branches and Mobilization
branch in provision of personnel for mobilizing units.
(h) Embarkation leave.
(i) Importance of provision of best available personnel for mobilizing units.
(j) Officers.
(k) Importance of reaching early finality in regard to changes in establish-
ments and organization of units.
(l) Preparation of new units.
(m) Equipment of drafts posted to mobilizing units.
(n) Special difficulties in provision of personnel for large forces.
(a) Avoidance of non-essential changes of plan.
(b) Prepared plan must be worked to.
Procedure
(a) Importance of a co-ordinated machinery.
(b) Need for early " Orders of Battle."
(c) Need for early decisions regarding War Establishments, War Equipment
Tables, etc., for all units.
(d) Importance of knowing definite location of units to be mobilized.
(e) War Office control of units until their mobilization is complete.
(1) Importance of reliable system of reporting mobilization deficiencies.
Vehicles
(a) Need for concentration of effort, resources, personnel, etc., in repair
rganizations
(b) Training of unit drivers.
(c) Importance of efficient system of vehicle maintenance within units.
(d) Spares, tools, etc., for unit vehicles.
(e) Need for one controlling authority for issue of mobilization instructions
(f) Special measures affecting " A" vehicles.
(8) Effect of late issues of " B" vehicles to units mobilizing as part of large
force (e.g. 21 Army Group).
