CHAPTER III-PRE-WAR PLANNING
System
The system of planning included the following :—
(a) Periodical meetings under the chairmanship of the Director of Mobiliza-
tion or Director of Staff Duties.
(b) Field Force Committee meetings.
(c) Field Force Sub-Committee meetings.
(d) Monthly mobilization meetings at which representatives of Head-
quarters of Commands were present.
(e) Preparation of Field Force Tables by A.G.5 (Mob.) showing personnel
requirements of each contingent of the Expeditionary Force.
(f) Half-yearly mobilization returns from headquarters of commands and
officers in charge of records, showing the man-power potentialities to
meet requirements on mobilization.
(g) Decisions reached as a result of mobilization meetings were notified to
all concerned at the time, detailed instructions regarding the procedure
to be followed on mobilization being embodied in the publications
" Regulations for the Mobilization of the Regular Army and Supple-
mentary Reserve " and " Provisional Regulations for the Mobilization
(h) Based on these instructions each unit was required to prepare and
maintain a mobilization scheme, showing in detail the method, on a
timed programme, by which it was to be brought on to a war footing
were inspected periodically under orders of head-
quarter commands.
In the case of units which did not exist in peace-time but which were
required to be formed on mobilization, the schemes were prepared and
maintained by the headquarters of the command in which the unit was
tion, by individual notices, by B.B.C. broadcast or by a combination
of these methods.
Places at which reservists were to report on mobilization were
published in an Appendix to " Regulations for Mobilization."
(j) Equipment.—Items not included in units' Peace Equipment Tables were
hit in store in peacetime arty with units and party tomance
The equipment of certain units required to be formed on
general mobilization was also held in ordnance charge in peace-time.
Detailed planning for the assembly and maintenance of mobilization
regards equipment (in consultation with S.D.2) were carried out by
M.G.O.- and o under the Director of Ordnance Services.
(k) Vehicles. -Planning for the provision of " A" and " B" vehicles on
mobilization was the work of M.G.O.5 and M.G.O.6 under the
Director of Mechanization, except in the case of Royal Army Service
WO277/26
WO217
Corps vehicles, which were dealt with by Q.M.3 under the Director of
Supplies and Transport. These plans included the impressment of
load-carrying vehicles, cars, motor-cycles, etc., from civil sources.
It is axiomatic that the more thorough the planning, the greater the
likelihood of the success of the plan.
The military plan, upon which mobilization calculations are based, must
be dependent upon Government policy, diplomatic relationships with other
changes, de, y it lay it ation a pied mat the factors are liable to
develops.
Plans have therefore to be made in advance, or adapted to meet various
alternative situations or developments.
At the same time it has to be appreciated that a detailed mobilization plan
cannot be worked out until finality has been reached in the General Staff
planning and a firm " Order of Battle" produced showing details of the
As indicated under the system of planning above, the methods by which
the persodel, equipment, vehicles, clothing to are to de found rames
branches at the War Office, and also with headquarters of commands con-
cerned in regard to accommodation, training facilities, etc., on mobilization.
This is a considerable task and may take many months to prepare.
material change of plan, particularly any increase of forces or decrease of
available man-power, must inevitably complicate the very detailed calculations
required to complete the mobilization plan.
Up to 1935, the military plan, based presumably upon a policy which
assumed that no immediate threat of war in Europe existed, envisaged the
despatch of one division only to the East within six weeks.
This required no detailed mobilization plan, since the remainder of the
Regular Army was available upon which to draw in order to complete this
division.
From 1935 onwards German plans for re-building and training their armed
forces began to unfold themselves, e.g.-
(a) Early in 1935, repudiation of military clauses of the Peace Treaty.
(b) Introduction of National Service Act, March, 1935, which established
military conscription.
(c) Conscription of civilian labour and material in event of war.
(d) Introduction of Armed Forces Compulsory Powers Act (1937), which
authorized the requisitioning of material by the Army for its own use,
even in peace time.
With the development of these plans, more direct threats to the peace of
Europe gradually became evident, e.g.—
(e) Re-occupation of the Rhineland, March, 1936.
(f) Annexation of Austria, March, 1938.
in ox tion of outria, March, stan. This resulted in the inn Ara-
an increase of some six divisions.
