WO 27 7/22
WO 217/712
CONTENTS
PART I-INTRODUCTORY
CHAPTER
II-Pre-war Organization
III-Pre-war Planning
PART II-WAR ORGANIZATION
IV-Mobilization Directorate
V-Other War Office Branches
VI-General Headquarters, Home Forces and Headquarters of Home
VII-Mobilization Centres
VIII-Ordnance Depots
Pages
1-2
4-7
13-16
17-24
25-27
PART III-MOBILIZATION PROCEDURE
IX-General
X—Pre-Dunkirk Period (1939-May, 1940)
XI-Post-Dunkirk Period (after May, 1940)
XII-Mobilization of First Army for North Africa, 1942
XIII-Intermediate Period (November, 1942-February, 1943)
XIV-Mobilization of 21 Army Group (February, 1943-June, 1944)
XV-Mobilization of Units for South East Asia Command (1944-1945)
28-31
37-42
43-51
54-65
66-71
72-88
PART IV-SUMMARY OF MAIN LESSONS
APPENDICES
Mobilization Progress Report for submission
Command Headquarters-Instructions and specimen pro forma
90-92
C-Part I-Information required for mobilization from War Office
branches by the General Staff for submission to the Mobilization
Branch.
Part 2—Specimen pro forma
D-Skeleton Mobilization Urgent Memorandum, showing the various
alternative contents, according to the circumstances, destination, etc.
93-96
97-100
E-Statements showing by months the numbers of units mobilized
for each overseas theatre or garrison by phases of the war, with
a comprehensive summary of all statements
101-107
F-Mobilization Graph
• after 108
SECRET
PART I
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I-DEFINITIONS
Mobilization in its literal sense means " the act of making mobile." Applied
militarily, it has come to mean " the act of preparing an army for war.
doin* M bitin van Resultiniation" (the purest publican armed) the
passes from a peace to a war footing."
This definition was accurate only in
its application to general mobilization before, or on, declaration of war, but
required modification in its relation to mobilization in war, since the forces,
which exist before the war, i.e. on " a peace footing," form a comparatively
small proportion of the total forces ultimately to be raised and mobilized in
the event of a major war. Mobilization applies only to the preparation of
units (including headquarters of formations) for war. After completion of
general mobilization, i.e. of units wholly or partly in existence, the mobilization
of new units must continue during war, so long as operations require and to
the extent made practicable by the availability of personnel, equipment,
vehicles, etc.
In the publication " Unit Mobilization (War) " issued in 1940, the pre-war
definition was, therefore, modified and brought up to date as follows :—
" A unit will be considered as mobilized when it is at War Establishment
in personnel, including first reinforcements, but subject to any modifications
in the Mobilization Order; when it has received all essential items of its
war outfit (viz. war equipment, clothing and necessaries, and medical
equipment) less any equipment or stores which may be despatched overseas
separately, i.e. when no serious deficiencies exist that would impair its
operational role."
This modification reflects the relatively increased importance, in terms of
mobilization, which must be given to all kinds of equipment including vehicles,
and also the wider field of responsibility for co-ordination of the various
activities, branches, etc., involved in the mobilization of units of a modern
army in war.
Re-mobilization is the term given to the process by which a unit, already
mobilized on a certain scale for a particular campaign or project, is prepared
for a different purpose on another scale.
The whole procedure adopted in its original mobilization has usually to
be gone through again.
Disbandment.—Where a unit, mobilized for some special purpose, becomes
redundant, the process bess i mobilization is reversed, personnel being
posted away, equipment and vehicles returned to store, etc.
(Note.—This process must not be confused with " de-mobilization," which
envisages the release from service of individuals.)
