Personnel
Personnel details had to be obtained from, or confirmed with, personnel
branches concerned through A.G.t (B), which was located at Hobart House
(and for a time in 1941-42 at Cheltenham).
This involved a certain amount
of delay in telephoning or visiting branches concerned.
The procedure adopted was for units in existence to submit returns on
Army Forms B26ogA (Officers) or B2609 (other ranks) to A.G.1 (B) witha
copy to command headquarters concerned, and in the case of other ranks, a
copy also to
officer i/c records concerned.
These returns showed units'
requirements in personnel to complete to War Establishments (including
Ist reinforcements where appropriate), and were submitted every seven days
during the period of mobilization.
On the seventh day before the mobiliza-
tion date a telegraphic return was submitted in place of the printed forms to
enable last-minute deficiencies to be made good urgently.
Drafts and individuals posted to units as a result of these returns were
ordered to join fully equipped and armed.
Unfortunately, owing partly to
shortage of equipment of correct pattern, and also sometimes to the short
notice given, these personnel frequently joined mobilizing units unarmed and
incompletely equipped.
This involved further delays at their units owing to
the necessity of providing equipment, etc., for them.
Embarkation leave, as ordered in the Mobilization Urgent Memorandum,
was at first given by the despatching unit in such cases to enable the men to
arrive at their new units fully equipped and ready to proceed overseas on
In certain cases also men's homes were nearer to their permanent
etc., than to the mobilizing unit, and this avoided delays in
returning on leave after joining their new units.
There were, however, reasons against this system, e.g. men failing to report;
men going sick after having had their embarkation leave, involving fresh
postings and further periods of embarkation leave.
Finally it was decided
posted should receive embarkation leave after joining their
new units, unless special orders were issued to the contrary.
In the case of newly-formed units, officers and men were posted in under
orders of the personnel branch, which ordered the formation.
after all postings
had been made and medical inspections carried out,
deficiency demands were submitted to A.G.I (B) as in the case of formed units.
Home details comprising personnel with the unit who were not included
among those to accompany the unit overseas, were ordered to remain at the
mobilization station under orders of the local command headquarters.
duties included the handing over of barracks and stores and the completion
of other administrative details not settled up by the unit before departure.
LESSONS (Personnel)
A.- It is important that there should be the closest liaison between
personnel branches and the mobilization branch to enable clear instructions
to be issued to mobilizing units, and all concerned with their mobilization,
home details, etc.
in regard to provision of personnel, medical categories, leave arrangements,
pret rabi be fet of the cal wining are mob ration pa Can) bould
to reduce to a minimum delays in the issue of mobilization Urgent Memoranda.
When forces are being prepared for overseas, the various personnel
problems require the full-time attention of one officer in the co-ordinating
ranch, who should be changed as seldom as possible.
B.—The grant of embarkation leave to units mobilizing for overseas was
essential for morale and family reasons, but it was the greatest single handicap
in the process of mobilization of personnel.
At first seven days, and later
14 days, were allowed. For security reasons the grant of this leave after a
man knew that he was going overseas was risky, and there was always the
chance that the man would absent himself, go sick, or for some compassionate
reason fail to return, necessitating a new posting and repetition of the leave
process.
Moreover, for operational reasons it was not practicable to send a whole
unit on embarkation leave at once.
To send 50 per cent. at one time while
the other 50 per cent. mobilized was the usual procedure.
This added con-
siderably to the period required for mobilization, with the result that urgent
mobilizations, which often became necessary for operational reasons, suffered
in consequence.
There appear to be two solutions (which, however, could not be applied
at this stage of the war) :—
(i) Orders of Battle for units required for overseas must be issued well
ahead of schedule and normal leave must be continued up to the last
minute.
In that case, no special embarkation leave would ordinarily be necessary.
(ii) Men posted in to mobilizing units must as far as possible be selected
from among those who have recently had leave in order to avoid further
grant of leave before being despatched overseas.
C.—Medical fitness was viewed very seriously at this stage of the war,
every man having to be category Ar to qualify for despatch overseas.
effect of this was to eliminate considerable numbers of men who might have
been usefully employed on certain duties or in rearward areas.
There was also a wide divergence of application of standards by different
medical officers.
It is perhaps human and inevitable that the medical officer
of a unit about to proceed overseas should be specially particular that every
officer and man in the unit is 100 per cent. fit, while the medical officer of
units despatching drafts or individuals to that unit, without being negligent,
might not be more than normally careful.
The effect was considerable
variance of opinion, with the result that large numbers of men passed fit by
medical officers of despatching units were rejected by the medical officer of
the mobilizing unit.
This caused a great waste of time and railway travel and
last minute postings which were often inadequately equipped and had little
or no embarkation leave.
Suggested remedies for this difficulty are analogous to those mentioned
under B above.
Men who are likely to be posted to mobilizing units must be
kept under constant review as regards medical category, leave, clothing, and
equipment, so as to be available for posting at short notice.
