pg_0066.pdf:
2. Marching on a Compass Bearing.—The guide must know
the bearing on
which he wishes to march.
He then observes
some object which has the required bearing and marches
In the Service Prismatic Compass
the magnetic north is
marked by a
broad luminous arrow-head.
The glass cover
is turned until the setting-vane on
its rim, corresponding
to the luminous direction mark on its glass, points to the
required magnetic bearing
as shown on the external ring;
the cover is then clamped at this bearing. The box is now
held so that the direction mark is superimposed on the arrow-
head, in which position the line of the luminous patches in
the lid, fully extended, indicates the line of advance.
In the liquid type of compass the bearing may
directly at night with the same exactitude as by day; but
in night marching some of this accuracy
is unavoidably lost
and marching on the pointers is in general sufficient.
As a rule,
the darker the night the greater the assistance
afforded by the lumous paint. During a moonlight night
a luminous compass
of no greater value than an
ordinary compass with & clearly marked north-point.
3. Prolonging the Compass Indication.-It is often difficult
to identify
an object ahead on the correct bearing.
painted white or with white paper pasted on it, or best of
all, one prepared with luminous paint, may then be useful.
The operator, standing perfectly
steady, should wait until
his compass has come to rest, and then hold the stick, at an
angle of 45° to 60° with the horizontal plane, in the direction
indicated by the line between the luminous patches in the
compass-lid.
stick thus held it is easy, except on very dark
nights, to pick up some object on which to march; the advance
is continued until the guide considers it desirable to halt
and allow the compass to settle so as to observe the direction
of advance afresh.
The object may be terrestrial or it may be a star. If it is
terrestrial the march can be
continued until the object i
eached. when a new point must be chosen.
If the object
is a star, it must be remembered that the bearing of a star,
except one close to the Pole like Polaris, is constantly changing
can be continued on a star for 10, 15 or 20
minutes according to its position in the heavens.
4. Celestial Objects.-The most convenient stars to select
for marching on are those which happen at the time to have
an altitude of from 15° to 30°; stars below 15° may become
lost in haze, whilst for those above 30° the head has to be
inconveniently raised.
Speaking broadly
a star at these
will rarely move more then 5o
a flank) in 20 minutes. Hence if at the end of every 15 to 20
minutes the observer halts and takes a fresh bearing, he can
count on keeping direction correctly.
Although it is of assistance to an observer to know the stars,
it is not necessary that he should study them.
with care, march on a compass bearing with the stars as points
to direct him, although he may be totally ignorant of the
names of the stars or even of the constellations.
point is to be sure that the compass bearing is correctly taken
and prolonged,
and that the star selected is adhered to until
a change is required.
In civilized and well-mapped countries the use of stars for
keeping direction is not likely to be necessary. In uncivilized
country on the other hand, the method may be of great value.
Any officer to whom such a task would be likely to fall would
be wise to acquire an elementary knowledge of astronomy.
5. Marching by Compass when no Objects are Visible.—It
may happen that, owing to clouds or fog, no terrestrial objects
on which to march between halts are visible; then the only
safe way is for an assistant to stand behind the observer and
work as follows: The guide with the compass and luminous
stick, as soon as the compass becomes steady, gives the word
"steady."
assistant, carefully noting the alignment of
the luminous stick, then advances in what he judges
the right direction, until the guide halts him before he is lost
to sight, by giving a low whistle.
The guide, having thus halted his assistant, notes by means
of the compass whether the latter is standing on the true line
of advance or to the right or left of it. He then moves up,
and placing himself on what he judges to be the correct align-
ment, sends forward his assistant again.
The rate of advance obviously depends on the distances
covered between halts; after the first few advances the assist-
ant will have ascertained the number of paces he can safely
take without being lost to sight, and on reaching that dis-
tance he will halt without waiting for the whistle.
important, since the whistling might attract attention when
close to the objective.
Slabs of cardboard or wood prepared with luminous paint,
are of great assistance in this tedious process of sending on an
assistant; a slab 12 inches square can be seen at from 30 to
200 yards distance, according to the condition of the atmos-
phere and the paint, and by this means the rate of advance
can be geatly accelerated
Besides the guide and his assistant, a third person should be
emploved to keep a careful record of the distances traversed
It may be useful to remember that a constant error of 5°
in bearing causes a deviation from the course of 150 yards
per mile of march.

