pg_0057.pdf:
66
66. Liquid Prismatic Compass
The advantage of this type is that the card, being immersed
in liquid, comes to rest very much more quickly than in the
It is therefore unnecessary to provide a
check-spring and stop.
In other respects the compass
generally the same as Mark VIII, but a few points of differ-
ence may be noticed.
graduation on the card is transparent.
luminous patch on the bottom of the box beneath the erected
prism emits rays which illuminate the graduation at night.
On the glass which seals the liquid there is another luminous
patch near the hinge; on this horizontal patch the lubber
line is drawn.
The setting circle is etched on the upper
glass, whose cell is milled and rotates as in the dry type. The
bearing is then set for night marching by bringing the desired
reading on the upper glass into coincidence with the lubber
(Note that in this graduation (5º) the short division
traces correspond to the figures.)
There is, however, a setting
vane for use with the points of the compass, which form the
to this setting
singe there is, as belore, a corresie to this set the
movable upper glass.
Bubble in the liquid may be trapped by turning the box
over and slowly turning it back.
67. Lensatic Liquid Compass
This compass may be met with in the service. but it is not
a general issue and is not now manufactured.
It is in appear-
ance similar to the, Liquid Prismatic Compass,
reading lens takes the place of the prism of the latter.
lens is mounted in a circular metal frame which is hinged to
and has a sighting slit cut above the lens.
reading, the compass is held in the same way as the Prismatic
with the reading lens upright, and the hair-line on the window
is sighted on the distant object through the slit in the lens
holder and the bearing is read by means of the lens direct on
the compass card opposite the lubber line.
To adjust the
focus of the lens its holder should be tilted slightly forward
or backward
as required.
The compass card is graduated
scale only;
this is in
single degrees-
numbered-and reads clockwise from the North point.
The setting circle for night marching is fixed to the case
of the com ass.
is graduated
anticlockwise
mark over the lubber line below the lid hinge.
20° graduation from zero is marked with a spot of
luminous paint, the graduations 360°, 270°, 180° and 90° each
The luminous setting index is
67
carried on a metal ring inside the setting scale and is rotated
by means of two small studs on it.
68. Compass Errors
1. Terrestrial Disturbances.-The presence
of iron always
affects a compass,
and great care should be taken to with-
draw from any
of iron when taking an
observation.
The following are minimum safe distances for visible masses
of iron:—
Heavy gun..
Field gun and telegraph wires.
Barbed wire ..
60
40
10
yards
Steel helmet..
Cap badge
Box respirator ...
in
" slung" position
Electric
cables and wires,
dumps,
railroads, tractors
cor-
rugated iron hutments, steel or " rolled gold " spectacle frames
and the like should be avoided.
Iron on the surface can be avoided, but when it lies below
ground it presents a serious difficulty.
Pipe lines below
streets, or buried shells in battlefields,
may be suspected,
but in general there is no means of detecting masses of iron
ore the common cause of error-except by the behaviour
of the compass itself.
If there is the least suspicion of disturbance the position
of the compass should
The compass may
showing that there had been local
different reading, it does not alter, there remains the
some widespread local magnetic field.
following test may be helpful although it is not conclusive.
Consider the forward (direct) and backward (reverse) bear-
ings of the line AB in Fig. 32
The bearings AB at A and
BA at B should differ by 180°; if they
do not, there is
presumably disturbance at A or B, or both.
Every ordinary compass has its individual variation, which
may differ from the mean.
Compass users should not rely
too much on the magnetic variation as charter (Plate VIII),
but should test their compasses on lines of known true
bearing, between trig points; and this should be done period-
Bearings taken from a small scale map by a small
protractor are
barely good enough for this purpose; a goo
ircular protractor and large scale map 1/20,000 are neces
In addition the line of known bearing may not be free from
magnetic disturbance:
hence
comparisons
at both extremi-
ties are desirable, and if possible a comparison should be made
on two different lines.
24531—54

