pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PArA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.— See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTe C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up daily,
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topegraphical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author.
Appendices will be
References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.—All diaries wiil conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infanty brigade or higher
formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the off
er 1/0
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information or order
caches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Date
Ju
Afte
of the be
moving a
almost a:
We 1
for a bit
from
time
so it wer
grand hea
BEUV
locate.
encircled
BIEVILIE.
and a Hun
Shelling
Our
Instructions regarding War
Diaries
summaries
contained
and the Staff Manual respectively
in Month ver
Ronthly
Darles Will De enciosea 1u
If this is
not avalade. and lor Intelligence ournaries, ute
cover will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year June 1947 •
WAR DIARY
XOrX
INFEELIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Unit
Army Form Q,2118.
2nd Bn K.S.L.I.
Commanding Officer It Col FoJ. MAUKLOR •
Place
Date
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
NEWHAVEN
AT SEA
ILA BRICHE
Hour
3
1000
4
The marching personnel
of the Bn ( i.e. a small Bn HQ and four Rifle Coys)
leave Camp J 3 and
embark in three L.C. I. (L) 's for operation " OVIRIORD " •
Operation postponed for 24 hrs owing to a strong Westerly Wind.
5
Operation "ON" The convoy composed chiefly of ICI's and ICI's assembles
outside NIHAM at 1100hrs and sails for FRANCE at 1400hrs. Still an unpleas
ant strong West Wind and a grey sky .. - Mean-while the various vehicle parties
of
the Bn had been assembling and embarking at PORTSMOUTH and the LONDON DOCKS
6
1010
in ICT's, IST's and MI Ships.
The voyage proved uneventful. Soon after 0800hrs news came that 8 INF BDE had
touched down and later we learned that they had secured the immediate beach-
head. We were cheered by the news that 6 ARBORNE DIV had captured intact
the bridges over the CANAI DECAY and Ro ORNE •
The ICI's carrying the Bn touched down very much as planned at LA BRICHE
D'HERMANVILF. It was NOT an easy landing, 4 to 5 ft of water and a sea
running.
The beach was still under Shell Fire . /
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co. Ltd. 51-1541)
(Conta Sheet 2).

