R. A
PARADE MAINTENANCE
A system of maintenance for the whole tank including the W/Set is standardised for all
units and all AFVs.
Adherence to this system under all conditions is vital to the successful performance and
reliability of equipment.
Four types of maintenance parade:
(a) First
Parade.
Daily, to prepare vehicle for running and ensure fit for action at short
notice.
Usually about 45 minutes,
(b) Halt Parades,
i) "First Halt": 10 minutes for quick check after first 20 minutes running
(ii) "Standard Halt": 20 minutes in each two hours for general check.
(ti) " Long Halt.": at least 50 mihates in each four hours (i e. at least. 30 minutes in addition
to the standard 20 minutes halt).
This halt takes the place of the second standard 20 minutes halt if the march is to be
continued for any considerable distance.
Objects: to allow engine to cool off; more thorough inspection; time for meals.
(c) Last
Parade.
Daily, carried out immediately and without exception
return to
camp, barracks or harbour to ensure AFV., guns and Wireless Set in good condition and
ready for operation at shoot notice.
Usually 11 hours.
(d) Weekly
Parade.
Additional maintenance.
Tasks carried out in addition to normal
daily tasks- about 5 hours if done as single parade.
At each of these parades the operator carries out maintenance on the W/Set in addition to
certain other duties connected vish the guns and the remainder of the tank.
Full details of these duties are found in the Parade Maintenance trainining pamphlet for
each type of vehicle.
2 FIRST PARADE.
(a) Opening-up drill, which includes the Daily Maintenance Tests.
(b) (i) If netted, check A' and 'B' nets at times specified by Signals N.C.O., not less than 30
minutes after switching on. If under Wireless Silence check 'A' net with de-tuned
senders.
(ii) If going to net shortly, do ' Prepare to Net' drill.
(ili) If tunt is not operuting, do ' Closing down' drill.
This should always be done if Wire-
less is not to be used, but set should normally be left of for 30 minutes while engine is
running.
(c) Report immediately to Tink Commander and Sqn.
E.S. any defects or spares required.
The Sqn. E.S. should he present to deal immediately with any defects.
3 HALT PARADES.
Rectify any taus observee at suspected. Oheck net.
4 LAST PARADE.
(a) Before Hulling. Carry cat as much as possible of 'Daily Maintenance Tests.
(b) After Halting.
Complet Daily Maintenance Tests' and Closing Down' drill.
The Sqn.
Hi.S. should be present to carry out any repairs immediately.
(o) Velvides Off The Road.
Remove the set from any vehicle off the road for more than two
days; store t in a dry blace.
5 WEEKLY PARADE.
This must always inclu. pi-
(a) Opening-up drill
(b) Closing-down
drill (excluding Daily Maintenance Tests) with a particularly careful
inspection of every part.
i. Clean outside of set and variometer with a cloth. Do not use water, petrol or metal
ii. Check that Aerial sections are clean, straight, ends greased with vaseline and fitting
tightly; bottom section held firmly in base.
iii. Check controls-not too tight or too loose. Grubscrews tight.
flick mechanism.
Check operation of
iv. Check ends; leads not frayed; terminals clean and tight. Either repair leads or inform
the E.S.
v. Check kit including spare headsets, key, valves and other spare parts.
vi. Butteries.
Inspect level of electrolyte and top up as necessary.
If hydrometer avail-
able, check specific gravity, otherwise have batteries ready with stoppers removed, for
Sqn Electrician Signals to do this.
Insure air vents are clear and stoppers tight.
Thoroughly clean and dry tops of cells. See that terminals are clean and tight and
protected by vaseline or mineral jelly. DO NOT USE GREASE. If vaseline or
mineral jelly is not available see that terminals are clean and dry.
Ensure that
switches are working correctly and making proper contact.
If leads have been removed
check that they have been re-connected correctly to proper terminals.
vii. Report (a) any faidts found which cannot be put right.
(b) any deficiencies.
Note: Remind Sqn. Electrician Signals when set is due for monthly overhaul.
6 DRILL ORDERS AND MOVEMENTS
(a) 'Crews front'- Crews fall in (at ease) in front of vehicles, facing forward. (Crew arrange-
ment varies with type of vehicle-see Parade Maintenance training pamphlet for each
type.
For schemes the crew commander takes post two paces in front of and covering
the off side mudgund the remainder of crew on his left and driver covering near-side
mudguard.
Owing to Jack of space, crews may have to be otherwise arranged).
(b) 'Attention'- before any further orders.
(c) 'Tell off by crews'-Crew commanders number in order-only the first and last adding the
word 'crew' to their numbers.
(d) 'For first (or last') parade..
• carry on'-Crews double to
appointed
vehicles and curry on as detailed in the appropriate P.M. training pamphlet.
positions
on
pletion crews fall in as for trews front.')
(On com-
(e) 'Reports.....
from crews.
No. 1 (and numbers in turn) -crew commanders give reports as gathered
(f) 'For exercise....
in the vehicle and carries on as ordered
carry on'— crews turn to the right; each individual takes up his position
(9) 'Close tanks' -Crews double to curry out duties in sheeting up ('Crews front').
(h) Fall out until (time)' or 'Disiniss'
