Then th
o tapestan 222 in Cont aluen.
ERIUCTION
tro nochanical condition of lia valicles. Vehiclen can only bo kant in
tno nochanical condition of ita valiclos.
Vahielon aan only bo kont in a
of sound socianical condition by rogular inppoction and conatant maintonanco".
Phia 21a0 applios piationlare to tho Royal Any Sorvico Come.
he drivos tho vonialo onl and my not even {111
Thia arator donands rogular daily sativition and a fixod location
tho vobicida
rotur nightly.
Tio syston io thorofore not suitable for
to in tho riola, lor tho roquiromants of sobilly and inotioal diaperaion
Veni do
1ll instructors plose note ti
stuchEs scoordingly.
1s in rondhonto anal
Po bIlliary sustom la foundod on the capacity of the drivor, not only to
hie vohiola but niao
to mintain it, 1.0. the moans to maintain the
B 2 Lino 12.
Daloto "grado" one sut ratto "
° BOOn Trith
tho vanialo.
one te "Doos it tie eror corestle?"
INITION.
faintovanco is an intoral pari of tha opezation of L.T. Ic comprises all
vater ill not piroulato till un no zu not, 1.0. abova 1600 g
mad "so not, 0 all plugs tirin for sorvice.
Lon nocossary to Loo a vanicle in mining order".
pun ines no littod ith thom
to objoot is tò achiova the croatont sossiblo number of vahlolas on tho
ho nood for this has boon over
groater than at this noment.
Page 2. Bolow lino 5 odd (iato: -
rubbor mountings considorablo oscillation normolly takos pinoo
idling specd.
"more on inos nro fitted ith infor covor, long hours of ruming tith littlo aloep - ACTIVE STuvIOn.
2ago 3. Itan 13, Line 4 Delota "Gande" subotituto "typo".
'S OF SYSTIZA.
Itch 15 Line 7
Icals".
Dalote "Is tho Muid loval corneat".
sond to road "Il soryn ruston 13 it Broo
sponsility.
Tho drivor is alrays vith his vohicle and so is reasonsible for his
im mintonance.
Ling 8. Doloto and substitite "In hydrauli.
systan frac Pron loas is luid loval corroat and is tho come
Ho is remnonsible to his Sootion I.C. .
us od?"
Tho Soction N.C.O, is responsiblo in turn to tha Platoon Officer und
Itar. 16:
ida as lino B.
¡re brako shoos froo trou unim en dru.s.
The Platoon Orfloor is rasponsiblo to the Company Commander.
2022.
That is the nomal nilitary chain of comonsibility.
I ten 26.
Tine 11 nond to rout Is piro fuze viro or spares
Tho Driver Mochanic assigts the Section and the Titter assists the
boing orried ?"
atoon as a hoic and so to hayo: -
ponsibility.
Ites 22.
Lino l insort artor "Iour", "''' itted".
roasonable load conditions?"
Insort as line 5 "If not fitteù la tire wousivo pinking undor. C..
Doloto "Is zoor box quiot in ail goars?"
noiso in the intor-zodiate, coars?"
an. "Is there any upy Conmander.
Latoon Officer
Assisted by Dati
Assistod by Mitker.
th this arrangomont somebody is resnonsible, horever, small a unit is
a single lorry evon.
• overriding minciplos of
maintonanco are:-
Cloanliness.
Insection.
Lubrication and Adjustment of Working Parts and
Renorting dofocts beyond the scope of the individul concorned.
cinciples.
the links in the chain of responsilility hovo duties in connection nith
119
037)
д%.
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
