пж от,
Paul tas
do 1102
1 and 220 1oa30s.
no 1on38.
atles:
DORCHIDEA.
INTRODUCTION.
Iho art of convalmont is a combination of two olomants: -
Tho disciplino or Concealianti.
The soimoc of Dooolt,
Noi ther noods abilition boron tho crainar, but boui aro tho job vi overy
Offloor,N. C.O, and driver in tho Ri.s.o.
lian is not ogui nod in naturo to loot tho dangor of attack tron the
air, and his natural
instinot of sali prosoration han vasted awar by rásuso
through the canturica.
Birds and animals and in their natural surroundings;
nodorn man and his voniole are not.
Therefaro a odo of controllod baraviour nust be ovolvod and onioroad
Y DISCIILINE ~ The "Disaiplino of Conconlmont and ay individual no faile
or a mononu,is saving binelr troublo at the eruense of the lives of others,
The "Disaplino of Concealmont" propula unzorood choild booono a second
ature to overy im.
to must tako aotion instinotivoly as ho does with his.
thor weapons, Conocaluont is the R. ..C!s most porerful delonsivo teapon.
CONCEAL INT' AGATIST "WRAN".
(a)
yo di eround servor (assistod by binoculars) .
(1j , at his losuro from an 0.1.
stalker vith less. loisuco.
attaoker with no leisure,
Iyo of sir Obsorvor (assisted by binooulars,.
High flying - too hig to notico dotoil, but his attention is
drawn to anything unusual.
Medinn leigh, - rare in this war - too dangorous.
Low flying - airmoult to spot exact arcas or to road a may,
bocauso of spood, but can soo a littlo von located in great
Air Camora - the "11l-reoing 050"..
Height no obstaclo (fine
dofinition and onlargenont,
Lor obliques, extremoly acourato
but would not bo triren unless suspicions aroused. Sterooscopios givo
a third dinonsion, Parchronatios pick out slightest dirferanoes
in tono and colour.
Infra red penetrates foza and trees and also
brings. out cortain colours, hiltors on pid: out othor colours.
HAT HAS 20 DE CORCE/TED
Objects are soon bacause thou aro in contrast with their badleground -
monber makground for the lAS.C. usually fong thoround indon our leot
I whools.
Tho following factors or a continention of an or ineso give this contrast: -
(a)
iny slight movenont of man or rohicio attracts attention
to obseivation. Compare "Procring of animals:
(3)
Shadow, Many objoots sould be completoly inviaible, but for their
and birds to lali andor countershading of fiah oto.
Considor crouching and flurring of animals
( 0)
For and outline. far objoots maur by mon aro of a "natural" torm
one outing ma so thay noo conspicuous against a "natural" badiground.
Compare natural for and outlino of beaste.
( a.)
Colour, Contrasting ol my botray, but Dolour cisappears with
astando, tradully bonning tones of bilaar, groy,white,
comparo vith wild animald
1 gain
6+7
