conforn vith pattern.
aru no soutral aroas in iran.
rtoneo that thoy nood spocial
transport arrivos - it
No.202 O.C.I.U., R.1.S.C.
REGIMENZAL ACCOUNTS.
DUTIES OF P.R.I.
- SERGEANTS MESS-
CANTSINS.
Refs: - Notes and Instructions on the
Method of Keeping the Accounts of
Regimental Funds.
K. Rs., 1940. parad 85-86, 1479-1482.
Regimental Standing Orders, R.A.S.C.
Paras. 106-107 & App. xviii-xxi.
Rules for the conduct of Garrison
and Regimental Institutes.
o or at tea at dot be contined with the tapest or other areasta
Unit funds are the private property of a unit and are expended at
discretion of the commanding offloar.
The general sourves of inoome of these funds are: -
Discount or rebate from N.A.A.F.I.
Profits on entertainments organized in the unit.
Subscriptions
from officers and men of the unit.
inoris danoro
iv) Grants from publio funde to new units only.
As a general rule the majority of the income of unit funds is derived from
spendings of the junior rank and file,
therefore members of Officers' and
Sergeants' messes are not entitled to
benefit from these funds.
As a general principle any monies obtained as a result of the mens' spending
may only be spent to their direct benefit, see Rules for Condurt of Garrises-eto.
Institutes paras 6 & 7.
The general intention as to the conduct of santeens etc.:
is contained in Rules
for the Conduet of Garrison eto. Institutes.
Mush of this must necessarily be
modifiod to suit oircumstances.
TELAL GRANTS FOR OFFICHRS' AND SARGHANTS' JESSES.
Amendment from Army Order 152 of 1941.
Messes divided into two categories:-
1. Static Unit lesses.
2.
Non-statio (operational) Unit Messes.
Statio unit messes are those of H.Q. Schools, units,
such as O.C.I.Us.,
i.e,, non-operational. Non-statin are operational units or
- those not included in the above categories.
GRANES.
(a) Statio: - Officers 17/5 per head - to purchase outlery and napery.
Sergeants 5/- per head - to purchase napery only.
Additional articles considered essential for statio messes will be
issued as laid down in War Accommodation Schedules.
(b) Non-statio:- Officers 42/6 per head Purchase articles necessary for
Sergeants 33/- per-head) formation of a Field Mess, i.e.
crockery, glass-ware, kitchen
utens tId, equipment, napery.
Officers mess may purchase
own cutlery.
and equipment for a feld mess.
2 no goat od so to to un to becoming pration a lit at ery one 1s
Above regulations retrospeetive and w.e.f. ist July, 1941.
Grant cleared on A.P. N.1470 from Command Paymaster.
Applications for statio unit messes will be accompanied by a certificate to
J effect:-
1) Issue in kind, of equipment, in lieu of grant has not been made.
11) Messes are (or are being) equipped in accordance with War Accommodation
Schedules.
(111) Initial grants as-previously laid down not already drawn.
Certificates for (1) and (11) must be countersigned by Officer i/c Barracks or
ledger charge; (1) in any case..
A. D.O.S., of the aren, in oases where accommodation stores ate held on unit
Over.
