DOse punotual for meals-
b) Treat senior officers with courtesy.
Warn out for meals if you intend. to
DON! too boisterous when you first join - find
Discuss Women,
Politics, Religion or 'Shop' in the loss.
Curse the Mess. servants.
Break up mess property through 'joie, de vivee!
Bring animals into
any complaint should be made to the ?.N.c
the public rooms.
3) Hear your hat and belt in mess.
about the public rooms imroperly dressed or in sports clothes.
GENERAL POINTS.
(a) Private Guests.
A member of a mess is allowed to introduce"
any friend whether belonging to the service s or not.
for all hospitality he gives to his own guess.
to the senior offiper present as a matter of cpurtesy. An officer natu
"Always introduce
(b) Ness Guests. Ghests asked by the mess are equally the guests of ey The
individual member. Therefore it is impolite to, leave the mess until all outdoor sports;
term Recreatio
ainner is hela for a special occasion remember that is a parade.
have departed. Hospitality shown to mess guests is paid for by ness fund Thus another term
wy and not only for
(1) In wer time nost messes do not dine formally, if, however a " with the present a
(11) 01120ersiana Be p assomole 10-12 minutes beforehand. An off renusus exercise vi
a wide difference
appointed to act as Presidnode and an sifioer to act as Vice-President. Me must keep fit met
officers sz at opposite ends of the vable. The president controls the wi differ between
you wish to leos the table during the meal refer to the President, liken
if you do happen to be late 10 ainner always apologise to the President, perts.
Remember that four
(111) When the last colise Is finished the table will be cleared and
This lecture does
decanters placed before the President.
The Latter passes the wine round
thet football and
clockwise direction - do not pass the wine backwards - every officer fint cher. It is the
tri roadiness to drink the King's health.
A teetotaler may drink the Kinole.
s duty is to inte
(iv) When ail glasses are filled the President will rice and say
Details of all so
• Mi Vice, the King:
tre ang" publisi
whereupon the Vice President and officuns rise and Mr. Vice says:
"Gentlemen, the King!
OF. BOREDOM.
Officers raise their glasses and coply The King' It is not necessary to
It sroula be rea
your glass when drinking the king's health.
(v). Do not smoke until the Precicent gives permission.:
Dessert and coffee foll ale one 101 18%
EverTone knows th
(vil If there are guests prosant do not leave the table until the mine vere An Army' 3
been passed round tiice, on other occasions, onre.
employed. Somethi
(a) The Headovarters Ness ot the R.A=S.C., is at Buller Barraoks, Aldersh efriciency and i
e) The R.A.S.C. Regimental. Association is a charitable organization forattention to ment
and other ranks, an administers both the Regimental Association Itembers 1. I.M. No. 42 App
Fund and the R.A.S.C. Benevolent Fund,
The fees are i/52 a vear por an ordinary member and £3. 3. ed. fora.
In order to aâmi
The Cums jounal com be ebtained for 3à by members and 6a byn neces:
Is setis
Is patient has l
In snar be sock
The lain Branch is as 1+2-113 Vi asor House, Victoria Etreet. Londonto Lose Ehoulà an
and there are 174 eub-branches spread over the vorld. The O.C.I.U: has itsay do hy persona
sub-branch under thn direction of the Officer i/o Administration.
The suo-brencros purchase ordinary merbers tickets from the main brats the a 4eS, On
it is convenient
2/12 and life members vichots for 22. 2. rã., and so have their own 'commite Corss unlike
uth, last or Wes
up to March 1942. The
The handbooks of the R.A.S.C. Reginental Ascociation gives all inform languages that
40,694..
rembership is - Life Members 1427 ard ordinary mine role of the c
ims - artificens
All nadets at the 0.C-C.U. should avail themselves of the opportunite tomsman is u
becoming membens of the R.A.S.C. Raginental Association.
nents close at h
(t) Dresso An caficon muet sat au exemple in dress, altays be clean and V. He is isea t
Battle dress is working dress kut change into service dress in the evening-
Entertairmen bre
your welcome.
when asked to any other noss or entertainment "do no?
she. dark, The
Leave when the senion of the parly doos so.
When attending as a guest representing your mess
to hate and is
with other
oss, cinema. h
/Cont'd sheet 3.
