2ER 21.
ration of rubbar has boaono of vlaal iizartanoo.
2010t onn cront a troat acving in rư bem
to vatoh.
Spoc ssod apoad ltuita not to so axaoaciod.
No deiviac on brakos.
o dre aeivo nootloo to oe doslot tion.
io ovanloaiang ana loada to ba uniy distribatoã.
1r03810 to io corruat (na l01d corl 1n 0.I.1l. Ciroulan 360 02 21.3.4201
Noton: -
Iro prossuea gaugoa nust bo anoalar, agninat not onos proquantlr and
caults notod 15 1033.406.
simllno punpa mat bo inspootal traqoatli Pantiouani tho filtors.
othomise oil and dirt mill bo pumod.
Valvo dust aovers muss almaga oo uaod.
Pressure in spare tyra to do mintalnad.
No oil, tar, groasa or parartin to ho allorad to cone into contact ritl
Corroct aligmont.
Carciul comering.,
Ronovol of stanag.
No to: -
Roang đá ty và th mạnnt tooi
aonantod if aliche, mularnisod if sovero.
Soo thet trin trees have
no stonoa atiol botrroei tha ..
Chango muna poriodioaly - usuo li diagonalli. Spare to do brought into
o at ovory third i/s inspootion.
Rowovo i'or ranoulding
vhoa duo - sos pioturas in lodol Roon (C.I...I.
roular No. 241). Roughly whai conteo on truad troin aooti, Rogoval too
on is e rasto; too lato palos it aparsitlo to ronoula.
Xoop aaue cakos and
sano otago of roar all rouna if possiblo.
ivoid tarving and taico spoaial onrs in denting avoy prou a loro.
lTorunily ua seoond goar lor atartis to avoid snatoh.
Protoot trros fron stroas ligit.
Storng:
Tadlo ocrofully.
Ксор бгу.
Irotcot fron lit.
Store tubes slightly inflatod in oovers and sione than upright in
Iooder troughs. Do not pilo than fl t. (coo C.IJT. Circular 199)
Il tyros and tubes nust be lout sen uadoly, hang tho tubo (slightly
inflatca) on tro voodan pogs (sec T.I.!.. Ciroular 192/12 for liagran.j
Iio mast bo graphited (paint on party nixturo of graphito na vator,
p a yoar, tho tres being spocially runovod ior this il nocussary.
tting and Rmoving.
Duvacs
Rin nust be thorougily oloanod nno graphitod,
Bvery man wust be taught to tast and purify water, and must unuer
Mny distortion of rin, clonchos or socuring rings nust bo roctified.
the value of mter under ootive service conditions.
With "wall" tupo of tyre the boad nust bo pushod richt down in tho moll
(risi)
Establishmont iill allow a water duties man - see he goes on a cog
boioro the other bead is loverca ni? or on.
Preferably given by the Hedical Officer - talk on V.D.
No force showld be nooossary il gazting hes bom carriod out.icovy
$11)
R.A.lí.C, personnel etc.
Duties offc of covers.
blos vita a hareier umecossar cal vory hamrul.
-0 1/c PIntoon on taking ovor now vohzclos must enter coyer nunbers on
Lectures on Eygiene, Sanitation, Conservancy - at home and abroaa,
inside of front cover of ,3.412 churing anto of ontr.
Establishment allows a Sanitary lan - see that he goes on a
Thon a nou covor is roquiroa 0 i/c intoontil: cranino 1.3.412, compioto
Clerks.
- Demanstration on how to wash clothing®
nilonge run and onter this undor reserd of ropairs, eto.
Irein tnem in their routino duties - indexing, filing, registratig
The storoimn on issuing till co ploto the ontry in 1.3.412 br
cleries.
knomleage of regulations, correspondence &eto.
insorting nar date ana covor nudor.
"G" Clerks and Sy
Changos betrean vohiclos uust e rcoordod in rospootive A.3s 412 viti.
ntloages zun, odonctor roadinss and dotor.
Clerks nay be' mustered fron driver persomel in the unit. See thaposa1 of rzras.
who have aptitude for this work are mustered.
Ire ture inst be socuraly fastorod to avoid, ciaring.
Covors ruoved for romulding aru rotumod to 1.2.3.D. ioto:-Tyros aro
•., cont'd sheet Red Lebel" iuon - 500 coi.000uts IV
419
-де.
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
ACA
