Dar' €
was to
Braining Sho
naturas 30 minutos.
on courao and instruotora to 80o
15 he has contzol.
(vii)
unit is authortead.
Don't forget the principlos laid down in 5.
Do not allow any mistakes to pass
- other your own on from the
a lork he must have attonded a Comed
but you can spond a wholo afternoon in rearoation.
Don not put all the "aotava" and "panaiva" pariodo in one part of
the weokly programa and nomos of men so that at a lator date
chaok up on the subjects covered por man.
Keep your self up to date with paaphlots.
SUBJECTS TO BE COVERED.
Physiant and Raaroational Fairing:
Haip toam spirit and koop overyone fit.
and send on arad or command course if untrained.
a bath aftorwardr.
Move at1on on a to not a 97122 at hat to Doe
with the happenings in the vorld.
i chen Try on dano indoor on on Location, - red erition of y
airarart, troops of both sidos.
Advancos work to bo done in the fold - Piro ordere and use
Map should be ahown in a prominent place and marked with amall flags.
mon the rango to to bo visited go there beforchand, and find o
Socuity - salvage - care of publia property - orops etc.
details laid down in Standing Ordors. Know your duty as Office TRAINING HOURS.
Arrange your details and
instruot them in d
discipline beforchand.
leoturos, disqussions given by nembers of the unit or
1o0k through to see there are no live rounds and
on in on to an hook die not of expon after o
Recreation and entertainments within and outsido the Unit.
nonal overy man will ba able to work in his rospirator - have
all theis gas equipent.
Evary man will know the procoss of
system of alarma in caso of gas raid, use on
Ma that a nitrom to a t in dat too once in .4, P, ana
(1v)
(V)
Nossing
Systen of Nassing and improvised messing
Blold Training.
Trashing in the Fiola de of vital importance, also be thinking &
Ty 8e22-dofence, paratroops, tanks, gas and improvsaod 11p0 in
Piolde
Foster offensive spirit.
Havigation by sun and stars eto.
Messages.
Water Duties
Every man must be taught to test and purify water, and must unden.
the value of meter under active service conditions.
wIth "Tal typo of tyre tho boad must bo pushod richt dom in the vell
Establishment will allow a woter duties man
- see he goes on a co
borore the other bead is loverca or? or on.
First Aid.
No force ahoula bo nocossary if siting las voch carried out icary
Preferably given by the Medical Officer - talk on V.D.
blows vith a hector umacossary cal vosy hariful.
R. A.M.C. personnel eto.
Duties co of covers.
-0 1/c Platoon on taking ovor now vohlulus must enter cover numbers on.
Health.
Lectures on Hygiens, Sanitation, Conservanay - at home and abroa
insido of font covor of 1.3.412 sharing anto of entry.
Establishment allows a Sanitary Man - see that he
Than a now cover in roquired 0 i/c Jatoon till ormine 1.3.412, comploto
goes on a cour
Laundry.
- Demonstration on how to wash clothing.
miloge run a eator this undor rogora of ropairs, ato.
Clerks.
Tho storamn on
issuing vill comploto the entry in 1.3.412 by
Train then in their routine duties - indexing, filing, registrati
insorting lar date md covor nuilar.
lanowleage of regulations, correspondence &etc.
Changos betroon voicos must be recordod in coupootivo 1.3s 412 tri th
clerks.
"G" Clerke and & milogon run, odonator reading and datou.
Clerks nay be mustered from driver personnel in the unit. See thyponl of tros.
ro tyro mist ba suouraly fustionod to avoid daring.
who have aptitude for this work are mustered.
Covers rooved for ronuiding ou ratumod to it..D. Hoto: -Pyros arc
•.., cont' a sheRod Labol iton - 500 olai 000uits IV.
1,9
4487)
PLEASE REMEMBER
PLEASE REMEMBER
