II
Offices and Violas, pies us which are posted up in all Uperating kooms.
Cadets will make themselves a worlanted withW Security Instructions for Signal
STANDING ORDIRS IN THE SCHOOL.
The Tp. Idr. or Crew Conthe will march the Class to and from the W/School, in
"double" as directed in Battalion Orders.
"quick time" or at the
rooms but will tee left out ide one the peg provided for that purpose.
Berets overcoats, mackintoshes and other impedimenta will not be brought into the
between the School and the F.G.S.
he room at the beginnins on a penod anu will. report the, class presetit or otherwise.
Instructor takilig the Class is not preschy the senior Cadet Will report immediately to the
parked under or against the covered way. During the mid-morning break, berets will be worn
Bicycles will not be
The Tp. Ldr. will call the
attention when the Offr. taking the class enters
Troop Office or Wing Office as the case may be.
4. Cadets will always have their Notes with them in the School.
carried in the field except under direct orders from the Ip. Offr.
They will not be
T. and O. Notes will not
be marked or defaced.
Butteries must not be "drageed" on the floor or moved by the lid.
Batteries will always be carried hy poth handles and put down with the greatest care
than one battery be carried at a time.
On no account will more
zero beat or when extraneous noise renders it necessary.
Headphones will be worn round the neck and not over the ears except when locating
7. No markings of any description Wil be made on scripts used for wired circuits.
8.
Stores will only be issued from the serving counter and no cadet will enter by the side
door.
It is the responsibility of the cal bt @ M. to draw all W/equipment required for the Tp's
period of training and he must produce his tally when so doing.
The Tr Leider will ensure that at the conclusion of a period, the room is left tidy.
Desks and chairs will be left straight and telephones,
microphones, etc., will be hung up.
Lighis will be turned off and all buildings and/or rooms locked up on the conclusion of work.
Waste paper will be placed in the
W P.Bs. and
no debris
will be deposited in desks.
Chinagraph markings on celluloid will be eradicated and maps returned to Troop Office.
10. Canteen cars are for the use of W/Wing Permanent Staff and will not be used by
Cadets.
11. No repairs will be undertaken to private W/Sets etc.
Remember-The W/Wing trusts and regards you as potential Officers.
equipment and premises as though they were allotted to a Ip. under your command.
Treat the
and we help you.
Help us
STANDING ORDERS IN THE FIELD.
1. General-In these Orders the word "car" includes any type of vehicle used on
a W/exercise.
Each Cadet will carry a map in a map case and chinagraph pencils.
folded ready for the day's operations before parade.
Maps will be
appropriate colours and conventional signs.
Maps will always be marked using
A syndicate will consist of not more than 2 cadets per car.
The vehicle Comd for the time being is responsible for seeing :-
(a) that these Standing Orders are obeyed
(b) that the Standing Orders of the O.C.T.U. are obeyed and in particular to report to
the V.M.W. any case of dangerous driving or exceeding of the speed limit by the
driver of his car.
No smoking within 5 yards of a car.
Berets will be worn at all times in the open.
First and Last Parade will always be carried out. No cadet will dismiss without
orders from the acting Sqn. Leader. The acting Sqn. Leader will ensure that he is on the air
until all stas have reported back.
As soon as maintenance is completed, Crews will fall in " Crews front" and await orders.
Continued on Page 3 of Cover.
