* of loưos,
ho sun code either: (2) by two stas faizing
tar a pariod of time or (2) by a groat
he sane code simultaneously.
ira links infomation or orders received
• - Espionage etc.
r be used
used within
Codo nanos under the last two categorias will cuntinue to be used
after contact.
(c) • Jaxgon.
This is not n code - It horely means framing a nessage in such a way
that it will by reason of the connon knowledgo of Sender and Rocipients
be intollizible only to them or to a linitod class of people. The degree
of security will depend on the number of persons in the "know". c.5•
"Ref our conversation under the stars last night, have received
complete confirmation". Sacurity may be 100, or
валл
2t(24.103, 716 Mores cast shoe - Have nounted Multun in Parvo", ould
nake it difficult for sone operators on enemy intercept, but would not
doceive a first cliss linguist. The vohiole, however, night be. a Tank,
ind Car, LoRd. or Carrier and howevor good the linguist the type of fomation
would not be disclosed.
Expressions such as "Square Leg" - "Silly Point" - "Cover Point",
night delay even a first class linguist until he could find someone versed
in the rules of the gane.
As in the case of Codes it is useloss for any period of tine to use
the same Jargon. e.s. always referring to Tanks as horses. You might just
as well use the word "vehicle", but do not in conjunction with it, use any
phrase which will give away its type.
5.
SWLECTION OF CODE WORDS:
(a).
NEVER select a single syllable word or a word of more than one syllable
where the syllables are liable to be slurred e.s. Good Code Woras -
POTATO - BANANA - POPHYS - PIPSQUEAK. Bad Code Words - BICITE -
ONION - FLOWER. Exceptions iCK and BEER which, although bad, are hallowed
by ting.
(b).
Code Words must have no reforence to what they represent. c.g. Do NOT
USA SAIMON for a river or MAHONEn for a bill.
(c).
Whore a series of Code Words are required for similar things e.&.
fregs, the Code words should have no interconnection e.g. frequencies should
not all be fish but 2730 BANANA, 4760 SHYLOCK, 5790 POLAND.
Where
however tho code is largely a gonvenience code coS. Bounds and Report Linos,
words easily remanbered nay bo usod 0.8. Freenan - Hardy - Willis for Report
Lines and Arnold Bonnett for Bounds. A systen such as this has the advantago
that it is casy to menorise and nothing, or possibly initial letters only,
need be marked on the nap.
(a).
If a Code word is to be used many tines uver the air, the ency nay be
foxed by solection of one on which the changes can be rung. c.g. 1st
report line - any colour. A different colour for the same report line
can then be used in different conversations or by diffurent troops.
- 3 -
