AMIRS.
eried with the arnoution of ca.
DIVROL MUTATION.
ILl Troope
- aitto -
Introduotion.
the Mrst link in the chain of rosponsibility for
voon dovisod to ensuro that ho doos
Copa Top
unit having medical personn
Tho drivor is
and
definito routino la
min tonanco
not Intl in his duty.
To a novioo an a volzolo lool, and in fact is, a compliantoa piooo of
19ust bo inauguratod to holp him.
wait mich mey. have medial
malinory and sono herd ond rast sohono
special bases.
Othariao vith the bost mul in tho world his maintonance vill bo dono in
bits and pioos nero and thoro, marta o tho valolo will be ilosod altogothor
Normally eun
and much of his
timo and offorts will bo wastoa.
Routino vintenance - Tho 16 Maste.
Ling equipment for the Roya
Tho sys tam which lus boon adoptod in the Rod.S.0. and thmughout tho Army
is onllod tho
"46 Pack Systou",
It has boon provod to bo hijily successful
1 In bulk. Normally Rinceto
In practioo,
2s
121 points on tho voiclo thioh nood tho drivor's attontion aro dividod
into t sin and oh group is called a cast.
(G Packs in sho caso of
I/o50l03)•
er in balk.
Baoh Task sots out in losioal order tho various points roquiring
either on tactical or at modification to suit sono spocial typos and unlias.
attention by the driver and lays dom axactly mat ho has to do at enon point.
Tho lagles are gonorally applionhle
to all vehiclos but may nocd slight
roch task is reckoned to
talo an amorioneed driver about & hour (somo
requirtients in advance
will have to be improva
aog, ete. (possibly
Till
tala. loss and sono mora bui that ig
the avorago, and at loast one lask
nust bo performed by the divor each day.
It vill be soon thorofore tiat in this arrangemen't wore adhored to tho
whole venicle would
bo ca.cr0s
in 16 days
but it is found more converiont, on
account or fortnightly ian cotions,
to perfom lasies 4 and 5 togothor on
020
orne Divisions.
day, and Testes 6 and 7 togeto:
- 02 010 day -
thus covering, the whole vohic?o
in tli days.
The river also has the armlement to 1.3.412 in which he insorts his
initials as ho porforms arch desk,
depots,
During carly training in the systen all vohiclos and their drivors shoula
L issue stores.
main supply
bo asscubled, ana
the sane tack periormod by all drivers undor the supervision
A22- be a3lo.
of the IT. C.Os,
In quite a short time the drivor vill pick up the systom and
to in addition shippi
torage and issues of's instanco, during period of waiting) •
to performa tho Tasks by hinsel. whorovor he happons to lo (for
the Driver must bo taugit oractly how much ho is allarod to do in oach
atch maintenance co mask and he must understand mat it in a serous oliceo to excacu the Lit
Iaid doin. He must be encouraged to roport innediatcly any dofuct which is
outside his sooge.
of the fleet, and
In th's way, all adjusinants, ropoirs and replacents necessary ano
discovored immodiatoly and tho appropriato aotion talion.
wing etc.
The system not only onsuros that voiclos are proporty minininod but
the driver in secing and toucing the various parts milst porforung his
Tasks soon gots to recogiso than, and rapidly beconing profioint, takos a livoly
interust in his vehiclo,
1 large numer of drive. am bo taught the syston in a shont time and no
toomical marlonge is regula.
In fact ib is part of the sohone that tho
driver is Nor taudat ony non.a
his veniclo offoctivoly e-
dotnils mtál ho has boon mintaining
he tangi how the wheela
no, tho prina pla boing that once a man
the tomtation to "tinier!
macao lo has proac dicticult in overooming
Tho drivor must simon sooy be vohiolo clon, A oloen voniolo is
/24
562/
