ctial shel
that
Sub-Unit,
nts
great
Ter
which
vend
necessary
C.H.
Sarettes
sch
£cr
sound
ne
reca
esi
instead
• 9 -
thơ condition of the road",
It will often not be practicable - or
tel with aqual strictness to the defence as to the proccoution.
rat Sumury Intals, for the Rules of Ividence to be
i evideroe must be relovunt. Each ase must be judged on its merits,
as an indicatior of the werking of the rule that evidence tending
wer soroly that the acoused is, because of his previous record, the sort
rould? Likely to ocait the offence alleged is inadmissible.
actions: - (a) in accused clains oredit for a gou character or attaoks
motor c. prosoaution' -, witnesses, (b) if it is necessary in order te
shr systen or intent under col tain nircumstanoes.
No hearsay is admissible. Hearsay is the loral or written statement o
rson not before the court', for examole, what the girl in the N.A...F.I.
penite
told the witness, or his nother said in a letter he produces to the Court.
Such statements are not sworn.
Defendant has no opportunity to orcss-examine. wa
court has no opportunity ic cbserve the demeanour cf
the person making
the statement to see whether or act he appears to be
Exceptions. The principal are;-
02 she
Sent
a cf te
ene if
& beddi
4 very largu ruber ci documents spacifically mentioned in dod. See
163 which should always be studied when preparing a case for Court
Statenents nade in the presence of the accused, in so far as they
affect his reply or other reaction to then.
Certain docunents such as a Birth Certificate, Certificate of
Corvintion ete - not doctor's certificate
B: - 4. I. 131:/1941 recognises that upon sumnary trial of c.M.P.
is is desirable tc avid unnecessary travelling and there-
fore if the aceused does not dispute the facts or desire the
i sed by
evidence tie a given on Oath, the C.O. can act upon the signed
rt of
statererts upon the back of the a.F. B.252.
erely fol
Best Evidence. If a document exists its conterts nusu nct be proved
by cral evidence or by a copy.
Reasons. To provide against: -
1. Inaccurate quotation of the contents.
A4163 (copin clant)
2. Inaccurate copying, e,go a tel gran in the course of transmission.
If the "other side" (prosecution or defe
e as the case nay be) has
the criginal and refuses to produce it.
If the criginal is lost or destroyed.
Certin certified copies under 1od. Sec 163.
NOTR: The rule does noi prevent proof ci a fact by one witness even
if 10 are available, nor the use of indirect evidence when
direct evidence is available.
a witness nay not express his cpinion upon any natter which it
is for the Court to decide - fct example,
whether the
language of the accused
Was obscene en his driving dangercus cr. his statement an admission of the
Exceptions. The evidence of experts such as handwriting experts,
doctors, engineers.
(alsc cases ci drunkenness,
though it is inperative
that reasens for this opinion nust always be given by the witness) •
The prosecution mist prove
confession was made
voluntarily - they will not succeed in this if it was made under the
Influence ce a threat or pronise nade by a person in a position of authority.
NOTE: That when sore than one person is charged, a confession is only
bridence against the person noking 15.
Witnesses need not answer any question,
the answer to which
would tene to roose them to crimal prosecuticre
This does not protect
an accused frem caces dimination about the otfence with which he is
Reading
H-B. Ponc
clipton,
13/4/42
2GM.
5
