Pate
si gou
mised nite
soard in
shit- 3, times.
sou on top
náth pals
На гогодми, пляа.
EANEMETON О УМОННО:
No. 2 = Conerale
Rocar X.Ru. 1940. Para, 80.
Voltaro In tho War timo
Any at hono,
Regu. for *odlonl
SoryLoor In tha Army,
1930,
Uphe Mighting Solation-
Dunlop.
N,8.D.B..2om
5 & 10.
Mandbook of iulitary
Hygione 1941.
Hanual of Sanitation &
INciono, 1934.
Lemong elona hilty dor Soutention and yedone or the lion thin whit dovolvos
tact? on to the co wander of that unit.
Sanitation,
so disefuline or a unit,
thoroforo, booones part of
and the disciplino of a unit can ho judged to a groat
extent by
standant and ita alok rate,
nat aliya teneabor
the sanita gant their personnel uny tor
Platoon officons and N.C.0s.
long poriods be boyond thoir
sporeston, and in sodontary cocupations, 1.o, driving voliolos and olorks oto.,
Sorerove nood to bo thoroughly trained in personal unnitation and to be given
hurt periods of plasiont and roareational training onch day.
DENTURIONS:
Is the scionoe of the maintonanoo and promotion of hoalth nd
prevention of diseaso.
(0)
Sanitation.
cora to artion appliation of the notonog o" letono to variol
(e) Conservangy. Is the collotion, renoval and disposal or wasto produots, such
as axoreta and rofuso,
NES DUNLES IND RISPONSIBEDENTES OF A RIEDDEL ONNICR.
a) the rajutant-conoral a Department is rosponsinio for "pho Ivrione and the
Sanitary loaswus for the proservation of hoalth and the prevontion of diseaso"
(a) Tho mit orticon is rosponsidlo for tho prosorvation of health of the troops
A mier his courand and will bring to their notico the advantagos of vaccinovion
oto,
Ho is also responsiblo for routino senitation and the goroml clomlinoss
ê his men, for tho sanitary conditions of his unit and no vill onauro
that all
orders in rogard to hoalth and sanitation are rigidly carriod out by tho troops
mier his control,
the Modioal Officor will adviso him on all matters do the proservation of
health or his troops,
The Unit Commondor will also unsuro thnt cortain of his person ol (abovo.
the ncber ho requiros) aro trinod to carry out vator dutios, snaitation and
chiropody, and the lodion Officer will havo spocially treinca persomel to
supervise and instruct in those matters.
CHiSES OF DISENS.
Discosos affooting the Army may be dividod into tiro groups :-
(a) DiseAsEs due to sono dofoot in tho conditions of life valch provont to
Ficient worlăng of the body,
such as exposuro, extremes of hoat and ool.
bad
housing a clothing, unsuitablo food, polions, excossivo indulgence in alcohol
ce tobãcco,
Pascases duo to such onuses are laom "virommental discasos".
b) Discases due to the invasion oi tho lody by living organians or "gorms
Those discases are non as "Conunion)l, Discasos and lay Do sub-dividod os
- entorio, dys ntry, cholora oto.;
Those gorn
lingors gain entranco to tho
influonsa, diahthoria, corobro sE nol
Chose discases are
spread by gorms fron the
in by healthy non.
121)
soabies etc. Those discases aro
interco esca
FT) Inscot oF animal Dormo discasas - lialaria, Dorguo (nosquito), Typhus (1100%
Bouck! tex
419
7/487/6999
PLEASE REMEMBER
TO RETURN THIS SLIP
WITH YOUR DOCUMENT
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
