pay
An anni
to
me? dated ons ta ar stoppagos of pay, avardod by a court
Tho lattor soltion
the various cirounstancos in which daduations way be,
itary
2060
and
ale thon a na's ai inly pay. Tho comonest are componsation for
anto to or loss of property, equipment eto. occasionea by negleot.
Is a contaibution to tsa maintenande or a nan's wire and childron.
I under compulsory deduction for this purpose, must be
tat with not less than one quartor of h. 7 pay if uider the rank of sorgeant,
lo not less than ano thind If sergeant on 7.0. (4./. U.5(2)).
tair th provision: Of to Royal Verat, (Art. 912). Tore
105
pay,
As is an automa, Parfeiture, and quite disti it from any
sorgt, alus
raisent thet oy be avarded by an officor.
the Royal arran' lays dorm that a man shall forfeit his pay
in the follaring cases:..
Lally recommended b
1 For every day of absence on desortion on vithout leave.
above the
2. For every day in sustody while under, sentence of imprisonment,
pay:
dotention or fiaid punishnent, except
that in the case
starian
field pistont per is not autonatically forfeitea for days
ca which punishment is not undergune. (..C.I. 7496/1941).
day in custody under close arrest (including
hospital) or of confineent in a civil prison or police cell: -
a) On a charge for an offence of which he is afterwards
sany men have now co
convicted by a court martial of civil court.
is pay.
b) On a charge of absence without leave for which he is
aiteraris awarded detention or field punishment by his C.o.
29 (z))
4 For every day on thich he is in hospital on account of sidness
certified by the IO. to be due to an offence against the Army
oply
only to post-19
5. For any period which on aotive service during which forfeiture
of pay las been avarded by a Court lartial or by his c.o.
antive,
War substantin
BISTHOZION BENTIRT "OLDTITARY PAT" AND "PAT".
Forfeiture of and pens deductions from pay under A.1-5, 46 and 138:
oly of "ordinary" pay, but the forfeiture ordered by the ? y Marrant
Always of "pay"
"Ordinary pey" means the rate of pay with increases, if any, after
so fica periods, to rich a sodier during hi: colour service is entitled
reason of is rani, appointient, trado group or trade classification,
only.
bitional remuneration, sich as proficiency pay and the various foris of
ditional pay does not i
within the temn "ordinary ny" (4.1.5, s.138,
-1023)
The is on postie
"Pay means the pay; including incoascs, if any, arter specifiod
-30à, Tar pay und 2aX,0. 161/1940, proficioncy PET, long servico and
b conduot pay, to thu on the soldier is ontitled by reason of his rank,
cantment, or trade classilication,
dream casually. CA.0. 66/1941, A.C.I. to Part I Of the Schedule):
but not additional enoluments that way
The explanation of the apparent discre anoy is that althoug forfeiture
ot reckonable
wer the Amy let is only of part of a man's pay, the Pay Warrant orders
Poitod are.
nay, under the Pay Warante
on penal deductions, Therefore,ne truy hot, he forfeits "pay" (i,e. all
onest only "ordinary pay"
a to contait all his nau pon all dars on mich he is contenced to forfeiti
in lact, when a man is sentenced to
22LI tary
0. B° 40
remember
ISSUES OF PAT. See 1.0. 66/194,1, :
•sea
Usoful troops
ids fruy Order direats that the following rules shall govoin' the
sođ
have
- IS:
CENC
vit on 1
te to defustiona fron pay to soot publio changes os payments to fallion or
to soldiers whose pay aocounts are in dobt, or who are
no oblization to reduoe the cash issue, to the minimum.
L•L soldien nust be lest with 1d a day if
otherm.
follorang are the minimun amounts which nust be paia to a soldior but there
Ho must be marri to
TS -1
the folloving conditions apply:-
/(p) ..
