28.
above intentiaper ha should not apply for a Court Hartial
case hinself as one of absence without leave, (W.O.L. 110/Gen/624
Investigation the C.O. has any doubt whethor
The offence of ilyartion cannot be punished within the unt f
the sooused had
at Summary Ir
This applies even when a Court of Inquiry under
declared an absenor in over 21 days, with the result that the
struok off as a deserter.
Tnaddition to the forfeituro
KeR. 774 and R. P. 124/125).
(Nor detatis of this epecial court over nas - particua
seniority (a.C. I. 2586/41).
надоше деате) а сенди де деволь висансь аиболао голдалой наш очині воддов во ве с
the condition of the road".
In proving eith co of these offences the naximin üse
La1 eviderco mist be relovant.
of the work
as an indication
that the accused is, be
likely te conni
certificates of arrest or surrender and certified
of absence by Courts of Inquiry under mod. See 163.
See. Adir.Is, l person who
should a*
of declarati
show nerely
potions: - (a) if accused elains ore
proseaution'- witnesses,
how systen or intent under certain di
is adnissible.
Under Hon. See 19 drunkenness itself is
and discrderly" in civil law.
mhe offence will vary in sericusnes
to the circunstances and also rank of the offender (an officer is lin
s an offence; compare minenson nitress, or his acther saia 1
before the court', for ex
Such statenents are not swer
Defendant has no opportuntty
In the case cf privates charges will nernally be dispos
Court has no opportunity te
sumarily and not sent to Court Martial and the punishnent will usua
the statenent te see whether
The principal are:-
fine according to the scale set cut in K.R. 506.
This is presorib
cases of "simple drunkenness" and the words "'active servicell in k.p'
Exceptions.
very large ruber ci docu
not be interpreted in this connection as applying te conditions at ju
163 which should always be s
Persons charged w. in drunkenness nust not be put through any fon
Statements nade in the prese
or be tried until sober:
privates will be placed i close arrest, a
affect his reply or other re
and visited every twe hours and nay be deprived of bects an
Certain docunents such as a
For ather provision see K.R. 601/7.
Corv -tion eto - nct decter:
COURIS OF INQUIRY AND BOARDS OF OFFICERS
NOTE: - 4. I.
131-/1941 recognise
19 is desirable to aT
if the accused does ne
These assenblies of officers for the collection of facts,
evidence te
> given on Oatl
hon Seo 70 cr Sec 72 - are dealt with in the Demonstration of a Curt
staterer ts upon the back of
the guidance of the C.O. or other convening authority.
They have no powers of punishnent and their reports are z.
Best Evidence.
If a document ex
by oral evidence or byra copy-
To provide against: -
Inaccurat- quotation of the
Inaccurate copying, e-g. a
EVIDENCE - INTRODUCTION.
exceptions.
Gils 1 mine,.
If the "other side" (proses
be that admissible in the civil courts.
rr.L. Chap b
.. Sec 128 directs, that the evidence admissible at Courts Wart
the criginal and refuses to
sane rule applies whenever a man is upon trial, e. 8.
If the criginal is lest cr
and alsc at the talding of a Summary of Evidence.
set out hereunder.
It is universally agreed the
Certuan certified copies un
before an 0.g
It is therefore d!
importance that a grasp shoula be attained of at least the main polo,
NOTE: • The rule does not prevent
$ 10 are avai able, nor th
Full details are contained in the M.Il.L. chapte!"
it must be remember & that evidence, supplemented only by facts!
reaschable doubt the substance of the offence alleged.
judicial note can be taken (e.g. that we are at war, or relativé rank
direct evidence is availabl
the any) is the material with which the presacution must prove berti
A witness nay not exp
is for the Court to decide - fcr exa
to prove more than the "substance" of the charge for
was obscene on his driving dangercus
under R.P. Hi
can oone to a "special finding" e.g. guilty of stealing only 50 cigar
whereas the charge alleged 100.
It 1.s not nag
doctors, engineers:
Exceptions. The avicence ci exp
But it will not do to prove
authorises this in certain specified circumstances ug. a conviction
othar than the one al, ged, unless the case cones under See 56,
(alsc cases of
absence without leave upon a charge of desertion.
that reasons for this opinion nust 2l
Confession.
distinguished fron inadnissible evidence.
thủs is direct &videnge of such stabbing by "g" .
indirect evidence - often caira circunstantial evidence - nust
The prosecution m
voluntarily - they will not succeed a
of a threat or prenise nade
no bolonging to preyes finding nearby a biloa-stained knife
That when nore than one I
evidence against the person making it
this is perfectly
Loading questions (which must not be
If "*" swears he sal
socd indirect evidence:
ins ca taegist, the paswer desired, e-g. "were the roads slippery
would tend to
Privilege Winessos neod not e
axpose hen te oriminal
an accused fron cross-exanination aba
aska, ' in chieft are quest.
Clifton,
/what was the condition,
13/4/42
