Nc. 20
(4) Leonand in rusistance of population due to poverty and
housing, poor sanitution and privation,
due to war and Pas
Water Su
No. 3.
REf: Rus
1)attack at sours, ' infootion, 1.0. Proteot individuals by net
prophylaotio olothing, quicate, Camps and Bivcuaos away fron Water
(11) atte veotors, 1.er, mosquito carriers of the discase by
Fumigating, spraying by hand or aeroplane.
(141) attack on breeding grounds, s,'e., alt water supplies, ponds ealth and for the prevention of
DUe provision of an ample supp
sunny pools - chiefly within half mile radius.
Ju nore urgent calanity than the
brain stagnant water, swanps, fill in low
round lo fron impure water supplies na,
t in nany instances - especially
becche ao urgent that it outweig
As a temporary neasure varicus types of cil, paraffin or
sprayed on te all water surfaces, with a vete suffconting or poischinnerated below tc bring emphasis,t
The main water-borne diseases h
y are as follows: - Typhola, Pada
Water nay alsc be e
and pupae which breathe on the water surface.
ER REQUIRE ENTS.
The quantity of water consined
a) Rabies is a disease which affects aninals and the virus is contained,
The fcllcwing aré a
calva, and humans are affected when bitten or licked by such diseasedan climates.
The incubation perica varies fren three weeks in the case of a severe bite
lien.
20 gallons - barre
- field
2-5
Face to 12 menths in the case of abrasions or licking on the hanas and fes
Infeoted animal vill have saliva at the nouth and will snap at everything
Animals.
10 gallens - nerna
- ninin
- norna
and should be destroyed.
1 pint
(b) Prevention.
In het countries where rabies is prevelant dogs, should be licensea an
2 gallon. - Deser
the nane of the cwner, all stray dogs should be destroyed.,
For the essential púrposes ef us;
ized with carbolio acid er sinilar disinfectant without delay, and the quily allewance for each man in the
period may allow a curse of anti-rabine injections.
go for any length ef time with
In all ousus of doubt of rabies, the brain of the aninal concerned sise to infection with veroin..
extracted and sent back te the base hospital for analysis, and possible parried normally invater bettles, in t
UNDULANT OR MERA FEVER,
ater containers of portable ceckers.
Passed on through goats milk principally in lalta.
develop, but has a serious wasting effect.
ESPONSIBILITY.
is properly steralized befcre use.
7. TPHUS TEVER.
Not fatal when o
service all water fer h
Essential to see that all golind after investigation nust be purifi
hat the troops receive sufficient wat
Lon is satisfactory und that it is saf
services are auvisory and instructicna]
Lice are the cheater duties personnel to carry out the
nich puss on the infection through excreta rubbed to cracks and mcmand nay aise finu wield Hygiene section
nich mass on the infection throuch aranet thed, tarta anand may else pina diola Hygiene Secti
a) Stilar to typhoid but considerably more virulent..
• hi eh fever do ufosted ana considerable casualties - as much as 75. 11p
Where bulk supplies are wealt with
During nobile operations, and
a not tao in tho eury etages - l preventativo nonaures are not in troops, arinking water has frequently te
one gioth bet new sent and the deside the and water botto, a the thi
8, Po, no i cose do rides proud in tho wildle Best ana partioularly in la
versonal cleanlineas is the pring preventative.
skin and the cuth are affected fron the snahl hairy swinning arentures i
ic thu nuked eye, mich enter the blcod struan and set up an irritation"
rise te the syagtons of the disease.
for treating water in such receptacles y
ponds and banals.
prevention - UFiln" -(The H
9. 1Be ( Meet to the hee fy are their restial countarios and must!
General renarks for 0.C., Units anu
1o on onus bit they anot lare in the ust us they have done at hotl
einployed in water duties
scolhouse, must be above suspioion wi
They should not be employou in these
the water berne iseases. e ne
They should be instruoteu to
duty personal and cocks are ir
personnel, be employed in the
that not only drinking wator
Ponda without
centainers should be cleane
a strong sclution of bleac
infeated areas
Preference skin
and radish unlass they have been pret
SOURORS DE SUPPIX.
will not be left in watey bottl
supply and the
It has alreauy been nentioned that tr
satisfaotory statg ef
water
eat core nuat be taker
cron reservoirs, rivers, undermound suppl
R. 4.8.C. nove the water by means
bank trucke (200 gallons) and water tank t
