3. -
ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS.
(a) The C.0, of an unit appoints an officer to be in, charge of unit
generally known as f.k.I. - President of the regimentad institutes.
b) A small committee
representative of the junice ranks should be
Tacilitate checking a]
c) The P.R.I. deceives and
di,shourses money from the account.
{om
ING.
For, example: -
aw a
line right across
cross
budget for routine expenditure.
each column,
Find Debi
(1) Daily papers
for reading room.
(ii) Sports equipment.
(111) Travelling expenses for Unit teams.
urry Credit balances,
sub-accolnt
(iv) Hire of wireless sets.
(ay question of capital expenditure should be referred to.
aft hand side.
The 2.R.I. Committee put forward suggestions for various amentities.
rawing a double line u
Lso kept intored of the stape oi une account.
resonciliation s
(e) A P.R.I. must be
energetilo
and not content only typeep his account i, scessary pot
The unit wellere depenas a great deal on hidi
(P) A balance sheet of the account must be displayed for the men to see
heques book bank balar
emerber that when car
he left are carried f
4.
SYS TR. OF ACCOUNTING.
The general form of account is kept in une abuste enty. "yorn in
ON. THE LEFT HAND SIDE are
ALANCE SHIET.
Balance. Sheet is p
This is a form divided in half.
List of Debtors
OTT THE RIGHT HAND SIDE again there are
the sub-accounts.
Bank and lash Columns to reoon
expenditure and further columns for
10 the right of each si
Reconciliation
Income and exp
Balance Sheet.
two columns headed Debtors,
It is most desirable
the number of bank accounts kept by a unit af the
(v) Analysis of fu
achieve this.
(i) arid
This system lends
following will deal with the bank as separate accounts:
Thus normallion to arrive at income :
sub-account on the r
2
simply take the endi
(i1) Officers/ Less. '
lo arrive at expendi
(jii) Sergeant's less.
becomes "Unit Bank"
side from ending tot
various sub-accountants and credits it to their account eg entertainments:
Under this system the P.R.I..
taken•
he receives money insarry balance of inc
By Produots. Likewise the sub-accountants Pass pills on welt account and Ricopy from A.B.397 o
' not shown in this a
sach sub-accountant must sure are om press and must not oversign the balance or
Rach sub-accountant must reP his. aucount and must not overd sign the balance so
The forner also keeps nis own perry eas wth wiren to meet smart exin erreat the balar
(e) The system can be modified or elaborated to meet the needs of a unit.
250 ME
correct it is only
IPOD OF ACCOUNTING. P:
Balance Sheet.
ING OR TAKING OVER
(a) the cardinal principle is that every receipt or disbursement is entered on neck cesh and ban
(b) The acepuntant must show: -
sides of the account, therefore the cross totals of each side must always be btaining a bank
(1) That is owed to and what js owed by the esta lishment a Debtors and in check property, s
called Personal
Check receipt and
(ii) The value of possessions -
(iii)
Hake certain you
propirty - investments, called Real Aocounts t is not necessa
Sources of expendivure and incoes and whether one is in excess of the e handing over t
These are nominal accounts.
This is done by analysing under various sub-heads in golumns provided.
(iv) The worth of the establishment,
to whom you hand
possessions less amount. owed by it.
Remember that the
i.e, the atiount oved to it plus total d everything is in
Ancounts are totalled and balanced as at the last day of each quarter. re
aecount is correct the final figures will show (b) (i) to (iv) above.
(a) It will be necessary.
It is the busine
aN' Petty Cash Book.
to keep certain subsidiary books in order to failita
account.
the keeping of the main account e.g. Property Book, Lists of Debtors and Credito
(e) Property must always be listed and valued. Dach quarter it is depreciate
Theref
must be decided according
the amounts edited to the Property account. The amount of appreciation per a
(i)
Al1 vouch
Payments
to the nature of the article and its expected life, o
depreciate rather than under depreciate.
Property
boots as opposea to a piano.
Consider the life of a pair of footbal
(f) The use of the columns Debtors and Creditors must be unde stood. They are,
(v) Check [I
The Audit Boari
establishment are entered as a total under creditors on the right hand side. Ner
(i) Excessi
at the ena of a quarter or any time when a balance is struck. All bills owed bycEANS' lIss.
bills are eventually paid each one is entered as a cheque or cash payment and on The sergeants
left hand side under crediturs. The result will be that the total under Creditos rank of serge
both sides must agree. The procedure for amounts owed to the establishment is ) The mess is m
The total owed is entered under Debtors on the left hand side
amounts are received they are recorded in Cash or Bank on the left hand side ani
under debtors on the right hand side.
(s) Every payment must be suppatted by a voucher and wherever practicable every
The senior me
lessing chars
living in mer
) A treasurer
receipt must be similarly supported. Vouchers must be consecutively numbered thin
senior serge
