I MPSA
Army Form E 531A.
NOTICE to be given to a person at the time of his .
offering to join the Territorial Army.
(DURATION ENGAGEMENT)
You (Name)
are required to attend forthwith at....
(8)
for the purpose of appearing before a Magistrate or Attesting Officer to be
attested for His Majesty's Territorial Army, in which you have expressed your
willingness to serve.
The General Conditions of the Contract of Enlistment that you are
about to enter into with the Crown are as follows :
1. You will engage to serve His Majesty as a man of the Territorial Army until the end
of the period of embodiment of the Territorial Armv, should His Majesty so long require your services.
2. You will be enlisted for General Service and on enlistment you may be appointed to
such Corps as the Army Council or other competent military authority may think fit, and may be
• transferred from time to time to any other Corps, and may be posted from time to time to any regiment,
battalion or othe military body (including a regiment, battalion or otler military body of the regular
forces) within the Corps to which you have been appointed or to which you may be transferred.
3. You will be liable for service outside the United Kingdom.
4. If you are still serving at the termination of the period of embodiment you will be
discharged as soon as your services can be dispensed with thereafter. If serving out of the United
Kingdom at the time, you will be sent to the United Kingdom free of expense.
When attested by the Magistrate or Attesting Officer you will be liable to all the
provisions of the Army Act for the time being in force.
6. You will be required by the Magistrate or Attesting Officer to answer the questions
printed on the back hereof, and you are warned that if you make at the time of your attestation
any false answer to him, you will thereby render yourself liable to punishment.
Signature of the Non-Commissioned
Officer serving the nolice.....
TURN OVER.
HEADQUARTERS.
FIRST
CANADIAN
sulle
NEWERP
дитаму
maik
9.
Ро
