-ПО ІЗДИТИ
prosident will be of field rank, i available.
Sarvioe (P.P, 107) there must be not less than three officers on
who have hold coumissions for not less than a yeor and if available on
of not loss than thrue years standing will be, appointed.
composition. - subjoot to the exigen cross-exanine witnesses.
POLAR TRO
All menivers should
c.O. or to objec
Sunnary of i
go try all ranks for any
(exoept treasch, treason-'elony, murder, nanslaughter and rape when him: hin
the U.K.) and to impose any of the punishments detailed in A.A.
cross-exanine.
subjeot to the maximun prescribed for particular offénces.
only, then the Court cannot impose death or penal servitude.
(z) wake statement or give evide
exanined thereon.
The nach very for trial by F.G.C.M. is intended to
simplify trial
active service a far as is compatible with justice and
nay be modifica
(iv) call witnesses.
(v) Be present.
Milo awaiting Court Wartial.
conditions in the Field (R.P. 121)•
2) Ic have a copy of the Charge
it Free communication with witne
court arranged.
PROCEDURE AI COURTS-MART IL.
after certain prelitinaries the Court will normally be open to the
(12i) To emp J Counsel (as definea
a defer ling officer assigned t
the accused will be asked to plead "guilty" or "not guilty! to the charme
and to consult ith hin.
list of names
If he pleads "guiity" no evidence as to facts need be callea,
of the acoused will be investigated; and the vourt closed for consideratie
(r) Io have his rig is under R.P.
This wil not, be disclosed unvil after confirmation by
authority, i.e. geneza?
the convening officer, or in certain cases the
If the flea is "not guilty" the procere is as follows.
(f) at Court Martial.
I) Objection to members.
Prosecutor makes opening speech.
First witness sworn (A.A. Sec 52),
(ii) Ic give evidence hinself and er:
Personally cr through Counsel cr
Prosecutor examines first witness (evidence in chief - no leading questing,
cress-exanine prosecution's witn
Defending efficer, Counse: or áccused cross-exanines.
Prosecutor re-examin
After Court Martie]
Remaining witnesses for prosecution Icllow as abeve.
Speeches ana/cr evidence for the defence then follow in the order
Before or after confirnation to
(K.R• 695 (as amended) ) ..
prescribed by Rof. 40 and 41 accerding to particular circunstances..
Witnesses for the Defence will be exanined. cross-exanined and re-exanined
in the same way as witnesses for the Prcsecution,
RIGHTS OF COMPLAINT.
Prosecutor will "heve the last word", if witnesses as to faots (other ti
the accused) have been called for the defence.
These are set out in N.A.D. para. 16.
Court closes to consider finding:
and finding anncunced.
It "not guilty" then Court re-cens
A summary decision cf a C.O. er an 0.C
If "guilty" Court re-opens and evidence as to
offence and the accused has no rig
Proceedings Porwarded te confirning officer. (Chr
mith the decision will entitle hin to exerc
DUTIES OF PROSBOUTOR ANU DEPENDING OFFICER
тік зо
above paras. 11 and 13 for powers of 0.0: at
The Prosec der must be serupulcusly fair.
r. R. 674 and R.P.
Nethods of complaint and how to deal wi
24.
The Defending Off oer has (R.P. 87) the sane rights and duties as Counsel
e. go, must not express his own cpinion (R.P. 92 (a)) •
attention should alsc
SUSPENSION AND REVIEW CH C.M. SENTENCES.
, notifica in → 0-Is 16 July: 1941.
See dodo Seos. 57 and 57a:
Взна 1 нелій к.R'.
A.C.I. 2178 of 1941 and 374 of 1942.
DO NETHOUT TRAVE AND: DESERTION.
PRINTRAL RICHES OF MOUSED.
6) 6 86
LECTURE 6.
Who offonce st absence without leave cre
hora nomily bi aisposed of within the unit
In naking
àn the a n ban man
Instigation at carlies's opportunity - norally within 2l hours,
Before 0.C. Sub-Unit or C.0.
if none within 48 hours (R.P..
pay he
it does. not
/To: -
(1) Insist on.
during
made to
arrest.
608/616 as v
steps to be taken when a
ning it Do taken to distinguish absence wi
prosecution
prove
/The off
