erience on cath
- subject to the
US A8TSUI
All menibers shoul
11) cross-exanine witnesses.
hinself cr.n
to facts
evidence
witnesses as
mean it on of poo28 on, ravat abd your and if avatib,
(a) Eleot C.M. in certain cases
of not less than thra years standing will be appointed.
(axopt treason, tyson-felony, murder, nanslaughter and
do try all ranks for añv y
(vi) Be present throughout.
in acoused has no right to
the C.0. or to object
taking of a Sumary of iN
(so v..) and to inposo any of the punishments detailed in ,
the maximun prescribed for particular offénoes.
nly, then the Court cannot impose death cr penal servitude.
cross-exanine.
of discipline, such sentences shuld be light,
propriate sentences is given in K.R. 681/2/3, and, subject to the
(111) Wake statenent or give evider
exanined therecn.
NOTE; - The nach -ary for trial by F.G.C.M. is intended to
(iv) Call witnesses.
active service a far as is compatible with justice
(v) Be present.
kilo awaiting Court Martial.
Ic have a copy of the Charge s
conditions in the Field (R.P. 121).
(11) Free commnication with witnes
fter certain prelirinaries the Court will nornally be open to t
a defer ling officer assigned to
The acoused will be asked to plead "guilty" or "not guilty! to the chay
and to consult with hin..
The pused "guty" no eridonce, as to facts nued be called, the chan.
of the acoused mill be investigated, and the court closed for considen
(iv). To have a list ef nanes of, nenb
Th vil: not be disolosed unvil after confirmation by bi
(v): To have his rig is under R.P. 1
authority, 1.0. Genera'T ine convening officex, of in cortain cases the
st. Court Martial.
G.D. 0.-in-c. If the flea is "not guilty" the proce are is as follows. f)
Prosecutor makes pening speech.
First witness sworn (A•A. Sec 52)
(i1) To give evidence hinself and cr
iii) Perscnally cr through Counsel cr
Prosecuter exatines first witness (evidence in chief - no leading questio
cress-exanine prosecution's witne
Defending officer, Counsel or áccused cross-exanines.
Prosecutor re-exa
Remaining witnesses for prosecution Icllow as above.
After Court Martial
Before or after confirmation to
Speeches and/er evidence for the defence then fcllow in the erder
(K.R. 695 (as anended)) •
prescribed by Rof. 40 and 41 according to particular circunstances.
vanesses for the Defence will be exemined. cross-exanined and re-examin ICHAS OF COMPIALI.
in the sone way as witnesses for the Prcsecution,
Prosecutor will "heve the last word" if witnesses as to facts (othert
the accused) have been calle for the defence.
These are set out in N.A.D. para. 16.
Court closes to consider finding:
a sumary decision of a C.0. or an O.C.
and finding annunsed.
t? "not guilty" then court regenhe sume offence and the accused has no rig
IP "guilty" Court re-cpens and evidence as to
rith the decision will entitle him te exerci
procodine formerded to confiring of 100r.
above paras. 11 and 13 for powers of C.0: an
DUTIES OF FROSBOUDOR AN DERRING OFFICER
hethods of complaint and how te deal wi
The Prosec sor must be scrupulcusly fair.
L.C.I. 806 of 1941.
r. R. 674 and R.P. 60.
0-gr, must not express his own opinion (R.P. 92 (a)) •
Particular
attention should alsc be
SUSPRAS TON AND REVIN OU C.M. SENTENORS
The Defending Off ser has (R.P. 87) the sane rights and duties as COUSINOR WITHOUT LEAVE AND DESERTION.
Telfare", notified in .C.Is 16 JulJ: 1941•
See dodo Sees, 57 and 5%a.
візна, 1 Меліт K.Rº. 0) 686
The offence, ce.
FAINTRAL RIGHTS OF HAUSTO
A-C.I. 2178 of 1941 and 374 of 1942.
shoula normally be disposed
absence without leave crea
of within the unit
LECTURT
bronco by a sclaier iron the place where it 1e
booause, under the Pay We rant,
absence.
perica of such absence nust be stated
the absence i8 less thun 6 hours,
has haa to
tad the soldier how nany days'
one day's pay i
fraction perfom duty for the absenter:
the Less of
it does. not
arte
a day counts as one day (1.A. Sec 14
without leave -
Roference must be de to K.R.
pay during close arrest.
and 205/42, for the
608/616
Bafere O.C. Sub-Unit on C.0.
steps te be taken when a
vithin 48 hours (R.P. 20)
within 24 hours,
must be taken to distinguish absence wi
prosecution must prove
/То: -
a de an intention t avoid an important du
Sea 12) where,
as ve
(i) Insist cn...''
/The off
