Netting-The Operator will prepare set for netting and net in.
All orders will be
received and acknowledged by the Comd. personally.
Operators will not act as Vice-Comds.
A Wavemeter will only be taken into the field on the 36 hours
Tuning and Operating
exercise.
The control station of any exercise will always net to wavemeter prior to departure.
Speed Limit-25 m.p.h.. In the vicinity of R.M.C. buildings, 10 m.p.h.
Roads-Cars will not be taken off metalled or gravel rds. except to halt and take
up posn.
On no account will they be taken over rough or bumpy ground or tracks.
Drivers when descending steep hills will engage lower gear-Vehicle comd'r responsible
In the Field-The following orders will be observed during operations and on the
move out or return home :—
Mounting-This order will be carried out at the " double."
Dismounting-Will be done correctly, and under no circumstances through the side
or top of the hood,
Density-Vehicles will always travel at a minimum distance of 100x from one another.
Refreshments-No Cadet will "break" or enter upon any premises without the exprest
ermission of his Tp. Offr.
It must
se given at the time.
Although such permission has been given, cars must not be
parked within 100 yds. and on no account will a car be left unattended.
Cover from Aw-Cars, when halted, must have cover from air at all times.
" Get-Away" -Cars, when halted, must always be so positioned as to have an immediate
get-away.
During T. and O., cars will always pk. off the rd, regard being had to the foregoing.
7. Headsets—(a) Will be worn over the ears by Tank Troops.
(b) Will be worn
round the neck by Armd Car and Recce Troops at
Cadets discretion.
(c) Will be worn round the neck by A.T.S. drivers.
8.
Utilities- Will always be regarded tactically as A.F.Vs.-The Commander will stand
up in the vehicle and command his operator and driver correctly by use of the
operator will sit by his set in an alert attitude and the spare front seat next to the driver will
never
be used by either Cadet.
Additional standing order regarding Utilities are posted in
each Bungalow and must be read and observed.
Any breach of such orders will involve
disciplinary action.
Rallying-If Crews or any cars rally in the fd. either for a break or as part of the
operations, the Orders in Para. 6 will be strictly complied with and in addition the Acting Sq.
Ldr. or Senior Syndicate Comd. (Seniority to be decided by numerical order of Tp.) will see
that cars are parked systematically, and, where possible, with a get-away in two directions
as though engaged on a tactical operation.
10.
Wireless Operating
(1) Sets will always be on Rec. with at least one operator on the set keeping
W/watch unless the Tp. Offr. has ordered sets to be switched off.
(2) On no account whatever will any of the following be mentioned over the air :-
(a) Prevailing weather conditions or an object of military importance which
actually exists, e,g., a col. of tps., convoy, searchlight post, etc.
(b) The name of a town or village or the R.M.C.
(c) The name of an Offr., cadet, rank or appointment. Cadets must know their
operators' numbers.
(a) A freg, except by ref. to its code name.
(3) Not more than 4-ft. of rod will be used, except on the order of the Tp. Offr., and
no car (other than a rear link—and then only when necessary) will travel with
more than 8-ft. " up"
(4) Misuse of batteries by switching on the Set or Supply unit for any purpose other
than Wireless Training will entail most severe disciplinary action.
11. Returning from Schemes-Unless the Tp. Offr. orders to the contrary, Syndicate
Comds. are responsible for ensuring that their cars are back at the W/School by the time fixed
in the Programme of Work allowing a minimum period of 30 mins, for "Closing Down Drill."
They will use their discretion and (without orders) break off from the scheme in time to ensure
tnis.
Any loss of equipment will be reported to the Cadet Q.M. who will report to the
Ip. Offr. as to who will bear the cost,
