8,
Ros
7.
Whon Notting the order of answering within the Regt will be as follows:-
Stas with 3 lotter Code Signs in alphabetical order.
(2).
Outstas of Senior Son in order of affixes, followed by outstas of
noxt Senior San in order of affixes ete e.g.
BSITE, BST15, GIA1, GLA1A, GIA2,
4.
Evory rule has its exceptions: - When a sta with a three letter code
sign joins a net which is already established eg. a Regt not, it will
answer for that day only immediately after the other stas having 3 letter
code signs ,e.g. ALD joins the not.
BSI, GIA, PRG,
ALD will be the order for that day.
The following day AiD will be absorbed into the gp and according to
the allotnent of code signs may find itself senior outsta on the go.
ABBREVIATION OF LINK SIGNS
If no confusion through another sta having similar Link Sign on the
net.
abbreviated to p
12 Ten 13
P1A or
or even A on B Set net.
5.
( На зін)
The L.O. on the Regtl net takes the Code Sign of the Senior San with
the affix 8 and an additional lotter affix which should not be duplicatea
within the Div. When he flicks to the Bde net he takes the Rear Link Code
6.
order of code signs) keeping the same affix. Hence the necessity for avoiding
duplication of letter affixes. ( See Para 2 D) •
RIGI AND SON EREQUENCIES
When San frequencies are being employed, rear links on a group call
will answer in order of seniority (See Para 3) using the lode sign of the
senior outsta with numerical affixes.
Thus: -
Control
BST
Hullo All Stas Baker - Orders - All Stas Baker Over.
Baker 1 O.K. Over.
GLA
Baker 2 0.K. Over•
PRO
Baker 3 0.K. Over.
SECURITY
To prevent the nets being linked, and thus enabling the enemy to build
up the order of battle, the Code Sign of Control must not be used on the
air on the gp which it controls. The only exception to this is the
B Set
net on R.H.Q. where the Code Sign of R.H.&e is used with the affixes
A, B etc.
NOTE: - A Diagran showing the allotment of Code Signs and derivative Link
Signs in an Arma Regt is attached.
