1. 2 S.0. 0.0..U. (202).
PRATEE SCHOOL.
Tox logue to Studonts.
RANTS OI, PAY.
Looturo I - Pay.
montay
a Pl. Commandor with many dutios
to peric rm it is obviously impossiblo to
an axpert on ovary subjeot, but it is essentinl that such an Officer shall
norance or carlossness often results in hardship to the soldier when he is
ta repay money overpaid to him or on the othor hand,
A TOM TA SEE CHERNE DO TEET CRUE
when ho is
ho object of the tiro loctures on this subjeft,
unscient infornation to enable an officer
therefore,
is to provido
to avoid mistakes and
to enable
.c. Ofs or men.
in to ansver simple questions on the subject which pay be put to him by his
Details of pay will be fouaunt the Royal Warrant for Pay etc - 1940 (P.W.)
tea by 1.C.I.s.
Soldiors axo dividod, into tvo main categorion for purposes of pay:-
Those draving normal rates of pay (P.I. 829). this clase tinoludos
all soldiers nt classified as tradesmen.
The rates of pay vary
acconting to rank, and consist of basic pay, plus proficiency pay
and any other extra pay to which the soldier nay be entitled.
Those dravi ug tradesmen's rates of pay (P.I.838). Theso are
soldiers who have assed a standard test in one
or other of a series
of recognised arny trades,
and who are employed at their trades
writhin a definite stablishent of tradesnen in their mits.
There is a further, but less i portant division into those who enlisted
26th October 1925,
and those wro enlisted arter this date.
The forner
iven the choice, in 1938, of coming on to the post-1925 rates.
As the majority of soldiers are on post-1925 rates this precis applies to
SECTROY PAY. (PoV%. IOU2-1018. A.0.]. 756 of 2940.)
In addition to basic pay there are various kindsof additional pay, one of
proficieney pay.
Proficiency pay is admissible for all British soldiers except boys
2.e, wder 174) up to and including lance-sergeants who draw normal
rates of pay at post-1925 rates.
It is not admissible for: -
Soldiers enlisted for service as tradesmen but draving normal
rates of pay while learning a trade.
Soldiers in receipt of tradesmens rates of pay.
Proficiency Pay.
ditions: -
Possession of 2nd class Ariy Certificate of Education.
matry on nan-service (172 years of age)•
On completion of 6 months service artor 3ra Sopt. 1939 may continue
Amount - 3a a day.
in fosue to a & dior sot receiving ar Proficioncy Pay.
mations: ~
3eà Sept, 1939.
One years colour servioe before completion of 6 nonths servico after
and efficiont soldier.
Cort fateiron C.O. thet man is in all respects a thoroughly trained
(Кузивао)
0) Physioal..•
