Ic. 202 U.C.
(11) Doorease l1 vssistanco of population dus to poverty und
SANITATIO
(112) Inoreased rainfall and nild weather.
(iv) Importation ef susteptables - armica una natives.
poer santpatien and privatien,, que to war and fun
Diseases of the lida
NC. 2.
1.oi, nos, Recorriers of the diseaso by was
spraying by hand or aeroplane.
all water supplies, ponda
quarters.
(11) attack vectors,
trapping, fumigating,
urat" stagnant water, swamps, fill in low ground
becone swampy.
as a temporary neasurvavarious types of cil, paraffin or Paris
with a view te suffocating cr
poisoning
VIRODUCTION.
troops go inte a theatre of wa
they are brought inte the dire
sprayed on to all water surfaces,
and pupae which breathe on the water surface.
(a) Rabies is a disease which affects aninels ahd the virus is contained linate,
saliva, and humns are affected when bitten or licked by such diseased he spreading of highly contagious inte
Phe incubation perica varies fron three weeks in the case ef a severe bità improvised acconcaation te be four
revalent in these areas, que chiefly t
face to 12 nonths in the case of abrasions cr' licking
on the hands and i a i giene for service overseas nust l
infected animal will have saliva at the mouth and will snap at everything utine sanitation in the previcus pro
lygiene required in this new theatre c
and should be destroyed.
In het countries where rabies is prevelant dogs should be licensed an ESPONSIBILITIES•
The responsibilities and duties
the name of the cner, all stray ugs should be destroyed.
perica yay allow a course of anti-rabine injections.
ized with carbolio acid er sinilar disinfeotant without delay, and, the limportance under these conditions whe
without nest of the artificial aids t
extracted anà sont baok to the base hospital for analysis, and possible unit.
In all casus of doubt of rabies, the brain of the awhmal concerned preservation of health ef his nen a 7
It is the duty of Platon Offic
of future serum.
themselves and their nen with the pr
6. UNDULANE OR IMULA FEVER.
all the diseases enunerated belcw un
Passed on through goats milk principally in lalta.
Not fatal when diseases, water purification etc., "
develop, but has a serious wasting effect. Essential to see that all gal at sea.
is properly steralized before use.
TYPHUS FEVER..
GROUPING OF DISEASES.
The four main groups nenticned
(a) Similar te typheid but considerably nore virulent.
Lice are the chiel!
heading but the three belcw need sp
A hon pass on the infection through exoreta rubbed to cracks and abrasions
A net fever i8 affected and considerable casunities - as much as 75,0 if p
(a) Intestinal (Excrenental and ali
is not taken in the early stages. - if preventative measures are not in being
• Cholera. Indenic in Ind
(b) Prevention,
8, BILHARZIA,
Personal oleanliness is the prine preventative.
isinfection of zen, clothing, beading and equipment, and the destrut
Dysentry. In all ecuntri
Typhcia and Para-Typhcia
Diarrhea. A great sigr
(a) This disease is widespread in the midale East and particularly in Eag
rise te the symptons of the disease.
kin and the neuth are affected fren the call hairy swimmind anentures. is
many diseases.
to the naked eye, which enter the blood strean and set up an irritation
Aninal and Insect borne
(li) Dergue Fever.
Drinking water must be boileù, filtered and chlorinated before const
. N.B: (a) Inseases fron the house, fly and their prevention - "Filn"-(Thet
or drinking water Pron rivers, ponds and: canals:
Prevent eggs entering the water supply. - prevent nathing wading,
Yellow Fever
) 35°g to
Rabies (Hydrophobia) I
Undulant or Malta Feve
b) Diarrhoea is considered a disease in tropical countries and must !
10, part one sen that they cannot live in the last aa they have done tinct
Bilharzia.
they aust take their personal hygiene and sanitation more
Phlebotenus Fever:
brink water unless it has been passed fit.
o) Baths of wush in the canils, rivers or ponus without permission..
( a in the notary he de i resented arend treat auro must bo tele
(a)
LARIA.
Malaria is responsible fo
coquite and/or Band-fly netting ibizue, and it must be properly usech
polar
in
It is spread by mosquito.
regions.
pre forence siame
+ x To ta he an every vate a to they have ban t
Clinatio diseases.
Hea
Pri
after
sorub and geass..
The nesquito i
The dange
dawn. The main breedin
partioularly sunny pools. Re
It's radius of activity is ab
(b)
The
causes of the spread
Large nunber of y
