8.
PASSING CODE HORDS
(1)• The loss said the better.
A Code Word is secure if passed with no
context e. g. LASKAR at 1045 may mean: -
(a).
"Move to LASKAR at 1045",
(b).
"Adv, Withdraw (eto) at 1045".
"Change freg at 1045".
Do not put. Code Word in a false context e.g. "Have bought a packet
Of PLAYERS" - It is a waste of time, and often leads to a breach of
security.
(2).
If ringing the changes on a Code Word keep to same code word for
each conversation and choose one which the Cond at the other end will
understand e.g. colours - Yellow, Orange, Crimson - NOT Azure,
Ultranarine®
(3)• Words! signal strength is loss than Strongth 4 always say again Code
(4).
If you make a mistake sending a word in clear which should be sent
in code do NOT correct it in the same breath or in same message, but
trust the LiGHTY to have confounded the hearing of the enemy.
7.
CONTACT
The use of codes is regulated by Contact. "Contact" in an Arma
Regt or Army Ik Regt may mean contact by the recce tp or contact by any tip
in the Regt. It may mean the bombing of R.H.Q. or a Sqn Hol. by aircraft.
In an Arma Regt or A.C. Regt where Sqns are more scattered, contact may be
restricted to your own particular Sqn. A Cond should therefore pre-arrange
a Code Word ( to be issued by him). when use of Security Codes should be
aiscontinued..
In the heat of battle when your San is actually engaging the enemy
even Jarion is at times useless. For instance if a Tank has gone up in
flames in sight of the enemy it should be reported in clear by ref to its
Code Sign. Jargon may however still be useful (a) if you are going to
manoeuvre a Ip round some feature in support, as a few valuable minutes
may be gained enabling the supporting Ip to effect surprise or (b) if
there is a reasonable chance that the enemy is unaware of the result of
some action on his part, 0.g•
Tank disabled by mines not covered
by fire or a troop shot up fron the air whilst still unidentified on the ground.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down. Use conmonsense.
GENERAL
1.
2.
Codes should be kept as simple as possible consistent with the object
in view.
They, should so far as possible be cormitted to memory. If cormitted
to writing other than on your nap talc, keep the paper in the bailing out bag
A small slip of paper, may drop into a crevice and no one will have tine to
find it until you are captured and the vehicle is searched by the enany.
Red.C., O.C.T.U.
