pue
SSeTUn
In cases where siraunsngaces, eig. the gravity of the offence, or
for p
risk or the accused attem martin to escape, nake it impossible to use
to attend", the accused will be arrested. ' o
The person ordering arrest may specify that it shall be 'open'
otherwise it will be 'close' arrest.
The onsequenoes, of close, and open arrest are set out in
559, 560, 564/566 and sumarised in N.A.D. para. 1.
points aro
LECTURE
effeots ch (1) liberty, (2) duty, (3) pay...w
Officers, Warrant Officers, N.C.Os in close arrest
under an escort, preferably of sane rank;
in open arrest they will be
pernitted to leave the barracks area only within certain linits
Private soldiers in close arrest will, be confined under
guard, picquet, patrol, sentry or provost narshal.
In open arrest change
not quit barracks.
Officers or Warrant Officers in close or open arrest will
perforn no duties other than perscnal rcutine duties.
As to relinguishen
"sumary Trial" under 4-n. and k.
and may be conpared with trial bi
of rank by office: in arrest see A.C.I. 83 of 1942. N.C.Os. in open or ch
Jury at Sessions r assizes.
arrest may be cravred to perform all normal duties, but this is not ustlat
Private scidiers in open arrest usually perform all duties;
Commanding Officers in connection wi
in close arrest the position is as for N.C.Os.
In no case may any additional duties be ordered.
here any duties and rights given then by
In the R.k.S.C. the efficers connanding co
ir.c.os, and private scldiors forfit pay for every day in close
all such purposes (A.O.I. 30 cf 1942).
arrest on charges: -
nirtue ef K. R. 590 (N.A.D. para 10) have
(a)for offences of which they are later. convicted by C.W:
b) for absenting themselves without leave if sentenced to detention ar
Field Punishnent py C.O. (A•A: SeC 138 (1). Pay Warrant, 942.)
other officers within their conand; suc
I Close arrest will caly be ordered for serious of ences, e. g. discbedent
to an order distinctly given (K.R. 559(e))
or to prevent escape; but note that
is at the C.O's discretion, subject in al
Officers
in KeRo 592, (N.A.D. para 5) -
open arrest has little usefulness and. unless close arrest is necessary a vari
called "Os. O, Sub-Urits".
In the M M.L
to attend is usually sufficient.
Officers and Warrant C/ficers, should not nomlly be arrested save pot
upon the infantry model - as "Coy Conds
witten authority of the c.o.
be Platcon Offi rs.
While a case is under investigation - during adjournnents - while an
soon ed person is awaiting trial by C.il. - a C.O. has discretion tc change thi
For of arrust or to ordef release vithout prejudice to se-arrest (1. R.5592
10 BORERS DE G.O. (UNED COMILANDER) •
Power to Order Arrestin
Every case, whethe
concerning Offic
corps of any branch of the service.
An officer nay arrest an officer of inferior rank or any soldier of an
lo irvestigated wi hin the unit and nay b
investigating officer, it is considered t
Sec 46(1), K. R.
There is power, very rarely exeroisia,
arrest a superior officer if that superior officer is actually engaged, in a
quarrel, frey er disorder, eig. appearing on parade drupk (A.A. See 45(3))
ana 577, R-P. 4(=)) -
A Warrant Officer or N.CFO. nay arrest any scidier.
with less than 4 vears service ordinarily will not
(K.R. 559(h))•
A Lance-corporal
power to punish an
place a private under arty
In respect of
For special powers ef Provest Marshals, see A.O. 181/19L1 and Statutory
Without perission of superior catho
Rules and Orders (1941) 1598 and note that all seldiers enjoy special warti
•See list at ]
780 of 1940 and 419 cf 1: 2.
To earnesting civilians under pefence Regulations 134, und 883,
less serious offen
Method of Arrest.
yant .C.Os and privates within the 1i=n
tabulated in II. 11-D:
An Officer, Warrant Officer or NC.O, ordering close arrest will order
para (9) (a) ana (b) -
, earded, except in cases
one or tore privates to conduct the offender
not of Fiela Ranis note
coring into personal contaot with him; unless in a serious case to prevent
escape (K.R. 559(g)). Note inevitable variations when in the Fiela cr
the line of mrch".
co thn suard Rocm and will avcid
Votes on certain punishments.
offence
of absence withei
Stops to be taken following trust !
antoiously kept in custody or awaiting trial!
he purgesa ce these steps de to ensure that no cè is unnecess fiy e
a nere "caution" but a
not of
ordering arrest mist deliver at the tim
serious
*Tis varies coording to the unit,
nat
/The tine linit...
Used as a pur
ahar deduation ta being nada, see
Particular
dibrating of tradesmen, see
Ten on 209в
property has
Military
1. C.I.
anount
coursed.
appropolat
Busstitute for
chox goa
Correation ana
5 рогов піти. 1.
