3.
2.
CIE BELORENE OF CODES
1.
DISTINUISI O CIPIERS
An enciphered message is one which is by means of a key transferred
entirely word for wofa into a series of letters cr nunerals which are than
divided into groups of 4 or into gus or 5.
There are various classes of
ciphers - High grade used down to Div - Low grede forward of Div.
Both
high and low grade ciphers are surnally enciphered ant déciphered by machine.
A low grade cipher may howver a issued to Units who. are likely to require
it, and the encodings and decoding of this cipher as by hand by specially
trained personnel in those Units.
This dipher effords only limited security
and its use will therefore be restricted to plans likoly to become affective
in the near future. With the exception of this last mentioned cipher, the
enciphering and deciphering of messages is the task of Signals. Cipher is
never likely to be used within the Regt.
Whatever precautions are used, most ciphers can be broken in time.
All nations employ intelligence personnel with a cross-word puzzle mentality
to break down even the cipher of States with which they are not at war.
In the British Army, the use of any unauthorised cipher is forbidden
(F.S.R.
Ch 11 Sec. 19) =
CODES
Codes are a set of lotter, fig or word gus which are substituted
in a message either: -
(a).
So as to disguise plain language for the required period of time
so ahat the purport of the message will be meaningless to any
porson not in possession of the codo, (security Code) or,
(b) .
For quick or easy cererence thus facilicating the transmission
and reception of the information, (Conymiunce Code).
Some codes incidontally may fulfil both vojeots but only to a limited
degree and a Convenience lode must never be rolied upon as giving any noasure
of security.
FACTORS WIICH FABLE DIE DUAY TO BREAK A CODE
(1). Bad Virolges Disciplino
(a).
Thoughtlosaness - 3.90
"Objective - correction - POTATO".
(b).
Using code referencs to any tubjact matter which, to your
knowledge, is in the emony's possussion. e.g. Ref Point Code
after contaet, or your own jargon in reference to the enamy
or onomy action,
"Enemy bonbing yollow".
( c).
Linking of code and clear c.g.
"BILLIARDS at 1700 hrs -
411 Sunrays to report to me on arrival" - "X ras PHR7363107".
Mo. come
