Recreati onus
posted to a unit quartered insod cut ci the way ocuntry distriot or
surroundings doing strange and perhaps to
a man such as this is sicker up und thrown into the array, inte
away overseas.
If such points as.
Find an adequate antidote for boredon.
sympathise ana to
these are borne in shind an officer will bett
and
relaxation is a tonic.
Recreation
ON ROOMS
A warm comfortable
The room
relaxation;
q the canteen.
mit at one
time.
METHODS:
4.
A stranger
in a strange
or things he left at home.
Lond always finds relaxation by contag
A writing room or quie
correspondent and every
This is a
provide recreation.
useful thougnt te these whose duty s
letters.
# (6) L
Thus as an officer find out:
Where your nen cone from
Ebrary can well be form
(it): Particular individual interest:
appeal or through the
city
of London
Terr
the
1184/40
---..(o.)...
to suit all types.
Provide, always. Icr the majority and arrange prysical and menta
What they want.
London(A.C.I.
even technical books v
(a)
Enocurage, peacetime hobbies in accordance with (a) above.
ones especially for older men.
BRAL
POINTS
It is insufficient t
Get a tal
ORGANIZATION.
out names by contact
Get men of sinilar
5.
Every unit nust have an organization for recreation.
nay be
assistants in charge of all the principal outdoor sports.
an officer appointed as officer i/c Fecreational Training who wil
In a lộng
See that everyone k
Do not have too man
i/c Sports will nost likely suffice.
In a sial. un Both can visit neig
Try and get a unit
(b) .
Investigate the po:
anenities.
Not Aird. Canteen rebate o per cent or Unit Canteen disco
com 104 4, of 10 per cent on turnover on bulk purchases fron N.A.A.F.I
Remember gardening
"(11) Initia grant c? 3/6à pur ho Pren publio funds to new th
(jii) intertainments crganizea by the unit e g. dances and whist,
(iv) Per Capita subscription fron a'1 runks.
If efficiency is
break in routine.
The last should be avcided if possible.
Sunday should alw
nts prevent it.
(o) The funds are aäninistered by anesfficer appointed by the unit cup day or a day or
this officer is usually knewn as the bok... In acccruance with ring's regung week day.
a simple incone and expenditure account nust be displayed each nonth for th Church Parades,
and must be returned te then by providing amenities for then.
It should be renembered that these funds are the dividents of the mins lay down that
form a snall P.R.I. Comittee fron representatives of the men.
It is a gimme a burden when
lembers inun of inspection
and Sergeants messes are not entitled to benefit fren the fund in the sane, When it is impos
the junior, ranks.
It would be incorrect for the fund to provide un cificants in one forma
foctball boots or an outing for the sergeants ness. There would be no coieby staggering th
efficers would normally pay their way.
the fund paying travelling expenses of a unit tet composed of all ranks, thi
(a) It should be noted that recreation grounds to a certain scale an
It should not 1
provided and maintained out of public funds, the scale is set cut in w..leng this weapon of
strong and proportional increases up to four grounds.
118/Gen/ 3217 6. 1G. 1.40d. 27/10/39 and is one ground for units between 10re in your wit
that besides t
(e) If units show that they cannot mintain their sports equipent ashould be given
normal incone (see (a) (i) tc (ivyabove) the Army Sports Contrel Beard can l
The suggestior
to assist. pplication must be nade through local welfare Officers. The fole to home serv
alse issue a pamphlet calleu Recreation' price 6a which is cf general assis for recreatio
Officer whe will give useful advice.
(f) In each Command there is a domanu Sports Boaru anu a Connand sphas got to keep
Their duties are briefly:
In each Commana there is a Conand Welfare Officer with assistant
(1) vistribution of gifts to the troops from philantrhopic bodies
(i1, assistance to soldiers in anj legal er financial problem.
following cnaitions:
(h) WoD Pransport is pernitted for recreational purposes under the
(i) One journey per man per fortnight, 15 Nev.tc 31 warch one per
(ai) Charge of au per milenixinun charge 6ü per nan
(iv)
(iii) Not to places more than 20 miles away er under 2 miles.
Not te be used if public services/rhicles are available.
/cont
