(233)
Frunal ohalk to
rovent pozpalation of mole taro stvura danago must bo vulcanda
Caronu ritting of chains
1 - 60) Qurato proois.
Reyal Arny Servico Corps.
No. 208 0.C. 2.0:
Rotos
CLOTHING AND EQUINENE.
Equipment Regulations.
Pa"t
1. Part 11 Sea.1ll
Rogs, for
Appendix 2.
War Clothing Regulations
1941 (notifled in A.C.I.
343/1941)
Regimental Standing Orders
R.A.S.O. Para. 37.
PRODUCTION•
To object of this lecture is in show the orgonization,
administration
100 ton sith obtaining,
accounting, and the custody of clothing and equipment
a unite
SPONSIBILITIES.
scioor 1/c Unit.
ho O.C. Unit is responsible that the clothing and necessaries of the soldiers
is command aro gerviceable and complete to acclo,
and that all
clothing nd
re carefully fitted in the presence of the OC. Company of an Offioer deputed
for that aurposo..
It do ci the tmos ingordoe to ensuro that ench soldier
ctive service conditions.
•QohioS. or his equizalent. (For the dutioz of a Cod lios. see precis on Unit.
The Company Quartermaster-Sergeant (C.OU S.) is responsible for the effiolent
or the "o" side of the company
and to eneure that the company has its full
ent in the kay of arms, aamualtion oothing and equipment etc.
In this
10n he is responsible for all matters dealing rich pay, accomodation, unit
nd equipment therein, property os
casualties and all reporte, returns and
applicable thereti.
The C.QN.S, is also regrongable for
the correctness
onal acouments of N.C.Os ena nen of a company ercept those of a disciplinary
Orders showing casualties alfeoing pay, szonotion, discharges, ration
se etc. are prepared by the C.0.1.Se
The ighest standard of accuracy
preparation of Part 21 Criers is essential as the informatic given therein
Loted by the Reinontal peymaster and Officer 1/c Records for the purpose
iting a scldier's docunents and account.
A.S.C. Units end sub-units ic not remally hold a big reserve of clothing
ES. CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT:
Indenting:"
The C.Q.M.S. on his equivalent car receive his issues of clothing
pment (thich. comes under the heading of Orinance Stcres), sither from
- which case he kill make known his requirements to the R.QNS., or direct
nance, and in this case he will indent. on the same form as the ReQ MIS, will
1., 4.F,G. 997
rce Unis will indent through the C.Q i.D. → XPOS. of the Division through
channels.
issue to Units and Acccuntiar..
Inits collect these requiraments from ordnance stores, and a the same time
ree copies of 4.I.G. 982 or 98 on tree unpies of a.I.G. 1033.
The goods
se vouchers arcire at the unit concerned. who check the stores and if they are
prrect, sign one crpy of the form usel and return it.
The record copy is kept
Init, and the
third copy is sent to A Dog. es proof of drawing; by the Unit.
is are then taken on charge in 1.2. L65 -
n ledger.
It is customary to have
althing and necossaries, and a decorate euiment, The Oeficer who signs
le voucher ard the 2.F.195 must mace sura ce tie tollowing points:-
These items are dram iron o-inance.
The sane minder ca items airins la his stones
That oranased hare issued the number on the toucher.
iv) That ine narbers in the richer, arcee vir he numbers in the ledger.
EASE REMEMBER
NEMENDEN
MENT
