noti
Auth
1c
11
12
VEH
Goosene do succe
Hoxchino Tablots
Brg nationa
Lifebolto (oxal IOW
porsy
Enorgoncy Rations
digammottos Tit of 30
Storilizing Cutfit Tino
Begs Vonit
Gun Fkte
I, Mobt tins
617
124/1
SOLDIERS' WILLS.
I. The soldier should always be careful to insert
particulars of his relatives on pages 10 and 11 but it must
be clearly understood that the entry of a name on those
pages has not the legal effect of a Will and does not
have any influence on the distribution of a soldier's estate.
Unless a soldier duly makes a Will, his estate has to be
distributed in accordance with the laws of Intestacy and
the person whom he might intend to benefit may receive
little or no share in the distribution.
2. The Soldier's Will should be made out either on
the separate Form provided for that purpose, or on one
of the Forms contained in this Book, or on a separate
sheet of paper, and unless he is on active service or under
orders for active service, the testator must be of the age
of 21 years, with the exception that a Scotsman can
always dispose of movable property (as distinguished from
heritable property-see paragraph 10) when of the age of
14 years or over.
3. The bequests in the Will may be varied according
to the circumstances and wishes of each Soldier; but
the form of attestation and the general outline of the
Will, as shown in the following Forms, are to be carefully
followed.
4. The Will must be signed by the testator with his
name (or, if he cannot write, with his mark), in the
presence of two witnesses, who must be present together;
and the Will must be acknowledged and attested in the
presence of all three, and dated.
5. A person to whom money, etc., is left by the W
or the husband or wife of such a person, should not
an attesting witness, for the gift would not be g
but he or she may be appointed an executor.
6. In English law a Will may be revoked by
marriage of the testator, and therefore a new Will or
to be made after marriage if desired.
By the lav
Scotland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man,
rights of the widow or children to some part of the es
cannot be defeated by a Will.
7. If any alteration is made in the writing of a !
the
signatures of the testator and the witnesses o
to be made in the margin or other part of the Will, opp
to or near such alteration, or at the foot or end of
opposite to, a memorandum referring to such altera
and written at the end or some other part of the Wi
8. But
an alteration or addition may be made b
Codicil (that is to say, by an addition to the W
executed and witnessed in the same way as the Will.
9. When on active service in the field, or when he
been placed under orders for active service, a soldie
English, Guernsey or Manx domicile is privileged to m
his Will in writing without the attesting witnesses
pages 19 and 20), or to declare the same by word
mouth in the presence of witnesses, and if the testa
is of English domicile he can dispose of all his proper
of whatever kind.
10. A soldier of Scottish, Jersey or Guernsey domi
can make a written Will without witnesses at any ti
provided that it is entirely in his own handwriting
