stre the amount of money to be paid to the orner of requisitioned
recoipt of the avery of Rgouisition.
sessing and arranging settlement for any damage done. It must be emphasised
san an forbidden to disouss terms of business with owners, who must be
any question of compensation to the W.D. Land Agent and Valuer.
dage done to requisitioned budldings or chattels, other than through wear
t, all be charged to the unit in ocaupation. Officers cormanding units are
a tor reporting any defects or necessary repairs in buildings oacupied by
han and dr onsuring that all barraok damages are settled bofore buildings
ss of damage to buildings due to fine or in other cases involving
comPart
d aney, courts of Inquiry will be arranged immediately, which shoula
a by the Officer 1c Barracks and the Clerk of Wrks.
2:
I 0. BE REQUISITIONED.
as they
things carmarked for other Government Departments.
alaings used for religious purposes.
comodatin
Ficipel Buildings and Libraries.
cases, 1
Seen
foy Seout Headquarters required by A.R.P.
transity Buildings except by special consent from H.M.Office of Works.
E hig mit
Prish Falls, Vis age
Institutes will not norin?lyibe requisitioned
less absolutely necessary.
at the be
Stels il requisitioned should not be used for housing troops but for
easie, on the sequisition ao 1053 of continuity may cause heavy loss
assing, officers accommodation or offices. Hotel Bars should be
за bilan
in the holders.
empty how
OLD UNCOUPIED PREMESIS, BILLETING.
so odetion is required in occupied premesis it will be obtained by
y be request
f the bailin
i a general rule it is desirable that unoccupied premesis shoula be
al, and that billeting under the Army lot section 108A, in such cases
owner.
te resorted to when occupation is to be for brief periods.
nurents of the lemy not are that payments must be made before the
, if they stay for longer than 4 days then payment must be made
a in every 4 days. While it may be possible by by arrangement with the
7 are payment at less frequent intervals, it must be realized that, if
at every four days can legally be insisted on. It must be clearly
a ta, the onus of making oleimsfor payment lies with the O.C. unit, who
Officer
ack
Stores
monsible for punctual payments. Money is obtained from the Imprest
its or houscholders are absent when the billeting officers call' to
etents visits must be repeated.
raar
tained
property ta
dang
Liên
8100 30 50
Kles. to full consent of the occupier:-
2 Milothns nene
An thich only women(with or without children) are living should not
of female religious commities,
Tests.
maidentes.
o° Rate Colloctors, Regiatrars eto, no conduct their business from
necessary to use private dwelling houses, the houses of
hollers should bo first utilized and the poorer dietriots
a cocked in tho billet a sultable and special room shoula be
no houses; not mera than opa man to every
the vene
should hot be usud as an ordinary living room or as a sleeping
káng kitchen bad octanes.
habitually uns.
two rooms should be
Occupants should not be deprived of
for offloors should not be in the sane building as those of the
Avoided but shoull be provided comeniently near the men.
../aont' a
