5.
6.
7.
TRATING BUPRALION
10. 202 U.0.I.U., RuL.O.C
36 HOUR MICROISE
INSTRUCITOIL FOR ULPIRUS
1.
The attention of all Unpirus in directed to A.7.1. No.36, Appendix a and
to loT.P. No. 37, Chapter VIII.
2.
The Exercise will be kept in nction by ln living of vorbal erdors as set
cut in Schedule of votail.
Unpires will recora the contents of vurbal criers, to when they were
given and the time they were Liven.
3.
Unpires will bear in nina that they are always, in principle, instructors.
They will direct the exercise, or portion ef it, as cocasions denana and
correct individual faults whun and where they cocur.
and the lessons to be stressed will be notel and brought ap at the
Ccllective faults
conference on D.3.
4.
They will assist in keeping all pursonnol "in the pioturo" by
inforning as nany students and permanent staff as possible of the
particulars of any incident which would be seen or exporienced in action
y nearby personnel as well as by those imediately concurnea, e.a
hen a lorry is blown up, a driver is lalled, a column is under fire, etc
The following are sene of the connen faults in training: -
Collective
Bad use of greund and cover at halt and during neverent.
Unnecessary noise, especially it night.
Bad march discipline.
Bad Ah. action and protection.
Bad. Anti-Gas drill.
Bad organisation and novement of 1s..•
No alternative pesitión.
Pailure to nake foding and annis rutive urrangenents.
Rost poriods not orderca.
Personnel at rust or slueping not roused when alarns are sounded.
Then at rost, sense of suspicicus alortuoss is dulled.
Individual.
Bad use of cover.
Occupation of positions fren which a man cannet see to shoot.
Wrong action taken with casualtius.
Bad sentries.
Failure of nen to be inquisitive and coservant.
Commandors withcut runners.
Lack of centrol by Section Cends.
Bad plans.
Bad fire orders.
Exposure during recoe ona craors.
Points te note during the varicus phases aro given on sepurate sheets.
Umpires will wear white armlets.
Umpires will be completely abalu nad will thenselves infor the R.s.M.
by 1200 hrs on D-1 whether they require a LoT. or a m/c.
67/24/4
