202)
RECRRATION AND WELFARE
Refs:
Sports
& Games in the Army 1941.
Edrication in
War Time
Army•
(notified in A.C.I.
1138/42)
the, P.M.C.
Welfare
in the
War Time Army at Home
(notified
in a.C. Is 9 Oct 40)
Rules
for control and use of W.D.
s clothes.
Transport amendment No. 1 notified
in N.C. Is 26 Feb 41
Notes
for
Staff. Officers regarding Allowances
e"
and certain amenities, Initial grants
troduce
into the
etc.
k.C. I. 1335/41.
The soldiers Welfare. ACIs 16 Jul 42.
natural
Physical
& Recreational Training 1941.
sts
i]
DUCT ION
Ss
) The
term Recreational Training not only enbraces physical training and all
of outdoor sports;
but also indoor recreation or
organized relaxation.
"Thus another tern may be Combating Boredom. This means recreation for the
funds, y and not only for the minority or athletic few. This point is emphasised
er a fone with the present army incake there all sorts
and conditions of men.
= a wide difference in ages in a unit anâfeveryone
in a unit will be able
s the mes
ant. The - differ between a man of 20 and a man of 40.
trenusus exercise vithout strain, which may do more harm than good.
An office must keep fit mentally and physicaily, but metrods of doing so will
Likewis
ident.
Remember that four football teans of indifferent players are better than
experts.
a and the
This lecture does not go into details of he obvious, Everyone knows
round
that football and cricket ace popular and arrangements must be made for men
c fills
by them. It is the principle which must be absorbed, wherever he is,
Le King,
"'s duty is to interest himself in his men's recreation and prevent boredom
Details of all sports and how to run them are to be found in "Sports and
a tre arny published by the wmy Sports Control Board.
ОГ BOREDOM.
It shoula be realized that boredom is a weapon.
If no steps are taken to
y to dt, menta? laziness develops, drunkeness,
rene real diseases increase, and
• aftency sinks to a low level.
Eventone lows the effect of unemployment on the population in the years
wine the ver. an Army's job is to fight, when it is not fighting it may be said
nemployed: Something must therefore be found as
ersho erriciency and its morale will decline,
a substitute or it will
This mostitute is training and
for attention to mental and physical welfare.
•S Be A. I.M. No. 42 Appendix C. - "On being Browned Offi
al order to administer the right medicine a doctor must understand his
5 necase is sets out to do this in many cases hy discovering the manner
non is netient hoe led, so that he can form a proper judgement of cause and
In chort be Lecis the rackround of the disease.
no to lose should an ofricer see: the background of the men he has to lead.
ts may do hy personal contact an general interest in all their activities.
It is convenient to consider in thie correction the general type of man
andes the 3.40S, Cn
tene Cores unlike the County Regimenco of she Line, may receive men from
• cuts, East or West
Thus there are in one unit at once men who speak
ath languages thas is dialecti and have alfrerent outlooks.
berne role of the Corps required the type of man who is generally to be found
ons - artiricers and drivers of motor venicles.
y the townsman is used to a routine in a factory or shop. He is used to having
ements close at hand und he lacks the power of observation of his friend from
say, He is lved to well lighted streets and would find it difficult to find
n the dark. The man in the Factory has the Trade Union outlook bred in him.
" to hare and is used to having everything he wants on his doorstep - electric
ens, cinema, his favourite football tean. In many cases he has anown up and
