0-0. I.U.
CUSTOMS OF THE SERVICE.
Refs: "Customs of the Service" - A.H.S.
K.Rs. paras 942-955.
1448-1478.
Sees. 73 & 92.
A.T.M. No. 36. Para, 10.
IING- In geTeral i@luting is an outward sigh of good dispipline. It is derived
(i) The oustom of our ancestors who showed the open hand in greeting as a
that no weapon was carried and that no harm was intended.
(ii) The serf in the middle ages was forbidden to look his master in the face,
when he bacame a free man this was his, privilege.
(i11) The knight raies his visor as a greeting and a sign of goodwill.
today we have the open hand carried to the head and looking each other in he
A non-comnissioned rank is ordered to salute not so much the person of the
cer as the commission he carries, Saluting between fficers is an ast of courtesy
b) 1IZ Offivers will calute their sentors before addressing them of duty or on
reupeot to superiors in rank.
de. There is no difference in the
manner of saluting between officers and the
er
in which conpommissioned monks s lute offiness.
c) Junior Offizers at all times salute o?finers of zield rank i.ev, major and
e.
Officers of une other services of equivalent ranks to major and above are
tled to the same compliment. Officers of the rank of major and above are always
ossed as 'Sip'
a) Offisers, M.O's and N.C.Os not under the orders of the 0.0- parade will
te during the playing of the National Anthem. When on parade,
only officers
te.
Officers and soldiers passing a military funeral will salute the body.
Officers
in the service of any foreign power recognised by His Majesty are
tled to compliments according to their rani.
) Officers boarding one of His liajesty's Ships will salute the quarter deck,
is the after deck reserved for the officers.
5) When in command of troops on the march offivers will order their men to march
ittention and giving the eyes right ot left, salute,
(i) Any guard turned out for them.
(11.)
Any armed or unarmed body commanded by ar Offioer.
(iii) Their ow brigade or equivalent commander, general offiger or offioer of
equivalent rank in other services.
(iv) An officer will return the salute of a N.C.O. in charge of an unarmed
body of less than 20, but will not call his men to attention.
(v.)
No compliments are paid during a march on active service
2) An officer on entering and leaving a military office coupled by
iner irrespective of the letter's rank.
i) When a group of officers is saluted the senior will return the salute.
j) An officer attending a civil court of law will remove his headregs and
will
salute. Do not salute on entering the office of a civilian offioial but remove
headress.
k) on informal sonasions the salute is the equivalent of raising the hat in
jian clothes.
MESS.
(a) Every officer is compelled to be a member of the mess of his unit. He is
o compelled to pay a contribution (subscription) to the mess to heip defray expenses
(b) The offisers' mens of a unit is the officers hone, it is also akin to a clu:
• ary offioers who are permitted to live out of mess. The mess is managed by an
Picer known as the P.M.C. - Predident of the Ness Committee - he is assisted,
ording to the size of the lless, by other officers who have a specific department
look after e.g. lessing nember or Wine lember.
(o) A general mess meeting is held each quarter presided over by the o.o.
counts are presented and officers have opportunity to vote on any proposition put
ward. An officer on giving notice to the P.I.C. can also have a proposition
luded in the Agenda.
(d) The less is governed by Mess Rules. Those affecting discipline in the less
Ll often be laid down by the 8.0. Other rules by general nonsent for the
efit of the community.
(e) It is laid down in K.Rs. that mess bils must be paid by the 7th of the
ceding month. In war time many messes have weekly bils which must be settled at
.../ over.
