130
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
simultaneously with his completion of the capture of Cherbourg, the American
commander did not "want to take the risk."3
Hence, the First United States
Army remained a quasi-autonomous subordinate command within Montgom-
ery's army group, and this distinguished it from the more orthodox subordinate
roles assumed by both Crerar's and Dempsey's Anglo-Canadian Armies.
During July and early August 1944, the ever increasing American numerical
strength within the Allied forces deployed in Normandy compelled Montgomery
to accept certain key politico-military developments, not least those that related
to the Allied command structure. At the beginning of August, the 12th United
States Army Group became operational with
Bradley being promoted to
command it.
There now existed the awkward situation of one army group
commander (Bradley) serving under the command of another (Montgomery).
Furthermore, the time was drawing near when Eisenhower would take over the
office of Land Forces Commander from Montgomery, in accordance with the
intentions stated during the pre-invasion planning.
Given these facts, during
August the grip that the British Commander-in-Chief exerted over the Ameri-
cans grew steadily weaker; the increasing communication difficulties Montgom-
ery experienced as the American forces swarmed out of the Avranches bridge-
head, only served to exacerbate his dwindling control of Bradley's forces. Then,
on 1 September 1944 Eisenhower became a dual Supreme Allied and Land
Forces Commander, and Montgomery reverted to being just an army group
commander, with merely the two Anglo-Canadian armies under his command,
in a theater, that now also fielded two A-metican army groups. In the light of
these factors, this study will not examine the contribution that the First United
States Army made to the manner in which the 21st Army Group conducted this
campaign.
THE FUNCTION OF AN ARMY IN NORTHWEST EUROPE
An army is a higher formation in the military chain of command below that
of army group and above that of corps.
The composition of an army is not
fixed, and its only permanent establishment is its headquarters staff. To this is
added several corps, typically between two and four in total, according to the
operational situation. An army also has under its command various army
troops -independent artillery, armor, armored car, engineer, signal, transport,
and service units — that army headquarters allocates to support corps for specific
tasks as required by operational needs.
In Northwest Europe, when the 21st Army Group decided that a particular
operation was required, it issued a directive to its subordinate army commands
setting out in broad terms their respective tasks. On 4 August 1944, for example,
the army group set the First Canadian Army the task of launching "a strong
attack from the Caen sector towards Falaise on night 7/8 August."4
The
Canadian Army's fulfillment of this task became Operation "Totalize." These
tasks were allocated to armies within the context of army group operations as a
whole. After studying the problem, each army headquarters would issue its own
Operation Instruction to its subordinate corps.
This set out the army's task in
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
131
greater detail, and specified the particular task to be carried out by each
subordinate corps. The army plan, however, left the precise methods by which
the corps accomplished these tasks to be worked out in the plan subsequently
drawn up by corps. Hence, it was the corps headquarters that drew up the
detailed tactical-or lower operational-plan for how a particular operation
would be conducted, and not the army headquarters. However, the latter did set
criteria within which the corps had to develop its detailed plan.
For instance, in
"Totalize," the First Canadian Army instructed the Il Canadian Corps that its
plan should both achieve surprise and address the problem of maintaining the
momentum of the penetration as the attack developed.'
The theme of the relationship between levels in the chain of command
weaves itself through many of the issues that this study examines.
One
fundamental principle of many armies, including the British, is that a higher
formation, once it has set a mission, should leave its subordinate formation to
decide which methods it will use to achieve that task. This analysis assesses the
extent to which higher formations maintained this principle under the pressures
of war. This chapter demonstrates that British and Canadian higher commands
tended to impinge upon the freedom of their immediate subordinate formations
to plan the methods to be used to accomplish the tasks set them from above.
This tendency to "overcontrol" subordinates is the subject of debate in the
modern British army as it wrestles with the doctrinal tenets of maneuver
warfare, particularly that of Mission Command.
In Northwest Europe,
"overcontrol" resulted from the following four attitudes held by higher com-
manders: their lack of confidence in their subordinates; their supreme faith in
their own abilities; their desire to help newly promoted —and thus inexperi-
enced -corps and divisional commanders master their new responsibilities; and
their desperate concern to see operations develop that not only achieved success
but did so with tolerable casualties.
In Northwest Europe, a British or Canadian army headquarters performed
seven main operational/ tactical roles: It allocated resources to support corps in
their operations; it helped establish the necessary administrative and logistical
infrastructures and organize the relevant preparations to enable its subordinate
corps to launch their operations; it negotiated with Allied air commands for the
provision of strategic bombing attacks in direct support of the land operation; it
arranged on a daily basis tactical air support for operations; it coordinated the
actions of its corps if the operation constituted a multicorps affair; once the
corps battle was underway, army commanders influenced the operation by their
commitment of army-level reserves; and last, an army commander could
intervene directly at key moments in the corps battle if he felt the operational
situation demanded, or justified, such intervention.
On balance, an army's
contribution to a corps-level operation lay more in the preparation phase than in
the execution of the battle.'
