Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Any historical analysis of this campaign must consider Montgomery's personal-
ity, but some historians' assessments of Montgomery's operational technique
have been clouded by the excessive emphasis they place on this aspect. Only in
certain -yet important-areas did the Field Marshal's personality impinge on
operations, particularly in the case of inter-Allied cooperation.
Furthermore,
some historians, overly influenced by Montgomery's manifest egotism, have
interpreted his military actions as reflecting principally his personal ambition
and vanity; yet the Field Marshal was too intensely a professional soldier for
such factors to be more than modest influences on his conduct of the campaign.
Consequently, some historians have understated the extent to which Montgom-
ery's pursuit of a British agenda within the Allied effort in Northwest Europe
influenced his conduct of the campaign.'' Together, these factors have obscured
an accurate appreciation of Montgomery's true abilities. Finally, this excessive
focus on Montgomery also has heightened the underestimation of the contribu-
tion made by his subordinate army commanders.
Second, this study asserts that a satisfactory analysis of the campaign needs
to focus firmly on the operational level.
Instead, historical literature on the
campaign has focused excessively on the disputes over theater strategy that
arose between Montgomery and Eisenhower after late August 1944 over the
"broad front versus narrow thrust" controversy !8
Even though this dispute is
significant, it does not merit the vast attention paid to it by scholars.l*
The
emphasis historians have placed on this debate has fueled historiographical
confusions based on the lingering repercussions of wartime inter-Allied
tensions; unfortunately, nationalistic undertones have permeated too many
studies of the campaign.20
Furthermore, this historical debate also has rein-
forced some historians' assumptions that theater strategic decisions determined
success or failure in this campaign, rather than the combination of these with
operational decisions. Some historians have discussed whether the Allies would
have won the war earlier if they had advanced on a narrow front after September
1944 with negligible consideration of whether this strategic decision was
compatible with current operational techniques. Indeed, many accounts of this
inter-Allied dispute fail to distinguish clearly between theater strategy and
operations. Much of the literature on this campaign has not focused sufficiently
on the operational level when considering how the 21st Army Group conducted
the campaign.
Third, this study argues that some analyses have criticized aspects of Mont-
gomery's generalship, such as his caution and reliance on firepower, without
giving due regard to the other facets that comprised his operational approach?'
For historians only can appreciate fully each element of Montgomery's opera-
tional technique in the light of all the other components of his approach:
historians can only understand each individual facet as part of the whole.
Such
a comprehensive analysis, however, demonstrates that Montgomery's caution
and predilection for firepower were more justified than many historians have
acknowledged.
Introduction
Fourth, this analysis asserts that some historical works have understated the
difficulties facing the British army during summer 1944.
The retrospective
knowledge of both ultimate Allied success and overwhelming superiority in
matériel, suggests now an inevitability to victory not perceived by participants
at the time; to the British population of mid-1944 the success of "Overlord"
remained as uncertain as the vast risks involved were clear. Many historians
have underestimated not only the extent of Britain's war weariness by D-Day
after four years of war but also the practical difficulties faced by the British
army in prosecuting this campaign? By June 1944 Britain was in the grip of a
chronic manpower shortage, and the British army would not be able to replace
all the casualties it would sustain in the liberation of Europe; the 21st Army
Group could be nothing other than a wasting asset.
This force, moreover, represented Britain's last substantial field army, and if
this was lost, the British could only make a modest contribution to any eventual
Allied success.
Montgomery realized the necessity to avoid incurring heavy
casualties in Northwest Europe.
This manpower shortage
also placed a
premium on getting the best out of the relatively limited personnel resources at
Montgomery's disposal through sustaining their morale. However, the morale
of the civilian conscript soldiers that served in the 21st Army Group proved
rather more fragile than that of the determined and resilient Wehrmacht.
Montgomery's concern about how well his troops would "stand up when they
had to play in the big league" constantly influenced his operational behavior?
He recognized both that simple weight of matériel was not enough in itself to
assure victory, and that such numerical superiority in equipment did not obviate
the need to nurture high morale within his Anglo-Canadian troops. Montgom-
ery's appreciation that the morale of his forces represented a key to victory
reflected his accurate perception of the strategic and operational situation facing
the 21st Army Group in mid-1944.
Historians have often underemphasized these two features of Montgomery's
operational methods, which might be termed casualty conservation and the
maintenance of morale. Yet these two factors influenced Montgomery's conduct
of the campaign more than any other consideration. All senior commanders
within the 21st Army Group strove to conduct this campaign in a manner that
both sustained the morale of their troops and avoided heavy casualties.
These
two concerns remained interconnected: Avoiding heavy casualties bolstered the
morale of these soldiers, and high morale facilitated a superior battlefield
performance that contributed to reducing casualties.
Though some of the campaign's historical literature has given modest atten-
tion to these influences, no work has accorded them the attention justified by
their significance 24 Historians have not recognized fully the influence these two
factors exerted on the other characteristics of Montgomery's operational
technique. Scholars can only understand his utilization of cautious, firepower-
laden methods in the light of these twin concerns.
This work, after giving due
consideration to these two influences, concludes that Montgomery's utilization
of his "Colossal Cracks" operational technique was appropriate to the circum-
stances facing the 21st Army Group in mid-1944. This reinforces the argument
