146
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
that the vital spot to hold was the Rauray gap." For he had calculated that this
"was where the Germans would strike," and hence "concentratled] everything to
give the Germans a sound beating when they came in there," as they duly did??
Generally, Dempsey's caution proved justified in that it prevented the Ger-
mans being presented with opportunities to use their undoubted tactical abilities
to inflict local defeats on Anglo-Canadian forces.
During
"Epsom," both
Dempsey and O'Connor rightly remained "anxious to strengthen and widen the
bridgehead over the Odon before letting 11th Armored Division push on," as
both feared that "too deep and narrow an advance" would enable the Germans to
cut off the Allied salient with counterattacks from either flank."8 Dempsey's
caution, therefore, also manifested itself in his concern over exposed flanks -a
consideration shared by Montgomery. As the advance of the XXX Corps on the
northern sector of the early October "Gatwick" offensive would create an ever-
lengthening, exposed northern flank, Dempsey instructed it both to advance on
only a very narrow (one divisional) front and to deploy the bulk of its strength
to protect this elongating flank."
Though Dempsey shared his superior's caution, and perhaps occasional
overcaution, he also carefully weighed the necessities of caution against other
valid operational considerations.
Like Montgomery, Dempsey could also be
bold -could demand boldness from his subordinates —when he felt that this was
required: Whether his subordinate commanders could deliver advances com-
mensurate to Dempsey's bold demands was another matter. The army com-
mander, for example, stressed the need for such urgency during Operation
"Bluecoat," when he informed Bucknall, the commander of the XXX Corps, that
"time was of the utmost importance. "100
Indeed, in the aftermath of the failure
of "Bluecoat," Dempsey sacked Bucknall on the grounds that the corps com-
mander allegedly had failed to inject sufficient urgency into his subordinates.
Dempsey clearly also shared that British doctrinal emphasis on extreme
concentration that remained so prevalent in Montgomery's offensive operational
methods and that contrasted with American techniques.
On 13 June 1944
Dempsey noted in his diary that it was "clear now that Caen could only be
taken by a set piece assault and we did not have men or ammunition for that at
the time. ''! Dempsey commented on the first abortive American drive on St Lô
that "Bradley had obviously made his task more difficult by trying to buck the
whole line instead of concentrating on punching a hole in one important
Dempsey's emphasis on concentration was reflected in the Second
Army's policy of meeting all resource demands made by its subordinate corps.
According to Brigadier Stone, the Second Army's Chief Engineer, Dempsey had
instructed his staff "to meet all demands" for men or stores made by corps "at
once and without discussion."103
Dempsey's headquarters displayed a reliance on massively concentrated
firepower that mirrored, if not exceeded, that emanating from the 21st Army
Group.
On 21 June 1944 Major-General Graham, the army group's chief
administrative officer, commented that "the demands of Second Army for
ammunition" were "fantastic" and "out of proportion to the real needs."104
conference the Second Army staff held on 27 October 1944 to discuss the
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
147
projected "Gatwick" offensive illustrates the
extent to which
Dempsey's
command desired to blast its way forward by weight of gunfire.
This confer-
ence produced a carefully calculated requirement for 1,112 artillery guns for the
operation —more than three-quarters of all the artillery pieces in the entire 21st
Army Group! If the "Gatwick" fire-plan had been carried out according to this
scheme, it would have been the largest Anglo-Canadian fire-program in the
entire Northwest Europe campaign. ºs
Dempsey's methods
also
reflected Montgomery's concept of balance.
Dempsey's control of reserves, engendered by his fear of German counterat-
tacks, enabled him to deal quickly with any enemy countermoves before they
could achieve significant success.
Furthermore, Dempsey's conduct of the
Second Army in Normandy revealed his utilization of a technique similar to
Montgomery's concept of forcing the enemy off-balance.
One of Dempsey's
motivations for "Goodwood" was what he called "tennis over the Orne." This
involved striking "first on one side of the Orne and then on the other" to force
the enemy to move reserve armor across the river, which permitted the British
"to hit them with our air forces in the process of crossing when they were
particularly vulnerable. "106 The Second Army could then exploit this opportu-
nity by undertaking a major offensive.
In the early phases of the Normandy campaign, Montgomery remained criti-
cal of Dempsey's abilities-or rather his lack of experience -on air support
matters. The fact that Montgomery's army group staff included senior officers
like de Guingand, Belchem,
and Richardson who had gained considerable
practical experience of such matters with the Eighth Army in North Africa,
served to reinforce Montgomery's critical views.
Given that air matters were
coordinated principally at army level, the fact that Dempsey had previously only
commanded a corps meant that he possessed little relevant experience.
On 7
July 1944, for example, Montgomery told Brooke that "Dempsey and his staff
do not know a very great deal yet about how to wield air power; and Dempsey
himself has slipped up once or twice in the matter." Montgomery reassured the
CIGS, however, that he was both "watching over this very carefully" and that he
was confident that Dempsey would soon "get the form," even though at present
he was too impatient.107
One of these "mistakes" appears to have been the manner in which the Sec-
ond Army staff planned a proposed attack in early June to outflank Caen in
conjunction with a drop of the lst Airborne Division.
On 11 June 1944, de
Guingand informed Montgomery that he was "not very happy with the way in
which planning was undertaken in Second Army, "108
The latter, he explained,
had commenced detailed planning on the assumption that the use of the airborne
division was definite, even though Leigh-Mallory, the Air Commander-in-Chief,
had not yet approved its deployment. Leigh-Mallory's subsequent rejection of
the plan as being potentially too costly in casualties, substantiated de Guingand's
concerns.
Consequently, all the staff work devoted to the plan proved to have
been wasted. Dempsey was keen to get on with the difficult task of forging a
way inland, although Montgomery's accusation that Dempsey was rushing his
fences may reflect the accuser's great caution as much as Dempsey's impatience.
