142
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Montgomery the ruthless military professional, however, also remained
aware that Dempsey had never commanded an army before and hence was
likely to experience teething troubles adjusting to this new level of command.
On 10 June 1944, Montgomery wrote to de Guingand that his time was "fully
occupied" as he had "two army commanders who have never commanded
armies in battle before. "6 Montgomery obviously felt it necessary to nurse the
two commanders until they adjusted to the task of commanding an army.
Similarly, Montgomery observed in his letter to Leese of 24 July that both
Bradley and Dempsey were "very inexperienced on the air side, but are anxious
to learn and are doing so."67
As the arrangements for tactical air support were
made primarily at army level, rather than at corps level, Dempsey had little
practical experience of such matters to draw upon.
Montgomery recognized that in addition to Dempsey's inexperience, the
Second Army staff also possessed little practical experience of running an army.
Only on 27 November 1944 did Dempsey reveal to the staff at the Second
Army's Main Headquarters how anxious he remained prior to D-Day about their
inexperience. He doubted whether his staff would "produce the goods at once,"
because many of them had "never been to war before," and because it remained
unclear if they could cooperate effectively with 83 Group RAF.68
During the
course of the campaign, however, growing practical experience gradually honed
the Second Army staff into an efficient, experienced organization, and this
development facilitated Anglo-Canadian successes on the battlefield.
summary, therefore, Montgomery held a slightly ambivalent opinion of
Dempsey's operational ability that recognized both the latters strengths and
weaknesses; this ambivalence mirrors the curiously contradictory contribution
Dempsey made to the campaign."9
Another important aspect of the conduct of the Northwest Europe campaign
was the making of appointments. Dempsey made only a limited contribution on
such matters, which were monopolized by Montgomery who devoted a lot of his
alention to them?" Dempsey's marginal role in appointment maters reinforces
the image of Dempsey as subservient to Montgomery. Dempsey's contribution
contrasted with that of Crerar who dominated Canadian appointments in the
theater -but only because political realities forced Montgomery to accept the
national sensibilities of the Anglo-Canadian military relationship.
Dempsey's
subservience to his superior on appointments was evident in the case of General
Allan Adair, the commander of the Guards Armored Division.
In February
1944, Montgomery concluded that Adair lacked sufficient drive to command the
division in the forthcoming invasion of France and wanted him removed. On 19
February, Dempsey faithfully informed O'Connor, who had just taken over the
corps that deployed Adair's division, of Montgomery's view and asked him to
write an unfavorable report on Adair." Since O'Connor remained "less in awe"
of Monty than most, and "certainly not in awe of Dempsey his former subordi-
nate," the corps commander refused to make such a report.?? O'Connor argued
justifiably that he had had insufficient time to form a valid opinion of Adair and
hence could not write an unfavorable report; as a result Adair commanded the
division during the campaign.
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
143
At the time, O'Connor consistently professed a high opinion of Adair, possi-
bly due to his sensitivity to the political power of the Guards lobby; but in 1975
he admitted that Adair "was not really a flyer."73 This latter view was shared by
other commanders within the 21st Army Group, like "Pip" Roberts who felt that
he would have succeeded if he had undertaken "Market-Garden" instead of
Adair?4
Indeed, a strong sense of the "Gentleman-Amateur" comes through
from Adair's own memoirs.'
Given Montgomery's intense resentment of
having his will thwarted, O'Connor's technically
correct actions scarcely
endeared him to a Montgomery who had not wished to have the elderly
O'Connor command a corps in the 21st Army Group in the first place. In this
affair, Dempsey's loyalties were firmly with the wishes of Montgomery, rather
than with the strict military correctness of O'Connor.
O'Connor clashed with Montgomery yet again over appointments in Sep-
tember 1944. Montgomery had met the aging general Silvester commanding the
American 7th Armored Division that was serving temporarily under O'Connor's
corps command.
Montgomery requested that Eisenhower dismiss Silvester,
without even discussing the matter with O'Connor? This behavior so infuriated
the latter that he tendered his resignation."
Although Dempsey persuaded
O'Connor to retract his resignation, this was the final straw in the strained
relations between Montgomery and the corps commander, and the former
allowed O'Connor to be poached for the vacant army command in India. On 28
September 1944, Montgomery cryptically told Brooke "the VCIGS will tell you
what I said about O'Connor, and if by chance you took [him] for Egypt then I
would ask you to let me have Browning for 8 Corps.
178 Montgomery's request
for the dashing, politically powerful, yet operationally inexperienced "Boy"
Browning, then the commander of the British airborne corps, is baffling. It is
inconceivable that a commander as consumed with operational efficiency as
Montgomery would seriously have wanted the inexperienced Browning as a
corps commander, because he must have been aware of Browning's culpability
in the failure of the airborne landings at Oosterbeek-Arnhem in "Market-
Garden."
Perhaps this request reflected political considerations in a war that
Montgomery believed would be over in a few weeks?" O'Connor believed that
Dempsey secretly supported his position over Silvester, as evidenced by the fact
that both commanders wrote letters of condolence to Silvester but Montgomery
did not.
However, O'Connor felt that there was little either of them could do
because "we carried no weight with Monty." O'Connor recalled that on the one
occasion after the war when Montgomery referred to the matter, he stated that in
his opinion Dempsey and O'Connor "had said far too much" in Silvester's
favor.80
These command squabbles illustrate the minimal influence Dempsey
exerted on his superior on such matters.
Another example of the marginal contribution that Dempsey made on such
matters concerned Major-General "Pip" Roberts, commander of the 11th
Armored Miricion
Roberts was unhappy with the GSO1 who had replaced
Brian Wyldbore-Smith and asked O'Connor to speak to Dempsey.
Both the
latter commanders replied that they could do nothing as Montgomery himself
had appointed the officer. Roberts persisted with his complaint, going over the
