188
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
skilled and effective Westheer.
Some of this criticism is perfectly valid. Yet it
is not in the least surprising that at the tactical level the 1944 British army could
not match the Wehrmacht, one of the most efficient military forces in history.
Four groups of structural factors shed light on why this was so: that the 1944
British army was a mass-conscripted civilian army, based on a tiny peace-time
nucleus; that many of its regular officers possessed Empire-wide experiences of
peace-time
soldiering and training that had
scarcely prepared them for a
technologically advanced major European war; that its personnel came from a
society that lacked a pronounced martial tradition, and consequently many of its
personnel lacked the fanaticism that characterized sizable numbers of the
German Armed Forces; and finally that whereas the desperate German need to
avoid Götterdämmerung reinforced powerfully their battlefield resolve during
1944-45, this situation simply did not exist for Anglo-Canadian troops.
Many historians critical of Anglo-Canadian performance in Northwest
Europe also have given insufficient consideration to the interconnections that
existed between the operational and tactical levels.
It was not necessary for the
21st Army Group to strive to compete tactically with the German army in order
to defeat the latter. Nor was such an approach appropriate either to British war
aims or to the nature of the resources available to Britain.
Even though the
operational methods utilized by the 21st Army Group remained crude, they
nevertheless constituted an appropriate way of securing British war aims given
the relatively fragile nature of the resources available.
These war aims did not
seek to produce the most impressive British combat performance but rather to
defeat the German army with the relatively limited manpower now available by
relying on matériel.
These British campaign objectives sought not only to
achieve a high national military profile within the victory attained over the
enemy by a larger Allied force, but to do so without incurring a massive blood-
letting of British youth.
The real task facing senior British and Canadian
commanders in Northwest Europe was not to attempt to match the virtuosity of
the best German commanders, but eventually to achieve victory by doing what
the British army did best: To gradually grind down the enemy into a virtual
submission by an attritional war based on Allied numerical superiority in
machines. As long as Anglo-Canadian forces avoided presenting the enemy
with any opportunities to inflict on them tactical setbacks, then overall Allied
numerical superiority would eventually succeed -through simple attrition -in
bringing the Westheer close to defeat. This was the inexorable dynamic of
Matérielschlacht. Of course, in Northwest Europe, once protracted attritional
warfare had depleted the fighting power of the Westheer, the Allies would
translate this combat potential into ultimate victory over their enemy by
unleashing their armored formations in large-scale mobile operations.
It is fair to argue that prior to D-Day, the British and Canadian armies might
have done more to improve the tactical training of the soldiers fielded by the
21st Army Group; in particular, to instill in them more-effective tactical
flexibility and use of initiative. It is debatable, however, whether there existed
enough time, or sufficient expertise within the army, to train personnel —some
of whom were then being drawn from the bottom of the manpower barrel-to a
Conclusions
189
significantly higher level of tactical effectiveness. In reality, however, what the
British army needed to achieve for the Northwest Europe campaign was to train
its soldiers to an adequate level of tactical competency, sufficient to permit them
to exploit the devastation that massed Allied firepower inflicted on the enemy.
For the 21st Army Group eventually would achieve victory over the Westheer
not through tactical excellence but rather through crude techniques and compe-
tent leadership at both the operational and tactical levels.
Some historians' criticism of the poor tactical combat performance of Anglo-
Canadian forces, moreover, has given insufficient consideration to the strong
influence that British operational technique exerted on their activities at the
tactical level.
The
"Colossal Cracks" operational approach stifled tactical
initiative, flexibility, and tempo. The availability of massive firepower within
the 21st Army group still would have stifled tactical performance to some
degree even if better training had produced tactically more-effective troops.
Such copious firepower support inevitably created a tactical dependency on it
amongst other combat arms.
The availability of large amounts of highly
effective artillery assets made it possible for British troops to capture enemy
positions devastated by artillery fire without having aggressively to fight their
way forward using their own weapons. The existence of such resources enabled
troops to achieve their objectives while minimizing unnecessary casualties.
Given that even soldiers determined to do their duty still desperately wish to
return home alive, it seems unlikely that more effective training would have
done much to lesson the adverse impact that this firepower-reliant operational
technique exerted on the tactical combat performance of Anglo-Canadian
troops.
This study's examination of Montgomery's two subordinate army command-
ers, Dempsey and Crerar, has highlighted the extent to which their operational
methods mirrored those of Montgomery. A strong degree of consensus existed
within the senior Anglo-Canadian commanders on what techniques should be
utilized to undertake effectively major operations.
This analysis also has
demonstrated that Montgomery tended to "over-control" both his army com-
manders, though each for different reasons.
The
Field Marshal gripped
Dempsey because his focus on Second (British) Army operations, the closeness
of their working relationship, and Dempsey's stoic tolerance of his superior's
interference all encouraged Montgomery to do so.
The campaign's historical
literature universally has portrayed Dempsey as being a mere cipher of Mont-
gomery. However, the fading of Dempsey's reputation into historical oblivion is
undeserved. Dempsey made a more significant contribution to the campaign
than historians previously have recognized.
Unfortunately, the nature of the
Montgomery-Dempsey relationship has obfuscated historical analysis, particu-
larly as both commanders have claimed authorship of the same key decisions.
Consequently, historians now may never establish precisely Dempsey's role in
the campaign.
However, despite this imprecision, this study nevertheless has
demonstrated that Dempsey exerted a greater influence on the way in which the
21st Army Group conducted the Northwest Europe campaign than scholars to
date have recognized.
