132
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
DEMPSEY'S ROLE IN NORTHWEST EUROPE
This analysis now examines the contribution that Dempsey, the commander
of the Second (British) Army, and his staff made to the manner in which the
21st Army Group conducted this campaign.
It also explores Dempsey's
relationship with Montgomery, and analyzes the extent to which he shared his
superior's operational methods.
These analyses show that although Montgom-
ery circumvented "Bimbo" Dempsey, as he was known according to an army
sobriquet of obscure origination, the latter was not simply the colorless cipher
that the existing literature has portrayed him as being.®
The dearth of extant archival material that relates to Dempsey constitutes a
serious methodological problem for any analysis of his role in this campaign.
Such archival scraps that do exist include his 1944 45 diary -simply a basic
narrative of his daily activities, the operational papers of the Second Army, and
fragmentary comments made by his colleagues. Indeed, principally as a result
of this paucity of documentary evidence, Dempsey has remained the forgotten
commander of the campaign.
His absence from the 1991 book, Churchill's
Generals, is highly significant, as is the fact that to date there has been no major
biographical work on him; an ignominy that is only shared, amongst the senior
Anglo-Canadian commanders in the theater -those at or above corps level-by
Bucknall and Crocker.l0
The enduring feature of the campaign's historical
literature has been an obsession with Montgomery, a focus that was encouraged
by the Field Marshal himself; incredibly, his account of the campaign only
mentions Dempsey just six times, and none of these entries is substantial."
Several historians have recognized the need to remedy this historical oversight,
but such intentions have fallen flat due to the dearth of documentary material
available.? However, with careful use of the wide range of snippets of material
relating to Dempsey, an attempt to examine systematically Dempsey's role in
Northwest Europe can now be made.
Another key reason for Dempsey's historical obscurity emanates from his
personality. Dempsey, a career infantryman, was an efficient, calm, charming,
and wholly unperturbable commander, who possessed a legendary ability to
read ground from a map.!3
But Dempsey also was an extremely quiet, intro-
verted, and unassuming soldier, who shunned publicity; he simply got on with
his job effectively and with the minimum of fuss.!4
Given the subordination of
the introverted Dempsey under the command of the glory-grabbing Montgom-
ery, it is not surprising that Dempsey's profile among the British general public
in 1944 45 remained very low indeed. The unassuming Dempsey proved the
perfect foil for the egotistical Montgomery, and one is compelled to ponder to
what extent this influenced the Field Marshal's selection of Dempsey as his
subordinate for this campaign. Dempsey's public prominence reached its - still
lowly —heights in 1945, on the crest of victory in Europe.
After the war,
however, his limited reputation dwindled rapidly, in part because Dempsey
refused to enter into public debate over the campaign. His firm determination
not to contradict the Montgomery line, and his disinterest in self-promotion, did
nothing to bolster the public's paltry interest in him; he remained the forgotten
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
133
victor of what was, for the Western Allies, the decisive campaign of the Second
World War in Europe.!5
Another methodological problem that dogs any examination of Dempsey's
contribution to this campaign revolves around the obfuscating features of his
relationship with Montgomery.
The closeness of their working relationship
makes it extremely difficult to trace the authorship of a particular operational
decision.
This problem is greatly exacerbated by their practice in Northwest
Europe of working entirely on verbal orders.
Montgomery's Directives were
merely the subsequent "confirmation of our conferences and discussions. "16
Montgomery later confirmed that the only written order he gave Dempsey in
Normandy was "the one for the record" about "Goodwood."IT
This reliance on
verbal orders attests to the smoothness and mutual confidence of their opera-
tional relationship; but this also muddies analysis.
These problems of interpretation are compounded by the fact, as Dominick
Graham has observed, that an almost symbiotic relationship existed between the
two commanders.!8 They had worked so long together that they thought along
very similar lines and often anticipated each other's reactions and decisions.
Though this symbiosis hypothesis is both eminently plausible and a useful
explanatory tool, it is impossible to prove.
Acceptance of this hypothesis
explains plausibly a notable feature in the two commanders' documentary record
of the campaign; sometimes, both their contemporary records claim authorship
for the same decision! Montgomery informed O'Connor on 19 June 1944, for
instance, that he had "told Bimbo to chuck" an intended operation by O'Con-
nor's corps east of the Orne; yet the day before, Dempsey noted in his diary that
he "had told" Montgomery that he had concluded that this attack was "too risky"
to undertake!'
This notion of a symbiotic relationship proffers two possible explanations
for the contradictions inherent in the disputed authorship of this decision, and
similar ones that also exist; that both men either reached independently the same
conclusion or together reached a mutual conclusion.
If one rejects this symbio-
sis hypothesis, there still exist other plausible explanations for this contradiction;
that the glory-grabbing Montgomery, as the superior officer, was claiming credit
for Dempsey's decisions; or that the down-trodden Dempsey,
tiring of his
superior's interference, was claiming (at least for posterity) credit for decisions
reached by Montgomery.
From what is known generally of these two com-
manders and the context of this campaign, all of these explanations are plausi-
Whatever the truth behind these confusions —and history may never now
know —the crucial point is that these uncertainties make it difficult to make a
conclusive assessment of Dempsey's role in the campaign. Reaching definitive
conclusions about his role remains problematic when the authorship of key
decisions may now never be attributed precisely.
Moreover, to date historians
have often assumed that Montgomery was the real author of these disputed
decisions; and hence, to date these confusions have both contributed to the
consignment of Dempsey's historical profile to oblivion and fueled the con-
suming fascination with Montgomery
But it may be the case that some
decisions that appear to have been made by Montgomery were in fact inspired
