70
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
from the eastern flank would attract German armor to that flank.
Hence,
Dempsey's army could achieve its role in the theater -to attract German armor
to its front —without necessarily undertaking massive break-in operations that
would inevitably incur heavy casualties.
The motive of casualty conservation
explains why Montgomery terminated operations like "Goodwood" soon after
he realized that relatively easy success was unlikely.
In retrospect, this approach has led some historians to accuse Montgomery
of excessive caution. Examination of the casualty and reinforcement contexts,
as well as his need to nurture troop morale, however, reveals that Montgomery
had sound reasons for this caution. Given the politico-Imperial dimension of the
campaign, there was little point in Dempsey's army capturing Caen in the first
week after a bloody, all-out battle in which it had incurred such massive
casualties that its long-term effectiveness was undermined.
Britain did not
possess the resources in 1944 to rebuild badly cut-up divisions; it proved
impossible, for instance, to rebuild speedily the lst Airborne Division after its
decimation in Operation "Market-Garden."
It was imperative for Montgomery
to protect the long-term viability of his inevitably shrinking army group so that
it would play an important part in the final defeat of the enemy.
Casualty conservation influenced Montgomery's methods most conspicu-
ously in the 18 July "Goodwood" offensive. Just prior to this, the Adjutant-
General, Ronald Adam, had warned Montgomery that he could no longer
guarantee the dispatch of sufficient infantry drafts to France.86
This infantry
manpower shortage led Dempsey to persuade a reluctant Montgomery to launch
an attack by an all-armor corps. In mid-July, Montgomery's forces needed to
resume offensive action to keep German armor tied down in the eastern half of
the bridgehead prior to the American "Cobra" offensive in the west.
An all-
armor attack also was logical because Dempsey could not afford to loose
infantrymen,
but could afford to lose armor.?"
"Goodwood" contravened
Montgomery's stated policy never to employ a corps comprising entirely of
armor. This policy reflected both the often poor performance of Allied armor
during break-in operations in North Africa, and the realities of modern warfare,
which now required intimate infantry-tank cooperation. Ironically, the shortage
of adequate infantry support for the armor constituted the biggest factor in the
failure of "Goodwood."
The extent of Montgomery's concern over casualty
conservation during this operation is demonstrated by the explanation of
Montgomery's intentions for "Goodwood" made by his military assistant, Kit
Dawnay, to the War Office, that "Montgomery has to be very careful of what he
does on his eastern flank because on that flank is the only British army there is
left in this part of the world. "89
Casualty conservation manifested itself throughout the 21st Army Group
down through the hierarchy of command. Even though such concerns consti-
tuted an established facet of the British army's approach to war long before D-
Day, the critical manpower situation in 1944 powerfully reinforced these
concerns. To what extent knowledge of this situation filtered through the army
group remains unclear.
It seems that all formation commanders down to
divisional level, if not to brigade level, knew something about the severity of the
Casualty Conservation
71
British manpower crisis and of the need to avoid heavy casualties.
The
Americans also possessed limited knowledge of the problem. On 24 July, Harry
Butcher,
Eisenhower's Naval Aide, recorded the American opinion that
Montgomery and Dempsey were "so conscious of Britain's ebbing manpower
that they hesitate to commit an attack where a division may be lost" because "to
replace the division is practically impossible. "9o
In Northwest Europe such concerns led British senior commanders to halt
attacks that met strong resistance and thus incurred high casualties, especially if
a breakthrough seemed unlikely.
At the lower formation (brigade) level, and
below that at unit level, British and Canadian commanders soon called off
attacks that met strong resistance, and then arranged a new, larger, fire-plan so
that their forces could repeat the attack the next day. The main impulse on this
cautious attitude was Montgomery, as demonstrated by
his explanation to
Simpson of his 21 July 1944 orders on proposed future operations.
The third
phase of immediate future operations, Montgomery envisaged, would entail an
operation by VIII Corps east of the River Orne passing through II Canadian
Corps and advancing down the Falaise road toward St. Sylvain and Conteville.
Montgomery believed that "if the form is not too good, we can always withdraw
into our own lines of the Canadian Corps firm base and repeat the operation a
few days later. "91
This intended operation formed part of Montgomery's post-"Goodwood"
alternate thrusts approach, which he adopted to maintain future casualties at
acceptable levels. Alternate thrusts involved a series of attacks at various parts
of the front as the preliminaries for a decisiv
Group had
already suffered heavy casualties at "Ep:
American breakthrough offensive im
forces had to keep the pressure on
armor to the American sector.
objective without incurring heavy
sectors of the front, the British forces
kept the latter's powerful armored
next, and thereby limited the cas
Allied forces.
The principle of casualty cons
combat performance of Anglo-Canac
sheds light on why numerically sun
failed to achieve decisive penetra
concerns and of the practice of es
ing of assault formations in depth
Canadian forces actually engaged
analyses have placed great emphas
numerical advantages,
but suchf
demonstrated, there exist marked dil
numerical advantage, largely due to
These diminishing returns also resu
"challenge" —the "response of a force of
