190
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
In contrast, Montgomery gripped Crerar because he justifiably remained
both suspicious of the latter's operational abilities and concerned that Crerar's
defense of the Canadian army's national interests would undermine the opera-
tional conduct of the campaign.
This latter concern reflected Montgomery's
narrow focus on the purely operational aspects of the campaign and the inability
of his decision-making to embrace fully the wider politico-military aspects of
inter-Allied cooperation in the theater.
This failing, as well as Montgomery's
arrogance and colonial superiority, dogged Anglo-Canadian cooperation in
Northwest Europe. The objective weaknesses in Crerar's generalship, however,
did not exert a serious deleterious impact on the campaign because he held both
of his capable corps commanders -Crocker and Simonds-on a loose rein,
permitting them to fight relatively unhindered their respective corps battles.
This study's examination of the army level of command also has demon-
strated first the extent of consensus that existed within the 21st Army Group
concerning operational technique, and second how the relationships between
these commanders influenced the conduct of the campaign.
This study has
demonstrated the validity of the argument that historians can only obtain a full
appreciation of the manner in which the 21st Army Group conducted the
campaign by combining an examination of the methods used by its senior
commanders with an analysis of the relationships that existed between them.
In summation, therefore, this study has examined the way in which Mont-
gomery and the 21st Army Group conducted the 1944 45 Northwest Europe
campaign.
It has demonstrated that this conduct was not only both highly
competent and appropriate but also more effective than some scholars have
acknowledged.
As a whole,
"Colossal Cracks"
remained an
appropriate
operational technique given British politico-Imperial war aims and the
real
capabilities of the rather fragile and limited resources available to the 1944
Anglo-Canadian army relative to that of the
Westheer
Serious inherent
drawbacks existed in this crude operational technique, not least the limitations
on tactical mobility caused by the vast devastation massive firepower inflicted
on the battlefield; this restricted Allied exploitation of the fleeting tactical
opportunities that arose out of the use of this firepower.
However, when
historians consider all pertinent factors, it is clear that the advantages of
"Colossal Cracks" undoubtedly outweighed the disadvantages. It is undeniable
that many of the senior commanders within the 21st Army Group could not
match the capabilities of their adversaries.
Yet, these commanders sensibly
stuck to what they —and especially their civilian troops —did best. They stuck to
conducting the campaign through the utilization of firepower-reliant, attritional
warfare —at least until the Westheer had been so weakened that large-scale
Allied mobile operations could achieve decisive victory.
The "Colossal Cracks" approach relied on the British army's strengths, nota-
bly its artillery and its ability to call down the awesome power of the Allied
tactical air forces. This operational technique also helped British forces avoid
presenting the enemy with opportunities to make use of their tactical abilities on
the counterattack to inflict setbacks on Montgomery's forces. Moreover, the fact
that Anglo-Canadian troops only attacked when they were in as favorable
Conclusions
191
position as possible to do so successfully nurtured the relatively fragile morale
of these civilian troops.
This method represented an appropriate use of the
limited manpower resources available.
For "Colossal Cracks" allowed the 21st
Army Group to wear down enemy assets and liberate territory without having to
do so predominantly by sustained individual combat. In this way, Montgom-
ery's forces avoided sustaining both severe casualties and significant morale
degradation.
Only after these methods had denuded significantly the combat
power of the Westheer would Montgomery run the risks involved in seeking to
achieve final victory. In this final bid for ultimate success, the forces deployed
by the 21st Army Group would attempt to tactically outperform their depleted
enemy through implementation of highly effective, large-scale, mobile opera-
tions. Above all, both the morale and casualty concerns inherent within the
"Colossal Cracks" approach ensured that the 21st Army Group secured Britain's
1944-45 war aims.
Using this operational technique, the 21st Army Group
emerged in May 1945 intact and undiminished in size after making a significant
contribution to the Allied defeat of the Westheer in Northwest Europe.
"Colossal Cracks" clearly represented a winning method, even if it not a
flawless one; it was a double-edged and rather fragile sword.
Yet it had taken
truly heroic efforts to get the British army from the depths of despair in 1940
after Dunkirk to a point in 1944 where it could, using these methods, defeat the
skilled Wehrmacht -without incurring a bloodbath —within a larger Allied
effort.
For the British army by June 1944 there simply had not been enough
time, and probably insufficient ability and experience within its senior echelons,
to overcome the weaknesses inherent in the "Colossal Cracks" approach. On D-
Day and after, the 21st Army Group had to do its best with whatever weapon,
unpromising or not, that the British army had managed to forge.
Overall, this
technique represented the most appropriate weapon the British army could
develop in the circumstances.
And it would prove to be enough, albeit just
enough, to defeat the enemy and secure British war aims.
The 21st Army Group
emerged intact in early May 1945 after making a significant contribution to the
Western Allied effort in defeating the Nazi canker.
For the British army of mid-
1944 there was no more viable alternative weapon than
"Colossal Cracks" that
realistically could have been forged by D-Day.
