30
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Brigadier Hargest recorded frankly the morale problems that many British
officers recognized but refused openly to admit, and observed that Allied troops
lacked "the spirit essential to victory." Moreover, while Hargest conceded that
Allied morale was higher than that of the enemy, he still confessed that the state
of the former "frighten[ed] me."
From this situation he concluded that senior
British commanders would "do well to depend on air, artillery, and tanks. "So
Hargest's frankness highlights the methodological difficulties that dog historical
analysis of morale problems; typically, the Allies did not admit openly such
difficulties but discussed them behind closed doors in a euphemistic manner
encapsulated in the term "stickiness. "51
By mid-July, British morale problems in Normandy proved particularly bad
within the very stretched forces of the I (British) Corps, under the command of
John Crocker, which held the vulnerable yet vital eastern flank beyond the River
Orne and Caen Canal.
On 24 July 1944, the experienced Crocker informed
Lieutenant-General Crerar, under whose
first
Canadian Army
command
Montgomery had just placed him, of these problems. Crocker stated that the 3rd
British Division, which "had been fighting continuously since D-Day" and had
suffered almost 6,000 casualties, "was tired out and had shown obvious signs of
this exhaustion. "52 The existence of such a morale problem within his Corps
prompted Crocker to refuse to carry out Crerar's 22 July Directive, the latter's
first orders in the theater.
This required the I (British) Corps to clear the
Ouistreham area and Caen Canal from close enemy observation.
Crocker,
however, insisted that he "had no troops fit or available for any such opera-
tion. "53
By the time that Crerar had referred this dispute to Montgomery, the
operational situation had changed and consequently, the I Corps never carried
out the intended operation $4
By this time, morale problems also had emerged in both of the Canadian
infantry divisions deployed in the theater-the 2nd and 3rd.
The latter had
spearheaded the D-Day assault, and both had spent long continuous periods in
the front, had suffered heavy casualties, and had had no chance to reorganize
out of the line and properly absorb reinforcements. By the end of July 1944,
these experiences had reduced the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division to a barely
battle-worthy state.
Crocker reported that although the division had performed
very well initially, it soon "lapsed" into both "a very nervy state" and "a
general attitude of despondency "56 On 25-26 July 1944 the division partici-
pated in Operation "Spring," the first attack undertaken by the Il Canadian
Corps under the command of Lieutenant-General Simonds.
"Spring" sought to
secure the Verrières ridge, but proved a failure, in part due to the unimpressive
performance of the 3rd Canadian Division. Moreover, Crocker noted the failure
of the divisional commander, Major-General Rod Keller, to exert a steadying
grip on his deteriorating formation.
Crocker concluded that Keller was
effect, soon admitted.'
"obviously not standing up to the strain"S; an indictment that Keller himself, in
Crocker passed this information to Dempsey, who
forwarded it to Montgomery, Crerar, and Simonds; all four concurred that a
serious morale problem existed 59
The Maintenance of Morale
31
As a result of the poor state of morale within these two Canadian divisions,
Simonds felt compelled to use the green troops of the newly arrived Polish and
4th Canadian Armored Divisions for the crucial second phase of his 8 August
1944 "Totalize" attack. The inexperience of these troops contributed to the
failure of this phase of the operation, which also resulted from dismal failure to
use effectively the massive firepower available. Furthermore, morale problems
immediately showed within the Polish Armored Division, which performed very
half-heartedly in this its first operation, though it seems that Crerar placed on
them more of the blame for the failure of "Totalize" than they deserved. On
hearing from Crerar of this stickiness, Montgomery angrily threatened that "if
Poles not inclined for the battle we [will] take away their tanks to keep up [our]
offensive strength and put [them] in def[ence]."l Part of the problem with the
Polish division was that it had virtually no reinforcements.
This manpower
shortage compelled the formation both to join combat in Normandy on a
reduced War Establishment, and to secure future reinforcements by combing
Allied prisoner of war camps in Normandy for Polish troops whom the German
army previously had conscripted. 2
In Normandy, the veteran North African formations-the 7th Armored, the
50th (Northumberland), and the 51st (Highland) Divisions —all also experienced
significant morale problems.
The British army had brought back these three
veteran divisions at Montgomery's request to provide backbone for the 21st
Army Group's predominantly inexperienced forces. Although using these
veteran divisions seemed a sound military decision, in Normandy it soon
became clear that this had been a serious mistake.
Signs of morale deterioration within the 50th Division became clear in early
July 1944. Indeed, the high incidence within the division of what the authorities
suspected were feigned cases of battle exhaustion led its chief medic to launch
an investigation on 31 July. During that same month the division also experi-
enced a high number of cases of soldiers either deserting or going Absent
Without Leave (AWOL).
During August, the British army convicted no less
than 150 soldiers from the 50th Division for these two offenses; this figure
almost matched the number of soldiers convicted of these two charges during
August for the rest of the entire Second (British) Army!64
Similar problems also surfaced in the veteran 51st Division. On 24 July
1944, Crocker informed Crerar that though the 51st Division "had not been
nearly so heavily engaged" as the 3rd (British) Division, it "had done badly in
the several operations it had been called upon to carry out." The 51st Division,
Crocker concluded, "was not, at present, fit for battle."
To make it battle-
worthy, he concluded, required "a new divisional commander, and a new point
of view. 165
Dempsey and Montgomery received Crocker's doubts and concurred
with them. Montgomery informed Brooke that the 51st Division currently was
not "battleworthy" because it lacked "determination" in combat.
Divisional
histories often remain more sanguine than critical, so it is significant that even
the 51st Division's official history admits that "it was obvious all was not well
with the division. "67
Montgomery replaced its commander, Major-General
Bullen Smith; and the new commander, the highly respected Major-General
