60
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
The infantry reinforcement crisis of 1944, therefore, represented a long-term
problem that the War Office undoubtedly exacerbated by its underestimation of
infantry casualty wastage rates for the Normandy campaign.
In fact, the War
Office estimation of total casualties for all branches in the campaign's first six
months remained higher than the total losses actually suffered; 109,396 total
casualties suffered up to 12 December 1944 against a predicted figure of
171,855 casualties up to 5 December.4l
However, predicted infantry casualties
proved significantly lower than actual infantry wastage. The 21st Army Group
incurred 39,107 infantry casualties by 1 September 1944, compared with 33,348
predicted casualties (on a "medium" definition) by 5 September. 42
Actual
infantry casualties exceeded estimated ones by some 17 percent.
The War Office miscalculated the proportion that infantry casualties repre-
sented out of the total casualties incurred over all branches by Montgomery's
forces in Normandy.
The February 1944 War Office casualty projection
estimated that infantry casualties would constitute between 38 percent and 45
percent of total casualties, depending on which definition of infantry was used "3
This estimate proved to be far too low for the fighting experienced in Nor-
mandy. Within the Canadian forces employed in Normandy, the actual infantry
casualties (based on a "wide" definition) incurred between D-Day and 17
August 1944 amounted to no less than 76 percent of their total casualties.* The
corresponding British figure was 63.7 percent for (medium definition) rifle
infantry other ranks, and 47 percent for officers. Use of the broadest definition
of infantry produced a figure for other ranks of 71.3 percent.4S
The Allied
infantry bore hardest the intense, constricted, fighting experienced in Nor-
mandy. After the successful Allied breakout of mid-August 1944, the propor-
tion of total casualties represented by infantry wastage declined markedly.
16 September 1944, total British rifle infantry casualties amounted to 55.7
percent for other ranks and 43.1 percent for officers. The corresponding figures
using a broad definition of infantry were 65.7 percent and 51.2 percent,
respectively. In Normandy, therefore, higher-than-expected infantry wastage
exacerbated Montgomery's pre-existing problems of infantry reinforcement
shortages.
The fear that the reinforcement pool would run dry remained a constant
concern for Montgomery.
It was more the fear that this pool would be ex-
hausted, rather than it being physically exhausted, that strongly influenced
Montgomery's handling of the campaign. The problems the 21st Army Group
experienced getting forward available reinforcements to replace casualties in
frontline troops also compounded these manpower concerns.
The British
reinforcement pool never ran dry, largely because Montgomery cannibalized
two British divisions for reinforcements before this pool became exhausted.
However, the Canadian pool became exhausted by August 1944.
Canadian
formations suffered heavily throughout Normandy, and their reinforcement
problem peaked in August and early September as a result of the heavy
casualties incurred during Operations "Totalize" and "Tractable." In August
1944 the authorized War Establishment of the First Canadian Army in terms of
infantry other ranks amounted to 20,599 troops.
On 2 September 1944 the
Casualty Conservation
61
deficit in infantry other ranks within Crerar's command peaked at a staggering
19.2 percent-some 3,917 soldiers.
Such a deficit in infantry strength threat-
ened seriously the long-term combat viability of Canadian formations.
As this
study discusses in chapter 7, during September 1944 General Crerar conducted
cautiously the Canadian operations designed to open up the channel ports along
the Pas de Calais and the Belgium coast. His caution is explicable in the context
of the severe manpower crisis that enveloped the First Canadian Army after late
August 1944. The Canadians found it hard to remedy these infantry shortages,
and even with the caution displayed by Crerar during September, the infantry
other ranks deficit in the First Canadian Army still amounted to a dangerous
10.69 percent as late as 7 October 1944.46
These manpower concerns persisted throughout the campaign, and hence
continued to influence the manner in which senior British and Canadian
commanders conducted their operations. By early 1945, however, three factors
had ameliorated the British infantry other ranks reinforcement shortage within
the 21st Army Group: First, Montgomery had disbanded the two British infantry
divisions previously mentioned; second, from late 1944, the higher monthly
number of troops that had completed their basic training boosted the flow of
reinforcements to Montgomery's command; and third, from December 1944,
soldiers who had completed their retraining from other arms to infantrymen
began to arrive on the continent. 47
Nevertheless, during early 1945 there
remained a serious shortage of infantry officer reinforcements.
On 22 January
1945 Montgomery complained to Grigg that he was 350 officers short and that
he expected this to rise to 1,100 by March 1945 despite the reinforcements
already promised him. Montgomery implored that "the most ruthless measures
must be adopted, both on my side and by your side, to comb out every source
and try and get a thousand officers for the infantry by the end of March."48
Irrespective of whether the infantry reinforcement shortage fell on other ranks,
as in 1944, or on officers as in 1945, this problem haunted Montgomery's
handling of the 21st Army Group throughout the campaign.
The Shadow of the Somme
The third influence on Montgomery's desire to avoid casualties was the
legacy of the Great War. Many of the senior officers in the 21st Army Group
had witnessed the slaughter of "the poor bloody infantry" on the Western Front
in the 1914-18 War.
Many of these, as well as senior British politicians,
remained determined in the Second World War to avoid the "chateau general-
ship" that had contributed to the decimation of a generation which had so
damaged Britain in the interwar period. Montgomery commented that the
Canadians at Passchendaele in 1917 had forgotten "that the whole art of war is
to gain your objective with as little loss as possible."49 This concern contributed
to a British grand strategic approach during the 1939-45 War that sought to
weaken the Germans on the peripheries rather than engage the main body of
enemy forces. Historians need to discuss with care the humanitarian feelings
of generals, because in wartime it is an unavoidable part of their job to send
