38
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
he was far too monkishly devoted to the professional art of war for this assertion
to be true 118
Montgomery's concern to preserve troop morale explains the great caution
and methodical nature of his operational technique.
These concerns also lay
behind his emphasis on preparation, extreme concentration of force, and
reliance on massive firepower. 19
Some historians have argued, echoing
Eisenhower's critique, that all Montgomery achieved in 1942-45 was to win
battles that any competent general, given the superiority he enjoyed, should
have won; that he in fact never started a "losable' battle. "120 One has to concede
that there is some truth in this, but such a verdict fails to consider the full
picture.
The experience gained in Northwest Europe and on the Eastern Front during
1943-45 demonstrated that simple numerical superiority was not enough to
ensure Allied victory on every occasion. The Germans, despite their marked
numerical inferiority, remained capable of inflicting tactical and operational
defeats on their enemies on both fronts, as at Targul Frumos, Romania, or
Villers Bocage!21
Equally, as this study demonstrates in chapter 4, Anglo-
Canadian numerical advantage appeared greater on paper than it actually was in
combat. Given the doctrinal techniques of "Colossal Cracks" and concerns over
casualty conservation, Anglo-Canadian forces often only deployed at any given
time a small proportion of their paper strength at the point of combat. Further-
more, Allied equipment often proved inferior to that of the enemy. Given these
factors, that Montgomery ensured that all his 1942-45 battles achieved victori-
ous outcomes —albeit marginally on occasion -represented a considerable
achievement. Not once did he risk experiencing a major setback that put at risk
the carefully nurtured morale of the British forces; the debacle of 1940 still
remained very much in the minds of Britain's senior commanders. Equally, the
dire impact on Allied morale exerted by the seven-week stalemate experienced
in Normandy, prompts consideration of the impact that a major reverse would
have exerted on the 21st Army Group. After all, the morale of certain American
formations had faltered during the
German Ardennes
counteroffensive.
Montgomery, therefore, did not blunt his army group in Normandy on several
spectacular victories, but ensured it would achieve every task set it throughout
the campaign.
Indeed, despite the cumulative disintegrative effects of pro-
longed combat, waterlogged terrain, and the short-lived glimpse of victory in
September 1944, the 21st Army Group maintained its morale integrity more or
less intact; the success achieved during the desperately harsh and interminably
long Operation "Veritable" during February 1945 supports this argument.
An analysis of operations in Northwest Europe indicates that Montgomery's
generalship reflected his concern to sustain troop morale.
The crucial point here
concerns the relationship between the operational demands of the moment and
the sometimes contradictory demands of preserving the morale fabric of the 21st
Army Group; a necessity that was, in a sense, also an operational consideration.
In Normandy, Montgomery proved unwilling to launch attacks that did not
enjoy the most favorable circumstances for success, and postponed operations
until conditions improved. A delay in build-up of artillery shells often proved
The Maintenance of Morale
39
sufficient to cause him to postpone an operation.
During the storm of 19-20
June 1944, Montgomery complained to Simpson that
"lying in ships off the
beaches is everything I need to resume the offensive with a bang." Unless he
got ashore a further division, and extra artillery ammunition,
Montgomery
warned, he would have "to postpone the attack. "122 Postponement also remained
the likely consequence if bad weather occurred, as this prevented the Allies
from using the awesome power of their tactical air forces.
Montgomery
signaled to de Guingand that not only had bad weather caused him to postpone
the "Epsom" offensive until the 25th June, but also that "each further day of bad
weather will mean a further postponement of one day. "123
Montgomery, however, weighed the demands of sustaining troop morale
against the requirements of the current operational situation.
His theater
strategy for Normandy envisaged a series of holding attacks on the British sector
designed to draw the bulk of the German forces to that front, thus permitting the
Americans to advance in the west.
His approach also strove to keep the
initiative, thus forcing the Germans merely to react to Allied moves. All of this
meant that the considerations of favorable operating conditions had to be
weighed against these other concerns.
Thus, while he was prepared to postpone
the "Epsom" offensive until better weather was present, he understood perfectly
that any postponement "would be of great nuisance as every day's delay helps
the enemy."12A
At times, however, the overall operational situation necessitated actions that
ran contrary to Montgomery's cautious, morale-nurturing approach. In late July
1944 he ordered Operation "Bluecoat," the British drive from Caumont toward
Vire-Vassy, to start as soon as possible in order to prevent the Germans from
redeploying reinforcements against Operation "Cobra," the American break-
through attempt.
Montgomery ordered "Bluecoat" to commence almost
immediately, leaving insufficient time for planning and stockpiling of matériel,
and instructed that the divisions being redeployed for the attack be committed
piecemeal as they arrived, in a fashion more reminiscent of the tactics that the
Germans were often compelled to adopt.25 Despite Montgomery's weighing of
morale preservation against other operational requirements, American senior
commanders believed that Montgomery, when weighing up these contradictory
considerations, regularly erred too far on the side of caution.
During the
Normandy campaign, Bradley lamented in exasperation that "the old cautious,
methodical Monty was back. "126
Other aspects of Montgomery's approach reflected this principle of the
maintenance of morale. The Field Marshal, like most commanders, sought to
keep the morale fabric of his army group intact by not placing overwhelming
burdens on his troops, or by sharing out this burden between forces and over
time. Montgomery's concern over the dwindling combat power evident within
his original D-Day forces led him to entrust the powerful late June "Epsom"
offensive to a newly arrived, and hence fresh, force -the VIII Corps led by
Richard O'Connor. Similarly, Montgomery made strenuous efforts to rotate
divisions at the front for rests in reserve within the constraints of his theater
strategy, the operational situation, the relative build-up position, and the
