68
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Germans grasped correctly that the essence of "Colossal Cracks"
was the
application of overwhelming firepower" to "avoid to the maximum possible
extent, the need for close combat."?
During 1944, several senior British commanders noted the existence of
casualty-conscious approaches in certain Commonwealth ground operations.
On 31 March, Brooke noted that in Italy "Freyberg has been fighting with a
casualty-conscious mind." Freyberg, Brooke continued, "has been sparing" his
New Zealand infantry and "hoping to accomplish results by use of heavy
bombers and artillery, without risking too much infantry."76
The predictable
result, Brooke concluded, was that Freyberg's operation had failed.
Brooke's
postwar comment on this diary entry demonstrates that casualty conservation
was not the product of the operational limitations of commanders, but of
circumstances beyond their control. Brooke agreed with the widely held view
that Freyberg was one of the most able Allied commanders, but understood that
by 1944 Freyberg had received instructions from his national government "not
to risk losing too many soldiers as casualties were already very high" that made
him "loath to risk heavy losses."?
Moreover, in an apparently whimsical culinary metaphor, Brooke made a
penetrating observation that pinpointed the operational side-effects of conduct-
ing battle in a casualty-conscious manner.
"Unfortunately it is hard in war to
make omelettes without breaking eggs," Brooke remarked,
"and it is often in
trying to do so that we break most eggs! "78
Brooke clearly recognized that the
operational repercussions of fighting in a casualty-conscious manner sometimes
meant that Allied forces squandered fleeting tactical opportunities.
Not only
were such consequences inherent to casualty-conscious operational techniques,
but they also may have actually prolonged the war and hence led to more
casualties.
Today it "seems hardly surprising" that such techniques "had the
reverse effect to the one desired. "79
paradox that dogs casualty-conscious operational methods.
This was, and remains, the fundamental
Given both the importance that Montgomery placed on casualty conserva-
tion and his belief in unity between theater strategy and individual operations, it
is not surprising that the Field Marshal's strategy for Normandy reflected his
concern to avoid casualties. That Montgomery allocated the Americans a larger
role in establishing the outer limits of the Allied lodgment area reflected both
their greater resources and British casualty concerns.
Montgomery's strategy
did not necessarily mean that the Anglo-Canadian forces would incur fewer
casualties
On the contrary, Montgomery recognized during the "Overlord"
planning that the Anglo-Canadian attacks would face a larger concentration of
enemy forces, especially armor; for the enemy remained highly sensitive to any
advances from the Allied eastern flank toward Paris.
However, the fact that
Montgomery could conduct Anglo-Canadian attacks as a series of limited
offensives designed to pin down German armor on that flank enabled him to
halt attacks that incurred high casualties without undue detriment to his overall
planned development of the campaign.
For obvious reasons of inter-Allied cooperation, the British could not admit
explicitly to the Americans the extent of their concern over casualties nor the
Casualty Conservation
69
impact this had on Montgomery's theater strategy for Normandy.
Senior
American commanders displayed some understanding that the Commonwealth
effort in Northwest Europe inevitably
was limited, as suggested by their
temporary allocation of an American army to the 21st Army Group at several
points in the campaign. In times of crisis, however, opinion at SHAEF and
among the American forces in Normandy sometimes suspected that the British
were not pulling their weight. ®1
The principle of casualty conservation also exerted a significant impact on
Montgomery's day-to-day conduct of the campaign.
The first few days of the
invasion saw the 21st Army Group fail to make full use of the operational
surprise gained by the D-Day landings to capture Caen easily before the German
defensive crust could harden.
After this Montgomery
initially remained
prepared to push Second (British) Army hard to capture the vital strategic town
of Caen, and consequently incur heavy losses. This determination was evident
during Operation
"Epsom," the 26 June bid to encircle Caen from the west
through the Odon Valley, in which infantry casualty rates reached Great War
dimensions at over 50 percent.?2 It was also apparent during "Charnwood," the
8 July British attack that captured the northern half of Caen. However, after the
capture of Caen, Montgomery did not continually smash the Second (British)
Army against the strong German defenses to the south of the town, located
along the Bourguébus ridge.
It was the scale of casualties incurred that
prompted Montgomery to halt Operation "Spring" in late July. Moreover, the
operational reality once the Allies had captured Caen was that Montgomery
remained reluctant to suffer massive casualties; his correspondence, however,
still suggested disingenuously that he was relentlessly smashing the Second
(British) Army against the formidable German defenses.
It was reinforcement shortages, together with the effectiveness of enemy
resistance, that forced Montgomery to modify his operational activities from the
broad blueprint he had conceived before D-Day. In the "Overlord" planning
phase, Montgomery stated his determination to reach Falaise as soon as
possible. However, after the bitter five-week battle for Caen, Montgomery was
less concerned to advance rapidly further south, unless this could be achieved
without heavy casualties? Montgomery certainly wanted to increase the depth
of the Second Army bridgehead, for reasons of security, administration, and
maneuver, as well as for the airfields located south of Caen.
He was not,
however, prepared to massacre the Second Army in the process. Montgomery
made clear this attitude to Dempsey in his 10 July orders, which stated that "the
south side of the [River] Orne opposite Caen will be secured and a bridgehead
thus gained, if this is can be done without undue losses."
Montgomery,
however, was "not prepared to have heavy casualties to obtain this bridgehead"
on the grounds that his forces were likely to suffer "plenty" of casualties
"elsewhere. "84
Montgomery, therefore, remained flexible in the manner in which he ful-
filled operationally his broad strategic plan, a flexibility noted by Brigadier
Edgar Williams."S
Montgomery was well aware long before D-Day that merely
the threat of the Second (British) Army launching a major advance toward Paris
