Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
34
divisions that were experiencing morale problems to deteriorate to the state of
being completely unfit for battle 87
This degradation in Normandy of combat effectiveness at the divisional level
was usually the cumulative effects of morale problems at the tactical level
within units and subunits. In early July 1944, in one exceptional case, Mont-
gomery had to withdraw the 6th Battalion, Duke of Wellington's Regiment (6
DWR), from its parent formation, the 49th Division, as it had become unfit for
battle after suffering atypically high officer casualties? Furthermore, unlike the
resilient Germans, the morale of Anglo-Canadian units took a long time to
recover from a single tactical drubbing, like that suffered by the 4th County of
London Yeomanry at Villers Bocage.?9
The frequent driving-out of Anglo-Canadian infantry units from their newly
gained objectives by enemy mortar and artillery shelling forced their troops to
incur further casualties reattacking these same objectives, and this further
undermined Allied morale.?" Just as the "Siegfriedesque" German commander
Kurt Meyer had to rally the fleeing men of 89th Infantry Division during
"Totalize" using only his cigar and considerable bravado, so too did the British
commander of 6 DWR twice have "to stand at the end of a track and draw my
revolver on retreating men."'! Hargest similarly observed that although the 8th
Durham Light Infantry easily captured St. Pierre on 10 June 1944, the next
morning "while under heavy mortar fire, they panicked and some of them went
right back to their previous day's start lines. "*2
Nurturing the morale, and thus the battle-worthiness, of the formations and
units fielded by the 21st Army Group proved a constant concern for Montgom-
ery throughout the campaign. The morale problems experienced in Normandy,
however, soon eased during the heady days of late August and early September
1944, when Anglo-Canadian forces surged through the interior of France and
into Belgium. Montgomery commented that "there is no morale problem here at
present; when soldiers win great victories they do not bother overmuch about
the future. 93
Yet such spectacular success brought its own peculiar morale
problems. An incredible wave of overoptimism, bordering on hysteria, swept
through the Allied forces in Northwest Europe; the belief spread rapidly that the
war was virtually won, and hence that it would be over in a matter of days or a
few weeks.'4
Given the desperate nature of the Normandy struggle, and the
desire that the slaughter be over, this curious phenomenon is intelligible.
The
result of this overoptimism was that, according to O'Connor, the commander of
the VIII Corps, "everyone was looking over their shoulder," and hence that
campaign. "95
"nobody was quite prepared to take the same risks as they had earlier on in the
To Lieutenant-Colonel Turner Cain, commanding the
191
Herefords in the 11th Armored Division, it was obvious that in this period the
soldiers "were a bit sticky about doing anything aggressive. "6
This caution
contributed to the failures of both the Guards Armored and the 43rd Divisions
successfully to meet up with the airborne forces dropped at Arnhem-Oosterbeek
during the overambitious mid-September "Market-Garden" offensive?
phenomenon of Allied overoptimism gradually died down during October as the
German forces recovered their fighting power, but it reoccurred in the last
The Maintenance of Morale
35
weeks of the war; then few soldiers were prepared to take significant risks when
victory was so close at hand.'8
The determination of the senior commanders within the 21st Army Group to
minimize potential morale problems frequently remained apparent during the
dismal,
waterlogged
operations of the
utmn
and winter of 1944-45
Throughout the autumn, shortage of replacements hampered the effectiveness of
the Polish Armored Division.
division had since "fought extremely well.""
After its poor first showing in "Totalize," the
However, Simonds recognized
that the desperate Polish reinforcement situation meant that "continued wastage
at their present rates, will reduce them to impotence in a matter of weeks."
Simonds, now acting commander of the First Canadian Army in place of the
sick Crerar, implored Crocker to change his corps plans.
Simonds urged his
subordinate not to use the division offensively now, which he feared "would
mean its finish," but instead to allow it time in reserve to reorganize so that it
would become in the near future
"a really effective fighting formation. "100
Equally, when Major-General Matthews assumed command of the 2nd Cana-
dian Infantry Division in November 1944, he found the formation's morale in a
poor state after the terrible experiences of its bitter fighting in the sodden
polders of the Scheldt estuary -fighting not dissimilar in character from the
waterlogged trenches of the Great War.
Consequently, the division required
several weeks on a quiet sector of the front to revitalize its combat power. 102
Although these examples indicate that serious morale problems existed
within Montgomery's command, it should be remembered that the majority of
units maintained reasonable morale. The crucial point for this study was that the
morale fabric of the 21st Army Group remained essentially intact throughout the
campaign.
This formation both maintained its general offensive posture and
continued to fight with reasonable effectiveness throughout the campaign. That
the 21st Army Group managed to do so had much to do with the manner in
which Montgomery fought the campaign; the very fact that the morale fabric of
the 21st Army Group remained intact was the inescapable achievement of
Montgomery's operational methods.
MAINTAINING MORALE AND MONTGOMERY'S CONDUCT OF THE
CAMPAIGN
Montgomery's operational approach in Northwest Europe was designed to
nurture this relatively fragile instrument toward an adequate, but sustained,
combat performance.
After all, as he and Brooke perceptively recognized, a
reasonable combat performance, "assisted by competent generalship," sustained
over the campaign, was all that was required to win this war of attrition in the
long run, given the Allies' superiority in matériel. In particular, Montgomery
had to avoid expending most of his army group's wasting resources in one initial
burst, as Britain possessed only minimal reserves to replace her "Overlord"
tarcec
Hence, it proved imperative for Montgomery to make "the most of the
units he had" in order to deliver a sustained combat performance in the theater.
The British commander recognized correctly that nurturing the morale of his
