102
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
The inability of the 21st Army Group to undertake two simultaneous army
attacks created similar consequences to those already observed in the compari-
son between British and American offensive methods.
Concentration, through
operation on a single army front, ensured a powerful attack, yet allowed enemy
counterconcentration against such a thrust. Critically, such concentration also
may have allowed the Germans to maintain the integrity of their precarious front
during September and October 1944.
If the army group had undertaken
simultaneous army operations, each necessarily with reduced fire support, this
might have pushed the Westheer into total collapse. For if Montgomery had
utilized this method, he may have undermined German ability to maintain their
beleaguered front through redeployment of their panzer "mobile fire-brigades"
from crisis to crisis, and hence caused total enemy collapse.
For most of the
campaign, the German defenders sought desperately to avert looming collapse,
and their ability to do so demonstrated both their resilient morale and tactical
abilities, as well as to the consequences of Montgomery's operational ap-
proach!*1 Though the set-piece approach would get the 21st Army Group to
victory eventually, genuine opportunities would be missed on the way.
The
Field Marshal, however, had to weigh the benefits of simultaneous army
operations against significant drawbacks, not least the adverse impact this
method would have on Allied troop morale and casualty rates; in this respect,
Montgomery —perhaps predictably -erred on the side of caution.
Montgomery's utilization of this set-piece approach also restricted simulta-
neity because it encouraged his command to conduct a series of single corps
attacks. At first glance many of his operations seem to be army-scale offen-
sives, but often -as at "Goodwood" —only one corps undertook the main assault
while both neighboring corps launched limited flank-protection attacks, and
fired much of their artillery in support of the central attack delivered by the
spearhead corps. The tendency of the 21st Army Group to undertake a series of
predominantly single corps battles did little to foster effective coordination or
generalship at the operational level. 132
When Montgomery's tendency to undertake offensives with just a single
corps, and often by only one army at a time, combined with his casualty
avoidance motives and his brand of extreme concentration (in which he retained
large forces echeloned in reserve), the tactical result was that his offensives
engaged just a fraction of potential Allied combat power at any given moment.
The constant exception to this was artillery, which the army group utilized to the
full. Many of Montgomery's contemporaries misconstrued his failure to bring to
bear on the enemy more of his numerical superiority, as evidence of willful lack
of determination; a reaction encapsulated by Tedder's dismissal of Dempsey'S
attacks on Caen as "company exercises. "133
What these critics failed to appreci-
ate, however, was that much of Montgomery's failure to deploy more than a
fraction of his potential strength was the result of the nature of his set-piece
concentration
approach, and in particular-in an illusory paradox-his brand of extreme
103
The Set-Piece Battle
Alternate Thrusts
The 21st Army Group utilized this set-piece battle approach on virtually all
its operations, irrespective of their scale; hence, multicorps offensives like
Operation "Veritable," single corps battles like "Spring" and "Constellation,"
and even divisional ones like the 4 July Canadian Operation
"Windsor"
assault —all these Montgomery conducted as set-piece "Colossal Crack" battles.
Some historians, however, have viewed another operational method utilized by
Montgomery -"alternate thrusts" —as an alternative to the set-piece battle
approach; but in fact this method usually represented an integral, complemen-
tary, component to his set-piece approach. For many of Montgomery's set-piece
battles fought on a varying scale from multicorps to divisional thrusts also
reflected his alternate thrusts technique.
This approach manifested itself many
times during Montgomery's Second World War campaigns. His alternate thrusts
technique took two main forms, one suboperational, which related to his
development of a sequence of operations, and the other tactical, which related to
the development of a single battle.
This technique, in its suboperational sense,
typically consisted of Montgomery first making a medium sized thrust in one
area. When enemy forces had been attracted to this assault and held there, he
would undertake another modest, but unexpected, blow in another part of the
front. Once enemy reserve formations had been drawn to this attack and the
enemy was hence unbalanced, he would unleash a "Colossal Crack" at yet
another part of the front. 134 Montgomery had switched his thrust lines within an
individual battle first at El Alamein. Later, during the March 1943 Battle of
Mareth, after the failure of his initial, narrow frontal "Colossal Crack," Mont-
gomery swung his southern flank round in a successful outflanking attack. 135
The only significant difference between these two forms of alternate thrusts was
that they were enacted at different scales in terms of duration and size.
Montgomery's utilization of this alternate thrusts method to unbalance the
enemy was also prominent in Northwest Europe. He used this technique in the
series of right and left hook envelopments of Caen that he ordered in June 1944.
He also utilized this approach in the series of right-left-right hook attacks made
by the Second (British Army south and southwest of Caen in late July and early
August.
Montgomery launched Operation "Bluecoat," for instance, on the
extreme right (western) flank of the Anglo-Canadian sector, then followed this
with a couple of feints and then a few days later still by the large "Totalize"
offensive striking towards Falaise on the eastern flank.
Montgomery's use of
this technique was evident in his description to Simpson of the operations he
intended to carry out now that the "bottleneck of Caen" had been passed: "I have
ordered Second Army to do a series of left-right-left blows east-west-east of the
[River Orme, so am keep the enemy] guessing. And then a really heavy blow
towards Falaise."136
Montgomery's elaboration of these intended operations
illuminated what precisely his alternate thrusts policy meant in operational
terms.
His envisaged sequence of operations included the following: first, a
Canadian attack "east of the Orne to capture Fontenoy" on 25 July; second "an
attack by 12 Corps west of the Orne to capture the area Evrecy-Amaye" on 28
