174
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Montgomery gripped Crerar more firmly than he did Dempsey. The evidence,
however, suggests that Montgomery gripped both commanders equally firmly
(albeit for different reasons).
Despite Montgomery's faith in Dempsey, the
closeness of their working relationship and the latter's bountiful tolerance meant
that Montgomery was able to interfere in the running of the campaign at army
level. Moreover, Dempsey, though highly competent, had no previous experi-
ence of army command and needed help initially to adjust.
In general, Mont-
gomery devoted equal amounts of attention to each army commander in
proportion to the importance (as he perceived it) of the operations then being
carried out!" But Montgomery's preference for the Second Army meant that it
was given more significant tasks and therefore more frequently received
Montgomery's focused attention.
Montgomery's doubts about Crerar's capabilities also prompted him to grip
firmly the Canadian army commander.
On 21 August 1944, Major-General
Kitching recalled that Crerar had complained to him that "he was having
trouble" with Montgomery who kept phoning Crerar with new instructions.'
Furthermore,
Crerar's limitations and political sensitivity to Montgomery's
operational demands, exacerbated Montgomery's tendency to circumvent Crerar
and deal directly with Simonds.
Crerar told Kitching that when he "was not
available," Montgomery "dealt with Simonds directly. "133
Brigadier Beament
also formed the impression that Montgomery sometimes bypassed Crerar and
dealt directly with Simonds.'4 Equally, according to Brigadier Belchem, for a
few days during "Veritable" Montgomery sading to Brigatter s at the XXX
Corps' Tactical Headquarters, while Crerar merely looked on and
"virtually
played no direct role in the proceedings."135
John English has hinted that had the First Canadian Army performed better
in Operations "Totalize" and "Tractable," it might have spearheaded the 21st
Army Group's advance into Germany. Yet irrespective of the success of these
operations, it seems unlikely that Crerar's Army would have spearheaded the
advance into Germany.
Any advance southeast or east by Simonds' Corps
toward the upper Seine would have widened the expo sast by i mand held by
the I (British) Corps. Any continuance of an advance spearheaded by Simonds
Corps would have required the transfer of some or all of the Second (British)
Army from the western flank, behind the First Canadian Army's frontage, onto
the eastern flank. A redeployment as fundamental as moving one army behind
another was impracticable after active operations had commenced.
moment that this was feasible was once the Falaise pocket had been liquidated.
However, given Montgomery's well-known loathing for crossed lines of
communication -which restricted administrative efficiency -it was extremely
unlikely that any such maneuver would have been attempted after D-Day.
Rather than Simonds continuing to spearhead the advance, it would have been
operationally more sensible for the most easterly corps of the Second Army to
continue the advance after taking over the frontage of Simonds' Corps, thus
allowing the latter to be deployed to cover the extending vulnerable eastern
flank; if done, this would result in no crossing of lines of communication 136
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
175
With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the future long-term role of the
First Canadian Army was, inadvertently, preordained when in January 1944
Montgomery assigned it to the eastern sector.
This pre-invasion planning
envisaged that Crerar's Army would cross the Seine, capture Le Havre, capture
the other channel ports, and advance up the sodden left flank into Zeeland. The
pre-invasion planning envisaged this sequence of operations because it was the
logical operational repercussion of being assigned the eastern sector of the
lodgment area.137
Montgomery's limited faith in Crerar's Army also contributed to him making
one of the most egregious mistakes of the campaign —the failure to open rapidly
the port of Antwerp to Allied shipping through clearing the German-controlled
Scheldt estuary. The Allies captured intact the Antwerp docks on 4 September
1944, yet failed to clear the Scheldt estuary until early November. After the
breakout from Normandy and rapid advance through Belgium, Montgomery
became obsessed with the Ruhr, Germany's industrial heartland lying east of the
River Rhine.
The deployment of Dempsey's Army in the eastern half of the
sector held by the 21st Army Group, when combined with Montgomery's
predisposition toward Dempsey, reinforced the Field Marshal's strategically
correct focus on this glittering prize to the East.
However, Montgomery's
distrust of Crerar's Army on his left (western) flank encouraged Montgomery's
focus on the Ruhr to escalate from appropriate strategic vision to a fixation.
Consequently, on 13 September 1944 Montgomery ordered Crerar's depleted
command simultaneously to clear both the channel ports and the Scheldt
estuary, while Dempsey's reinforced forces meantime attempted to "bounce" the
Rhine in Operation "Market-Garden." When this operation failed, Montgomery
immediately reconstituted the Second (British) Army so that it could launch
Operation
"Gatwick," an eastward thrust intended to reach the Rhine near
Krefeld 138
Montgomery had given the First Canadian Army a task impossible to
achieve with the inadequate resources he had allocated to Crerar. Consequently,
the Canadians struggled slowly in mud and flooded polders to clear the Scheldt.
Inexcusably,
though Montgomery fully recognized Antwerp's enormous
logistical significance, his Ruhr fixation made him slow to shift the main weight
of the 21st Army Group to the task of clearing the Scheldt. Despite clear orders
from Eisenhower and the exhortations of Admiral Ramsey, the Allied Naval
Forces Commander, Montgomery did not deploy the full weight of his army
group to clear the Scheldt until 16 October 1944.139 The six-week delay before
opening Antwerp constituted the gravest of errors, as some of Montgomery's
peers recognized at the time.
With hindsight, it is clear that Montgomery
should have rapidly opened the Scheldt by using the full power of his army
group, before turning east.
After the war, in an extremely rare example of
honest self-appraisal, Montgomery was humble enough to concede that he had
made a serious mistake.41
