Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
entire campaign, and the individual decisions ordering action in pursuance of
that strategy. Prior to 1 September 1944, there existed a unity between theater
strategy and operations since the same commander,
Montgomery, not only
controlled both but also believed fervently in the need for such a unity. After 1
September, however, Eisenhower decided a theater strategy that balanced the
conflicting demands of his three army group commanders, but it was the latter
who enacted operations to fulfill this strategy; thus, after this date a disjuncture
existed between strategy and operations. The focus of this study on the way in
which the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign requires a definition of the
operational level of war.
It will suffice here to define briefly this as the "area
between strategy and tactics which denotes the fighting of battles in a given
theater of operations in pursuit of the political objective of the war,"" and as the
"gray zone once called Grand Tactics, the tactics of large formations," such as
army groups, armies, and corps.' This concept is examined in more detail later.
This analysis of the operational technique utilized by the 21st Army Group
in Northwest Europe is based on a systematic examination of the individual
characteristics that comprised its overall operational approach.
It is not a
narrative of the part that the 21st Army Group played in the wider Allied
campaign in Northwest Europe.® This formation's operational technique closely
reflected British army doctrine-the body of corporate knowledge that was
either "officially approved to be taught" or used in practice on the battlefield'
Doctrine is critical because it "is the substance that binds" together the correct
organizing, equipping and training of military forces! The first section of this
study, chapters 2 through 5, examines Montgomery's operational methods, and
demonstrates that he made a crucial contribution to the manner in which the 21st
Army Group conducted the campaign. Montgomery's operational technique is
encapsulated by his phrase "Colossal Cracks," which is used here as a generic
name for his approach."
The second part of this work extends the investigation of how the 21st Army
Group conducted the campaign beyond Montgomery to the army level. This
section examines the methods utilized by Montgomery's subordinate army
commanders, Lieutenant-Generals Miles Dempsey, commanding the Second
(British) Army, and Henry Crerar, commanding the First Canadian Army !2 It
demonstrates the degree of consensus on operational technique that existed
between Montgomery and his two subordinate army commanders. Although
not examined in this study, the evidence demonstrates that Montgomery's six
original corps commanders, Gerard Bucknall, John Crocker, Brian Horrocks,
Richard O'Connor, Neil Ritchie, and Guy Simonds, utilized the same methods as
their 21st Army Group superiors.!3
Within the above framework, this book argues that the 21st Army Group
previously.
conducted the campaign more effectively than some scholars have suggested
This assertion combines two interconnected subarguments: first,
that Montgomery handled the 21st Army Group more appropriately than some
of the existing literature has recognized; * and second, that historians can only
appreciate fully how the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign by examin-
ing its two highest command echelons rather than by focusing solely on
Introduction
Montgomery. The re-evaluation presented in the first subargument, however, is
a measured one that falls short of the overly favorable view of the Field Marshal
portrayed by his eulogizers.!5
Some early narrative-based British works
favorable to Montgomery, heavily reliant on his own biased accounts, used the
fact of ultimate Allied victory as evidence of the extent of Montgomery's
achievement, instead of presenting sustained critical analysis! This indiscrimi-
nate praise of Montgomery has obscured appreciation by historians of his real
abilities and achievements-as has the excessive criticism made by his detrac-
lOTS.
A systematic and balanced analysis needs to explain in
what ways
Montgomery handled effectively the 21st Army Group, because the ultimate
Allied victory is not evidence in itself that Montgomery conducted the campaign
well. This study presents a balanced assessment of Montgomery that combines
appropriately criticism and credit; such an analysis produces an opinion that
falls marginally closer to the views presented by the Field Marshal's hagiogra-
phers than those offered by his critics.
The second subargument asserts that historians can only fully comprehend
the way in which the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign through an
analysis of how the formation's two highest command echelons interacted,
rather than through one that focuses solely on Montgomery. Scholars only can
obtain a full picture by examining the methods utilized by this formation's army
commanders, as well as their command relationships with Montgomery and
with one another.
The two subarguments this study develops are complemen-
tary, because exploration of the second assertion reveals the extent of the
consensus that existed within the 21st Army Group concerning operational
techniques.
The existence of this consensus reinforces the argument that
historians critical of Montgomery have blamed him unfairly for methods shared
by his senior subordinates.
This reassertion both of Montgomery's operational abilities, and of the 21st
Army Group's conduct of the campaign, reflects the author's conviction that to
date historians have not produced an entirely satisfactory comprehensive
analysis of these two interconnected aspects. The following six interconnected
weaknesses evident in historians' works on this campaign explain why this body
of literature still lacks such an entirely satisfactory analysis: that they have
overemphasized Montgomery's unpleasant personality and the significance of
his role within the campaign; that they have focused excessively on theater
strategic disputes rather than on the operational level; that they have not
analyzed systematically Montgomery's Operational technique; that they have
given insufficient regard to the actual situation facing the 1944 British army;
that they have underestimated the appropriateness of Montgomery's methods to
British war aims; and that they have criticized Montgomery personally both for
methods shared by his subordinates and for failures as attributable to the latter
as to himself. Appreciation of these features has prompted this reappraisal of the
campaign.
First, the excessive focus placed by historians on Montgomery's distasteful
personality has obfuscated a proper appreciation of his operational abilities.
