1
Introduction
This study examines the manner in which the 21st Army Group conducted the
Northwest Europe campaign of 6 June 1944-8 May 1945.'
This army group
formed the combined Anglo-Canadian contribution to the Allied forces that
landed on the Normandy coast on D-Day in Operation "Overlord" and success-
fully advanced into the heart of Germany by VE-Day.
The British General
(from 1 September 1944, Field Marshal) Bernard Law Montgomery ("Monty")
commanded the 21st Army Group? This work argues that the 21st Army Group
conducted this campaign more effectively than some scholars have argued
previously and that the generalship of Montgomery and his two subordinate
army commanders was both appropriate and competent.
The date 1 September 1944 marks an important chronological divide within
the campaien. Septem this, during the battles fought for Normandy, Montgom-
cry not only commanded the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group but,
temporary Land mandCommander, controlled all Allied troops in the theater
irrespective of their nationality.
In Normandy, Montgomery held his dual
operational and strategic responsibilities under the overarching authority of the
theater Supreme rategic respondet, the American General Dwight ("Ike")
Eisenhower. He Allied. Commaseet,ber 1944, in accordance with the pre-
"Overlord" planning, Montgomery ceased to act as Land Forces Commander.
Instead he became solely an army group commander in a theater in which now
the Americans also deployed two national army groups?
From this date, all
three army group commanders came under the direct operational command of
Fisenhower. who now ascumed the role of land Forces Commander in addition
to his responsibility as Supreme Allied Commander.*
This changing command structure is crucial to understanding both the cam-
paign and Montgomery's handling of the 21st Army Group.
Here, one should
make a distinction hotdon thaater strategy and onerations. hetween the
decisions made of the loudl of the thenter concerning the develonment of an
