66
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
double dilemma was to attempt to remain as theater Land Forces Commander
after the end of the Normandy battles.
With Montgomery commanding all
forces in the theater, any success, irrespective of the nationality of the forces
achieving it, would reflect on him, and hence on Britain. No doubt, retention of
this command appointment also assuaged his rampant personal glory-seeking.
By remaining as Land Force Commander, Montgomery also could ensure
that Allied operations conformed to a clear theater strategy.
Not only was this
operationally sound, but it served British interests.
For a clear theater strategy
could select, and justify operationally, the northern line of advance toward the
Ruhr, and such a strategy would ensure a key profile for the 21st Army Group
within the theater.
Lastly as Land Forces Commander, Montgomery could
allocate logistical priority to the 21st Army Group to ensure that his forces had
the resources necessary to enable them to achieve significant advances.
Given
that Montgomery's retention of overall control of all land forces was so vital to
both British politico-strategic interest and his own personal ambition, it is not
surprising that he waged such a long and insubordinate campaign against
Eisenhower to get himself reinstated in the position.
Montgomery, however, utterly failed to comprehend the huge impact that
public opinion, especially that in America, would exert on the Allied conduct of
the campaign. His rigid military mind could not grasp the fact that American
numerical superiority in the theater after August 1944 meant that there would
have to be an American Land Forces Commander. Montgomery seemed to have
learned little from his own previous personal experiences of inter-Allied
tensions in Africa, Sicily, and Italy. His decision-making, with its narrow focus
on British interests and strictly operational matters, could not grasp the subtle
realities of inter-Allied cooperation, unlike Alexander in Italy.
Montgomery
"appeared to have been temperamentally incapable of recognizing that opera-
tional requirements (no matter how correct on their own terms) would have to
be subordinated to the paramount need of holding the Grand Alliance to-
gether. "68 In Northwest Europe, this weakness in Montgomery's generalship
came very close to undermining the
professional inter-Allied operational
cooperation he deemed so vital to the achievement of victory over the Westheer.
In reality, Montgomery struggled to maintain the delicate balancing act
required to marry effectively his strict operational professionalism with his
ardent British patriotism in order to produce effective British participation in a
wider, successful Allied campaign.
When Montgomery failed to get himself reinstated as Land Force Com-
mander during autumn 1944, he strove for a "half-way house" position by
cajoling Eisenhower to accord him the power of operational coordination over
Bradley's army
group.
Montgomery's other compromise position was
persuade Eisenhower to place American formations under the direct command
of the 21st Army Group. In this way Montgomery, and hence Britain, would
enjoy a greater military profile than his own dwindling forces could obtain in
the field.
approach.
These measures also reflected Montgomery's casualty-conscious
For Britain would receive most of the glory achieved by the forces
Casualty Conservation
67
within these command arrangements, but this success had been secured, at least
partially, by both American efforts and casualties.
Given the nature of this agenda, it is not surprising that many senior Ameri-
can commanders in the theater hated Montgomery, a view subsequently
entrenched by the American historical literature written about the campaign.
Montgomery's caution in front of Caen, for example, prompted "unpleasant
comments" by senior American officers at SHAEF that Montgomery was
attempting "to save British lives at the expense of those of his Allies."» Senior
American officers often interpreted Montgomery's actions as examples of
personal aggrandizement.
The fact that British reticence prevented American
appreciation of the true extent of Britain's manpower crisis, only served to foster
such suspicions.
Equally, few American commanders appreciated the extent to
which Montgomery's pursuit of British national interest in the theater at the
expense of Allied interests served to reinforce his personal ambitions.?º
Historians also have not awarded the crucial, yet shadowy, role maintained
by Brooke in Montgomery's defense of British interests in the campaign the
attention it deserves.
Brooke was ready to blame Montgomery's behavior on the
latter's vanity, yet approved of the Field Marshal's defense of British interests.
Brooke supported Montgomery's military logic, and staunchly defended his
protégé in the latter's campaign against the Americans over the command issue.
Yet when Montgomery went too far and threatened the stability of the Alliance,
Brooke castigated his subordinate.
Within parameters, Brooke backed Mont-
gomery as the best individual to defend British interests in the campaign."
CASUALTY CONSERVATION AND MONTGOMERY'S CONDUCT OF
THE CAMPAIGN
When combined, the four aspects discussed here produced a powerful moti-
vation for Montgomery to conduct the campaign
in a casualty-conscious
manner.
Having examined the factors that led to Montgomery's casualty
conservation,
this analysis now
examines
how
these
worries
manifested
themselves in Montgomery's conduct of the campaign.
The senior German
commanders that faced the 21st Army Group during the campaign deduced the
existence of casualty-conscious motivations behind Montgomery's utilization of
an attritional approach based on massive firepower.
On 10 July 1944 General
Gehr von Schweppenburg,
commanding the Panzer Gruppe West, astutely
observed that although the Anglo-Canadian troops "were magnificent," the
"slow and rather pedestrian" Allied high command "was not making the best use
of them" by merely seeking "to wear down their enemy with their enormous
material
superiority."72
Schweppenburg
considered
possible
that
"Montgomery had received private instruction from his Government to avoid
for the British troops another bloodbath such as they had suffered in the First
World War. "73
Another German report of November 1944 concluded that "the
Allies believe in material superiority: instead of attacking energetically they
attempt to smash the enemy by means of their heavy weapons and to occupy
ground without having to fight for it, thereby avoiding heavy casualties."74 The
