86
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Montgomery stuck to it39
Despite this considerable debate, this author is
convinced that the contemporary evidence demonstrates that Montgomery
always intended that the Second (British) Army would engage substantial
German forces on the eastern flank to facilitate an American advance in the
west. 10 The Second (British) Army operational plan of 21 February 1944 stated
that its task was to "protect the flank of the US Armies while the latter captured
Cherbourg, Angers, Nantes and the Brittany ports" and indicated that "there is
no intention of carrying out a major advance" until "the Brittany ports have been
captured. "41 Similarly, Montgomery signaled de Guingand on 11 June 1944 that
"my general object is to pull the Germans on to Second Army so that First [US]
Army can extend and expand. "42 Montgomery largely stuck to this broad plan
and resisted pressures from the Americans, and from Dempsey in "Goodwood,"
to radically alter this conception. However, this is far removed from Montgom-
ery's totally specious claim that the Normandy campaign went "exactly as
planned. "43
At best the campaign developed similarly to a broadly based
operational-level vision. That it did so reflected Montgomery's determination to
develop his sequence of operations along lines appropriate to fulfill his opera-
tional-level master plan.
During the early part of the Normandy campaign, however, Montgomery
displayed considerable flexibility in the development and sequence of opera-
tions he ordered in pursuit of his operational-level master plan; he utilized a
flexible suboperational master plan to fulfill his more rigid operational-level
master plan.
Montgomery remained flexible when deciding the location,
sequence, and development of the series of corps offensives undertaken in
Normandy.
Rather than adhering rigidly to a fixed program of planned
operations decided before D-Day, Montgomery rightly permitted
himself
considerable leeway in the manner in which his individual operations achieved
the ultimate objectives of the operational-level master plan.
That the 21st Army
Group planned many more corps operations to fulfill this master plan than it
carried out is evidence of this flexibility.
This formation, for example, never
undertook its early June plan for a double envelopment of Caen from east and
west, nor its planned mid-June "Dreadnought" attack to outflank Caen from the
east.
This flexibility resulted from operational circumstances that forced
Montgomery to modify his intentions. Despite what he said, it is not surprising
that a commander as experienced as Montgomery could be flexible in his
methods, just as he had been at Alamein and at the Battle of Mareth in March
1943.
Moreover, whereas Montgomery was determined to adhere to his
operational-level master plan, he remained more flexible as to how his subop-
erational or individual operation master plans fulfilled this strategy.
After the collapse of the German defense of Normandy, Montgomery's con-
duct of the remainder of the campaign reflected greater adherence to a more
rigid suboperational master plan. Having been replaced by Eisenhower as Land
Forces Commander on 1 September 1944, Montgomery no longer directly
decided theater strategy. Yet, after Normandy, Montgomery's conduct of his
army group's operations reflected greater continuity in planning in that he
managed to plan the next operation while the current one was still being
87
The Set-Piece Battle
conducted. 45 Such a practice was feasible only if the current operation unfolded
as planned, because the next operation could only commence as planned if the
present one achieved its final objectives, which represented the starting points
for the next operation.
In Normandy, the battlefield situation meant that
operations typically did not go as planned and, hence, future operational
planning had to be flexible.
After September 1944, however, Anglo-Canadian
operations achieved their objectives more frequently than in the earlier period.
In late February and March 1945 the Second (British) Army planned Operation
"Plunder," the assault crossing of the River Rhine, while the First Canadian
Army conducted "Veritable," the precursor to "Plunder" that sought to reach the
Rhine's west bank; "Plunder" could commence as planned only if "Veritable"
was a success.46
This process reflected a growing confidence within the 21st
Army Group that it could dictate events on the battlefield.
These planning principles also were evident when on 22 September 1944
Montgomery ordered planning to commence on the successor operation to
"Market-Garden," code-named "Gatwick."
This attack aimed to advance from
the eastern flank of the
"Market-Garden"
penetration up to the Rhine.47
However, given the precarious state of the
"Market-Garden" salient and the
failure to clear the flank-threatening enemy salient at Venlo, Dempsey post-
poned and then shelved "Gatwick. "48
By ordering the "Gatwick" planning to
commence on 22 September, Montgomery already had abandoned his intention
of pursuing the "Market-Garden" advance north beyond Arnhem some five days
before the beleaguered 1st Airborne Division withdrew from the Oosterbeek
perimeter.
Montgomery's conduct of individual operations-rather than a series of
offensives —also reflected his master plan concept.
Montgomery was deter-
mined to see that his diligently preplanned and well-prepared operations were
carried out according to the original master plan.
He continued Operation
"Veritable," for example, inexorably day after day in accordance with the phases
outlined in the original plan. This determination was also evident in the
twinned Operations "Nutcracker/Mallard," in which convergent thrusts by the
XII and VIII Corps eliminated the German salient west of the River Maas at
Maeseyck 50
Montgomery's influence on the conduct of individual operations, however,
did not always remain devoid of flexibility in response to changing tactical
situations. Even though most of these flexible initiatives came from subordinate
corps commanders, both the army commander and Montgomery had to approve
these modifications before they were enacted.
In Operation "Switchback," II
Canadian Corps' 6 October assault on the Breskens pocket south of the Scheldt
estuary, the main assault at Eede made little progress. Consequently, General
Simonds transformed the diversionary assault across the Savojaards Plaat inlet
into the main effort 51
Similarly, when "Market-Garden" ran into difficulties, a
new plan was formulated that swung 43rd (Wessex) Division west, outflanking
the German defenses, to reach the endangered lst Airborne Division at Ooster-
beek; but this could not be implemented before German pressure forced the 1st
Airborne to withdraw.S2 Yet despite this flexibility within individual operations,
