3
Casualty Conservation
The second foundation of Montgomery's "Colossal Cracks" operational
technique was casualty conservation. Historians can only fully understand his
methods, particularly his caution and reliance on firepower, in the light of his
concern to avoid heavy casualties in the campaign.
Prior to the 1980s the
campaign's historical literature showed only limited awareness of the issue of
casualty conservation. The British official histories only briefly mentioned this
aspect, while the Canadian history merely produced a limited analysis' In the
mid-1980s, however, Carlo D'Este highlighted this issue and observed that "post
war British accounts of the Normandy campaign have not given sufficient
emphasis to the seriousness of either the reinforcement problem or the effects it
produced on Montgomery's strategy after D-Day."2
D'Este emphasized the
effects that the manpower shortage had on the campaign from the beginning of
July 1944. D'Este argued that this problem was a new, temporary phenomenon
that emerged after the opening of the second front.
This analysis goes further than D'Este, arguing that the manpower problem
was a long-term problem that the British had foreseen well before D-Day. The
manpower crisis not only overshadowed the whole of the "Overlord" planning
process but also shaped the campaign Montgomery intended to undertake on the
continent. This fact, when coupled with Montgomery's long-harbored revulsion
at the slaughter of the Great War, meant that casualty-conservation concerns
influenced Montgomery's entire operational approach.
Historians can only
appreciate fully the Field Marshal's predilection for the cautious, attritional,
firepower-based set-piece battle in the concio of his de cautio sy oid heary
casualties. This work cannot overstate the complexity of the manpower issue;
the vast array of manpower, casualty, and reinforcement statistics for the
campaign are extremely confusing and often contradictory.
Given this fact,
together with limitations of space, this analysis cannot present a systematic
examination of this manpower situation." Instead, this study just demonstrates
