Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Wehrmacht. By June 1944 the British army had had insufficient time, and
probably insufficient ability and experience, to
overcome the weaknesses
inherent in "Colossal Cracks." This technique was the most appropriate weapon
the British army could develop in the circumstances, because it could not have
forged a more viable alternative weapon by mid-1944. And, above all else, the
"Colossal Cracks" technique would prove to be enough - albeit perhaps only just
enough -both to defeat the Nazi canker and achieve British war aims.
METHODOLOGY
Having outlined the main arguments of this study, some discussion of the
sources and approaches used is germane.
This analysis has utilized primary
source material as widely as possible-an approach made particularly necessary
by the existence within the historical literature on the campaign of contradictory
assertions by the senior participants. Adopting such an approach helps avoid
entanglement in the nationally-orientated squabbles that have rumbled on since
1945. Historians previously have examined much of this primary material, but
the assertion that "the archives have been drained" is incorrect. This analysis
has relied heavily on the substantial sources not previously consulted, notably
the less obvious War Office files at the Public Record Office.
The sources this study has examined include the vast range of official British
and Canadian army records at the Public Record Office, the National Archives
of Canada, and the Directorate of History, Canadian National Defense Head-
quarters. This work also has consulted extensively the private papers of officers
and historians located in London at the Imperial War Museum, the Liddell Hart
Centre for Military Archives, and the National Army Museum, as well as those
at the Churchill College Archive, Cambridge, and both Canadian archives.40
Interviews and correspondence with selected senior officers has reinforced this
data.
Though the extent of new primary material this study introduces is not
inconsiderable, its contribution to scholarship on this campaign lies more in
argument than in new archival material. Moreover, though the secondary
literature on the campaign is immense, this study has consulted this material as
widely as practicable.
Despite the misconceptions sometimes apparent in such
works, familiarity with this literature helps place any particular argument within
its wider context.
The Operational Level of War
The central methodological concept that this study utilizes is the operational
level of war, which has only reached prominence in Western military theory in
the last two decades.4
Of course, the conceptual term operational, which
relates to this level of war, should not be confused with the descriptive adjective
"operational," which relates to military operations.
In 1944-45 Anglo-
American military thought recognized just the grand strategic, theater (or
military) strategic, and the tactical levels of war, but included "no adequate
term" for the operational level. 2 At that time, most British generals concurred
13
Introduction
with Horrocks that the defining line between strategy and tactics lay at the
army/corps boundary, whereas modern commanders would describe a corps'
activities as operational. 43 In contrast to the ignorance of the operational level in
Western military thought, in the interwar period, Soviet military thinkers, and to
a lesser extent German ones, developed sophisticated operational concepts.'*
That the British army only embraced this concept in the 1980s resulted from its
traditional disinterest in doctrinal theorizing in preference to a practical,
extemporized approach to combat, and from the small-scale nature of its typical
battlefield activities.45
But having ignored this concept until the 1980s, Anglo-
American military thought has now embraced it with a vengeance. 46
It is methodologically questionable for historians to use anachronistically a
modern concept inapplicable to the period in question.
Yet it is appropriate to
use the concept of the operational level in relation to how the 21st Army Group
conducted this campaign.
For in 1944-45, some implicit conception, termed
grand tactics-similar to what commanders now call the operational level - did
exist in Western military thought. In this period, just a handful of the British
army's most effective generals commanded their formations in any sort of
genuine operational sense, however "vague or ephemeral. "47 The idea of granc
lactics had emerged in nineteenth century military theory, and in 1914 was
defined in British thought by Major-General J. F. C. Fuller as "that part of the
art of war which links strategy to fighting tactics. "48 In the interwar years, the
progressive British military thinkers Fuller and Captain B. H. Liddell Hart
championed these ideas.*9
By 1939, grand tactical notions had permeated to
some extent the gentleman-amateur British army that was dispersed across the
Empire. During the 1939-45 war, a few British commanders handled their
formations in a manner that suggested some hazy grand tactical or operational
understanding. During September 1944, for example, Montgomery strove to
regain control over Bradley's American army group, in order to coordinate fully
their respective tactical activities into an operational, theater level, whole 50
The modern concept of the operational level is defined as the sphere where
"schemes of warfare" are undertaken "to obtain the goals set by theater strategy
through suitable combinations of tactics."Sl This level, therefore, concerns the
planning, preparation, and conduct of a series of coordinated, synchronized,
battles by large formations (ranging from army groups down to divisions)
within a given theater to achieve the objective of decisive victory set by military
strategy; the exercise of command or generalship at this level is termed opera-
tional art.2 The operational level also concerns the style of operations -how
large formations organize and use combinations of tactics within a continuum
ranging from maneuver warfare through to attrition warfare.
Attrition is a
routine, methodical, and inflexible style that deploys massive firepower against
easily targeted concentrations of enemy forces.
Maneuver warfare involves
attacking enemy cohesion - their ability to react systemically — rather than their
military assets, in order to achieve swiftly a decisive victory 53
Military thought associates closely —but not exclusively -the operational
level with the concept of maneuver warfare.
According to Luttwak, in pure
attrition warfare "there are only techniques and tactics" but "no action at all at
