120
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
circled continually overhead until directed onto enemy targets by forward air
controllers on the ground. 35
The Allies demonstrated the effectiveness of these
tactical air support methods by the particularly terrible slaughter they inflicted
on the German forces desperately attempting to escape entrapment in the Falaise
pocket?" The frequency with which Montgomery called off ground offensives
when poor weather limited the extent of available aerial support illustrates the
importance that he attached to air power.
On 20 June 1944, after Montgomery
had postponed "Epsom," the attack by the VIII Corps toward the Odon, he
signaled de Guingand that "each further day of bad weather will mean a further
postponement of a day. "7 Tactical air power made an enormous contribution to
eventual Allied success, and some authors have even argued that the campaign
"was decided by Allied superiority in the air."38
The Allies based their organization of land-air cooperation in Northwest
Europe primarily at the level of army, the highest echelon link between ground
formations and the tactical air forces.
During 1944 45, British and Canadian
forces honed further the organizational techniques first developed in North
Africa. In Northwest Europe, both of the British and Canadian army headquar-
ters in reality constituted joint army and tactical air force headquarters, with
adjacent layouts and common representation in the Joint Battle Room."
Moreover, the 21st Army Group ensured that it integrated direct air support with
the proposed development of the land battle to produce a single combined - in
modern parlance, joint -bi-service plan. Such integration not only constituted a
fundamental element within the operational technique utilized by the 21st Army
Group but also contributed crucially to ultimate Allied success. A Tactical
Group, RAF or RCAF each supported the two Anglo-Canadian armies fielded
by the 21st Army Group. Every day in the campaign, weather permitting, both
armies allocated fighter-bomber targets to their respective supporting tactical air
forces for them to attack to assist land operations. Essentially, therefore, Anglo-
Canadian utilization of tactical air power simply represented another method for
applying effectively massive firepower onto enemy positions. The awesome
power of such fire support, when combined with effective, massed, artillery
fires, constituted a devastatingly potent weapon with which to weaken the
combat power of the Westheer.
ANCILLARY ELEMENTS OF MONTGOMERY'S APPROACH
Seven other ancillary tenets together formed the remaining characteristics
that completed the overall operational technique implemented by the 21st Army
Group in the 1944-45 Northwest Europe campaign.
One such aspect was
Montgomery's concept of "grip." This notion had two senses, one concerning
leadership and the other operations.
Grip formed part of Montgomery's
conception of command, whereby he tightly controlled the activities of his
immediate subordinates —his two army commanders. Undoubtedly, Montgom-
ery's firm emphasis on grip sometimes led him to "overcontrol" these subordi-
nate commanders. Clearly, the issue of grip dominated Montgomery's relation-
ships with his two subordinate army commanders, albeit in subtly different
121
The Other Elements
ways; the nature of these relationships forms the substance of the analysis that
this study presents in the following two chapters.
Grip
Grip in its operational sense was a means by which Montgomery sought both
to retain the balance of his dispositions and to ensure that operations developed
according to his master plan.
Grip meant that the Field Marshal monitored
closely the development of an operation.
Montgomery believed that "the
modern battle can go very quickly off the rails," and that "to succeed," an army
group commander had to grip firmly "his military machine." For such grip was
the only way a commander could ensure that his force maintained "balance and
cohesion" and thus developed "its full fighting potential. "40 He felt that it was
not enough for commanders, "once their plan was made and orders issued," to
take "no further part in the proceedings, except to influence the battle by means
of reserves." To Montgomery a firm grip was essential to keep an operation
unfolding according to his predetermined master plan.
In particular, such grip
helped him ensure that his master plan was not distorted by other influences.
Without grip, Montgomery feared, an operation might become merely
"a
compromise" between the master plan and circumstances: namely, that the plan
might be distorted by either subordinate intent, the tactical outcome of subordi-
nate action, or the results of the enemy's seizure of the initiative.*l
Montgomery recognized, at least in principle, that "this firm grip does not
mean interference, or the cramping of the initiative of subordinates," and indeed
acknowledged that "it is by the initiative of subordinates that the battle is finally
won. "42
In late July 1944, for instance, the Field Marshal warned Crerar for
cramping Crocker's conduct of his corps.
Despite this, Montgomery over-
stepped that fine and subjective dividing line between an army group com-
mander's proper handling of his formation and his impingement on the appro-
priate authority of subordinate army and corps commanders to fight their
respective battles. Montgomery did not just give his subordinates the minimum
detail necessary for them to complete their detailed plan to fulfill his directive.
Montgomery's personality, his experience of not being gripped by Alexander
when commander of the Eighth Army in North Africa, and his packing of army
group headquarters with trusted former subordinates, all reinforced his strong
influence on the army and corps level within the 21st Army Group.
One
historian, for instance, concluded that in Northwest Europe, Montgomery acted
more like an army commander than the head of an army group.43
One reason behind the Field Marshal's emphasis on grip was his unshakable
belief in his own abilities and his limited confidence in the abilities of his
subordinates. This attitude appeared widespread within the senior command
echelons of the 21st Army Group. Although Montgomery clearly was guilty of
overcontrol, this also remained true of his senior subordinates.
Dempsey
gripped his subordinate corps commanders, and Simonds' lack of confidence in
his divisional commanders, Keller and Foulkes, after Operation "Spring," led
him to control them more tightly in their next operation,
"Totalize."44
This
