156
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Boulogne." To avoid this, Crerar ordered Simonds to take "more time,
necessary, in order to ensure a decisive assault. "2
Crerar was also as concerned as Montgomery about avoiding heavy and
unnecessary
casualties.
Crerar's 22 July 1944 Tactical Directive, his first
instruction after assuming command in Normandy, stated that his "tactical
methods" sought to both "defeat the enemy" and "spare us needless casualties.
Similarly, Crerar reported to Colonel Ralston, the
Canadian Minister for
National Defense, that Simonds had used novel methods in Operation "Totalize"
to penetrate the strong German defensive position "without heavy casualties."A
On occasion, this concern made the First Canadian Army reluctant to accept that
impending operations would be difficult; its planning of operations to clear the
Scheldt estuary, for example, was permeated with the expectation that the
Germans would withdraw from Zeeland after only token resistance.'
The fact that Crerar was a career gunner may explain why he was as wedded
to a doctrine of massive firepower as was Montgomery. In his 22 July directive,
Crerar emphasized the need to employ "preliminary, prolonged, and over-
powering fire" to avoid unnecessary casualties."
Like Montgomery, Crerar's
Great War experiences as a gunner staff officer exerted a strong influence on his
Second World War methods.
Major-General Vokes,
commanding the
Canadian Infantry Division, recounted that at a 1944 Eighth Army tactical
conference in Italy, Crerar stunned those present by stating that they
"should
adopt [1918] Flanders tactics."
According to Vokes, the conference chairman,
Lieutenant-General Oliver Leese, "was too polite to tell" Crerar that "he was old
fashioned."?
Montgomery concurred with Vokes's assessment and confided
spitefully to Brooke that Crerar had "gained the idea that all you need is a good
fire-plan, and then the Germans all run away!!"8
Throughout the campaign, the First Canadian Army's operations displayed a
reliance on firepower equal to that of Dempsey's Second (British) Army.
The
stated administrative policy of the 21st Army Group was immediately and
unquestioningly to allocate the resources that each army requested they needed;
arguments concerning "overinsurance" in resource requests would be settled
after the battle had been fought.
However, 21st Army Group suspended this
policy temporarily after it received the First Canadian Army's 24 September
request for the artillery ammunition it required for their Scheldt operations. The
Canadian request provoked Colonel Oliver Poole, the Army Group's Colonel
(Plans) to accuse the Canadians of seeking a degree of "administrative
security" unjustified by the circumstances - in other words, "overinsurance."
The First Canadian Army stated their initial logistic requirement as 9,000 tons
daily, falling to 6,000, whereas Second (British) Army requested 7,700 tons per
day. However, at that time Dempsey's Army had priority for resources while
they undertook the crucial "Market-Garden" operation.
This fact, plus the
extant deficiency in logistical stocks and infrastructure that prevented daily
supply from meeting demand, led Colonel Poole to conclude that Crerar's
demands were excessive.
Consequently, while the 21st Army Group allocated
to both Dempsey's army and the Headquarters, Line of Communication, all the
157
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
resources they demanded, Crerar's command only received 53 percent of the
logistic tonnage it had requested.º
Crerar, however, was not just an old-fashioned Great War "weight of gun-
fire" general, in that Vokes seems to have misunderstood Crerar's advocacy of
Great War gunner techniques. In Normandy, Crerar stressed the use of surprise
as well as firepower; he advocated "obtaining maximum surprise by eliminating
prolonged preliminary bombardment" prior to the attack, and "substituting for it
really overwhelming fire, from the air if possible, as the advance to close with
the enemy commences. "1
It appears that by 1918 Flanders tactics Crerar
actually meant the use of tactical surprise achieved by attacking without
preliminary bombardment, rather than, as Vokes perceived it, just crude "weight
of gunfire" methods.
Before Operations "Totalize" and "Veritable," Crerar stressed the need to
gain tactical surprise as an alternative to simple reliance on overwhelming
preliminary bombardment. 12
Simonds, as acting army commander,
issued
similar orders for Operation
"Switchback," the 6 October 1944 attack on the
Breskens Pocket. 13
These two methods-surprise and preliminary bombard-
ment-were not opposites, but rather different emphases within a broadly
similar approach.
Seeking surprise, therefore, did not indicate abandonment of
firepower doctrine; instead it meant the development of a more sophisticated,
flexible, firepower-reliant operational approach. In this respect, Crerar's gunner
thinking was relatively progressive. The flexible artillery tactics he advocated
in August 1944 were subsequently adopted by the 21st Army Group as its
firepower doctrine evolved during the next six months of combat. It was in the
light of these recommended methods that Crerar was to claim somewhat
exaggeratedly —but not without some justification —that his was the inspiration
behind the novel methods used by Simonds in "Totalize. "14
The impact of Crerar's relatively progressive firepower thinking, remained
limited, however, because these ideas remained rather theoretical and because
he exerted only moderate influence on the genesis of operational fire-plans.
Although Crerar had advocated a surprise attack for "Veritable" supported by
barrage without preliminary bombardment, the fire-plan actually utilized saw
the greatest preliminary bombardment of the campaign! This fire-plan was the
brainchild of Horrocks, the commander of the XXX Corps, and of Brigadier
Rawlins, his Corps Commander, Royal Artillery [CCRA].
Superficially, it
appears that Rawlins sacrificed surprise in favor of the crude, devastating weight
of shell of "a typical Monty set-up" with "bags of guns crammed on a narrow
front."15
Horrocks, though concerned over loss of surprise, appreciated that the
sodden, restricted "Veritable" battlefield permitted him "no room for manoeuvre
and no scope for cleverness," which left him compelled to simply "blast" his
"way through. "16
Though Horrocks sacrificed tactical surprise by using
preliminary bombardment, the Allies had already achieved operational surprise
through extensive deception and security efforts that concealed the Allied build-
up.
Moreover, even though the fire-plan developed for Operation "Veritable"
sacrificed surprise, it remained a progressive, ingenious, flexible one with
excellent target discrimination.' This example attests to the ability of a capable
