124
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
to maintain balance: It made it easier for him both to redeploy divisions in
response to the changing operational situation and to vary corps composition to
match their particular task.
O'Connor's VIII Corps, for instance, comprised
entirely of armor at "Goodwood," fielded mixed divisions for "Epsom" and
deployed mainly infantry
for the twinned Operations
"Nutcracker" and
"Mallard," the November 1944 British attempt to clear the enemy salient on the
west bank of the Maas around Venlo.
The drawback of a such a policy, as O'Connor observed to Montgomery,
was that in a fixed corps, divisions became experienced in cooperating with
their supporting armored or tank brigades, and the efficiency engendered by this
familiarity was lost with flexible corps compositions.53
Montgomery was not
unsympathetic to this point, and in the 21st Army Group he attempted to keep
old cooperation associations together as much as possible; the tee-ing up of the
XXX Corps for
"Veritable" saw three of the four main assault divisions
supported by armor with which they already had had a long association. 54
Cooperation
Montgomery also regularly stressed that proper cooperation was essential if
the Anglo-Canadian forces were to fight effectively in the field. His conception
of cooperation encompassed both interservice and interarm varieties.
The army
could only reach its full potential on the battlefield with full cooperation from
the navy and particularly the air force. The greatest example of the power of
effective interservice cooperation was the D-Day landings, one of the greatest
amphibious assaults in history. The other aspect of cooperation was interarm
cooperation.
Montgomery stressed to his subordinates the need for both
realistic combined arms training and for an effective combined arms tactical
approach based around solid infantry and tank cooperation that was tied in
appropriately to the mechanics of tactical fire-plans.
Despite the widespread
recognition of these requirements within the senior command echelons of the
21st Army Group, Anglo-Canadian infantry/tank cooperation proved rather
deficient during the first few weeks in Normandy Gradually, this cooperation
improved, partly through increased tactical experience and partly through
modification of divisional force structure to produce better integrated all-arms
combat teams.56
Simplicity
Montgomery also placed great emphasis on the need for simplicity in the
planning of military operations.
He believed that simplicity was one of the
"fundamental principles that really matter" in achieving success. Plans had to
remain simple, because the more complicated a plan, the greater the chance that
things would go wrong. Simplicity was also important because Montgomery
wanted all the soldiers participating to fully understand their own individual part
in the bigger operation: This would, he felt, improve both troop morale and
efficiency.
The one example that vindicated this belief in simplicity was
125
The Other Elements
Simonds' August 1944 "Totalize" offensive, where a complicated corps plan
hindered rather than facilitated successful development of the attack through the
depth of the German defenses.
The Assimilation of Combat Lessons
One of the most emphasized elements in Montgomery's thought was the
need to learn from combat experience. A large part of his conflict with the War
Office and Home Forces during 1942-44 centered on the identification and then
assimilation of the correct lessons of his experience in North Africa. Montgom-
ery argued, in typically patronizing style, that the doctrinal statements emanat-
ing from the War Office in this period did not equate to the realities of modern
war that recently had been discovered in battle in North Africa. In Northwest
Europe, Montgomery remained slightly more interested in the assimilation of
tactical lessons than operational ones. Initially, this might seem surprising, but
it arose principally because Montgomery believed after Alamein that he had
developed an effective operational doctrine.
He utilized this operational
technique virtually unchanged for the remainder of the war; and this fact could
be interpreted by the cynical as suggesting that Montgomery never learnt from
his mistakes.
This chapter has examined the remaining four fundamental tenets and seven
ancillary
characteristics of Montgomery's
"Colossal Cracks"
operational
technique.
This completes this study's comprehensive examination of both the
characteristics of, and the
factors influencing,
Montgomery's operational
approach. Having established the factors that influenced his conduct of the 21st
Army Group in Northwest Europe, this analysis now turns to examine the
contribution that his subordinate army commanders made to the campaign.
NOTES
1. IWM, BLM/90/1, Addrs Stf Coll, 7 Jan 44, point 3; Montgomery, Memoirs, 80-
90; PRO, WO179/2579, (WD CPS 44), Headley.
2. Montgomery, Memoirs, 8.
3. LHCMA, AP/14/27, M508, BLM to CIGS, 7 July 44. (Instructions): LHCMA,
AP/14/26, f19, M505, 21AG Dir, 30 June 44, para 6a; IWM, BLM/75, Notes Cmpgn
NWE, /1, p. 2, para 8.
4. IWM, BLM/90/1, Addrs Stf Coll, 7 Jan 44, point 3.
5. IWM, BLM/74, Ping Cmpgn NWE.
6. PRO, WO205/5G, M515, 21AG Dir, 27 July 44, para 3.
7. IWM. MSC/17, Mess from BLM, 1130 14 June 44.
8. Blumenson, Generals, 98; Ellis, Victory 1:295-96.
9. IWM, BLM/75, Notes Cmpgn NWE, /1, p. 2.
10. IWM, BLM/75, Notes Cmpgn NWE, /1, p. 3. (Feints): NAC, CP/2, 1-0:V1, f38,
Ltr Crerar to Crocker, 28 July 44; and f39, Crerar's Notes Mtng BLM, 29 July 44.
