Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
reasonable morale among their troops by seeking to secure a continuous series
of modest victories. They achieved such success by securing the best chances of
victory before an attack was launched. To this end, these senior commanders
would allocate in support of the troops the greatest possible cornucopia of
matériel -support that helped to avoid both a setback and the sustaining of
unwarranted casualties.
The senior commanders of the 21st Army Group
would, if humanly possible, avoid placing demands on Anglo-Canadian troops
even more horrendous than those typically imposed by combat.
Sixth, this study argues that though Montgomery contributed greatly to the
manner in which the 21st Army Group conducted this campaign, some histori-
ans have exaggerated his significance.
The existence of so many books written
directly about Montgomery, that assume that he exercised an overwhelming
influence on how the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign, has fueled
these exaggerations? Scholars can only appreciate fully Montgomery's vital
role, however, within the wider context of the senior command echelons within
the 21st Army Group, particularly his army commanders.
Some historians have
criticized the Field Marshal personally for methods and attitudes shared by his
senior subordinates. Indeed, Montgomery did not impose an alien doctrine on
the 21st Army Group, which already had developed techniques similar to those
of Montgomery before the latter returned to Britain in January 1944 to assume
command of the formation.
Some of the Field Marshal's alleged failures, moreover, remain as much
attributable to his subordinates as to himself.
Sometimes, Montgomery was
only "responsible" for these failings in the technical sense that, as the army
group commander, he was ultimately responsible for all the activities of those
serving under him irrespective of any direct culpability on his part.
The
spreading of this culpability among this formation's senior commanders also
reinforces this reassertion of Montgomery's reputation.
The extent of the
consensus that existed within the army group's two senior command levels
supports the argument that analysts have underestimated the appropriateness of
Montgomery's technique; this issue is the subject of the latter half of this work.
The existence of these six, interconnected, distortions within the literature on
this campaign justify a reassessment of the way in which Montgomery and the
21st Army Group conducted the Northwest Europe campaign.
This study
develops these twin subarguments first through an analysis of all the compo-
nents of Montgomery's operational technique and then through those of his
subordinate army commanders. This re-examination reveals that Montgomery
was an effective general and that the 21st Army Group conducted this campaign
competently.
This measured reassertion of Montgomery's abilities, however, does not
argue that he was one of the "great captains" of history, as he so vainly believed;
for clearly he was not. Historians should not attribute the fact that he so
fervently believed this himself with more significance than it deserves.
Montgomery proved no more than fully competent at the flexible, masterly,
Introduction
hands-on control of a battle.
His greatest operational strengths lay in his
perceptive grasp of the wider art of the practicable.
He astutely recognized the
real long-term capabilities of his forces, both man and machine, relative to that
of the skilled, and resilient, Westheer.
Moreover, Montgomery perceptively
recognized what the British army had to do to defeat the Germans.
He then
correctly matched together these two appreciations.
It is also possible that he
next matched these two assessments to a private understanding of his true
capabilities as a general. "Colossal Cracks" represented what the conscript 1944
British army did best; it remained a way of winning the war with tolerable
casualties; and above all it was what Montgomery did best.
It remains unclear
whether he stuck to this approach because he believed that there was insufficient
necessity or time to develop another effective technique or because he realized
privately that he was incapable of effective generalship using any alternative
technique. 31
Montgomery's egotism might lead historians to
dismiss the
possibility that he privately appreciated his own limitations, but he was a
complex personality, paradoxically
astounding myopia. 2
capable
of both acute
perception and
Montgomery is precluded from the ranks of the "great captains" of history
by his obvious shortcomings as a military commander: his failure to exploit
ruthlessly any success gained; his deficiency in the fluid battle; and his limited
ability at adjusting his methods to changing operational situations.?
This
assumes that achieving inclusion within the ranks of the "great captains" is
historically significant, but this notion may be a chimera reflecting an overem-
phasis on the individual element in warfare?4
Occasionally, alleged "military
geniuses" may have imposed their will in contradiction to the underlying
realities of the battlefield situation, but most commanders have failed to exert
any significant personal influence on military events.
Neither Rommel,
Rundstedt, nor any other German senior commander in Northwest Europe
exerted any real individual influence on the course of the campaign, which was
decided more by superiority in matériel than by command capabilities.?5
Moreover, during the Second World War, widespread competence among senior
commanders arguably proved more beneficial than isolated examples of genius.
The real streneth of the Wehrmacht was the effectiveness of the General Staff
system in "institutionalizing military excellence" repeatedly to produce highly
competent senior commanders and staff officers? Indeed, Montgomery would
oversee victory in Northwest Europe not by military genius but by sustained
competence.?7
This work examines systematically the 1944 British army's "Colossal
Cracks" technique through a categorization of its component parts.
It analyzes
Montgomery's methods, and those of his subordinate army commanders, in
terms of eleven fundamental characteristics together with seven lesser ones, all
of which were interconnected to varying degrees.
First, this study examines the
two paramount aspects, casualty conservation and the maintenance of morale.
Second, it examines the four key components of the set-piece battle: the master
plan, concentration, firepower-based attrition, and a methodical and cautious
approach. These four together with the notion of "alternate thrusts" constituted
