24
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
that faced the 1944 British army all combined to ensure that these two factors
dominated Montgomery's handling of the 21st Army Group.
This chapter first examines the phenomenon of morale and the significance
this had in Montgomery's military outlook. Next, it demonstrates that at certain
periods significant morale problems existed within the 21st Army Group. Last,
it analyzes the impact that Montgomery's concerns with the maintenance of
morale exerted on his conduct of the campaign. This examination reveals that
Montgomery's cautious, firepower-based, attritional methods reflected his desire
to nurture his forces to preserve the morale fabric of the 21st Army Group.
Such maintenance of fighting spirit would enable Montgomery's command to
deliver an adequate, but sustained, combat performance in Northwest Europe
that would eventually prove sufficient, as but one part of a larger Allied effort,
to defeat the Westheer.
MORALE AND THE MAINTENANCE OF MORALE
Montgomery's abiding concern with the human aspects of war, with morale,
and with the "maintenance of morale" formed one of the two foundations of his
operational doctrine?
The Secretary of State for War, James Grigg, who
became a close colleague of Montgomery during the campaign, observed that
the Field Marshal's "technique rested" on "the supreme importance of morale in
war."3 Montgomery conducted this campaign in a manner designed to sustain
the morale of his troops as far as was possible within the complex, and often
contradictory, requirements of the unfolding operational situation.
Hence, this
study analyzes the significance of morale maintenance in relation to other
operational demands.
This work needs to explore the concept of morale, however, before it exam-
ines how Montgomery sought to sustain such fighting spirit.
Morale is a
nebulous and highly complex phenomenon. It concerns the fighting élan, or
spirit, of troops; their willingness or ability to risk death or overcome abject
terror, intense trauma, excruciating pain, and utter fatigue by pressing forward
in attack or by remaining staunch in defense —in both cases against a terrifying,
noisy, hail of lethal metal. Morale is a dynamic, rapidly changing phenomenon;
individuals, small groups, units, and formations from different types of society
are all variously affected by disparate morale factors at different times.
Morale
also remains a subjective, emotive, and controversial subject that encompasses
vexed judgments such as where do the genuine limits of individual endurance
end and cowardice begin? Among all these complexities historians can reach
few concrete conclusions on the issue of morale.'
During the Second World War, Montgomery, like many other senior British
officers, recognized the crucial importance of these human factors in warfare.
An appreciation of the significance of morale factors in war was by no means
new, because most armies have long regarded this factor as one of the
"classical" principles of war.' However, for the 1939-45 British army, the sheer
extent of Montgomery's concern with such influences proved highly significant.
His lectures and writings during this war, like those of Field Marshal Slim,
The Maintenance of Morale
25
consistently demonstrated that he believed fervently that morale was "the big
thing in war" and "one of the chief factors for success."6
In a pamphlet Mont-
gomery issued in 1946 that summarized the ideas with which he had fought his
Second World War battles, he stated that "man is still the first weapon of war.
His training is the most important consideration in the fashioning of a fighting
army. All modern science is directed towards his assistance but on his efforts
depends the outcome of the battle. The morale of the soldier is the most
important single factor in war."?
Furthermore, in August 1946, Montgomery,
now the new Chief of the Imperial General Staff [CIGS], presided over the
annual War Office doctrinal exercise, this time suggestively named "Evolution."
The doctrine he espoused here underscored the extent of his concern with
morale factors.
"Without a high morale," he declared, "no success can be
achieved in battle; however good the strategic or tactical plan,
or anything
else."8
Montgomery's appreciation of the human dimension of war refutes
Thompson's accusation that in Northwest Europe the Field Marshal had become
nothing more than a "general manager" of a campaign reduced to the mere
"ironmongery" of overwhelming weight of matériel -of machines rather than of
men? In reality, Montgomery believed that man and machine formed "a team,"
but one where "the man in the machine was what really mattered. "10
The recognition that, with hindsight, historians have attributed more cer-
tainty to the success of the
"Second Front" than that expected at the time
expedites a fuller understanding of Montgomery's concern with the relative
fragility of the British army's morale. For recitation of crude figures indicating
numerical superiority, irrespective of other considerations, is chimerical.
To
those involved at the time, the success of "Overlord" remained as uncertain as
the vast risks involved were clear." It is not inconceivable that Britain might
not have enjoyed a second chance to invade Nazi-occupied Europe if "Overlord"
had failed.12
Moreover, historians often have overlooked the extent of war
weariness within Britain by 1944—a lassitude indicated by the inability of
civilians on the Home Front to endure the German 1944 V-weapon onslaught
with the same stoic resilience as they had the German Blitz of 1940.13
The campaign's literature also has underestimated the fear and foreboding
with which senior Allied commanders viewed "Overlord," the culmination of
three years' desperate toil. Field Marshal Alan Brooke, the CIGS, confessed to
his diary on 27 May 1944 that the operation was "eating into my heart. I wish
God we could start and have done with it."14 And on the eve of D-Day he again
sought catharsis by confiding his fears to his diary: "I am very uneasy about the
whole operation. At the best, it will fall so very short of the expectation of the
bulk of the people, namely all those who know nothing about its difficulties. At
the worst it may well be the most ghastly disaster of the whole war."Is Recog-
nition that simple weight of matériel was insufficient to convince senior Allied
commanders that victory was certain, facilitates a fuller appreciation of the
appropriateness of Montgomery's belief that the morale fabric of his forces
represented one of the keys to victory. " Though there is much validity in the
portrayal of the 1939-45 War as one essentially of industrial production, it was,
however, not simply this. For the Anglo-Canadian land forces of 1944, at least,
