Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
manpower shortage.
Unfortunately, these factors seriously limited Montgom-
ery's scope of action in this regard. He could not release as planned back to the
United Kingdom soon after the D-Day assault the 6th Airborne Division and the
1st Commando Brigade, for instance, because of the level of enemy threat;
consequently, these formations remained in the frontline under the command of
the I (British) Corps until August 1944.
This principle of nurturing troop morale meant that the conscript soldiers of
the 21st Army Group went into battle with all the material aids that Montgom-
ery possibly could arrange.
Generally, British and Canadian infantry only
would attack with as copious fire-support as possible: This included not just
artillery, tactical air, antitank and conventional armor assets, but also the
specialized armored vehicles of Major-General Hobart's 79th Armored Divi-
sion.127
Consequently, throughout the campaign, the British undertook only a
tiny proportion of their infantry attacks without artillery and armor support. 28
In contrast, unsupported attacks remained far more frequent among German
forces. 129
Montgomery's intent to sustain troop morale exerted a strong
influence on the genesis of such a firepower-reliant operational technique.
Montgomery also desired that his soldiers have the best medical facilities
possible, and that his subordinates undertook every effort to get hot meals
forward to the fighting troops, including regular supplies of that essential item, a
hot brew of tea!3* Such zealous administration seemed less prevalent within the
American army in Northwest Europe: The provision, for instance, of hot meals
to forward troops proved marginally more efficient in the Anglo-Canadian
forces than in the American. 131
One fascinating manifestation of Montgomery's concern with troop morale
in Normandy concerned his reaction to news of German tank superiority.
When
GSO1 (Liaison) reports began commenting on this superiority, while suggesting
tactics to counter it, Montgomery felt compelled to suppress all such liaison
reports, to avoid "the troops developing a Tiger and Panther complex. "32 Such
censorship may have limited the development of such a complex, but did not
prevent it. Hargest noted that on 12 June 1944 a sol a complex, but er taok
to engage it. "133
"fired for one hour" and then "drove off unmolested" as "not one tank went out
Montgomery's reaction to these reports is significant as it
suggests that his concern to nurture troop morale inadvertently hindered his
command's assimilation of the lessons of combat experience-a process
Montgomery believed to be essential to success.
Equally, morale concerns
fostered a reluctance within the 21st Army Group to criticize commanders and
troops for failures, and this reticence also hampered honest, searching self-
appraisal 34 Whether the morale advantages the 21st Army Group derived from
such an attitude outweighed the resulting limitation in tactical development
remains a moot point for historians to consider.
There is one aspect of Montgomery's desire to sustain morale that this study
has not yet addressed. This was the necessity of avoiding unwarranted heavy
casualties as a prerequisite for sustaining the morale of the troops. This study
has left an examination of this issue to the end of this chapter because it
establishes the connection between the maintenance of morale and casualty
41
The Maintenance of Morale
conservation, which this study examines in the next chapter.
Montgomery, like
many of his senior colleagues, recognized that avoidance of heavy casualties
would help sustain the relatively fragile morale of his civilian troops.
He
explained to his army group staff on 28 March 1944 that "soldiers will follow
you if they know you will not waste their lives."13s
Brigadier Edgar ("Bill")
Williams, the army group's chief intelligence staff officer, observed that "we
were always very aware of the doctrine, let metal do it rather than flesh.' The
morale of our troops depended upon this. We always said:
Waste all the
ammunition you like, but not lives. "136 Equally, one of Montgomery's Brigade-
Majors in Africa commented that "we knew he was dead against unnecessary
casualties.
One of the reasons we liked serving under [him] was that we had a
better chance of surviving. "137
This approach contrasted with the rather less
casualty-conscious approach of some American formation commanders.
One
such case was Patton' battering attacks against the German defenses at Metz
during the autumn of 1944, which incurred heavy casualties but achieved only
modest results.138
It is germane here merely to observe that heavy casualties exerted two major
adverse effects on morale.
First, the expectation, or fear, of severe casualties
expedited degeneration into
"stickiness."
Secondly,
actually
sustaining
casualties steadily unraveled the basic fabric of a unit.
The devastating effect on
morale that such severe casualties exerted on infantry battalions is attested by
the atypical example of the 6 DWR. In fourteen days of combat in Normandy,
an official report observed, the unit suffered severe wastage that amounted to 23
officer and 350 other rank casualties, or 66 and 43 percent of its war establish-
ment, respectively.
Deliberately targeted German sniper activity inflicted most
of these heavy British officer casualties, and this prompted the surviving officers
to remove their insignia of rank. The physical absence of "all the key" officers,
now dead or hospitalized, plus the visual absence of the surviving officers,
minus their insignia, wrecked utterly the effectiveness of a unit now so filled
with fresh reinsonia, wrecke "wat" the battalion did "not know" one another !a9
On receiving this damning report, Montgomery removed the battalion from the
division and ordered it broken up for reinforcements.!40
The avoidance of casualties, however, did not remain imperative for Mont-
gomery solely on the grounds of sustaining morale. For the 21st Army Group
also suffered from a chronic and insoluble manpower crisis in Northwest
Europe, which when coupled with the shadow of the slaughter of the Great War,
led Montgomery to conduct the campaign in a way that did not incur severe
casualties. It is to this second paramount influence on Montgomery's conduct of
the 21st Army Group during 1944 45 that this study now turns.
NOTES
1. The British and Canadian official histories devote only modest attention to morale
or manpower problems. (Manpower): Ellis, Victory 1:132-33, 308, 453; 2:141-42, and
158-59; Stacey, Victory, 284-85, 385-86, 630-33. Recent works have focused a little
