134
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
by Dempsey; but proving this assertion beyond reasonable doubt is fraught with
significant difficulties.
Dempsey was in every sense Montgomery's right-hand man.
He had been
one of Montgomery's students at the Staff College, Camberley, in 1930-31, and
the latter had requested personally that Dempsey assume command of the XIII
Corps in December 1942. Yet Dempsey was not Montgomery's initial choice to
command the Second (British) Army in the 1944 45 Northwest Europe
campaign.
Originally, Montgomery intended that another of his favored
protégés - Oliver Leese —who had taken over the Eighth Army after Montgom-
ery returned to England to command the 21st Army Group, should command
the Second Army with O'Connor replacing Leese in Italy 20 Montgomery hoped
that alongside Leese would be Dempsey as commander of the First Canadian
Army, because Dempsey had served both successfully and popularly with the
Canadians in 1940 as the BGS(Ops) of the new Anglo-Dominion VII Corps."
In these considerations, Leese had a slight advantage over Dempsey in that he
already possessed a modicum of experience as an arco commander in the field
whereas the latter had none. However, Montgomery's plan fell through after
being blocked by Brooke. The CIGS both refuse to a plan teese s abilities to
be withdrawn from the Italian theater and recognized that Canadian political
requirements demanded that the Canadian General Henry Crerar head the First
Canadian Army, not a British commander.22
Subsequently, Montgomery
without hesitation selected Dempsey to command the Second (British) Army.
At the time, the military thinker Liddell Hart and the radical tanker General
Percy Hobart both welcomed enthusiastically this appointment 23
Montgomery and Dempsey worked very well side by side. The latter com-
mander was-like Leese, Horrocks, Simonds, de Guingand, Belchem, and
Richardson —one of "Monty's men," in that they had hitched their careers to the
Montgomery flag and that the Field Marshal had nurtured their abilities and
careers.
refusing to contradict his superior's disingenuous accounts of the campaign
Dempsey nailed his flag firmly to Montgomery's post after the war,
Dempsey also defended unobtrusively the Field Marshal's battlefield reputation
from criticism both at home and particularly in America.
In 1968, Dempsey
told Lewin-while requesting that his information not be conveyed to Liddell
Hart -that "since the war [Montgomery] has been his own worst advertising
agent. I would not attempt to defend that. It is an anathema to me. But I will do
anything I can to help you establish his genius as a commander in the field. "24
Such loyalty may have been misplaced given that in 1946 Montgomery
treated the faithful de Guingand with shameful insensitivity when he casually
informed his former chief of staff that he would not now be made VCIGS as
Montgomery had previously indicated.2s
Dempsey's postwar loyalty owed
much to Montgomery's shielding of him from criticism during the campaign,
especially over the failure of "Goodwood."
Montgomery also exerted a
remarkably strong influence over all the former "Monty men" long after the war
had ended? Dempsey's fidelity also may have been counterproductive in the
sense that his determination not to contradict Montgomery's obvious massaging
of the historical facts reinforced increasing American alienation with British
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
135
accounts of the campaign.
Indeed, the nationally orientated historical debate
that raged during the 1950s and 1960s served both to increase these confusions
rather than clarify them and to hinder objective analyses of Montgomery's
generalship not excessively focused on his personality. Furthermore, Dempsey's
loyalty to Montgomery also was misplaced both in that his superior never gave
Dempsey the credit he rightly deserved for the important role he played in the
campaign and because such fidelity also proved personally damaging to
Dempsey's historical reputation.
Dempsey the Cipher
To date, the campaign's historical literature has portrayed Dempsey the army
commander as just a cipher who simply passed on Montgomery's orders to his
highly capable corps commanders, and who made little contribution himself.
This view asserts that Montgomery "commanded an Army Group as he did an
Army" —or to be more precise, the Eighth Army.?
This view argues that
Montgomery circumvented Dempsey by frequently dealing directly with his
corps commanders. Ronald Lewin noted that when he asked O'Connor "what
did [Dempsey] personally contribute, beyond being a 'usual channel' between
Mont[gomer]y and his very able corps commanders, there was really no
answer. "28 The fact that Dempsey has had such sparse historical investigation
justifies further examination of Dempsey's actual contribution to the conduct of
this campaign.
An army commander can contribute personally to the conduct of a campaign
in several ways. One such aspect was theater strategy, traditionally the preserve
of the theater or army group commander, but where army commanders might
exert some marginal influence.
Given Montgomery's personality, command
style, and operational methods, it seems highly unlikely that Dempsey exerted
any significant influence on the higher strategical direction of the campaign.
General Horrocks, the commander of the XXX Corps, did not believe that
"Dempsey was much involved with the higher planning of the Normandy
campaign," for which Montgomery "relied almost entirely on his own judge-
ment."
Indeed, Horrocks recalled only one instance during the entire cam-
paign —in October 1944-"when Montgomery ever consulted me about future
operations. "29
Such a view is reinforced when one recalls that Montgomery was infamous
for not changing his mind once he had reached a decision on some strategic
matter —as was demonstrated egregiously by Montgomery's decision to go for
Arnhem in "Market-Garden. "30
Indeed, in Normandy, only Montgomery's
decisions altered the proposed sequence of operations he had envisaged to fulfill
the theater strategy he had established.
On 8 July 1944, for instance, he
instructed Dempsey to shift the center of gravity of the Second Army to the
attack by the VIII Corps west of the Orne, this taking "priority over the advance
attack the Ore" that had been the intended development of operations."
Whereas the higher strategic conduct of a campaign remained the domain of
Montgomery, one might expect that the objectives of specific operations would
