72
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
by such inferiority," in that within certain parameters
"the psychological
pressure of coping against odds unquestionably stimulates the weaker force to
intensified efforts. "94
From this concept, one can extrapolate the idea of
"negative
challenge,"
that the existence of numerical advantage
in itself
encourages a less-than-satisfactory combat performance through the lack of the
motivating force of dire necessity.
"Negative challenge" sheds further light on
the modest combat performance of the 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe.
In this campaign, moreover, Anglo-Canadian numerical advantage in per-
sonnel proved of limited significance because the existence of a serious
manpower reinforcement problem prevented Montgomery from undertaking
prolonged and costly battles.
Montgomery's need to avoid heavy casualties
negated the benefits that ought to have accrued from his numerical superiority in
men and machines. If Montgomery possessed abundant manpower resources, it
seems likely that the Second (British) Army would have advanced much quicker
than it did. Additionally, if British senior commanders had developed a greater
disregard for casualties, similar to that displayed by the Germans and Soviets,
the Second (British) army might have advanced much quicker.
Or rather, it
might have advanced faster initially, but then ground to a halt.
For it seems
likely that if Montgomery had utilized his troops without care to avoid casual-
ties, this
would have exerted a serious impact on the morale of civilian,
conscript troops who lacked strong ideological motivation.
If Montgomery had
handled the 21st Army Group with a disregard for the lives of its soldiers
reminiscent of certain Soviet commanders, the consequent damage to troop
morale quickly would have undermined the combat effectiveness of his forces.
John English cites Kurt Meyer's conception of how the Soviets would have
enacted successfully Simonds' "Totalize" offensive; the Soviets would have
advanced "not by tactical maneuvering, but with guns blazing to either Falaise
or a glory finish. "'S Even though this approach may have achieved a much
better short-term success than Simonds' corps plan, the crucial point is that such
methods remained inappropriate for the civilian soldiers fielded by the 21st
Army Group.
Though such methods held out the prospect of swifter initial
successes, they did little to nurture in the long-term either the morale of
Montgomery's soldiers or the number of divisions he was able to deploy. Such
tactics were scarcely conducive to the achievement of the particular set of
politico-military objectives that Montgomery pursued in Northwest Europe.
Montgomery, however, also weighed the principle of casualty conservation
against other operational necessities. He was prepared to accept heavy casual-
ties when he felt it operationally vital to do so. Montgomery was more prepared
to incur heavy casualties both before the capture of the strategically vital town
of Caen, and in mid-August when attempting to close the Falaise pocket.
Similarly, the slow progress of Allied operations to clear the Scheldt estuary to
enable use of the vital port of Antwerp prompted Montgomery on 16 October to
order that these attacks now be pursued with the utmost vigor irrespective of
casualties.'6
On 8 February 1945, he also launched the great
"Veritable"
offensive knowing that the planned southern American pincer to the assault,
"Grenade," had been delayed by the enemy's deliberate flooding of the Roer
Casualty Conservation
73
valley.
He was aware that consequently his army group would take the full
butcher's bill of the stubborn German defense."
The evidence presented clearly demonstrates that Montgomery "more than
most manifested an abiding concern with avoiding unnecessary casualties. "98
The caution he displayed in his operational technique, as well as his reliance on
firepower, resulted from his determination to minimize casualties.
D'Este
perceptively observed that "what has never been understood" by critics of
Montgomery's cautious approach in Normandy was "the dilemma he faced in
using the 21st Army Group at maximum fighting strength while still avoiding
unnecessary casualties —a paradoxical impossibility. "99
D'Este correctly also suggested that "how much of this was really overcau-
tion and how much a commonsense need to employ his dwindling combat
strength judiciously is a matter of personal opinion. "on
This analysis has
demonstrated that Montgomery's caution largely was based on military common
sense.
Montgomery's employment of the 21st Army Group in a casualty-
conscious manner constituted a sensible policy on three grounds: First, it helped
nurture the morale of his civilian troops; second, it reflected appropriately the
acute infantry reinforcement shortage that plagued the 21st Army group; and
most importantly, it constituted an appropriate way of achieving British political
war aims by preserving the fighting power of the Anglo-Canadian contingent
within the larger Allied liberation forces. Having examined the maintenance of
morale and casualty conservation-the two key background influences on
Montgomery's "Colossal Cracks" operational technique —this analysis now turns
to a systematic examination of the individual characteristics that comprised
Montgomery's operational approach.
NOTES
1. Ellis, Victory 1:131-33, 308, 453n, and 2
85, 385-86, 630-33.
2. D'Este, Decision, 258-59.
3. See Peaty, "Manpower."
4. Britain "has put in her body and soul ..
come out of it poor in substance" (Smuts' Addr
quoted J. C. Smuts, Jan Christian Smuts Londo
5. Shelford Bidwell.
"Indirect Artillery Fil
Barnett, Shelford Bidwell, Brian Bond, John Hard
Defences: Can We Learn from Military History? (Lc
6. Shelford Bidwell, Gunners at War (London: An
7. H. M. D. Parker, Manpower: A Study of War
of the Second World War: UK Civil Series), (U
Decision, 252; Thompson, Montgomery, 21; (Disba
of Army Manpower Requirements.
8. D'Este, Decision, 254-55.
