Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
114
such an operational approach would facilitate his concerns to nurture the morale
of his civilian forces.
The Field Marshal believed that the need to maintain the initiative applied
equally to commanders at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels.
Montgomery's directives, written thoughts, and actions in Northwest Europe all
indicate that maintenance of the initiative represented a key concern in his
conduct of the campaign. Variants of the slogan "We must keep the initiative
and not let the enemy dig in'' appeared frequently in his instructions? Indeed,
by 1944 the Field Marshal felt that the maintenance of the initiative was so
important that a commander could not "win without it."4
Maintenance of the initiative dominated Montgomery's Normandy plans at
the theater strategic or operational level.
He sought to ensure that his Anglo-
Canadian forces kept hold of the initiative to prevent the Germans redeploying
their armor from the eastern flank to the western, American sector! Operation-
ally, Montgomery also strove to make the German commander-in-chief of
Heeres Gruppe B, Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, merely react to Allied moves
during the Normandy campaign.
Allied commanders correctly feared that the
Westheer might manage to concentrate an armored reserve with which to launch
a counterattack against the precarious "Overlord" bridgehead.
Montgomery
sought to control the initiative through being on the offensive, with the aim of
preventing the Germans from using infantry to relieve the panzer forces
deployed in the front line, permitting the latter to pass into reserve.' In Nor-
mandy, Montgomery was delighted to discover that Rommel had been forced to
commit his panzer reserves to plug the holes that Allied offensives had torn in
the German line, instead of concentrating them as a counterattack force? In
mid-June, Rommel had been compelled to commit his newly arrived reserve, the
2nd Panzer Division, to seal off the Villers Bocage penetration.
Allied intelligence concerning the recent arrival at the front of the II-SS Panzer
Corps proved a powerful incentive for the British to launch their "Epsom"
offensive. This operation ensured that Montgomery kept the initiative because
it forced Rommel to commit the powerful II-SS Panzer Corps to halt "Epsom"
rather than to use it for his own planned counterattack.?
The 21st Army Group strove to ensure that it maintained the initiative by
assuming an offensive posture as often as possible in the circumstances, as this
orientation continually would force an enemy reaction.
However, obvious
frictions existed between this requirement and other elements of Montgomery's
operational technique. The retention of the initiative through offensive action
conflicted with three other considerations: Montgomery's determination only to
attack after he had concentrated copious resources so as to prevent the occur-
rence of any
"set-back or reverse"; his resolution to remain balanced, for
offensive operations often left dispositions ragged and unbalanced; and his
abiding concern with casualty conservation and the maintenance of morale?
Some historians have criticized Montgomery -with some justification -for
his frequent postponement of impending Anglo-Canadian attacks in Normandy
on the grounds of insufficient matériel. These delays in part resulted from the
Field Marshal's desire to avoid battering his forces against the powerful enemy
115
The Other Elements
defenses in the Caen area.
But despite this, throughout the campaign as a
whole, the 21st Army Group maintained a reasonable record for time spent on
the offensive; even though their American allies spent a marginally larger
proportion of the campaign on an offensive posture.
Montgomery's com-
mencement of Operation "Plunder," the assault crossing of the river Rhine, just
thirteen days after the completion of the massive "Veritable" offensive showed
this commitment to continued offensive action, even though there is some
justification that "Plunder" should have been launched even sooner given the
weakness of the German defenses. Overall, Montgomery sought to assume an
offensive attitude whenever possible within the powerful constraints of his
cautious, casualty-conserving, and morale-nurturing methods. Furthermore, on
one occasion, Operation
"Market-Garden," the Field Marshal launched an
offensive when his administrative system could barely support such a thrust.
His motivation for undertaking this operation was an appreciation both of the
fleeting operational possibilities of the moment and the prospects of achieving
the Montgomery/British agenda in the Anglo-American debates over command
and strategy.
Significant tensions existed between the need to maintain the initiative and
other elements of "Colossal Cracks," particularly Montgomery's desire to
nurture troop morale and avoid heavy casualties.
To surmount these frictions,
Montgomery had to utilize techniques other than full-scale offensive action.
When the Field Marshal believed that the 21st Army Group was unable to
assume an offensive stance, he sought to maintain the initiative by ordering
limited Anglo-Canadian attacks, raids, and feints." In Normandy, these actions
sought to provoke a German response and prevent them from transferring their
armor to the American sector.
In late July 1944, for example, Montgomery
ordered that Crerar's static First Canadian Army undertake several small-scale
raids with the purpose of pinning down German armor in the Bourguébus ridge
area, to prevent Rommel from redeploying it against either the unfolding
American "Cobra" offensive or the imminent British "Bluecoat" attack."
The 21st Army Group proved highly successful in maintaining control of the
operational initiative during the majority of the campaign.
The Allies only once
lost control of this initiative to the enemy during the latter's mid-December 1944
Ardennes counteroffensive.
This lapse resulted largely from faulty Allied
dispositions -poor balance-that arose from intelligence failures that were
compounded by a tinge of complacency.
The Allies also maintained a much
weaker grip on the operational initiative during their crawling advances in
autumn 1944. But even during this period the Germans only twice challenged
seriously the hold exerted by the 21st Army Group on the operational initia-
tive-during their resistance to "Market-Garden"
and their counterattack at
Meijel in late October; both these instances, however, represented nothing more
to the Allies than local setbacks.12
The ability of the 21st Army Group to maintain the initiative in Northwest
Europe proved a crucial factor in its victory over the Westheer: It prevented the
Germans from successful concentration of any significant counterattack force,
with the one exception of their Ardennes counteroffensive.
Once the Allies had
