Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
the operational level." Indeed, he seems to argue that the 21st Army Group did
not conduct the campaign in any operational sense, as their operations remained
largely attritional. To Luttwak, operational art involves expanding operations so
that they are more than just disjointed conglomerations of units fighting
individual tactical battles.54
Yet it is a gross oversimplification to dismiss the conduct of the Northwest
Europe campaign by the 21st Army Group as simply an unsophisticated,
attritional campaign without activity at the operational level.
First, there has
never been in the history of warfare either a purely attritional or maneuverist
campaign.
Second, Luttwak's argument reflects a marginal overemphasis on the
dichotomy between maneuver and attrition; these styles are not opposites, but
complements that exist simultaneously to varying degrees at all four levels of
war.
Some historians have exaggerated both the differences between these
styles and the proximity of German Blitzkrieg and British "Colossal Cracks" to
pure maneuver and attrition, respectively. But Montgomery's heavy attritional
emphasis was designed to wear down the enemy to the point where the Allies
could conduct successful mobile warfare with tolerable casualties against their
tactically superior enemy.
Firepower-laden operational techniques, moreover, do not equate precisely
or simply to attritional warfare; the modern American maneuver doctrine of
AirLand Battle, for example, emphasizes the heavy application of synchronized
firepower throughout the enemy's depth to swiftly destroy their cohesion.56
Furthermore, Montgomery and the 21st Army Group did design an operational
level master plan for Normandy, did strive to coordinate tactical battles within a
wider campaign context, and did seek-eventually -to reach mobile operations
where a decisive Allied victory would be reached. Clearly, this formation did
conduct the campaign in some sort of operational fashion, however partial or
hazy; and how it did this is the main focus of this study.
HISTORIOGRAPHY
This study must be set within the body of literature on the campaign because
this has influenced interpretations of these events. In particular, the inter-Allied
tensions extant in 1944 45 have produced ripples of mutual misunderstanding
that have influenced much of this historical literature. The immediate postwar
period saw publication of numerous personal accounts, typically
self-
congratulatory and uncontroversial, and based as much on memory as on
methodical research 58 Several American works, however, augured ill for the
future, because they focused on the 1944 45 inter-Allied disputes over theater
strategy. This controversy was fanned by the critique made by Major-General
de Guingand, Montgomery's chief of staff, of his superior's single thrust
proposal in an otherwise innocuous memoir.
In 1947 Montgomery published an uncontroversial account that only pro-
voked disagreement through his spurious assertion that the campaign developed
precisely as he had planned." His recognition of the need for effective Anglo-
American cooperation against the Soviet threat prompted this atypical display of
Introduction
15
sensitivity. During the early 1950s, the Cold War influenced scholarship on the
campaign in other ways:
Scholars
emphasized the tactical abilities the
Wehrmacht demonstrated during 1943-45 as a paradigm applicable to NATO's
successful resistance of Soviet numerical superiority; while
"the need to
rehabilitate West Germany as a bulwark against communism, also led Anglo-
American historians to de-emphasize" the impact Nazi ideology exerted within
the German military. 02
During 1946-48 a serious rift emerged between the
Allied commanders after the publication of accounts by Eisenhower and his
chief of staff, Beddell Smith, that mildly criticized Montgomery 53
In 1958
Montgomery retaliated with his Memoirs, which slated the Americans. 4 The
latent nationalist tinges to accounts by the senior commanders had become
overt, as had the fixation with theater strategic arguments.
During the 1950s
and 1960s, a British historical school developed that sought, through operational
narrative, to repudiate American criticism of Montgomery. 05
This period also saw the publication of the relevant national Official Histo-
ries."6
Although these works represented monumental examples of diligent
historical research, they left some room for critical analysis of the campaign's
more controversial issues."
In the 1970s another genre emerged that revealed
the well-kept secret of Allied intelligence successes such as "Ultra."68 Much of
this early literature was noticeable for the limited criticism it offered or how
rarely it raised searching questions. In part this reflected the 1944-45 reluctance
of commanders within the 21st Army Group to question the failures of col-
leagues who had done their best in this monumental struggle —a reluctance
illustrated by the closing of ranks after the September 1944 failure at Arnhem.59
Both this reticence and the fact that many historians still remained too bound up
with the monumental psychological experience that was the Second World War
hampered objective historical analysis of the campaign.
Professor Michael
Howard, himself a veteran of the Italian campaign, observed that "it is under-
standable that military historians of my generation should not have dealt with"
the weaknesses of the British army "as frankly and as openly as perhaps we
Should 170
By the 1980s a generational gap had opened between the events of 1944-45
and historians, and it was no coincidence that revisionist critiques then ap-
peared, such as the works of D'Este (1983), Lamb (1983), Hastings (1984), and
English (1991).7]
These cut through the euphemisms of the earlier works to
expose the unpleasant truth of Anglo-Canadian tactical weaknesses relative to
those of the enemy. By the early 1990s these works had broken the mold, and
most historians accepted that Allied combat performance left much to desired.
During 1994-95, the fiftieth anniversary of these events, authors published
many new books that introduced untapped sources rather than presented new
arguments that advanced understanding of the campaign.
The campaign's historical literature may now enter a postrevisionist phase.
Given that scholars have elucidated the weaknesses of the Allied performance in
Northwest Europe, historians now need to produce deeper analyses of why these
failings existed within the Allied forces, whether they were solvable by 1944,
and to what
extent Allied commanders used appropriately their available
