144
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
heads of O'Connor and Dempsey, to speak directly to Montgomery, who agreed
to replace the officer with Roberts' preference.'1
Similarly, in October 1944,
Montgomery visited Lieutenant-Colonel Michael Carver, and they discussed
who should assume command of one of the latter's battalions. Despite the Field
Marshal's initial reservations about Carver's choice, Montgomery personally saw
to it that Carver got the man he wished 2 Equally, O'Connor failed to secure for
Brigadier Combe an appointment in the theater because Montgomery was
"adamant" about age limits for commanders —a concern that was later to cost
O'Connor his corps command.3
After the war, Montgomery recounted an incident concerning Horrocks,
which again reveals Dempsey's limited contribution to appointments.
Horrocks
had reported to Montgomery that he was dissatisfio pohn his thief Signals
officer and wanted another. After discussing the mater with the army group's
senior Signal Officer, Montgomery appointed a replacement.
Horrocks,
however, refused to accept the new man and threatened to resign. Montgomery
telephoned Dempsey, who remained determined not to become involved; it was,
he said, a technical matter beyond his competence!
Montgomery refused to
alter his decision and eventually compelled Horrocks to take the new man.?A
There is, however, some contrary evidence that Dempsey did exert some
influence on appointments within the 21st Army Group.
Lewin noted that
Dempsey had told him that Montgomery "never sacked any" of his officers
unless the army commander had "so recommended."8S
Brigadier Pyman also
believed that it had been Dempsey's decision that Bucknall be sacked -a view
Dempsey subsequently affirmed to Chester Wilmot in 1946.8 Thus, though it is
problematic to be definitive about Dempsey's contribution to appointments
within the 21st Army Group, the balance of evidence seems to suggest that
Montgomery monopolized this area, at least with regard to British-as opposed
to Canadian -appointment matters.
SECOND (BRITISH) ARMY'S CONDUCT OF THE CAMPAIGN
This study now examines briefly the extent to which Montgomery's opera-
tional methods were either duplicated or modified at the level of the Second
Army.
This analysis utilizes the same categorization used to investigate
Montgomery's operational technique to demonstrate that the methods used by
the Second Army reflected strongly those of Montgomery. That this was so was
not surprising given the following factors: that the Second Army Headquarters
had been created out of Montgomery's Southeastern command and already had
absorbed many of the Field Marshal's techniques by late 1942; that Dempsey
had worked so long and closely with Montgomery; and that the latter remained
so determined to instill his approaches throughout the 21st Army Group 87
Dempsey displayed the same prominent concern about the morale of his
troops as his superior. On 18 October 1944, in the midst of the sodden gloom of
the autumn, Dempsey gave a morale-boosting address to the men of the 7th
Armored Division.
Dempsey stated with regard to their next operation that the
division "will do it 100%—that I know: just as you have always done.
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
145
Dempsey's rhetoric was intended to bolster the morale of these war-weary
veteran troops. In reality, however, Dempsey felt that the division was "lacking
in drive," at least during
"Goodwood" if not elsewhere as well.?"
The sparse
documentary record that concerns Dempsey, however, does not reveal the same
extreme emphasis on the maintenance of morale that can be discerned from an
examination of Montgomery's thoughts and actions in Northwest Europe.
Dempsey also shared his superior's overwhelming concern with avoidance of
heavy casualties. Selwyn Lloyd, the Second Army's Colonel GS (in effect, the
deputy Chief of Staff), observed that Dempsey's "experience in the First World
War" had made him "determined to have no unnecessary casualties."9 Briga-
dier Pyman concurred, remarking that Dempsey was "by nature, merciful to a
fault. "91
It was avoidance
of infantry casualties that shaped Dempsey's
"Goodwood" plan, with its heavy reliance on armored formations instead of
infantry ones.
This consideration also prompted Dempsey to halt the operation
soon after it became clear that a major breakthrough was unlikely." Dempsey
remained acutely aware of the infantry reinforcement situation throughout the
campaign; on 15 August 1944, for instance, he informed O'Connor and two of
his divisional commanders of the severity of the situation.'3
Similarly, in
October 1944, Dempsey instructed that Operation "Nutcracker," which sought
to clear the German salient at Venlo on the west bank of the Maas, had to be
carried out "slowly and in considerable strength, to ensure complete success
with as few casualties as possible."'4
Dempsey also shared his superior's cautious operational methods and dis-
played a similarly healthy respect for German abilities, especially in the
counterattack.
Dempsey, like Montgomery, desired the provision of maximum
possible fire support at every opportunity, and emphasized in particular the
employment of tactical air power.
The day before "Goodwood" was due to
commence, Dempsey noted that the operation was "entirely dependent on the
weather, and if the air cannot take part the operation will have to be can-
celled. "95
Similarly, on 4 October 1944, Dempsey noted that the forthcoming
Operation "Gatwick" due to commence on 10 October, would "be postponed
from day to day if the weather does not allow the air to function.
This caution reflected Dempsey's fear of German counterattacks because his
methods sought to offer no opportunities for the Germans to catch British units
and formations off-balance or without adequate firepower support and inflict
morale-damaging local defeats on them.
This study already has noted
Dempsey's concern to anticipate the expected German counterattack on the
eastern flank in the days after D-Day.
Furthermore, his policy of holding
reserves under army control also reflected his fear of German counterattack.
Both of these approaches were very close to what Montgomery meant by
balance: the art of arranging your dispositions in such a manner that any enemy
move had been anticipated and hence could be swiftly dealt with.
Dempsey
displayed this attitude during "Epsom" when the VIII Corps had managed to get
a foothold on the strategic Hill 112. Though Dempsey recognized that to hold
Hill 112, his forces would also have to hold Evrecy and Hill 113, he had
insufficient troops to take and hold these objectives because he "was convinced
