гязогно то илитая
C13
Appendices "E" and "H.' Originators of documents are responsible for preserving copies for assignment to
War Dianes
Nevertheless it is convenient to include in
War Diary, copies of important orders and
If duplicates of these are not available
for inclusion, a note of the fact should be
instructions received. If duplicates of theft ate not is emphasised that, whether copies of
s are included in the War Diary or not, a note of the receipt of such orders giving sufficient details™
to enable them to be identified, should be made in the narrative.
Appendix "I?"
Relax, hony statisticat oro
• statistical or other returns, i.e. Location Statements, Strength States, Distn. of Tpt., Amn.
Appendix "Z". Documents concerned with future pl nning for operations which will or may take place after
the oumnal cony of the normal War Diary is due yor despaten will tom a supplemellay
Document nor of the ted by it art Formation e du spite pril to Mas secremenary We Day:
will never fall into this category.
Units and brigades wul verv seldom. and divisions rarely. lanale such
documents
Appendix "Z" will be prepared and disposed of as shown in paras. 8-10 below.
DISPOSAL OF WAR DIARIES
6. Formation and Unit War Diaries will be disposed of as follows :-
(a) British
(b) Indian
To 0.2.E. (Erit.), M.E., and advanced O.2.E.(Brit.)where established.
To 0.2.E. (Ind.), M.E.
(e) Colonio!
To respective 0.2.Es.
(d) Local Forces in Palestine,
Sudan and Aden
•• 10 respective 0.2.Es
The original copy will be forwarded to 0.2.Es. as soon as possible after the end of the month to which
it refers. It will be accompanied by the duplicate copy (complete with all appendices) for the previous month.
same time as the original and forward the triplicate a month later.
Units and formations of the Indian Army will forward a duplicate copy of the war diary at the
diary will be carefully checked before despatch to ensure that they are identical in every respect with
the original.
The duplicate, and in the case of Indian units and formations, triplicate, copies of the war
MOST SECRET SUPPLEMENTARY WAR DIARIES
If several subjects fall into this category, it may be found convenient to sub-divide the papers
by subjects, calling them Appendices ' ZA,' " ZB," etc.
opies will be placed in a double cover. The inne
cover will be
(a) Name of unit or information.
(b) The words " War Diary Appendix, 'Z' for (month and year)".
03 bet 2025 detonal Archives noreply nationalarchives gov
Advanced Doc.
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
ert Duan
09 October 2025
Document reading room
Comp use DA
GENERAL NOTES
ecret. The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a War Diary is
an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
12 to bit of a War Dang is to try tre i cal real, of perio and nd to prote data upon
WO 171/677
14625542
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51
