pg_0005.pdf:
Бесе оволо
Brignal
WAR DIARY.
2.0. RoR. The Staffordshire Toomanty.
June 1944.
Iage.4
15th (contd. )
16th.
from Honey Troop went out at dark as anti-parachute watching guards - 2
tanks on Pt. 61 ridge and 2 tanks to square wood 0413•
Casualties Veh.
Personnel. Ipr. Gibson "C" Sqn. Killed.
Sgt. Billings, L/Cpl. Geary, Tpr. Savage, Tpr. Wagstafie
wounded "C"
Sgn.
Remained in some position. Chaps began to get their fist
Slit trenches are dug everywhere and in spite of
occasional shells and the noise of our own guns,
the men are quite tired enough
Sgns. take turns in posting the two dutybtroops and one is
30•mins notice.
Rumour of a Corps attack supported by very heavy RAF support and Corps Artillery
17th.
18th.
Casualties.
Personnel. Tpr. Wagstaffe "f" Sqn. died of wounds.
As for 16th. Big attack now aparently off as RAF will not
support so close to our own forward troops.
satisfied with our present positions.
rapidly although our own vehicles are already about 4 days behind
of runabout vehicles.
Weather is not too good. Very cold and more wind and we are not too happy
things are landing as per programme.
Al P.W. and deserters coming in to 185
BIEVILLE ahead of us testify to the effect of our shelling on
Personnel NIL.
Same location.
Same position.
Now talk of a big attack everywhere along the
front.
We are preparing plans with both 8th and 185 Inf. Bdes.
for local
attacks on
our
Div. Comdr. has run aver one of our own mines in a
Jeep and is
Bd e
Comd
away
resting. Wound not thought it to be serious.
came to
in the evening and while we were talking in the yard
several
shells landed in the Farm area, including 2 in the yard itself. Luckily
no
casualties
A large new dual carriagewey is being constructed
running Fast to West behind the ridge and it is supposed
that 8 Corps will be
going over
the
river and canal to the Airborne and H.D. bridgehead. Routine on
before.
Vehs. and Personnel NIL.
19th.
Routine all as before. Still 2 Troops out in observation 2 Sqns
at immediate notice and one at 30 mins.
A little shelling but otherwise nothing
We are still trying up future attacks with the Inf. and several
troop leaders and Sqn. representatives
go out with the Inf. both by day and night
to study the ground and hull down positions that they can adopt.
I.O. sets up a proper information room in a garage in the farm with plenty of
Weather does not seem to be improving which is
unfortunate as we particularly wish to get on with this attack before his line
gets too strong, and weather is sure to hold up supplies. Brigadier Roscoe
Came over from 29 Armd Bde to see the Colonel. He was our old Brigadier in
8th Bde in North Africa.
Vehs. and Personnel. - NIL.
20th.
Position still unchanged.
Airborne Div who have now been holding
on excellently for 2 weeks are being supported by the H.D. who are following them
over the river.
The 13/18th stay over there all the time now and one Sgh is
actuallyunder comd H.D. and one under Airborne Div.
in M.E. 109 was brought down near us by A.A gunners.
The pilot baled out and
we understand was captured.
The Plane farnt immediately it crashed.
Attacks on LEBISEY and LA BIJUDE etc. now being fully discussed.
Infantry are
still sending out their patrols for information, but enemy patrols appear to be
getting more active. We are all anxious to get on with the attack.
John Turner in
"B" Syn. is not well so we put him to bed and got upCapt.
Eardley from 266 F.D.
Casualties.
21st.
Some Location.
Routine and position unchanged. A war correspondent from Reuters
came and we told him how bad and untrue the first accounts were of the fighting in
the CAN secotr.
He agreed that this was so, but stated that his own reports

