pg_0001.pdf:
ма
WAR DIARY.
па
June 1944.
laboRe ho staffordshire leomony.
VOLUME: 54
1st.
Tarks and personnel moved out to Marshalling Area at 0815 hrs. Reveille
0500 hrs.
remaindeg personnel were sealed in Comp Aroa.
2nd.
All the remaining personnel of the Regt. moved out to Comp J. 6. at 1200 hrs.
arriving at approx. 1300 hrs by
route via Haywards heath, Comp J.10 is
sealed
but provided
excellent NAANI and a cinema.
Tanks remained in J.2.
Everyone had a good rest.
3rd.
At 1600 hrs the D + 2 and D + 4 personnel left Job. to proceed to Marshalling Area
D Day vehicles and
personnel in Newhaven,
leading tank leaving marshalling area
at 1500 hrs.
at 1800 hrs and was completed the same day.
4th.
Bad weather made it impossible to sail on thisday and the whole operation was
postponed
for 24 hours.
In the
afternoon personnel returned to T.G.V. to J.2. where they had a hot
meal and
a shower and went back again.
5th.
Reveille - 0700 hrs.
Craft moved out at 0830 hrs and anchored about 3 miles
outside
the harbour.
We finally sailed at 1230 hrs.
Sea was rough and some
personnel were
6th
D Day•
Pouched down at 1030 hrs on White beach and had practically speaking a dry landing
A terrible jam on
the beach where no organisation appeared
to be operating and no
The majority of our
Spaamodic shelling and a considerable amout of sniping.
Traffic control seemed non existant and even after leaving the beach vehicles
remained head to tail for long periods on the only available routes.
decided not to proceed to the
Assembly Area and Sgns were ordered to
rally in the area of the Xrds South of HEIMANVILIE.
In order to save time
0.C.2 KSII decided that his bn should proceed on foot instead of riding on the tanks
Porpoises were dumped in the Assembly
The C.O. appreciated that the ridge in the vicinity of It. 61 was ground vital
Son. to seize it forthwith.
They gelloped for it and shortly
after reported it clear of the enemy.
At this juncture Comd.
185 Bde ordered
to proceed on a special task in conrection with the clering up of the
strongpoint HILLMAN which was still holding out.
1. H.Qo and "B" Sql. then proceeded
the axis of advance.
"B" Son. was engaged by an 88mm Tk gun
flank which destroyed 2"Fascine "Tanks, 2 other
Sherman IIIs and a Sherman V (0.F.
tankl and the M.0*s half track.
engaged and the gun was silenced.
C.O. then ordered "B" Sqn. to take up battle positions on the It.
S.W. in case on outflanking attack by enemy armour should develop.
"C" Sgh. was now engoged by a Bty of 122mn guns firing Fast from the wooded area
arOund PERTER-SUR-L-DANS,
and temporarily held up.
The KSLI were now fighting
hard in BHUVILLE but the C.0. asked for a Coy to clear up the wooded strip to our
His request was acceded to by Col. Maurice and in spite of running
the gauntlet the tank advance continued without further loss.
Nos. 1 and 2 Tps. "C" Son. and elements of the Recce Ip. moved on fast on the richt
flank and succeeded in crossing the natural anti-tank obstacle S.W. of BIEVILLE,
No.4. Tp. on the left was held up at the obstacle as there was no possible crossing
in that area.
No.1. Tp. then succeeded in working forward into LEBISHY with the leading infontry.
c.o.
KSLI then decided to launch an attack on LEBISHY at 2114 hrs.N Recce Tp. now
reported enemy tanks advancing North from the diroction of CAN. I+
C.O. asked for the immediate release of "A" Sqn. who arrived just in time to take
up battle positions to the West of BIEVILLE.
The enemy tanks advanced very
were engaged when they reached the Western end of the A/T obstacle.
Iwo were K.Od.
and the remainder moved West into the wooded country in the direction of LE LANDEL
Two troops "4" Syn. moved across to our right flonk and when the German tanks
emerged No.1 Ip. engaged and destroyed four.
Other enemy tanks swung still more to
the West and moved fast for the high ground above FERIER-SUR-LE-DAN.
ordered 3 17 pdr tanks and one Shermen III to engage and 3 more German tanks were
destroyed.
No other enemy tanks then from the woods.
Neither the 2 Warwicks or 1 Norfolks were available
LEBISHY and in view of the very heavy losses sustained by the K.S.L,I. in a hard
doys fighting Col. Maurice decided not to attack that night.
At last light the regiment rallied and leagured West of BIEVILLE but in spite of
innumerable snipers in the adjacent woods we were note seriously disturbed the 3a
hrs in Lesguer.

