WO 171/2689
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. -1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L.
of C.
i) Unit r mmanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
VOTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the ernitorial Army, war duties will be
xept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTe C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
mit mil be reierred, L
The war mile, Erefer, S. W.l
rough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (5.D.l),
PARA. 2.- A war diary is Secret.
and to provide
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, op
id recommendations, based on factual experience
no inter-service co-operation which
to weapons, equipment, tacti
v be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
iter for the History of the War.
on A r diary Wil be entered ed daily ach eratin diale bey the oficer detailed to keep it,
• to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NOTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
d decisions taker
i) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
arch tables in the case of large units or c
li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographi
mportant onases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
n addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. — Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
outine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war carv.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reierence.
iti) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operation ludinshed in the text of the diary (ge the , , a bople emp the aes ount of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author.
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C. 2118.
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
lay have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
See P.S.. Voll elaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
direct to the officer i/c G.H Q.
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
enod o1 two monuns to the omicer 1/c G.h.0. 2nd I
(1) The duplicate copy, peral on tire antic to the bricade ge dife and hena lo
ion units will be sent eithin a period of three month.
n a period of three months to the officer i/c G.H.Q
offices at home for safe custody.
the unit concerned.
The time entered should be the time the information or order rei
SpECt NO. The the in entered record be the time the fren in the tex, ir e
ORIGINAL
Army Form C. 2118,
No. ll ORDNANCE BEACHAR
DETACHMENT.
will be prepared in manuscript.
WAR DIARY
NTELLSCENCE SUMMARK
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Date
JUNE
5.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
- 5 AUG 1944
s. H.Q. 2nd Echefen
Kershalling area - Unit resting - cinema shows.
Boarded craft to discover that 200 tons of armunition plus R. E, stores were improperly loaded.
No space left
for vehicles and guns.
After much adjustment of load, vehicles and guns boarded. Personnel - 56 men under
commend of Major Stidwell.
On board craft.
Postponed 24 hours,
Craft sailed at 14.25 hours.
Lookouts posted Ior mines.
The laden L.. I. made heavy going and approximately
one third suffered fromx sea-sickness.
It was almost impossible to prepare hot food owing to the confined
pace. Self-heating soups and cocoa were a boon.
D Day.
Heavy bombardment of enemy coast witnessed.
Personnel on craft uncomfortable owing to exposure,
during the night.
H Hour.
Sleeping on top of ammunition with one blanket which was soon saturated.
H + 75.
Heavy shelling of
Shelled fran about 700 yards from beach
craft, noticed ICTs 297 and 302 assembled eliut 500 arta attor 303 hit, causing
Pire in Incine Room necessitating flooding,
and upon beaching shelled and mortared.
All vehicles and ammunition saved.
ICT 297 had a nunber of
very near misses, but broke back on beaching.
A 15 minute recce
Six casualties
of S. S. D.
aused
Pound
Detectors
heavi:
xo Lodino
area approx.
SSD
O. B. D.
receiving amn, mainly 105 mm H. E.
SSD 3 - no mines - receiving
ssues camenced.
visit
craft to
H + 5. 5 38 sets used for
communications between
get ammunition for demanding nits.
of D Day 450 tons were held on each SSD.
continual.
SSD4
Pre-loaded dutirs catried
held in reserve.
It was necessary
to
Dous
and by the end
mortar
fire almost
Wt 35842/1764 1000м 12/39 BPL 51/5694 Forms C2118/22
Document 2:
Document 3:
Document 4:
WO 171/2356
WO 171/2363
WO 171/2419 (to
WO 171/5998
Document
DocumentS
9€ 66 91 0002/20/60
Document 11:
Document 12:
2ZE/121 OM
E6ZL8E
Bot 2025 d
DUAN - Standard vis
Booking summary
Name: ALBERT DUA
• Date of visit: Friday 10 October 2025
Reading room: Docum
• Reader's ticket number: F203207
999191
Booking reference: RR219-681-06162E
Document order
Document 1:
289L
