years.
Consequently the human material on the register varied considerably.
There was the ex-officer of ability and energy, who from the highest motives of
patriotism gave up a lucrative profession and who brought back those same
qualities to the service of the Army.
There was the ex-officer who had made no
success of life in the intervening years and to whom a second war meant only a
golden opportunity to draw a steady income for the minimum of work in congenial
surroundings.
In between there was every graduation of character and ability,
and it is a great tribute to the essentially sound qualities of the British race that the
general standard was so high and the real failures so few.
Despite this defect, the A.O.E.R. was beyond question of great value and im-
popance, especially in ho if year of the mate wifact it is dificult to sue of its
In fact it is difficult to see how the
success is the supply of nearly 30,000 men in the first two years, who could not
have been obtained from any other source at the time.
An improvement in the
selection of applicants was made in the summer of 1940 by the establishment of a
number of interviewing boards in various large towns.
The president was an
ex-officer of standing in the neighbourhood, one member was a serving officer and
the other a man of high position in the professional, industrial or commercial
These Boards were of much value, particularly in assessing the applicant's
standing in civil life, which was often an important guide to the development of
his character and ability since he had last served.
They continued to sit for about
a year, by which time the pool of non-technical officers had been almost exhausted
and the technical applicants, who were for the most part quite young and without
former service, needed a different method of assessment.
As regards non-technical
officers the value of any such reserve must largely depend on the amount of
opportunity there is for selection by proper methods and for keeping the registered
candidate under review if he remains on the reserve for any great length of time.
In considering the supply of specialist officers, it must be remembered that the
Army had a use for a very wide variety of qualifications, but the real interest lies
in the problem of the engineer, civil, mechanical or electrical. There was always
a shortage of qualified engineers, just as there was always a shortage of tradesmen
the engineering trades and for the same reason, namely, that the engineering
industry in all its many branches underwent greater expansion than any other
industry, and many different steps were taken at different times to increase the
supply.
But there was never any serious difficulty in meeting the demands for
other
kinds of specialists barristers, solicitors, accountants, surveyors, stores
officers and so on.
Demands for these categories were comparatively small, and
at the outset a large number of officers, with a large variety of qualifications, were
supplied from the pool of those registered before the war.
Then there grew up
another practice which in the end effected a radical change in the functions of the
A.O.E.R.
It often happened that the military authority concerned knew someone
in the commercial or industrial world who possessed exactly the knowledge and
experience required for some particular military appointment: the obvious course
was to get him registered in the A.O.E.R. and then to apply at once for him to be
called up for the particular appointment. This was in effect putting an applicant
on the register in order that he might be immediately selected for call-up and was
wholly different from the original intention that the prospective employer should
go to the register and pick from it a candidate already registered.
This new
method was patently the most efficient, but it was very dangerous and open to
gross abuse.
In the first place, it often happened that there were already on the
register men who were apparently as well qualified as the man now sought for and
the earlier members of the Reserve were sometimes justifiably indignant at what
they considered to be unjust favouritism.
Secondly, there was always the possibility
WO 277/=2
that this method might be used to secure a direct commission for a man who should
properly have been called up in the ranks.
But in point of fact this development
was quite inevitable. The Army's many varied needs could not have been met
from the original pool, and as the war developed new needs suddenly arose which
could be met only by finding the individual in civil life and having him registered
in the A.O.E.R. for the specific purpose of immediate call-up. Furthermore, it
was often the case that the services of some individual could not be secured at all
unless he was granted a direct commission.
In many cases the Ministry of Labour
and National Service would not consent to his release from industry unless they
were assured that he would be used in a capacity appropriate to his qualifications
and standing; in others the individual himself would not have given his services
without a guarantee of sufficient status and emoluments.
The Army would cer-
tainly have been compelled to devise a method of granting commissions direct in
certain cases, and it was a wise step to allow the machinery of the A.O.E.R. to be
thus developed since by that means the greatest safeguards were assured. It was
possible to insist on a certificate that there was no suitable candidate already on the
register, and although such certificates might be lightly given at times, consciences
were quite often stirred by them. It was also laid down that men liable to be
called up under the National Service Acts should not be granted direct commissions
without very strong reasons, and as all such applications were dealt with by one
branch, that branch developed a considerable flair for detecting the "ramp" which
called for the exercise of the Adjutant General's veto.
The supply of engineer officers, civil, electrical and mechanical, presented a
problem essentially similar to that of the supply of tradesmen in the engineering
trades.
There was the same competition between the expanding Services and an
ever-increasing industry, and the same sources of supply for the Army, either
from industry or by making full use of qualified personnel otherwise employed
within the Service or by training new material from the beginning.
There were
before the war a certain number of men with full professional engineering qualifica-
tions serving as officers in non-technical arms of the Territorial Army.
A few,
who held key positions in industry, were released in the comb out of the Territorial
Army in the last months of 1939, but it was not until 1942 that any further steps
were taken to discover unused qualifications within the Service. In February of
that year men of all ranks who possessed engineering qualifications or had passed
the Higher School Certificate were invited to apply to transfer to the Royal
Engineers, Royal Signals or Royal Army Ordnance Corps either immediately or
after suitable technical training.
Only too applications were received and of these
less than 50 were found suitable for transfer or training, which showed that there
was no great source of supply of this kind available within the Army itself. Another
admirable but limited source of supply was found among the warrant officers and
senior N.C.O.s who had been trained from apprentice boys within the Army, and
a ho, while not pose sing trademic anatoe, had by node cherin even ived
fitted for duties as officers.
Training from the beginning up to professional qualifications in a limited time
was beyond the capacity of any training that the Army could give, since it demanded
the full instructional resources of a University or Technical College.
Under the
direction of the Technical Personnel Committee, presided over by Lord Hankey,
a scheme was devised by which youths either at school or already serving in the
ranks were awarded bursaries at Universities and Technical Colleges and trained
in a two-year course, in an engineering or other scientific subject, the number being
regulated according to the estimated needs of the Services and of industry.
Those
who successfully completed the course were allotted by the Ministry of Labour and
