rank releases, the numbers were much larger, and the conflict between civil and
military needs was likely to be much more acute. It was in fact only another phase
in the battle for skilled men which persisted all through the war.
Inevitably, the
men asked for by civil firms were those who had formerly been in their employment
and were therefore skilled in their trade before enlistment, the very type in fact
which the Army most needed. Replacement in the next intake did not fully com-
pensate for such loss, firstly because it became increasingly difficult to find men
of similar skill who could be called up, and secondly because, however skilled a man
might be in a civil life, he was usually unacquainted with service equipment,
especially the more complicated instruments and fighting vehicles.
It was, more-
over, particularly inconvenient when the release of a man was asked for just after
he had completed a course of training on some Service equipment and had become
of real value to his corps, and for this reason the War Office was compelled, from
time to time, altogether to refuse releases in certain trades and arms.
This system of release for work of national importance undoubtedly served a
useful purpose and filled a real need.
It helped towards that flexibility by which
the best use could be made of individuals where they were most needed.
It could
have been very liable to abuse, but was singularly free from it in its administration.
What might have become a serious cause of loss of manpower to the Army was kept
always within bounds by the vigilance and firmness of the War Office and of the
Ministry of Labour and National Service.
It remains to speak of battle casualties and of other losses through discharge on
medical grounds.
The total number killed-including those who died of wounds—was just under
145,000 and the total wounded just under 240,000.
The corresponding figures for
the war of 1914-18 were just under 705,000 killed and just under i,665,000 wounded.
To make an exact comparison between the proportion of battle casualties in the
two wars would be very difficult, since it would be necessary to take into account
the difference in the strength of the Army in the two wars and the difference in
their duration.
In the earlier war the maximum strength of the Army rose to
about three and a half millions as compared with a maximum of two and a half
millions in the later war, but on the other hand the later war lasted for six years
while the earlier lasted for four.
Without entering into a complicated calculation
of the total "man-days" in each war, it may safely be asserted that the fall in the
number of casualties was not only an actual but also a relative fall.
The second war
reproduced neither the endless trench warfare with its mounting tally of daily
casualties nor the prolonged struggles of Ypres, The Somme, and Paschendaele;
even in the final campaign from D. Day in 1944 to V.E. Day in 1945 the losses were
not very heavy—31,000 killed and 94,000 wounded-and not to be compared with
those of any similar periods of intense activity in France in the former war.
About
35,000 of the total wounded were ultimately invalided from the Service, and the
proportion was not markedly different from the rate of discharges in the earlier war.
It was indeed fortunate that the battle casualties were as light as they were.
From 1941 onwards, the Army was always short of men fit for the strain of a fighting
arm in battle, and had the rate of battle casualties been higher it might not have
been possible to stage some of the operations which were undertaken without with-
drawing considerable numbers of men from other activities.
The distribution of
the nation's manpower between the fighting services, civil defence, the munitions
industry, agriculture and other essential work is an interesting and important study,
but it is outside the scope of this volume, which relates to the Army only.
It must
here suffice to say that, given the limitation of manpower imposed by the Govern-
ment, the Army was always working on very fine margins.
The final operation in
Europe was staged at the expense of everything else and drafting to other theatres
WO2T
12
of war was almost suspended. Had that campaign developed into the stalemate
of trench warfare or had there been a period of prolonged fighting with losses on
the scale of the Somme battles, it would quickly have become impossible to maintain
the B.L.A. at its original strength. Fewer names are written on the regimental war
memorials for this later war than for the war of 1914-18; had these new lists been
the longer, exhaustion might have come before victory was achieved.
Losses caused by sickness and disease are even harder to compare with those
of the former war than are battle casualties. Not only must account be taken of
the differences in maximum strengths and in the duration of two wars, but many
other factors have direct bearing on the rate of such discharges: for example, the
locations of troops and the climatic conditions under which they lived, the degree
of hardship to which they were exposed, the average age of troops, the strictness
of the medical examinations on enlistment.
Modern methods of hygiene and
prophylactics undoubtedly contributed to keep the average rate of sickness low,
even though a large proportion of the troops were for a long time in tropical or
semi-tropical climates, where there is much endemic and epidemic disease.
striking example of the improvement in prophylactic methods is given by the fact
that in West Africa the incidence of malaria among European troops dropped from
90 per cent in 1941 to 9 per cent in 1945.
Over the whole period of war, the rate
of discharges on medical grounds averaged about 2 per cent per annum and it is
interesting to note that apart from cases of pregnancy the average rate in the
women's services was about the same as that among the men.
Of other causes of wastage little need be said. Discharge of other ranks for mis-
conduct was very restricted, since such discharge might have become too easy a
method of escape for the unwilling.
It was almost entirely confined to cases of
gross depravity which made it undesirable to have the offender mixing with decent
men.
Under 500 other ranks were discharged for this cause.
The commissions of
about 1,800 officers were terminated by courts-martial or as a result of convictions
by the civil power. Many of these must later have been called up again in the ranks
under the National Service Acts. It is regrettable to record that over 97,000 other
ranks were struck off as deserters, although many of these subsequently rejoined
on apprehension or voluntary surrender.
It is an obvious platitude to say that avoidable wastage must be kept to the
minimum possible, but it is regrettably true that in some instances, and more
particularly in the earlier part of the war, wastage was greater than it need have
been
From September, 1939, to June, 1945, over 70,000 were discharged "Services
no longer required", which included those considered unsuitable for military service.
Unsuitability must always be a matter of opinion. There were certainly a number
of men among those called up who were of so poor intelligence that they could be
taught nothing or of so low moral character as to be incapable of improvement, and
whose presence in the ranks was a positive danger; but it is equally beyond doubt
that in some cases commanding officers and superior commanders were too prone
to the view "Let's get rid of him. It's only one man and he isn't much good to me".
It must be remembered that since no proper allotment of the better and worse
material was ever made among the three Services, the Army had to take all the
unwilling, the least intelligent and the least desirable, and it is remarkable what good
use was made of some very unpromising material.
Nevertheless, the "only one
man" outlook is very dangerous and if not strictly checked will certainly lead to
excessive wastage, and excessive wastage is bad for many reasons.
It is bad for morale that the men in the ranks should have reason to believe
that discharge is quite easy to obtain and that one can quickly get out by "swinging
the lead" or by being a nuisance to one's superiors.
Secondly, easy methods of
discharge are bad for commanding officers and for officers of all ranks.
If it is too
