to allow for an uncertain number of men obtaining priority through marriage. It
is true that an overriding priority was given to married women, but there are
special considerations applicable to women which will be discussed later.
In the
nature of things, the married men tended to be in the groups due to be released
early, and criticism on this point quickly died away, which probably indicates that
the men in the Service themselves and the nation at large accepted the decision
as reasonable.
The final point of controversy was whether all service should reckon of equal
value or whether some additional weight should be given to service overseas or,
alternatively, to service in an active theatre of operations only.
The relative value
of the service given by individuals has been a matter of acute controversy in many
Those who fought at Talavera and Salamanca looked down on the
"Belemites", and the remarks of troops returning from the Somme battles about
R.T.O.s and Town Majors will be fresh in many memories.
Whatever the feelings
of individuals may be, it is impossible to distinguish between one form of service
and another in a theatre of war.
Quite apart from any question of the respective
merits of different kinds of services, which may be exceedingly difficult to dis-
tinguish, the continual movement of units and individuals into and out of the
actual scene of operations makes it impossible accurately to check the periods which
would have to be valued differently.
But it is possible to distinguish clearly
between periods of service at home and periods of service overseas, and there is
much force in the claim that all service overseas should be reckoned at a greater
value than service at home.
Those who worked long hours day and night in
London during air attacks, often carrying a very heavy burden of responsibility,
may perhaps feel that their service was at least as valuable as that given in Gibraltar
or Cairo or Khartoum,
But the fact always remains that service overseas did
entail long separations from families and friends, especially in the darker days
when shipping was in extremely short supply and leave from overseas could not
be granted.
The differentiation between service at home and overseas was
acknowledged by the Service Departments, and service overseas would have been
reckoned at a higher value in assessing priority but for the practical difficulties
involved.
The real difficulties numbered four; two of comparatively minor importance and
two major ones.
If all service were counted the same, a man could be assigned
to a group and would normally remain in it.
If overseas service was reckoned at
twice or one and a half times the value of home service, it would have been necessary
to reckon his group afresh whenever he left home for overseas or returned from
overseas to home.
This would have been at least inconvenient but not insuperable.
Moreover, it was always considered desirable that priorities should be assessed on
information which the commanding officer of a unit in the field might have readily
available.
The soldier's Pay Book usually showed the date of birth and date of
enlistment with sufficient accuracy, but they were rarely reliable in regard to former
periods of service overseas.
Of the major difficulties, one was that it would have
been impossible to ensure that the men for whom the benefit was intended were
in fact released any earlier.
In the very nature of things those who would gain
priority by such a concession were, for the most part, still serving overseas, and the
main effect of the concession would have been to swell the earlier groups to such
a size that it would have been impossible to move the men home in time for release
in their proper groups.
It was of first importance that whenever a period was
allotted for the release of a group, all men in that group, whether at home or
abroad, should be released" within that period.
With the very limited shipping
available at the start of demobilization, a priority for overseas service would have
been in fact nugatory; a promise
would have been made which could not be
WOZY
72
fulfilled and confidence in the whole scheme would have been shaken at the
outset.
Finally, it must be remembered that at the moment when the demobilization
scheme was being finally shaped, it was probable that when hostilities had ended
in Europe there would be a large scale re-deployment of troops for the war against
Japan.
It was evident that the units already in the Far East would, in any case,
lose many of their best trained personnel at once and, even if it had been possible
to increase the homeward movement, the efficiency of units would have been seri-
ously impaired if they had lost yet more in the earliest groups.
For all these
reasons it was decided that all service must be reckoned equally and that com-
pensation for overseas service should take the form of increased leave on release.
One further question relating to service caused much debate.
It was often
strongly urged that those who had served in the auxiliary forces before the war
began should receive some reward for their patriotism by counting service rendered
before the date of mobilization.
On the face of it, the contention had much force,
but again there were considerable practical difficulties.
The amount of actual
service given in any one year by the several members of the auxiliary forces varied
greatly, and all sorts of claims for special treatment would undoubtedly have arisen.
If any former service were once admitted, it would be impossible to fix any limit.
At the moment of mobilization there were in the Army over 30,000 conscripts who
had already served for six weeks under the Military Training Act, and it would
have been indeed difficult to equate their position to that of members of the
Territorial Army, whose service was not whole time. It was finally decided that
no service earlier that grd September, 1939, should be reckoned.
In its final shape, therefore, the scheme of release was founded on a simple
combination of age and service, service being defined as whole-time service with
the Colours since 3rd September, 1939.
Periods spent in absence or under
sentence or on release, for which pay was not drawn, were deducted, provided that
the period extended to more than 28 days.
It remained to fix the ratio between
age and service.
In calculating "age and service" groups, the simplest method
obviously was to begin by arranging men in their order of age.
Since a man's
actual age changes daily, it is easier to calculate from his year of birth, which does
not change.
It is, for example, easier to group "all men born in 19I4" than "all
men aged 33", since at any given date in say 1947, some men born in 1914 would
have attained their 33rd birthday and some would not, and it was therefore decided
to ignore the actual day and month of birth (or actual age at any given moment),
and to group men according to the year of birth.
The next step was to weight the
age order according to length of service, thus making a younger man with longer
service equal in priority to an older man with less service.
The general trend of
opinion was that service should carry great weight and the first proposal was that
three months of service should equal one year of age.
The objections to this were
that it did not appear to give sufficient weight to the service element and that it
also made the numerical strength of the resultant groups very large, which would
certainly have made it necessary to fix priorities within groups; this would have
been most undesirable since these priorities must have been determined on factors
not recognized in the main plan.
To equate one month of service to one year of
age gave all weight possible to the service element, but in many cases the resultant
groups became
so small as to make any distinction nugatory.
The final decision
to equate two months of service to one year of age was
admittedly somewhat of a
compromise, but like many other compromises it served the purpose well, giving
groups of reasonable sizes and producing a scheme which experience proved to be
wholly workable.
The final plan, therefore, was founded quite firmly on the interest of the
