CHAPTER II
INTAKES DURING THE WAR
On ist September, 1939, the German Air Force bombed Warsaw and two days
later the people of Great Britain heard the Prime Minister announce that the nation
was at war. It is not the purpose of this volume to follow in detail the history of
the war, but to examine the methods of dealing with manpower, its problems, and
the courses followed at different times.
This chapter will, therefore, deal with
manpower intakes in general while succeeding chapters will deal with particular
aspects which demand separate treatment, namely, the provision of tradesmen, the
provision of officers, the provision of special classes such as doctors, dentists,
chaplains and nurses, the women's services, manpower from outside the United
Kingdom, drafting, and release during the war. The final chapter will deal with
the reduction of the Army by demobilization when victory had been won.
On the first day of the war three important Acts of Parliament were passed, the
Military and Air Forces (Prolongation of Service) Act, the Armed Forces (Con-
ditions of Service) Act and the National Service (Armed Forces) Act.
The first
of these enacted, briefly, that during the continuation of the emergency all men
who had entered any of the Services before the war would be held to serve not-
withstanding that their original engagements, entered into before the war, might
The Conditions of Service Act modified certain of the peace-time conditions of
service which would have greatly hampered manpower administration in war.
It permitted enlistments for an indefinite term, instead of for the fixed periods
provided in the Army Act and the other Acts governing engagements in the different
While enlistment on a normal Regular Army engagement was never
completely suspended, the very great majority of voluntary enlistments during the
war were for "the duration of the present emergency".
compulsory transfer of individuals from one corps to another, even against the
individual's wish. There were other minor provisions, all of which were intended
to remove any restrictions on the fluidity of manpower.
The National Service Act was the main authority throughout the war for the
supply of manpower to the Services. A second Act, making some amendments and
extending the principle of conscription to women, was passed in December, 1941,
but the main provisions of the original Act remained unaltered.
imposed on all males between the ages of 18 and 40 a liability to service in the
The Minister of Labour and National Service was responsible for
carrying out registration and medical examination, for issuing enlistment notices,
and for dealing with appeals for deferment and with conscientious objections.
Act followed closely the lines of the Military Training Act, which it superseded,
all registrations effected under this earlier Act being deemed to hold good under
the National Service Act. The machinery for operating the Act was the same as
that used for operating the Military Training Act; by great good fortune the
machinery was in being and had already been tested.
These three Acts, together with the Schedule of Reserved Occupations, gave
complete control over manpower. It is important to observe that the Schedule of
Reserved Occupations was not enacted by Act of Parliament. It was an administra-
tive measure of the Government and could, therefore, be altered as circumstances
demanded without new legislation. It was intended to prevent the indiscriminate
WO217/=2
calling-up of men who were urgently needed in industry and whose loss to industry
might seriously cripple the production of munitions.
The corollary to this was
an equally careful control over voluntary enlistment, which all the time remained
open to men of ages not yet made liable by Royal Proclamation to register under
the National Service Act. It would have been a manifest absurdity to defer from
call-up young men of, say, 25 years of age in some industry and at the same time to
permit the indiscriminate enlistment of older men from that same industry. Every
application for voluntary enlistment was, therefore, submitted at the recruiting
centre to an officer of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, who decided
whether the man might be enlisted or not, having regard to his age and occupation
and position under the schedule. In certain circumstances, the terms of the
Schedule could be waived, and disputed cases could be referred to a "Waiver
Committee" in London, whose decision was final.
The Schedule of Reserved Occupations underwent many changes. In its original
form it provided for block reservations, which automatically kept out of the Services
men of certain ages in certain occupations, irrespective of the exact work which the
individual might be doing. This had the outstanding merit of preventing in the
first days of war the indiscriminate loss of skilled men from industry, but in one
sense it achieved too much. Firms were, therefore, divided into "protected" and
"unprotected" according to the work they were doing, and in certain trades the age
of reservation for men in "protected" firms was lower than that for men in the
"unprotected". But from 1942 onwards the system of block reservation was
gradually replaced by that of individual deferment, and outside certain special
occupations more and more men became liable to call-up by withdrawal of block
reservation, unless the employer could prove to one of the special manpower boards,
which were now set up, the necessity for deferment. By reason of these changes it
often happened that a man was refused permission to enlist voluntarily and was
later called-up for service, which caused no little heartburning. That a man should
mind whether he was called-up or enlisted voluntarily was an unfortunate legacy
from the war of 1914-18, when conscription was not enforced until the war had
been long in progress and the first hundred thousand might well have felt them-
selves superior, but the passing of the National Service Act on the first day of war
in 1939 made any distinction between volunteer and conscript absurd.
On the outbreak of war in 1914 a vast recruiting campaign was opened, and
thousands of men were enlisted for whom there was neither uniform, equipment,
nor accommodation, and of whom many would have rendered better service at that
moment by remaining in industry. In 1939 a better planned method was adopted.
It had long been recognized that for many months after the outbreak of war the
supply of munitions and equipment and not the supply of men would set the limit
to the rate of expansion of the Army. The original strategic plan was, therefore,
to despatch four regular divisions to France at once, with the necessary corps and
army troops, and to despatch other divisions in successive contingents at the rate
at which they could be equipped. Training units were established for the different
arms, designed to give the required output of trained men monthly, and personnel
branches calculated the numbers of men required each month to maintain a regular
flow through the training units.
These demands were consolidated and passed to
the Ministry of Labour and National Service, due allowance being made for the
numbers joining by voluntary enlistment. The demands specified the numbers
required to join each particular training unit on a specified date, detailing trades-
men separately by army trades. In addition to these intakes to training units, some
intakes were, in the early months of war, posted direct to units of original and
duplicate Territorial Army divisions to replace men returned to industry, and the
unfit and immature withdrawn from these field army formations.
