mistakes were made.
There is the classic story of the fitter posted to a technical
corps who turned out to be a fitter in a tailor's shop, which may not be literally
true but does at least illustrate what some people thought was happening.
There were frequent complaints from training units that men posted as fully
qualified tradesmen were nothing of the sort and were quite unable to pass the
Class III test in the alleged trade.
The Army trade tests were in fact to some
extent out of harmony with modern industrial practice.
The Army tests were
designed to secure a tradesman who could work with hand tools under any active
service conditions without the aid of the mechanical resources of a factory: industry
had tended more and more towards specialization and the use of power tools.
A man might be a perfectly competent fitter in a factory and might be perfectly
correctly classified as such but unable to pass a trade test immediately on joining
because he was suddenly put to unfamiliar work with unfamiliar tools.
Greater understanding led to considerable improvements in the system.
were posted as "FQ", "E" or "T", that is as fully qualified, or learners or merely
men were not posted as mustered tradesmen
and could be transferred to non-technical arms if they failed to qualify as tradesmen
Service trades were broken down and tests modified to conform
more nearly to industrial practice.
For example, the old trade of Armament
Artificer was replaced by six different trades, since it was impossible to find men
with the versatility of the former Armament Artificer, who was a craftsman of very
high skill and all-round knowledge, formed by many years of Army training.
the posting of tradesmen was never really satisfactory until the introduction of what
came to be known as the "254" system in the autumn of 1942.
The Ministry of Labour and National Service introduced a Form, N.S. 254,
which was completed for every man who on registration appeared to be employed
in engineering or in an occupation allied thereto.
questionnaire, to be completed by the man, which covered not only his occupation
at the moment but his occupations over the preceding five years, any form of
skilled work done as a hobby, and his educational record. The recruiting officers
were instructed to make particular enquiry into men's hobbies in the course of
interview, and, if it appeared that a man had gained some valuable skill in pursuit
of a hobby, the recruiting officer could recommend that an N.S. 254 should be
completed, even though the man's main occupation was in no way connected with
engineering. By this method a great deal of unsuspected skill was discovered and
The completed N.S. 254 was sent to the War
Office and examined by expert officers who classified the men into three groups,
tradesmen, convertibles and non-tradesmen.
Tradesmen were those who appeared to be fully trained and capable of passing
at least the Class III trade test on joining. If a man could not be mustered in one
of the three alternative Service trades named on the N.S. 254, he was discharged
and returned to industry. Convertibles were first tried in a Service trade, but, if
they failed to make good in that, they could be transferred to any arm and trained
for ordinary non-technical duties. Non-tradesmen were either those who could
not be mustered as tradesmen because there was no Service trade comparable to
their civilian occupations, or those for whom it had been deemed expedient to
complete an N.S. 254 but who, according to the information disclosed, were
obviously not sufficiently skilled in any kind of trade needed in the Service.
who had too little skill were not included in the tradesmen's register but were
posted for general service; those whose trade had no Service counterpart were either
posted for general service or placed in the suspense register according to the
importance of their occupations in civil life.
Just as the introduction of Selection Testing and the General Service Corps
WO277/22
created a revolution in the proper sorting of intakes, so the introduction of the
N.S. 254 created a revolution in the methods of posting tradesmen. Originally
designed for men in the engineering and allied occupations, its use could be extended
to any types as circumstances made desirable, and it did ensure that each man's
qualifications were considered by officers who were properly competent to do so.
Since the introduction of the "ceiling" system in the spring of 1941, tradesmen
were included in the total maximum strength permitted for the Army; any propor-
tion of the intake allotted to tradesmen meant a direct reduction in the numbers
available for combatant duties.
Not until the N.S. 254 method began was it
possible to ensure that the limited intake of tradesmen was filled only by men of
the occupations required.
One other feature of tradesmen intake deserves notice. When the maximum
strength of the Army was limited, the establishments in some trades of less urgent
importance were considerably reduced; demands for them in intakes either fell
considerably or ceased altogether.
This was particularly the case with bricklayers,
carpenters and similar trades, and there resulted a large accumulation of certain
trades on the tradesmen register who could not be called up because there was no
demand for their trades.
Trades in which these accumulations occurred were
therefore starred by the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and if the men
were not required to fill vacancies in Service trades, they were called up for general
service posting. It happened, therefore, that some men in a particular trade were
mustered as tradesmen and drew tradesmen's rates of pay while others, who were
just as skilled in that same trade in civil life, were not posted as tradesmen.
Some
heartburning naturally resulted, but able-bodied men could not remain unposted
merely because there was a surplus in their trade, and the inequality was unavoidable.
Once the N.S. 254 procedure and the starring of certain trades had been finally
established, the machinery of calling up tradesmen from civil life did not materially
alter. The Service demands might be greater or less from time to time and the
available supply might vary, but the method of finding the supply to meet the
demand remained unchanged. But because it was soon apparent that the demand,
at any rate in the electrical and mechanical trades, would always outrun the available
supply, attention was early directed to the problem of making the best use of
material already in the Service, partly by the proper placing of tradesmen not
employed at their trades and partly by training new tradesmen from the beginning.
Precisely the same problems faced the industrial world. Britain entered the war
with a quite inadequate supply of munitions of all kinds for all three Services, this
inadequacy was aggravated by the slowness of industrial expansion in the winter
of 1939-40 and by the total loss of the B.E.F.'s equipment at Dunkirk. It is
scarcely an exaggeration to say that in July, 1940, we were almost disarmed, with
the threat of invasion imminent. The real problem was this: with an inadequate
supply of skilled men, how could we best not only manufacture equipment for the
Services but ensure its proper maintenance?
The only answer was to spread the
available skill to the best advantage and to train more.
Reference has already been made in Chapter I to the misplacement of skilled
men in the Territorial Army and to the possibility of applying the Schedule of
Reserved Occupations in peace.
Immediately on mobilization some 2,100 men
holding really key positions were released, and a little later a complete occupational
census was taken of all units of the Territorial Army, except units of A.D.G.B.
(Air Defence of Great Britain). As a result about 7,100 men, who were over the age
of reservation in their occupations and were not employed at their trade in the
Service, were released. The census also disclosed a considerable number who had
qualifications suitable for a Service trade and these were recorded on a card index
so that they might be absorbed into tradesmen's vacancies as soon as possible.
