but it was not in fact applied to any country other than Egypt. The British
Ambassador was authorized to order the registration of British subjects in Egypt
and in fact to carry out all the functions performed by the Minister of Labour and
National Service in this country under the United Kingdom National Service Acts.
By agreement with the Egyptian Government,
British Military Police were
authorized to arrest those who failed to obey enlistment notices.
The numbers
obtained were not great, nor was the quality very high, and the gesture had a political
more than a military value.
The peculiar status held by Great Britain in Egypt
at the time made it possible to enforce the operation of the Act, but in no other
foreign country were conditions similar.
The application of the Act to other
countries was mooted from time to time, but political considerations made it
preferable not to press the question.
Taken all in all, the assistance received from manpower from outside the United
Kingdom was very great and very valuable. In particular the use of African man-
power was on a scale hitherto quite unprecedented, and it is in the African Colonies
that the effects may be most lasting.
Thousands of Africans have seen countries
and manners other than their own and have mentally grown up. This is not the
place to speculate on the future of Colonial Government, but it is at least possible
that experiences of the African troops during the war may profoundly alter the
relations of the Colonies to the Mother Country in the future.
48
wO 277/=2
CHAPTER VI
DRAFTING
There is an old music-hall song, one line of which runs "We've got the men,
we've got the ships, we've got the money too". Money is, fortunately, outside
the scope of this volume, but ships and men are the very essentials of drafting, and
it was the plenty or dearth of one or other of these essentials that governed the
rate of drafting throughout the war. The conditions in the war of 1939-45 were
different from those which had obtained in 1914-18. In the earlier war the main
strength of the British Army was in France, which was but a short distance from
Great Britain.
India never became a major theatre of war; the Mediterranean
Sea and the Suez Canal were never closed to British shipping and the eventual
development of the route to Egypt by sea from Folkestone to Boulogne, thence by
rail to Taranto and thence by sea to Alexandria greatly reduced the risk of losses
at sea.
In the second war, the British Army fought in France only for two com-
paratively short periods at the beginning and at the end: for four years the major
operations were in Africa, Greece, Crete, Sicily, Italy, Malaya, and Burma; for
three of these years he funt, too, Hope, Niember, 9g, the roof sho rig
losses and withdrew troops from any active employment for long periods. It is
in general true to say that in the earlier war the limiting factor was always the
supply of men and not the lack of means of moving them. If the forces in Egypt
or Gallipoli or Mesopotamia ever went short of drafts, the cause almost invariably
was that no more men could be spared from the Western Front, whereas for a
large part of the later war overseas commands went short not so much for lack of
men to send as for lack of means to send them.
The first month of the war was naturally taken up with the despatch of complete
formations and units to France.
Units took with them their first reinforcements
and as there was little fighting and few casualties there was little demand for drafts
—a striking contrast to the first month of the war in 1914, which included the
desperate fighting and heavy losses at Mons and Le Cateau, in the long retreat to
the Marne and the victory there.
In October, 1939, drafting began on a small
scale and in that month some 3,200 of all ranks were sent.
It continued on that
scale or slightly larger until February, 1940, the main purpose being either to make
good deficiencies in units which had originally gone abroad below their full war
establishment or to replace officers and other ranks brought back to the United
Kingdom as instructors in the training organization.
By March, 1940, although there were still scarcely any battle casualties, normal
wastage through accident and sickness began to mount up and the formation of a
considerable number of new units was undertaken in France. Demands for
drafts became heavier and in March, April and May the numbers sent to France
monthly averaged about 12,000 or I3,000.
At this time a good deal of quite
unnecessary confusion arose through lack of control over the methods of demanding
reinforcements.
The proper channel for such demands was through 2nd Echelon
who controlled the base depots and knew how many and what types of personnel
they held, and who by receiving strength returns of units were in a position to
match supply to demand and to notify requests for replacements to the War Office.
Unfortunately a habit grew up of making departmental demands, often by telephone,
direct to the heads of services at the War Office, ignoring znd Echelon altogether.
