pg_0016.pdf:
27 Arma Be Maintenance Project
MOST
SECRET
Copy No. Al
section 14
TRANSPORT
POLICY
1. Until sufficient tpt is available for replenishment on a unit basis all
3-ton Go S.
lorries will operate as a Bde pool.
2. One tot pl. plus two tot. secs. RaA. So Co
are landing on evening of D day
to assist with replenishment of ann and P.O.I. They will bring fwd one
complete load in addition to their pre-load.
3. If Beach Sub Area vehicles are used for fid delivery to units, they must
be off-loaded and returned to Beach Sub Area at once.
Any delay to tpt by
misappropriation will render offenders liable to trial by Court Martial.
VOYAGE
4. Wherever possible, arrangenents will be made for a fitter to travel in each
craft containing MI.
LOADS
5. (a) Appx "C" shows loads of vehicles landing on D and D + 1.
(b) Appx "D" shows special loads of 3 ton G.S. load-carriers landing after
D + 1, and basic loads of Compo packs and petrol jerricans for certain
other vehicles.
(o) Natures of amn in GoS. load carriers will be in accordance with table
at Appx "E", When a partial load only is curried, batures will be reduced
as uniformly as practicable in proportion to the overall reduction in
(a) When balance of load of GoS. lorries shown in Appx "D" consists of petrol,
the normal 6% of lubricants and greases will be added.
Derv will NOT be
carried except by ARVs landing D day, as tanks will be replenished under
special arrangements.
6. After D + 1 a proportion of vehicles will be landed from MI coasters.
This will entail restriction of loads as follows
Vehicles whose unladen weight is less
than 5 tons
-
5 tons gross weight
Vehicles whose unladen weight is more than 5 tons
and less than 10 tons
10 tons gross weight
3 ton GoS. lorries loaded on MT Coasters will therefore only be able to carry
a pre-load of 14 tons. It is doubtful whether information will be available
prior to
Dday as to which lorries will be loaded on coasters after D + 1.
7. In additions
to loads shown, every vehicle landing D to D + 11 will carry a
tow-rope attached to front and looped ready for use, shovel,
wirecutters,
where possible pick. As many vehicles as possible landing after D + 11 will also
carry the foregoing.
Every B vehicle will oarry personnel
All vehicles will land with one pihtfit distilled water for topping up
batteries. This will be refilled as opportunity occurs.
8. All vehicles will have partly filled sandbags placed on the floor beneath
dvr and normal passergers.
REPLENI SEMENT FROM BMA
9. Replenishment from BMA will be in unit tpt. After D day the following block
times are allotted to
Petrol 1200/1500 hrs.
Supplies 14.00/1700 hrs.
Amn may be drawn at any time.

