pg_0008.pdf:
ee bolties
BRUSO VAN
Seton Chim
8. (b)Staffs Yeo and E.R.I. will mark dumps ( and if possible turn-off fron
nearest route to them) with metal signs bearing the letter
on a black ground,
size not less than 12" x 12", stuck in a cleft pole
at eye level. Ips towing porpoises will carry signs for this purpose.
(c) Porpoise dumps will be cleared by two M. 14's each of 13/18 H,
and E.R.Y. working in pairs as set out below.
comd of R.S.M.
or Sgt of H.Q. Sqn of unit concerned.
(a) 2 M.14's of 13/18 H. will stay with 13/18 H. R.H.Q. until either
porpoises towed in by 13/18 H. have been emptied,
or further ann has
been landed and can be made available for this regt. As soon as
they will report to Staff Captain via MP referred to in para 7(c) above.
2 M.14's of Staffs Yeo and 2M.14's of E.R.Y. under cond Staffs Yeo will
remain with porpoises being towed by Staffs Yeo until these are unshackled.
They will then clear porpoises to Bde amn dump
as soon as tactical situation
permits, after ascertaining its location from Staff Captain or guide at MP
referred to in para 7(c) above,
and discharging their pre-load there.
(e) Porpoises will be towed by M.14's to Bde amn dump as well as opened up
and contents loaded into M. 14's,
in order to concentrate amn as rapidly as
possible. At least 3 men in addition to cond and dvr will remain with
each M.14, and all available personnel will assist. Rapid turn-round is
(f)When porpoise dumps have been cleared, M. 14's will proceed to ReA.Ps for
use of R.M.O. In emergency, they may be released earlier on orders of
IMPLOYMENT OF UNIT AMN LORRIES
9. (a)3-ton lorries of 13/18 H will de waterproof in Vehicle Transit Area,
other suitable area clear of beach and immediately proceed to MP referred
to in para 7(c)
above. They will be under cand of an SSM,
who will have
a deputy. Both will land with,
and remain with, the vehicles on D day.
(b)As soon as the tactical situation permits they will dump their pre-loads
at Bde amn dump. They will then run shuttle service to bring amn from
Sector Stores Dunps to Bde amn dump.
(c) Lorries will be returned to Sector
Stores Dumps singly or in groups
two or more on orders of Offr in charge of Bde A Ech dump (see para 3).
He will hand the dvr of each lorry a slip of paper to show natures required.
(a) Crews will remain on each lorry to load and unload amn, until required to
take their place in tanks. Loading of lorries at Sector Stores Dumps will
be assisted by personnel of Beach Group.
(e)3-ton lorries of Bde H.Q., Staffs Yeo and E.R.Y. landing on third tide will
be met in Vehicle Transit Area under arrangements to be made by Bae H.Q,
and directed to Bde A Ech or Regtl A Echs in accordance with the tactical
(f) First Line lorries will be returned to units as soon as practicable arter
EMPLOYMENT OF RASC LORRIES PRE-LOADED WITH AMN
10. (a) Iwo secs
tpt pl 23 Inf Bde Coy RASC will land at H + 15 pre-loaded with
amn for 27 Armd Bde.
(b) They will be met under arrangements to be made by Bde H.Q. and guideo.
to Bde A Ech.
(c)On conpleting replenishment of tanks and discharging balance of load at
Bde amn dump lorries will return to Sector Stores Dumps to bring fwd a
further load. Natures required will be given in writing by Offr in charge
of Bde A Ech.
(a)After delivery of second load lorries will revert under control of CRASC.

