ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affectin
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
mportant phases
bordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
meers and the
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
sec. 36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
a his representatives.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ny, war diaries will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
the war diary.
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
VoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3)
il Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
ganisation and administration.
A It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
irom a war diary is an offence under the Offcial Secrets Acts.
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
ning the author. References
(Se P.S.. Vo diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
PARA. " _ Omitten
preparing aTy so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Important osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
at atisin lovements during the ast trenty-four hours and pres
vements during the past twenty-four hours and present disposition
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(i Treatin wie copy, dearly marked a such, of a cavaty or intenty bie or higher
SPECIAL NOTE. —The time entered should be the time the information or or la
the unit concerned. The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text
Teaches
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE/ SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
army.
Jnit. HQ 6. Airborne Div (resia
Incorporating HQ RASC att 6 A
Commanding Officer MaJ.CH. Sty
borne ba
Oxf Bucks.
eved ha]Ger. Rickcord 1 RUR as Coma
detailed for op "OVERLORD".
Is Head Capt
the necessary IOOs inspeption and
0900
LO00
0900-
Airborne Div (residues).
Was Dost
where it was reme
Transport reported to units of 6
nounced approx Il00hrs that today if D-1
preparation made for move of 634 and 636 Coys to GRAVITAN.
Move of 634 Coy to Grantham.
**636 Coy to Granthan.
Transport of 518 Coy reported to Units of 6 Airlanding Brigade to conver
them to airfields.
Released approx 2200 hours.
o. C.
518 Coy, on instruction
D. D.S.P. Airborne Ips, dispatched transport to Granthem area in batche
or 20 lorries at intervals of half hours during night 6/7 June
oadins of 63 Coy Transport during noming preparatory to remsupply
11 aircraft loaded by 2100 hours
• У.
Vt.47724/ 093 2,000,000 3/13 W. H. & S. 51/6375
tions.
ents in your Bulk Or
u have requested,
re of your doc
ts - Enquire at
documents are in use
sk for full details
101009
