ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations
of mobilisation or
operations,
important phases.
topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecti
Clear sketches showing positions of troops
bordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
and the number of other ranks
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
Othere and the number trither ranks folenge in of ani, tris should be
followers and of animals should be noted
(vii) Metsorological notes.
pec. 36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time the
hd his representatives.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be adde
hy, war diaries will be
PARA. .—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
and of each operation or
NoTE B. -See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
the war ciary
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
request, thought whthe or no, to the didey short be kot be a 13)
The War Office, London, S.W.0ugh the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
and to
•vide dava dion we Seo to as object is to furnish historical record of operatint,
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
It will be
daily
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, o1
A.F. C.2118.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc
NoTE.-It should be
made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
ParA. 3.-Omitted
PARA. 4-
—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
and each will have a brief descriptive headin
Appendiaccount of
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
ning the author. References
(See FiSt. Vol diaies will conform to the regulations for drating orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
ucceeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echel
for transled on to the dr of the sueding month direct to the fier c 2nd chelo
(*) Imp decist ostets, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(ii) Daily locations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
larch tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
SPECIAI. NOTE. — The time entered should be the time the information or
the unit concerned
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the tex
Airborne Div (residues).
This HQ will then arrange for the necessary IOOs inspeption and
issue disposal
instrs.
Army Post Offioe,
Instructions regurding War Die
2331
cover
Army
WAR DIARY
YNTELLAGENCE/ SUMMARY
Delete neuaing not recuree
Jnit. HQ. 6. Airborne
Incorporating HO RASC att 6 A:
Commanding Officer Maj CH. Sty?
Place
Monih and Year... Jun 44...
Hour
summarv of Events and Intormaton
Jun
Field.
Major C.H. Styles, 2 0x1 Bucks. relleved haJor Record. RUn asbou
6 Airborne Div Residues - latter offr
detazled tor on "kLorD'
6 Airborne Div Residues "g" Instrs No. l issued
Instes isued for fm of im rovised Goner. Transport-Goy
-418.
borne b.
2 OxP Bucks.
lo appchuee
nx "A"
Annx 3 fin order
WAR DIARIES SECTION
14 JUL 1944
G. H.Q, 2nd Echelon
W1.11724,058 2,000,000 8/48 W. H. & 5. 01/001
(WAR DIARY IN RESPECT OF HQ RASC, 6 ARBORNE DIV ATTACHED)
ents in your Bulk Or
u have requested,
re of your doc
- Enquire atl
documents are in use
sk for full details
