ILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
y of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
ubordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ficers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vil) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Sec. 36), and personal
ad his representatives.
ny, war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Nour i bey question of doubt whether on not a whar diary should be kept by a unit
The bar will London,, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of Stato (S.D.3),
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
ong to ponide data pot which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
AF. Mile entered up nah
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
OTE.—It should be made clear that the offcer who initials the entries is the commander
I other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
LARA. 3— Umuled.
PARA. 4- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(*) Imp decisit os ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
11) Daily locations.
lovements during the past twenty-four hours and present disposition.
larch tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
111) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
liaries of units will be sent within state, The War Office.
nd i chelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECT NO. F. The in entre tould he to time the fren in te movies
411O.
repared in sunnies, the cover i te
Month and Year July, 19W.
WAR DIAKY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
NIL for Whole Month (War Diary for HQ RASC att)
Unit. HQ 6 Airborne Div (Residues
(incl HQ RASC.)
Commanding Officer Major C H. STY
BAH
63 Coy please provide
expedients from own resouroes.
with necessary training
maunde
zoz Rlanke
100 Thunder Flashes.
Smore Canemtong.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
1 4 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
raining expodionts
ponsible
le on
To ben
/12/20.
ci-
TARK
247.
ents in your Bulk Or
i have requested,
e of your doc'
- Enquire at
ocuments are in use
k for full details
1012000
