TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
mobilisation or
oprations popographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
dinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ficers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given ahove but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
36), and personal
representatives.
ar diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NotE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
cial Secont and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTt. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(1) Imp daint os tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
1) Dare cation in thee ent dens then at twenty four hours and prese
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA, 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows : —
") Delorwarherone hered, to the sal copy a th dire to the preceding m ch an
be forwarded on the
for transmision the hear of the sure being month dirat to theone are attachelon
the unit concerned.
SPECT NO. T The one entered stood is the tine the ten i he tex it roches.
Month and Year... JANUAY 1944
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
Irmy Form
Unit 241 H.Q. Provost Coy, C.M.P.
Commanding Officer Capt. J.W. Glen
References to Appendices
13
New Years Day 1944,
Main body moved from Ayr towards new location.
Main body arrived at new location - Spey Bay Hotel, Morayshire.
A.P.Jl. 1 Corps, Major Godfrey-Porcett visited Company in p.m.
Sections retured from Leith and Portabello to new location.
I/Cpl, lackinlay in Bridge of Bern Hospital following accident en route back.
Pour N.C.Os despatched to C.T.Q. Inverary on Waterproofing Course.
paled
Capt. C.D.G. Pearson, S. Lanes. Regt assuned command vice Capt. Glen as.
#/Lieut, to 185 Provost Company, G.ll.P.
Scottish Cma
0.C. visited A.P.M. 3 Br. Inf, Div at Inverness. D.A.Q.11.6 / visited
Company on unofficial visit.
1800
Lieut. Glen and Lieut. Beard returned from leave.
0900 - A.P.N. 3 Br. Inf. Div visited Company to inspect administration and
1 700
supervise handing over of Company to Capt. Pearson.
Cochianso
Cpp:
OC. 241 MO PROVOST COY, C.M.P.
22293 Wt. 33096/1140 1,000m 12/40—McC & Co Ltd-51-8212 Forms C2118/22
37 3 1
Not
documents in your
documents in your Bu
for the date you have reque
requirements.
or more of yo
requirements
more
