c. 36), and personal
his representatives.
o war diaries will be
cept Irom the nist udy on cmovumien.
NorE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
i sub-unt wil be ye queti, thouth he wittic on as ta ther diady should be kept by
referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Ofice, London, S.W.1.'
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
па 10 oroce 204
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
rganisation and administration.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
ordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and the
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
number of other ranks of followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation of
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
See F.S.R., Volum
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
ToTt. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.- Omitted
PARa. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
d decisions taken
1) day ate in he case entage it or at torent, fou hour ast prese
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
SPECIAL NOTE. -The time entered should be the time the information or order rea
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if kn
Place
FRANCE
11
12
14.
thailable
count and fo
Month and Year.. JUIX, 19440
Hour
1545
підтов
VAR DIARI
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C. 2218.
Unit211. HQ. PROVOST. COY. C.M.P.
Commanding Officer apt. C.D.G. PRARSON.
References to Appendices
2 NCO's on duty at Band Stand in Rest Centre, PETIT HIER. Band to play
Свів
1545 hrs for 1 Corps Tps on
rest period.
ombined RN. HM, Army & RAF search and Identity Check up of all persons
Сол
nd buildings in
Section 56 again loaned to 245 HQ PROVOST COY, for duty in LUC SER IR Area. (
Coul
OC and It. JONDS to REVIES for interview with AFN 11 I of C Area. Subject: - Coll
Transfer of It. JONES.
APIl. 11 I of C Area in Area on visit. PI Cage raided for looted property. 6 NCOs arrestea.
Cal
Coy Pay Parade, It. KIAY returned to 601 Coy (VP) HQ from PW Cage.
Сал
Causeway Club for Ips opened on Queen Red Beach Area.
Convoys passing through 'C' Iateral towerds Fast for attack at 0400 hrs.
Cal
2359 Good liaison
0400
with 3 Br Inf Div Pro Coy. Forward movement for attack.
Attack by RAF (450 planes with 2500 tons of HI) on Panzer concentrations around CAN. COLl
2000 Gun barrage
opened up whole front
to back up RAF attack. Results very good.
Devastation in Panzer Concentration Areas.
NAR DIARIES SECTION
O.C. 73 Coy (IC) Coy AP came over to liaise ref TO arrangements.
• MBE. and HQ Staff (Advanced) to CARY with DAPM.
(Map 1/25000 CAIN area) Rue Isadore Piene, Report Centre at Eglise St, Stienne.
SHQ at 025687. CoNo:
O.C. appointed unpaid/DAPM. of 101 Beach Sub Area.
(rear)
сон
10 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
1000
E.M.F. inspection of all vehs, arms, G.1098. V.0. Controlled Stores.
Parades at HERMANVILLE and COLLEVIILE for 14 July. Band Concert at OUISTRIAM under
Not all documents in your Bub
for the
date you have reque
requirements
One.
or more of yo
requirements
- more
Infor
