36), and personal
is representatives.
war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTe C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, thr
the War Olie, Lootern, . through the usual channels, to the Under Secretary of State (& irit
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
A.F. C.2118.
it 2ill.e intsted up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
xtraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
OTT. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande
• other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical worl
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
PArA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
id decisions taker
auly locations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units of of formations are of assistance.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
f mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NotE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
) A cope of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W. 3009) and of each operation or
order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume ‹
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ji) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
I unic. incindino
operations furnished in the tes or maps relating thereto, to s
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows : —
En he dions of transmit be so record one at done treate custody.
I of three months to the ote is
the unit concerned.
no NO. Th The in entered diola be he ting the stren in rendit ten
ENGLAND
2215
wil the
Month and Year. JUNE 1944
Date
Tour
Army Form C. 2018.
WAR DIARY •
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Unit.. 241 H.Q. PROVOST COY, c.M.P.
Commanding Officer
Capt. C.D.G. PEARBUN
Kelerences to Appendices
6.
Company still in Marshalling Areas under M.C. (Iceroise "Overlord").
Coc
L.C.I. and L.S.T. craft loads embarked.
"D" day. Postponed 24 hours owing to rough weather.
"D" day. Beach Corporals landed H + 20 (H = 0730 hrs) •
Col
Con
Beard and Beach Sections landed at H + 45.
Ti Cut Jones End Dump Sections Landed at H + 120.
Remainder
of Company in various Serials all landed by H + 5 hrs.
During early stages extremely heavy mortar and gunfire was directed on the
beach.
Many landing craft were hit and assault troops had a very diffioult
time until
approximately H + 6 hrs.
nd traffic on the Lateral
Exits were completed by H + 4 hrs.
apart from the vicinity of the gun areas,
as flowing well by H + 8 hrs.
Signing equipment was lost up to 25%
but pointsmen who were following up the advancing troops manned all points
up to and including the "p" Lateral by H + 6 hrs.
At H + 8 hrs Lieut. Jones cormenced B.M.A. recce. with 2nd 1/c
6 Beach Group but did not complete it as the "g"
Lateral was still being
contested up till H + 16 hrs.
After this time darkness prevented further
reconnaissance and even in the a,m. of D + 1 the reconnaissance was still
uncompleted owing to many
strong points on "c"
Lateral.
Liaison with
9.C., 245 Provost Goy, C.M.P.
was maintained all night and a new T.C.
plan put
into execution at 0800 hrs. D + 1.
Tweedale and I/Cpl. Hilliard were killed in action during
"D" day on
WAR DIARIES SECTION
6 - JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon.
Conl
5176575
•A 1169
ra sd oT
2qiò)
100 I bas
D.H.D yd
Not all documents in your Bu
for the date you have reque
requirements.
One.
requirements
- more
