NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA. 2.- A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ind to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
AF. C.2118, It is
eat the try faction a hy the oficer detailed to keep it, on
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
Nort.— It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 1- In so far as they, are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
() and atant os der, instructions, reports, mesages or despatches received and issued,
(* Pay ate i ocean during the at trey done he or and preene dipositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174):
( mobilisation or
(r) Operation Counts peation mait,
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
of cet to the caber of the the followers and of ari, should be
umber of other
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
followers and of
should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NotE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notioe.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
ParA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
war diaries will be
(* Ace of to intruction (se using an A see) and of each operation or
or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
nd cách vin the text of the retin
App his will be
ming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
be forwarded on the first
twine Daries intelle
Month and YeaMAY, 1944•
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit 241. HQ. PROVOST COX. C.M. POLICE.
Commanding Officer Capt. C.D.G. PEARSON
cererences to appenaces
1/3
0850
0100
10
11
12
13
14
15
1445
Exercise "FABIUS". Company in Marshalling Campa.
"D" Day of Exercise postponed 2u hrs owing to inclement weather.
"D" Day. Successful day for Coy. Movement through exits good.
col
Сосв
Conference ref dispersal. 0700 hrs Dispersal under Coy arrangements, ended 0930 hrs. 1230 Coy lack in coul
Company resting in Billets.
M.T. Maintenance and G.1098 check of Arms and equipment.
сосв
•WAR DIARIES SECTION
O.C. to see A.P.M. 21 A/Gp reference general Coy enquiries.
Coll
o.c.
to see A.PM. 1 Corps ref conference held at Beach Sub-Area HQ on 9th inst.
G. H.CCoepd Echelon
D.AP.M, visited Coy on Administrative business. D.A.P.M. 102 Beach Sub-Area visited Coy
reference operational vehs. ¿ sec to 101 Beach Sub-Area under Sgt. WOOD.
Coll
Conference at B.Gp. HQ subject requirements and enquiries in regard to Ex "OVERIORD" • Coul
MTO and 3 N.C.Os. to SHREWSBURY to hand in 21 M/Cs.
z see under Sgt. WOOD returned from 101 Beach Sub-Area.
cal
сал
O.C. visited C.0. 5 Beach Gp reference "OVERLORD" .
Cp/s BENSON. & CHATT and I/Cpl. STHPHENSON posted to R.H.U. GRAVESIND, D.A.P.M. visited
Cou
Coy ref
"OVERLORD"
Capt. RUPERTI, RE, gave lecture on Mines "s" type and "Teller".
signs, Sub-Section to 101 Beach Sub-Area on security duties coul
Vt.47724.993 2,000,000 3;48 W. H. & S. 51/0675
29900
Not all documents in your Bu
for the
date you have reque
requirements.
or more of yo
requirements
more
