TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
Optated out peration i it hoot iportant out post, fast of rope ne
important phases.
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
in addition the be of other ran so lowers anil stores, transport, the.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Occur, or Fe to to strel entered up not in i order de in th ve thut t tho time they
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
and of each operation
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume or
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
the war diary.
Not be question of ente wither or not a the diar should to sit ky a a
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
The War Office, London, S.W.1.'
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data
uture improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
to be noted that
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-0mitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
"*) Impotent osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(* Pairy tate i love saring the past renty our hours and present dispostions.
(is) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA. 6.
(Sec F.S.R., Volume II).
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Hour
B. L.A
Sher 10/2
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Commanding Officer M/ 00s
Summary of Events and Information
6 ORe epiloato Puter t UK. Stores
tpla
ad o/ atore eteens o /Can
Army Form
References to Appendice:
6 oRo PASC. Then
Kelment
tral / age Lake totall
dillacal.
5
- OCT 1011
1450 Vel put eft camp - vert chos
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd. 51-1541)
2 .A 11s9
nents in your Bulk Oi
ou have requested,
ore of your doc
ents - Enquire at
re documents are in use
Desk for full details
101000
