bate.
Name: A
Bulk Order table:
dated 12/9/Wke
came davy ony, and are o de more an
same day
en you have finished:
75. 7/902 RAVIRS, A.J.
- 39 COY RASC (Gon Iot)
B.E.M.
and ran over
a trailer driven
This NCO immediately got out of his
He unloaded the trailer and had
It is considered
he above statement cannot be corroborated, but was obtained as a result of hearsay.
7/14312666 DUr INGOLDBY P.G.
299 Coy RASC (Gen Pot)
B.E.Me --
At approximately 1200 hrs
D+t drivers Gibson and Ingoldby were approaching a
coaster in order to collect a load when they saw another DUKW in difficulties.
There was a strong sea running at the time
the DUKW was swamped.
Drivers Gibson
immediately steered their DUKW to where the other
and between them they were able to pull the driver out of the sea by
He was unconscious at the time and wilst ono gave
but 2 th i not the a to pin the chi diven conta mangod
artificial respiration to the casualty.
By the time they reached the Beach
Dressing Station the driver was again conscious.
T/14329131 DVE GIBSON G.I..
299 Coy RASC (Gen Ist) _ B.E.M.
go in to 100 hot 10 hen i sa a The d in approhing a
There was a strong sea running at the time and eventually the DUKW was swamped.
Drivers Gibson and Ingoldby immediately steered their DUKW to where the other had
sunk, and bat hook.
and between then they were able to pull the driver out
of the sea by means
He was unconscious at the time and whilst one gave artificial
respiration, the other tried to find the second driver of the swamped DUKW.
10 ton to the ast and yed choy evin che act are a tation
the driver vas again conscious.
r are guaranteed to be available
r they may have special viewing
Euments have special viewing
at the Information Desk to arrange access
lents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
or full details
39 Coy RASC (Gen Ipt)
M.B.E.
ascientious and loyal manner.
Lo that ittle extra which means so much.
During the time he has been on active service he has continued to fulfil his duties
in a most efficient and commendable manner.
For the past month,
on tha at man hoth to the death of Cat, Dada ( a ho to), the .
reparing a diary :-
Importan
1) Dally locat
larch tabic
11) Important:
