voy conds Conorenco - 1730 hrs 27 DEC L.
Major W.I. Payntor, Major J.C. Taylor, Coot. J.W.J. Morris,
de Lochom,
Tit. Donbret,
Rosort was madc by RS Ponton rogarding Provost arrongenonts now in hend.
To trom 11 Coy
would havo to bo
chanrod as ho dous not spoak Enlish.
This was
roportod by tho co to have
rocoived attention.
CRASC connonted on the turn out of tho non on tho parade hold this morning.
that
many
are unshaven and rocuired hair outs vory badly.
It had
mon walkod about the stroots in a vory
slovonly state o...,
boon obsorved that numorous®
etc,
and this vas drown to tho attention of the Coy Conds for
no in oke to a on
CRASC statod his vious regarding
the purchase by
Dal ion ORs of S irits fron
Tot lo and it was arrand thet Coy Cords should includo in Coy Ordors, an order to tho
Pruct that the purchaso or Spirits by ORs was forbiddon.
It ves clinoa to the Coy Conds that the postal arrangenents would bo mado
alar by the Iritish Postal authoritics on 29 DEC 44.
Coy Conds voro instructod thet these must bo submitted throuch
At the perco this mornine, it was observed that nunerous porsonnel
Moto si thout the
cornect badros of rank.
Coy Cones toro instructod to provide list
of doficioncios to lajor Paynter so that those my bo obtrined.
Renors: Injor Payntor advised that the issue of those ins fell in hand with Doro.
advisod that application had boon made to War Orfico for issuo of
101/ BaGELo Dross to nil ranks.
Cond 12 Coy reisod question of whother it is rossiblot issue adcitionl
CRISC explained that men were bein
fod on standari
Hone Sorvice scal of mitions and that nothin: more could be done in the mattor.
Cond 12 Coy askod for vohs to be providod to tost his porson-
with 32 vons and. 1 cor for troining pur, osos.
ms and immunition
¡loral possession pe arms and ammunitio
OR'SC oxplainod dificultios of porsonnol loin found in
This has boon arran od with the Bank but to a linit of
Coy Conds advised that reconnodation stores most not bo
their rossonsibility.
This is to camenco 28 DEC.
footin will ontinue at the
itajor Taylor explainod
propraine.
W.T. Instructors.
rate of 30. to 60 or day until
Tost-
for oxhibitic
"anonstmtion squd vill be providoa, elso P.I., Drill anc
by comonstration smud.
12 Coy to bo mado followin the domenstration.
Enquirios rogerdin exporioned
28 DEC 44
dvrs of
Doth Coys to pereto at 1415 hrs, 28
1100 hrs in lernin hon Porte.
bo dividod on vill
30 DUG - P.T. end Drill.
orie hole tith onch of 11 and 12 Coys.
Is fron arturnoon of 29 DRO, denonstention squat
111 treinin
to be trans
on anilbility of 250 men por
Dononstratin aqued. to be noconnodated by. 12 Ory tomporrily.
15 for Motor Cyclists courso nd ronindor to lo divided into 7 scures.
includod on li0s courso.
211 soction Cols to be
Car cerengenants bo undo for fol inn parsonnel to ronit money direct
WO171/2232
de guaranteed to be a
éy may have special v
ents have special viev
le Information Desk to
fare in use elsewher
details
