Report by NO. In CRASC 21 Toẻ Coln
on Polcion G.I. Coys.
IPPX F
to tho conditios
of recruitmon in
e guaranteed to be a
ey may have special v
ents have special viev
he Information Desk to
are in use elsewher
details
1. Mal nutrition durin; the occupation.
Spoll of cold wonther and for in. Inrland at the timo of transit.
cross infection which securs honover men are
Tho gonoral physi uo of tho mon on the helo,
is not rood, and this is am ravatod
20 dount by thoir bad dontal condition.
Carious tooth and acute ulcorative in ivitis
abound, duo largoly to the non uso of the tooth brush.
In addition,
the avorare age
of tho mon is hich, and it is to be apected that a
cod roportion of them will not.
stand up to tho oxiconcios of activo sorvico espocially durine the wintor months.
The wastaro of public monoy and expense could bu decroased by a much more caroful
modical oxamination of the mon before enlistment.
Proforably they should ho brought
boforo a Modical Doard end a syston of cate oriention institutoa comparablo to that of
In particuler, caroful exanination of visurl acuity should be carrica
Is a satisfactory standord of vision.cannot be obtain-
Undor the present syston of modical ermination on recruitment, mon with sorious
organic disenses who cannot possiblo 3o or any use to an Arny in the Fiola are being
their only modical entororisation is 'fit for activo sorvico',
insufficiont to verrent their cischerre fron the Amy but
of sutriciont sovority to
nake thon inanpablo of purfomin satisfactorily, the job for which they vore enlisted
and trained.
It vould o2:
oar that the hol inn Amy Luthoritios aro not fully are how arduous
the lite of on RiSe driver is on Activo Sorvice.
Prom our on experience in Franco
and. bolium, concoinlly curin o cretionl ur oncy, and thon the I
of C is lon, Drivers
must to cape lo of underain Ion
hours of worle with little sleop
for
many days.
a mon hysicily incopailo of those domnds continue to be recruited
ho vastare of man pover vill be roet, and valuble tine will havo beon lost trainin
unsuite? lo pursonnel.
Examples of con vith sorious or cnic disonse cIroady onlisted are:
1. Mon with rovon historios of potic vloors.
2. Soldior with ovidonce of sovere rhoumatic hoart discase.
3.
Soldior with radiolo ical ovidenco of a cortic nourysm with clinical
history of dyspnon and tho had boon wered by
to undortake
his mediocl sarisone not
any torm of sovere exereise.
co be opteined).
(Confimation of this is still
4.
Soldior with salivnry opitholion recontly runovod at oportion and still
undorn in doop X Rey troatnont.
5. Soldior suftoring fron sovore ataxy of mit.
walkin in a strai ht lino).
soriolonionl confirmation to bo outainod.
(Con lotoly incapable of
Clinically a sovere cose WDES DORSUI,IS
WO171/2232
