kept trom the tirst day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.1. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
matict hour at sketches showing positions of troops at
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishen foster fat.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
n addition in the case of units on
the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or FEet to hould emered up not in the vete es are ho vi hit be the time they
is representatives.
, war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
) A copy of cach test retin ( ding the pete sered by of each pertin or
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
or one pete thent ted i ete, hot the offer eho is to die in dierica to commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
nearns a dily so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
" Ind dent os dare, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
* Pay ate Meet due us to at terent outhout and recent dispositions.
(ti) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(Se F.S.R., Voin dingies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :-
the mi Co No. The the or there trod be to tin the pren in the tong
Place
INVERNESS
Date
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
March 1944
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit 21 L of C Transport Colum, RASC
Commanding Officer It.Col. H.B. HOFCROFT
References to Appen
CRASC held conference for all 0Cs of
units under command. 12 Officers
in attend ance.
Conference opened 1500 hrs closed 1700 hrs.
CRASC attended indoor deployment exercise with 101 Beach Sub Area.
Суварь.
Sjbupe.
CRASC interviewed OsC 101 Gen Ipt Coy and 299 Gen Tpt Coy.
CRASC and 2 1/c proceeded to location of Bx. 'Baron' to take part in planning.
Capto Miles, W/Shop OFficer From I,T.F, reported for duty and attached to Soupe.
299 Gen Ipt Coy.
Adjutant to HQ 101 Gen Ipt Coy to conference held by CRASC. 2 i/c and
Езварс.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
OsC 101 and 299 Gen Ipt Coys in attendance. Details planned for practive
driving on and off ICTs for DUKV drivers of both doys.
Training and office routine continued.
2 2 APR 1944
Cape: H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Training and office routine continued.
DUKW drivers of 101 Gen Ipt Coy and 299 Gen Ipt Coy started training at
Chanonry Pt - 6 ICTs available and 5
DUKWs per ICT.
Practiced driving
on and off both at sea and when ICT was beached. Adjt saw training.
facesa
Out.
*0391. Wt.48123/1073. 3193, 2/43. Wy.I.P. Gp.658.
datod 12/9/41.
FIE
Bulk Order are guaranteed to be available
rested, or they may have special viewing
f your documents have special viewing
Enquire at the information Desk to arrange access
re documents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
e day only, and are to be minisneo
ive finished:
