ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
pordinate command
c. 36), and personal
his representatives.
war diaries will be
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and +h.
number of other ranks or
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
iN one Fronto should be mered up not in the order i ren ho i ht be aho time they
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
Ne al and ta at or nine ly to other, desting to kop c
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
oF other pete shout he in de cleat, hot the offer who is to the in ries is the commander
(See sA Vum fies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
prepaRe aty so far as they are applicable, the fallowing points should be recorded when
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
() Impotenton ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
an at rate one tries the pat bey one her and preme dietin.
Month and Year...
Date
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form
Unit HQ 21 Transport Colum, RASC.
Commanding Officer It. Col. H.B. Tr
References to Appendices
LOFT, RASC.
3
Exercise LRAPYRAR finished. Ipt details issued for the olearance of
Exercise area in respect of tps and stores. HQ returned to Rear HQ in
INVERNESS.
Office routine continued.
CRASC's conference of all Offrs Capt and above of Gen Ipt Coys to discuss.
the traffic problems which resulted in Exercise IRAPYRAR. Coma 101 Beach
Sub-Area attended - 15 RASC Offrs.
CRASC proceeded on leave p.m.
2TC visited 299 and 39 Gon Tpt Coys also 96 and 138 DIDs.
Office routine continued.
299 Gen Tot Coy to CHONONRY POINT for DUK training with IST.
Excellent
results.
2IC held tpt conference of Gen Ipt Coy Cond re Exercise HANDSUP. AS
101 Gen Tpt Coy to CHONONRY POINT for DUKW training with IST.
only available until 1500 hrs but results of training good.
Commenced packing prior to move Exercise HANDSUP.
Loading vehs for Exercise HANDSUP.
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd, 61-1541)
er table
and are to be tintshec
have finished
anteed to be available
save special viewing
on Desk to arrange occess
• Enquire at the
