ZEZZILLLOM
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
!
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
!
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
and establishen to strength of teards aalies the is sho un be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
c. 36), and personal
(viri) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice. At the
1. Even to siould be entered up, act in the order as aven who me tht be ho time they
each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
!
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Not C.- Any quetion of doubt wither or not to the dhar short by off by aunt.
The War Office, London, S. W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide dat upon which to base future improvements in army traming, equipment,
Ar. ail be intered in maty, tach entry faction a by tientifier depeed to keep it, on.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
Nott.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Ind deist os ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
i March tables in the case of large its of ot formations are of assistance.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the war diary.
( Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(See F.s.., Voi diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
2nd editons be transmit be one cord on at one torea mouts to tin
the sEe NoT The time atred told bo to tin the ventine rea
Month and Year. JAN 44
Date
Hour
Place
BRAHAN
CASTLE
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
DDST 1 corps visited 138 DID and
238
Petrol Depot.
Exercise 'Smash' cancelled.
S Sup O to Comars conference HQ 101 Beach Sub Area.
S Sup 0 visited 138 DID and 238 Petrol Depot.
Normal Training, maintenance and office routine continued.
2 1/c returned from Senior Officers Course OTS RASC Southend.
Assumes
coumand of HQ.
Film show for troops in 'Brahen Castle',
Soccer match versus CRE 103 Works. Result 6 - 0.
Adjutant proceeded on leave.
2 i/c and S Sup O to Comars Conference.
Warning order of concentration
of HQ 101 Beach Sub Area. Move to Inverness on 12 Jan 4+. Accommodation
not satisfactory, means splitting of HQ and sharing
with CRE Works.
A ragged arrangement.
I/cpl. Bailey attached to 6 Beach Group for Exercise 'Crab'.
CRASC returned from leave.
Wt, 34859 1676 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 51-1676
Wt. 84859, 1078 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 51-7676
Army Form C. 2118.
Unit. HQ 21 L of O Transport Colum,
Commanding Officer ItoCol. H.E.HOER
References to Appendices
Jackso Carraajo H
12/9/22k
cable
Bulk Order are guaranteed to be available
lested, or they may have special viewing
of your documents have special viewing.
• Enquire at the information Desk to arrange access
ire documents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
ave finished:
