Name: Albert Duan
Date of visit: Thursda
alans
Onal Archives ‹noreply@nat
visit - Thursday 09 October 20
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
•.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
6) Each trans of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
i Commanders of detachments of a unit
Âv) fier i/s G.O. 2nd Echelon, oficers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept Nom the As the case em bodiations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras, 1. 3 and 7
(vi) Cha
ure and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
men of strerrah.ss
vii) Meteorological notes.
vli) Summary of important information received, whether military or political
1 e entered up, cat in th, ever i an bi, it at he time they
PARA. 5. —Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i ovation of
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
anders of formations.
(Sce FAS.., Voll laries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
ANOS
or oNer pet or should be made dear hot the oficer we deia to do en it a tie commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(*) Imd decist os tars, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(i Day oats in teement during the ot torenty fouate of and present dispostions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the unit concerned.
CAN i tie it he even hold be the tina the Biven in the rode
nown
FELT
Month and Year.
Feb 1944
Place
Hour
INT
M. 122831
4th
Meny more V.O.U.M. 's r
Units and And Car Reg
8th And Bde - one of
command..
Discussed th
Five more Railway wgns ar.
received - No guntowers yet ar
Spoke to Mobilisation Branch, C.0.
Bde. Arranged for two lS of 8th Aamd Bae to proceed to Domington on
5th to check their C1098 Equipment.
A.D.O.S, visited Dump and arranged
with R. Es to repair lavatories and alter lights.
One milway truck fron C.0.1. Old Dally.
Unable to visit Units, car off road, A.D.O.S. visited Siding, 3 trucke.
being cleared, all fron C.O.D. Ola Dalby.
Hoved to new location at Landsdowne House, Newmarket.
Spoke to 3.0.W.0;
8th roma Bao xe me sonal equipment for his units, proceeding antisfactonity.
Под олем
SHot na01
SISTE IN 700990S
629L
09€/LLL OM
96
