F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
11) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARTES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close ‹
of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
heir formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
weadons, chu
ement, tactics, e
which
the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
nATe da. i see tend in that hacktraton and el enth oap dealed to keep it,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:
(:) Important
orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions
¿i) Daily locables in the case of large
Movements durin the past turnty-fos are urs asid present dispositions.
are of assistaniue.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
he war diary.
(ii)
Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
reference.
li) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including:
sketches or maps relating thereto,
to suddlement the accoull Vi
operations furnis!
in the text of the diary (para
4, iv above).
Anoenaices will De
naming the author. Kelerences
to appendices
(iv) Copies:
of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
lev showe
ARA. 6.-
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(1) De for vatery in ord fit, day of the co is month difer to precing leah!
be forwarded on
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(i) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
led within a period of two not State, The War C
forwarission to the Under-Sect within a period of three me for safe custody.
the diachedof to be til enient within as ofices at hon
he dunicate copies o.
nths to the officer i/c G.H. Q
the un one o. P. The it entered should be the tinto ativen in the ter, reache
12689
Fochabers
Cairnfiela.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMNARY
Army ronx
Unit... No. 11 Ordnance Beach Detachn
Commanding Officer. Major Ga Stido
Month and Year March Wn.
lour
Date
РИ
AM.
10...
11
AM
12.
PM.
14.
summary of Events and Information
cross Country kur.
Ao Do Ca ho
Recreational Training.
Inspection of all clothing and equipment (a1l personnel)
Technical Training Exercise
Unarmed Combat.
Va..wa...
Vocab. Lecture and discussion "Night Identification"' 12 QBs on leave
Range - Rifles, Brens, Stens.
Keterences to Appenaices
Half Day.
ocsizon
reparation for move to new
Moved to new location (4 men detached for duty with 5 Beach (roup.)
Unit fatigues and preparation of new billets.
Unit fatigues and preparation of new billets.
Unit fatigues and Q.N. Duties - Beach Croup H. Q. Guard Mounted. 12 0. Rs- on Leave
WAR DIARIES SECTION
Unit fatigues - Daily Duties,
Cross Country Run - A.B.C. A.
Football Match - 0,B.D. v 0AG
Cross Country Kuna
13 APR 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Weapon Training - Technical Training
Route March.
Wine Lifting Lecture - P.T.
Armunition Lecture,
raining
outine Tral Trainins
M3594/1918 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd. 51-1541)
9E 66 S 1 0002/20/60
2ZE/121 OMA
Document 3:
Document 4:
WO 171/2363
WO 171/2419
WO 171/5998
WO 171/1112
Document
Document 10
Document 12:
Document 2:
WO 171/2356
Booking summary
Name: ALBERT DUA
• Date of visit: Friday 10 October 2025
Reading room: Docum
• Seat:
• Reader's ticket number. 7203207 99919
• Booking reference: RR219-681-06162E
Document order
Document 1:
289L
с 219/14*
