F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. L.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
i1) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTe C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
The War will, Conten, S. through the usual channels, to the Under Secretary of State (S.D.3),
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to provide data upon
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
Call be entered i day, tact enter ration a ty tie of or depriat , nep it. on.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
) Ind decisit oster, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
perations, topographical and climatic.
mportant phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketche
's showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and the number of other ranks or followers
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
VOTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Appendices will be
(Sce F.SR., Volm inies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. T.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
the unit concerned.
SpER NO. The time entered should de the time the for at nor order,
• Month and Year...July 1944+
La namere
16.
Langmne-s-n
17
27.
28.
31
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete heading not reg
Summary of Events and Information
Unit contimed working on ships, 9b
Unit moved with Io, 8 Port Op. Gp. RuS, to Longrune-su-ner to work
on Oboe. Beach, 9/
Standing by to supervise discherge of ammunition fran Ships Ho. 2026 and
2030.
Personnel sent on board each ship. fb
Unit comenced working on ships. All en unition sent to Io. 17 B.A.D.9gß
Enemy shells landed near ships - No damaged or casualties. gors.
Enemy shells landed in sea or on beach. No casualties in this Unit
but 5 casualties amongst working panties one of which was fatal. Igh.
Sorting Bay opened in Western Ind of Promonado. Arrangements made to
assist 40 Port Amunition Detachment RA. O.E, at Queen Beach, Petit Infer.
by taking mixed loades (DUCT) fron them for sorting. Armunition from
Petit Infer sent to,101 Armunition Coy. at Hermanville, 9b-
A71 armunition from Oboe and Queen Beaches now to be sent to 101
Armunition Coy. at Hermanville. Mod.
Wt. 34839 1676 800,000 11/48, W. H. & S. 61-1876
Army Form G. 21
Unit 44 Port Arminition Detachment R.
References to Appendices
See Appendix A for tonages.
WAR DIARIES SEO-..
- S AUG 1944
G. HO. 2nd Echeion
TЯАЯ
uments in your Bulk
you have requested,
nore of your doc
lents - Enquire al
re documents are in
Desk for full details
