pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBJECT.
1.
The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b)
To furnish an historical record of the war.
2.
- A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b)
Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(d)
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e)
Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4.
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(a) Cover;
(b)
Index as printed on cover;
(c) Narrative;
(d)
Appendices.
5.
All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6.1
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
8. The narrative should be written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them.
It should contain: —
(a)
Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
(b)
Notes of how orders were carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
(o) Nature an administrative dificulties encountered antraction taken to overcome them.
(e) Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
(f) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages and a reference to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(g) Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
(h) Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary. When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down policy
or other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diary.
It is essential that copies of all important documents should be placed in the
war diary, including
commanders' "personal" and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance.
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases where additional appendices appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with " K."
10. NOTES:
Appendix " A."
The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
Summaries are contained in F.S. Regs.,
Vol. I.
Monthly
War Diaries will be enclosed in
A.F.
If this
not available, and
Intelligence Summaries, the cover will
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year AUGUST
1944
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
ANTEILIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Sheet 1.
Army Form C. 2118
Tnit 3(Bx) chat Duo th Bay 6ml
Commanding Officer A
References to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
Place
Date
Hour
Goy MI tocate at COLLEVIALE SUR-ORNE (map nep 08383).
9 Cn/ Bae Gection located AT BIEVILE (map re/ 059741)
8 chal Bar Sectin" locata an BEUVILLE (map ref 009450).
180 crol de Seckon located eE CAZELLE (map Rf 025765).
Prove of this of the Lirain completed regarding the
move WEST oweS R. ORNE.
All Pontamen reland to thei
France.
1000
See ald die ta moves of from forsat docation logice witt
WAR
G,H:O. 2nd ECHELON
Gey placel under foul have narco so mones Segin prepared
Che Grous and a Section d 102 Pr bo (I Get attacks for dutie
Infa recid that in As will more from present a Nor bole 2000 kin.
Inim scuied that Du I wil max NoT befer 0800hn 2 Ay
Weatter - Zie and
*5973. Wt.22861/1499. 300M, 8/42.

