pg_0051.pdf:
the battery should be kept ciean and dry; care should be taken not
to spill water or acid on it while adjusting the level of the electrolyte.
The initial charge should be given in accordance with the printed
instruction sheet supplied with every uncharged battery, and all
subsequent charging should be at the correct rate and for a sufficient
period of time to ensure the normal evolution of gas from all the
plates. Only distilled water should be added to replace loss of the
acid caused by the action of the charging current. If, however,
acid solution is spilled it should be replaced by filling up the cells
diluted sulphuric acid solution of 1.225 specific gravity at
60° F.
The porcelain vent plugs in the top of the battery can be removed
for inspecting the level of the solution in the cells; it is important
that naked lights should not be held near the vents when examining
the cells in this way, on account of the possible danger of igniting
the gas coming from the plates.
When the battery is under
examination it is as well to complete the inspection of the cells
by checking the specific gravity of the acid, as the density of the
solution gives a very good indication of the condition of the battery.
An instrument known as a "hydrometer" is employed for this
purpose, and should be of the syphon type, as illustrated on page
Voltmeter readings of each cell do not provide a reliable indica-
tion of the condition of the battery unless special precautions are
taken, which make such tests unsuitable for the average owner,
and on that account we do not recommend this test.
If the equipment is laid by for several months the battery must
be given a small charge from a separate source of electrical energy
at least once a month, in order to obviate any permanent injury
to the plates.
Under no circumstances must the acid be removed
from the battery and the plates allowed to dry, as certain changes
take place which result in loss of efficiency. The battery lugs and
the cable terminals, which are made in a non-corrosive lead alloy,
should be periodically examined to ensure that the nuts holding
the lugs in position are quite tight. It is advisable to keep the
battery terminals and lugs smeared with vaseline.
Instructions for Using the Lucas Syphon Hydrometer
Before measuring the specific gravity of the acid solution by
means of a hydrometer, see that the acid is at its correct level.
Readings should be taken after a run on the vehicle, when the
acid is thoroughly mixed.
To assemble the hydrometer insert the float, thin end first,
into the barrel, then wet the plug carrying the rubber tube, and push

