pg_0024.pdf:
FOOT BRAKE.
A turnbuckle adjustment is provided at the front
end of the brake-rod, and at the rear of the servo box.
The other
adjustments are similar to those of the hand brake connections.
It will be noted that the brake mechanism on the Six-wheeled
machine is of necessity somewhat differently arranged to the usual
brake mechanism on a four-wheeled vehicle.
Owing to the extreme
articulation of the axles relative to the chassis frame and to one
another, it has been found necessary to take all the brake links to
the one common centre about which the axles articulate. This
point is between the two axles. It is, therefore, necessary to arrange
for the brakes on the forward axle to be pushed on by means of
adjustable tubular links, while the brakes on the rearmost axle are
pulled on by means of adjustable brake links of the usual pattern.
There are two brakes on each wheel, one hand and one foot, the
hand lever operating one brake in each of the four driving wheels,
the foot brake pedal operating the remaining four. Compensating
gear between each of these four brakes is not provided, and equal
adjustment of the same is, therefore, necessary. When once either
of the four brakes (hand or foot) have been equally adjusted and
equally worn, further adjustment of the hand brakes may be effected
by means of the turnbuckle provided between the lower end of the
hand brake lever and the forward brake cross shaft.
In the case
of the foot brake, a common and equal adjustment of the brakes may
be effected by means of the turnbuckle fitted in the link between the
servo mechanism and the forward brake cross shaft. On no account
should the adjustment of the link between the foot pedal and the
servo mechanism be altered in order to effect adjustment of brakes.
Should the equal adjustment of either the hand or the foot brakes
have been disarranged, such as for instance by the fitting of new
brake-shoes or the removal of axle or springs for adjustment, it will
be found advisable and more expeditious to effect this adjustment of
the brakes by proceeding methodically as follows, assuming that
the whole of the brake link mechanism from the foot pedal to the
camshaft levers on the axles may have been dismantled or their
adjustment altered.
Firstly, ascertain that the link connecting the foot pedal to the
servo mechanism is adjusted to such a length that, when the foot
pedal travels over its whole range, the long lever inside the servo
mechanism will travel over its whole range also. The connecting
link between the servo mechanism and the forward brake cross shaft
'off" position, the levers on the brake cross hake pedo ar in the
rear end of the chassis at an angle of about 30 degrees from the
vertical. All four wheels should be jacked clear of the ground, and
the two foot brakes on opposite sides of the final axle should then be
connected by means of their respective links to the correct levers on
the brake cross shaft. The foot brake should then be applied, and it

