pg_0018.pdf:
Morning the or two pieces or strip tin under
neath the rings, which may then be lifted out of the groove. The
grooves should be scraped quite clean from any carbon deposit
before replacing the rings.
When fitting new rings, try these in
the cylinder bore to see that the ends do not butt up, but leave
a space of about .004 in.
The rings should move quite freely in
the grooves, but should have no vertical movement.
When replacing the piston and connecting rod, see that the
opening of the oil dipper in the big-end bearing cap points towards
the off-side of the engine.
The top piston ring has the majority of its "spring" lent to it
by the internal centring ring. Therefore, it is essential that these
rings should not in any circumstances change places.
The bottom
piston ring is a piston ring of the normal type which exerts spring
pressure without any centring ring. Care must be taken not to
change the rings, and to state, when ordering spares, which ring
is required.
Also the spring ring, which must always go under
the top ring, must be fitted with its opening opposite the gap in
the cast iron ring.
Where possible, for adjustments to camshaft, crankshaft, con-
necting rod, piston, etc., a competent mechanic should be employed
The cylinder head is easily and quickly removed for decarbonisa-
tion purposes by first draining all the water from the radiator,
then uncoupling the ignition wires, and removing the fifteen holding-
down bolts,
take these off completely one at a time, as this may set up
stresses and strains in the middle of the cylinder head. Each of the
bolts should, therefore, gradually be eased off one turn at a time.
Carefully scrape off all carbon deposit from the inside of the cylinder
head and the top of the pistons with a suitable blunt-edged tool.
When replacing the cylinder head, care should be taken that no
loose particle of carbon or dirt is adhering to the faces of the gasket.
The valves should also be inspected for any loose carbon which
may have adhered to the seating.
Cylinder Head
The gasket should be covered on both sides with gold size before
being placed in position.
When clamping down the cylinder
head, a start should be made with the inside row of bolts, com-
mencing with the centre one, before the outside ones are touched.
Care should be taken to get an even pressure on each bolt.
This
is obtained by going over all the bolts in rotation three times,
gradually increasing the pressure. If one end is tightened up
at the first, it will be found impossible to get a joint. Having

