pg_0078.pdf:
knite;
the
Whole
and then the face of the valve should be touched here and
there
with the end of a match that has been dipped in some valve-
grinding compound such as Richford's Paste or Carborundum.
(On a Morris-Commercial it is not usually necessary to use coarse-
grade paste or compound; the finer grades, if they may not cut
so quickly, ultimately give better results.)
The valve is then dropped into position, the special tool inserted
in the holes in its head, and, while a comfortable amount of pressure
is employed, it is twisted backwards and forwards in its seating.
Here we come to the secret of good valve-grinding. The valve
should be lifted away from the seating after every two or three
twists.
If this is not done the grinding compound spreads un-
evenly into streaks, the result being that minute circular grooves
are cut into the valve face and the corresponding seating, and
these absolutely prevent the formation of a good gastight fit.
The most convenient way of ensuring that this lifting process
is done is to obtain a light spring which will fit under the head
of the valve, and to drop it into the port over the projecting valve
guide.
Then, when pressure is released on the special tool, the
valve will pop up and the capillary action of the compound will
let it spread itself.
How it is done
On a Morris-Commercial engine that has done about a thousand
miles it only takes two or three minutes' continuous twisting to
grind in each valve, and one notes that the operation is finished
when the valve face has a clean, even, matt-surfaced ring around
it. It is sometimes thought that the valve face should be absolutely
polished bright, but this is not so; it should simply have a nice
white appearance, smooth and even.
If the engine has been run without being decarbonised for long
periods the valve face may be pitted; that is, it will have little
black specks on it, these being caused by small pieces of carbon
getting between the face and seating, and being hammered into
the metal by the continual operation of the valve. If these pits
appear to be very deep it is best to have the valve face trued up
can be coal utte until they disappe usually the grinding proces.
After a valve has been ground in it should be very carefully
washed with paraffin and, what is more important, the valve port
should also be swilled out thoroughly and cleaned, preferably by
using an old tooth-brush or something similar. It is of utmost
importance that valve-grinding compound should not find its

