pg_0028.pdf:
plunger-type oilpump is carried on the upper half of the
crankcase, the plunger being operated from an eccentric on the
camshaft.
The oil is fed by pressure to the camshaft, big-end and
main bearings, having to pass a filter before reaching the pump.
An oil-pressure gauge is provided on the instrument board.
The
actual reading on the gauge may be found to vary considerably,
not only on various trucks, but also on the same truck under vary-
ing conditions.
When the engine is first started up a fairly low
pressure will be recorded, and when the engine is properly warm
and running under normal conditions a pressure of 7 lb. approxi-
mately will be shown.
The action of the lubricating pump, which
is driven automatically by the camshaft, is to keep all the bearings
constantly supplied with oil.
The filter should occasionally be dismantled and cleaned. To do
this it will be necessary to first take off the flange at the bottom
of the sump, after draining off the oil through the plate alongside
the flange. The oil filter may now be withdrawn.
The cylinder walls are oiled by splash. The pistons are slightly
bevelled off below the bottom piston ring, and a number of small
holes drilled through the piston.
This causes any surplus oil to
be scraped off the walls, letting only the exact amount of oil neces-
soke tron the lubrication to st starting giving tha a faure bine
experienced driver that "all's well" with pistons and cylinders.
The gudgeon pin takes its bearing in the piston, and, therefore,
gets ample lubrication from the cylinder walls.
An observant driver will pay as much attention to his supply
of lubricating oil as to his petrol supply.
Neglect of this results
in harsh running and an overheated engine, loss of power, and
finally the "seizing-up" of pistons or connecting rods.
To remove or drain the whole of the oil from the engine, it is
only necessary to remove the large drain plate screwed in the
bottom of the case, afterwards replacing and filling up through
the filler.
We recommend the following oils for summer and
winter use respectively :-
Summer - Double Shell, Adcol "N.P.2," or Gargoyle
Mobiloil "A."
Winter - Single
Shell, Adcol "N.P.2," or Gargoyle
Mobiloil "A."
The magneto should have two drops of good quality thin oil in
the oil filler every 1000 miles.

