pg_0070.pdf:
"(Reprinted from The Morris Owner)
)ETROL is what is known as a hudrocarbon. That is, it is
i made up, chemically, of hydrogen atoms and carbon atoms
in a certain proportion.
There are other constituents as
well, but these two are basic. When petrol burns, the hydrogen
combines with the oxygen in the atmosphere and the carbon is
"liberated."
All that happens inside the engine is that petrol
gas burns.
True, it burns very quickly
"explodes," one might say-but
anyway, the carbon is liberated.
Some of this passes out of the
exhaust in gaseous form, but some is deposited on the inside surface
of the cylinder head and valve ports in the form of a hard, black
coating.
If this coating be allowed to accumulate it eventually
reduces the volume of the space at the top of the eylinder, thus
increasing the compression ratio, causing
"pinking."
that metallic
tapping sound that occurs when the engine is made to pull hard
at slow speeds with the ignition advanced- and it also impedes
the gas flow into and out of the cylinder.
In other words, it
reduces the efficieney of the engine, making it sluggish and killing
the natural liveliness of a Morris-Commercial power unit.
Why Carbon Forms
The formation of carbon, of course, is not peculiar to the Morris-
Commercial engine in particular. It happens in every truck, and
as a matter of fact, thanks to good carburation,
the Morris-
Coramercial engine carbons up very slowly. It only requires
decarbonising about once every 2000 miles, although it is advisable
to clean the head (as described hereafter) and to polish up the
valves faces after the first 1000 miles have been covered by a
new truck
The job is very simple. It can be done properly with the
standard tool kit bv anvone with an average
"handy-man's"
mechanical skill in an afternoon. This is due to the fact that the
Morris-Commercial was designed as an owner-driver's truck— easy
to look after.
And so when the speedometer and log book say that it is time
for the periodical uncoking, this is what to do.
Materials required-for decarbonising only-are the standard
tool kit and a bottle of gold size.
(For which go to the local oilman
or paint shop.) But as the head has to be lifted to decarbonise,
it is not a bad plan to deal with the valves at the same time.
And
so get some valve grinding paste (cost about is. 6d.) and a big tin
and some paraffin to make a washing bath. A supply of rags is
also indicated
67

