pg_0031.pdf:
IMPORTANT
The clutch being of the single plate dry type it
is most important that no lubricant of any description is put into
the clutch compartment, as the presence of any oil on the clutch
faces will cause persistent slipping and much trouble.
To obtain the maximum life and service from the truck, we
recommend that this process of draining and replenishing
the
engine, gearboxes and back axles should be carried out at 300
miles, 600 miles and 1000 miles, and on the completion of every
subsequent 1000 miles.
By so doing, the life of the bearings will be considerably prolonged,
and the efficiency of the vehicle maintained at a very high standard.
Chassis Lubrication
On every point of the Morris-Commercial Six-wheeled Chassis that
requires lubrication a nipple is fitted.
For chassis lubrication we
do not recommend grease, but gear oil such as "Shell Gear Oil,"
Gargoyle Mobiloil "C,
" or a similar grade of lubricant. In normal
use every nipple on the chassis should receive a supply of oil
once a week, presuming an average weekly mileage of about 500
miles.
The amount of lubricant to be injected must be left to the
operator's discretion. Obviously, less oil will be required on the
brake camshaft than the front axle swivel pins, and such parts as
the latter should be lubricated until the oil exudes from the bearing.
Also, when charging ball bearing housings care should be taken
to ensure that sufficient lubricant is forced in to reach the bearing
Special points which require attention are the following :
Two nipples will be found on the pad between the upper and
lower rear springs. These lubricate the spring bearings,
and
should be oiled once every week.
Particular attention should be
given to the nipples on the brake countershaft rod which runs
across the chassis underneath the floor boards.
A lubricator is provided on the steering-gear box.
The oil gun
should be attached, and the pump worked till oil begins to exude
from the worm wheel bearing.
Lubricators are also provided on the propeller shaft universal
joints between the driving axles, and should be oiled every week.
Periodical Inspection
It is of great importance to have all small adjustments attended
to, and to make sure that the lubricant of all wearing parts is not
neglected, the owner of a truck should, therefore, make a point
of periodical inspection.
To ensure that no point of importance is being overlooked, a
résumé of items to be looked after will be found useful.

