pg_0014.pdf:
first 1000 miles, the working surtaces will become well polished
and bedded down, and the life of the truck very considerably pro-
longed.
The Magneto. (See also separate section.)
When ignition trouble is suspected, before intertering with the
magneto, verify that the sparking plugs, cables and connections
are
correct.
Check the spark gap at the plug points.
These
points are liable to distortion from heat, and sometimes open up
too wide, when difficult starting and spitting back will occur.
If these are in order, turn the engine slowly by hand with
the
lower circular cover off the magneto and watch if the contact-
breaker lever works properly.
This is equipped with a fibre
insulating bush, and in damp weather there is a possibility of this
material swelling and sticking. If this happens, ease the hole out
very slightly and clean the steel pin with fine emery cloth.
The platinum points on the contact breaker should open to a
maximum distance of 0.5 mm. or a full 1/64th in.
The points
onlv need adjustment at very long intervals.
Should they become
pitted or burnt they may be dressed with a dead-smooth file, the
least possible amount being taken off, but this is rarely necessary.
The distributor should be cleaned every 1000 miles.
Move back
the retaining spring, remove the distributor, and wipe out the
inside with a dry rag.
See that the brush on the rotating arm is
clean and perfectly free in its holder hefore replacing the distributor.
Give the magneto two or three drops of good quality thin machine
oil every 1000 miles in the lubricator.
Valve Timing
The plug provided in the cylinder head of No. 4 cylinder should
be removed, and a thin rod inserted. The engine should now be
turned until the piston of No. 4 cylinder comes to the top of its
stroke, with the exhaust valve closing. This position is called the
top dead centre. The engine should then be slowly turned by
means of the starting handle until the piston has gone down on
the suction stroke a distance of 3/32nds of an inch. The exhaust
valve of this cylinder should then be just closing, the tappets
having been previously set to a clearance of 6/1000ths of an inch.
This is necessary owing to the slight rise at beginning of lift, making
it difficult to get a correct reading.
When the valve timing is
finally adjusted, the inlet tappets should be reset to 4/1000ths of
an inch, and the exhaust tappets to 5/Ioooths of an inch.
Timing the Magneto
When the Morris-Commercial Six-wheeled Truck leaves the Works
the ignition is carefully set. Should it be necessary to recover
the setting, proceed as follows :-
In all engines a plug is provided in the cylinder head over No. 4
clinder. The culinder numbers are read from the front of

