pg_0050.pdf:
To replace a fuse wire proceed as follows: Remove the fuse
holder from the switchbox, loosen the two screws "G,
" and then
remove any remaining pieces of fuse wire.
Take the length of
spare fuse wire from the carton "A," and wrap the end once round
one of the screws "G," underneath the washer, taking care that
the wire does not cross.
Tighten this screw, then stretch the wire
lightly across the holder and wind it round the second screw,
taking the same precaution as before.
When the second screw
is tightened, the remaining length of wire may be cut off and the
fuse holder replaced in the switchbox.
NoTE.- Should it be found that the fuse is continually blowing,
do not add two or three more strands to prevent this occurring, but
have the equipment thoroughly overhauled to find out the cause
of the trouble.
Battery
Important Points
(I) Keep the acid well above the top of the plates.
(2) Add only distilled water, never tap water.
(3)
Take frequent readings of the specific gravity by means of
the hydrometer (see page 49).
(4) Do not allow the battery to remain discharged; if run down,
through whatever cause, recharge at once.
(5) Keep the terminals spanner-tight and smeared with vaseline.
We would impress upon the owner the importance of the battery
in the electrical equipment, and the necessity for careful treatment
and regular attention, if it is to be kept in good condition.
The chemical nature of the battery must always be kept in mind
when considering how much attention is necessary in order that it
will function properly under all conditions of use.
It is the chemical
condition of the cell which determines its usefulness, and limits
the work it can do, and only a much-restricted yield of electrical
energy is possible unless the chemical condition of the plates is
good.
It is for this reason that manufacturers give detailed instruc-
tions for the first charge and subsequent care of the battery. The
sulphuric acid solution used in filling up the cells must be quite
pure and of the correct density (1.225 at 60° F. for Lucas batteries),
and it is important that the level of the acid should be kept well
but just short of the bottom of the
vent plugs.
above the toReglect of this simple precaution will seriously impair
the efficiency of the battery. Under ordinary conditions it will

