pg_0046.pdf:
Lucas
To adjust the output of the dynamo, loosen the two control
brush gear securig screws
"K"
(Fig: 4), and move the control
brush backwards (opposite to direction of rotation) to reduce the
output, or forwards to increase it.
It should be remembered that
the adjustment is a sensitive one, a small movement of the control
brush being sufficient to appreciably alter the output.
In some
models the control brush is arranged so that its position is altered
by the turning of a nut (the magneto spanner can be used).
This
turns a pinion which engages with a rack in the brush carrier and
so moves the whole of the control brush gear. The combined
nut and pinion is situated just inside the slot in the end bracket
and opposite the terminal block. In models where one of the screws
"K"
is replaced with a nut, it is only necessary to slacken this one
nut before making the adjustment.
The third of the brush gear
securing screws should not be tampered with under any circum-
stances during this operation.
Care must be taken to tighten up
the two screws or nut after the adjustment has been made. Before
making further tests after the adjustment, always allow the machine
to run for a short time so that the control brush becomes properly
"bedded" on the surface of the commutator. It is also advisable
after any adjustment to observe the condition of the battery and
the lamps (see page 48) after running for a few days under normal
working conditions.
Starter Motor M45
The armature spindles of these machines are fitted with a pinion
which, on rotation, runs into engagement with the geared ring on
the flywheel. Immediately the engine begins to fire, the pinion
is automatically thrown out of mesh.
If for any reason the pinion wheel on the motor does not engage
with the flywheel teeth, examine the screwed sleeve on the arma-
ture spindle to see that it is free from dirt; if necessary, wash
over with
parathn. Occasionally, give it a few drops of thin
machine oil.
As in the case of the dynamo, the surface of the commutator
must be kept clean and free from oil, brush dust, etc.
Warning
The starter is designed for starting the engine under normal
conditions, but any unnecessary or additional loading will con-
siderably diminish the life of the machine and battery.
In order to facilitate starting in cold weather, it is advisable
to flood the carburetter, and make use of the mixture control or

