pg_0049.pdf:
56
2. If true north only is shown on the map
(either by a
special marginal north point or by the east and west margins
of the map itself), then set off magnetic north from true north
with the protractor, draw in the magnetic north line and
proceed as above.
Strictly speaking, it is not absolutely necessary to draw in
the magnetie north line.
If the compass is aligned on the
"true north" line, and map and compass are revolved until
the compass card (inner graduation) reads the amount of the
local variation east or west (against the index at the hinge),
the correct setting of the map will have been obtained.
3. British military maps are normally over-printed with
a grid, and in the margin of the map information is given as
to the relation between grid north, true north, and magnetic
north, for that particular sheet.
Thus, either of the above
methods can be used, substituting grid north for true north
and the angle between grid and magnetic north for magnetic
54. Setting by Objects
A map can be set on the ground without using the north
point as follows: —
i. If the observer's position can be identified as some
point marked or known on the map,
the next step is to
identify, also on the map, some distant object which can be
the ground.
Join the two points by a straight line.
Then turn the map about until this line points to the distant
The map is then set.
ii. Even if the exact position of the observer cannot be
identified on the map, it may be possible, by moving slightly
to one side or the other, to find a place in prolongation of some
straight road, railway, canal, telegraph line or other feature
shown on the map. Fig. 30 should be studied in reading this
and the subsequent paragraph. It is not necessary that the
straight line should be continuous.
It may happen that a
distant spire and a near-by fence corner are seen to be in a
line from the observer's position and can be identified on the
If then the map is so placed that the line through
them coincides with, or is parallel to, the same line in nature,
It sometimes
happens that two con-
spicuous points appear opposite each other on either side of
the observer (say at P). In this case draw on the map the
line joining them, and lay the map on the ground so that
this line points to one of them (say F).
Now look in the
direction and see if the other point, say G, is in
prolongation of the line. If it falls to the right (left) move
to the right (left) and try again.
57
ili. A map can be set approximately for reading by iden-
tifying on the map prominent objects than can be seen.
The
F
C
B
OA
FIG. 30.
map is then held so that the directions between these objects
as they appear on the ground and on the map are parallel to
one another.
55. Finding Position on a Map
1. It will be observed that in the case considered under
Sec. 54, ii, above, the position is not fixed, but only a straight
line on which that position must lie.
With this information,
however, the map being set, it is usually quite easy to deter-
mine the position with all the accuracy required for map
reading, as apart from sketching
2. In general, in fully developed and fully mapped coun
tries like the United Kingdom, the correct position can be
fixed from map detail.
The position is first fixed roughly in
relation to the greater features around, such as hills, villages.
voods. roads and the like. The locality being thus identified.
exact location is found by means of the smaller features. For
purpose, the intersections
of fences, the windings of
streams, the presence of farmhouses, lanes and tracks, corners
of copses and
other minor
features are
according to circumstances.
Here, as in setting,
it is often
easy to identify on the map two fences or other straight lines
which, if produced, intersect near the required spot. (Refer

