pg_0008.pdf:
10
of man-towns, villages, roads, canals and railways-should
come last. The aim of instruction should be to train the
mind to form, from a map, a correct mental picture of the
country, and to estimate the amount of cover and of tactical
difficulty which it is likely to offer. If maps of two different
scales are available, a comparison between them, and between
each and the country, will explain the amount that a map
can show on these different scales. Ultimately it is the stan-
dard map, the one inch (abroad the 1/50,000 or 1/100,000),
which is the most important. However expedient it may be
to start the recruit upon a large scale (say six-inch or three-
inch), it must be remembered that the rank and file will see
few such maps in war. The large scale will seldom be issued
in quantity, except during periods of comparative stability
and the small scale which might be widely used in uncivilized
or poorly mapped theatres of war will not be the normal
issue for operations or training in a civilized country.
however, important to explain how all scales can be read and
reference made to them in the light of a common grid.
CHAPTER II
DEFINITIONS
8. Topographical Forms
Basin.—(a) A small area of level ground surrounded
nearly surrounded by hills, and (b) a district drained
by a river and its tributaries, e.g. the "basin of the
Thames."
Col. A neck or ide of let then tetint moon his it
connects, and higher than the surrounding plain or
valleys.
rest.-The general line formed by joining the summits c
ne main ridge or a chain or mountains
False crest.-The line along which
a lower steep
slope changes to an upper gentle slope.
Dune.—A hill or ridge of sand formed by the wind.
Defile.-Any natural or artificial feature which causes a body
of troops to contract its normal front during its pas-
sage through it, is a defile for that body. A mountain
pass is the most common type of natural defile; a
bridge, or a raised causeway through a marsh, is
example of an artificial defile.

