pg_0060.pdf:
411 ...
112=
73
be indicated. They may also be shaded, the depth of
shading becoming less as the distance from the observer
Roads.—Roads should be shown by a double continuous line,
diminishing in width as it recedes.
Railways.—Railways are indicated in the distance
single line with the telegraph poles shown by vertical
ticks: in the foreground as a double line
cross lines (indicative of sleepers) to prevent confu-
sion with roads.
Churches.-In simple outline sufficient to show whether tower
or spire is denoted.
Villages.—Definite
rectangular shapes
houses, with indication of towers, factory chimneys
and outstanding buildings where they occur.
Cuttings and Embankments.—May be denoted by the usual
map conventional sign—a firm line with ticks at right
angles to it, diminishing in thickness from
bottom.
Moorland or Heath may also be shown by the usual map
conventional sign groups of short upright ticks.
75. Other Methods
1. The foregoing method of drawing panoramas will be
found the easiest and most encouraging for a beginner.
however, other methods.
A simple device which will
greatly assist in panorama drawing can be made by taking
& piece of cardboard and cutting out of the centre of it a piece
the approximate dimensions of a service protractor: a
piece of photographic film, previously cleaned in warm water
and quite clear, is then pasted over the hole so made and on
the celluloid are drawn firm lines making a grid of squares
about 1"
The effect thus obtained is that of a ruled
celluloid window in a cardboard frame, through which the
landscape may be viewed.
The paper on which the drawing
is to be made is ruled in a similar manner to the window.
If the frame be kept at a fixed distance by & string held in
the teeth, the detail seen can then be transferred to the paper
square by square.
2. An alternative method is to divide the paper into area:
by vertical lines denoting a fixed number of degrees of are
and then to plot the position of important features by taking
bearings to them.
This method is accurate, but
1. The finished panorama should be clear and simple
(Plate XVIII). A few touches of colour may assist in

