pg_0053.pdf:
PLATE XIV.
ENLARGING AND ADDING DETAIL
Scale /" to / mile.
50
igon
/ale
Stone
+ 6
100
Scale 4" to / mile.
(Enlarged from /"to / mile)
Detail added from photographs in purple
"
Ordnance Survey 1929.
reconnaissance in red
18 Sept 1928
10,050 | 38
59
Tracing cloth is useful for copying; it is tough and will
bear much handling.
the glazed side and put
washes of water colour, if required, on the back, making then
darker than they are intended to appear on the front
58. Value and Use of an Enlargement
Enlargement is often useful, but should be done with
caution and a proper sense of its value and limitations.
Mere enlargement adds nothing to the information given
on the map, which remains precisely the same as on the small
scale original.
The details on & small scale are of necessity
generalized and in some cases exaggerated.
Enlargement
may, however, be advisable for one or other of the following
purposes, viz.:—
i. To serve as a basis for a more detailed sketch at a larger
ii. To provide room for writing notes and descriptions.
The scale of the original must be stated on every enlarge-
ment.
Plate XIV shows an enlargement, on a scale of 4 inches to
a mile, from & 1 inch to the mile map,
additional
information added from photographs and reconnaissance.
59. The Method of Enlarging a Map
The general idea of enlarging by eye is to copy the detail
shown inside a small figure (square, triangle, ete. on the map
into a similar but larger figure on the fresh paper. In theors
it does not matter what sort of a figure is
chosen, but in
brace the figure which is easiest to draw is naturally the
Usually enlarging is done by
"squares" because many
maps are already squared, and require no further subdivision
except by drawing in the diagonals, as in the so-called Union
Jack method. If diagonals are drawn in, other lines may be
added by joining up the points at which the diagonals intersect
each other. By drawing all these lines the map will be divided
into small triangles.
However the map is divided, and
practice it will be wise to keep to the grid squares and their
diagonals, the fresh paper must be divided up in the same way,
and the detail sketched in at its enlarged scale by eye.
60. Examples
1. It is required to enlarge a gridded quarter inch map to
one inch to the mile.
The grid squares aro 10,000 yards.
The ratio is, obviously, as 1 : 4.

