pg_0067.pdf:
82
APPENDIX III
SPELLING OF PLACE NAMES
1. Spelling.—There is no geographical
subject which has
given rise to more discussion and
to greater differences
opinion than that of the spelling of names, and it is desirable
that officers should have some acquaintance with the principles
It is a matter which affects not only maps, but
also official reports and handbooks.
When a country uses the Roman characters there is no
difficulty. Clearly the name must be spelt as in the country
of origin unless there is an anglicized form in common use,
e.g. Florence for Firenze, when the form adopted would be &
matter for consideration in each case.
The question of trans-
literation does not arise.
2. Transtiteration.—When, however, a language does not
use the Roman character, the names must be transliterated
for English use. Such languages are Russian and Bulgarian
which use the Cyrillic character, Arabic and Persian
use the Arabic character, Hebrew, Greek, Chinese,
other Eastern languages.
Russian, Arabic,
Hebrew and
Greek it is possible to prepare tables showing how each letter
should be transliterated so
that an Englishman should pro-
nounce the word in its new form as nearly as possible as it
is pronounced in the country of origin.
Whatever system of transliteration is used it. is evident. that.
only a small measure of success can be obtained
The letters
and ot, as it uley are the ext thy othere Banglish leters;
and even if they did,
different ways of
pronouncing the same letter would make a
perfect representation of the sound impossible. It is easy to
see that the transliteration, letter by letter, of the English
words through, though,
and tough, would give a foreigner no
guide to the pronunciation of more than one of them.
3. Principles of Transliteration.-For better or worse, how-
ever, names have to be transliterated, and rules for doing so
have to be devised. These fall into two parts:-
i. The sounds to be attributed to each letter
English alphabet must be laid down and adhered to
for the transliteration of all languages.
ii. A table has to be drawn up for each language which
it is desired to transliterate, showing what letters of
the English alphabet, employed as in i, are to be
for each letter of
the foreign alphabet, in
For i, & new set of rules has recently been drawn up by the
Permanent Committee on Geographical Names at the Royal
Geographical Society on which the War Office and several
other Government departments are represented.
It differs but little from the Knox rules which have
been followed
years by the Geographical
of the General. Staff, which themselves were almost identical
with the old rules of the Royal Geographical Society, based
on the Washington system of the Admiralty.
aim at rendering sounds approximately only, without having
recourse to the elaborate symbols, used by phoneticians, and
unsuitable for maps.
4. R.G.S. II system, 1924
Rules for the Spelling of Geographical Names for British
1. The spelling of every place-name in an independent
country or self-governing dominion using the Latin alphabet*
shall be that adopted by the country or dominion, except in
the case in which certain important localities have also, in
addition to the official
notably different, in which case the name customary in British
"conventional")
may be adopted (e.g. Geneva,
Warsaw, etc., for Genève, Warszawa, etc.).
2. In colonial possessions the spelling of such place-names
as belong to languages coming under Rule 1 will be spelt in
accordance with that rule.
3. The accents and diacritical marks in official use by the
above countries will be retained.
Wherever it appears desir-
able, the pronunciation will be shown by giving the name as
transliterated on the system below.
4. All other place-names throughout the world will (with
the exception of
"conventional"
names and some others)
be spelt in general accordance with the following system.
The broad features of this system are:—
i. That vowels are pronounced as in Italian and con-
sonants as in English;
ii. That every letter is
pronounced, and no redundant
The system aims at giving a close approximation to the
local pronunciation; but it is recognized that in some languages,
notably Russian, Greek and Arabic, the necessity for letter-
for-letter transliteration often renders this impossible.
"Latin" alphabets containing extra or modified letters,
tuebe le Cerch, Sion , Pole Ahabetian, eto. Th roguaciation of
these letters is given in the

