pg_0058.pdf:
68
2. Damaged Pivot. Sometimes
exposure or rough usage
will corrode or damage the steel pivot on which the compass
card spins.
Not infrequently the card may be sluggish
its movement and may come to rest on an incorrect reading.
(In this case it is clear that several observations of the same
bearing may give different readings.)
When this trouble is suspected
bring the end of a nail
or other piece of soft iron
towards the pointer of the
card
from one side.
If the pivot is in good condition, the pointer
will swing
easily towards,
or away from, the nail and will
return to its original position with an easy oscillatory move-
ment when
removed.
If the pivot is
causing
pointer will remain stationary or move jerkily
and will probably gettle on a new reading when the nail is
removed.
This trouble seldom occurs with a liquid compass.
CHAPTER XI
ILLUSTRATION OF MILITARY REPORTS
69. General
1. The form in which the report of a Military Reconnais-
sance should be rendered and the matter which it should
contain are given in the Field Service Pocket Book and Field
Service Regulations.
The value of a report will be greatly
increased, however, if it is freely illustrated by maps,
sketches, panorama drawing or photographs.
are of no value unless they make the subiect matter of the
report clearer to the reader and save writing
2. An officer, before proceeding on & military
sance on active service, must secure the best available map.
In peace, and in a friendly country, he should obtain all the
available topographical information about the
which he is to work. He should also study all existing hand-
books of the locality to avoid duplicating information.
indi te det top il natural perture which the effect eatedd
novement, camps or billets, and supply. It should include
also a statement of the effect of seasonal
changes of weather.
of
69
second in geology.
Without any particular knowledge of
this subject, observation and information may make it clear
what soil becomes sticky and heavy for cross-country traffic,
or where rocky outcrop or broken surface may make it difficult
to find landing grounds. A geological map will then show
where similar conditions are likely to be found.
Similarly,
on the important questions of boring for water and of finding
stone for road making, useful information may result
from observation guided and helped by such geological infor-
mation as can be procured in advance.
4. A map is never perfect and rarely up-to-date.
when a large scale map exists, much information must
added before it can become a full illustration to a military
In cases where topographical
maps exist,
the scale be large enough, it will only be necessary
such information as is required, but care must be taken to
ensure that over-crowding does not spoil its clarity or render
it useless as an illustration.
Should the scale be small, enlarge-
nents can be made of those areas of special interest
These
nargements should omit everything which is irrelevant, anc
should then be amplified by the addition of the special detail
and information required by the report.
5. In cases where no maps exist, the information required
in a report must be illustrated by field sketches, panoramas,
thumbnail sketches and photographs.
Traverses are especially
useful for road or river reconnaissances.
No hard
and fast
rules can be laid down on this subject, and in carrying out a
reconnaissance, the most suitable form of illustration for the
report must be chosen.
The methods of field sketching and traversing are described
in Part III.
70. Panorama Drawings and Landscape Sketching
Panorama drawing is the art of reproducing on paper the
view obtained by an observer from any given point.
& drawing,
intelligently produced, is of the greatest value
in illustrating a report and thereby adding to its clarity. No
artistic sense is required, but practice is essential.
The principles to be observed in making a panorama are as
fallows:—
i. A definite proportion of the time available for producing
the panorama should be spent in the careful study of
the ground with the naked eve and with binoculars.
This should be done before ever pencil is put to paper.
ii. The principles of perspective must be followed as far
as possible. These, for military purposes, may be

