pg_0055.pdf:
64
64. Prismatic Compass
The Service Prismatic Compass of the dry type, Mk. VIII,
is illustrated on Plate XVI.
It is enclosed in a
brass box,
partly lacquered, with a lid C, containing an eccentric cir-
Press open the box by means of the nail
The compass is then seen,
The latter is of mother-
of-pearl, blackened in the centre save for an arrow, which is
with a radium compound so as to be visible at night.
The needle and its attached
card are suspended on a pointed
steel pivot, working in a jewelled boss seen beneath the cover.
dial are two graduations, both increasing
clockwise, the inner figured inwards from zero at the arrow-
head, the outer and finer (degree) division figured outwards
and starting from a zero at 180° from the arrow-head. Note
further, that affixed to the inside of the box at the hinge is
an index with a short vertical line L: this is named by
mariners the lubber line.
By slackening a clamping screw, J, seen
to the right of
he hinge, the glass cover of the box can be rotated. Attached
beneath the glass near its edge is a luminous radial index,
known as the direction mark, shown as D; and exactly corre-
sponding to this, interrupting the milling on the casing of
the cover, there is an index or setting vane I, working over an
external 5-degree graduation,
which is at the
centre of the hinge,
corresponding exactly to the lubber line
within.
On a second and lower external graduation are shown
the points of the compass, N under the hinge, N.W. (315°)
near J on Plate XVI.
The compass card is normally motionless, being held clear
of the pivot.
It can be released by pushing the stopS away
from the ring handle. It will be noticed that this stop isa
automatically brought into action by closing the lid, the
stop being thus moved towards the ring by the cam-chip K
on the lid.
The design is to lift the card and its boss off the
point of the steel pivot, which otherwise would be lable to
damage when not in use.
A hair-line HVH is engraved vertically on the window.
In the casing and at the ends of the hair-line are two luminous
strips P for sighting at night. Observe that in these strips
are two
small holes H, which are drilled through the window
casing: if the glass is broken in usage, a horse-hair or thread
can be passed through these holes as a substitute for the hair-
line.
tongue forms
an extension of the lid; notice
notch N at the end and the similar notch N
the
on the ring
handle.
SERVICE PRISMATIC COMPASS

