pg_0065.pdf:
78
The reader can improve at will on this crude arrangement,
experiment on the
ground with the shadow of the
corner of a roof suitably
situated or with a pointed stake
set at a slight angle in the ground.
The centre of the circle
C in these cases is vertically beneath the edge of the roof or
the point of the stake; in the latter case it may be obtained
by aid of a weighted string or plumb-bob.
If the observer's position be not too
near the poles,
apparatus be suitable and care be taken with the working, it
GREAT BEAR (Urse Mean
o* PLOUGH
Apparent
Diurnal
Motion
Polaris
FIG. 68.
FIG. 59.
is possible to
obtain true north with considerable accuracy
by this method
4. True North by the Stars.
1. Northern Hemisphere-The Pole Star (Polaris).-Every-
one should be familiar with the Pole Star.
It is the bright
star indicated by the two "Pointers" of the Great Bear
or Plough, Fig. 59.
Polaris gives an approximate line to true north. In latitudes
less than 60° it is
more than 21° in bearing
All stars revolve round the Pole and twice in the
24 hours Polaris is in the meridian, i.e. truly north.
between the times when it crosses the
Midway
approximately at its extreme distance, i.e. 2° about lat, 45°,
east or west of true north.
79
are two easy ways of knowing when Polaris is in
the meridian: the first, by means of stars in the constellation
of the Great Bear: the second by stars in Cassiopeia, which is
a conspicuous
shaped like the letter W
the opposite side of the Pole Star from the Great Bear.
(Fig. 59) on
The Pole Star is exactly
north when the point halfway
between the two end stars of the tail
of the Great Bear is
vertically above or below it; and the same is true for the point
halfway between the two stars which form the first stroke in
the W of Cassiopeia.
Note this line of points, as
in Fig. 59, passing through Polaris.
As the height of the Pole, in other
the latitude,
increases, Polaris becomes of increasingly less value as a means
of finding true north.
2. Southern Hemisphere-The Southern Cross. —The South-
ern Cross may be used as follows: Consider the Cross as
the te old & te greate his times in pros dirtin the
and the point reached will be approximately the
South Pole. If a piece of paper be marked off along its edge
by 12 dividing lines, spaced equally, and be held so that the
first and third scale lines coincide with the head and tail
stars respectively, the intersection of the 12th line with the
edge of the paper will give, approximately, the southern Pole.
The southern Pole is more difficult to fix than the northern,
as there is no bright star near it.
3. Southern Cross and Hydrus.—Continue the line above
described for another two lengths of the greater axis of the
Cross, ie. to the 16th line of the scale; we thus reach a star
named ® Hydri, which of the bright stars is the nearest to
the South Pole.
When a Crucis, in the tail of the kite, and P Hydri are in
the same vertical, they are nearly in the meridian and thus
mark true south.
APPENDIX II
NIGHT MARCHING
1. General.-Night marching even under the best conditiong
demands long practice and care on
the part of the guide.
Unless the guide has a knowledge of elementary astronomy
and tables to give him the correct bearing of the stars, the
direction of a night march in a country unknown and un-
mapped or featureless must be maintained by compass,
luminous for dark nights.

