WO 171/2381
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Note C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, th
ough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up dail
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.211
• te extraction and
retention of appendices, maps, etc.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
of other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
and decisions taken.
(1) Daily locations.
Bary cation exent grin then ot toenty-four hour and present dispositions
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical' and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
bordinate command
(v) Nature and descripfion of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metcorological notes.
c. 36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F.
W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ji) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps
operations furnished in
to supplement the account of
have a brief descriptive headir
Appendices
will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
ng naming the author. References
PARA. 6.-
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
1) be learnervie ordered to tie a coping not diary for the preten kh von
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
the unit concerned.
SPECTAT NO. T the one entered should be the time the formation er ordit reaches
1716
sonating the rendition of A FlU S010 B.AC.
SATURDAY 10 TUNE 44
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
Commanding Officer gr
(Erase heading not required).
will be prepared in manuscript.
Summary of Events and Information.
Month and Year
Date.
Hour.
Place.
Lilal
08: 00 land disferend ans varians deubt cants anita enlalantia
11000 Pendina f Unit landing
land at H+195 -
Run pat
too shits of and (fox) hand
bach cant 1 the slit let as HaiL Belf send
nd H + 5%.
land ed H+22. Duba land at corrent dine
ent in 12 en la late le De a late Ci
ences to Appendices
39ª BR. INE D
lll -
10:00 lan lanel bankr
14/822
funned beal
Peritand nuro
- barbi
MATOR,
beard l
phima des
WE 13474/1805
1,200,000 7/40 BPL, 51-7171 Forms C2118/2:
PAR DIARIES SECTION
1oJUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
9 F (R.A.S.C.)
