NoTe B. - See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C
any question or doubt whether or not a war diary should be kep
by a unit
-ule will De reiered..
hrough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.I)
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any idea
piment, tactics, organisation adations, based on factual experience
velduon which
a her the titory of the Wan research in the Army, as well as material key eration which
B. C. 218. i is tee ented that hach tray initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
- It should be made dear tha
officer who initials the
on mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerica the commander
ILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations,
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors altesting
y or mobilsation or
important phases
Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
ubordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranies ci
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
tments (Sec. 36), and
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
nd his representatives
ny, War audes will ne
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
lor reference
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit. includin
any sketches or maps relating thereto, to
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para.
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive he:
4, iv above).
supplement the account of
Appendices will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
ding naming the author. References
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.-
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
xA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
aring a diary
B) In dant os ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
Daily locations.
Bad tables in the veron ta lein then at twenty our hour and present dispositions,
Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate
SPECIAL NOTE
transmitted to records offices at home for sto the officer i/c G..O.
the unit concerned
"The the time entered shoud be the time the information roder rache
1692
Date of Despatch.
with
Place.
Ayr.
11
Instructions regarding War Diaties and Intellin
WAR DIARY Onyma
Unit 1o1 Vueral_ Amy FormC. 2118
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
Commanding OFficer Capt. 8. 9. Jos
Month and Year January 1944
Date.
Hour.
(Erase beading not requirea).
Summary of Events and Information.
References to Appendices.
Started Field Documentatin
1 Kony to new bration enct AM. L.0
2.
3.
Receind intimatin that to offier 120 0. Rs 37 Vehicles
would datle supplemer iit strength...
4.
5.
Routine Detes
Ser Strees 150 ORE ioultes Typhus.
Pantie Dehe
Veheiles loadig Beach Gump Atra, Major Post
stumed from Leave.
Signature of Commander.
Bdc., Divn., Area, etc., with which unit is serving.
Wt 43550/1614 560м 3/41
BPL 61/8792
N
REMARKS.
3009 F (R.A.S.C.)
