WO 171/2381
NoTE B. —See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
Not wil bey questi, thot doubt whether or not to tar diary Should by eft be a i
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
ARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration!
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual
n recara to weanons.
equipment
mav de of benent for short.
salsauon and inter-service con
operation which
lter for the Historv of the War
research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
on A C. diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the oficer detailed to keep it,
It 1S to be noted that the ovtroa
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
tion and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
DreDaring a diary •
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
i) Important
orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
* Day cation i. Movemen saferin the pat toventy four hours and present dispoitions.
(ti) Important mätters relating to the dutles of each branch of the ssista
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
ly of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
udordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
tments (Sec. 36), and
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
id his representatives.
y, war duties will be
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary.
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operation turns a in the text t the dha ra the ,, Bople does vi be
umbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
See F.S.R., Volume II.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
on the first day of the
for the sins day to the sur oedin me hi i ect to the afices endie
ned. The the tone entered secold be the time the stormation or order reache
rosinitating renditia of A FS J. 3010 B•+ C
- 142010A rendered is S.H.Q. 2u Colela S/do 34 2/d 11 her 44.
bet-
(Date of Despatch)
(Bde., Dirn., Area, etc., with which Unit is serving.)
But 1 on AT (a) Sinate of Commander)
war parie and doo
pate, the cove mil bo prepared
Setober qu
Month and Year...
lour
Date
Place
Kela
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not reguired).
Summary of Events and Information
62 bezve coctora Maily ni Part area Ollers on
smideny hareport details in laud
hack subwe
me 2230 hous
2 Dubos employed but Poet operatin
Army Form C. 2118.
Unit/01 Coy RAsc (Gen TV)
Commanding Officerkaj HS Arue bang. RASC
References to Appendices
WAR DIARIES SEGION
6 NOV TA
Hã. 2nd
1x/5 entarmento dos detailid:
auchi Mall detacia 5 coney Dealas
l Dubus an ploijed on detailo. Ales 15as
S8 buRns employia. Ou ou land operati
5f Dukes employed on.
detailo
section of
no. (39 Tpt. Col) ma
V. Chi have tom
