WO 171/2381
36), and personal
is representatives.
var diaries will be
NOTE B.-See also A.C.1. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTe C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a
war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-1
The War Office, London, S. W..
will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
PARA. 2de data dian ice to ase fuject is to urments in toy training, equipations,
ang to provide data mist toi
It will be entered
A.F. C.2118.
It is to
nati, cach entry factial a yete if or detailed to keep it, on.
raction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts
NorE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
) Important orda.
no deist os ders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
(i) Daily locations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
No drops
drape reced los india in Pat a C2
red fat molin en Past A. bol.
sitting she redection of A FS V.
prepared in sunscriptes, thic
Month and Year. Jehman 1944
Place
Date
Hour
GORDONS TOON 1
2
3
ON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
mobilisation o1
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
linate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE —Events should be entered up, not
in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
and of each operation or
routine or
der or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(i a on, if each narative or resort on prations draco ip by feet the account of
• wut, inclndi.
tomped, and each wil have a late in of had comming the author. References
(See FAR. Vol dinies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
" Unless atherwin ordered, to the salcody
be forwarded on the first day of t
SPECIAL NOTE.-
-The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
init 101 Seneral Transpor
Army Form G. 211
Commanding Oficer Major A Poole Ate
References to Appendices
4Q for conference bite seach Emo
Cemmande
camid at movement o else fa Exerci
• WOUM 19/104/5224/682
recaved
- -
4
5
at 1500.
arisen.
Stoe fa Exercis
Camed, 5
Charenny.
* Alren. All available behicles used
avenen al 0330 han
on t Craft fe tracin
all vehicle
Vehicle setaneoe pa Charons, at 0300ms, deloaded
I netuned t Chamour..
aft eload, precedes.
Alarm
Wt, 34850,1C76 800,000 11/43 W. H, & S. 61-7676
pre baded aloe fa Exerci
250
