WO 171/2381
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data
organisation and administ which to base future improvements in army training, equiration,
It will be entered up daily.
A.F. C.2118.
intered be naily, hath entry tactial a by the fier depend to ep it, on,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTT.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(*) Ind dant or tre, instructions, reports, messages or despatches reccived and issued,
(i Rate cation i een on de us the op of trenty-our hour and present dispositions
(li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
ordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metrorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para
relat gatheto, a suplement the as ount of
tud each will have a brict descriptive heading mahog the appen. is win be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(Sec F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.— All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Loat Afr 3on
Saturday daing ut.
umns 4 and 5 of Part Ah
Instructi
TEACH
died
Bde. Pion
7701
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
contain Diries and Intellen
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
the SPECT NOThethe tore coted should do to time the information tode toche
Army Forn
Un /01 Coy RASC (Gen. Tot,
Commanding Offer May NSAmustong. RASC
References to Appendices
(Delete heading not required).
Month and Year. lug. ut
Summary of Events and Information
Hou
I azze Bany fling beach t anchorage Rotter ligh
Outus. Commenced operating
1630
LeG in auchorage shelig enemy fun
coased
bositius: Enemy cheugukio, ceased
1800 due consters ampetta.
forward
oberatug:
1910 boamp avillary fine heart if atta ...
WAR DIARIES
9 - SEP 1944
G,H.Q. 2nd ECHELON
areas; avioraft overhead ar
attent fore, Caem area.
Sporadie gunfir
aling beach area.
d.
fuciney aircraft orer; heavy aa
No cortes k work bolay ae Dukus ache
enced operatis; / coaste t work.
Clared.
) 0700 Stee.
pes operating ouring to rough sean
9F (R.A.S.C.)
