WO 171/2381
36), and personal
his representatives.
war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NOTE C.-
-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by
ill be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It Will be
A.F. C.2118
Is to b
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
notly, each he extraction and retention of appendices, maps, to.,
Nott. — It should be made clear that the officer who initials the
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
entries is the commander
Para. 3.—Omitte]
preparing a diary :—
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
larch tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
(isi) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
f mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops al
portant phase
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(ini) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
supplement the account of
Appendice
will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
aming the author. References
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
(See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
"The the time entered should be the time the information et ordet reaches
Flace
regard nine in , on
Intelliol
Army Form C. 211
WAR DIARY
Unit. /01 Cup RASC( Gen.Tak.
not available
Table wil
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Commanding Offer Waj.HS Arustong RASC
Month and Year. Jub. 44
(Delete heading not required).
Date Hour
Summary of Events and Information
Keterences to appenaices
1 0030 Occasioral AA Fil
Heavy artly fore heard APPEN A AN. 3003 x3061
inland. Naval funo aldo in actión
Enemy shelling: ceased:
0200
Daso
Enemy avi activitt.
Enemy shells falling in Beach are an
WAR DIARIES SECTION
contentedly..
Storadio foir form
barones clan to the locatin:
- 8 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
1500/
cation,
all escipe et packed + mit tbe
2000.
Informed not moving bright Read to mone
except for disautting brunts
ceased ofcatio
Pe bacs) at duck
B%,400 11/40 W, H. & S. 61-7670
und:
Wt,84859,1676 800,000 11/43 W. H. & S. 61-7676
