WO 171/2381
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-
—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iti) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
versonal start
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NOTE A.-In the cas
e of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
should be kept by a unit
The van him am no dan i hate c i a vic ding shout a b
PARA, 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ind to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
"Salisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
n regard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operatio
which
Idy De or benent for short.t
rm research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on A.F. C. 2118.
It 19 to be note
that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, êtc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
Nore.—It should be
nade clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
() Id deant os tere, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
case due mith or at trenty our hours and present disposition
(li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
iv) Detailed account of operations
perations, topographical and climatic
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
y of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
•Appendices will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included
(See F.SA., Vol laies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES.
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
" Unles otherwise are test, the or had copy of war dia dy for the preeding me chil
ve forwarded on the first day of th
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are altached
the sPECTAt No The the tine entered should o the tine the information corder reaches
Place
ROTHES!
Month and Yeail.
Yarek/944
Date
Hour
/ 1500
ENIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Mai Pore Vest fog attended confuse al M4. 21 609
ple Cola Pace
Livemen. Cap. Joe abacted to 1D 21
se preCole for dutc.
Unit 101 General Tran
Army Form C. 2
Commanding Officer Mail o
References to Appendices
2
WAR DIARIES SECTION
0925
Doin tool
APR 1944
Comy Commande,
1- Een temper: bite Beach bap
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
x all Commandio offee intoduan ch lin
F.G.C.H. Kela me
Marisual
3
1030
1100
Ries. Inveness
Cape Namera procused in leane
4
51500
Conference
Lt. Ge Nepente, Maja.
Cola.,
Perian
299. Ge Ye be. Cape jacho
IAS
