pg_0022.pdf:
Sheet. 2.
(a) 111 vebiolas will carry a minimum of two men in addition
to the driver.
One sitting beside the driver the other
looking out at the back,
(b) 111 personnel who ther on foot or in volicles will bo in
possession of their aims at all times, and it will bo
a disciplinary offenco for thosa who fail to comply.
(o) During a move administrative vehicles must have an escort,
in particular the tail of any column on the move.
6 POW
There will be overy indusement for POW to try and escape
after capture.
Up to
data ve have been accustomed to provide
very small escorts.
In future, the basis of escorts will
be six men per twenty
fivo POW whon marching,
two at the
Iront two at the roar and one on cither flank.
Whenever
possible POW will be evacucted in Ipt with three mon per veh
ns escort.
7. Hood and cigarettos
The Germans are short of food and the handing of either food
or cigarettes to civilians or soldiers is forbiden unless
on receipt of an order to do so from an officer.
it is forbiaden to take food from local inhabitants.
Saferuarding of wehs and stores.
At no time will vehs or stores be left unattended and
procautions will be taken against sabotago.
9.
Security
(a) Both W/I and L/I will be more than ever likoly to
intercertion.
It will be treated in the same way as iT.
No intentions as regards future moves or plans wili be
montioned in clenr.
(b) 111 officers and men will alwys be in possession of their
identity documanta mud tuards end centrios will inspect those
of any officer on soldier on they do not recognise.
(c) The danger of 5th columnists in British or imerican uniform
must never be lost sight of.
(2) Accept NO order fron an offico who is not personally
recognised or vouched for within the unit.
10. Conclusion.
The above points do not cover every point or precaution, but
should be sufficient to gride all ranks in the principle of
maintaining "VIGILINCE" at ali times.
Onls by strict compliarice
with these orders will we save unnecessary
• loss of life and
equipment at a time when we least desiro it.
They will be made
known to all ranks.
(Signed)
D.S. GORDON. Bris.
Comd. 151 (Durhom) Inf- Bdo.

