NorE B. — See also A.C.I. 533 of 1911, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detail a contrapper in diat oaf potatoes post, factor opting
mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
i) Changes in establishment or strength
i addition in the case of units on the I.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc
vll) Metcorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, wether mintary or ponucal.
occur, or come to notice.
OT Reton she be entered up, not in the order
the order a ven thi ht be th time they
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
war diaries will be
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
FAS. Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
will be enteted be did that the en
toP, Car day sno he noted that be citractions Ad
NOTD.-
on mont he made cal, the the offer to suite the entre i the commander
-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
und decisions taken.
(i) Daily locations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
or tre dimricion to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
and Echelon to be transmitted to record ofices at home tore monuts do the officer i/c
he unit concerneu.
SpECT NO. - The in entered should be the ting the ren ti he to tastes.
Return by (20/11/2025 07:00:04
WO 171/426
14624323
AR DUAN
BETT
Month and Year... Feb 44...
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE-SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Bulford
Larkhill
Diy changed over to system of "Field Documentation".
N. I I
NIL
1 Airborne It Ik Sqn re-organized and re-designated "Airborne Ard Recce
Regt" - Serial 34093 effective date 14 Jan Ll - Authority WO letter
20/Nise/2447/AG 17/A dated 4 Feb 44.
NI L
N I I.
NIL
NIL
N I I
N. I It.
torm © 2118.
"Д/Q"
init..
6 Airborne Div
Commanding Officer ajor-General CAA, CAR, 035,10:10..
References to Appendices
Document 4:
Document 5:
Docume
Documen
Document
Document 3
