The Italian Campaign
The docks units included in the Order of Battle for operation "Baytown"
were:
A detachment Docks Group Headquarters.
Two Docks Operating Companies.
One I.W.T. (Port) Operating Company.
A detachment Port Maintenance Company.
A detachment "Z" Craft Operating Company.
Reggio di Calabria was soon captured and put into use, and, despite sporadic
though relatively ineffective enemy air attacks, 1,400 tons a day were cleared
through the port.
Owing to the rapid advance it was sood necessary to open
San Venero and Crotone, in order to shorten the overland lines of communi!
On 14th September the first ship was discharged at San Venero, all
cargo being cleared to DUKWs and "Z" craft in the absence of alongside
Two days later Crotone, which was taken in good working order,
was opened to shipping, a daily average of 1,200 tons being discharged.
Following the occupation of Sapri the coaster anchorage at that place was
opened and the first ship commenced discharge on 22nd September.
The port units included in the Order of Battle for the Salerno landings
(operation "Avalanche") were:-
One Docks Group Headquarters.
Three and a half Docks Operating Companies.
A detachment Port Maintenance Company.
The majority of the personnel of these units sailed in the assault convoy, in
the ships which they were to discharge on arrival at the Salerno beaches.
Despite enemy opposition from the air and long-range artillery, ship working
proceeded satisfactorily, though the need to anchor beyond effective gun range
lengthened the time of turn-round between ship and shore and aggravated the
shortage of ferry craft.
By 12th September Salerno was captured and a small
vessel entered the port, but owing to the enemy's proximity ship discharge was
impracticable until the 22nd.
Early in October the ports of Castellamare and Torre Annunziata were
captured and taken into use, and on the 10th October Naples was opened,
though few alongside berths were immediately available owing to the very
extensive demolitions in that port.
After a short period the Americans assumed
responsibility for the Naples group of ports, but the British units including
a "Z" craft detachment from Calabria) continued to assist until the end of
November when they moved over to the east coast.
Following the Italian surrender in early September and the launching of
Operation "Elstree," the port of Taranto was opened for military traffic on
16th September by a docks detachment from North Africa; by the end of the
month 40,000 tons had been
Brindisi, Bari and Barletta were
taken undamaged and opened to shipping on 27th September, 3rd October and
8th October respectively; together with Taranto they remained the principal
points of entry
all allied shipping to the east
As additional units arrived from Sicily, Calabria and Naples, one Group
H.O. assumed charge of Taranto and Prindisi and the other Group of Bar
and Barletta the nimkar af unite in sach Groun heing varied from time t
time according to the incidence of work.
The average daily tonnage rose from
8,000 tons to 14,000 tons by the end of November and remained at about the
latter figure until July, 1944.
Throughout this period there was a general
tendency for traffic to increase through Bari and to diminish through the other
three ports.
In accordance with usual policy attempts were made to employ
civilian stevedores to the maximum possible extent, but results were disap-
pointing; Italian dockers were short of food and clothing and their output was
Ancona was captured in July, 1944, and though very badly damaged as
the result of both air bombardment and enemy demolitions, it was taken into
use as a main port and depots were established in the neighbourhood.
number of serviceable alongside berths was so small that some 60 per cent.
of the tonnage landed during the first month of operation was discharged to
craft, all of which had been brought up the coast in the absence of any captured
craft fit for use.
Ancona remained the principal forward port until the final
advance brought the campaign to an end in May, 1945, thereby making available
the large north Italian ports of Genoa, Venice and Trieste.
Among the subsidiary operations in which docks personnel participated
was the Anzio landing, the Order of Battle for which included a Docks Operating
Conditions were in many, respects similar to those at Salerno,
although there was not the same shortage of craft and the landing of stores
was facilitated by the early capture of the small harbour at Anzio.
Until their arrival in Italy, I.W.T. units had not been concerned a great
deal with the actual manning of harbour craft, but had been occupied rather
with the organization and supervision of lighterage work in ports.
the mainland, however, it was found that, as little or no demolition had been
effected by the enemy, some harbour craft were available in the Heel ports
for operation by I.W.T. troops.
The lessons of Africa had indicated that it was necessary to have a supply of
lighters available for use in heavily damaged ports, and a large number of
pre-fabricated barges had been ordered from Canada and the United States.
These craft were assembled by the available Port Maintenance Companies
and by an I.W.T. Workshops Company which was formed in the theatre.
Craft were erected in four locations, and by the end of June, 1944, 255 had
The I.W.T. organization, fully equipped with craft, made a large contri-
bution to the work of the ports and accelerated the turn-round of ships.
the end of June, 1945, 1,565,813 tons had been handled by I.W.T. in eastern
Owing to the expansion of this branch of transportation work it was
necessary to increase the number of I.W.T. units available; the only way to do
this was to form Italian I.W.T. (port) operating companies and three such
units were formed from personnel of the Italian Navy.
ciency of these units was, however, not high, and it was found preferable to
dispense with their services altogether once an adequate civilian organization
A considerable amount of coastwise movement
was carried out by I.W.T. troops.
The first large move was the transfer of tugs,
dumb barges and ramped cargo lighters (R.C.L.s) from the Heel ports to
Ancona; 120 craft were involved in this operation.
north as Venice were subsequently undertaken.
The port maintenance commitments in Italy were at first covered on the
east coast by two companies, one working at Brindisi and Taranto and the other
WO 27
2:
W027,
28
