prepared by the Shipping sub-branch.
In these, there were included, apart
from materials for definite projects as estimated from air reconnaissance, certain
quantities of general stores for initial stocking of depots and a few spare parts
for the first major items of plant to be brought into the theatre.
As already mentioned, initial supplies of stores were held in the Tn. stores
depots at home and the Tn. Stores branch of 21 Army Group had little physical
control over them.
It was, however, agreed that stores for one pott area in
the phased programme should be concentrated at Marchwood to suit the port
construction and repair plan.
Two coasters were allocated to P.C. and R. and
the materials held at Marchwood were to be loaded into these two vessels for
eventual delivery to captured ports.
Establishment of Depots
The general stores plan for the period immediately following the assault
was that stores for all services were to be worked over the beaches into previously
allocated beach maintenance areas and thence into depot locations known as
L. of C. terminals.
The intention was to operate two Tn. stores depots and
one Tn. stores spare parts depot; advance parties of a Group H.Q. and one
company landed on D + 5 and the remainder of these units on D + 10.
It was found, however, that these advance parties should have been landed
earlier, as Tn. stores already landed had been distributed between the depots
of other services,
amd considerable delay was experienced in locating these
stores and removing them to Tn. dumps.
Sites for Tn. stores depots were reconnoitred and two depots were eventually
opened, one at No. 1 Army roadhead at Luc-sur-Mer and the other at No. 2
Army roadhead at St. Martin des Entrées, near Bayeux.
A site for a spare
parts depot was also selected adjoining the St. Martin depot.
In addition to
operating these depots, personnel of the stores company were allocated to the
beach groups to act as the first port detachments.
Early in July it was decided
that the St. Martin depot should become the main base depot for Tn. stores,
and it was gradually expanded accordingly.
Also during July, several small
sub-depots were set up to meet the needs of I.W.T. and of" Mulberry" construc-
tion.
By the end of July, there were four Tn. stores depots in operation at
Luc-sur-Mer, St. Martin des Entrées (main depot),
Ouistreham and Arro-
manches: there were also four spare parts depots at St. Martin des Entrées
(main depot), Courseulles, Ouistreham and Arromanches.
By the end of the
first week in August, there were three stores companies in the theatre.
With the capture of Cherbourg and the opening of the port, the off-loading
of locomotives and wagons, and of a fair tonnage of permanent way, bridging
and cement, was started in August.
Owing to movement difficulties these items
could not be moved to the depots in the Bayeux area, and a detachment was
therefore sent to the British stores transit area at Cherbourg and a small dump
started there.
In mid-August, a detachment was also sent to Caen to safeguard
spares found in the locomotive workshops there and to establish a sub-depot
for stores needed in the several port projects in the area.
Almost from the day of landing, the Stores Group H.Q. had been inundated
with requests for stores not included in the earlier shipments.
While certain
deficiencies could be and were met from other services in the field, many items
had to be referred back to H.Q., and every sosible means was used by the
Shipping sub-branch to ket stores across the beach-head, including despatch by
170
tion and repair coasters.
air and express coaster and the use of any spare space on the two port construe-
In July, special provision had to be made for two important projects, the
"vinterization" of the Mulberry harbour and the rehabilitation of ports.
Many
additional stores demands were placed for immediate delivery, and special action
ad to be taken regarding the shipment of large quantities of steel pling for the
Mulberry project.
The majority of the special stores demanded for these
projects were handled through the depot at Marchwood and shipped by the
port construction androp in coastes.
During July and August it was necessary
to provide stores to stock a second base north of the river Seine, as a resuit of
which further supplementary demands were placed,
By this time it became necessary to revise the system of progressing demands
and recording availabilities in the H.Q. Stores branch.
In the middle of
August rear headquarters of 21 Army Group moved overseas, but the main
party of the In. Stores branch remained in the United Kingdom, primarily to
complete records and also to make out the first forecasts of requirements to be
placed on heads of services in 21 Army Group to cover the period January to
June,
1945.
The balance of the branch moved overseas in mid-September,
leaving the second Stores Group H.Q. in the United Kingdom as a rear link.
Organization of Supply during Advance through Belgium
On 14th September, 1944, a small captured depot of bridging material was
taken over at Hal by a stores detachment, and towards the end of the month
the remainder of the unit moved to a captured German permanent way depot
at Vilvorde, near Brussels.
In the first week of October a reconnaissance was
made and a site selected for a Tn. stores depot in the Antwerp area; a detach-
ment was sent forward to collect and take charge of captured stores in the area
and to organize the new depot.
Following the break-through and the movement of the Armies into Belgium
and Holland, the problem confronting Tn. Stores was that the majority of stores
were still being supplied through Normandy and the main theatre stocks were
in the Rear Maintenance Area in Normandy.
Ports north of the Seine were
gradually being opened and, in theory, the additional stores which had been
ordered in July and August should now have come forward to stock the forward
depots.
These stores were delayed, however, and it therefore became necessary
to move up from the Rear Maintenance Area, by train and coaster, all the
stores required.
From the start of the campaign, the provision of coal and oil for transporta-
tion use was dealt with by the Tn. Stores branch.
It did not, however, become
a major job until September when demands increased in proportion to In.
commitments.
Except for a small operational reserve of oil, coal and oil were
not handled by the Tn. Stores depots, the supplying service arranging delivery
direct to the consumer.
Details of all requirements for the Tn. service were
co-ordinated by Tn. Stores and demanded from Supplies and Transport at
H.Q. 21 Army Group.
One of the major tasks at this time was the supply of stores to the French,
Belgian and Netherlands Railways to enable them to operate as essential links
in the lines of communication.
Many lists of stores required by these railways
were received and examined by the Director of Railways before any action was
taken. The problem was to ensure that only stores required to run the railways
171
WO 27 7)
