SECTION 7.-PORT CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Planning
When the invasion of the Continent was first planned, it was realized that
it would be extremely difficult to obtain the necessary degree of surprise for a
successful attack on the Atlantic Wall.
The Germans, rightly appreciating
that a force of the size necessary for such an operation could not be maintained
over open beaches for more than a short period and that the early occupation
of a port was therefore of vital importance, had concentrated a large part of
their defensive plan on ensuring the security of the Channel ports.
Mulberry
A plan was therefore conceived whereby ports should be constructed in the
United Kingdom, towed across the Channel and planted at selected points on
the Continental coast.
These artificial ports were known by the code name of
Mulberry.
The two main components of Mulberry were breakwaters and piers.
The
breakwaters consisted of lines of concrete caissons, known as Phoenix, ranging
in size from 2,000 to 6,000 tons.
The Phoenix units, each of which required
two large tugs for the tow across the Channel, were sunk in depths of water
up to five and a half fathoms, and their size was so arranged that as far as possible
the exposed portion of the breakwater above the surface of the sea was of uniform
height.
Other breakwaters were formed by sinking blockships in varying depths
up to two and a half fathoms.
The havens of sheltered water formed by these
breakwaters were known as Gooseberries.
The piers, known by the code word
"Whale," were prefabricated, made up into tows, some of which were about
600 feet long, and towed across the Channel.
At site, these tows were made
up into pier roadways, the longest of which was three quarters of a mile.
Pier-
heads consisted of floating steel pontoons, and these were brought across
separately and attached to the ends of the floating roadways.
Hospital ships,
coasters and barges could then berth alongside.
Roadways and pierheads
were free to rise and fall with the tide and provided a Class 25 road link between
the ship's side and the shore.
It was originally planned that two artificial ports should be erected, Mul-
berry ' A" in the American Sector and Mulberry
'B" in the British Sector.
But in a great storm between 19th and 22nd June, 1944, the American Mulberry
was very badly damaged and this, coupled with the loss of a number of com-
ponents while on tow across the Channel, led to the decision to abandon
Mulberry "A" and to concentrate all remaining components, including any
that could be salvaged from the American Sector,
on the completion and
strengthening of the British Mulberry at Arromanches.
The assembling of the various components of Mulberry B" at Arromanches
was entrusted to a special Port Construction
Force.
Survey and preliminary
work for the Whale piers started early on 7th June (D + 1) and by 9th June
(D + 3) about 1,500 feet of the centre pier and 600 feet of the east pier had been
built and the shore approaches constructed.
The first Phoenix was planted
on 10th (D + 4), and the following day the Gooseberries were completed so
that it was possible for craft to discharge in sheltered water.
Ry 15th June
(D + 9) the east stores pier, complete with one pierhead, was ready to receive
ships, though stores were not actually discharged over the first pier until 23rd
162
June.
Owing to the time taken to salvage components from Mulberry "A."
the L.S.T. (landing ship, tank) pier was not completed until 17th July.
Repair of Small Ports
At the same time as the special Task Force for the construction of Mulberry
"B," other port construction and repair units were landed with the port operating
units to repair the small ports of Port-en-Bessin, Courseulles and Ouistreham.
Apart from a few craters in walls and quays caused by Allied shell fire, Port-en-
Bessin was found to be undamaged, and the only work required the clearance
of anti-tank walls to re-open the approaches, and the removal of a sunken ship.
was done by the Navy.
To provide easier and deeper access, the river channel
running through the entrance was straightened by bull-dozers working at low
tide, and an extra two feet of draft was made available for coasters by this means.
The severe storm in the latter part of June caused damage to the sea walls in
places, and repairs were carried out.
At Courseulles, except for the damaged entrance jetties and very heavy silt
and gravel deposits in the entrance, the port proper was found to be in working
order.
There were no prepared demolitions, but a number of anti-personnel
mines had to be cleared.
The inner basin was dredged by drag-line, and the
quay wall, which had been damaged by enemy bombing, was restored.
lay-by area for small craft was prepared, and work was carried out on the
construction of additional hards for P.B.R.s (ramped power barges).
The port of Ouistreham was entered by a reconnaissance party on 7th June
and was found to be undamaged except for a plate girder bridge which had
been dropped into a lock.
Demolition charges had been placed but had not
been fired, and these were removed.
The power house and machinery for the
locks had been damaged by Allied shell fire.
The port was under shell and
mortar fire from the enemy, and no major work could therefore be undertaken.
As a result of enemy action, the canal was breached at the south end and the
water level fell.
As the lock gates were not designed to take a reverse load,
these had to be strutted.
During July, the damaged bridge over the lock at Ouistreham, which had
been repaired, was again hit and had to be removed to prevent possible damage
to the lock gates.
Sunken craft in the entrance channel were broken up by
divers and cleared.
Reconnaissance parties were ordered forward to Caen
on 21st July, and the port was found to have suffered considerable damage as
a result of the fighting in the area.
The barrage on the Orne had been destroyed,
and the construction of a dam was therefore begun on 23rd July to maintain the
level of water in the canal.
The withdrawal of the enemy from the area com-
manding the entrance to Caen made it possible to start work at the Ouistreham
end of the canal on 20th August.
The lock gates were tested and found to be
satisfactory, and the first vessels passed through on 24th August.
Demolished
bridges over the Caen-Ouistreham canal had meanwhile been cleared.
During
August quays were cleared of debris at Caen and craters filled in.
New quays
were constructed on the west bank of the canal, using pontoon piers.
Work on Mulberry and Opening of Channel Ports
Work on the winterization of Mulberry proceeded during July and August.
Several of the Phoenix units were raised and re-sited, and some were filled with
163
WO27
2
W02
7
