Suez and Ataka in the Canal Zone, and at Safaga and Akaba further south,
and improvements to existing wharves and docks at Port Said, Fanara, Alex-
andria and Port Taufiq.
New plans provided for the construction of four
deep-water berths at Marakeb, opposite Suez; four at Adabiya Bay, south of
Suez; four at Safaga; and two at Akaba, at the head of the gulf of that name.
Two of the Safaga berths and those at Akaba were never completed, while
the other two at Safaga were never used to any great extent.
The berths at
Marakeb and Adabiya Bay were completed too late to be of use during the peak
period of imports at Suez when the Eighth Army was advancing rapidly towards
Tunis in the winter of 1942/43.
In July, 1942, after the retreat to Alamein, the port of Alexandria became
temporarily very quiet, and advantage was taken of this lull to improve and
increase the rail facilities on the quays.
This work proved of great value during
1943 and 1944, when these quays were in full use for exports.
Following the battle of Alamein in October, 1942, Mersa Matruh was
captured on the 8th November, Bardia on the 12th and Tobruk on the 13th;
all three ports were repaired and working within seven days of their capture.
Benghazi was captured on 20th November and repairs were carried out in
conjunction with the Royal Navy.
By the beginning of 1943 the Eighth Army was well on the way to Tripoli,
and the port construction requirements were reviewed.
erected at Alexandria, and it was decided that only seven of the eight proposed
berths in the Suez area should be completed.
Twenty cranes were allocated to
the new berths at Adabiya Bay.
captured on 23rd January.
Enemy demolitions had been
carried out on a large scale, but fortunately the final blockship had been sunk
by the Fleet Air Arm before it could be placed in position; the enemy had
therefore to improvise a block, and this was cleared by 29th January.
of wrecks and debris and repair of port facilities continued, and the capacity
of the port was raised to the target figure of 4,000 tons a day by the end of
The end of the African campaign in May, 1943, removed the need for any
further new construction, but repair and clearance of wreckage and debris
continued in the war-damaged ports.
SECTION 5.—PORT OPERATING
It was not until the end of 1940 that a Transportation Docks organization
was set up in the Middle East.
Up to that time ports had been working with
civilian labour under the control of Sea Transport and Movements, the latter
performing many of the normal functions of Transportation Docks personnel.
The advance into the Western Desert in January, 1941, entailed great difficulty
in providing docks personnel for the captured ports pending the arrival of a
docks group from the United Kingdom.
companies in Palestine, one Jewish and one Arab.
A start was made by raising two
The port of Tobruk was
opened on 28th January and manned by docks personnel, but the majority of
the Egyptian ports continued to work under the control of the Sea Transport
and Movements organizations.
Colonial troops to find personnel for harbour lighterage.
Considerable combing out was done amongst
In February the
ports of Tobruk, Derna, Bardia and Sollum were all working, and the limited
resources of docks personnel were strained to the utmost.
By the end of March,
there was a total of eight docks operating companies in the Command, some
having been formed i additional others came from the United Kingdom.
The formation of two additional companies by absorbing some Movement
Control personnel was approved.
to which some senior docks officers were appointed.
A Combined Training Centre was set up
Docks troops took part in the expedition to Greece early in 1941, operating
in Piraeus and other smaler ports and sultering heavy casualties before being
withdrawn to Crete and Egypt.
In May, 1941, a second Docks Group arrived in Egypt from the United
One Group was now located at Suez, covering Port Said, the Suez
Canal ports and Ataka, while the second Group was located at Alexandria,
covering Haifa and Tobruk, with detachments at Port Sudan, Massawa and
In June, the second Group's responsibilities were extended to cover
Jaffa, Beirut and Tripoli (Syria).
During the summer of 1941 serious conges-
tion of shipping occurred owing mainly to the periodical blocking of the Canal
Ships that should have passed north of the Canal for
discharge had to wait their turn at the Suez ports, and a very considerable
increase in the capacity of this area became essential. Projects undertaken
to cope with the need are described in the previous section of this chapter.
It was also decided to use Port Sudan for the transhipment of vehicles from
large ocean-going ships to smaller ships for eventual discharge at Suez, thereby
shortening the turn-round of the larger ships.
In August, 1941, responsibility for port operation in the Middle East passed
from the Transportation Directorate to the Directorate of Movements.
last months of the year, additional units arrived from India and Mauritius.
A "bonus for good work" scheme was introduced for payment of Arab labour,
and this improved the output considerably.
To deal with the large amount of
paper work involved in connection with documentation and checking and with
financial matters concerning the Arab labour and craft used, a school for
training civilian checkers was started.
During 1942 the number of dock units was increased by one company from
India and two from South Africa.
With the retreat of the Eighth Army to
Alamein came the resumption of heavy bombing of the Delta ports and air
attacks on the Canal, which caused a renewal of congestion at Suez and the
In October, 1942, the Battle of Alamein changed the whole tempo of the
For the next six months the Eighth Army advanced along the
north coast of Africa, its rate of progress controlled not so much by enemy
opposition as by the rate at which the lines of communication could be devel-
The sea route was the main supply line, though the Western
Desert Railway and road transport was also used extensively.
the rapid opening and development of the Western Desert ports became one
of the high lights of the campaign.
All types of ports were used to a greater
or lesser degree, according to requirements; the medium-sized ports of Tobruk,
Benghazi and Tripoli were worked up to a capacity far exceeding anything
dreamed of in peace-time; the small ports of Matruh, Sollum, Bardia, and Derna
were opened for short periods, while beaches, such as Smuggler's Cove, Mersa
Brega, Ras el Ali and Buerat, were used for landing operational stores, the
main item being petrol, which under favourable conditions could be floated
The bigger ports had been badly damaged by the retreating enemy
quays and other shore facilities had been destroyed and ships had been sunk
WO 277/2
WO 27 T/
28
