at Bari and Barletta, while two detachments were employed for a short time on
the west coast. Towards the end of July, 1944, a third company came from North
Africa to relieve the unit at Brindisi and Taranto which then moved to Ancona.
The work of the port maintenance companies expanded steadily as the quantity
of mechanical plant and craft increased, and before the end of the campaign
300 pieces of mechanical plant, 150 powered and 200 dumb craft were being
maintained, besides numerous requisitioned craft of all kinds.
The resources
of all companies were augmented by the employment of large numbers of
civilian tradesmen, and the situation was somewhat eased following the formation
of the f.W.T. Workshop Company referred to above.
Soon after the opening of the east coast ports British shore labour was
replaced by Italian Service personnel.
These troops were dissatisfied with their
conditions, and their general morale was so low that it was only with the utmost
difficulty that reasonable tonnages were achieved; an inordinate number of
British troops had to be allocated for supervision.
Efforts were made to engage
civilian shore labour, but at the rate of pay offered it was found that only labour
of an unsatisfactory kind was forthcoming for dock work.
After the failure of attempts to get higher rates of pay authorized for dock
labour, it was decided to institute quay labour contracts.
This system was very
successful at Bari and resulted in a better type of labour being attracted to
employment in that port, thus relieving transportation troops of much super-
work and generally assisting quay clearance and ship working.
Brindisi and Taranto similar contracts were initiated but did not prove so
successful, owing to the spasmodic nature of the work and to the absence of
suitable contractors.
Shore labour at Ancona was provided entirely by Pioneer
Corps units until the early part of 1945, when civilians were gradually introduced.
In general, docks personnel were, as always,
fully employed throughout
the Italian campaign.
They had been faced with a great variety of conditions,
from beach
work at Salerno and Anzio to operation of the well-equipped
modern port of Bari.
Their work got little limelight and, except during the
assault phases, they saw little of the glamour and excitement of active operations;
but their contribution towards the successful outcome of the campaign had
neverthless been a very substantial one.
SECTION 5.—PORT CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
The North African Campaign
Port construction and repair units in the First Army Order of Battle were:-
One Port Construction and Repair Group Headquarters.
One Port Construction and Repair Company.
One Port Repair Ship.
The Transportation Directorate did not include any element specifically for
port repair and the above units were therefore directed by the Tn. 5 branch.
In the expectation of having to repair deliberate demolitions the units vete
all nominated to arrive earlv. and the Repair Ship was loaded to capacity
with port construction stores Owing to a misundertanding the chin wa
128
first held at Gibraltar and then diverted to assist the Americans at Oran; it did
not reach Algiers until some six weeks after the assault.
Fortunately this was
not a serious matter as there were no demolitions at the British controlled
ports, but in other circumstances the lack of port repair stores might have been
disastrous.
During the campaign there was little important work for the Company
and none at all for Group Headquarters.
Some minor improvements to quays
were undertaken at Algiers and Bone, and from time to time there was work
on the repair of bomb damage, but it was not until the campaign was over that
work started in earnest with repairs at Tunis and La Goulette and the construc-
tion of loading hards for the invasion of Sicily.
The Repair Ship was employed
in assisting the Royal Navy on salvage work, and on ships repairs, until the
capture of Tunis, when it joined other port construction and repair detach-
ments at La Goulette.
The Campaign in Sicily
The units included in the Order of Battle for operation "Husky" were:-
One Port Construction and Repair Group Headquarters.
One Port Construction and Repair Company.
One Port Repair Ship.
The Group had the misfortune to lose its Commanding Officer, who was killed
in action only a few hours after landing.
The ports of Syracuse and Augusta had suffered little damage and the only
work required to put them in perfect order was the usual clearance of debris
and repairs to the quay surfaces.
At Catania, however, the damage was
more serious, due partly to bombing and partly to deliberate demolitions.
All dockside cranes and most of the bollards had been destroyed, craft and
floating cranes had been sunk in the harbour, and some quays had collapsed or
were blocked by sunken ships. In order to prepare the port for its role as a
loading point for the invasion of Calabria a number of repairs and improve-
ments was put in hand, including constructing hards for landing craft, levelling
and clearing assembly areas, repairing water mains and replacing bollards.
The Italian Campaign
Two sections of a Port Construction and Repair Company and a Port
Repair Ship took part in landings on the toe of Italy (operation "Baytown").
Conditions were such that there was little opportunity for port repairs until
Taranto was reached, but some small jobs were carried out including the con-
struction of hards for landing craft and a train ferry terminal at Reggio di
Calabria.
The Repair Ship was employed first on pumping out the dry dock
at Reggio and later on salvage at Crotone until the end of October, when she
moved to Naples.
One Port Construction and Repair Group H.Q. and one Port Construction
and Repair Company participated in the Salerno landings.
In the early stages
these units took their part in an infantry role, in the defence of the beach head
against determined counter attacks.
Following the capture of Salerno they
carried out minor repairs to that port, including the removal of demolition
charges laid, but not fired, by the Germans.
129
v029t
WO 277/2
WO 27 772.
28
