Calcutta
One of the causes of the bad working at Calcutta was the lack of sufficient
intelligent supervision.
Accordingly in December, 1943, a Port Supervisory
Company of 100 low medical category British other ranks was authorized:
their training and subsequent employment was made the responsibility of the
Indian Docks Group at Calcutta.
The arrival of a British docks operating
company in January, 1944, provided a valuable pool of experienced technical
N.C.O,s and men whose knowledge was used to the full. In December, 1943, a
bombing raid on Calcutta Docks again caused a shortage of labour, and once
again docks units were called in to assist.
Pioneer Group were also called in to supply labour.
Troops from the transit camp and a raw
With the appointment
of a Regional Port Director in April, 1944, certain units of the Calcutta Docks
Group were placed at his disposal and deployed throughout the port.
arrangement, though somewhat unorthodox, worked well and greatly improved
tonnages were handled.
companies were formed and trained.
in December, 1944, two addition possesse
Many of these men were subsequently
taught to operate and maintain mobile cranes, of which an increasing number
was now becoming available.
All were trained as portal crane drivers in case of
strikes.
Vizagapatam
Vizagapatam, approximately mid-way between Calcutta and Madras, was
obviously a port to use for supplies for the forces in Burma.
The port had
been used since 1930 for the export of manganese, but the local position was
such that no large-scale undertaking could be organized without considerably
augmenting the port administrative facilities and labour.
A start was made
in 1943, when a Docks Group was located at the port, and a considerable
quantity of vehicles was loaded for Chittagong, thus reducing the load through
Calcutta.
Further Tn.
and Pioneer units were transferred from Calcutta
early in 1944, and a large transit depot was constructed at Waltair.
On 1st April,
1944, Vizagapatam was militarized under a Port Commandant, who controlled
all the operation of the port, both civil and military.
Some of the docks
operating companies were converted into cargo working sections to conform to
the new establishment, and civilian employees were recruited into the Defence
of India Corps (Docks) and given military rank and status.
For some months
traffic was quiet, but in January, 1945, Vizagapatam justified itself when the
Akyab operation was mounted from that port and Calcutta.
Craft Erection
Prefabricated craft from Britain, Canada and the United States began to
arrive in India in the autumn of 1943, and large quantities were programmed
to follow in 1944 and 1945.
Also, with the close of the African campaign,
"Z" Craft fabricated in India for the Middle East were becoming available for
the Eastern theatre.
All civilian yards in Calcutta were already overloaded
with repairs to their own craft, but some were nevertheless constructing river
steamers for Transportation.
A number of make-shift sites in and around
Calcutta were also being used for craft erection, but it was essential to find
additional accommodation and facilities.
The site selected was 12 miles down-stream from Calcutta at the disused
192
jute mills of Fort Gloster. The preparation of the site began in August, 1944
and the work was completed by the middle of 1945.
The project included
construction of slipways, fitting-out basins and workshops; the erection of
hutting for machine shops and stores; the laying of track to serve the yard by
rail; and the reception and storage of large quantities of craft in a knockey-
down condition. The erection of craft began before the project was completed-
In addition to an I.W.T. Workshop Company, an I.W.T. Craft Erection
Company, two Riveting Companies and a Tn. Stores Section, all under the
command of a Workshop Group H.Q., a number of docks personnel were
attached to assist in the discharge of lighters and the operation of mobile
cranes, and several railway units were employed from time to time to assist
in the erection of craft.
Some 2,000 civilians were also employed. In addition
to erecting large steel barges, "Z" craft and ramped cargo lighters, small craft
parts were sorted and despatched to 14th Army for erection on the Chindwin,
and parts for ramped cargo lighters were cut down for overland carriage to
Burma.
SECTION 6.—PORT CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
The main problem in port development in India was to increase the floating
equipment in order to bring the ports up to the required standard and capacity.
Unfortunately, the war in the West required such vast quantities of craft of all
types that little could be spared for this theatre. It was, however, found pos-
sible to provide additional deep water berths in some cases.
Port construction
in India was a responsibility of the Engineer-in-Chief (except in the case of the
Bombay Docks reconstruction referred to below) although port construction
(Tn.) troops were lent for this purpose.
At Bombay, lighterage facilities were developed by the construction of a
new small craft pier and additional lighter frontage.
Road and rail communi-
cations were also improved. At Cochin, new construction carried out by the
Port Authority included extension of the existing jetty to give three 500-feet
berths, and the construction of a new oil fuel jetty.
Madras was given an
additional oil mooring berth and a coal discharge berth, while road and rail
communications were improved.
At. Vizagapatam, which was formerly only
used for the export of manganese and ground nuts, two new lighter wharves,
a loading basin and quay for bulk petroleum, a new loading hard for tank
landing ships (L.S.T.s) and a lay-up berth for lighters were constructed.
existing quays were re-surfaced and a considerable amount of dredging was
carried out.
Road and rail communications were improved considerably,
and a large rail transit depot was constructed at Waltair to serve the port.
At Calcutta, five new import berths, two new personnel and mechanical transport
jetties, new berths for barges and loading hards for L.S.T.s were constructed.
In addition, extensive developments for water supply for shipping were carried
out by the sinking of tube wells ants for crater supply nessary power houses,
and road and rail communications within the port area were greatly improved.
The port of Chittagong was closed in the spring of 1942 and partially dismantled
under the denial policy.
In 1943, however, this port grew considerably in
importance, and the cranes removed in 1942 were replaced. One new deep
water berth was constructed and the existing berths strengthened; the lighter
jetties were was construengthened and increased in number.
193
we
WO271
