was set up, the establishment being very similar to that previously functioning
at Algiers.
Backed by previous experience in Africa, and helped forward by
the acquisition of office accommodation large enough to house both the Ameri-
can M.R.S. and British Transportation, the integrated Headquarters was soon
working with little friction, though the difficulties due to the different organiza-
tions of the two Armies still remained.
In an attempt to resolve these diffi.
culties,
Transportation was again reorganized in May, 1944, by dividing the
main H.Q. into two sub-directorates- Railways and Docks the former being
responsible, technically, to D.G.M.R. and the latter being a British service.
As all British railway and dock operating was, at this time, confined to the
east coast these two sub-directorates were located in eastern Italy.
Following the move of A,F.H.Q. from Algiers to Caserta in July, 1944, and
the departure of the American D.G.M.R. for France in September, 1944, there
were some further reorganizations, of which the most important was the amalga-
mation of the appointments of D.G.M.R. and D.Tn.
The new combined
appointment was held until the end of the campaign by Brigadier R. D. Wag-
horn who, in March, 1944, had succeeded Brigadier R. F. O'D. Gage on the
latter's appointment as D.Tn. 21 Army Group for the invasion of Normandy.
An outstanding feature of the campaign in Italy was the extent of the
strategic demolitions executed by the Germans. In Sicily and Southeastern
Italy the Italians showed a natural reluctance to destroy Italian property; but
to the west and north the Germans exercised no such restraint and the Trans-
portation construction troops were soon committed to the repair of widespread
damage and were fully employed on this task until the end of the war and
after.
SECTION 2.—RAILWAY OPERATING AND WORKSHOPS
The North African Campaign
The units on the First Army Order of Battle were:—
One Railway Operating Group Headquarters.
Two Railway Operating Companies.
One Railway Workshops Company.
Two Railway Mobile Workshops.
At Transportation H.Q. the work of these units was directed by the Tn. 3
Branch, consisting
of one lieutenant-colonel, one major and two captains.
This seemed a pitifully small organization with which to control the extensive
railway system of North Africa and it was obvious that, unless the French
would co-operate, railway transport would have to be on a very meagre scale.
The planning staff assembled early in September, 1942, and after an intensive
study of intelligence reports an appreciation and plan were prepared.
attitude of the civil railway staff could not be estimated, but it was expected
that some at least would co-operate in areas where hostilities had ceased.
was decided that the first effort should be directed to getting the railway working
from Algiers, and that as soon as possible an attempt should be made to e-open
the line from Bone. The American Staff was advised to make an immediate
provisional demand for 250 locomotives and 5,000 wagons, in order that
production in America could be geared up to this probable requirement.
estimate assumed that at least half of the total locomotives believed to be in
106
North Africa would be sabotaged beyond repair. The demand dealt with
standard gauge ee information a ail the metre gauge requirement could not be
assessed from the intoruation sumable. North Africa was known to be very
short of coal of good a a.0, some coal was therefore taken on the first stores
convoy to Algiers, and ast of tons on each 14-day convoy were demanded to
cover the British zone east of Orleansville. In the event, this estimate proved
to be remarkably accurate.
An appreciation, giving the railway plan and
including railway maps, gradient diagrams, station layouts and locomotive
watering points, was prepared and issued to each unit officer on board the
transport some two days after sailing from the United Kingdom.
Following the assault, it was soon established that there had been no demo-
lition or sabotage on the railways and, instead of railway troops being faced
with the physical operation of routes as soon as they could be repaired, it became
clear that their task would be one of assisting the civilian authorities to work
their lines to capacity.
As the operating units arrived they were put to work
promptly with the object of familiarizing themselves with local conditions
and Chemins de Fer Algériens operating practices.
Towards the end of the
month detachments were sent to assist operation of the narrow gauge routes
Bone-La Calle and Ouled Rahmoun-Tebessa where trouble was being
experienced, chiefly owing to machine-gun attacks from the air directed against
the locomotives in those areas.
During December, 1942, efforts were concentrated on increasing the capacity
of the L. of C. from Algiers to the east.
Five intermediate block posts had
already been opened on the long single sections between Algiers and Constan-
tine, and a time-table was prepared giving eleven train paths daily.
shortage of locomotives, it was not possible to utilize all these paths, but an
average of five paths daily was operated for Allied use in addition to French
military and civil traffic and locomotive coal. Operating troops were gradually
moving eastwards where the difficulties were greater than in the Algiers area,
though it was necessary to retain a half company to assist operation of military
traffic in Algiers port and the Base Area.
The Bone-La Calle line was assuming
importance as a line of communication for troops in the coastal region, but its
operation had continued to be unreliable, and on December 15th it was decided
to displace the civilian staff, requisition the line and operate it with troops as
a military railway.
The French railway authorities were strongly opposed to
the employment of British troops in their workshops, but the shortage of loco-
motives was so acute that no resources for repairs could be wasted.
the French protests were overruled and the Railway Workshops Company, on
arrival, was put to work on locomotive repairs in the shops at Algiers and
Sidi Mahbrouk, near Constantine.
By the beginning of 1943 all units had arrived in the theatre and were fully
employed in assisting the civil railways to handle traffic.
Operating troops
were dispersed over great distances, in small detachments, and were difficult
to administer and direct.
The results, however, were satisfactory, for an average
of seven trains daily was worked for Allied use east of Algiers.
Supply of
locomotive coal was proving difficult, because coal demanded on Transportation
account had to be diverted for urgent needs elsewhere, and at one time coal
trains had to be worked from Oran to Constantine at the expense of military
traffic.
During January, 1943, the first of the American railway troops arrived.
The British workshop detachment at Sidi Mahbrouk was replaced by an
107
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/2,
28
