without great difficulty,
involved the examination not only of alternative
bridging sites, but also of two viaducts, a tunnel blocked by a partially destroyed
rail-mounted gun battery, another seriously damaged tunnel and numerous
damaged or destroyed minor bridges and works.
The site selected was at
Le Manoir, and the new bridge, 500 feet in length, was constructed and opened
for use on 22nd September.
At the same time an avoiding line a quarter of a
mile long was constructed in order to by-pass two damaged viaducts.
The
total earthwork amounted to 90,000 cubic yards, and was carried out in fourteen
days.
In the meantime, the advance across Northern France and Belgium had
taken place.
An Advance H.Q. of the Tn. Directorate was set up at Amiens to
co-ordinate reconnaissance and repair east of the Seine, and a Group moved
to Douai.
Although the damage, caused mainly by
Allied bombing,
waC
very heavy at railway centres it was far less than expected on the open line,
and by using by-pass routes a L. of C. was run through to Neerpelt in north-
east Belgium.
The major obstacles on the main route were the two Somme
bridges east of Amiens and the canal bridge at Hal, south of Brussels.
The
Somme bridges were repaired and opened at the same time as the Seine bridge.
For the construction of the Seine and Somme bridges and repairs to
approaches,
1,180 tons of bridging stores were brought up from Normandy
by road in twelve days.
The Hal bridge was by-passed satisfactorily by a
subsidiary route.
During this phase civilian railway engineers came forward
quickly to put repairs in hand, and in Belgium contractors were found making
preparations for work
within a very short time of the enemy's departure.
While the Seine and Somme bridges were under construction traffic was worked
forward across the
gaps from railheads in the Forêt
de Londe area,
and
railtails were established at selected stations east of the Seine.
This called for
extremely rapid construction in existing station yards.
A certain amount of
traffic was worked past the Somme gap by use of the secondary line via
Doullens, which was put into working order although it had been considerably
damaged by bombing.
During October railway construction was in progress at widely scattered
locations from west of the Seine to the Maas, but the general shift of units
continued eastwards.
At this time it was found convenient to allot a Group
to each of the 1st Canadian and 2nd Army areas, but the Groups remained
under the direct control of the Transportation Directorate for major works.
The maintenance of the L. of C. from the Rear Maintenance Area to northern
France became a considerable problem at this time, and a complete Group
had to be allotted to this task.
A fourth Group was engaged on all other work
in north-east France from the Seine to the Belgian frontier and on the repairs
required in the ports of Calais and Boulogne.
Antwerp
At Antwerp the damage was comparatively light, but nevertheless a con-
siderabantwer the damage was com doratito make it possible to handle the
required traffic.
The extensive north márshalling yards, built for operating
the modern North. Docks were considerably damaged by mortar and shell
fire, and in addition the enemy had lifted and removed 35 miles of track and
207 turnouts from the rail layout in the port area.
•No extensive railway
construction was carried out for Antwerp as a base, the principal new rail-
156
the other at Antwerp.
served depots being two Tn. Stores depots, one at Hal for bridging stores and
Other services were able to exploit existing installations:
Holland
In the Netherlands the problem of 100 per cent. railway bridge destruction
was met for the first time.
The majority of the bridges were over canals, few
less than 100 feet wide.
At this stage the demand for railway construction
forces reached its maximum.
Towards the end of November the additional
labour working with the railway construction units included 18 Pioneer com-
panies, 2 docks operating companies, 2 railway operating companies,
and a
port maintenance company, making a total of 10,800 men employed.
During
November nineteen bridges, six of them for double line traffic, were opened,
and work was in progress on twenty-two others.
4,000 feet of standard bridging
was drawn from depots and used during the month.
In November and December, the water in the Seine rose to a higher level
than at any time since 1910.
The bridge at Le Manoir stood up, although the
water rose nearly to rail level and flowed at a speed of 10 knots.
During the
flood the bridge was kept constantly loaded with twenty-five coal wagons,
and by rafting trains over by means of locomotives operating on the approaches,
traffic was kept going except for three days, when occupation was necessary to
effect protective works.
By the end of 1944, lines were open to the river Maas at Ravenstein and Mill
and railheads were available within ten miles of the forward positions of the
Armies.
The main routes out of Antwerp were open and repairs to the northern
marshalling yards were complete.
Further west it had been possible to hand
over the majority of the heavy maintenance commitment to the American Army
and the S.N.C.F.
One Group was still committed to works in north-east
France and the Channel ports.
During the first six months of the campaign,
75 railway bridges, comprising 202 separate spans, had been wholly or partly
reconstructed by British railway construction and ancillary units.
Twenty-
eight of these bridges carried two or more lines.
The Maas to the Rhine
The next phase of the campaign was the clearing of the area between the Maas
and the Rhine preparatory to the build-up for the assault across the Rhine.
On 4th February, 1945, the bridge over the Maas at Ravenstein was opened to
traffic and the L. of C. extended to Nijmegen.
Railheads were required as
close to the Rhine as possible in the area of Cleve, Goch and Geldern.
The
line from Nijmegen to Cleve was subject to enemy observation and was flooded
to four feet depth.
It was therefore decided to build two new lines, one of 37
miles to avoid Nijmegen, and the other 8 miles in length from Mook-Middelaar,
to Gennep.
The latter line was completed in 21 days.
By the end of March,
1945, ten railheads were in operation for the build-up and support of the assault
into Germany and a further route was opened by the completion of the new
bridge across the Maas at Gennep.
In the plan for the advance into Germany the following factors were taken
into account.
kridoe reconstruction cuckoo. ste that the repair of the railway
The approach via Nijmegen, Arnhem and Zutphen would involve
would be too slow to be useful.
The Wesel Munster route was allocated to
the American Army.
A new bridge over the Rhine at a point between Nijmegen
157
WO 277/2
2
WO27773
28
