of all types, including 227 powered craft.
Because the importance of the
Persian L. of C. was increasing all the time there was a tendency for the Karun
riverhead at Ahwaz to be congested, while towing units on the Tigris were
only partially employed.
The formation of Persia and Iraq Command in September, 1942, had little
effect on the organization except to lay stress on "Aid to Russia" efforts.
Pending the opening of the Kut-Baquba railway, Russian cargo was being
carried by inland water transport to Baghdad and thence by rail to Khanagin
In September, 1942, a joint Anglo-Russian reconnais-
sance party investigated a new route by rail to Kirkuk, thence by road to
Haidarabad at the southern end of Lake Urmia, across the lake to Sharif
Khaneh and thence by broad gauge railway to Russia via Julfa.
be quite practicable, but was rendered unnecessary by the rapid
development of the Persian ports and railway.
The new regulator at Chahala was completed in July and came into use
By agreement with the Iraqi Government Irrigation Depart-
ment, the Chahala and Majarr Kebir regulators were operated alternately,
the Buteira regulator was blocked and maintained at a constant head of one
metre and the Micheriyah was ignored because it was comparatively insignificant.
The effect on navigation was considerable: instead of the repeated groundings
which had been a notable feature of the 1941 low-river season, a minimum
channel of four feet depth was maintained in the Narrows throughout 1942.
The Kut-Baquba railway was completed at the end of November, and
Kut wharves were opened to general traffic in December.
time, I.W.T. were discharging "Aid to Russia" cargo at Kut faster than it
could be moved forward.
The first contingent of Chinese artisans arrived
the majority were vastly superior in skill to the
Indian tradesmen.
These men subsequently proved a serious administrative
problem, largely owing to confusion regarding their military status, but
segregation in their own camp near the Dockyard and an improved ration
scale resulted in a considerable reduction in absenteeism, crime and disease.
The workshops and dockyards could not have dealt with the ever increasing
volume of work without this contingent.
By the end of 1942 the organization of I.W.T. Persia and Iraq was fully
developed and two Deputy Directors (Operations and Engineering) had been
appointed.
The organization at this time is shown in the Appendix to this
chapter (page 101).
The peak of the I.W.T. effort was reached in the spring of 1943, and
an average of 5,208 tons of cargo was handled daily in May (2,076 river
traffic and 3,132 harbour lighterage).
Although this tonnage was subsequently
exceeded, it was only when I.W.T. efforts had been concentrated on port
The total ton-mileage for May, 1943, was 11,300,000.
included large quantities of grain from the Hai district down to Basra for
export to India, and also bricks from the Kut-Abdullah kilns down the Karun
Considerable resources were also employed on cross-river, inter-
port and Gulf ferry services, the only direct communication between Bushire
and Bahrein at this time being provided by I.W.T. fortnightly coaster service
from Basra.
high water levels.
River navigation was very dificult at times owing to exceedingly
Serious trouble was also caused at the Kut lock, where
flood conditions, with no difference in level above and below the barrage,
caused silting up of the lock gates.
By June, 1943, unit strength exceeded 10,000 all ranks, including nearly
200 officers, 600 British other ranks, 400 Chinese and 6,000 Indian other ranks,
the balance being made up of locally engaged Iraqis, Persians, Kurds and Arabs.
With the increase in officer strength and the implementation of the full estab-
lishment of warrant officers and N.C.O.s more attention could now be given
to the military and welfare aspects of the organization. An I.W.T. Battle
School was opened at Kut, and this subsequently proved of considerable value
in selecting personnel to be posted to the United Kingdom for the invasion
Training, discipline and turnout were improved, and hygiene
and anti-malaria precautions on board ship were tightened up. An education
centre was opened to give lessons in languages and to run courses in engineering,
navigation and allied subjects.
Two I.W.T. security officers were appointed,
and succeeded in reducing the incidence of theft and in recovering considerable
amounts of stolen property.
Fleet strength passed the four figure mark early in April, 1943, and had
reached 1,300 by the end of June.
This threw a tremendous burden on the
Base Workshops, which were rapidly approaching completion. Continual
trouble was being experienced with Eureka tow-boat engines, especially with
broken crankshafts and cylinder heads.
As there were no spares of any sort
available for these engines or for the various types of engines used in local
craft, the welding and moulding shops were kept working at top pressure
repairing damaged and making new parts.
Decline of I.W.T. Lift
Early in 1943, India recalled the towing units which had been sent in 1941
and 1942, and they were converted for the sea passage and sailed as soon as
they were ready.
A total of 22 steamers and 20 barges were involved.
The second half of 1943 showed a gradual decline in inland water transport
tonnages, but a sudden increase in harbour lighterage during the months of
November and December restored the daily average to early 1943 levels.
general decline was attributable to the increasing proportion of cargo being
carried by rail both in Iraq and Persia. In Iraq, the British military commit-
ment had been reduced to such an extent that the bulk of "Aid to Russia"
cargo for Khanaqin could now be sent by rail via Baghdad, while in Persia
the importation of diesel locomotives and the extension of the railway from
Ahwaz to Khorramshahr and Tanuma were rapidly rendering an I.W.T. service
up the Karun unnecessary.
The rail extension to Tanuma was to serve the
Chibassi Basin, which had been developed for barge discharge on the left bank
of the Shatt-el-Arab opposite Muftieh, Basra.
In addition to the large basin,
there was a road and rail transfer yard which was connected by the Hull Bridge
at Coal Island to the Iraq metre gauge railway system.
The Hull Bridge was
handed over to I.W.T. for operation in September, 1943; it was a timber piled
structure designed for both road and rail traffic, and was unique in that the
centre span was lowered into the water to permit navigation.
July saw the finish of the most northerly I.W.T. commitment, the carriage
of gravel from Belad, 100 miles north of Baghdad: two of the Gulf outstations,
Bushire and Um Qasr, were also closed.
The former was an "Aid to Russia"
port which had been rendered
superfluous by the rapid development of
Khorramshahr and Bandar Shahpur; and Um Qast, which was designed as
a relief port to Basra in case of emergency, was no longer required.
WO 277/2
WO 2777z
28
