in the anchorages, so that lighterage was in most cases the only means for
clearance of cargo and vehicles from the ships.
Craft were always in short
supply, but the "Z" craft, manned by Indian engineers, were an invaluable
Mersa Matruh was opened on the 15th November, and closed 6 days later
after averaging 328 tons a day.
Bardia was opened on the lith, and also
Tobruk, captured on November 13th, was in use
from the 20th, but with the capture of Benghazi and the extension of the
Western Desert Railway to Tobruk Harbour it was soon used, not for imports,
but for the on-shipment to Benghazi and beyond of supplies brought up by
Derna was entered on the l6th November, but was hardly used at all as
Benghazi was captured on the 20th, and rapidly brought into use, the tonnage
handled after the first week being more than double the planned figure.
the end of the fourth week the port was dealing with 2,500 tons a day.
end of December, however, a storm breached the outer breakwater and the
capacity fell to 1,500 tons a day.
The Eighth Army overcame this setback by
advancing to Tripoli with one corps instead of two, and using the transport
of the other corps to lift stores forward from Tobruk.
On 23rd January, 1943, Tripoli was captured.
The port had been blocked
and badly damaged, and it was not until 30th January that ships could enter.
By the end of March the target figure of 4,000 tons a day had been reached.
Discharge at first was entirely by lighter, and an important part was played
by Indian "Z" craft which had made the journey round the coast under their
Air attacks were frequent but not heavy, and on only one occasion
was there any serious damage to shipping or port facilities.
In the early months of 1943 imports began to decline, but exports increased.
These included regular shipments to Malta.
The flow of supplies to the Western
Desert ports continued satisfactorily, and some docks personnel were transferred
from Port Said to work in the Desert ports.
Four of the new berths at suez
were opened in March, and additional cranes were installed at Alexandria.
Tobruk ceased to be used as a port in March, and docks personnel were moved
Sfax was captured on 10th April.
In May, congestion occurred
at the base ports owing to an increase in imports coinciding with important
operational loadings which had to have priority.
In June, the loading and
mounting of the Sicilian campaign was completed.
The strain on manpower
was relieved by the formation of another stevedore battalion from Royal
Armoured Corps personnel.
The amount of traffic
remained high for the third quarter of the year, but towards the end of the year
imports again started to decline, and the port of Safaga was closed.
The amount of traffic continued to be high during 1944, in spite of the fact
that Africa was no longer a theatre of active operations.
The Middle East
was being used for the maintenance of the Armies in Italy, and stocks were
being built up for potential operations in South-East Europe.
quantities of commercial cargo, mainly grain and other foodstuffs, were also
In October, landings were effected in Greece and the loading of some
ships for the South of France landings was carried out.
Exports from Egyptian
ports now, for the first time, began to exceed imports, as not only military stores
but also food for the liberated territories were shipped to Europe.
SECTION 6.-INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
Inland Water Transport activities in the Middle East theatre fell into two
distinct spheres; firstly, the control and operation of services on the River
Nile and in the Delta, and secondly, the provision, manning and maintenance
of craft of all types for clearance of cargo from ship to shore in Egyptian and
Western Desert ports. The I.W.T. service was started in 1940 on a small
scale, primarily for the purpose of accelerating turn-round of craft carrying
military stores from ports to depots.
Its activities increased rapidly until the
small H.Q. staff at Cairo controlled the operation of practically all power craft,
tugs and dumb barges on the Nile and in the Delta. In all the operational
ports craft were either manned or controlled by the I.W.T., while in the Egyptian
ports many of the harbour lighters were supplied and maintained by the same
The policy from the earliest days was to use civilian resources to a
maximum, and excellent results were achieved with only a small expenditure
of military effort.
In addition to acquiring craft by hire and requisitioning and, at some of the
Western Desert ports, by capture, the I.W.T. organization constructed a number
of craft both for use on the Nile and canals and for harbour lighterage.
included sectional lighters for the Western Desert ports, concrete pontoons for
Alexandria and concrete lighters and self-propelled river craft for the more
sheltered waters of the Canal ports.
A number of dismasted sailing craft were
also provided for the Canal ports.
The principal success in the field of craft
construction was the "Z?' craft, fabricated in India and assembled in the Middle
East; these self-propelled lighters were in great demand for the operational
ports, as they were useful for carrying personnel, vehicles and cargo and were
capable of making short sea passages unladen.
In the Nile Delta, I. W.T. operated an extensive service of power craft, tugs,
dumb craft and sailing craft carrying stores from the main ports of Alexandria,
Port Said and Suez to the lighter ports along the Suez Canal and to depot
wharves along the Ismailia Canal and in the Cairo area.
Ismailia, Abu Sultan, and Fanara, all on the Suez Canal, Qassassin and Tel-el-
Kebir on the Ismailia Canal, and Tura Wharf near the caves of that name, were
the main ports of call for the river fleet.
In addition, a regular service was
operated in conjunction with the Sudan Railways and Steamers on the Nile
Valley route from Wadi Halfa to Shellal near Assuan, while some stores were
carried right through to the Delta by water instead of transhipping to the Egyp-
tian Railways at Shellal.
All I.W.T. traffic in Egypt and through traffic from the Sudan was centrally
controlled at G.H.Q., Cairo.
Craft were diverted from port to port, and from
and to the Nile Valley route, according to requirements.
patrolled to speed up movements of traffic, control posts were opened at key
places, and, later, voyage bonus schemes were introduced with greatly improved
SECTION 7.—STORES
There was no proper Transportation Stores organization in the Middle
East until the formation of the Transportation Directorate late in 1940.
this time, however, a few orders had been placed, mainly in India, and stores
consisting largely of permanent way materials began to arrive from India in
a fairly steady flow from the beginning of 1941. A forecast of requirements
WO 277/2
2
WO 277/3
28
