planning was necessarily short term, and this inev
orecasting demands.
To help overcome this delay, an al
day was granted for the movement of Tn. stores by air
Central Burma.
This air lift started in March and continue
fficulty in
20 tons a
gong to
le, when
supply through Rangoon eased the position.
Depots were established at Mandalay and Myinge in May, 1945, for the
collection, sorting and protection of salvaged stores.
It was found that unless
these stores were collected and placed under guard they were very soon pilfered
by the local population.
The Mandalay depot was handed over in June to the
I.W.T. workshops in the dockyard, and in the following month the Myinge
depot was closed down.
A main depot, principally for permanent way and
bridging stores, was opened at Thazi in June, and this continued to be the main
depot for railway stores in Central Burma until the handover to the civil authori-
ties at the end of the war.
On the capture of Rangoon, two Tn. stores depots were established in the
port area, one near Athlone wharf for permanent way and bridging stores and
the other at Botataung Goods Yard for general stores.
In addition, the railway
coal wharf at Rangoon was reserved for the use of Transportation.
As the
Imphal road was becoming difficult for the passage of heavy loads, much of the
remaining stock in the Manipur Road depot was railed back to India and shipped
to Rangoon; most of the stock in the Chittagong and Kyaukpyu depots was
also sent on to the new depots at Rangoon.
Malaya, 1945
In October, 1945, a Tn. stores company was moved from Rangoon to
Singapore, and a start was made on collecting to a central site at Sentul stores
which had been dispersed by the Japanese.
In the following month, two main
Tn. stores depots were established in Malaya, one at Berlayer Creek in Singapore
and the other at Kuala Lumpur, while sub-depots were opened at Prai, Port
Swettenham and Alexandra Road, Singapore.
218
WO 277/21
27
WO 2777266
28
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS THEATRES
SECTION 1.-GENERAL
In addition to the main campaigns, theatres of operations and bases in which
the Transportation service served as described in the preceding chapters, it
also participated in the brief 1940 campaign in Norway, in the temporary
occupation of Iceland, Madagascar and the Azores, in the docks working of
Gibraltar, and in the organization and development of communications in
East, West and Central Africa.
The main aspects of this work are described
SECTION 2.—NORWAY, 1940
On 15th April, 1940, following the German occupation of Narvik and the
surrounding districts, a force known as Rupert Force was landed at Harstad
in the Narvik area.
Force on 11th May, 1940.
This force was re-formed as the North-West Expeditionary
Transportation was headed initially by a D.A.D.Tn.
and later by an A.D.Tn.
Included in the original Rupert Force were a docks
section and a movement control detachment.
They were followed about a
week later by an advance party of a docks group headquarters, a second docks
section and one company of a stevedore battalion.
Owing to some misunder-
standing these last three units were reshipped to the United Kingdom without
the knowledge or approval of the D.A.D.Tn., but the stevedore company
returned to Harstad early in May.
Harstad is a small town, situated on an island 35 miles north-west of Narvik
which at the date of these operations was connected to the mainland by a rather
dilapidated ferry capable of carrying every hour about eight vehicles of not more
than four tons gross weight each.
Quay facilities were very poor, and were
not designed for the size of vessel or type of traffic required by the Force.
There
were only three quays capable of taking seagoing vessels, and owing to the
shortage of docks personnel and lack of port equipment only three ships could
be unloaded a week.
As convoys of six or more ships were frequently arriving,
this meant delays of several days before unloading started, which in turn led to
complaints from the Naval authorities.
At Harstad, depots for the various Services were located in warehouses
adjacent to wharves which could be served by small craft, the latter being as a
rule loaded direct from seagoing vessels.
This involved the sorting of cargo
on board ship, and consequently slowed down the date of discharge, but on the
other hand it enabled the very limited quay space to be kept clear.
cases the discharge of stores ships had to be suspended in order to make berths
available for urgent tactical moves of personnel.
Owing to the absence of railways, the poor condition of the roads, and the
hortage of road transport. the Force. spread as it was over some 200 miles
