CHAPTER X
BURMA AND THE FAR EAST
SECTION 1.-GENERAL
Malaya, 1941-1942
The first Transportation Staff for Malaya arrived in May, 1941, when a
D.A.D.Tn. and a staff captain were appointed, without any clerical staff. A
reconnaissance was carried out of railways and docks and of the L. of C
installations then being planned, and a report was submitted in June in which
capacities of ports and railways were assessed and recommendations made on
the organization of the L. of C. Until that time all depots had been sited
independently by the services concerned, and questions of co-ordination and
rail service had hardly been considered; but thenceforward new proposals were
dealt with through inter-departmental reconnaissance parties, and co-operation
between the Engineer, Tn., and other services became much closer.
An A.D.Tn. and two more staff captains arrived in October, and by Decem-
ber, 1941 staff had been disposed as follows:-
At Malaya Command Headquarters
Federated Malay
States Railway
(F.M.S.R.) Head Office, Kuala Lumpur
With
Q(Mov.)
Malaya
Command
Headquarters.
With Movement Control, Singapore
A.D.Tn. and D.A.D.Tn.
Staff Captain.
Staff Captain.
Staff Captain.
Defence of Singapore
Although the main strength of Singapore was against direct sea attack,
the deployment of the Army and Air Forces in Malaya was against a probable
attack from the direction of Siam.
Bombers were concentrated in Kelantan
in the east and at various airfields in the west, and the military forces were
disposed with the object of defending these airfields.
There was also an offensive
plan for a quick advance from North-West Malaya into Siam to capture first
Haadyai Junction and then Singera.
this advance, and armoured trains had been constructed.
Movement plans had been prepared for
With a view to a
possible protracted advance into Siam, advance depots had been sited on the
F.M.S.R. opposite Penang for the supply of three divisions.
Japanese Attack
The Japanese attack against Malaya began on 8+h December 1941. and the
east and west coasts.
ampaign that followed was one of almost continuous withdrawal down both
By the end of January, 1942, the withdrawal to Singa-
ore Island had been completed and from then until the surrender : Februat)
n. personnel were mainly occupied in nuttine locomotives out of action by
02947
117
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
lumping essential parts in the sea and in making arrangements for the evacua
tion.
Burma. 1941-1942
Until the actual outbreak of hostilities with Japan little or no consideration
had been given to the subject of military transportation in Burma, and it was
not until 12th December. 1941 that Army H.O. in Burma asked India to send
D.D.Tn. from Delhi was sent, and it was decided to send what
troops could be made available and to form a In. Directorate. The Diar
of Transportation, Burma, was not actually appointed until the campaien had
already been in progress for seven weeks. A Docks Group H.Q. and one
Docks Operating Company were sent from India in January and a Railvay
Construction and Maintenance Group H.Q. in February; no other units could
be provided during the campaign, but a detachment of railway engine drivers
and Signals personnel was sent to assist Burma Railways after the fall of Ran-
By the end of January the Army in Burma was falling back before the
Japanese, Moulmein had fallen and the fall of Martaban was imminent.
was already clear that the civilian staffs of transportation agencies could not
be relied upon to remain at their posts in the face of enemy attack, but the
available troops were completely inadequate in numbers to fill the gaps caused
On the other hand the Burmese transportation facilities were
well developed and well equipped and there was no shortage of material, craft,
locomotives, rolling stock, plant or stores.
unreliability of civilian staffs, and various proposals were put forward for
militarization; except for the raising of a Docks Operating Company in Rangoon
none of these proposals was carried out.
On the evening of 24th February the railways in the Rangoon area ceased
to function owing to the large number of desertions.
The railways south of
Toungoo and Prome were therefore taken over by the military and operated
by the Railway Construction and Maintenance Group, assisted by such civilian
Rangoon fell on 7th March, and just previous to this the
Docks Group H.Q. and original Company were evacuated by sea to Calcutta.
The Docks Operating Company which had been raised in the country retired
by river towards Prome.
As the withdrawal continued further civilian desertions
took place, and on 14th March the railways in Northern Burma also were taken
over by the military.
On the river considerable difficulty was encountered
in persuading crews to take their craft downstream, and military crews had
to be found for these craft.
Mandalay station was destroyed by enemy air
action on 3rd April, and the Tn. Directorate moved to Ywangtaung.
The plan for the withdrawal north of Mandalay was for the Chinese, who
were by then operating on the left flank, to withdraw towards Lashio, while the
British forces withdrew partly on Myikyina and partly up the Chindwin
The rapid advance of the Japanese on the left flank, however, caused
a change of plan and the whole British force withdrew via the Shebo-Yeu-
Kalewa route. Wounded, sick and hospital stafl were evacuated by river
to Kyaukmyaung and Kat, a, hence the hospital cases were moved to Myhe-
kyina and then flown out to India.
Finally, after ferrying the whole of the
British force. with a proportion of their guns and transport, from Shwegin
to Kalewa, and moving one brigade up river to Sittaung, the bulk of the Irra-
waddy Flotilla Company's fleet was scuttled.
