1943, that it was finally settled.
Earthwork was undertaken by the Persians,
who also completed the tracklaying at Ahwaz.
In some of the remaining places
they began tracklaying, but progress was not satisfactory until they were relieved
by British or Indian troops.
Apart from yard development it was necessary to intrease for line capacity
to handle the expected traffic.
Three main steps were taken for this purpose.
Firstly, three long sections were sub-divided, and this number was subsequently
The latter were not, however,
complete when the
Secondly, a second loop was laid at each of some
twenty-two stations and all loops south of Andimeshk were lengthened to
500 metres clear, and those to the north to 400 metres clear.
railway water supply had to be greatly improved: this work is described in
more detail below.
Changes in operational command and in strategic conditions had inevitable
effects on the planning of Army bases.
Moreover, the principles governing
the siting of dumps and the layout of depots were continually being altered
and developed as the war in the Western Desert produced new ideas.
changes adversely affected "Aid to Russia" works, for although all available
material was required for such works, it was sometimes necessary to divert
stores for use in military sidings, which when complete were not used and were
taken up again after a short interval. There was always the possibility, however,
that events would make this work vitally necessary, and it therefore had to be
Finally, the layout was reduced to a Base Supply Depot at Ahwaz and
an Oil Depot and an American Depot at Andimeshk.
The most urgent and difficult engineering problem was the improvement
and maintenance of the railway water supply.
Even the peace-time require-
ments of the railway were difficult enough to meet in places.
desert produced little or no suitable water, the central mountains required
powerful pumps with adjustable intakes to cope with deep gorges and seasonal
changes of level, and the salt lake area south of Teheran was as barren as the
The importance of the problem was at first masked by the low trafic
target figure which did not involve a great deal of new work.
was increased at a later stage, the water supply requirement was more than
doubled, and in some places this proved to be physically impossible. In the
early days an expert was flown out from England,
and in conjunction with
the water supply engineer of the Persian State Railway recommended the
following seven important developments:-
(i) A new installation at Ahwaz, on the river Karun, to supply all stations
south of Andimeshk.
(ii) The relaying of the existing 11 kilometre 4 inch pipe-line at Andimeshk
with 6-inch.
(iti) A new installation at Balaroud.
(iv) A supplementary supply by open channel at Sultanabad.
(v) Additional wells and reservoir at Teheran.
stations.
(vi) Increased storage capacity and additional water columns at certain
(vii) The erection of six water-softening plants.
The majority of these works were put in hand early in 1942.
86
Subsequently events showed that some of these works were unnecessary.
This was probably due to two factors; firstly the rainfall of 1941 was abnormally
low, secondly much of the information given by local inhabitants as false.
The water analyses at certain stations appeared to call for the installation of
softening plant, whereas the water subsequently proved to be suitable without
The analyses were carried out in October, 1941, by a civilian firm
in Teheran, many of whose staff were later arrested as suspected enemy agents.
shortage of staff and materials allied with dual control hindered progress.
Military personnel could not be spared for supervision until September, 1942,
when an officer became avallable, and the work was then well behind schedule.
Maintenance of existing works was badly carried out, owing largely to pay
grievances among the Persian staff.
Until February, 1943, practically no
deliveries of water supply stores had been made from military sources, and
they had had to be obtained from civilian sources or from Railway stores.
Towards the end of 1942, it was decided in principle that new water supply
installations should become the responsibility of the Works Service, as in other
theatres; in practice, however, the Railway and private contractors continued
the work until the Americans took charge.
The reorganization of the telephone system, referred to in the previous
section, necessitated almost complete reconstruction of the existing routes.
Trained Signals troops were almost unobtainable and therefore in late
December, 1941, a start was made with two locally recruited gangs.
in 1942, a detachment of an Indian signals unit and a British railway telegraph
company became available.
The Indian unit repoled the line from Bandar
Shahpur to Ahwaz and constructed the line from Ahwaz to Khorramshahr with
two pairs for railway working and a third pair as administrative trunk from
The line maintenance sections of the British unit reconstructed
the route from Ahwaz to Doroud and supervised the civilian gangs working
The original programme was finished by November,
1942, and the internal wiring of stations and cutting in of the selective ringing
control was completed some two months later.
started from Ahwaz in May, 1942, reached Ghom in November, and Teheran
The operating section was split up over the system to operate
Track maintenance was hampered by shortage of materials, particularly
sleepers, the only local source of which was in the Russian zone, but the main
line was kept in a fairly good state.
Re-sleepering south of Doroud had been
completed by the time of handover to the Americans.
Inspection of the track
was made difficult by the lack of motor trolleys: of 54 originally in service
only 10 were fit for use over the whole system and these were unreliable.
Twenty-two chassis were received from American sources in October, 1942,
and were put into use as soon as bodies had been made for them.
Ballasting of new works and of the main line in the south was a problem
of some magnitude.
The only source of supply in the south was one quarry
near Andimeshk, but the demands on this quarry had increased enormously
because almost all new works depended on it, and the supply was quite inade-
87
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/
28
