demoralized by the Italian bombing, and the consequent delays, accidents and
congestion at unloading points were causing grave anxiety.
A railway oper-
ating company was therefore raised locally in September, and double banked
the Egyptian railwaymen on the length from Dabaa to the west.
In November,
1940, this unit was relieved by a New Zealand railway operating group con-
sisting of a headquarters and two companies.
The Group, which was joined
by a third company in the early summer of 1943, continued to operate on this
line until the autumn of 1943, although companies were withdrawn for other
work at times.
When the new line from Matruh to the west was being constructed during
1941 and 1942, the New Zealand railway operating companies took over the
completed sections from the construction troops.
Military personnel were
moved up from the eastern sections as the railhead advanced, and were replaced
by E.S.R. personnel. In the middle of 1942, when the retreat to Alamein took
place, the operating companies worked back along the line, evacuating the
E.S.R. staff as they took over from them.
All locomotives, except one which
could not be moved, were evacuated, as were all wagons except for some 280
in the Matruh depots.
During the period between the 1942 retreat and the advance after the Battle
of Alamein, one of the operating companies worked what was left of the line
from Amriya forward, while the other was left in reserve in Alexandria.
plan for the operation of the line during the advance was for the New Zealand
Group, which knew the whole road, to be in front and for a mixed British and
Indian Group to follow up.
The whole line from Alexandria was worked as a
military railway and only handed over to the E.S.R. when conditions returned
to normal.
Operating was carried out during the advance in spite of very
poor communications; for a time the advance was so rapid that trains had to be
run in teams without any communications at all, and for a long time there was
only a single pair of telegraph lines in operation.
Later in 1943 one Group was
withdrawn and the E.S.R. took over up to Capuzzo.
The scale of air attack against the Western Desert line was never high and
was confined mainly to night bombing of railheads, with a period in the
summers of 1941 and 1942 of daylight cannon "strafing" of locomotives in
forward positions.
The latter form of attack caused considerable alarm at
first, as locomotives were already scarce enough and their withdrawal for
repair for weeks at a time could ill be afforded.
To combat this form of
attack, various methods were tried, including anti-aircraft wagons, camou-
flaged and armoured locomotives, kite balloons, and locomotive stables, but
the most successful were close liaison between Railway Operating and the
R.A.F. on a zone basis, and the recasting of the time-table to avoid as far as
possible running trains in dangerous sections at the enemy's favourite time for
The limiting factor to the capacity of the Western Desert line was always
water supply, and the need for a pipe-line and diesel locomotives was appre-
ciated in 1940.
The diesels did not arrive, however, until the summer of 1942,
and there was then a rush to run in the engines and to train drivers in time for
the advance.
The pipe-line was built first to Dabaa and then to Matrun.
It was later carried to Mishaifa and doubled as far as Dabaa.
Local brackish
water was injected at Fuka and at Sidi Haneish up to the limit acceptable for
boilers, and the Matruh supply was also mixed with a proportion of local water.
Water was also brought up from Alexandria to Matruh by sea and in rail tank
cars to supplement this supply and to carry it further forward.
advance, the diesels were in the the forward sections, and the pipe-line was
repaired, section by section, in the rear.
When railhead advanced beyond the Egyptian frontier, the need for a
forward railway
workshop was felt, and a railway mobile workshop was
employed at Semilla both betore and after the battle of Alamein. The American
Army carried out the maintenance of the main line diesel locomotives in the
Benghazi-Barce and Solluch Railway
The Benghazi-Barce and Solluch Railway was taken over and operated
by Transportation troops after the first advance in 1940/1941, after the second
advance in 1941/1942, and again after the final advance in 1942/1943, when it
was used to assist in the clearance of the port of Benghazi.
After the close of
the campaign, the line was run on a civilian basis under military supervision.
Tripolitanian Railway
Following the capture of Tripoli, the Tripolitanian Railway was also taken
over by Transportation.
Although clearance from the port was mainly by
road to depots within a radius of 15 kilometres, the patched-up railway was
also used up to a tonnage of 800 tons a day.
The scale of enemy demolitions
on this line was considerable; every locomotive had been blown up and the
workshops severely damaged.
In spite of this, traffic was able to move a few
weeks after the capture of the line.
This line was also eventually operated by
civilians under military supervision.
Nile Valley Route
The development of traffic capacity on the Egyptian Railway section of the
Nile Valley route depended mainly on the release of wagons and locomotives
from the Delta. Only on the Sudan Railways was any large importation of
locomotives or stock necessary to move the theoretic peak tonnages. All
traffic on the Nile Valley was operated by the civil railways.
Qena to Safaga
The main difficulty on the Qena-Safaga line, which was operated by the
E.S.R., was water supply.
A pipe-line was built from the summit of the Red
Sea hills to Safaga, and water was carried by rail from Qena to the summit.
The haulage of large quantities of water over a steeply graded single line
restricted traffic severely and, had it been necessary to work to capacity, a
pipe-line would have had to be built from Qena to the summit.
This had been
considered but was postponed on the strength of reports, subsequently proved
to be unduly optimistic, of a plentiful supply of good water at Mons Claudius
near the summit.
Later, the threat to the Delta ports decreased and the con-
struction of the second pipe-line was no longer considered necessary.
Eritrea
On the capture of the 95 centimetre gauge Eritrean Railway, detachments
of a railway construction and operating company were sent to get the line
working again. This line was eventually handed over to civilian operation.
WO 277/2
WO 27772
28
