CHAPTER VIII
NORTH-WEST EUROPE 1944-45
SECTION 1.-PLANNING AND CO-ORDINATION
Early Planning
Preliminary planning for an eventual return to the Continent of Europe was
initiated within the War Office soon after the Dunkirk evacuation of 1940, and
in the Transportation Directorate the collection of intelligence material and the
study of technical requirements proceeded without interruption.
The operation
stas originally known, perhaps somewhat optimistically, by the code name of
"Roundup," and early in 1942 a series of Roundup Administrative Planning
(R.A.P.) Committees was set up to undertake the co-ordinated inter-Service
and inter-departmental planning of the various aspects of the operation, one
of these being the Transportation Plant and Personnel (Overseas) Committee.
The formulation of anything approaching firm estimates of transportation
requirements in the early stages was extremely difficult.
At the same time,
owing to the long time lag in the delivery of locomotives and other heavy
transportation stores, it was essential to place orders early and to justify the
orders by reasoned estimates.
It was accordingly decided to work out the
theoretical requirements, in every type of transportation store, of a line of
communication consisting of 200 miles of railway, mainly double line, and served
by a port or group of ports to handle approximately 6,000 tons of stores a day,
on the assumption that a line of this length would be adequate for the first
six months of the operation.
It was also decided to provide initially for four
such theoretical L. of C., two for the British and two for the American Armies,
and it was agreed with the Americans that all the necessary material should
be ordered through the War Office and held in a joint stockpile,
for issue
primarily on a fifty-fifty basis, but subject to reallocation in accordance with
operational requirements. Later, as planning developed, it became evident
that material for a fifth and sixth L. of C. would be required by the larger
American forces allotted to the operation; this extra material was, however,
not included in the joint stockpile, but was ordered separately by the Americans
on the same basis of calculation as for the first four L. of C.
The work of calculating requirements in detail was handled by sub-com-
mittes, of which there were initially two, dealing with Railways and Ports
(including I.W.T.) respectively: other sub-committees were formed later to
deal with cargo handling gear, dredgers, ferries and pontoons.
Formation of 21 Army Group
With the appointment of a Supreme Commander and the formation of
21 Army Group and the U.S. Army Group, the detailed planning became the
responsibility of the Army Groups co-ordinated by Supreme Headquarters
142
Allied Expeditionary Force (S.H.A.E.F.). S.H.A.E.F. Movements and Trans-
portation was responsible for transport co-ordination, and probable railway
and port requirements were discussed at meetings presided over by the Chief
of Movements and Transportation and attended by representatives of 21 Army
Group, the U.S. Army Group, the American Chief of Transportation and the
Allied Naval
Commander
Expeditionary Force (A.N.C.X.F.).
Estimates
of stores required to be landed were put in by the Army Groups and calcu-
lations were made as to the capacity of the beaches and the ports likely to be
available at a given time, thus enabling a balance to be struck between require-
ments and capacity.
This type of planning had to be continued throughout
the operation until Antwerp was fully equipped and working.
S.H.A.E.F. Movements and Transportation
The function of S.H.A.E.F. Mov. and Tn. in co-ordination and supervision
during the operation was to ensure that the best use was made of the available
plant, equipment, ports and inland waterways by the Army Groups.
Daily
information on tonnages landed at the various points was received and a watch
was kept on clearance.
Regular meetings were held at which all questions in
connection with ports and I.W.T. were reviewed.
These meetings enabled
a close watch to be kept on conditions and changes to be made in order to effect
improvements and relieve congestion: they covered not only the technical
Transportation side of the work, but also the broader Movement aspects and
forward planning for the use of captured ports.
Mulberry Harbours
In view of the number of Service Departments and Ministries involved in
connection with the constructon and planning of the Mulberry harbours, the
arrangements were centralized in the hands of a Co-ordinator for Ministry and
Service Facilities.
The detailed work of designing breakwater units and
floating piers and their assembly and preparation for use from a military point
of view was undertaken by the Transportation Directorate at the War Office,
working in collaboration with representatives of the United States Navy and
The erection on the far shore was in the hands of 21 Army
Group and A.N.C.X.F. on the British side and of the United States Navy on
the American side.
Transportation S.H.A.E.F. were associated with all the
It became evident in planning that there would be a large commitment
for towing transportation floating plant, and with the development of the plans
for the Mulberry harbours the question became acute owing to the shortage of
tugs.
To ensure the most economical use of tugs and the most expeditious
towing arrangements, it was decided to pool all available tugs and to set up an
organization under Á.N.C.X.F. known as "COTUG," which included repre-
sentatives of the two Navies, the American Transportation Corps, S.H.A.E..,
21 Army Group and the Director of Sea Transport.
This organization worked
smoothly and carried out the task of towing not only dumb craft but also the
difficult types of tow such as Mulberry units,
Rhino ferries, floating cranes
and dredging plant.
143
W027
28
