stores companies had been increased to five, with two
roup
H.Q.
The responsibilities of the Tn. Stores branch in Italy were very similar to
those in North Africa, but the governing conditions differed in several important
In North Africa the civilian agencies were critically short of stores
and there was little manufacturing capacity available, but the theatre received
high priority for supplies from the United Kingdom.
In Italy supplies from
the United Kingdom were more difficult, but the country was not nearly so short
of civilian stocks and, once it had recovered from the shock of invasion, there
was a considerable output from factories and workshops; these advantages
wase however, largely offset by the heavy demand for construction stores to
repair demolitions and bomb damage.
The work of the Stores branch was no less onerous than it had been in
North Africa, but, profiting from previous experience, the organization worked
well. It could not, however, claim always to have produced stores when needed
for there were many shortages, and the work of the technical branches, especially
railway construction, was often affected by the stores situation.
SECTION 7.-FINANCE
The North African Campaign
A small Finance Section was included in the Transportation Directorate.
Its most important duties in North Africa, namely the agreement of rates and
the settlement of accounts for services rendered to the Army by civil railway
and port authorities, were complicated by changes and uncertainty in Allied
financial policy due to high level political considerations.
The protracted
delay in reaching decisions about the payments, if any, that should be made to
the various French authorities was a matter of grave concern to the Transporta-
tion service.
There were occasions when port and railway authorities were
obliged to say that they would have to close down unless funds were forthcoming,
and although no untoward results actually occurred there was always the feeling
in the background that, in the event of a serious military setback, collaboration
by the local authorities might not be whole-hearted.
One of the lessons of the
campaign is that a satisfactory agreement for the use of railway and port facilities
is an operational necessity and should be reached at the earliest possible stage
Administrative Memorandum No. 13 issued by A.F.H.Q. in London on
20th October, 1942, placed on Civil Affairs officers the duty of negotiating
agreements with local authorities and of providing funds to meet railway
operating expenses.
This clearly implied the assumption that the Civil Affairs
organization would take over the civil administration of the country, whereas
in fact the French authorities were found willing to co-operate, but determined
to maintain their sovereignty and to exercise their own financial responsibility.
The first contact with the management of the Chemins de Fer Algériens
(C.F.A.) was made on 16th November, 1942 at a meeting attended by the
Director of Transportation, the Deputy Director of Movements and representa-
tives of the interested Transportation branches.
The Director of the C.F.A.
expressed his desire to collaborate to the utmost.
He agreed to accept freight
and personnel warrant forms, pending negotiations for a financial agreement,
136
but said that the railway system was financially embarrassed and that a substan-
tial cash advance would be an early necessity to keep the railway running.
A succession of meetings followed with Civil Affairs officers and it was finally
decided to seek authority for a payment on account of 30 million francs.
authority,
however, was not forthcoming.
This
While negotiations proceeded,
demands for payment were being made by the C.F.A., and Transportation
made continuous representations to the effect that unless some payment was
made there might be a failure to carry essential military traffic.
Eventually
as a result of a meeting in February, 1943, it was agreed that the British and
Americans should make payments in proportion to their outstandings, less
deductions for the value of services and supplies provided.
The amounts
actually paid under this arrangement were 32 million francs by the Americans
and 11 million by the British, while the total of transport bills against both at
that time was in excess of 113 millions.
The only subsequent payments made
were 8 million francs by the Americans and 12 millions by the British.
Following a decision that railway warrants were to be checked, and a separa-
tion made of American traffic included in British bills, it became necessary to
increase the Finance establishment.
To deal with the large amount of American
traffic, American personnel were attached to the British Transportation Finance
Office.
After a short period of training and supervision, these Americans
were able to carry out a complete check of their own accounts and, although
a Lease-Lend reciprocal aid agreement had been concluded between the Ameri-
cans and French, the section continued to check and agree accounts with the
railways
before passing them to the French service for liquidation.
The
check of warrants started towards the end of May, 1943, by which time a
considerable number had accumulated. Many anomalies were revealed which
could have been avoided if it had been possible to begin the check on presenta-
tion of the bills instead of after a delay of six months.
Between May, 1943
and the end of the year, over 50,000 British warrants out of a total of 60,000
accompanying railway bills had been examined, checked with the third copies
of warrants from receiving R.T.O.s, and verified as to charges.
Many dupli-
cations and errors were detected and out of a total of British bills amounting to
520 million francs some 20 millions were found to be overcharged.
American
traffic to a total of 65 million francs was separated from the British and extracts
were handed to the American section for direct settlement with the railways.
Discussions on port and harbour charges at Algiers took place on 24th No-
vember, 1942, at a meeting between Army, Navy and Port authorities, at which
Transportation was not represented.
At this meeting it was agreed that, for
reasons of security, charges would be based on two representative types of
cargo.
It was also agreed that at the end of each quarter the expenditure and
receipts of each port should be reviewed and the standard charges adjusted.
The initial standard charges were fixed at 9.50 francs a ton for general cargo and
10.40 francs for bulk petrol, and payments were authorized accordingly.
the end of the first quarter the Algiers Chamber of Commerce produced figures
claiming to justify an increase in the rates.
As a result, a joint audit board on
which Transportation was represented was convened and all payments were
suspended until it had reported.
The audit board found that many capital
items had been included as revenue expenditure and that the position seemed to
justify a reduction in the rates rather than an increase.
The board recom-
mended, however, that in order to avoid the need for holding such an investi-
gation every quarter, payment of port dues should be suspended and that the
137
WO 27
7/2
2.
WO27
T/,
28
