Arakan, 1942
in the latter part of 1942, operations against the Japanese in Burma we
in these operations were under the control of A.D.Tn., Calcutta, but in th
recommenced in Arakan.
Until December,
1942, the Tn. troops engaged
nonth an A.D.Tn., Eastern Army, was appointed, though without any staff
Meanwhile a Burma Planning Section had been formed at Delhi to plan fo
the eventual re-entry into Burma.
In December, 1943, a Tn. Directorate.
formed trom the Burma Planning Section, ma dice up at the H.Q. of the new,
formed 11 Army Group.
Although a firm directive was not received until
April, 1944, planning of the stores, craft and equipment requirements for the
years 1944 5-6 was started, and the forecast was approved and forwarded ho
the War Office in April, 1944.
The forecast of unit requirements was submitted
to G.H. Q.(India) in the following month.
In June, 1944, the Transportation
and Movements Directorates were placed under a D.Q.M.G.(Mov. & Tn.) and
a combined Movements and Transportation Planning Branch was formed.
A.L.F.S.E.A., 1944-1946
In November, 1944, 11 Army Group became H.Q., Allied Land Forces.
South-East Asia (A.L.F.S.E.A.).
Advance H.Q., A.L.F.S.E.A. was located at
Barrackpore near Calcutta, while Rear H.Q. remained in Delhi until it closed
down in January, 1945.
Hitherto the Tn. Directorate, 11 Army Group, had
been concerned only with 14th Army and Ceylon Command, but in November,
1944, 14th Army were relieved of responsibility for the L. of C. by the formation
of an L. of C. Command. Most of the Tn. Staff from H.Q. 14th Army were
transferred to this new Command, but during December and January additional
officers were posted to Tn. staff appointments with H.Q. 14th Army, under
D.D.(Mov. & Tn.) whose appointment took effect from the beginning of
The principal tasks of the nucleus Tn. Directorate so formed
Januaryd the creation of the I. W.T. service on the Chindwin from Kalewa, and,
in March, the restoration of a railway service in Central Burma.
At the same time as the formation of L. of C. Command, 15 Corps operating
in the Arakan was separated from 14th Army and became directly responsible
A small Tn. staff to control port and I.W.T. operating was
located in Akyab which was occupied during January.
Hapese STE. A, moved to Ceylon in July, 1945, and in Augus, Gloring
the Japanese surrender, a Tn. Directorate was set up in Malaya.
Command was handed back to India in October, and in November H.Q.
A.L.F.S.E.A. again moved, this time to Changi, Singapore.
1946, the Burma Railways, Rangoon Port Commissioners, Irrawaddy Floila
Company, Burma Government Marine Department, Penang Harbour Board,
and Malaya Railways took over control of their respective undertakings,
but Transportation still controlled the issue of stores procured through miliay
channels and all n. units employed on assistance to civilian agencies.
Burma, 1945-1946
1 Burma In. Direntorate under a D.Tn who alan anted aa D.O.M.G.
(Mov. & Tn.) in Burma. was formed following the canture of Rangoon in
May, 1945, and took over control of all Transportatión activities except in
the Arakan, which remained under the direct control of A LF S.E A until
ver
WO 277/21
27
WO27726
28
st October, 1945. Tn. Headquarters, which included four deputy directors.
vas set up in Rangoon on 16th May; but part of the staff, organized as o
letached H.O.. remained at District H.Q. at Meiktila and was responsible for
the railways and waterways in North and Central Burma.
In addition to Tn. units, three Civil Affairs (Burma) units were formed
under the control of the Directorate.
for railways, Rangoon port, and I.W.T. and outports, and were employed
for re-establishing the civilian organization and gradually took over amaration
These units were primarily responsible
of all services from Transportation.
By 1st January, 1946, they had been
transformed into civil organizations and had assumed full control of their
respective services, with minor reservations.
The In. Directorate, by this time very much reduced in size, continued to
be responsible for certain railway construction works, craft erection and port
and I.W.T. operating in Arakan and on the Tenasserim Coast, and continued
to assist the civil authorities with railway, I.W.T. and workshop units. The
rate of reduction in Tn. commitments and the withdrawal of units from January,
1946 onwards were regulated in accordance with the speed at which the civil
authorities could become self-supporting.
Malaya, 1945-1946
Owing to the sudden and unexpected end of the Japanese war in Malaya
and to the fact that no resistance was offered, it was found that Tn. troops would
not be required to assist
in the operation of the railways or ports, and in
consequence most of the units in the order of battle were returned to India.
The officers of these units and certain other ranks were retained, however, to
form the nucleus of a Malayan Railways Supervisory unit, which was formed
to staff civilian pre-war appointments in the European grades. A Railway
Liaison Staff, a Civil Affairs (Malaya) formation consisting mainly of Malayan
Railway officials, was affiliated to the Tn. Directorate and formed the con-
necting link between the Directorate and the Asiatic staff who had been in the
country throughout the Japanese occupation.
The Tn. Directorate, Malaya, was organized into a Directorate of Docks
and I.W.T. and a Directorate of Railways, each under a Deputy Director.
The Railways Directorate had its H.Q. in the F.M.S.R. Head Offices at Kuala
Lumpur. On Ist January, 1946, control of the railway passed from A.L.F.S.E.A.
to the British Civil Administration, and the Railways Directorate became
the Railway Department of that Administration.
Netherlands East Indies, 1945-1946
Following the surrender of the Japanese in August, 1945, transportation
commitments in the Netherlands East Indies grew rapidly. At the beginning
of October the demand for In. units increased from one section of a Port
Operating Company to to full units, and continued to increase until January,
Ample provision had fortunately been made for Malaya, and it was
possible to divert considerable quantities of materials and numbers of morn at
In the opening stages it was decided that the Malayan Directorate
ents for the onsible for all transportation commitments in the Dutch East
Indies, but in November. after recents for the had been made of ports and
railways it was decided that a separate organization was necessary, A Th.
with branches covering co-ordination, administration, stores,
