and Wesel would be of little use without concurrent development of the railway
eastwards into Germany.
The plan adopted therefore was to develop railtails
east of the Rhine to be used in conjunction with the railheads between the Rhine
and the Maas, to develop an L. of C. eastwards from the railtails as far as
possible, and to construct a new bridge over the Rhine in the neighbourhood
of Emmerich.
All these works were to be carried out concurrently to a co-
ordinated programme.
A site at Spyck, near Emmerich, was provisionally selected for the new rail
crossing of the Rhine.
The area between the Maas and the Rhine was clear
of the enemy in the early stages of the operation and bridgeheads were firmly
established for an appreciable depth in the area south of Spyck, but unfor-
tunately the enemy continued to hold the high ground on the north bank
overlooking the site, and it was not until 2nd April that a full examination
could be made.
Plant and units were moved up immediately and detailed
survey and planning was begun.
The design was decided on 5th April and
work started on 7th.
A train of known requirements of material was held
at Nijmegen, and train paths were booked for a regular flow to the bridge site.
As soon as working drawings were sufficiently far advanced, indents were placed
for materials and the booked trains were loaded in the Stores depots.
The
new bridge consisted of 34 spans,
27 piled piers and 6 trestle piers, and was
2,368 feet in length, of which 1,905 feet were over water; it was opened to
traffic on 8th May.
East of the Rhine
East of the Rhine two railway construction and maintenance groups moved
forward, one to the southern sector and the other to the northern.
All recon-
naissance reports were co-ordinated by the southern group, which had attached
to it reconnaissance officers from
the
operating, locomotive running and
railway signals branches.
The route Emmerich-Empel Rees-Borken-Coesfeld-
Rheine was first selected for repair, from railtails at Praest, Isselburg, Dingden
and Hamminkeln to railheads at Emsdotton and Messum.
By the time the
Rhine bridge was opened the L. of C. had been extended to Osnabruck, Lohne,
Kirchweyhe (south-west of Bremen), Mehlbergen and Munster, and the line
Almelo-Hengelo-Rheine was re-opened.
Summary of Repairs Undertaken
Thus between D-Day and VE)-Day repairs had been carried out on lines
stretching from Lison in Normandy to Munster and Osnabruck in Germany;
the Orne, the Seine, the Somme, the Albert Canal, the Maas, the Rhine, and the
Ems had been bridged.
Exclusive of work done by civilian railwaymen,
Transportation troops had, during the campaign,
(a) constructed or repaired 122 railway bridges, consisting of 346 new spans
and 47 repaired spans, of a total length of 20,324 feet.
(b) repaired I,030 route miles of damaged main line (1,632 track miles),
(c) laid 34 miles of new track in depots,
(d) laid 29 miles of new track in main lines,
(e) carried out 501,000 cubic yards of earthwork.
After the capitulation the work went on, and repairs were continued to
re-open lines for the maintenance of the Armies and other needs.
158
SECTION 6.—PORT OPERATING
D-Day and First Phase
On D-Day the initial stages of the landing operation in the British sector
went according to plan, but there were two difficulties caused by the gente
slope of the beaches; firstly, all craft and tank landing ships (L.S.T.s) driente
at low water and, secondily, shipping anchorages were too far off shore.
Fully
laden store ships had to drop anchor five miles from the beaches, and this
considerably slowed down the rate of discharge.
There was no serious bombing,
but a gradually increasing number of attacks were launched by E boats and
explosive devices, particularly against the eastern end of the beaches.
Courseulles was captured virtually intact and the utmost use was made of
this port, where up to 1,000 tons a day were unloaded.
It had been hoped
that Ouistreham would be captured on D-Day and would compensate for the
limited capacity of the beaches, but this did not materialize as the port area
was under constant shell fire from enemy positions to the east.
In the planning stages it had been reckoned that Port-en-Bessin could only
be used for shallow draft coasters, and should therefore be developed as the
bulk petrol port for tankers discharging within the port and through ship-
to-shore lines from up to three miles out.
After its capture on D + 1 this
port was found to be better than expected and capable of taking tankers of up
to 14 foot draft in the outer harbour.
The quays also were relatively undamaged
and it was therefore decided to use the port for mixed cargoes in addition to
bulk petrol, and also for heavy lifts unloaded to craft in the neighbouring
beach sector.
The first cargo was unloaded on D + 5, but owing to weather
delays bulk petrol was not discharged until 14 days later.
Both British and
American tankers used the port, the British pipe-line being to the east of the
harbour and the American to the west. The first ship-to-shore petrol line was
opened on 1st July.
The initial development and construction of Mulberry B at Arromanches
proceeded according to plan,
and the first coasters began to discharge on
11th June.
Between 19th and 22nd June, however, the port was considerably
damaged by a very strong gale, while many harbour craft were driven ashore
and wrecked.
Despite this set-back the port achieved its target figure of 4,000
tons a day by 22nd June.
During the first few days, responsibility for discharging ships lay with the
Beach Group commanders, assisted by their port operating staffs.
As the
operation proceeded, however, the Port Operating Groups took over complete
responsibility for the discharge of ships and for controlling the unloading of
craft when beached.
The phasing in of port operating units kept pace with the
tasks they were set.
Until the middle of August unloading continued across the
beaches, y were seMbetty, and through the other small ports in the beach area,
in preparation for the expected advance to the north.
September, 1944
into use, while Antwerp. Rouloone and Havre were cantured in the same month.
During September the ports of Caen, Dieppe and Ostend were brought
These new ports provided an alternative to working over beaches, and the
latter were closed early in September, thus bringing to an end the first phase of
port operating.
Up to the closing of the beaches 1,260,540 tons of stores were
159
WO 27
2
WO27
