Army, locomotives, some complete and some in sections, were imported by
air, road and river.
In the following chapters will be found particulars of the activities of the
Transportation Service in the United Kingdom and in all theatres of operations
during the 1939-1945 war.
It will be observed that Transportation played an
important and, in many cases, a vital part in the support of operations.
There
is no reason to suppose that its part will be any less important in a future war.
Field-Marshal Montgomery, in a lecture on the campaign in North-West
Europe, delivered at the Royal United Services Institution in October, 1945,
made the following statement:-
"It is not possible in such a short survey to go into any detail concerning
the vast and complicated machinery necessary for the support of a modern
army in the field.
I will; however, mention the tremendous importance of
Movements and Transportation. Their problems in this campaign were
immense."
CHAPTER I
THE TRANSPORTATION DIRECTORATE IN THE WAR OFFICE
The summer of 1939 found Transportation represented in the War Office only
by a branch (Q.M.G. 13) of the Directorate of Movements and Quartering
in the Quarter-Master-General's Department, organized as follows:—
Quarter-Master-General
Director of Movements and Quartering
Q.M.G. (O)
Co-ordination
Q.M.G. 1
Quartering
Q.M.G. 2
Q.M.G. 13
Movement of Troops Transportation
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
28
Q. M.G. 13(a)
Technical and engineering matters
regarding transportation services,
rallways, inland waterways and
Q.M.G. 13(b)
Movement of stores by sea, coast-
wise traffic
and movement
stores by rall at home.
Provision and general control of
Agreements with home railways.
the War Department Fleet (oper-
Questions involving Tn. policy and
administered by the
intelligence.
Assistant
of Military
Technical instruction and training
Transport, Woolwich Arsenal).
of railway troops.
Vessel and boat equipment.
Administration of the Tn. Branch
of the Supplementary Reserve.
Railway stores.
The establishment consisted of an Assistant Director of Transportation
(Colonel) with two staff officers, two attached officers and two retired officers:
the latter dealt with the work of Q.M.G. 13(b) which in fact had little real
connection with Transportation.
On mobilization, the Director of Movements and Quartering became Deputy
Quarter-Master-General (A) and his principal branches were raised to the status
of Directorates.
For a short period the Directorate of Movements consisted
of Q.M.G. 2, Q.M.G. 13 and Q.M.G. 14, the latter being a newly formed
branch to which the duties of Q.M.G. 13(b) recorded above were transferred.
At the same time, Q.M.G. 13(b) was reorganized to take over Transportation
Stores duties from Q.M.G. 13(a).
On 7th October, 1939, Q.M.G. 13 became the Directorate of Transporta-
tion; and Colonel J. P. S. Greig became the first Director with the rank of
Brigadier.
At the same time it had been decided to create the new senior
appointment of Director-General of Transportation and Movements (D.G.T.M.)
