Sea, was originally the only deep sea port in Persia connected to the railway.
The two deep water berths of the existing jetty were inadequate, and plans
were produced for the construction of three additional berths and of a lighter
The construction of the new three berth jetty, which was of steel
screw pile construction 1,800 feet long, was given to a civilian firm.
materials and stores started to arrive in January, 1942, but progress was
hampered by difficulty in obtaining stores, and when the port was handed
over to the Americans in February, 1943, the new jetty had still not been
The lighter wharf was constructed by the British Engineer Services
and was brought into use in November, 1942.
The first task of Transportation on arrival at Bandar Gulf was to clear
the yard of some 30,000 tons of commercial cargo which was lying about in
This took about a month, and ships then began to arrive.
cargoes received were of a straightforward nature and discharge was fairly
Rail clearance was good as there was no shortage of rolling stock.
The staff at the port for the first three months consisted of one officer, two
railway N.C.O.s and three Indian docks staff; good co-operation was received
from the Persians.
In January, 1942, a D.A.D.Tn. was appointed and more
British railway staff arrived.
In June, 1942, Movement Control was introduced
and also a Docks Superintendent and a small Docks staff.
were only two pilots at the port and only one of these could berth ships.
December, 1941, the Royal Navy supplied a pilot vessel which remained at
the bar, where it acted not only as an accommodation vessel for pilots but
also as an examination vessel. Prior to this, pilots had been sent out in a
vessel wirelessed her arrival.
experienced at first owing to the small size of the vessel, which caused it to
spend long periods away for refuelling, but the subsequent arrival of a larger
and better vessel did away with these delays.
good, both on board and ashore.
The stevedore labour was run by a contractor
throughout; the shore labour was run by a Persian Government concern called
Iranbar until August, 1942, when this concern was liquidated and a contractor
A certain amount of difficulty was met with in the payment of
labour, as the cargo agents were very slow in paying for work done.
fore became necessary for the Port Director to make all payments and in turn
Owing to the very limited space available on Bandar Shahpur Island, it
was found that five berths were the maximum that could be placed there.
This was not sufficient for the target figures envisaged for "Aid to Russia"
and for the normal civil and military requirements of Persia.
deliberation therefore as to whether Tanuma or Khorramshahr should be
developed as a second port, the latter was selected as the more suitable site.
Khorramshahr, which is situated at the confluence of the Karun and the
Shatt-el-Arab, was being developed as a port by the Persians before the war,
but owing to lack of funds the project had been abandoned after one T-shaped
jetty, known as the Sehtab Jetty, had been constructed.
Near the mouth of
the Karun were two barge berths of light construction.
Clearance of the port
was by inland water transport up the Karun to Ahwaz, or by dry weather
track across the desert to Ahwaz.
Ahwaz, 120 kilometres away,
nearest point on the railway.
The decision to connect Khorramshahr to the
railway was taken in No dember, 1941, and the connection was completed in
It was first decided to build three rail-served deep water berths
with trestle bridge connections at each end, making with the Sehab jetty four
After tests, it was found that the latter jetty was not strong
enough to take either main line locomotives or the portal cranes which had
been ordered for the port, and loads had therefore to be restricted over this
In June, 1942, the American firm which had been sent to construct
Um Qast moved to Khorramshahr and undertook the jetty construction.
the German offensive in 1942, shipping demands went up and the number of
new berths proposed was increased from three to five.
The bar of the Shatt-
el-Arab restricted the size of ships which could enter the port, and the length
of each new berth was therefore limited to 500 feet. In peace-time, the port
of Khorramshahr had been used only as a lighterage port, and the discharge
of ships at the first berth called at first for considerable improvisation as there
were no cranes or other aids available.
coal and timber for jetty construction.
The first cargoes discharged were
The only port operating staff at this
time were one British officer and two serjeants. A docks operating company
which had been asked for from India did not arrive until October.
trainload of supplies to Russia left on 31st May, 1942, the day the railway to
In addition to the deep water berths, a lighter wharf was
necessary to deal with cargo that could be easily manhandled.
intended to build this wharf between the deep water quays and the old lighter
wharves, but owing to shortage of materials an existing site at Failiyah Creek
was chosen instead, and this creek was connected by rail to the rest of the
Subsequently the wharf was further developed and a 100-ton derrick
and a 3-ton portal crane were installed. The creek was then used for unloading
locomotives, tanks and other very heavy lifts.
At the time of handing over
to the Americans in February, 1943, the port of Khorramshahr was still not
Construction work had been a continuous obstacle to the working
of the port, as certain lines had periodically to be given up to construction
and parts of the jetties were stacked with construction material.
trouble at this port, however, was labour.
Apart from two officers and a few
N.C.O.s there was no reliable supervision, and the labour was all native and
without any previous experience of this type of work.
supplied by a semi-official firm of labour contractors, and payment was at
a flat rate per ton unloaded and loaded into railway wagons.
board was supplied by the agents for two British shipping firms.
ment continued until the arrival of docks operating troops from India.
When the British forces entered Persia, Ahwaz already had a rail-served
barge wharf on the right bank of the river Karun.
Part of this wharf was
the property of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, who used it mainly for the
discharge of packed oils brought by barge from Abadan: the remainder of
the wharf was railway property.
This inland port was put to early use for
military stores brought from Basra Docks by inland water transport, for Persian
civil traffic mostly discharged from ships at Khorramshahr, and for locomotives
and rolling stock, both complete and in sections, discharged from ships at
Abadan or Khorramshahr.
For the discharge of locomotives, a 100-ton derrick
on the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company part of the wharf was used until the
91
WO 277/2
WO 27772.
28
