depots themselves were dismantled as they became empty. Jassimiyah base
was completely dismantled by the end of the year, and by April, 1944, the
depots at Hindiyah and Mussayeb had also been completely taken up and the
railway materials recovered for use elsewhere.
Dismantling of rail facilities
continued throughout 1944 until, at the end of the year, there remained of the
works constructed during the war north of Shuaiba only the Kut-Baquba
branch, the standard gauge line to Hindiyah, and the Khanaqin railhead.
Khanaqin railhead was dismantled in the early months of 1945 as by this time
the Persian L. of C. was capable of handling all the "Aid to Russia"
SECTION 4.-PERSIAN RAILWAYS- GENERAL
The Trans-Persian route, completed shortly before the war, was single line
throughout with long sections, and with the greater part of the line abounding
in tunnels, heavy gradients, and severe curves.
Water, though adequate for
the pre-war traffic of about one train each way a day, was in short supply and
was often of poor quality.
The temperatures varied from well below freezing.
point in winter in the mountains to as much as 130° F. in the shade in the
When the Director of Transportation and his small staff arrived in Persia
in October, 1941, charged with the initial task of expanding the capacity of
the railway as a line of supply to Russia from 200 to 2,000 tons a day, it was
intended as a matter of policy to work as far as possible through the medium
of the existing civil staff, in order to keep demands on British technical troops
It was found that there was in all departments of the Railway what can
only be described as
complete lack of organization.
Statistics normally
available to any railway management were either lacking or inaccurate. Few
records were kept, and such essential information as the number of locomotives,
coaches and wagons in service and under repair was very scanty.
visory staff had been mainly German or other enemy aliens and had con-
sequently been deported, and among the native staff there were many active
Axis sympathizers who were only gradually weeded out with the help of the
British Legation.
In the early stages, there was anti-British feeling throughout
the country and a belief in an ultimate German victory which would be followed
by reprisals on any who had helped the British.
The remaining Persian officials
had little real experience of railway work. It was, therefore, necessary to
employ a much larger British technical staff than had been expected, and when
the first British Transportation troops arrived the officers had to be employe
mainly as technical advisers to the Persian officials in charge of the various
departments, while the other ranks were used to double-bank the lower grades
in order to raise the general standard of efficiency.
A further problem which had to be faced immediately was the division
of responsibility for control of the railway with the Russians and the efect
that division
would have on the railway organization.
Before the allied
occupation the ratay waS organized in five Divisions.
Two of these, the
Northern and Azerbegan visions, len naturany within the kussian sphere,
while the Central and souman visions went equally naturally to the British
but it appeared that the read Division must either be carved up or sur-
rendered to the Ruis railvay administrati use of Teheran itself, as the Head-
quarters of the civil railway administration, with the only workshop of any
importance on the system, were of vital importance to the British, on whom at
this time lay the main respond it for the development of the railway. Alter
much technical discussin and protracted political negotiation, it was agreed
that, while facilities showd be given to the Russians in Theran to enable them
to run that part of the railway for which they were responsible, Teheran itself
should be under British control.
Civilian Staff
The increase of traffic made it necessary to recruit large numbers of civilian
staff from Persian sources.
The difficulty was training them, for few of the
permanent staff were sufficiently well trained to allow of the normal procedure
of putting new entrants on the job with experienced staff for training, and
it was therefore necessary for all new entrants to pass through the Railway
School at Teheran. This was a slow process, and only about 600 were trained
The pay system of the railway was complicated and inefficient, payments
were always much in arrears.
This not only caused much discontent, leading
to lack of efficiency and to the desertion of many employees, but also dis-
couraged recruitment.
The British Transportation staff did not have the
personnel available to take any part in running this department.
SECTION 5.—PERSIAN RAILWAYS-OPERATING AND
WORKSHOPS
Organization for Increased Traffic
The technical organization required to operate the pre-war traffic of one
train a day was very elementary, and the first essential from the railway operating
viewpoint was to introduce new methods to suit the large increase of traffic
which was planned.
Train control offices were set up in each Division. For language reasons
the controllers had to be Persians, and suitable men from the civil railway
staff were trained by double-banking with British personnel who made all
As the Persian staff became used to the work the British personnel
were withdrawn, but it was necessary to retain British N.C.O.s as head con-
trollers in each office owing to the Persian unwillingness to accept responsibility.
The existing telephone communications were quite inadequate.
sisted of a station-to-station omnibus circuit in each Division, and a trunk
circuit serving certain principal stations.
Telephone discipline among the
Persians was very bad; it was almost impossible to teach them to lisation
a line before ringing and to refrain from shouting down other conversation
Initially train control had to be done on the omnibus circuit,
but the bad telephone discipline prevented efficient working of the esatroy
system, and as the omnibus circuit was also used for block working, the safety
wester
WO 277/2
WO 277/2
28
