The civilian authorities hoped that by these means work would be continued
with the minimum of interruption due to air raids.
When, after the first raid,
most of the labour vanished, hasty improvisation had to be resorted to.
The first air raid on Singapore Docks occurred on 3lst January, 1942.
Only a very small proportion of the docks labour reported for duty on the
following day, and the Army was called upon for assistance.
500 Indian
soldiers and about 40 sappers from a fortress company succeeded in getting 4
ships working, but further raids on the two following days caused the remainder
of the native labour to desert, and an attempt was then made to form a docks
operating company, using the Fortress Company as a nucleus.
This unit had
reached a strength of 250 by oth February, and the working of ships continued
until 1ith February. From lith to 15th February the only work done was
mustering small craft and arranging for the evacuation of military personnel
from Singapore.
Although it had been realized that docks units might be required in Burma,
no steps had been taken to provide them before the outbreak of war with Japan.
The port of Rangoon was worked entirely by civilian labour, and following the
first air raids on the port at the end of December, 1941, during which serious
casualties were sustained, most of this labour deserted and the discharge of
shipping was brought to a stand-still.
Fighter protection was given to the port,
and the enemy was forced to abandon daylight bombing with the result that the
port labour gradually returned. The arrival in mid-January of a docks group
H.Q. and one docks operating company from India, and the successful air
defence of the port, prevented any serious interference with port working until
the last fortnight before the evacuation.
The civilian inland water transport services continued to function during
the operations at Moulmein and Martaban, but desertions began to occur.
A number of docks and I.W.T. units had been asked for from India, but no
more could be spared, and a start was therefore made by the formation of a
local Docks Operating Company at Rangoon.
became of increasing value during January and February when a large tonnage
of stores lying on the wharves at Rangoon was back-loaded to India. All
stocks of rubber, wolfram and tin were cleared.
The official evacuation of
Rangoon on 21st February brought about a wholesale disappearance of labour,
and the docks units stayed on almost alone.
On 28th February the Group H.Q. and the original Company started by
sea for Calcutta, while the second Company proceeded up the Irrawaddy.
The orders for withdrawal were cancelled shortly afterwards and the units
were recalled, but the second Company did not arrive back at Rangoon in
time to be of any service.
During the last days in Rangoon work in the
docks was carried out by the Docks Group H.Q. and Company assisted by
the Sea Transport Service and a few civilian crane drivers.
A certain amount
of labour was obtained from refugees by the promise of evacuation by sea.
Attempts at sabotage were frequent during the last few days.
the final evacuation took place, and the docks units again left for Calcutta.
Civilian demolition parties were ferried to ships by river steamers which were
No military T.W.T. organization had been set up by the time Rangoon fell.
the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company virtually acting in this capacity.
WO 277/21
27
WO 271/26
increasingly difficult to persuade crews to work steamers down to Rangoon
he workers in the Rangoon dockyards deserted, and services had to he curtailed.
line steamers had to be held in readiness for the evacuation of demolition
arties, and this added to the difficulty of finding enough towing craft Bu
ith March, sabotage and armed attacks in the Delta area had reached such
proportions that it was doubtful if services could be continued. The Manager
of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company persuaded some of the steamer crews to
return towards Rangoon, but before this plan could be carried out the Burm
Docks Operating Company, evacuating by river, was ordered to turn a Burna
To help overcome the shortage of towing craft a staging system was
introduced and craft were moved back by stages, the staging points being earad
to prevent looting and sabotage.
After leaving Rangoon, one Section of the Docks Operating Company was
stationed at Prome while the remainder of the Company moved to Mandalay.
By 10th March, practically all river craft had arrived at Prome from Rangoon.
All craft abandoned on the river were immobilized. The morale of the native
crews was beginning to suffer from attacks by hostile Burmans on the way.
Considerable quantities of military stores, petrol, ammunition and rice were
shipped north from Prome, together with numbers of sick and wounded.
Enemy air attacks on the river route increased in intensity as the Japanese neared
Prome, with the result that it became even more difficult to persuade crews to
go downstream. Once again, a number of steamers had to be held in readiness
to evacuate demolition parties. In order to maintain services in the forward
area, certain officers of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company volunteered to captain
river steamers, and British guards were placed on these craft. Burma Auxiliary
Force personnel were trained as crews, and it was arranged that they should
work all craft in the forward area; it was found, however, that as these crews
did not know the rivers, delays were caused by craft running aground, and mixed
military and civilian crews had to be employed.
In the final withdrawal the staging system of clearance was adopted from
Prome to the north, and no loaded craft were left for the enemy.
Increased
dificulty was met in obtaining crews to go down river, or even up river to Bhamo,
as would-be deserters were thinking of the Chindwin as an escape route to
All sick, wounded and hospital staff were evacuated by river from
Mandalay to Kyaukmyaung and Katha, together with some 40,000 refugees.
The bulk of the Irrawaddy fleet was scuttled at Mandalay, Kyaukmyaung and
Katha and the I.W.T. personnel marched out from Katha for India on 3rd May.
Sufficient crews, assisted by military personnel, were retained to work essential
civil and military traffic.
Owing to low water on the Chindwin, it was impossible
to work deep-draughted steamers on that river, and part of the Chindwin feet
was cut off by the enemy at Monywa, but most of the steamers escaped.
final effort was the ferryins of all personnel of the Burma Army with their
animals and a proportion of their guns and transport from Shwegin to Kaleva
and the transport up river of reached suchry Brigade from Shwegin to Sittaung.
Arakan, 1942-1944
In the latter balf of 1942, operations against the Japanese were started in
Arakan. maintenance of the forces being carried out by water from Chitta
for craft was at Cox's Bazaar.
Until the capture of Mauesdaw in December, 1942, the only terminal
This involved transhipment at an anchorage,
