Although a Movement Control Group or Sec.
exist.
Headquarters since early in 1940, it was not until August,
2 that t
was placed on a proper footing with a definite war establishment
Directorate of Movements and Transportation.
Before this time, Trat
tation matters had been dealt with by the Transport and Works Section of
Political Branch.
With the passing of the Eritrean Railway to Middle East
Command and because of other diminishing commitments, this latter Section
was later
largely disbanded, the Assistant Controller joining the newly
formed Directorate as D.A.D.Tn. (later A.D.Tn.) together with two other
The Transportation Section was the engineering department of the Direc-
torate, dealing with the construction and development of railways, docks and
No major transportation construction works
were undertaken in the Command solely on Army account, and the work of the
Section was mainly in an advisory and liaison capacity.
In general, the duties fell into two main categories routine and planning.
Routine included such matters as the construction of rail access to depots,
the installation of military siding facilities, the co-ordination of demands for
major railway stores and the certification of stores required for sponsored civilian
All the construction work undertaken was carried out by the
engineering departments of the various railway systems concerned, but Trans-
portation was concerned with general specifications and facilitating the supply
In the task of stores supply, close liaison had to be maintained
with the Transportation Directorate at the War Office, with the Central Provision
Office in India and with Transportation organizations and authorities in the
Railway systems which were sponsored for stores supply
were the Kenya and Uganda Railways, the Tanganyika Railways, the Franco-
Ethiopian Railway and the Madagascar Railways.
In planning, many schemes for improvements in existing facilities were
studied in detail and appropriate advice given.
Schemes examined included
an investigation of the possibilities of Tanga as a satellite port to Mombasa,
involving a study of the Voi-Moshi link and the Tanga line; an appreciation of
the possibilities of coalfield development in Southern Tanganyika and of the
transportation problems involved; the preparation of a detailed scheme for the
construction of a lighter berth on the mainland at Mombasa to relieve Kilindini;
and an investigation of an inland water transport route from Ndola to Kasama
in Northern Rhodesia.
The results of planning were, as it turned out, largely
negative, but saved much diversion of effort towards unprofitable development
such as the Tanganyika coalfield proposal.
The construction of the lighter
berth at Mombasa would have greatly assisted ship working at Kilindini, but
was rendered unnecessary by the Allied occupation of North Africa.
Two steamers were reconditioned for use as troopships on Lake Victoria.
The Somalia Railway was dismantled and of the 76 miles of 95 cm. gauge track
recovered, 60 miles were shipped to the Middle East and the remaining 16 miles
Locomotives and rolling stock from this railway were also recovered
Two new deep water berths were constructed at Kilindini;
the actual work was carried out by the Kenya and Uganda Railways, but assist-
ance was given by Transportation in the supply of plant and equipment.
No Transportation units were employed in the East Africa Command,
apart from a South African Docks Company which was employed for a shori
time at Berbera and later took part in the Madagascar operation together with
ks detachment.
nd Burma.
An East African Docks Operating Company
he Command and served subsequently in Madagascar, the Middle
SECTION 5.— WEST AFRICA
Forces in West Africa in June, 1941.*
An Assistant Director of Transportation was appointed on H.Q. Military
His field of duty covered the British Colo-
nies of Gambia, Sierra Leone, Gold Coast and Nigeria, while he was also
responsible for technical intelligence and advice in relation to French West and
Equatorial Africa, Portuguese and Spanish Guinea, and Liberia. A suitable
establishment for the Tn. Directorate was authorized in due course.
Until the collapse of Vichy authority in North Africa in November, 1942,
there was always the possibility of West Africa becoming an active theatre of
war, and In. preparations had to be made to conform to the various staff
appreciations and plans.
Freetown in Sierra Leone was a port of call for
convoys proceeding round the Cape to the Middle East and India; and the
maintenance of Trans-African air routes added considerably to the import
traffic at this and other West Africa ports.
In order to improve the efficiency of the port of Freetown, West African
Docks Operating Sections were formed early in 1942 with small cadres of British
officers and other ranks.
This process was carried further in September, 1942,
when it was decided completely to militarize the working of the port. One H.Q.
Docks Operating Group, two Docks Operating Companies and one Tug and
Lighter Company, West African Engineers, were gradually formed, with a
total strength of 364 British all ranks and 2,228 Africans. The capacity of the
port, which in May, 1941, was 600 tons a day only, was raised by these means,
and by the construction, improvement and equipment of lighter wharves, to
1,200 tons by July, 1942 and 2,200 tons by the beginning of 1943. A scheme
for the construction of a deep water quay, never enthusiastically supported by
Transportation, met with many difficulties over the provision of labour and
materials and was abandoned in the summer of 1943.
Africa Railway Operating Section was formed, also with a British cadre, to
work on the narrow gauge Sierra Leone Railway with the object of taking com-
plete charge in case of emergency.
In all four Colonies there was a demand for more locomotives, rolling stock
and other equipment to handle not only increased military traffic but also the
export of local mineral and food products, which had been vigorously stimulated
in the general war interest.
One of the main tasks of the Tn. Directorate was to
investigate the relative importance of these demands and to support or reject
Experience in Malaya, Burma and Assam had shown the folly of relying on
undisciplined natives to continue at work in times of crisis and particularly
under air attack. It was therefore decided in August, 1942, to set up a military
organization to run the Nigerian Railways in the event of active operations.
number of railway units were formed, composed mainly of existing civil
railvay employees strengthened by cadres of British military personnel; these
units underwent both military and technical training, but were not to be
embodied excent in case of emergencv. and were in fact never embodied.
similar scheme was prepared later for the Sierra Leone Railwavs, but was
abandoned on the change in the strategical situation earl in 1943.
11717
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
28
