craft.
This line, however, was not much used and was pulled up in 1944 after
the conclusion of hostilities in Africa.
Palestine
It was also decided to provide an alternative route into Palestine and to the
North by developing the port of Akaba, at the head of the Gulf of that name,
and connecting it with the 105 centimetre gauge railway system at Maan, some
70 miles inland.
Difficulties of terrain, however, resulted in the railway being
extended as far south as Naqb Ashtar only, connection between Akaba and
Nagb Ashtar being established by road.
In order to increase the capacity of the Palestine Railways, many schemes
were prepared and long-term projects, such as the construction of extra crossing
loops, were put in hand.
With the retreat to Alamein in 1942 there came a
flood of evacuation to Palestine and, although most of the crossing loops were
completed, improvements and extensions to marshalling yards were still mostly
in the planning stage.
The physical connection between the Egyptian and Palestine Railways had
been a wagon ferry at Kantara, and pending completion of the bridge at Firdan
a second ferry was constructed.
After completion of the bridge, both these
ferries were maintained in reserve as a precaution against possible damage to
In Syria, the Yarmuk Gorge from Samakh to Deraa on the 105 centimetre
gauge line, with its numerous bridges and tunnels, was obviously a section on
which damage would take a long time to repair, and the capture of this line
intact by a surprise attack was the first objective of the Syrian campaign.
Certain minor works were carried out by the Syrian Railways at the request
of Transportation, but no major works were necessary apart from the precaution
of building a deviation round the Here Dere viadict, close to the Turkish border.
This was done by a South African construction company.
The need for a direct connection between the standard gauge railway
systems of Egypt and Palestine in the South and of the Lebanon, Syria and
North became increasingly obvious, and in 1940 and 1941
routes were surveyed as far as the Lebanese frontier.
The route favoured at
first was from Haifa, with many variations, to the Jordan north of the Sea of
Galilee, and thence to Rayak, but very heavy rock cutting in basalt caused
this route to be ruled out.
An alternative up the coast from Haifa to the
mouth of the Litani river and thence to Rayak was subsequently ruled out
owing to heavy work on the Litani Gorge.
The final choice was a coastal line
from Haifa to Tripoli; this also included heavy work, including small tunnels
at Naquara and Bayada headlands, and about a mile of tunnelling at the Chekka
Several major bridges and heavy works were necessary, particulany
on the Beirut-Tripoli section.
On the other hand, this route had the advantage
of serving Beirut and the Chekka cement works, and the rock work was not
Work began in December, 1941, and the construction troops were faced
with a formidable task.
South African railway construction units took charge
of the Haifa-Beirut section, with a special company of miners from the Rand
so go through the Chekka tunnel; Australian units took on the Beirut-Tripl
Hundreds of Arab labourers were employed with scores of Arab
masons, the later being ideal for the heavy masonry work requiet i bridge
piers, abutments ased retaining walls, as much mechanical plant as possible
was pressed into service to accelerate the work.
60 feet deep and embankments 80 feet high were needed to keep the grade line
within reasonable limits.
In spite of these difficulties, work proceeded at high speed.
Beirut Section was opened in August, 1942, and the whole line to Tripoli
was completed by December, 1942.
Thus a total length of 176 miles was
finished in a year, that is at the rate of approximately half a mile a day.
rapid railway construction through semi-mountainous country ranks among the
more remarkable engineering achievements of the war.
SECTION 3.—RAILWAY OPERATING AND WORKSHOPS
Middle East Base
Railway operating troops were not called upon to work any part of the
Egyptian State Railways other than the Western Desert Line, a short extension
to Adabiya Bay, and the shunting of certain depots and docks.
assistance was, however, given to the E.S.R. in various ways as they were not
sufficiently flexible to deal with unusual and rapidly changing traffic problems.
This assistance had to be given tactfully, in order not to upset political suscepti-
bilities, and difficulties were met in the early days, but in the course of time
a good spirit of co-operation and trust was built up. The principal form of
assistance given was over empty wagon control.
At the start of the Middle East campaign it was obvious that the numbers
of locomotives and rolling stock would have to be increased.
were therefore placed, based on estimates which proved to be reasonably
correct, but which were naturally not perfect.
The number of shunting
engines needed exceeded the estimate owing to the very large degree of dis-
persion that was adopted in the layout of depots; also insufficient allowance
was made for the effect of old age on the existing locomotive stock as the
war continued, and for the effect of poor materials in the new locomotives.
On the other hand, the demands for ordinary wagons proved to be on the high
side and by the middle of 1943 there was a slight surplus; box wagons, tank
cars and flats were, however, barely sufficient.
of coal, a large-scale conversion of locomotives to oil burning took place,
mainly in 1942, and this caused a shortage of tank wagons which for a time was
As soon as this crisis had been overcome, demands for tank wagons
for Persia and increased demands from the British and American Air Forces
The biggest demands for railway workshop assistance came from Palestine,
but the E.S.R. shops were also hard pressed at times, particularly at the time of
the conversion of locomotives to oil burning.
personnel, in addition to assisting the E.S.R., carried out a considerable amount
of work in Egypt on the erection of imported rolling stock.
shops company was established at Suez, and was largely engaged in the later
stages in reconditioning locomotives from Persia and Palestine.
Until September, 1940, the Western Desert line to Matruh was operated
The Egyptians were, however, becoming slightly
WO 277/2
WO 2777₴
28
