Courseulles port to the Tn. Stores Depot at Luc-sur-Mer.
With the capture of
Caen at the end of July, the Operating Company moved into Caen and began
the counting and classifying of captured rolling stock.
Ferry terminals for rail-fitted tank landing ships (L.S.T.s) and train ferry
vessels were opened at Cherbourg on 4th August.
During August the Group
was made up to a strength of two Companies, and a Canadian Railway Operating
Group H.Q. and two Companies also arrived in the theatre.
The Commanding
Officers of the other two British Groups allocated to the theatre paid a liaison
visit to examine the conditions under which their units would have to operate.
Trafic during August was mainly confined to stores from Courseulles and to
ballast and railway construction materials.
Towards the end of August the situation was completely changed by the rapid
advance to the east, and preparations were immediately put in hand to work the
L. of C.
Bayeux-Caen-Mezidon-Serquigny-Rouen as each successive stage
was opened up.
During September the L. of C. was extended from Caen to the
Forêt de Londe, and railheads in this area were opened on Ith September.
A low-level bridge over the Seine at Le Manoir was opened to traffic on 22nd
September, and through running as far as Serqueux was then started.
Facilities
were given to the Americans to work American traffic over the line Lison-
Mezidon-Argentan.
After the capture of Brussels, a line from east of Rouen to the Brussels area
was found nearly intact, though it included a long single line stretch from
Amiens to Arras via Doullens.
willingness to help.
central control in Brussels was in full operation, as the Germans had departed
from all except the eastern portion of the country.
was, however, small and several were isolated by rail cuts.
It was agreed that the area south of the Seine should be operated by the
Army owing to the poor condition of the track and signalling apparatus, while
the area north of the Seine should be operated by the local civilian organizations.
With the increase in traffic and in the length of British operated railways the
priority that had hitherto been given to the Americans for imported locomotives
and rolling stock was transferred to the British, who had insufficient locomotives
south of the Seine to maintain the L. of C.
American to British control was also arranged.
Experience proved that the normal Group and Company technical organi-
zation was unsuitable for the Bayeux-Lisieux area, where the whole traffic and
locomotive working centred round a single focal point at Caen. A divisional
organization, with the C.O. of the Group as Divisional Superintendent, was
therefore inaugurated on 20th September, providing for centralized control
and running shed organizations and the pooling of all officer and other rank
personnel resources.
further Railway Operating Group
H.Q. and two
Companies arrived in the theatre on 13th September and were sent to Amiens,
where they were employed on giving technical assistance to the French State
Railways (S.N.C.F.) and Belgian State Railways (S.N.C.B.).
One company
of this Group was held in reserve for eventual use in Belgium or Germany and
was temporarily used to assist with railway construction work.
On 23rd October the lines west of Lisieux were handed over for operation
to the Americans, who agreed to continue wor wine British military trafic from
the Rear Maintenance Area over this section.
During November and Decem-
her nrenarations were made towarde handing over the remainder of the lines
148
in France to the S.N.C.F., but this transfer could not be completed during this
phase of the campaign.
Towards the end of the year changes occurred in Belgium and Holland
owing to the opening of the port of Antwerp and the consequent traffic from that
port to depots in the Advance Base area, to the extension of railheads as they
were handed over by Railway Construction, to alterations in Army boundaries
and to the opening of the line to Holland via Roosendaal.
via Lille and Louvain was little used,
The line from France
withdrawn.
and all operating detachments were
Tilburg-Boxtel-Mill
Railheads were opened in the areas Antwerp-Roosendaal-Breda-
and
Helmond.
Antwerp-Aerschott-Hasselt-Neerpelt-Eindhoven-
The rail L. of C. was divided into three sections: the first, from the Rear
Maintenance Area to Serqueux, was operated by British Transportation troops:
the second, from Serqueux to Lille and the Franco-Belgian frontier, by the
S.N.C.F.: and the third, from Lille forward to railheads, by the S.N.C.B.
The
first two sections were controlled from Railway Operating H.Q. at Amiens,
under D.D.Tn. (France).
After the handover to the Americans of the lines
west of Lisieux, the working of British Army traffic over these lines was co-
ordinated with the Americans from this H.Q.
American traffic was moved
from the port of Le Havre over some of the British controlled lines, and co-
ordination was ensured by the attendance of American representatives at the
daily meetings with the S.N.C.F. at Amiens.
Until December the third section,
Belgium and parts of Holland, was controlled from Tn. H.Q. at Brussels, but
in that month a separate organization, similar to the H.Q. at Amiens, was set
up under a D.D.Tn. (Belgium).
1945 Belgium and Holland
With the decrease in British military traffic in France, the need for the
operating H.Q. at Amiens ceased and on 7th February, 1945, D.D.Tn. (France)
handed over to D.D.Tn. (Belgium), who thus became D.D.Tn. (France and
D.D.Tn's H.Q. from Amiens re-opened on 9th February at Tilburg
as D.D.Tn. (Holland and Forward).
Although the operation of the Belgian
Railways continued to improve, traffic operation in Holland still depended
largely on British railway operating personnel.
The chief centres of the Nether-
lands Railways were still in enemy-occupied territory and the liberated parts
of the system were short of experienced staff.
During January and February railway traffic in Belgium increased owing
to the opening of the port of Ghent and to the blocking of canals by ice.
4th February the bridge over the Maas at Ravenstein was opened to traffic,
thus permitting the extension of the rail L. of C. to Nijmegen, and subsequently,
as operations proceeded, to Groesbeek and Mook-Middelaar, where railheads
At the beginning of March there were important changes in the location
of railheads and in the routing of traffic from the Advance Base.
These included
the moving of railheads from the area Moll-Neerpelt-Weert-Houthalen to
the area served by the Boxtel-Oeffelt line with forward railheads at Cuijk,
Boxmeer and Vierlingsbeek, the development of Mook-Middelaar as a railhead,
and the subsequent development during the second half of the month of forward
railheads between the Maas and the Rhine.
The route Antwerp-Roosendaal-
Tilburg-Nijmegen then became the main artery of the British rail L. of C.
149
WO27
W027
28
