D.Mov.
D.D.Tn.(A)
A.D.Tn.
Assam
I.W.
A.D.
Trg.
Stores
Planning
A.D.Tn.
Planning
S.E.A.C.
Rlys.
Stor
Provis
A.D.
Inde
ocomotives which could operate on this section of light rail wae antenato
imited and no new locomotives of this type could he obtained The chartea
vas met by re-laying one length with heavier section rail and transferring the
ocomotives from this section to the Trincomalee branch, which was of great
importance.
New locomotives did not start to arrive until 1945, but 200
wagons were borrowed from India until the arrival of 950 from Austral t
The condition of the track gave cause for anxiety, particularly
regarding sleepers, the supply of which was short for a consideratie line.
in addition to the Indian construction troops, Sections of the Ceylonese raimay
troops were formed into mobile gangs and put on to track maintenance and
repair in the worst lengths.
Colombo
The island of Ceylon had only one commercial port of any size, namely
Colombo.
Colombo was a scene of great congestion for long periods.
The
port consisted almost entirely of lighter wharves and there was only one deep-
water berth.
The facilities for unloading were old and out of date, and the space
between quay faces and transit sheds was too narrow for efficient working.
Under peace-time conditions the port was run by a Port Commission, while
numerous lighterage companies managed the tugs and other craft, stevedoring,
shore labour and road transport.
The weakness of this system under war
conditions was clearly shown by the air raids in April, 1942, when the heads of
many of the lighterage companies, labour contractors and labourers absented
themselves for several days and brought work to a standstill.
Owing to political
and commercial reasons, however, the Government could not take over the
entire running of the port, and a compromise was arrived at by the setting up
of a Port Controller and a Shipping Priority Committee, and by the elimination
of labour contractors. all labour being emploved direct. An Indian Docks
Company was employed at the port on the discharge of military cargo from
hired transports, and was available in case of emergency.
Trincomalee
Trincomalee was a naval port, and therefore all tugs and other craft belonged
to the Navy and all ships were worked under Naval supervision. Civil labour
soon became very scarce in the neighbourhood, however, and in September,
1942, a Sea Transport Officer and a section of an Indian docks company
were sent there.
Subsequently, a second docks company arrived on the island
and was stationed at Trincomalee.
In peace-time, Trincomalee had only a
small lighterage wharf, with sheds right against the quay face. The hinterland
was incapable of development for the reception of any large tonnage of stores.
A suitable rail-served whart was essential to enable the required tonnages to be
handled, and was constructed at Shina Bay, with road and rail access and with
reasonable space for storage.
Most of the work was carried out by an India
port construction company, but it was completed by the C.R.E. alter this unit
had left for an operational job elsewhere.
Note.—Ap
[To face page 197
197
WAsTe 14
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7/26
28
