In August, 1941, in the general reorganization which followed the new
appointment of an Intendant General, the Directorates Of Movements and of
Transportation were amalgamated under a D.Q.M.G. (Movements and Trans-
The necessity for the closest co-operation between the Movements
Staff and the Transportation Service had long been appreciated, and this step
was intended to ensure it.
In addition, however, the Director of Movements took over responsibility
for the technical operation of railways, ports and inland waterways, a combina-
tion of staff and technical functions which was later recognized to be unsound
in principle and abandoned, but which nevertheless worked successfully because
the key appointments in the Movements Directorate were held by technical
Transportation officers.
Under this arrangement, the Director of Transporta-
tion remained responsible for railway construction, for the supply of Trans-
portation stores and equipment, for Transportation finance, for the provision
and operation of Transportation workshops, and for the technical efficiency
of all Transportation units, including those under the control of Movements.
Early in 1941 a start had been made with the earthwork for the extension to
the Western Desert Railway, but work had been stopped after only eight miles
had been done
At the end of May, however, it was decided to proceed, and
in September railhead was opened at Mohalfa.
By this time the second offen-
sive was being planned, and orders were given for the extension to be pushed
ahead as fast as possible.
By 15th November, a railhead was opened at
Mishaifa in time for the opening phases of the attack.
continued immediately to Capuzzo, and by June, 1942, when the retreat stopped
further work, railhead was being constructed at Belhamed near Tobruk.
In the meantime, railway construction in depots and ports in Egypt, Palestine
and Syria was proceeding apace, while in the closing months of 1941 work was
started on several new lines, including the Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway.
Construction resources were strained to their utmost and the limiting factor
became the supply of materials; these were so short that at times construc-
tion trains for the Western Desert extension were being loaded direct from
ships' holds at the ports.
1942, the route mileage of
railways of all gauges completed and in hand totalled 760 miles, while an addi-
tional 275 miles of track had been laid in depots and in various minor works.
The erection of imported railway
wagons and locomotives was in full
swing, 132 main line locomotives and 1,776 wagons of various types having
already been put into service on the standard gauge lines alone.
were constructed to cope with the heavy maintenance, and these were manned
by railway workshops troops.
With the Battle of Alamein and the advance to the west, Transportation played
a large part in the supply and maintenance of the Eighth Army.
The Western
Desert Railway was repaired and reopened to traffic within fourteen days of
the occupation of the ground, and the ports were all in operation within seven
days of their capture.
The extension of the Western Desert Railway to Tobruk
Port had been begun by the enemy during his occupation and was subsequently
completed by railway construction troops.
Meanwhile, behind the Army,
the Suez Canal bridge at Firdan was opened in September, 1942, and the Haifa-
Beirut-Tripoli Railway was opened to traffic at the end of the same year, although
work on its consolidation and on the completion of yard facilities continued
for some months after.
The railway from Qena to Safaga was also completed
in June, 1942, but owing to the changed circumstances was little used and was
finally taken up in 1944.
During the period when the Eighth Army was on the
deserve a Adminklantite of the Milese East base in the Levant was
DIANA GLY TRANSLAVI MALIANS CARES WeE CravaNa to Palestine
After the advance, however, this Levant base was reduced.
Throughout the Batte of Alamein and the subsequent advance in the
Western Desent lupon anu beyonu, ine organization of Movements an
transponduve as we made Last remained virtually unchaugea.. At the
end of 1944, however, it was here the dopt the more orthodox arrangement
in force in other theatres, tire of do Director of Transportation was respon-
sible for the technical operation of docks and railways, in close co-operation
with the Movements Staff.
The appointment of D.Q.M.G. (Mov. & Tn.)
remained, however, as a common head of the combined Staff and Service.
Arising out of this close association of Movements and Transportation,
the value of a combined Planning Section was proved beyond question.
portation projects of any size are of necessity somewhat slow of realization;
the ruling factor is usually the supply of stores to site, and the tonnages involved
are considerable.
On a long-term basis, therefore, Transportation planning
must go hand-in-hand with Staff planning, and on a short-term basis Movements
and Transportation must set out to obtain the maximum benefit from available
resources without prejudice to long-term schemes.
After the end of the African campaign in 1943, the Middle East was con-
cerned with the mounting of operations against Sicily, Italy, Greece and the
Aegean Islands and the maintenance of forces there, and also with the shipping
of grain and other foodstufis to the liberated countries.
the Aegean Islands, all these operations were carried out in co-operation with
A.F.H.Q. (Allied Force Headquarters).
In the following sections of this chapter the work of the different branches
of the Transportation Service is described in more detail.
I.W.T. operating, although withdrawn from the control of the local Director of
Transportation during the most important period of the war in the Middle East,
are included in this account as they involved the employment of Transportation
troops and are essentially responsibilities of the Transportation Service.
A chart showing the transportation functions of Movements and Trans-
portation, Middle East, from August, 1941 to May, 1944, is shown in the Appen-
SECTION 2.-RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
Canal Zone
The development of the Middle East Base in Egypt and Palestine, which
was hurriedly put in hand after the entry of Italy into the war and the collapse
of France, led to the construction of a number of large rail-served depots,
mainly adjoining the west bank of the Suez Canal.
At the same time an
extensive programme of deep water and lighter berth construction at Suez
and in the Canal Zone was undertaken in order to deal with stores ships which
were no longer able to use the Mediterranean route.
in order to keep pace with these developments and with the consequent
increase in traffic, the single line from Suez to Ismailia was doubled and large
marshalling yards were built at both Suez and Nefisha Junction.
This doubling
was extended to Firdan, where a single track swing bridge was built over the
Canal to join the Palestine railways at Kantara East.
With the construction
wer 947
WO 277/21
27
лил░=
WO277/26
28
