CHAPTER VII
NORTH AFRICA AND ITALY
SECTION 1.-GENERAL
The North African Campaign
Transportation planning for the North African campaign was begun in London
in August, 1942,
under First Army Command.
Information available on
transportation facilities in Algeria and Tunisia was very full and accurate.
planning was carried out under conditions of the most rigid secrecy it was
not permissible to give transportation unit commanders any indication of the
tasks that lay before them, nor was it possible to do any detailed co-ordination
with representatives of the United States Transportation Corps.
that the Americans would look after all transportation matters in Morocco and
Algeria (west of Orleansville) and the British would be responsible east of that
There was, at that stage, no indication of the vast American resources
of men and equipment, that were greatly to outnumber the British Transpor-
tation Service as the campaign progressed.
The Transportation Staff was built up during the planning period and the
Director himself, Brigadier R. F. O'D. Gage, and several of the heads of
branches arrived after the work was already well advanced.
ceeded overseas in November, 1943, split between the first three convoys. Its
constitution remained unchanged for the whole of the North African campaign.
The rapid advance of the First Army into Tunisia soon necessitated the
establishment of a forward Transportation Headquarters.
The need for this
had been foreseen and it was set up at Constantine on 15th December, with
staff detached from the main H.Q. at Algiers.
The rapid installation, by the Railway Telegraph Company, of a direct
teleprinter service between the Transportation Advanced and Main H.Q.s
with branches to the main ports and other important centres, provided a
system of communications often superior to any other in the theatre and greatly
facilitated the control of transportation activities throughout the campaign.
At the time of the Allied invasion North Africa—a territory of negligible
industrial capacity and with no sources of mineral oil or good coal— had been
cut off from its normal supplies of manufactured goods for upwards of two years
and was critically short of nearly everything needed for the maintenance and
operation of its transportation system.
In these circumstances the provision
of sufficient Transportation stores to prevent a complete breakdown on the
railways and in the ports was a matter of great urgency and was a continual
source of anxiety from the outset until many months after the war in Africa
On Ist January, 1943, Allied Force Headquarters (A. F.H.Q.) was established
at Algiers and Transportation reverted from First Army to A.F.H.Q. Command,
Staff direction being received from the Chief Administrative Officer (C.A.O.),
A.F.H.Q., through the D.Q.M.G. (Movements).
On 9th February, 1943, the Director General of the Military Railway
102
Service (D.G.M.R.) avniten States Army, arrived in Algiers with a small
His directive gave him complete control of all Allied Military Railway
operations in Norths Airies and placed all British Railway personnel, stores
and equipment at his disposal.
(British) was appointed Deputy to the D.G.M.R.
The D.Tn., in addition to his duties as D.Tn.
venient to the British because it meant that railway policy on the British lines
of communication would no longer be a British responsibility. However, the
situation was accepted loyally; the British railway branches were integrated
with corresponding American branches each branch being put under an
American head- and the various routes were allocated to British or American
units for operation.
Owing to the differences in the organization of the two
Armies there were many difficulties to overcome and the partnership was not
altogether easy, though it worked with reasonable efficiency and many warm
personal friendships were made between officers of the two nationalities.
A plan of the integrated M.R.S./Tn. Staff, North Africa, March, 1943, is
shown in the Appendix to this chapter (page 141).
American railway units began to arrive in the forward area towards the end
of January and by the end of June two grand divisions, five operating battalions
and one shop battalion were located east of Algiers, outnumbering the British
In this campaign the Transportation Service was fortunate in one respect,
for the Staff appreciation had erred on the side of caution with the result that
Transportation plans for the early stages worked with most satisfactory
Had there been protracted opposition to the landings, however,
or systematic demolition of ports and railways, things would have been different,
for Transportation then lacked the experience, manpower and equipment to
deal with prolonged beach operations or wholesale demolitions of the kind
The Campaign in Sicily
In March, 1943, a planning staff, known as H.Q. 141 Force, was set up at
Algiers.
Its duty was to co-ordinate plans for the invasion of Sicily, which
were then being made by the British Eighth Army in Cairo and the American
Seventh Army in Oran.
Subsequently, as H.Q. 15 Army Group, this Head-
quarters was to command the Armies in the field.
D.D.Tn.,
141 Force,
arrived from England in May, and a small staff, composed mainly of officers
already in North Africa, was posted to him.
The task of co-ordinating plans
drafted by two other H.Q. nearly 2,000 miles apart proved a difficult one; the
poor communications between Cairo and Algiers meant that nothing but the
broadest policy could be discussed.
Neither D.G.M.R. nor D.Tn. A.F.H.Q.
had any clear directive how far they were responsible for the operation, and,
though liaison officers were exchanged between Algiers and Cairo, many im-
portant matters were still unsettled as the date of the operation approached.
This lack of co-ordination was to have serious consequences at a later stage,
in Italy.
the operation took place as planned, "D-Day" being 10th July, 1943.
though the campaign lasted only a few weeks Transportation served under
three different commands-15 Army Group, Eighth Army, and Fortbase.
These changes made the formulation of transportation policy very dificult,
especially as, in addition, there was little co-ordination with the Americans
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/2,
28
