accommodated. The whole establishment at each port was under a Port
Superintendent (Colonel) who was responsible direct to In. 6 War Office on all
matters except local administration.
SECTION 7.-INLAND WATER TRANSPORT (Tn. 7)
During the winter of 1939, in anticipation of employment on the canals
of Northern France and possibly Belgium, steps were taken by the War Office
to raise and train an inland water transport organization consisting of a group
H.Q., two I.W.T. operating companies and one L.W.l. Workshop company.
The course of the campaign however prevented these units being employed
overseas, and after a period of service at home the group Ht.Q. and workshop
company were disbanded and the operating companies were attached to docks
groups to provide lighterage service in the home ports.
Although the use of inland waterways figured largely in the campaigns in
the Middle East and on the lines of communication through Iraq and Persia,
it was not until the summer of 1943 that planning for Overlord, or Roundup
as it was then called, showed the need for an elaborate inland water transpor
organization in the Order of Battle of the Expeditionary Force.
new units had to be formed, consisting of three I.W.T. group H.Q., five I.W.T.
operating companies, two heavy and three light aid I. W.T. workshop companies,
and eight floating crane sections.
In order to handle the collective training
and employment of all these units, and the preparation of the great number
and variety of floating craft required for the operation, a separate branch,
Tn. 7, was created in the Tn. Directorate, under the D.D.Tn. (Docks) (later
Director of Ports and I.W.T.).
Work was started by an I.W.T. heavy workshops company in the Surrey
Commercial Dock in August, 1943, on the adaptation of some 400 Thames
sailing barges to fit them for operational service.
The majority of these were
fitted with power units, and all were equipped with ramps to permit of rapid
and direct unloading to beaches.
They were christened P.B.R. (Powered
Barges Ramped) and D.B.R. (Dumb Barges Ramped) respectively.
The craft were taken over at Tilbury from the Royal Navy or the Ministry
of War Transport, towed to Surrey Commercial Dock for conversion and
thence to stabling areas further up the river.
The depot at Surrey Commercial
Dock consisted of a "blitzed" dockside area of some four acres on which
damaged buildings had to be levelled and workshops, stores, administrative
buildings and hutted accommodation erected.
Owing to the varying dimen-
sions of the barges it was impossible to employ standardized methods, but in
spite of this and of constant shortages of tools and materials, an output of four
completed barges a day was attained.
While this work was proceeding, the first deliveries of 400 Canadian pre
fabricated "Minca" barges began to arrive for assembly in the United Kingdom,
and added to the responsibilities of the I.W.T. organization.
were established and prototypes erected in the London Docks and at Sout
ampton by I.W.T. units, but as the latter soon ceased to be available for opera-
tional reasons the bulk of the work was done by contract under the supervision
In addition to the larger quantity of "Minca" barges, 100 rampeo
cargo lighters (R.C.L.s) in sections were also coming in from the United States,
and though they were clearly too late for use in the assault stages of the invasion
their erection was proceeded with, again by civil contractors, in anticipation o
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
28
a possible requirement for canal transport later.
Actually this requirement
did not materialize and 80 per cent. of the assembled R.C.L.s were later dis-
mantled for shipment to India.
Other craft erected for Overlord were 96 "Sea Mules," or small sectionalized
American tugs, in theory very simple, but in practice very difficult to assemble;
these again were erected by contract.
The most onerous of all Tn. 7's activities in the period before D-Day was
the erection and manning of 39 large "Rhino" ferries.
These were constructed
of American Naval pontoon equipment, and as originally planned were to be
erected and manned entirely by United States personnel.
In December, 1943,
however, the commitment was unexpectedly transferred to the British I.W.T.
organization; at that late stage there were many conflicting priorities, but by
the combined efforts of civilian contractors and of such I.W.T. personnel as
were available the project was just completed in time, the crews were trained,
and on D-Day Rhino Ferries took their allotted place in the operation.
SECTION 8.—TRAINING
Before the War the technical training of Regular Transportation troops
was carried out at the Railway Training Centre at Longmoor Camp, Hants.
The Centre consisted of a Headquarters and the 8th and 10th Railway Com-
panies, R.E.: included in the 8th Company was the 29th (Survey) Section,
which formed the nucleus of the 29th Railway Survey Company on mobilization.
The Centre was also responsible for the training of Supplementary Reserve
Transportation units, which were raised mainly from personnel of the four civil
Railway Companies and the Port of London Authority, and which attended a
fortnight's camp at Longmoor during the summer months.
As the name of the Centre implies, peace-time training was limited almost
There was no Regular docks unit, and only
elementary provision was made for the specialized training of the Supple-
mentary Reserve Docks Sections, while I.W.T. units and their training were
It was not until April, 1942 that the name of the
Centre was changed to the Transportation Training Centre in order to mark
its responsibility for training in all technical transportation duties.
On the outbreak of war the mobilization of the 8th Railway Construction
and Operating Company and the 29th Railway Survey Company, both Regular
units, and of the Supplementary Reserve units, was completed according to
plan, and the H.Q. and 10th Company became the nucleus for the formation
of new units and of a greatly expanded training organization.
The peace-time training facilities at Longmoor consisted of the Longmoor
Military Railway, some eight miles in length and comprising a total of eighteen
miles of track, and a small workshop.
On the outbreak of war the numbers
arriving at the Centre were so large that detailed training in mechanical subjects
was impossible, and men of these trades had to be accepted at their face value.
Fortunately, the majority of recruits at this stage were bona fide tradesmen
who needed instruction only in the military aspect of their trades.
It was, however, obvious that additional training facilities were urgently
necessary to cope with the flow of recruits for the formation of approved new
units, and in November, 1939 No. 2 Railway Training Centre was set up at
Arrangements were made with the London, Midland and Scottish
Railway for the use of their admirably equipped Traffic School, and for facilities
