(colonel), two D.A.D.sTn. and one captain.
This was increased in February,
1940, by the addition of an A.D.Tn. and a second captain.
At the outset there was a division of responsibility for the discharge of ships,
the Sea Transport Service being responsible on board and the Docks Directorate
This led to many difficulties, and in March, 1940 the Docks
Directorate was made entirely responsible at overseas ports for the discharge
of cargo and for all cargo handling gear.
The War Office letter giving effect
to this change is reproduced in Appendix B to this chapter (page 50).
Under the pre-war plan, as subsequently adjusted from time to time, certain
berths were allotted to the B.E.F. in absolute priority; that is to say they were
British berths and could always be used when required.
Although, in theory,
these berths were available for general use when not required, in practice they
were left almost entirely to the British.
Other berths were allotted for inter-
mittent use but these were not held vacant for the B.E.F., and the British had
to work in with the normal civil traffic.
Berths were allotted up to the agreed
number, as was most convenient to the Port Authorities and to the Docks
The ports initially used by the B.E.F. were Nantes for stores, cased petrol
and vehicles; St. Nazaire for ammunition, vehicle drivers, vehicles and frozen
meat; Brest for stores, cased petrol, ammunition, vehicles and drivers; Cherbourg
for personnel and vehicles; Dieppe for hospital carriers only.
to be opened were Caen (October) for cased petrol only; Le Havre (October)
initially for supplies but later for all classes of traffic except petrol and ammu-
Fécamp (December) for ammunition; Rouen (February) for empty
petrol tins, R.E.
and Tn. stores; and St. Malo (March) for ammunition and
In addition Boulogne (November) was used for
leave personnel and frozen meat; Marseilles (November) for trooping to and
from the East and for the import of a small amount of special stores from the
East, and Calais and Dunkirk for the import of rolling stock and vehicles
by train ferry.
A schedule showing the ports and berths in use at the end of
April, 1940, and how they were manned, is given in Appendix C to this chapter
(page 51).
At the start of the campaign, two docks groups, each of a H.Q. and four
sections, were available and these were allotted to the Nantes and Brest areas.
A third docks group was raised in the United Kingdom and, on arrival in France
in January, 1940, was allotted to Le Havre.
The duties of these units were
technical and supervisory only, labour being provided initially by general
labour companies (unskilled) and by special labour companies.
Both types
were composed mainly of cavalry and infantry reservists, but the special labour
companies included a small proportion of dockers.
As the reservists were
due for withdrawal it was decided to form permanent stevedore battalions.
One was formed in the United Kingdom and sent to France in November, 1939,
and two more were formed in France by December.
Some of the smaller
ports were worked with French civilian labour.
The disembarkation of the original B.E.F. with its vehicles was completed
by 7th October, 1939, and a stores shipment programme was begun.
this programme 7,500 tons a day were being unloaded by the end of October,
but this tonnage was altogether beyond the receiving capacity of the temporary
and emergency B.E.F. depots and had to be drastically reduced. In fact, by
December, 1939, imports had decreased to such an extent that it was possible
to send all docks personnel
on leave in two batches.
As new depots were
completed and brought a use, imports increased; in February, 1940, 120,000
tons were discharged, and here won his rate was maintained during March and
April, the docks were nownere working to full capacity.
Considerable difficulty was caused in the first few months by the mixed
loading of cargo in ships' holds.
This was apparently due to the system at a
United Kingdom port, whereby long trains of stores were drawn up alongside
several berths and the contents of each wagon then loaded into the nearest
sorting stores on discharge.
The time thus saved in loading was more than offset by the time lost in
Marking of stores also left much to be desired in
the early days, and this, coupled with mixed loading, caused much congestion
SECTION 6.-INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
Although at the start of the campaign the War Establishment of General
Headquarters of the British Expeditionary Force allowed for a Director of
Inland Water Transport (lieutenant-colonel) under the D.G.Tn., the appointment
was not filled until January, 1940, when it had become evident that water
transport would have to be used for the carriage of sand and gravel for forti-
cation works in order to relieve the railways, which were short of rolling stock.
The new Director proceeded to reach a very good understanding with the
Directeur des Voies Navigables at French General Headquarters and with the
officer of the IVme Bureau who was the controlling authority in Paris for barges
and coastal vessels used for the transport of bulk petrol. To facilitate contact
with the French authorities, the Directeur des Voies Navigables detailed one
of his executive officers, a lieutenant in the French Sapeurs du Navigation,
to be attached to the Inland Water Transport Directorate as liaison officer,
an attachment which proved extremely valuable.
At the end of February, 1940, a circular regarding the use of I.W.T. was
issued by the Quarter Master General.
The main points of this circular were
(a) The control and ordering of inland water transport was to be centralized
under the Inland Water Transport Directorate.
No demands were to
be placed by Services on private firms in future, but any contracts which
had already been made were to be allowed to run until they expired.
(b) Weekly demands for tonnage were to be submitted by Services to Q(M)
at G.H.Q., except in the case of Nantes and St. Malo where they would
be submitted to local Movement Control.
state the tonnage to be lifted, and the place of loading and delivery.
They should in no case be for less than an 80-ton consignment, and
consignments should be kept as large as possible.
(c) Inland water transport is suitable for bulk traffic which can be moved
in an even flow, and should not be used for detail traffic.
keep railway traffic to a minimum, it was essential that every effort be
made to use inland water transport.
Items for which it was most
suitable were bulk petrol, building materials, road stone, coal, defence
stores, ammunition and cased supplies.
Applications for advice about
routes and types of traffic should be made to the I. W.T. Service.
(d) It should not be used for long journeys, and except for local transit
was mainly applicable to areas north of the Seine.
wes get
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7/26
28
