There were also 800 War Department unbraked wagons.
To ensure that the
necessary brake power was available entailed much extra work in marshalling
yards and very careful control in loading at the ports to ensure that the
necessary braked vehicles were available to "carry" unbraked wagons over
With the arrival of American wagons, a large percentage of which were
power braked, it was hoped these difficulties would be overcome.
American vehicles, however, had very weak couplin ss aice the brakes were
weaker and slower acting than the types already in service.
of couplings and snatch due to slow release of brakes caused many cases of
trains dividing, and it became necessary to lay down that not more than 25 per
cent. of a train should consist of American wagons and that each pair of them
should be separated by other stock, the couplings of the latter only being used.
This further complicated marshalling of trains.
A further difficulty was failure of superheater elements on the L.M.S.
Class 8 F locomotives converted to oil-firing.
The rate of failure was extremely
high-far above normal-and the number of spare elements available was
inadequate for replacement.
Three sets of elements were therefore removed
from each locomotive, the superheater header blanked off accordingly, and
the elements removed used as spares to replace failed elements.
were repaired by welding and were also shortened to increase their life: they
were then taken into stock as spares.
Reorganization of Workshops
The Central Workshops at Teheran were reorganized and a proper loco-
motive and wagon repair programme was put into force, with immediate results
on the out-turn from shops.
At Ahwaz, a detachment of the Railway Work-
shop Company, together with the Railway Mobile Workshop, supervised the
erection of imported locomotives and assisted in shed repairs.
imported wagons was also undertaken at Ahwaz.
The Railway Mobile Work-
shop was later moved temporarily to the Central Division to assist with shed
repairs and repairs to superheater elements.
Distribution of British operating
and workshop units at the end of 1942 was as follows:—
H.Q. Railway Operating Group at Teheran:-
One Railway Operating Company from the ports to Andimeshk (exclusive)
with H.Q. at Ahwaz.
One Railway Operating Company from Andimeshk (inclusive) to Irak
(Sultanabad) (inclusive).
One Railway Operating Company from Sultanabad (exclusive) to Teheran
with H.Q. at Teheran.
One Railway Workshop Company in Teheran workshops with a detach-
ment at Ahwaz.
One Railway Mobile Workshop at Ahwaz.
SECTION 6.—RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION-PERSIA
Construction of Line Extensions
On the formation of the British Transportation Directorate in October, 1941,
it was found that the Persian State Railway had three incomplete extension
in hand, namely from Teheran to Tabriz, from Garmsar to Meshed, and from
Ghom to Yezd.
After detailed inspection of these works it was decided, in
view of demands folatiour and materials for other works of military importance,
to complete the Tabriz extension as far as Mianeh only, where the country
became mountainous; to stop the Meshed line at Shahrud, a convenient transit
point; and to abandon the Yezd line, removing all suitable material for use
It was not until the end of February, 1942, that the first British railway
construction company arrived in Persia, and not until July and later that partial
completion of the iraq construction programme permitted the transfer to Persia
of a number of Indian survey, construction and maintenance units.
meantime, such works as were possible in Persia were carried out by the Persian
State Railway under British direction.
The extension to Mianeh was in the Russian Zone, and was to be completed
by the Persian Ministry of Communications.
The Tn. Directorate took little
direct interest in this line until December, 1942, when instructions were received
to develop the line to a capacity of 2,000 tons a day.
consisted of protective works in areas liable to flood, development of water
supply and completion of loops and yards.
that wheat, lorries and materials would be provided, three months went by
without anything being received.
The Persian Government were, however,
persuaded to continue at an increased rate, and by the end of January, 1943,
protective works had been completed and the track ballasted to stand up to
Preparatory work on the Mianeh railhead was started in
February, though no track or water supply stores had yet been received.
Fortunately it was decided that owing to the improved strategic position the
British had no further interest in the line, and development thereafter rested
between the Russians and the Persians, though Transportation was still called
on to supply certain stores.
In November, 1941, the construction was sanctioned of a new line, 120
kilometres long, from Ahwaz to Khorramshahr, where a new port was being
Formation work was begun in November, 1941, by local con-
tractors, and the earthwork and bridges were completed by the end of March,
Tracklaying was supervised by the Construction Department of the
Persian State Railway
the general control of the Transportation
Directorate, and the first train left the newly opened port on 31st December, 1942.
In May, 1942, a branch about 40 kilometres long from kilometre 80 on the
Ahwaz-Khorramshahr line to Tanuma was authorized.
taken partly by a mechanical equipment section and partly by a contractor;
the tracklaying was carried out by Indian railway construction companies.
The work was complete by the target date at the end of October, but the Tanuma
lighterage basin was not completed until four months later, so the line was
In January, 1943, the Tanuma development scheme
was greatly extended and, to facilitate supervision, execution of the works in
the Tanuma area was handed over to the R.C.E., Basra, under the Transporta-
tion Directorate, Iraq.
Organization for Increased Traffic
To cope with the increased traffic it was necessary greatly to improve the
yard facilities at the port of Bandar Shahpur and at Ahwaz, Andimeshk and
The yard layout at Khorramshahr was also extended several times
as the target figure for the port was increased, and it was not until January,
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/2
28
