the creeks around Dockyard Island and also the wharf front at Margil under
the direction of a civilian dredging master.
The Conservancy Section com-
pleted the survey of the narrows below Amara and, in collaboration with the
Iraqi Irrigation Department, had agreed to the details of the new Regulator
in the Chahala off-take, the construction of which was to be completed at
British military expense before the low river season.
The geographical distribution at this time was as follows:—
Headquarter Offices
Beit Seraji (3 miles below Ashar).
Base Camp •
Khosrowabad (9 miles below Abadan).
Engineering and Marine H.Q.
Dockyard Island, Ashar.
Margil Docks.
Up-River detachments, River Tigris
Baghdad, Kut, Amara and Calet Saleh.
Up-River detachments,
Khorramshahr and Ahwaz.
Abadan, Khorrowabad, Bushire and
During April, 1942, in consequence of a report submitted by a junior liaison
officer from India, an Inland Water Transport Investigation Committee was
set up to review the organization and administration of the I.W.T. Service,
This committee was composed of the Financial Adviser to Tenth Army, the
Area Commander and the Director of Movements, with the Hon. I.W.T.
Adviser to the Government of India as technical representative.
mittee's report not only approved the administration and the general disposition
of craft and personnel, but drew attention to the difficulties faced by the
organization and to the need for additional supervisory and workshops per-
sonnel, as well as stores, if the lift capacity was to be maintained.
The arrival of large towing steamers from India necessitated the adoption
of a sectional towage system.
All except two of the largest local towing craft
were capable of navigating the Tigris and Karun at all stages of the river and
could operate at three feet draft, but the new arrivals had drafts which varied
from four feet to six feet six inches and could not be used for through towing
The Tigris was therefore divided into four sections and worked
with the following types of craft:-
Base: Basra to El Azair (8 ft. draft). Large paddlers and twin screw steamers.
Narrows: El Azair to Amara (4 ft. draft).
Small twin screw motor tugs.
Middle: Amara to Kut (4 ft. 6 in. draft). Medium paddlers and medium
stern or quarter wheelers.
Upper: Kut to Baghdad (3 ft. draft). Small paddlers and small twin screw
motor tugs.
The Narrows section was the most difficult to operate, as in addition to draf
difficulties there was the problem of breadth of tow.
There are four irrigation
distributaries leaving the Tigris in the Amara district, and in 1941 all except
one of the regulators had fallen into disrepair so that, at low river, at least
80 per cent. of the water was flowing to waste in the marshes.
In consequence
of this the river, which was several hundred yards wide above Amara, con-
tracted to a narrow tortuous stream barely 120 yards wide in places, which
andessitated the building of a series of observation towers to control traffic
and eliminate the danger of collisions.
The adoption of sectional towage and the need for greater economy of
96
WO 277/2
irrigation off-take led to the establishment of " Area Control" at the end of May.
Base Area controlled all Gulf and Port operation and towage in tidal waters,
while Forward Area, with Headquarters at Kut, was responsible for all river
operation, conservancy and irrigation.
Kut was selected as Forward Area H.Q.
on account of its growing importance as the riverhead for transhipments to
the new Kut-Baquba railway.
A floating workshop was established at Kut to carry out craft maintenance
until the new dockyard and workshops could be constructed, and vessels on
sectional towage only returned to the base when in need of major repairs.
The shortage of workshops personnel and equipment was a severe handicap
During the 1914-1918 war, I.W.T. had built slipways, workshops
and craft erection sites at Dockyard Island, Ashar; only the slipways now
remained, the rest of the island being occupied by Iraqi civilians, and all
machinery repairs had to be carried out at Messrs. Gray Mackenzie's workshops
The island was cleared of its inhabitants and the Construction
Department levelled the site, raising the level of the whole island an average
of three feet by sludge dredged from the surrounding creeks; laid roads and
Decauville track; built jetties and workshops and installed light, power and
The work was completed by the middle of 1943. In the mean-
time, the capacity of Messrs. Gray Mackenzie's workshops was increased by
the temporary installation of new machinery from the United Kingdom and
The load on the workshops was increased during this period by
the arrival of the first batch of Eureka tow-boats from the United States.
The Eurekas were intended for use with the Higgins barges which were being
erected at Kuweit under American supervision. Kuweit had been chosen
because of ample foreshore accommodation with a suitable rise and fall of
tide and because, being the centre of the Gulf boat building industry, there
were considerable numbers of carpenters available locally. Its disadvantage
from the I.W.T. point of view was that a considerable effort had to be diverted
to towage from Kuweit to Basra and elsewhere.
The first barges were towed
to Basra in August, 1942, and thereafter they came off the assembly lines at
an increasing rate until a total of 365 had been delivered by the time the
American project closed down in the middle of 1943.
Practically all consumable stores had to be obtained by local purchase until
July, 1942.
The Anglo-Iranian Oil Company at Abadan were very helpful in
supplying certain scarce items, particularly when these were required for the
running or maintenance of craft on hire from the Company to I.W.T., but
the bulk of the stores was obtained in the bazaars of Basra and Baghdad.
By the end of August, however, stores began to arrive from India, and the
Stores section was taken away from the Engineering Department and formed
into a new Department of Stores and Accounts, responsible for receipts and
issues of all types of stores engineering, marine and accommodation-
invoices and accounts, timekeeping and costing.
The latter was important
because by this time I.W.T. was undertaking a considerable amount of outside
work for the Royal Navy, Port Authorities and other organizations.
end of the year the Stores and Accounts Department was fully functioning,
and was able to produce a monthly profit and loss statement for the whole
During the four months ending August, 1942, the Traffic Department
handled an average of 3,000 tons of cargo a day, in operations extending over
1,264 miles of river and seaway, with a fleet which now numbered 661 vessels
28
