had to be made, and a so-called two-year plan was produced and demands
At this time it was almost impossible to make any accurate fore-
cast as, although it was realized that the Middle East theatre would require
a great deal of transportation development, details of this future development
could only be guessed at.
In fact, the two-year plan forecast turned out to be
totally inadequate, and commitments were met only because the Director of
Works was able to help with the supply of steel and R.E. stores such as plant
As the war progressed and plans became more settled, the position began
The unavoidable time-lag, however, between the submission of
demands and receipt of stores
caused difficulties at times.
During 1942 the
bulk of permanent way materials received in the theatre was being sent direct
construction railheads in the Western Desert or on the
Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway, and stocks were being used as fast as they were
Experience in the Middle East showed that it was impossible to base fore-
casts for transportation stores on any known factors of consumption.
war-time it is essential to hold adequate stocks of all items which may be called
forward for operational purposes.
This was shown particularly in connection
with the construction of the Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway, which was started
without adequate warning being given for the provision of the considerable
quantities of stores and plant required.
Even after construction units had made
their forecasts of requirements, it was found in practice that the quantities
actually needed were greatly in excess of the estimates.
stores and plant required for construction were also found to vary considerably
according to the circumstances under which work was carried out.
quantities of tools required for the construction of the Western Desert Railway,
for example, bore no relation to the quantities required for the Haifa-Beirut-
Tripoli Railway, while some 300 miles of track were laid in depots without the
need for any tools or plant other than railway construction companies' G 1098
Owing to the difficulty experienced by civilian undertakings in obtaining
stores, it was agreed early in the war that undertakings such as railways and
ports should receive assistance from the Army where they were considered
essential to the war effort.
In accordance with this decision, stores were issued
from transportation
stocks to the Egyptian, Sudan and Palestine Railways.
By December, 1941, the issue of stores on repayment on these conditions had
grown to such an extent that it was decided to set up a Stores Accounting
Section as a link between Tn. 2 (Stores) and Tn. 1 (Finance).
accounting was no longer sufficient owing to the continual rise in prices, and
At first this proved difficult as Transportation
Stores were not supplied with details of stores costs and the sources of supply
were widespread; debits were raised, therefore, on estimated costs as a temporaly
measure.
The work of pricing continued, however, and by the end of the war
had been completed in most cases.
The main Transportation Stores Depot in the Middle East was at Suez.
Work on the construction of this depot started in November, 1940, and it was
completed by April, 1941, although parts of it were in use before this date.
Sub-depots, which at first were little more than dumps of permanent way
material, were formed at the other Egyptian ports.
With the extension of the
Middle East Base to the Levant, the necsity arose for another depot to serve this
68
area, and a seconen construction starte stores depot was established at Essib
When construction started on the Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway,
were set up at Beirut and Tripoli.
the depot at Essio wasud Tripoli supply of stores to this line, and sub-depots
A mechanical spare parts section, with a depot at Ein Shams, near Cairo,
was established to be used exclusively for the reception and issue of mechanical
spare parts for cranes, locomotives (both steam and diesel) and wagons. This
was the main centre for controlling spare parts arriving not only for the Middle
East theatre but also for Iraq and Persia.
A depot for I.W.T. stores was estab-
lished at Bulak, and another, mainly for docks stores, at Alexandria,
the capture of Cyrenaica and Libya, two more depots were established, at
Benghazi and Tripoli, to serve the two captured Italian Railways.
At the beginning of 1941, the manufacture of certain items of docks gear
was started at Alexandria on behalf of Transportation Stores.
it was agreed that all cargo handling gear at Middle East ports was to be pooled,
and thereafter gear for the loading and unloading of cargoes, both civilian and
military, was provided by the Army, irrespective of which organization carried
This led to a large increase in demands for gear, and arrange-
ments were made for considerable quantities to be made by local native trades-
men in the stores depot at Alexandria.
Use was made of locally reconditioned
cordage and discarded steel wire rope obtained from salvage.
of this cargo handling gear proceeded so well that, by the end of the war,
supplies were being sent not only to Mediterranean and Persian Gulf ports,
but also to India and the Far East.
A transportation stores depot workshop was operated at Suez, until the
second half of 1942, by the Transportation Stores Company in charge of the
depot. This workshop was used for the construction of bridging stores, over-
head gantries, locomotive spare parts, docks gear, wagon fittings, and special
fishplates, and for smiths' work.
Towards the end of 1942 it was taken over
by a railway workshop company which continued to carry out any work of this
nature in addition to the repair and maintenance of locomotives.
Considerable trouble was experienced with the American diesel locomotives
supplied for use in the Middle East, owing to cracked cylinder heads.
available resources were used locally for welding cracked heads, but sometimes
spares had to be flown from the United States to keep the engines running.
Eventually a better design of head was produced, a number of these being
made in South Africa to save time.
In May, 1944, with a reduction in the quantity of stores required in the
Levant, the depot at Essib was reduced to the status of a sub-depot of the
Suez depot, and became responsible for the supply of stores to the Haifa-Beirut-
Tripoli Railway only.
The sub-depots at Beirut and Tripoli (Syria) were closed.
In the same month, the I.W.T. Stores Depot was moved from Bulak to Helouan.
The concentration of stocks continued throughout 1944 and the first half of
1945, general stores being collected at Suez and mechanical spare parts at Ein
In the middle of 1945, the depots at Essib and Helouan were closed
down and stocks were transferred to Suez.
At the end of 1944, one of the two transportation stores companies was
moved to Italy and the Group Headquarters was disbanded.
of Group Headquarters were formed into an Inspectorate of Transportation
Stores, the function of this Inspectorate being to check the G 1098 equipment
of all transportation units.
WO 277/2
2
WO 27 77₴
28
