No. 4. Transportation Stores Depot, Richborough
In the spring of 1944 a Tn. stores detachment was allocated to No. 2 Port
and I.W.T. Repair Depot at Richborough, Kent, and this detachment later.
became No. 4 Tn. Stores Depot.
As in the case of Marchwood, the object
b this unt a to sing within normal acco. 2 Pound .W. stoat
and materials which were being delivered to No.
Depot for special projects.
The depot was also used to take overflow stores
requiring covered accommodation for which there was insufficient room at
In February, 1945, a long-felt want was met by the establishment of small
Tn. stores detachments at the principal home ports.
Their duties were to
ensure that stores arriving at their ports for shipment were properly packed
and marked; that large items of plant were suitably treated for carriage as
deck cargo; that stores held in transit were protected against damage and
pilferage; and that consignments were shipped complete.
They undoubtedly
saved a considerable amount of loss, damage and delay at the ports and in
In the course of the war, thirteen Tn. stores companies and four H.Q.
Tn. stores groups were formed in the United Kingdom for service in overseas
theatres and bases.
These units were composed mainly of conscripted men
trained in the Tn. Training Centre at Longmoor or at Derby, and the vast
majority had no knowledge of stores work before joining the Army. Com-
panies, after formation, and prior to mobilization for overseas, were attached
in turn to one or other of the home depots to assist in the work and at the same
time to acquire practical experience in storekeeping.
Newly formed Group
H.Q. were in some cases attached to the War Office in order to gain experience
in stores planning and procedure.
SECTION 4.—RAILWAYS (Tn. 3 and 4)
In the early part of the war the Railways branch of the Directorate (originally
Q.M.G. 15, renamed Tn. 3 in February, 1940) was concerned mainly with
ensuring that adequate railway facilities were available in the United Kingdom
for the storage, movement and shipment of supplies to the B.E.F. This entailed
close liaison on the one hand with the Directorate of Movements and the Move
ment Control staff, who were responsible for stating requirements in terms of
tonnages, depots and ports, and on the other hand with the Ministry of Trans-
port (later Ministry of War Transport), the Railway Executive Committee ano
the civil Railway Companies, who agreed and carried out any necessary im
provements and extensions.
But with the withdrawal of the B.E.F. from France in the summer of 194,
followed by the threat of invasion and the autumn "blitz?" the work of thi
section of the Directorate increased greatly in scope.
It was therefore expanded
into two branches, Tn. 3 responsible for railway operating (and temporan)
for port operating also) and Tn. 4 responsible for railway construction:
in 1941 a Deputy Director of Transportation (Railways) was appointed in
control these two branches and to be responsible to the Director for all railway
matters at home, including the command, training and employment of al
railway operating, railway construction, railway workshop and associated units
The first duty of the railway operating troops was to be prepared to car
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
28
out essential railway operating tasks, particularly in advanced areas, in the
To this end, the few units available were distributed about
the country in detachments employed in rail-served military depots, with ar-
moured trains and with rail-mounted artillery batteries, while as many men
as possible were "learning the line" on important sections by doubling up with
the civilian railway staff.
The armoured trains, of which twelve were formed in 1940, each consisted
of an armoured tank locomotive with an auxiliary tender, two converted
20-ton mineral wagons mounting a 6-pounder gun and anti-aircraft weapons,
They were stationed along the east and south
coasts and were manned by Polish troops, with British Tn. troops as train crews.
They were disbanded in 1943.
The train crews for rail-mounted artillery batteries, consisting of one Royal
Marine and three Army batteries deployed on the anti-invasion defences, were
in 1941 formed into a special Railway Operating Company which continued
to serve in this capacity until the batteries were disbanded in 1944.
Meanwhile the railway construction troops were employed on the construc-
tion of spur-lines near the coast to serve both rail-mounted and fixed coastal
They also assisted the civil railways in the construction of alter-
native routes and junctions at a number of key points for use in case of emer-
gency. Help was also given to the railways, and valuable experience gained,
in emergency repairs to bombed track and bridges on routes of military impor-
In this work use was first made of the special steel trestling which had
been designed under War Office direction for military railway purposes, and
which was later employed in very large quantities overseas.
As the reorganization and expansion of the Army proceeded and the
immediate threat of invasion diminished, a start was made with the development
of the United Kingdom as the main base for future operations on the Continent
This involved the construction of a number of new rail-served
Army depots of all kinds and the enlargement of others already in being.
design and construction of the railways serving the great majority of these
depots were undertaken by the railway construction branch (Tn. 4) of the
Tn. Directorate under D.D.Tn.(R), and by the Railway Construction and
Survey Companies R.E., stationed in the United Kingdom.
Both during construction and after completion the depot railways were
as a general rule worked by railway operating troops under the control of
Tn. 3, which branch was responsible for the provision of locomotives and
operating equipment and also for concluding any necessary agreements with
the Railway Companies or with private firms in connection with the railway
working of depots or sidings.
The locomotives originally provided at the
depots were of many different types, mostly hired from the Railway Com-
panies. No running shed facilities existed in the early stages, and repairs and
servicing were carried out either in the open air or at the nearest main line
It was not until November, 1942, that a beginning could be
made with the standardization of depot locomotives by the gradual introduction
of newly delivered American shunters in replacement of hired engines; by
July, 1943, deliveries of British built shunting engines had begun, and these
replaced the remaining hired engines.
It is desirable at this point to explain how the railway operating and rail-
way construction troops in the United Kingdom were organized.
the railway operating troops consisted only of field force companies, of which
