dores and crane drivers and which a year later became the nucleus of No. 6
Group.
Nos. 1 and 2 Groups took part in the landings in North Africa in
October, 1942, and were joined by No. 5 Group in July, 1943.
No. 7 Group
started forming in September, 1942, and went overseas in 1943, having in its
turn provided the nucleus for No. 8 Group. In addition to these Groups,
individual companies and specially organized units were sent at various times
to Gibraltar, West Africa, Madagascar, the Azores and elsewhere.
During 1941 and 1942, in addition to undergoing military and combined
operations training, docks operating companies had been employed on ship
discharging in the Clyde, Mersey, Humber and Bristol Channel and at Belfast,
Southampton and elsewhere; while the docks maintenance companies, which
were again remodelled and renamed Port Maintenance Companies in July, 1941,
had been mainly employed on dismantling dockside cranes at Southampton,
Harwich, Glasgow and Leeds and re-erecting them at Birkenhead and at the
Military Ports.
experience gained in beach landings in North Africa, Sicily and
Italy, and in exercises and studies in preparation for the main cross-Channel
operation, showed that the War Establishments of docks operating units,
designed as they were for more or less normal port working, were not entirely
suitable for the type of work which, in the early stages at any rate, the units
would be required to do.
Their duties, as now envisaged, were first to assist
in a series of beach landings and the establishment of beach heads, and secondly,
immediately a port was captured, to take advantage of what facilities remained
intact and by improvisation to bridge the gap until quays, cranes and other
equipment
could be repaired. Linked with the docks operating units in this
connection would be I.W.T. units, whose role would consist of manning,
operating and maintaining the craft used for ferrying cargo between ships and
In order to fit the Docks Operating Companies for their dual role, a new
revision of War Establishment was approved in November, 1943; the revision
involved a reduction in total strength, particularly in checkers, but an increase
in the number of N.C.O.s for supervision, and of crane and transportation plant
Units so reorganized were renamed Port Operating Companies,
and the Docks Group H.Q. were renamed Port Operating Group H.Q., in
order to get away from the idea that they were designed for working only in
established docks.
After the departure overseas of No. 7 Group in the summer of 1943, there
remained at home two Groups, Nos. 6 and 8, both of which were performing
special training roles in addition to their normal duties.
The formation of three more Groups, Nos. 9, 10 and 11 was put in hand
during the second half of 1943, and these five Groups were all gradually reor-
ganized in the new establishments.
A sixth Group H.Q. (No. 2) and a number
of operating and maintenance companies were brought home from the Mediter-
ranean early in 1944 in order to complete the six full Groups needed for Over-
lord (the concentration of troops for the invasion of North-West Europe).
Towards the end of 1943 it became necessary to train and form into military
units some 4,000 stevedores for employment at United Kingdom ports during
the Overlord operations.
This was done mainly to provide an insurance against
the ports being rendered untenable by civilian stevedores through enemy
Three stevedore battalion H.Qs. and eleven stevedore companies
were formed between December, 1943, and April, 1944.
After initial training
WO 277/21
at the Tn. Training Centre (Port Operating Training Wing) or at the Military
Ports, these units assisted at civil ports on the Clyde, Mersey, and Humber
until April and then moved to Southampton, Hull and Tilbury. Between
May, 1944, and May, 1945, with the assistance of Pioneer Corps and civil
labour, they loaded over a million tons of cargo for the forces on the Continent.
The personnel of one company were employed as storemen in charge of gear on
coasters plying between British ports and the Normandy beaches until Novem-
It will be seen from the foregoing that the main duties of the Port Operating
Branch (Tn. 6) of the Tn. Directorate consisted in supervising the technical
training and technical employment of their field force units until they left for
They were responsible in addition for the operation of the two
Military Ports in Scotland whose construction is referred to in the previous
No. 1 Military Port at Faslane officially began operating on 19th May, 1942,
and No. 2 Port at Cairn Ryan on 8th May, 1943.
The total tonnages handled
until the end of 1945 were 645,000 tons at Faslane and 284,000 tons at Cairn
The bulk of this was military stores, equipment and vehicles loaded
outwards, and included the tactical loading of ships for long sea voyage assault
At these ports it was possible to stow cargo exactly as
called for by tactical considerations at destination, and with a much greater
degree of secrecy than at civilian ports.
Tankers bringing oil from America were specially adapted to carry deck
cargo consisting mainly of aircraft and aircraft parts, and No. 1 Port was con-
stantly used for the unloading of these deck cargoes, which by special organiza-
tion was done very rapidly and entailed only a few hours delay to the tanker
before she proceeded to her main port of discharge.
vessels were dealt with in one day.
The ports were not designed for the discharge of any considerable quantities
of miscellaneous military stores, but they were used from time to time for the
discharge of urgently required stores, such as vehicles, when it was not conveni-
ent for them to be unloaded at civilian ports.
August, 1944, 8,715 vehicles, cased and uncased, weighing 37,000 tons, were
discharged from 27 ships at Cairn Ryan, assembled within the port area and
cleared inland on their own wheels, thus relieving the then congested railways.
Occasional use was made of the Military Ports for the embarkation and
disembarkation of personnel, both American troops arriving and drafts and
leave parties to and from overseas theatres.
They were also used for the
servicing, refitting and laying-up of ships and aircraft carriers of the Royal
Navy, and for experimental work with floating equipment where secrecy was
They provided admirable facilities for the individual technical
The operation of these ports, including the loading and discharging of ships,
manning of tugs and barges, quay working, railway working and maintenance
of quays, permanent way, craft and all port equipment was the responsibility
of the Transportation service.
At each Port there was a static establishment
consisting of a H.Q., I.W.T. operating section, cargo securing section, technical
stores section, railway operating and maintenance section, and port main-
tenance section, together with one docks operating section for each berth. At
No. 1 Port there was also a floating crane section.
Additional help was pro-
vided by such field force units as were available from time to time and could be
WO277/26
28
