of a number of rail-served depots in the Shuaiba area and of a number of
crossing stations on both the metre and standard gauge lines, and the doubling
of the metre gauge line from Margil (Basra) to Baghdad.
The period from the end of 1941 to March, 1943, was one of continued
expansion of railway facilities to meet the growing traffic demands.
docks area and the Shuaiba depots were the scene of continuous new con-
A line was laid to a new port under construction at Um Qasr.
Sidings were laid at Mosul and Kirkuk, and a railhead for Russian trafic
was constructed at Mubarak, near Khanaqin.
A series of new depots was
constructed at Hindiyah and Mussayeb, and connected not only to the metre
gauge line but also to the standard gauge by means of a new line from Baghdad,
In order to reduce the rail lift over the metre gauge section from Basra and to
relieve the I.W.T. over the difficult part of the river, a new line was laid from
Kut to join the Khanagin line at Jassimiyah, near Baquba, and this station
was subsequently developed into an advanced base.
Finally, Basra was linked
by rail to the Persian Railways system at Tanuma.
It was decided in the early days to double the metre gauge line from Basra
An alternative proposal to lay the second track in standard
gauge, and so complete a standard gauge line from Turkey to Basra, was
rejected because of the shortage of standard gauge locomotives and rolling
Earthwork and bridges were, however, to be constructed in such a
way that the line could subsequently be converted to standard gauge if required.
In order to avoid heavy bridging on the section, some 120 miles in length,
which follows the left bank of the Euphrates between Samawah and Hindiyah,
the second line in this section was laid on the right bank of the river, crossing
it at the Hindiyah Barrage; this diversion was known as the Nejf loop.
was started on the doubling from both ends, and by January, 1942, the first
section, from Basra to Shuaiba, was opened to traffic.
In March, owing to
shortage of men and material, the doubling was suspended, but work was
continued on the earthwork and bridges, and sections already laid were brought
The line was doubled during the summer from Basra northwards
to Ur Junction and from Baghdad southwards to Hindiyah.
In October, 1942,
earthwork and bridging were started on the Nejf loop, and as the Iraqi Govern-
ment questioned the safety of using the Hindiyah Barrage for rail traffic civilian
experts were brought from India to examine it and report on its suitability.
These experts reported in November, 1942, that the Barrage could safely carry
metre gauge loads.
Work continued on the earthwork and bridges until
March, 1943, when it became obvious that, owing to the changed war situation,
the doubling could not be completed in time to justify any further expenditure
of labour or materials.
In the original plans it had been decided to construct 39 additional crossing
stations on the Basra-Baghdad line, 12 on the Kirkuk line and 31 on the standard
gauge line, work on the two latter lines being carried out by the Trag State
Although the earthwork for all these stations was completed and
most of them were laid, less than half were brought into use owing to operating
difficulties, the greatest of which was lack of personnel.
Remodelling and extension of the rail facilities at Basra Docks continued
almost without interruption during the whole period.
In addition to the
connection from the Docks to Margil stanon, a new chord line was laid direc
to the base marshalling yard at Shuaiba.
construction throughout 1942 and were completed in March, 1945, although
some minor extensions were later found to be necessary.
A railway workshops
and a wagon assembly plant were constructed at Raffidiyah, the starting point
for the new line to the port under construction at Um Qast.
line started in February, 194, and construction was completed up to the second
berth by April, 1943, when all work on the port was suspended.
Surveys for the depots at Hindiyah and Mussayeb, and also for a standard
gauge line from Sachiyah to Hidingh, were begun at the end of 1941, although
plans for the depot layouts had not been finally approved. Earthwork and
bridging for the Salchiyah-Hindiyah line started in January, 1942, and linking
was completed in May.
The first 17 miles were handed over to the Railway
for traffic in June and the rest of the line in July. The depots had been designed
originally for metre gauge only, but in February, 1942, it was decided to connect
them to both the metre and standard gauge lines. This led to complications
as the two types of track crossed frequently, but it was too late to alter the
The depots were completed by July, 1942, and the yards and loco-
motive shed a month or so later.
In September, 1942, certain extensions were
authorized and these were carried out during the remaining months of the year.
Survey for the Kut-Baquba line began in February, 1942.
ran for 125 miles from Kut, through Azizayah and Tel Cheliab, to join the
main Baghdad- Khanaqin line at mile 40 at a place called Jassimiyah.
started in July, 1942, and the target date for opening was fixed as Ist October.
Lack of rails and turnouts, however, delayed the completion until 2nd December
and the line was not opened to traffic until 17th December.
1942, it was decided to construct an advanced base, with rail-served depots,
at Jassimiyah, but in February, 1943, work on this base was suspended.
In the autumn of 1942, G.H.Q. P.A.I.C. decided to build a road bridge
across the river at Coal Island, just north of Basra, to take 56-ton loads.
Enquiries were made by Transportation to find out whether the bridge could
be strengthened to take the 63-ton load of a metre gauge locomotive, and
in October it was decided to lay a metre gauge line from Basra across the
new road bridge to Tanuma, which had just been joined to the Persian State
Railway system, and to construct a standard-metre gauge transhipment yard
Survey for the new line started in November, 1942.
the standard gauge layout at Tanuma was under the control of the Transpor-
tation Directorate in Persia, but in January, 1943, in order to simplify control,
responsibility for the whole Tanuma project was taken over by Iraq.
struction of the line was completed in July, 1943, but the bridge could not
be opened for rail traffic until September, and then only for light locomotives
at a maximum speed of 5 m.p.h.
Various difficulties in the construction of
the bridge prevented the removal of this restriction until January, 1944.
Rundown of Commitments
By March, 1943, all the depots were complete and only minor extensions
were required during the summer.
Units could now be spared for use in other
theatres, and by the end of July, 1943, there remained only one group he the
quarters and three railway maintenance companies in the Command.
last four months of the year, stocks that had been built up in the depots at
Jassimiyah, Mussayeb and Hindiyah were withdrawn and exported, and the
79
was 947/7
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/2
28
