provision was transferred in theory from the War Office to the newly created
Ministry of Supply, and accordingly, soon after the outbreak of war, Mr.
Everall's services were taken over by the Director of R.E. Equipment, Ministry
A year or so later, when the bulk of his original programme was completed,
Mr. Everall was commissioned with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and appointed
Chief Bridging Instructor at No. 2 Railway Training Centre, Derby, at which
centre the collective training of Tn. units in railway bridging was concentrated.
From the autumn of 1942 onwards, Lt.-Colonel Everall's specialized knowledge
was called into play on an increasing scale in connection with designs for
floating piers and other emergency port construction work, and he was brought
War Office in charge of a special steelwork branch under D.D.Tn. D)
(later Director of Ports and I.W.T.). But he and his staff continued to give
part of their time to railway bridging, and as a result of war experience they
designed and developed the Unit Construction Railway Bridge, the Everall
Through Truss Bridge and various types of trestle equipment.
Truss Bridge was also designed as an improvement on the Through Truss
Bridge, but was not in production in time for use on service.
SECTION 5.—PORT CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR (Tn. 5)
During the first stages of the war little or no port construction work was
and there was no special organization, either in the War Office or
in the field, to handle this type of work.
But the loss of the Channel ports
in 1940, followed by the threat of invasion and the heavy bombing of our own
ports, and followed later by the initiation of plans for offensive operations
overseas, created a number of technical problems in the field of harbour en-
gineering which could only be tackled with the help of specialists. In the late
summer of 1940 a new branch of the Tn. Directorate, Tn. 5, was created to
deal with these problems.
This branch was shortly afterwards associated with
the Port Operating and Inland Waterways branches under a Deputy Director of
Transportation (Docks) (later upgraded to Director of Ports and I.W.T.)
and was responsible for the initiation and supervision of some of the most
spectacular engineering achievements of the war.
The first problem facing the new branch in the latter half of 1940, and in
fact the problem which it was specifically created to handle, was that of pro-
viding port capacity elsewhere in the United Kingdom to take the place of
south and east coast ports which had become virtually closed to ocean-going
Examination of existing facilities at West Coast ports showed that
they were quite unable to carry the extra load, and it was accordingly decided
to build two entirely new deep water ports.
For reasons of secrecy it was
necessary that these ports should be located in out-of-way sites, and this in
turn entailed the decision to build, maintain and operate them with military
After careful reconnaissance two suitable sites were found on the
west coast of Scotland, one at Faslane on the Gare Loch and the other at
Cairn Ryan near Stranraer; these became known as No. 1 and No. 2 Military
Port respectively.
Six 500-feet long berths were constructed at Faslane and
five at Cairn Ryan, all with a minimum of thirty feet of water alongside at low
tide, and fully equipped with roadways, railway tracks and cranes.
lighterage wharves of timber construction 900-feet long were built at each port
to permit of the rapid discharge and loading of ships moored in deep water.
WO277/21
27
Wo27 1/2h
28
The design throughout was kept as simple as possible in order to speed up
construction, length of life being a minor consideration in the circumstances.
Responsibility for the execution of these projects rested throughout with the
Port Construction branch of the Tn. Directorate, but on certain parts of the
work valuable assistance was given and designs were prepared by a panel of
civilian consulting engineers.
In addition to the construction and equipment
of the berths and wharves, a vast amount of ancillary work was necessary.
Railway connections to the main line were laid, three miles long at No. 1
• Port and six miles long at Cairn Ryan; fifty miles of railway track in all were
laid in these main line connections and in internal sidings at the two ports.
Hutted camps, provided with all necessary amenities, were built for the accom-
modation of troops engaged on the construction of the ports and subsequently
on their maintenance and operation.
Work began at the end of 1940; the first
ship berthed at Faslane in July, 1942, and at Cairn Ryan a year later.
Meanwhile, planning for an eventual re-entry to the Continent had, at an
early stage, shown the need for units specially designed and trained for the rapid
repair of captured ports and for emergency construction work on open beaches.
The principal type of unit for these purposes was the port construction and
repair company, two or more of which were linked together under a H.Q.
port construction and repair group.
Other special types of unit formed
were dredging companies, port artizan companies, port floating equipment
companies and port repair ships.
Although all these units were formed as far
as possible with technically qualified officers, warrant officers and senior N.C.O.s
and with other ranks of suitable trades, it was nevertheless essential to provide
facilities for collective training for each unit in its own particular duties and
also to provide facilities for the storage and maintenance of the large quantities
of special plant and equipment which they would need.
the formation of two port and I.W.T. repair depots was approved. No. 1
Depot was sited at Marchwood, on the west side of Southampton Water,
and No. 2 Depot at Richborough in Kent.
At Marchwood, where work was started in June, 1943, the layout included
a well equipped jetty with sufficient water for coasters at all states of the tide,
two groups of railway sidings and a large storage area, and a concrete raft
and slipway for the construction and launching of concrete pontoons.
the Mulberry project was decided on in the autumn of 1943, additional
facilities were provided for the assembly of floating bridge spans and for
the construction of "Whale" links.
Camps were also built to accommodate
No. 2 Depot at Richborough, where work was not started until November,
1943, was fitted out on similar lines, but was fortunately already provided with
a wharf and with hutted camps dating from the 1914-1918 War.
also was extremely busy on the assembling of Mulberry equipment during the
It was not until the Quebec Conference in the autumn of 1943 that the
momentous decision was taken to go ahead with the construction of two arti-
ficial harbours for the projected landing on the Normandy Coast.
that date, however, a good deal of experimental work had been carried out
under the Tn. Directorate on floating piers and pierheads, primarily intended
for use on open beaches until a port had been captured.
Satisfactory designs
had been evolved and tested, and some miles of sectionalized pier units were
These went by the code name of "Whale" and, together with
