SECTION 8.—FINANCE
When a Transportation Directorate was established in the Middle East
towards the end of 1940, a Finance branch was included to cover the financial
responsibility of the Director General of Transportatione or Docks, Railway
and Inland Water Transport services.
In August, 1941, the duties of the Move-
ments staff and the Transportation service were reorganized and responsibility
for docks and railway operating passed from 1 ransportation to Movements;
financial responsibility, however, remained with the Director of Transportation.
This rather unorthodox arrangement continued until 1944.
The work of the Transportation Finance branch at G.H.Q., Middle East
(a) the financial aspect of all Movements and Transportation contracts,
agreements and policy questions;
(b) the checking and recording of railway I W.T., air and other transport
expenditure incurred in Egypt, and the passing of relevant bills for
(c) the recovery of charges for the hire and sale of War Department loco-
motives, rolling stock, stores, plant and machinery, and for miscel-
laneous services rendered by the War Department throughout Egypt
Transportation finance officers were appointed at the ports of Alexandria,
Port Said and Suez to control and record expenditure for docks working at
these ports and on the Canal.
They passed bills for payment in accordance
Officers were also posted to Haifa and Beirut
in connection with expenditure and recovery of charges in Palestine and Syria.
The year 1942 was the first complete calendar year during which transporta-
tion finance activities were properly recorded.
A major characteristic of the
year was the heavy increase in the carriage and handling of commercial and
non-military traffic by the Army.
The largest tonnages were nitrates and wheat,
but general merchandise for business houses, cereals for the United Kingdom
Commercial Corporation, and goods for Turkey and for the Malta Shipping
Committee were also largely concerned.
The work involved in the recovery of
the cost of these services entailed improvisation, the production of divers forms
of documentation and considerable accounting.
Numerous agreements and
contracts were negotiated and reviewed during the year, the chief of these being
new cargo handling agreements at Alexandria and Suez and freight and pas-
senger agreements over the Palestine and Syrian Railways.
the Suez Canal Bridge at Firdan, which was opened in August, 1942, was
continuously checked by Transportation Finance.
increase, a Commercial and Foreign sub-section to the Transportation Finance
branch was inaugurated in March, 1943.
transactions not strictly on account of the Services.
ordination of the final phases of all work relating to commercial firms, non-
military concerns, philanthropic bodies, Lease-Lend and other foreign traffic,
and comprised recovery or adjustment through the War Office of costs of stores
transferred on repayment, hire charges for rolling stock, and various other
services rendered by the Army.
During 1943, agreements were signed with the Egyptian, Palestine and
and rolling stock.
Synan Kalways regarding the terms or hire or wal Department locomotive
Twenty locomotives were sold to the Egyptian State Rail-
records were kept of American Locomotivesocomotives and rolling stock hired
1o the railways, so that a refund of hire charges could be made.
Reverse Lease-Lend, to mice this deeisients of United States Forces in countries
outside the British Empire.
This decision affected Egypt and Syria, and after
further discussion, the Sudan was also included in February, 1944.
when available, were still issued from the joint stockpile under Reverse Lease-
Lend, but all stores, supplies, services and engagements of civilian employees
which involved local expenditure became United States liabilities.
The question of the disposal of works executed on behalf of the War Depart-
ment by various civilian railways in the Middle East was taken up so that sales
could be timed in the most economical manner.
needs in other theatres, which involved all available stores, a decision on dis-
posals was postponed.
Nevertheless, the fact that the matter was raised and
kept continually under notice proved beneficial when, at the end of hostilities,
Transportation Finance were in a position to give up-to-date and useful advice
concerning the disposal of surplus assets.
As the Middle East was the first theatre of operations in which Transportation
Finance problems had been dealt with on a large scale, the experience gained
proved of great value in other theatres.
A Transportation Finance Handbook
was produced in July, 1944 and was used as a guide in Europe, and a number of
finance officers underwent courses of training in the Middle East before being
posted to other theatres.
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/2
28
