of the new ports of Marakeb and El Shatt, opposite Suez, a railway to serve
them was laid on the east side of the Canal from Kantara.
were also extended from Suez to the satellite ports of Ataka and Adabiya Bay.
Marshalling yards and sorting sidings were constructed at all the ports and major
None of these works except the Firdan bridge presented any major
engineering problem, and most of them were carried out by the Egyptian
State Railways (E.S.R.).
The Firdan bridge consisted of a single swing span
of 100 feet resting on steel screw pile piers, with short approach spans on either
It was open for traffic in September, 1942.
The most interesting feature of depot design in the Middle East was the
This was easy from the point of view of construc-
tion, as space in the Desert was almost unlimited, but from the operating
point of view it had drawbacks, such as the extra number of shunting engines
As the scale of air attack against depots was not large, this dispersion
was perhaps overdone.
On the other hand, it may possibly have been one of
the reasons why the enemy did not consider it worth while to make any serious
attempt to attack depots.
In this connection, it may be noted that the only
major damage to depots caused by air attack was at Abbassia and Abu Suweir,
both of which were pre-war installations with little or no dispersion.
At the beginning of the war the Western Desert Railway ran from Alex-
An extension to Sollum had been contemplated and
a rough survey had been made by the E.S.R.
With the advance of our forces
into Cyrenaica in the autumn of 1940, plans were prepared for the extension of
the line to Bomba via Capuzzo and Tobruk.
The biggest problem was not so
much railway construction as water supply.
The Western Desert is practically
a waterless waste from the borders of the Nile Valley to the hills of Cyrenaica;
such water as is found along the route is brackish and unsuitable for locomotive
consumption.
A pipe-line to serve all military purposes was laid along the
railway to Dabaa, whilst water trains of tank wagons were run to supplement
this supply and carry water to the Mersa Matruh garrison.
Early in 1941 work
was started on the difficult section to Mohalfa, at the top of the escarpment
above Mersa Matruh.
The first retreat caused a stoppage of the work, but
following the successful advance later in the year, rapid progress was made
with the railway. Rates of track laying up to two miles a day were achieved
by the New Zealand Railway Construction Group, which was primarily respon-
sible for the work.
Lorries and tractors were used to haul material forward
across the open desert from the railhead.
The rate of laying was controlled
by the rate at which material could be forwarded along the L. of C., and at times
rails were unloaded direct from ships at Alexandria into the construction trains.
By mid June, 1942, the railhead had reached Belhamed, a few miles east of
Tobruk.
While construction of the railway was in progress, the pipe-line was
extended to Mersa Matruh and later to Mishaita.
Even this was not sufficient
for locomotive needs, and water trains still had to be run from Alexandria until.
the arrival of diesel engines from America.
line.
After the retreat to Alamein, plans were prepared for the reopening of the
Restoration went ahead at great speed after the battle and operating was
never delayed after the first few days.
Mines, blown rails, and general neglect
turing the enemy occupation were the only obstacles, but the problem oi
restoration was increased by large-scale washouts after the line was opened.
WO 277/2
27
troops.
Benghazi and Tripoli
The Benghazi, Barce and Solluch Railway and the Tripolitanian Railway
were never of major importance, though projects were investigated for joining the
former to the Western Desert Railway and the latter to the Tunisian Railways.
The speed of the advance, however, was too great for these two projects to be
implemented.
The B.B. and S. Railway, although it had been demolished by
five retreating armies in succession, was working again within a few weeks of
its capture.
The scale of enemy demolitions on the Tripolitanian Railway was
higher, but it was possible to start traffic within a short time.
railways were converted to metre gauge by Transportation troops.
Parts of these
Eritrean Campaign
When Italy entered the war in 1940, the "back door" to the Middle East
was seriously threatened. The Italians captured Somaliland and occupied
Kassala, and were consequently threatening not only the sea route in the straits
of Bab el Mandeb, but also the overland routes in the Sudan.
of major railway bridges was made in order that suitable material might be
assembled for their repair, but owing to Italian inactivity this proved to be
When the offensive against Eritrea was planned, it was decided, after dis-
cussion of alternative routes, to concentrate railway construction on a line
from Malawiya, near Kassala, over the river Gash near Tessenai, and onward to
join the 95 centimetre gauge Eritrean Railway to follow the advance.
found unnecessary, however, to go beyond the far bank of the Gash. Track
laying was undertaken by the Sudan Railways, who achieved an average rate of
a mile a day, while the bridge over the river Gash was built by Transportation
troops, largely out of girders found on a Cairo scrap heap.
detachments also followed up the advance and repaired the captured Eritrean
Nile Valley Route
The Nile Valley route was the most effective overland "back door" route
to the Middle East and the most highly developed.
firstly the Sudan Railways from Port Sudan to Wadi Halfa, secondly the Nile
from Halfa to Shellal, and finally the Egyptian State Railways from Shellal to
An obvious improvement was to extend the two railway systems to
meet each other and thus avoid one transhipment, but survey showed that this
would be a very difficult project and it was therefore abandoned.
Railway was, however, extended from Wadi Halfa to Farras, just north of the
most shallow section of the Nile, and this considerably reduced the period of the
year during which water conditions interfered with river traffic.
As an additional or alternative feeder to the Nile Valley route a metre gauge
railway was built from Safaga, a small phosphate port on the Red Sea, to Quena,
on the banks of the Nile in Upper Egypt, at which point traffic could be tran-
shipped either to the Egyptian Railway standard gauge system or to Nile
28
