CHAPTER II
THE WAR OFFICE (continued) AND THE HOME BASE
SECTION I.-GENERAL
In the previous chapter we have seen the general lines followed in the organi-
zation of the Transportation Directorate at the War Office and how it grew,
under pressure of events, from a mere half-dozen officers at the outbreak of
war to a peak establishment of more than 160 officers.
In this chapter the work of each branch of the Directorate is described
This work, for reasons which follow, was so intimately con-
nected with the employment of Transportation troops at home and with the
development of the Home Base that it will be convenient to deal with the two
There was one feature in which Transportation was unique among the
Quarter-Master-General's principal directorates.
From the nature of its prob-
lems, dealing with continuous lines of communication which cross and recross
the artificial boundaries of military administrative areas, Transportation must
necessarily be a highly centralized organization in which it is rarely possible
to delegate responsibility for policy below the highest formation in any one
Thus, apart from a nucleus anti-invasion staff at G.H.Q. Home
Forces in 1940-42, at no time during the war did Transportation have repre-
sentatives at H.Q. of commands in Great Britain, nor were the latter responsible
for how Tn. units within their boundaries were employed.
The Director of
Transportation at the War Office, acting through his Deputy Directors and
branches, and assisted by his Inspector, was directly responsible for the tech-
nical training and employment of all Tn. units, both field force and static,
wherever located in Great Britain, until such time as they embarked for over-
seas or were placed under the orders of the commander of an expeditionary
A further result of this centralization was that all Tn. works services at
home, varying from large projects such as the construction of the two Military
Ports down to the laying of a short railway siding, were planned and supervised
directly by the Directorate, and in fact the greater part of the work of the Rail-
ways and Ports branches (Tn. 3-6) throughout the war was concerned with the
construction, maintenance and operation of Tn. installations at home.
any detailed description of the work of those branches must necessarily cover
also the work done by the majority of Tn. units during their service at home,
in other words, it must cover the history, from a Transportation point of view,
of the growth of the United Kingdom Base.
On the other hand, the duties of the policy and stores branches (Tn. 1 and 2)
were much more varied in nature and much wider in scope.
to do with the training and employment of units at home, although Tn. 1 was
responsible for the Transportation Training Centres and Tn. 2 had under its
control the two main Tn. Stores Depots at Longmoor and Derby and later
smaller depots elsewhere.
The main duties of these two branches were in
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/56
28
connection with overseas theatres of operations and with bases and lines of
communication at home and abroad.
Tn. 1 was responsible for assessing,
with the advice of other branches concerned, world-wide transportation require-
ments in terms of units and staffs, and for all action necessary to ensure that
these requirements could be met in due time: while In. 2 was correspondingly
responsible for forecasting world-wide requirements of Transportation stores
and equipment and for taking all necessary steps to secure their provision.
The planning sections of these two branches, necessarily basing their estimates
on the same data, worked in ever closer contact as the war proceeded.
In the following sections of this chapter some account is given of the work
of each branch of the Directorate and of the main features in the development
of the Home Base with which that Branch, and the units under its control,
were associated. For the sake of simplicity the earlier designations of branches
(Q.M.G. 13, 15, etc.) are ignored in this account and the designations adopted
in 1940 (Tn. 1, 2, etc.) are used throughout.
A section on technical training
and the Transportation Training Centres is also included.
SECTION 2.—POLICY, ORGANIZATION AND INTELLIGENCE (In. 1)
It is difficult to define in a few words the duties of Tn. 1. At different times
efforts were made to do so for purposes of War Office publications: they varied
from the single word "policy,
which leaves a lot to the imagination, to the
fuller but still incomplete description, "operations, policy, planning, training,
etc." which omits all reference to organization and personnel questions.
was, in fact, the maid-of-all-work of the Directorate, and undertook as a matter
of course every question which could not by its nature be allocated to one or
other of the specialized technical branches.
At a comparatively early stage it was found that the work of this branch fell
naturally into three main sections; the branch was therefore organized into
three sub-branches whose respective duties, with minor modifications and
adjustments from time to time, remained substantially the same until the end
They were as follows:—
Tn. 1(a) Policy, co-ordination and operations.
Tn. 1(b) Organization, administration, technical training, and personnel
questions (in liaison with the Adjutant General's and Military
Secretary's Departments).
Intelligence and Planning.
Tn. 1(a)
In general, any question of policy, or any question which affected the work
of the Directorate as a whole or of more than one branch, was dealt with in
the first instance by Tn. 1(a).
All correspondence and signals between the
Directorate and overseas commands, other than those dealing with store matters,
were handled by Tn. 1(a), who arranged for their circulation and initiated or
co-ordinated action required on them.
They were responsible for the compila-
tion of regular office memoranda for despatch to all Tn. Headquarters abroad,
and for the collation, editing and distribution of the fortnightly or monthly
Progress Reports
which
incidentally constituted the
War Diary of the
Directorate.
It was their duty to keep a close watch on the progress of operations and of
