piling equipment were obtained from civilian contractors in the mted King-
dom, and a large order was placed under mutual aid arrangements with a local
manufacturer in Belgium.
The Shipping Section arranged special shipments
of equipment from Britain, and eventually the full quantities required were made
available.
Large quantities of other special equipment were also manufactured
locally in Belgium.
Organization of Supply for Advance into Germany
In preparation for the move into Germany two stores trains were fitted out,
one for general stores and one for spares.
The intention was to use these
trains in order to move quickly into Germany a small stock of general items
and spare parts for locomotives, so that there would be no breakdown in
continuity of supply.
The spares train was never used, because sufficient
locomotives were captured in Germany and it did not prove necessary to take
military locomotives across the Rhine.
Tn. Stores Dumps to handle the equip-
ment and stores required by forward Tn. units were established at Acht near
Eindhoven, Kraneenburg, Offelt and Spych.
With the advance into Germany another forward dump was established
at Rheine, east of the Rhine.
Arrangements were made to close the four
dumps west of the Rhine, but before these were closed a depot was opened
at Hamburg.
There was no further large-scale movement of stores until
September and October, when it was decided to move all stores that were to
be retained into Germany and eventually to use the depots in Belgium for
surplus stores only.
SECTION 10.-FINANCE
A Transportation Finance branch, consisting of a D.A.D.Tn. and one staff
captain, was established in the United Kingdom during the planning stages of
the campaign.
Work during this period was limited to the formulation of
policy and to the interpretation of this policy in the form of Financial Instruc-
tions to Tn. units.
The general policy laid down was that procurement should
be by requisition rather than by
negotiated purchase or contract, and that
whenever possible payment should be deferred until mutual aid or other agree-
ments had been negotiated with the governments concerned.
Detailed instruc-
tions were also issued with regard to the records to be maintained in respect of
construction and repair work carried out by the Tn. service.
The normal functions of a In. Finance branch are to safeguard the financial
responsibilities of the Directorate of Transportation as laid down in Field
Service Regulations.
In this campaign, when all payments were made by the
governments of the countries concerned on mutual aid terms, the branch was
mainly concerned with the administrative side of finance, i.e.:
(a) ensuring that procurements were being made in accordance with the
instructions laid down;
(b) arranging for the proper certification and checking of accounts before
they were passed to the respective government departments for payment;
(c) giving technical advice and assistance to these government departments
in the drafting of contracts and in the settlement of problems arising in
their interpretation.
174
In practice, the effect was to relieve other branches entirely of the problems
affecting the financial side of their transactions with public and civil authorities
and, by close contact with the various mutual aid organizations, to ensure that
the Th. service landing in Normand without any serious financial dificulties.
Between the landing in Normandy and the advance into Belgium very few
financial transactions were reported.
Minor requisitions were effected on
Army Book 361, but no major procurements or important services were involved.
Under an arrangement made with the Director of Claims and Hirings, it was
agreed that the n. service would assume responsibility for the requisitioning
of publicly-owned
transportation installations,
within such installations would be treated as a normal hiring.
but that private property
Steps were taken
therefore to obtain records of transportation acquirements within the port
areas of Caen, Ouistreham. Courseulles and Port-en-Bessin, and details were
subsequently reported to the appropriate regional commissioner.
A beginning
was also made on the compilation of records of works and services carried out
by Transportation.
A standard system of documentation for rail traffic within
the theatre was agreed with Q (Movements).
As the campaign developed, an Inter-Allied Railway Commission was set
up in Paris, Tn. Finance being represented on the sub-committee on rail docu-
mentation.
In general the French railway authorities agreed to accept the
British system of documentation for all military traffic, and the American forces
were asked to bring their procedure into line.
Following the rapid advance into Belgium the volume and complexity
of In. Finance work greatly increased, and it became necessary to implement
the appointment of A.D.Tn.(F) and to increase the staff of the branch by a
number of civilian clerks.
By this time, mutual aid agreements had been signed
with the French and Belgium Governments which set up special departments
to handle Allied military requirements, in France the Aide aux Forces Alliées
(A.F.A.) and in Belgium the Office of Mutual Aid (O.M.A.).
Special demand forms (21 A.Gp. Form 80) were issued, and authority was
given for day-to-day requirements to be arranged by Group commanders through
the local burgomaster, while major items or important services were arranged
by D.D.Tn.(Stores) through the appropriate
government authorities.
Belgium, O.M.A. requested that bills in respect of demands placed upon them
should be checked and certified before payment by the Belgian Government.
This was agreed, and complete records of Transportation procurements in
Belgium were therefore maintained.
the let there financiall problem which arose was the contract for the
In this case, the Belgian
handling of military cargo in the port of Antwerp.
authorities requested Transportation to open negotiations with the local con-
tractors, to prepare a draft form of contract and to submit recommendations.
These negotiations were completed by the signing of the contract at the end of
January, 1945, an interesting feature being the inclusion of a "costings clause"
authorizing the Belgian Government to arrange an independent audit of
contractors' accounts, and limiting profits to ten per cent. of the turn-over.
Tn. Finance undertook the task of checking and certifying all bills under this
contract, and an additional officer with a small staff was established at Antwerp
for this purpose.
Similar contracts were subsequently signed for the ports of
Brussels, Ghent, Ostend, and Bruges, but in these cases accounts were certified
by port superintendents.
On the railway side, complete agreement with regard to documentation of
175
WO 277,
W027
