branches) roads in the area in which it was proposed to operate, in order to
calculate the size of force which we could maintain there and the speed at
which it could be concentrated. These assessments involved not only a know-
ledge of existing Transportation facilities, but also consideration on the one
hand of possible enemy demolitions, and on the other hand of the repairs or
improvements which could be effected by Tn. troops within a given time.
This
in turn led to an estimate of the Tn. stores required to implement the plan, and
on this estimate the Stores branch (Tn. 2) based its demands on the Ministry
of Supply.
With the world-wide expansion of the war, the In. Intelligence section,
in order to fulfi its duties efficiently, needed to have immediately available
full technical information on ports, railways, etc., in any part of the world.
This involved a vast amount of research work, much of it without any immediate
connection with current or prospective military operations.
Co-operation in
this research was established with a number of outside agencies, including the
Inter-Services Research Bureau and the Railway Research Service (a branch of
the Ministry of Economic Warfare). But even so it became necessary in 1943
to throw off routine work as much as possible in order to enable the sub-branch
to devote its whole time to co-ordinating and embodying in ad hoc appreciations
the mass of intelligence which was being accumulated.
Accordingly a new
sub-branch, Tn. 1(d) was created as an offshoot of In. 1(c) and attached to the
Inter-Services Topographical Department at Oxford, where it undertook the
preparation of chapters of that Department's publications dealing with railways
A further branch of Tn. intelligence, namely the preparation of technical
dossiers on the structural and engineering features of ports and inland water-
ways, with a view to planning for their demolition or reconstruction, was
undertaken by a special section (Tn. 5(a)) in the department of the D.D.Tn.
(Docks) (later Director of Ports and I. W.T.).
This sub-branch was set up in
the summer of 1943 in preparation for the invasion of the Continent, and later
extended its scope to the ports and waterways of South-East Asia.
A most valuable source of up-to-date intelligence on the state of transporta-
tion facilities was provided by air photography, and a Transportation Section
was accordingly added to the Allied Combined Interpretation Unit at Med-
Here four Tn. officers, assisted by seven or eight R.A.F. officers,
and working in close touch with Tn. 1(c), were employed in interpreting air
photographs of ports, railways, etc., in North-West Europe.
taken in the Mediterranean and South-East Asia were interpreted by similar
sections in those theatres.
As regards organization generally, certain difficulties arose at an early stage
owing to the existence of organizations in other War Office Directorates, and
in other Government Departments, whose activities in one way or another
overlapped those of the Intelligence section of the Tn. Directorate.
meetings were accordingly started in November, 1940, and continued until
the end of the war, for the exchange of information and the allocation of specific
These meetings were attended regularly by representatives
of the Ministry of Economic Warfare (Railway Research Service), War Office
(Tn, 1, M.I. 10, and M.I. 14), Admiralty, and Air Ministry, and later by repti
sentatives of the Intelligence and In. branches of G.H.Q. Home Forces, H.0. 2.
fulfilled a very useful purpose.
All Group, Supreme H.Q. Allied Expeditionary Force and others, and
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7/26
28
SECTION. 3.-STORES (Tn. 2)
The function of Tn. 2, the Stores branch of the Tn.
Directorate, was to
ensure the availability, at the right time and place, of all materials and stores
required for Transportation projects and for the maintenance of the Army's
Transportation facilities.
It was responsible for estimating probable require-
ments, in collaboration with the planning and technical branches of the direc-
torate and with Tn. stores representatives on the H.Q. of overseas forces, and
for making appropriate arrangements for procurement, storage and shipment.
At the beginning of the war, the Stores branch was called upon to deal with
only a limited range of stores, principally railway material and bridging, to
But as the war spread to the Mediter-
ranean and elsewhere, and as preparations proceeded for the invasion of North-
West Europe, the variety and quantity of Tn. stores required increased enor-
The organization of the branch was built up gradually from two or three
officers in 1939 to 54 officers or civilians of officer status in 1944; it was probably
under more severe and continuous pressure, and suffered more constantly from
an inadequate establishment, than any other branch of the Directorate.
As
ultimately organized it consisted of three main sections, dealing respectively
with planning, provision and administration.
The planning section, further
sub-divided geographically to cover the various theatres of operations, was in
constant touch with its opposite numbers at Tn. Headquarters overseas, and also,
through Tn. 1, with War Office strategical planning; from these sources it was
able to estimate long-term requirements, which were passed to the provision
This section was sub-divided technically
to cover the
various classes of stores, each sub-division handling the provision of its own
The third (administrative) section acted as shipping agents for the branch;
they were also in charge of the administration of the Tn. Stores Depots at home
and sundry other general subjects.
The main source of supply for Tn. stores, apart from local purchase and
hire, was the Directorate of Royal Engineer Equipment at the Ministry of
Supply, and it was through this organization that the vast majority of orders
was placed.
In the later stages of the war, however, it became the practice to
obtain certain special stores from other sources; this applied particularly to
powered craft for military use in ports and on inland waterways, of which some
thirty different types were supplied, many of them to the design and specification
of the Tn. Directorate.
These were obtained mainly through the Ministry of
War Transport, who accepted responsibility for assembling the craft require-
ments of all Government Services and Departments and setting up production
programmes to meet these combined requirements.
Other types of craft were
obtained through the Admiralty and the Ministry of Supply.
Tn. 2 was also responsible for the War Equipment Tables (Army Form
G 1098) of all Tn. units, this duty running parallel with that of Tn. 1(b) who
were correspondingly responsible for War Establishments.
It has been seen
that the number of different types of Tn. units rose from nine at the outbreak
of War to over sixty.
The A.F. G 1098 of each unit was a comprehensive
list of every article of equipment and plant, and every tool, machine and store
which that unit needed on active service, showing the approved quantity of
each item, and it constituted authority to Ordnance and other Provision services
