This organization, with an establishment of 65 officers, was approved in
March, 194l, and in its main structure held good for the remainder of the war,
with the exception that, in 1943, Inland Waterways were formed into a separate
branch (Tn. 7).
In May, 1941, the Director of Transportation was raised to a Major-General's
appointment, and in August the three Deputy Directors were upgraded from
Colonels to Brigadiers.
In July, 1941, following the entry of Russia into the war and developments
in North Africa, Syria, Iraq and Persia, the load on the planning and stores
branches was rapidly increasing, and a further expansion of these branches,
approved in October, raised the establishment of the Directorate to 77 officers
and 5 civil assistants.
In June, 1942, it became necessary to ask for a further substantial increase
in the stores branch, owing to:—
(a) the extension of the war to the Far East:
(b) increasing production difficulties both at home and in U.S.A.:
(c) stores planning for the reception of American troops in the United
Kingdom and for operations on the Continent:
(d) stores planning for new or emergency lines of communication, such as
the "Afloc" route across Central Africa:
(e) the responsibility, which had perforce to be undertaken, for checking
and sponsoring the stores and equipment requirements of civil railway
and port undertakings all over the world, whose efficiency had to be
maintained for strategic reasons.
No further important changes in the organization became necessary until
March, 1943, when intensive planning for a return to the Continent began to
bring out many difficult transportation problems, particularly in connection
with beach landings and with the rapid repair of ports.
This placed a heavy
load on the D.D.Tn.(D)'s branches, and in June an addition of 18 officers
to those branches was approved.
By November, as a result of the decisions
of the Quebec Conference to proceed with the construction of two artificial
harbours (Mulberries) for the landing on the Continent, and to set up the South-
East Asia Command and prepare for offensive operations against Japan, it
became necessary to ask for further increases, mainly on the Port and I.W.T.
side but also in the operational (Tn. 1) and stores (Tn. 2) branches.
agreed that D.D.Tn.(D) should be upgraded to Director of Ports and I.W.I.
(Brigadier) with three deputies in charge of branches as follows:-
D.D.Tn. (Port Construction and Repair)-Brigadier Tn. 5.
D.D.Tn. (Port Operating)
-Colonel
D.D.Tn. (Inland Water Transport)
-Colonel
Tn. 7.
This marked the peak of expansion of the Directorate, whose layout at
this stage, totalling i61 military and civil officers, is given in the Appendix
to this chapter.
Following the landing in France in June, 1944, it became possible to make
wittions in all branches except the stores branch, where work in connection
with operations against Japan became increasingly heavy:
The opportunity
mes canen to dave a thorougn investigation of the organization anu mendous o
n. 2 carried out by independent specialists, and it was satisfactory to find tha,
so far from suggesting extravagance, they recommended an increase of 10 officers
W97707/17
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 1/26
28
