SECTION 2.-GENERAL
First Phase of the Campaign
The Transportation Directorate began to assemble at H.Q. 21 Army Group
towards the end of 1943.
During the first phase of the campaign, immediately
after the landings in Normandy, H.Q. 21 Army Group, including the Directorate
of Transportation, remained in the United Kingdom.
An Advance Tn. H.Q.
proceeded overseas and was placed under the command first of H.Q. 11 L. Of C.
Area, and later of H.Q., L. of C. until the arrival of H.Q. 21 Army Group in
The main task of Transportation during June and July, 1944, was to
discharge and clear over beaches and through ports the planned tonnage of
900,000 tons of stores, as well as many thousands of vehicles.
first few days discharge was mainly over the beaches, but some use was made
of the small ports of Courseulles and Port-en-Bessin, which were captured intact.
The construction of the British Mulberry harbour at Arromanches was started
on 7th June by a special force of port construction and repair units, and the
first coaster was discharging there four days later.
Unfortunately a very severe
gale between the 19th and 22nd June did considerable damage to the port,
while the American Mulberry further west was completely wrecked and had
organization performed good service with its tugs, ramped
barges and Rhinos loaded with motor vehicles, but was much handicapped by
the weather during the first three weeks.
I.W.T. workshops were established
and craft repairs put in hand.
The Rhino ferries proved to be under-powered
and unsuitable for their task during rough weather, but performed more satis-
factorily during the better weather which followed.
in after the port and I.W.T. personnel, but, apart from reconstructing minor
lines, repairing wagons and developing one or two rail-served depots, little
could be done during the first two months.
August and September, 1944
Until the middle of August there was no great change in the activities of the
Transportation service, as unloading continued across the beaches and through
Mulberry and the small ports in the beach-head.
When the break-through to
the Seine took place, followed by the advance through France and Belgium
into Holland, Transportation were faced with two big problems.
Firstly, a
long rail L. of C. had to be organized from the Rear Maintenance Area across
the Seine and forward into Holland and, secondly, the Channel ports had to be
opened up to shorten the L. of C.
By the end of September both these tasks had
been successfully tackled and a rail L. of C. existed right through from the Rear
Maintenance Area to Eindhoven.
The port of Dieppe was open, and Ostend,
Boulogne and Antwerp were being made ready to accept shipping, though the
opening of Antwerp depended on the removal of the enemy from the Scheld
Work on the rail L. of C. focused at first on the development of Caen which,
in spite of heavy damage, had to become the main tratic and locomotive centre.
The repair and reconstruction of facilities in this area were followed by the
opening of the line to Serquigny and the Seine, and latet 4 railway construction
groups with 14 companies were spread out along the lines to Serqueux and for-
144
ward into Belgium.
Throughout north-east France bomb damage was extensive,
although demolitions were less widespread north of the Seine.
of the bridge over the Seine at Le Manoir on 22nd September, railheads south
of the river were linked by road to railtails to the north.
the Somme near Amiens were by-passed and the only other major break, a
bridge near Hal, was repaired by the Belgians.
In spite of efforts by the railway operating organization it was not until the
end of September that the railways of France and Belgium began to show signs
of settling down to provide a reliable service.
especially in the Amiens region.
and rolling stock owing to an inadequate allocation of the engines which were
being imported through Cherbourg, but the opening of the Dieppe train ferry
on 29th September finally overcame this problem as locomotives for British
use could then be delivered direct to the British sector in accordance with a
pre-arranged programme.
In order to tackle the problem of organizing the rail L. of C., which was
operated by British troops in some sectors, by French and British jointly in
others, and entirely by French or Belgian personnel elsewhere, great flexibility
of organization was required.
It was found necessary in the mid-September
to drop the normal Group and Company organization in the area south of the
Seine and to set up a Divisional Superintendent's office at Caen.
time the head of the Railway branch left the main Directorate H.Q. at Bayeux
and moved forward to Rouen.
Even this was found to be not far enough
forward, and a Group H.Q. moved on to Amiens.
As soon as Brussels fell,
a railway staff was set up alongside the Belgian State Railways (S.N.C.B.) in
that city.
It was not possible to open up Caen as a port until the end of August, but
other facilities were found to be adequate and, as a precaution, the Mulberry
harbour at Arromanches was strengthened to withstand the approaching winter
weather.
Preparations were made well in advance for the re-opening of the
other ports as they were captured.
Transportation reconnaissance parties
were sent forward together with Naval parties, the Port Commandant and Sub-
Area representatives.
Dieppe was captured on 2nd September and was in use
five days later.
The capture of Ostend and Boulogne, however, did not imme-
diately provide two additional ports as they were both in a very badly damaged
state.
With the extension of the L. of C. to Eindhoven the Transportation service
became very difficult to control, mainly owing to poor communications.
On
the move of 21 Army Group to Brussels, D.D.Tn.(Ports) became directly
responsible for the development of Ostend and Antwerp and for Dieppe, Le
Treport,
Boulogne and Calais,
while
Mulberry, Port-en-Bessin,
Caen and
Ouistreham continued to be developed under the supervision of No. 12 L. of C.
Area.
The Railways and Stores organizations also moved to Brussels, leaving
a Divisional area organization at Amiens and a Railway Operating Group at
Caen.
By the end of September it was apparent that the Transportation Direc-
torate was of insufficient strength to deal with all the problems arising in France
and Belgium.
The Directorate was therefore divided into sub-directorates, of
Ports and Railways, each under a brigadier.
WO 277/2
2;
WO27 7/2
28
