Palestine
With the retreat to Alamein and the evacuation of stores and personnel to
Palestine, it became necessary to increase the capacity of the railways in Palestine
The civil railway administration made a great effort
to cope with the additional traffic, but were very heavily overtaxed.
shortening of the Western Desert line, however, allowed a British railway
operating group headquarters and two companies to be placed at the disposal
It was arranged that the commanding officer of
this Group should act as Divisional Operating and Running Superintendent
from Kantara to Gaza, and that the two companies should be stationed one
at Gaza and the other at El Arish. At the end of October, 1942, the Group
Headquarters and one company returned to the Western Desert, while the
remaining company stayed for some months more at Kantara.
traffic had dropped considerably, and the Palestine Railways were once again
able to manage without military operating assistance.
At the beginning of operations, the Palestine Railways had more locomotives
and rolling stock than they required, but these were gradually laid up for
repairs in increasing numbers.
When traffic increased, maintenance of loco-
motives became a very heavy item, and the Railways found themselves unable
to keep pace with the maintenance of their own rather antiquated engines and
of the large number of War Department engines that were provided.
maintenance was poor, and the policy of working locomotives to death resulted
in 58 per cent. being out of action by the autumn of 1943.
given by British railway workshops troops at Suez and Jaffa, and further de-
terioration was checked.
With a decrease in traffic and an improvement in
the maintenance organization, the situation improved considerably by the end
The opening of the Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway and of the Suez Canal
bridge at Firdan led naturally to the development of through traffic between
the Egyptian, Palestine, Syrian, Turkish and Iraqi railway systems and, with
the help and encouragement of the Transportation Directorate, to the negotia-
tion of wagon exchange agreements.
The 105-centimetre gauge railway from Samakh to Deraa was operated
after its capture in June, 1941, by a New Zealand railway operating company.
When the next section from Deraa to Damascus was captured, the local civilians
were persuaded to return to work by a junior officer with an armoured trolley
and a bag of local currency.
French resistance in Syria ceased shortly after-
wards, and the concessionary company working the Syrian Railways carried
on as if there had been no trouble.
A few additional locomotives were put
back into service, but axle load limitations prevented any large-scale increase
The southern section, from Deraa to Maan and Nagb Ashtar,
Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway
The standard
gauge Haifa-Beirut-Tripoli Railway was operated, after
construction, by a railway operating company, apart from the short section
WO 277/2
between the fonder station at essib and malla which was operated by the Pales
tine Railways, althougar on the engines and crews ran through to Haila.
Excessive flange wear on the sharp curves of this line led to the replacement
of steal locomotes by man the diesels do soon as these to be spared from
the Western Desert line.
Later on these diesels, designed for a comparatively
short life, gave trouble, particularly with cracked cylinder heads, and it became
necessary to use steam locomotives again.
Wagon exchange troubles, caused
originally by delay in the conclusion of exchange agreements, were aggravated
by technical difficulties resulting from the connection of the Syrian pressure
brake system to the vacuum system.
In spite of the dual fitting of certain
stock, including an ambulance train and flat waggons, transhipment was neces-
sary in many cases.
SECTION 4.—PORT CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
At the beginning of the war Egypt possessed three principal ports, namely
Alexandria, which dealt with the bulk of the imports and exports, Port Said,
which was designed mainly for transhipment traffic, and Suez, which dealt
only with the comparatively small Red Sea traffic. Apart from one section of
wharves at Alexandria, mechanical handling equipment was non-existent,
and the majority of the berths were not rail-served, as plenty of cheap labour
With the virtual closing of the Mediterranean in the summer of 1940,
ships could only reach Alexandria and Port Said via the Suez Canal, which
itself was under constant threat of obstruction by enemy bombing. It was
obvious, therefore, that the port of Suez would have to be expanded rapidly
to handle a far larger proportion of import traffic.
which work was started in August, 1940, provided for the number of deep water
berths at Suez to be increased to eight, and for lighterage wharves to be con-
structed at Ataka, at Suez itself, and at a number of points in the Canal Zone.
At the same time the other two ports were improved by the construction of a
new railway marshalling yard at Port Said and by the provision of additional
rail facilities and wharf cranes at Alexandria.
Although port construction and repair, and the installation of port facilities,
were normally Transportation responsibilities and were in all cases sponsored
and co-ordinated by the Director of Transportation at the War Office, all such
work in the Middle East was carried out by the Director of Works.
Middle East was, however, responsible, in conjunction with the Movements
Staff, for approving all port development layouts as well as any necessary railway
In February, 1941, the enemy first dropped mines from aircraft in the Suez
Canal and in the following month the Canal was closed for twenty-one days
for clearance of mines.
The need for a considerable increase in port capacity
in the Suez area was urgent, and plans were prepared for large-scale develop-
ment. In August and September, a party of consulting engineers was flown
out from the United Kingdom to advise on the suggested improvements: the
scheme finally settled on was designed to raise the capacity of the Suez ports
from 3,000 tons a day to between 8,000 and 10,000 tons by the end of 1942,
increasing to 12,000 tons during the first half of 1943.
In October, 1941, projects in hand included the construction of lighterage
wharves at Kantara East, El Firdan, Abu Sultan, Fanara, Fayid, El Shatt,
28
