After the capture of the other Channel ports this work was continued
as a precaution, but by October the situation had developed to such an extent
that work on Mulberry was no longer necessary, and arrangements were made
for the dismantling of the Whale piers and pierheads: this was completed by the
end of the year.
The rapid advance during September called for the opening of the newly
captured Channel ports as quickly as possible in order to relieve the strain on
the L. of C.
Reconnaissance parties moved forward to the ports of Dieppe,
toulogne, Calais, Ostend and Antwerp as soon as these were occupied. Dieppe
as captured on 2nd September, Ostend on 9üh, Boulogne on 28ih, and Calais
on 30th September.
Antwerp was also captured in September but the enemy
still dominated the entrance.
A Port Construction and Repair Company
arrived in Antwerp on 12th September to begin repairs.
A reconnaissance party entered Le Havre after its capture, but was with-
drawn after making a preliminary examination of the damage, as the port was
to be handed over to the Americans.
Work on the clearance of enemy demo-
litions at Dieppe began on 4th September.
Bridges and dock gates had been
blown, ships sunk, cranes and warehouses destroyed and mines laid in the
entrance channel.
The latter was cleared in three days and by the middle of
the month most of the quays had been cleared sufficiently for ships to discharge.
Owing to the destruction of the dock gates, however, ships had to enter at high
tide and dry out.
On 8th September work began on the construction of a train
ferry terminal at this port, and by the end of the month this was in use and
capable of taking all types of ferry.
The small port of Le Treport was also
cleared of debris and a damaged dock gate was repaired.
Work started at Ostend on 14th September.
The port was severely damaged
and all the basins and quays to the east of the main channel had been completely
destroyed.
The main entrance channel was obstructed by 11 sunken vessels,
and mines had been sown in the outer harbour. The remaining quays were
obstructed by debris and partially demolished.
The gates and sluices, however,
were found to be intact.
The first vessels docked on 29th September and
repairs were almost completed by November.
Three small barge berths were
constructed in the Bruges canal near Ostend and a large quay at Bruges.
Boulogne had suffered very considerable damage from demolitions and
Allied bombing; the entrance was completely blocked by sunken shipping,
and about 600 feet of quay face had to be rebuilt.
Repair work was started at
the end of September and continued until the end of the year.
Calais was also
badly damaged, although the entrance was not so thoroughly blocked as at
Boulogne.
Calais was at first to be allotted to the Americans, and work on
repair and reconstruction
was not therefore begun immediately.
It was
decided subsequently that work should be undertaken on the construction of a
train ferry terminal and an L.S.T. hard, and a start was made on 26th October.
The train ferry terminal was completed on 15th November except for the bearing
pad which arrived with the first vessel on 21st November.
Construction of two
L.S.T. hards was completed in December, and woke then proceeded on the
by the enemy.
reconstruction of the lock gates which had been very thoroughly demolished
The first port construction and repair parties arrived at Antwerp on 12th
September, but enemy interference made it impossible until later to start work
on the repair of the Krusschaans lock, which wassthe only point that appeared
to have suffered any appreciable damage.
Apart from this, the only work
164
necessary consisted the alearance of scrap steel and other debris from the
quays, and this work was d asset out largely by civilian labour under the dithe
tion of Tn. personnel and assisted by mechanical equipment units. Repairs
to the Kruisschaans lock were completed in December.
Clearing and Repairing Canals
In November, a small representative body known as the Schedit Dredging
Control was set up by the Director of Ports to co-ordinate immediate military
requirements with long-term civilian dredging policy and to ensure that the best
use was made of all available facilities.
A provisional allocation of plant was
made at a meeting on 15th November. Dredging was started in the river
Scheldt on 28th November.
Damage
had been caused to bridges and to the lock gates, and repairs were not completed
until December.
While Belgium was being liberated, all port construction and repair resources
were deployed on opening the French Channel ports and Ostend and in preparing
Antwerp against the day when the Scheldt would be cleared of the enemy.
During this stage the Belgians themselves did all they possibly could to clear
their canals.
During November, the amount of work required in the ports
decreased and more and more the Port Construction Organization was diverted
to canal clearance.
Initially the Belgian contractors were helped with plant
and equipment to speed up their work, but gradually more military labour was
employed and some of the more dilatory contractors were replaced and their
work taken over by the Army.
A permanent reconnaissance party was established, which followed up
the Armies, thus enabling headquarters to get an early idea of the extent of
damage and to assess the most difficult jobs.
The main job was the rehabili-
tation of the Albert Canal, the opening up of which to 600-ton barges formed
an essential part of the system for the clearance of the port of Antwerp.
Work
was also started on the Ghent-Terneuzen, Antwerp-Turnhout and Meuse-
Escaut canals.
It was agreed that the clearance of the Albert Canal should be
a Transportation responsibility from Antwerp to Kwaadmechelen and an
American responsibility from there to Liége.
Enemy projectiles caused damage at Antwerp until April, 1945, and this
was repaired by civilian labour supervised and assisted by
Transportation
personnel.
Repairs to lock gates were carried out at Flushing and in Dutch
and Belgian canals.
During April, 1945, only two companies remained at work
at the ports, one at Flushing and the other covering Antwerp, Ghent, Ostend
and Calais.
The remaining units were either employed by other
services,
mostly on the construction of road bridges across the Rhine, or were in process
of moving to new locations consequent on the enemy collapse east of the Rhine.
After the surrender in May, the majority of port repair work was handed
over to civilians in the Channel
and Belgian ports,
Transportation
troops were engaged on clearing the navigable waterways in Holland and
Germany.
165
WO 277/2
WO27 T/s
