the submersible concrete breakwater units whose code name was "Phoenix,"
formed the main features of the Mulberry harbours.
The design and supervision of the whole Mulberry project was the task of
the Tn. Directorate.
Separate branches handled the design of the breakwater
units, the floating piers, spud pierheads, and other steelwork, and the general
co-ordination of the whole scheme.
The work also involved, at the National
Physical Laboratory at Twickenham, the planning and supervision of research
into the behaviour of the various items of equipment in rough water, the forma-
tion of an experimental station at Cairnhead for full-scale tests, and the forma-
tion and training of two port floating equipment companies which assembled'
the equipment in the experimental and trial stages and later in the actual opera-
tion at Arromanches.
The closest co-operation was maintained with the
Ministry of Supply, who were responsible for the production of all necessary
equipment within the very limited time available, and with the Admiralty who
were responsible for the towage of the Phoenix units to points of concentration
and thence across the Channel.
The most careful watch had to be kept by
Tn. 5 on every detail, and prior to D-Day a special liaison staff was set up
at Southampton to co-ordinate and report on all local arrangements.
D-Day onwards, the build-up of the two Mulberry Harbours was recorded at
the War Office on progress charts from information received by signal, and in
the case of the British Mulberry at Arromanches a specially prepared relief
map was used to show the actual build-up from air photographs received daily
from the Royal Air Force.
Other works carried out by port construction
troops at home, were piers
at Drake's Island, Flatholm, Steep Holme, and
Ardentinney to meet local
military requirements; ferry terminals, with special lifting and link span equip-
ment for the rapid loading and discharge of locomotives and rolling stock, of
which two were constructed at Southampton, and one each at Weymouth,
Harwich and Dover; and the equipment of hards at Southampton, Folkestone
and Dover to permit of the loading of locomotives and rolling stock on tank
landing ships (L.S.T.s).
In ports such as those on the English Channel, where there is a considerable
rise and fall of tide, shipping is mainly berthed in non-tidal basins whose level
is maintained by lock gates.
It was therefore of prime importance, in the plans
for the utilization of captured enemy ports, to find some method by which the
water level could be rapidly restored in the event of lock gates being damaged
To meet this requirement Tn. 5 designed a floating sectional
dock caisson, known by the code name "Shark," composed of tank sections
which could be assembled to suit any width of lock.
For the rapid construction of light piers and jetties two types of equipment
The "V-type" trestle equipment was similar to that used for
railway bridging and could be erected in up to 17 feet of water without the
use of divers. Fine adjustments in height, and re-levelling after settlement,
were carried out by means of adjustable "camel's-foot" foundations.
Bailey piled jetty was also designed, but owing to production delays did not
become available in time for use on port rehabilitation; it was, however, used
for bridges across the Rhine.
SECTION 6.—PORT OPERATING (Tn. 6)
At the beginning of the War, responsibility for the discharge of ships carrying
military stores was divided between the Sea Transport service (Ministry of
W0277/21
27
WO 1/h
28
Transport) and the Army Transportation service, the former delivering cargo
from ship's hold to overside, and the latter receiving on the quay, checking,
and clearing from the docks area.
Local civilian resources were largely relied
upon to provide labour for the physical handling of the cargo both on board
and on the quay; in fact, the general principle was that ports should continue
to be worked as far as possible under their normal peace-time system, subject
only to Service direction and supervision.
Conforming to this principle the pre-war docks units which went to France
with the British Expeditionary Force, consisting of two H.Q. docks groups
and eight docks sections, all R.E. Supplementary Reserve units, were organized
only for supervisory and specialist duties within the docks area.
dependent on the Sea Transport service to deliver cargo to them, and on outside
labour in one form or another to enable them to handle it.
which followed later, was organized in the same way.
It was very soon found that this organization was not satisfactory. The
civil labour supply was quite inadequate.
Army reservists had to be employed
on handling cargo on the quays; and three British stevedore battalions were
hurriedly recruited in order to provide the Sea Transport service with shipboard
Moreover, the division of responsibility between the two Services,
particularly after the introduction of Army stevedores, was not conducive to
In March, 1940, therefore, it was agreed that the Army Transporta-
tion service should assume responsibility for all cargo handling, both on board
ship and on the quays, while the Sea Transport service remained responsible
for the berthing, movement and general safety of ships in port.
As a result of these added duties, and of experience gained in France, the
organization of docks operating units was remodelled in June, 1940.
sections and stevedore battalions were abolished as separate units, and the
normal organization of a docks group became a H.Q., four or more docks
operating companies, and one docks maintenance company. The new Docks
Operating Company consisted of four sections, each with the necessary propor-
tion of stevedores, and each designed to work eight hatches for two shifts a
day, with a third shift for general supervision of quay clearance.
Maintenance Company was designed to operate and maintain dock cranes
and other plant, and also the railways within the docks areas.
This new set-up had barely been approved on paper when the campaign on
the Continent came to an end; the docks units returned home and, with all
other Tn. troops, came under the direct control of the War Office.
fell to the Tn. Directorate to carry through the reorganization; stevedore bat-
talions and docks sections were disbanded, and their personnel absorbed into
new docks operating and other companies.
this way by the end of 1940.
As these units had no technical role at home at
that time, they were employed in local defence schemes and were given as much
military training as possible a very necessary step because the stevedore
battalions had perforce gone to France with very little training.
From the end of 1940 onwards, as the war spread and as plans for expeditions,
large and small, were formulated and put into action, there was a continuous
and ever-increasing demand for docks operating units, which were, of course,
one of the first essentials to any overseas operation. By March, 1941, two
Groups (Nos. 3 and 4) had left for the Middle East, and No. 5 Group had
begun to form at Cardiff.
In July, 1941, No. 5 Group moved to Lancashire,
but left behind at Cardiff a detachment which undertook the training of steve-
