Company on the Tunis line and another on the Bizerta and Tabarka lines
while a Mechanical Equipment Sectlrka lines gnals Line Maintenance Section
were kept for use as required.
The enemy's retreat in Northern Tunisia was rapicto nd the damage was
than had been expected.
Bridge demolitions appeared to have been
carried out rather to deny the passage of armoured vehicles than to hampe
On the normal gauge system only four bridges were
had been blown by our own
A few culverts were damaged at various places, some of which
troops in December, 1942, and repairs had
either been completed or were in hand by the Germans, who left materials on
There was a very large number of rails, broken by mortar or shell fire,
spread over long lengths of line and concentrated in the areas where fighting
with sleepers destroyed and several rails broken.
These breaks varied from simple rail cuts to craters
Damage in the Tunis-
Enfidaville section was heavier than elsewhere, as it was here that the last stand
of the enemy took place and deliberate destruction of plain track occurred for
On the Beja-Bizerta route, there were about 150 breaks due to
shell fire and three bridges had been demolished.
Telephone lines had been
taken out in many places and poles removed for defence purposes. Much
track in Bizerta had been destroyed, largely by Allied bombing.
In the absence of any major obstacle, repairs to the track and bridges were
soon effected and the main lines to Tunis and Bizerta were opened on 12th May
and 20th May respectively, though repairs to the telephone system continued
for several days after the permanent way had been completed.
Before the start of operations, a few officers and men of the British railway
construction companies had done a course on mine detection, but units had no
detectors or other disposal equipment.
Tellermines and "S" mines were found
everywhere, and although fields were swept by British and American Engineers,
many more mines were found later by railway troops.
The destruction of railway telephone and telegraph lines was extensive and
was proportionately greater than the destruction to track and structures. The
single Line Maintenance Section available was quite unable to keep pace with
the track repairs, and in consequence operation of the re-opened lines was
hampered by lack of communications.
The maintenance problem also became
acute, as much of the wire which was apparently undamaged had been nicked
by rifle or shell fire and was ready to fall at the first high wind. The wire
breaks were too frequent to permit of rapid repair by jointing and in most
cases re-wiring was undertaken.
At the outset of the campaign it had been anticipated that the main task of
Railway Construction would be the repair of demolitions and bomb damage.
In the event, with the exception of the final two weeks, repair work had been
of only a very minor nature.
On the other hand, Base and lines of communi-
cation development had been a larger commitment than expected and had kept
all personnel, except the bridging sections, fully employed.
troops were well qualified to deal with work of this kind and carned high
commendation for their speed and efficiency in carrying it out.
Although the Groun Headquarters had only three construction companies
and ancillary units under command, the need for a second Group Headquarters
was felt continuously, because the arka lines nvolved were so great that it was
impossible for a Group located in Tunisia to give any sellous attention to
railway affairs at Orleansville on the borders of Morocco,
The Campaign in Sicily
"Husky" were:-
Railway construction units included in the Order of Battle for operation
One Headquarters Railway Construction and Maintenance Group.
Two Railway Construction Companies.
One Railway Bridging Section.
One Section Railway Survey Company.
One Section Mechanical Equipment (Tn.) Company.
The railway system up to Catania was captured almost undamaged, and
as there was scarcely any demand for rail development in this campaign, there
was little employment for the railway construction troops.
of appreciable size was the repair of a bridge over the River Simeto.
The only job
As the
campaign was fought during the dry weather season this bridge was re-opened
by means of a temporary low-level deviation 2} miles long, permanent repairs
being left for execution by the Italians later.
The Campaign in Italy
Two British Railway Construction and Maintenance Group Headquarters
were employed in Italy throughout the campaign.
One came from North
Africa and took part in the Salerno landings, the other came from Middle
East and landed at Taranto.
Five Railway Construction Companies, one
Mechanical Equipment Company, one Railway Survey Company and two
Railway Bridging Sections also participated. In November, 1943, the Railway
Construction Group of the South African Engineer Corps arrived in Italy.
It was composed of a Group Headquarters and three Companies.
African Tunnelling Group, consisting of a Headquarters and two Tunnelling
Companies, arrived in March, 1944, and was absorbed in the South African
Construction Group. In September, 1944, an Indian Railway Construction
and Maintenance Group Headquarters arrived. An Indian Railway Construc-
tion Company followed in February, 1945, and two Indian Railway Maintenance
Companies in September, 1944, and May, 1945, respectively.
The Mechanical Equipment unit consisted of a Company Headquarters and
two Sections which arrived at the beginning of the campaign; and a third
Section which was formed in Italy in October, 1944. Owing to the great
distances involved one Section was attached to each of the British Construction
Groups for employment on a permanent basis.
formation, was kept as a reserve with Company Headquarters.
Two British Railway Telegraph Companies, Royal Corps of Signals,
served throughout the campaign with railway construction troops.
tember, 1944, a South African Signal Company arrived.
units, and of various other British, Italian and German units employed on
railway construction, was directed initially by the Tn. 4 branches attached to
Fortbase (Heel Area) and Fifth Army (Salerno/Naples Area) and latterly by
the engineering branch of the Anglo-American Railway Service.
The first railway engineering unit to land in Italy was a Railway Con-
struction Company, the advance party of which landed at Reggio on Sih Sep-
This Company, following behind the rapid advance of the
Eighth Army, opened the whole route from Reggio to Taranto by the end of
September, and with assistance from other Engineer troops moved forward
WO 277/2
WO 277/2,
28
