and storage of large quantities of coal and coke at a special civilian depot at
Rouen.
In connection with the shipment of coal from the United Kingdom,
it was found that Welsh steam coal was too friable to stand rough handling,
and by the time it reached the locomotive tender was frequently little more
Quarry sand, river sand, gravel and locomotive ashes were all used as
The initial supplies of ballast were required
in the Rennes and Nantes districts of the Western region of the S.N.C.F., and
in October, 1939, the S.N.C.F. undertook to make arrangements for the supply
of this material, including all arrangements with quarry owners and with the
railway traffic department for the provision of wagons and the working of
ballast trains to the site of work.
At the end of the campaign, similar arrange-
ments were being made in the Rouen district.
Although the S.N.C.F. were
rarely able to meet all demands in full, this method was the best that could be
arranged in the circumstances, and prevented the possibility of the S.N.C.F.
and the British Army buying in competition with each other.
The procedure for the issue of stores was that units submitted indents on
the prescribed form, where necessary giving reasons and explanations.
items which were available were then issued on the authority of A.D.Tn. Stores,
acting under the general policy laid down by the Director General.
instructions were in hand specifying the powers for demanding stores to be given
to company commanders, group commanders and directorates respectively
in order to prevent the possibility of units making extensive demands and
drawing out plant which was possibly more urgently required elsewhere.
complete stores ledger account system was maintained from the start, all items
being taken on charge as received and all issues covered by signed receipts,
except during the final active operations and retreat when postal facilities were cut.
SECTION 8.—FINANCE, STATISTICS AND ACCOUNTS
About the middle of September, 1939, it became evident that a separate
section would have to be formed to deal with the financial arrangements which
had to be made on behalf of the Director General of Transportation and
Consequently, on 26th September, the D.G.Tn's Finance and
Statistics (later Transportation Finance and Accounts) Office came into being,
and on Ist October moved to Rennes, where it functioned until evacuated on
16th June, 1940.
The original establishment of this office was one officer
and three other ranks; by June, 1940, this had been increased to five officers,
twenty other ranks and two French civilians.
Originally, the work of the Finance Office was confined to the negotiation
of financial agreements with the S.N.C.F., passing local transportation charges
for payment, and compiling docks and other statistics (it was agreed with Move-
ment Control that the latter would maintain railway statistics).
gressed and the field force expanded, the following additional matters arose:—
(a) Financial agreements with Chambers of Commerce controlling the
b) The hire of 69 private sidings utilized by various units of the B.E.F.
(c) The payment of inland water transport freight charges to private barge
owners and petrol barge-owning companies through the Office Nationale
de Navigation des Voies Navigables and the Société pour l'Importation
des Pétroles et Dérivés (S.I.P.D.).
(d) The hire of several hundred condemned wagons for billeting and other
(e) The settlement o CN paven to secondary railways which did not
come within the S.N.C.F. Convention.
(f) Charges for carriage of troops on light railways and bus services.
(s) Passing for payment locar transportation stores purchases, and railways
and construction directorates' bills contracted with the S.N.C.F. (out-
side the terms of the financial agreement) and with private contractors.
(h) Subsidiary to the S.N.C.F. agreement, the settlement of charges for
extraneous services, such as charges for British locomotives and rolling
stock running over the French system, and the method of raising charges
for British locomotives hauling French Army and civilian trains.
The most important financial agreement was naturally that with the S.N.C.F.
At a meeting held in Paris in October, 1939, it had been agreed in principle that
the British Army would enjoy the same rates as the French Army.
Finance Office had studied the French Army agreements, a sub-committee was
formed which met in December, 1939.
At this meeting, many points were
raised and certain variations to the French Army agreements were decided upon.
After considerable correspondence and many private meetings with S.N.C.F.
officials, a draft Convention was prepared and submitted to the War Office on
16th January, 1940. At the end of February, the War Office agreed to this
Convention with certain provisions.
The S.N.C.F. accepted these provisions
at the beginning of April, and it was intended that the Convention should be
signed in Paris on 17th May, 1940.
This did not take place owing to the start
of active operations, but it was eventually signed by D.G.Tn. and forwarded
to the S.N.C.F. on 10th June, 1940. It was not returned before the evacuation.
WO 277/21
27
Wo27 1/2h
28
