locomotives and other transportation equipment built in that country to
British specifications.
But when the United States War Department became a
big buyer on its own account, it not unnaturally took the view that design for
the production of transportation equipment, destined in the main for common
allied use,
must be primary an
the U.S. War Department adopted the policy of basing specifications on the
probability of a short war, and accordingly went all out for rapid quantity
production,
with
durability and maintenance as secondary
Owing to this policy spare parts provision became a major problem, and it was
some 18 months before agreement could be reached on the provision of standard
scales of running spares covering a year's operation for each major item of
railway equipment.
Thus much of the early procurement of locomotives and
rolling stock suffered from lack of essential maintenance parts.
In November, 1942 the United States Transportation Corps was formed
with its own Procurement Division in the War Department, and in order to
conform
to this organization the Transportation
Engineer's branch broke away from the Engineer Section and formed a separate
branch under an A.D.Tn.
By this time, through the medium of a Joint
Standardization Committee, a large number of major stores items in common
use with both armies was already in production.
During the early months
of its existence the new Transportation Corps in Washington, staffed as it
inevitably was by officers with little experience of transportation outside the
American continent, and stimulated by reports from American commanders in
the field stressing the importance of providing equipment adapted to local
conditions, relied to a large extent on British advice.
The need for united transportation planning was agreed by all, and a Joint
Planning Committee was set up with the authority to say in what order of
priority the different types of equipment were to be produced and to regulate
the placing of orders in such a way as to bear some relation to transportation
war plans.
Until the establishment of the new Corps there had been little
regard for this essential co-ordinating element in planning, and owing to the
shortage of raw materials the controllers of production and the Engineer
Corps had frequently shown an autocratic attitude about what should be
produced and what degree of priority should be given.
The Joint Planning
Committee was in effect a sub-committee of the Combined Munitions Assign-
ment Board to whom it made recommendations on production.
included representatives of "Q," Transportation and Movements on the British
side, with similar representation from the United States War Department.
This committee also reported to the Transportation Committee of the Combined
A sub-committee was also set up for assignment, and was responsible to
the Munitions Assignment Committee (Ground) which operated under the
International Division of the American War Department.
tion soon resulted in a saving of time between production and export, and the
business of allocation and assignment was greatly facilitated.
Immediately on the formation of the new Corps, provisional estimates of
2,000 locomotives,
wegons, hundreds of cranes, 2,000 miles of track and a mass of equipment,
were examined in detail, and prompt action was taken to obtain the necesan
raw material allocations for production.
As regards non-common items,
whereas in the first place it was taking a minimum of sixty days to g
017e714
WO 277/21
27
Wo 277726
28
approval to a requisition, in the new set-up Transportation had direct access
to the Assistant Chief of Transportation for Supply in the new Corps, and
negotiations were frequently concluded in twenty days.
One difficulty which threatened on the formation of the new Corps was the
procurement of railway bridging and track materials, because, contrary to
the British system, the U.S. Engineer Corps retained responsibility for new
railway construction in the field, and consequently for the provision of con-
structional stores and materials.
However, it was soon realized that the real
Transportation planners were in the Transportation Corps, and the Engineers
agreed to accept the advice of the new Corps on planning and requirements.
In December, 1942, Transportation shipping was placed directly under
A.D.Tn., an arrangement which saved much inter-section paper passing.
all sides of the job, common stores and assignments, non-common stores and
requisitions, and by established direct contacts with "Q," "Q" (Ops.) and
Movements, Transportation was now a self-contained organization working
smoothly with the American War Department and the new Corps. Although
nominally still under the Chief Engineer, it was becoming increasingly clear
that complete divorce was the natural development, and that the Transportation
branch should eventually be responsible direct to the Deputy Quarter Master
General, British Army Staff, on Army matters and to the Deputy Director
General, British Supply Mission, on Supply matters.
This reorganization was
brought into effect in May, 1943.
Since February, 1943, Transportation had been taking an increasing interest
in the matter of small craft procurement, which had hitherto been a respon-
sibility of the British Merchant Shipping Mission.
barges and ramped cargo lighters under production both in the United States
There was also an accumulation of unfilled requisitions for
spares for engines and craft already exported. A policy of gradual infiltration
into the procurement and progress side was adopted and, since the British
Merchant Shipping Mission was completely non-technical, by June, 1943
Transportation was taking a leading part in the co-ordination of production
of War Transport, Montreal, the Department of
Munitions and Supply in Canada, and the Maritime Commission in the United
States, and in the ensuing export through Army Shipping programmes.
lengthy schedule of craft was at this time being produced by the Transportation
Corps for the American Army, and many advantages accrued to British interests
through Transportation holding a review over the whole field of craft production
and productive capacity in both the United States and Canada.
During the spring and summer of 1943 railway bridging became a major
The Americans had taken little interest in this matter until faced with
the request for assistance in providing a portion of the joint stockpile for
European and Central Mediterranean operations.
and it was not until May, 1943 that the War Department were persuaded to
include in the 1943 supply programme some 39,000 tons of British standard
Although under peace conditions the Engineer Corps
had undertaken many large bridging schemes, they had no designs suitable for
use under active service field conditions.
At the end of the year the influence of
E.T.O.U.S.A. in London, caused the production of 109,000 tons of bridging
to be approved without any of the previous hesitation about quantity or design.
The first large assignments were made by the Munitions Assignment Committee
