After the first two months, railway operating in Italy was an Anglo.
At Headquarters, the combined
integrated into Operating and Mechanical branches, each under an American
chief, but in the field the troops, as far as possible, operated in separate zones-
the British on the East and the Americans on the West.
The differences between
American and British operating practice and methods of sending out orders
caused frequent misunderstanding, while in the field the strongly officered
Grand Divisions to which there was no British counterpart enabled the Ameri-
cans to
exercise a degree of control far beyond British capability.
obviously essential, however, to have a centralized allied control of the Italian
railways, and probably the integrated Allied Railway Service performed this
function with no more disagreement than would have accompanied any other
improvised organization.
In the initial stages of the Italian campaign (September-October, 1943)
both the American Fifth and British Eighth Armies were supported only by
British units, one Railway Operating Company working from the Salerno area
and another out of Reggio di Calabria.
American railway operating battalions
arrived at Salerno in October and early November, however, and relieved the
British company which was withdrawn on 25th November and transferred to
the east.
With the exception of this short period, no British railway operating
troops were employed on the west side of Italy.
The original plans for the Salerno landing (Operation "Avalanche") called
for an advance party of the Railway Operating Company on D + 4 with the
remainder of the Company following on D + 8 and D + 12.
The Company
did not actually arrive, however, until D + 28 and D + 30, but part of a Rail-
way Workshops Company arrived on 2nd October (D + 23). This Workshops
detachment started working immediately on the rehabilitation of Salerno shed
and the repair of locomotives, and diverted some of its personnel to operating
a line from Agropoli to Pontecagnano, pending the arrival of operating troops.
Meanwhile,
the Company which accompanied the Eighth Army from Sicily
found itself responsible for some hundreds of miles of railway to which only
comparatively slight damage had been done.
Following the liberation of Bari
and Taranto, the Railway Operating Group Headquarters and a second Operat-
ing Company were moved from Sicily to Bari to cover the Heel area, including
the ports of Bari, Brindisi and Taranto.
Absence of damage in the Heel area
enabled the Italian State Railway organization to continue to operate as far
north as Barletta, British operating units being employed in a liaison and super-
visory role, except in the dock areas where docks shunting was taken over and
operated by troops.
Towards the end of October the northern railhead was advanced to the
North of Barletta, however, owing to recent fighting, civilian
railwaymen were not available, and a detachment from an Operating Company
was moved up from Calabria to operate this section of line as a military railway.
Later, with the advance of the railhead to San Severo, the Italian State Railvays
resumed operation up to Foggia, the Railway Operating Company continuing
to operate Foggia and beyond.
It became the regular practice to organize
the operation of newly opened lines in four stages, namely:-
Stage 1. Full military operation, assisted by civilian railway personnel as
they were available.
110
Stage 2.
Railway worked under military rules, but with civilian railway
personnel
supervision.
performing most duties under immediate military
Stage 3.
Railway worked under Italian State Railway rules, but with military
supervision at low level (controllers, yard masters, shed foremen,
etc.).
As for stage 3, but with military supervision in key positions only.
By the close of 1943, the northern railhead was at Istonia, the line thence
to San Severo being worked by a British Railway Operating Company.
Railway Workshops Company was installed at the main workshops at Foggia
which, in spite of heavy air attacks, had suffered little serious damage. With
the fall of Ortona at the end of the year, a prolonged period of military inactivity
set in and full advantage was taken of this lull to improve the railway facilities
and to re-establish the Italian State Railways' organization, with the object of
ensuring that the maximum number of operating troops would be available to
undertake new commitments.
In early January, 1944, a second Railway Operating Group Headquarters
arrived and took over the Bari area, the original Group Headquarters moving
to Foggia to control operation forward of that point.
railhead was opened at San Vito, which remained the railhead until 10th April,
when the line was opened to Ortona.
Ortona, however, could not be used as
a railhead until 11th June owing to the local military situation. In March a
further Railway Operating Company joined the forward Group and took over
operation in advance of Termoli.
On 1st April, 1944, responsibility for the operation of the railway south
of Termoli was handed back to the Italian State Railways, though military
running shed personnel and two Railway Mobile Workshops were not with-
The original railway plan had been to continue the British L. of C. up the
east coast from Ortona to Ancona via Pescara, but in view of the rapidity of the
advance up the west coast which left considerable mileages of little-damaged
track in our hands, coupled with the fact that during the long period of
inactivity the enemy had carried out considerable demolitions on the east coast
route, it was decided to abandon this project and to supply the east side through
Rome, Orte, Foligno and back to the coast at Falconara, five miles north of
To meet this change of plan a very considerable redeployment of
railway operating units was necessary.
Termoli was handed over to the Italian State Railways and the forward group
H.Q. moved from Foggia to Foligno.
From the operating aspect July to September were months of great activity,
some 280 kilometres being opened to traffic and operated under military rules.
On 24th July the line from Orte to Assisi was opened and operated by military
personnel. On 3rd September the main line was opened from Foligno to Fabriano
but was not immediately brought into use. Between 4th and 10th September
the Falconara-Ancona section and the rail connection to Ancona docks were
completed and Chiaravalle, lesi and Senegallia were successively opened as
railheads.
In addition, several base depots, including a Transportation Stores
depot, were brought into operation in the Ancona area.
The speed with which the rail L. of C. was pushed forward and the antici-
pation of an early extension to Rimini necessitated a further reshuffle of operating
111
WO 277/2
WO 27 7/z.
do
