Groups,
A Mechanical Equipment Group of three Companies was available
for all Transportation work, and a provisional allotment of one of these Com-
panies was made for railway construction.
Fifteen Pioneer Companies were
earmarked for railway
construction and distributed to the Groups.
Commanders of the Railway Construction and Pioneer Groups got in touch
with each other in the United Kingdom before embarkation, and in all respects
except administration and military command the Pioneer Companies formed
part of the Railway Construction and Maintenance Groups.
It was accepted that the combined resources of British Transportation
and American Engineers would not be adequate for all the railway construction,
maintenance and repair which would be needed.
To follow up at the earliest
possible date and relieve the Army units of the work of maintenance, the
services of the French State Railways (S.N.C.F.) were to be enlisted.
Stocks of
tools were arranged for this purpose and issued to units due to disembark in
the early stages.
Stores were phased in to cover the estimated capacity of units
to consume them plus the gradual build up of a reserve.
Until D + 15 no stores
of a greater length than twenty feet or heavier than one ton were to be discharged.
The first Railway Construction and Maintenance Group commander was
briefed shortly before D-Day and given a copy of the railway construction
plan.
Sufficient copies of the plan were prepared for distribution down to
units after D-Day.
The plan was written with the object of laying down the
tasks of each Group, the conditions to be faced, the availability of stores in the
initial stages and the general works organization to be adopted.
It provided
for Group commanders to act in the first stages entirely on their own initiative
should communication with the Directorate prove difficult.
June, 1944
Group H.Q. were disembarked before the units in their Group.
Advance
parties of units preceded units overseas and balanced groups of units, con-
struction, bridging, survey and pioneer companies and mechanical equipment
detachments, were built up.
The first Group H.Q., together with an advance
party of the Directorate, landed on D + 5. It had been planned that Groups
should land in Normandy between D + 4 and D + 29,
but owing to con-
gestion at the beach-head, and also because the tactical situation did not develop
as rapidly as anticipated, the last three Groups were phased back from time
to time and the programme of disembarkation was extended by some six
weeks.
The Directorate party on landing was attached to H.Q.
L. of C.
Area until H.Q. 21 Army Group was established overseas.
The revised pro-
gramme of disembarkation worked in very well with the progress of the cam-
paign, and further strength became available at the right times.
Immediately after the landing a reconnaissance of all lines available for
inspection was carried out, and from then on forward lines were reconnoitred
at the first possible opportunity.
One of the first tasks was the establishment
of Tn. Stores depots, which were constructed in accordance with the plan at
Luc-sur-Mer and at Bayeux,
becoming the main depot.
establishment of such depots is an absolute essential at the earliest possible
opportunity, as speedy and efficient repairs to major damage cannot be properly
undertaken without them.
Only one other fully rail-served depot was con-
structed in the Rear Maintenance Area; storage space for other commodities
was made by adapting existing station yards.
154
Bridge Repairs
In the initial plan, track damage was estimated to be such that 20 per
cent. new material would be required throughout; on the first section it was
estimated that bridge demolitions would amount to 25 per cent., on the
second section 50 per cent. and on the third 100 per cent. In fact, until the
Albert Canal was reached, the damage encountered was much less.
had been taken completely by surprise and no damage, except slight battle
breaks, was experienced in the beach-head area.
Not until Caen was captured
was it necessary to undertake bridge repairs of any magnitude.
to the Seine, damage to bridges was considerable but not up to the degree
expected.
From the Seine across Northern France and Belgium to the Albert
Canal the damage was remarkably light and was mostly the result of Allied
bombing.
It was in the Netherlands that extensive bridge demolition was
first met, amounting to almost 100 per cent. East of the Rhine air raid damage
was very extensive and deliberate demolition of bridges considerable.
as the Ems river almost all major bridges were either bombed or blown up.
There was a delay in the development of the L. of C. owing to the tactical
situation around Caen.
Units of the second Railway Construction and
Maintenance Group were assembled in the beach-head area in convenient time
for the entry into Caen, and between 23rd July and 29th August five major
bridges, including two across the river Orne, were repaired. In the built-up
area of the town bridge destruction was complete and damage to tracks was
very heavy.
By the end of August, however, 23,400 feet of siding accommo-
dation had been opened up.
In order to complete the programme of necessary
repairs in Caen by the requisite date, it was arranged after a reconnaissance
that all stores required for the complete new bridge over the Orne leading to the
dock area should be shipped by special coaster to avoid loss of components
or small parts.
Caen-Mezidon-Rouen L. of C.
In the early days of August it became clear that the development of the
L. of C. for 21 Army Group would be on the axis Caen-Mezidon-Rouen.
The situation was therefore re-appreciated and the objectives set out in the
planning stage in London modified.
From 19th August, the section of the
line from Caen to Mezidon and Argentan became available for reconnaissance
and the third Group to disembark undertook its repair.
By the end of August,
work was in hand as far forward as Serquigny with the fourth and last Group
to enter the theatre.
From then on the L. of C. was progressively extended.
Seine to Belgian Frontier
At the end of August, plans were made for bridging the Seine. It was
anticipated that the problems of crossing the river and repairing approach
lines would be considerable, and the Group detailed for the job was therefore
strengthened and assembled to go forward as soon as possible.
To reconnoitre
and select the best route and to carry out detailed planning, a party of twenty-
one officers and forty-five other ranks were moved into camp outside Rouen
and began work on 31st August.
The inspection of possible sites involved the
walking of 156 miles of track and the examination of five demolished bridges.
The determination of the most suitable route across the Seine, to be completed
in the shortest possible time and yet to provide a line which could be worked
155
W027,
2:
28
