three miles to a point where jetties were improvised.
argo and personnel being then conveyed by sampan up a tidal creek for some
being coal for baking bricks for road-making.
Cox's Bazaar was by road. the largest item in the stores shipment program.
The forward route from
Excent for five Eureka tow-boats and fifteen Higgins barges locally erecto
sy I.W.T. troops, all the craft allotted were old, low-powered steamers and
launches powered by converted lorry engines.
Dumb craft were provided by
requisitioning river lighters and large flats capable of carrying up to 1,000 to
These craft proved very difficult to handle at sea.
In late November, 1942, two I. W.T. companies moved forward to the Nail
river and began to operate country craft found in the locality.
The seaward
end of the river was at this time still in the hands of the enemy, and these unit
were largely responsible for maintaining the forward brigades.
In the third
week of December, Maungdaw on the Naaf and Buthidaung on the Mayu were
occupied, and two convoys successfully made the sea journey from Chitagon
to Maungdaw. It was obvious, however, that this journey, 75 miles of which
was on the open sea, was beyond the capacity of most of the craft availabe.
A coasting steamer was acquired in Calcutta in January, 1943, and at the same
time a second steamer was employed by the Sea Transport Officer.
This second
steamer was, however, withdrawn during the monsoon period from April
In January, 1943, a force was assembled at Chittagong for the assault on
Akyab.
It consisted of an infantry brigade, with a Naval component to man
the landing craft.
A detachment of a docks operating company was also
included as a beach unit. The force was carried in three I.W.T. paddle
steamers, and made good progress down the Mayu peninsula, but was held
up at Donbaik four miles from the point where the assault was to be launched.
After an unsuccessful attempt to land tanks from landing craft, the sea-borne
assault had to be cancelled as the weather was deteriorating and the Japanese
were firmly dug in.
Meanwhile, development of Cox's Bazaar and Maungdaw had progressed,
and an Indian Port Construction Company carried out jetty construction during
April at Cox's Bazaar, Tumbru, Maungdaw
and Buthidaung.
workshop lorry was included in the equipment of the Indian I.W.T. Workshops
Company, and this enabled a detachment of that unit to be stationed at Tumbru
and later at Maungdaw and Buthidaung.
Many craft were thereby able to
continue in service which would otherwise have had to be sent to Calcutta for
Two large river flats were also fitted out as a floating workshop for
this unit, so that a heavy workshop could be established where it was most
This floating workshop was not, however, taken forward to the Naf
river owing to the risk of its capture.
By April, 1943, the Japanese had begun to take the offensive and, as they
had control of the Mavu. Kaladan and Kvanttaw Watanuave loading north
from Akyab, they were able to outflank the British forces.
It would obviously
have been difficult to maintain forces south of Maunedaw and Ruthidaung,
as the Naaf estuary is closed during the monsoon period by gales.
of three days in five during the monsoon.
maintenance being evacuated from Maungdaw.
during May much of the stock which had been accumulated for monsoon
The force therefore withdrew
Arakan campaign for this season and it then hecame , holding operation.
The monsoon closed the
It was obvious that, to clear the enemy from Arakan, a stronger force would
be required, with more Tn. units and equipment.
units formed from the 2,000 Flotilla.
he Arakan I.W T. Group was reorganized and expanded by the addition ne
During the summer, therefore,
After the monsoon of 1943, operations were resumed in Arakan, but little
was achieved.
Two I.W.T. groups were involved, one operating between
Chittagong and Cox's Bazaar and the other in the Naaf river. In addition to
¡he development of Chittagong port, jetties were constructed at Cox's Bazaar
Wlakhali and Samadar Bridge, Baile minor jetties were built at the Nat iver
hats of Teknaf, Redwinbyin, Bawli Bazaar and Kapagaung, Two floating
workshops were in use, one at Chittagong and the other in the Naat river.
In July, 1944, with the advent of the monsoon, the Group from the Naf liver.
was withdrawn to Jullundur for refitting and military training.
Chindwin, 1944-1945
In December, 1944, orders were issued for the establishment of an I.W.T.
fleet on the Chindwin.
Trials had already been carried out to investigate the
best methods of moving craft over the long overland route from India via
Manipur Road and Imphal, and immediate arrangements were made to move
the necessary units and stores to Kalewa where the craft were to be erected.
Owing to the length of the L. of C. overland to Kalewa from India, together
with the necessity for frequent transhipments, it was inevitable that consign-
ments of stores and prefabricated parts arrived in many cases damaged or
incomplete, and some of the units and small quantities of stores had to be
To meet immediate requirements, ten Unicraft tugs and twenty
Unicraft barges were flown in from Arakan.
Kalewa was captured on 2nd December, 1944, and Monywa on 22nd Janu-
The craft erection site at Kalewa was selected and in use by the
beginning of January, though preparation of the site was not entirely completed
until 25th January.
Practically no craft were captured in a serviceable con-
dition, but salvage operations were immediately put in hand and many sunken
craft were raised and repaired.
The target figures set for the I.W.T. lift down
the Chindwin were 575 tons a day for the first half of May, rising to 700 tons
a day in the second half.
This tonnage was to be carried from Kalewa
A service from Kalewa to Alon and Monywa was started on
Ist February, at first for engineer and Tn. stores and units only, and experiments
were carried out with rafts.
These experiments were very successful, and a large
proportion of the tonnage subsequently moved down river was carried by this
means. In March a hundred low medical category British troops were sent to
help supervise traffic on the Chindwin.
Mandalay dockyard was captured in March, 1945.
portion of the plant and was chinery had been dismantled during the Japanese
occupation, the power plant, smithy and foundry were intacs.
nthidaung, to full working order bv mid-April, and was used for the repair
and fitting of new engines to salvaged craft.
myingyan in April to service craft at the end of their journey from Kalewa.
By the end of May the TW T. ik for some he Chindwin comprised 73 tugs of
various designs, 128 Unicraft Ind 6. 97 Higgins barges and 45 ramped cargo
lighters all of which had been erRuthidaung, lewa, and many salvaged and
70 7/77
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
28
