War Transport Department were limited almost entirely to matters of policy,
since this Department was not technical.
Further developments in respect of
the control of ports took place in 1944 at Calcutta, where a Regional Port
Director with a considerable staff was appointed to enable this port to deal
with the very heavy traffic resulting from the war.
This Directorate included an
American officer as Deputy Director, in view of the large quantity of American
military stores shipped through Calcutta.
Although the Port Directorate
worked under the War Transport Department and the Director himself held
civilian status, most of its officers were military.
A plan showing the organization of the In. Directorate in India in August,
1944, is included at the end of this chapter.
The Problem of Development
Before the war, and until the entry of Japan at the end of 1941, such planning
as had taken place in respect of transportation in India was almost entirely in
the north-west.
For years past the strategic picture had been one of an invasion
of India from this direction, and railway maps of the country clearly indicate
this conception.
Furthermore, little or no thought had been given to the possi-
bility that India might become a base for offensive operations, least of all towards
the east.
The effect of this was evident.
In respects of ports, India was ill-
served; she had only four major and three minor ports on a total coast line of
2,640 miles.
Such ports as existed were designed entirely to meet commercial
requirements and were in no way equipped to handle the vast quantities of
materials required by modern war.
A similar situation faced the railways in India, but to a far greater degree.
In the first place, the eastern frontier was served by a metre gauge railway of
low capacity, with a physical break formed by the river Brahmaputra, which
remained unbridged throughout its length.
Secondly, during 1941 and 1942,
large quantities of railway equipment, mostly metre gauge, were exported to
Middle East and Iraq without replacement.
Thirdly, with the entry of Japan
into the war and the reverses suffered by the Allies during the early part of 1942,
the port of Calcutta was virtually closed.
This placed an added burden on the
railways, particularly in the case of coal, large quantities of which up to that
time had been transported by sea from Calcutta.
Fourthly, whereas bases
and depots had been created during the early part of the war to serve Bombay
and the north-west frontier, there was no such organization designed to feed
the eastern frontier.
An additional load, which assumed vast proportions,
was the construction of airfields in the eastern part of India, necessitating the
transport of immense tonnages of materials concurrently with the movement of
fighting troops, their equipment and maintenance stores.
Inland water transport resources in India, as in the case of the railways,
were drawn upon heavily to meet deficiencies in Iraq.
No less than 27 large
river steamers and 49 river flats were requisitioned during 1941 and 1942 and
sent to the Persian Gulf, thus further reducing the capacity for movement in
eastern India.
The problem of port development was met mainly by increasing floating
equipment rather than by the construction of additional berths, although the
latter method was adopted at Calcutta and on a smaller scale at Chittagons.
Unfortunately, the demands of the western theatres of war prevented the pro-
180
hostilities in those theatres.
vision of large and small harbour craft in sufficient quantities until the end of
It was on the with the amar the greatest development was necessary for
India as a base.
With the approach of the enemy to the frontiers of Assam
and Bengal, immediate development of the wholly inadequate rail faities
serving those parts was necessary, and in particular this applied to what was
known as the Assam L. of C., running from Calcutta across the Brahmaputa
at Amingaon and terminating in north-eastern Assam.
With the closure
of the Burma Road, the only link with China was by means of the American air
ferry service from Assam, and this was later followed by the construction of the
Ledo Road.
These two commitments, together with that of serving the fighting
troops based on the Imphal plain, imposed a load on the Assam L. of C. pre-
viously undreamed of.
Its development took the form of the partial doubling
of sections of the single line, of the provision of additional wagon ferry facilities
at Amingaon/Pandu, of the import of locomotives and wagons and finally of
the stepping up of operating capacity.
For the latter purpose, in addition to
the Indian Tn. troops which were placed at the disposal of the Bengal and
Assam Railway, American Transportation Corps units were used, and eventually
the responsibility for controlling the operation of the metre gauge section of
the L. of C. devolved upon these American units.
Other railway development consisted of the laying of a large number of
sidings to serve new airfields in their constructional stages and also for their
permanent maintenance traffic. New Reserve Bases were constructed near
Calcutta and near Madras, and these involved the laying of 85 and 107 miles
of track respectively.
Both these works were carried out by the railway
administrations concerned, with assistance from the In. service.
A transit
depot was installed to serve the port of Vizigapatam, involving 26 miles of
tracks.
This task was carried out entirely by the Tn. service, working on behalf
of the civil railway. Other depots and bases were also provided with rail service
totalling hundreds of miles of track, and in a number of these Tn. troops were
lent to the railways to assist in the work and to provide training.
The main development under the head of Inland Water Transport was in
organization.
As already stated, the river steamer services were controlled by
a number of private companies.
While some of these companies had working
agreements regarding routing of traffic and rates, there was considerable com-
petition both among themselves and with the railways serving the same areas.
Control was first imposed on the steamer companies by the creation of a
Regional Controller of Priorities in Calcutta, but this was not entirely satis-
factory, and later direct control passed to the War Department.
By this control
uneconomical running was reduced to a minimum, and pressure was applied
to persuade the steamer companies to operate traffic primarily to meet military
necessity rather than for private gain.
In 1943, with the improved war situation
in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, it was possible to obtain the release
from Iraq of the steamers sent there during 1941 and 1942.
All except five
arrived back safely and were returned to their owners for operation on the
Brahmaputra.
A central committee was set up, under the control of the War
Department, to be responsible for all river conservancy work on the Assam
L. of C., in order to co-ordinate the work and thus permit better performance
during the difficult months of the year.
181
WO 27
W027
