In Gambia Tn. development took the form of impro
organizing an I. W.T. service on the Gambia river.
deep water pontoon quays were constructed.
In January, 1943, Movements and Transportation at G.H.Q.
were amalgamated under a Deputy Director Mov. and Tn.; from
onwards the importance of technical In. work in West Africa progressively
diminished.
British Tn. units and detachments were gradually sent away to
other theatres and surplus stores and equipment were evacuated.
The port of
Freetown reverted to civil control early in 1944.
SECTION 6.—THE CONGO-NILE TRANS-AFRICAN LINE OF
COMMUNICATION (AFLOC)
The entry of Italy into the war in the summer of 1940 made it necessary
for all British and, later, American shipping bound for the Middle East to
follow the long sea route round the Cape of Good Hope instead of the normal
route through the Mediterranean.
As the size of the forces to be maintained in the Middle East continued to
grow, this long sea L. of C. put an ever-increasing strain on available resources
an sterlang of it wars scided to seek otine measure of relief in the form of
Preliminary investigations showed that the only route by which any appre-
ciable tonnage of stores could be handled was from Matadi, at the mouth of the
River Congo, by rail, river and road to Juba on the Upper Nile and thence by
river and rail to Egypt and the Mediterranean.
The development of the western portion, between Matadi and Juba,
was placed in the hands of an organization known as H.Q. No. 70 L. of C.,
which reported direct to the War Office and which included Transportation
The remainder of the route, from Juba to Lower Egypt, was over the
systems of the Sudan Government Railways and Steamers and the Egyptian
State Railways, and responsibility for its organization and for such development
as was necessary rested therefore with G.H.Q. Middle East.
route from Juba to the Indian Ocean was also to be developed via Soroti and
Nairobi under the control of Commander-in-Chief, East Africa Command.
No. 70 L. of C. reached Africa at the end of April, 1942.
laid down by the War Office for the ultimate development of the route was to
be limited only by the capacity of the port of Matadi over and above the
requirements of the Belgian Congo Government, but was fixed provisionally
at 30,000 tons of stores and 800 cased vehicles a month.
The main Afloc route to Lower Egypt consisted of eight sections, namely:
1 Matadi to Leopoldville by 3 ft. 6 in. gauge railway
2 Leopoldville to Aketi by river
3 Aketi to Gao by 60 cm. gauge railway
1,012
410 "
4 Gao to Juba by road .
5 Juba to Jebelein by river
6 Jebelein to Wadi Halfa by 3 ft. 6 in. gauge railway
846
860
7 Wadi Halfa to Shellal by river.
8 Shellal to Cairo by 4 ft. 8} in. gauge railway
Total.
550 ,,
4,489 miles
224
sportation problem was, of course, to ensure, by organization and
ision of personnel and equipment, that all sections of the route
co handle the target tonnage.
So far as the western sections were
concerned this involved the provision of a number of wharf cranes for the ports
of Matadi and Leopoldville, of additional locomotives and wagons for the
3 ft. 6 in. gauge Matadi-Leopoldville section and the 60 cm. gauge Aketi-Giao
section, of steel for the construction, in the Belgian Congo, of large and small
barges and tugs, and of permanent way material for the construction of loops
to increase the capacity of the Aketi-Gao section. The railway and river sec-
tions between Jebelein and Cairo presented little or no difficulty, but the real
bottle-neck was the river section between Juba and Jebelein. Existing craft
were fully occupied in handling local traffic and it was necessary to establish
and man a large new fleet; the manning problem moreover was complicated
by the malaria-infested nature of the country which made it virtually out
of the question to employ any but local natives. It was soon found that
the attainment of the target tonnages was quite impracticable within any reason-
proceeded under their own power.
The winter of 1942 and spring of 1943 brought a complete change in the
Mediterranean situation, and made the full development of the Afloc route
of far less importance.
This led the Americans to withdraw in May, 1943,
from further participation in the development of the route, which had by then
reached a capacity of 4,000 tons of stores a month as far as Juba and 1,500
The British authorities, however, considered
that it was still prudent to continue the development of the route on a modified
scale, and the target was reduced to 5,000 tons of stores a month between
Matadi and Juba by the end of 1943, the Juba to Jebelein capacity being main-
tained at 1,500 tons a month.
In March, 1944, all work was stopped and the
west 17
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
28
