together on line 65, to open the route to Arezzo.
They met considerable
bomb damage, but little enemy demolition until the area near Arezzo was
reached.
Here the enemy resistance had stiffened and between Arezzo and
Florence the line, which included many high viaducts and tunnels, was so
badly damaged that its repair as a military proposition was abandoned.
Rail.
head at Arezzo was opened on 10th August.
Meanwhile the South African Group, having opened line 65 from Rome to
Orte, was ordered to repair the Orte-Falconara link (line 87).
This did not
figure high in the A.F.H.Q. priority list, but from the point of view of railway
policy it was an obvious and essential link.
Without it the port of Ancona
could not be rail-served, and the nearest west-east link was the Naples-Foggia
line.
The line was opened to Foligno on 24th July and railhead was established
at Bastia.
The line to Ancona was opened on 3rd September and the Group
started work on repairs to the railways at Ancona port and station and on the
development of rail service in the Ancona base area.
At this point the military
situation changed; the front had become static near the Arno valley to the
west and was slowly moving northward from Ancona.
The tactical plan, after the Arno was reached and Florence liberated, called
for a switch of the whole of the Eighth Army back to the east coast, with the
intention of breaking the Gothic line at its weakest point, near the coast at
Rimini.
Meanwhile, the Fifth Army was to make a frontal attack on Bologna.
The ports of Leghorn and Ancona were in full use as bases for the Fifth and
Eighth Armies.
The centre of gravity of railway construction thus swung
once more to the east coast.
One British Group, strengthened by units from
the other Group, moved to line 86 to follow up the Eighth Army towards
Bologna.
The other British Group, reduced in size, remained in the Arezzo
area, carrying out improvements to temporary structures and making recon-
naissances of the railways near Florence.
The advance of the Eighth Army
turned out, however, to be much slower than anticipated, and it was soon
obvious that in the east more construction strength had been deployed than
was necessary.
Meanwhile, severe rainfall had caused washouts at temporary
structures on lines 90 and 50, and South African units had to be withdrawn
from the forward areas to carry out repairs on those routes.
By October, hopes of the war ending before winter had vanished, and the
policy for future railway construction was reviewed.
It was decided that a
rail connection between Leghorn and Bologna must be pushed through at all
costs.
All the resources of A.F.H.Q. would be at the disposal of Transportation,
as the job would be given the highest priority.
This link meant the crossing
of the Apennines by one of three railways, the Bologna-Pistoia, Bologna-Prato
or Faenza-Florence lines.
All of these lines are heavily engineered and they
all lay right through the Gothic line.
Demolition on the stretches then in
Allied hands were as complete as they were on the lines connecting Leghorn
The work had to be started before any knowledge could be
obtained of the condition of the portion of the line in enemy hands, but it was
obvious that without a connection to Bologna, the whole rail system of Italy
(line 65).
It was decided to select for repair the Prato-Bologna line
Demolitions were very heavy and included 17 tunnels and 17 large
bridges in the section in Allied hands alone.
But the line was double—a great
assistance in tunnel repair-and gradients and curves were much less severe
than on the alternative routes, thus increasing the possibility of deviations and
in any case providing a better railway.
It was also decided to repair line 218, Lehgorn-Pisa-Pistoia-Florence.
This gave the shortest connection to line 65 at Prato and would provide, as a
short-term dividend, useful railheads serving important roads at Pistola and
Prato.
garrison troops.
Florence required rail service to support the civilian population and
Work started in October, one British Group taking over the
task of repair from Pisa to Florence and the South African Group from Prato
to Bologna.
The other British Group remained on the east coast repairing
line 86 behind the Eighth Army, and by 14th October they had opened Rimini
as a railhead. In September an Indian Group took over from the South Africans
the completion of base development at Ancona and the maintenance of lines
86 and 87 behind the British Group.
possible pressure throughout the winter.
Work on these lines proceeded at highest
A.F.H.Q. allotted to the Leghorn-
Bologna project the services of five Artisan Works Companies, one Mechanical
equipment platoon, eighteen Pioneer Companies and a considerable quantity
of transport and mechanical plant.
the Prato-Bologna section.
The bulk of these resources were used on
Pisa was opened to traffic by the Americans on
8th November and Montecatini by the British on 7th January.
a severe setback was experienced.
Repeated attempts to open the Serraville
tunnel between Montecatini and Prato by clearance from above were prevented
by rock slides and continuous bad weather, and by the end of January it was
still not possible to forecast with any degree of certainty the opening of the
through line from Pisa to Florence.
On 1st February, 1945, railheads were working at Montecatini on line 218
and Forli on line 86. Arezzo on line 65 was also still in use.
Prato-Bologna line was proceeding according to plan against a completion
date of 15th May to railhead at Grizzana, the most forward station then in
The Fifth Army badly needed a railhead at Florence before any
offensive could begin on the Bologna front.
to open the Serraville tunnel was obvious. The situation was therefore reviewed,
and it was decided to open line 219, Pisa-Empoli-Florence, and to give up any
hope of a quick solution to the repair of Serraville tunnel.
The task of opening
route 219 was allotted to American units.
Meanwhile, the front was completely static.
The British Group on the
Pisa-Florence section moved to the Ancona-Ortona section of line 86 to hasten
progress on repairs already started by civilian contractors.
Group and the Indian Group started to double the line 86 from Ancona to
These plans were designed to furnish the maximum possible rail service
to both Fifth and Eighth Armies at the start of the spring campaign. Line
219 was opened very rapidly, and rail connections were established from Pisa
to Fifth Army railhead at Florence and Prato station on 1st April. The Ancona
to Forli doubling was completed by 10th April.
Plans were formulated in March, 1945, to cover the anticipated capture of
the whole of northern Italy within a few weeks of the opening of the offensive.
They aimed firstly at the completion of the two lines 65 and 86 into Bologna,
as soon as possible after Bologna was captured.
Following this, an endeavour
was to be made to provide a skeleton rail service to the whole of Northern
When the break-through and the German surrender occurred, these
plans were put into operation.
One British Group and the South African
Group pressed on to complete lines 86 and 65 into Bologna.
units moved forward to take over repairs of the Bologna-Verona-Brenner
line and the second British Group moved into north-west Italy.
WO 277/2
wO 27 7/2
