repaired craft, including large flats and barges with a capacity of some 12,000
In April, 1945, deliveries of prefabricated parts from India were stopped,
and in May, following the capture of Rangoon, the craft erection site at Kalewa
began to close down, the units and stores being transferred to Alon, Myingyan
and Rangoon. The output of Mandalay dockyard was stepped up for the
repair of salvaged craft, and by June this had reached a figure three times that
of the pre-war capacity.
The Chindwin L. of C. became of decreasing impor-
tance as the supply route from Rangoon was opened up, and was finally closed
down in December, 1945.
Arakan, 1945
The third Arakan campaign opened after the monsoon in 1944, and Maung-
daw and Buthidaung were recaptured at the end of November.
I.W.T. sup-
ported the advance down the Mayu and Kaledan rivers which culminated in the
capture of Akyab at the beginning of January, 1945.
Ramree Island was occu-
pied on 21st January, and the port of Kyaukpyu was brought into use as a base
for the supply and maintenance of forces engaged on the landings on the coast.
ending with the capture of Taungup on 13th March.
Following the Japanese
defeat in Arakan, as many units as possible were withdrawn for use at Rangoon.
but the onset of the monsoon prevented the total withdrawal of all forces
engaged in Arakan and a number of I.W.T. units had to be retained for
their maintenance.
After the fall of Rangoon at the beginning of May, units
and stores were moved by sea to Rangoon as and when they could be spared,
but the last Tn. unit did not leave Arakan until early 1946.
Rangoon, May, 1945
On the re-occupation of Rangoon in May, 1945, the port was found to be
in a bad state from damage and neglect.
The deep water berth at Ahlone was
undamaged, but of the six at Sule Pagoda only threé were usable, and one of
these was damaged.
At Brooking Street both berths were obstructed by sunken
craft, although the quays themselves were intact. All cranes had been destroyed,
and as the Japanese had not carried out any dredging during their occupation
most of the berths were badly silted up.
Only six pontoon lighterage jetties
were found afloat, and these were all in a bad state of repair; all the fixed jetties
Development of the port was planned to produce the maximum capacity in
the shortest time with the very limited resources available.
There was a great
shortage of tools and plant throughout the period of military administration.
First priority was given to Ahlone wharf and to clearing debris from the Sule
Pagoda wharves so that four berths could be used.
At the same time, all
available resources were used on the salvage and repair of lighterage jetties.
By the end of June five deep water berths were in use and twenty-five lighter
berths had been built or reconstructed.
A port repair ship arrived in June and
began repair of moorings, while work was started on the construction of two
floating deep water berths at Brooking Street. These were built of P.C. pontoon
equipment with Bailey Bridge approaches, and were completed before August.
Similar berths were also constructed at Barr Street.
A Port Commandant, who was specially charged with executive responsi-
bility for port construction in addition to his normal tasks, arrived in Rangoo
very shortly after its capture on 2nd May, 1945. The usual Port Executive Com
mittee system for inter-service and inter-departmental working was applied.
and meetings later took place weekly.
tally, the Committee met almost every day; but this was found to be excessiva
overlap with matters which should properly have been dealt with by the Por
Too frequent meetings tended to cause
Working Committee.
The working of the port was progressively handed over
to the civil authorities during the period October to December, 1945. and with
elect from Ist January, 1946, the Port Commissioners assumed full control
and began to function once more on a commercial basis.
Assistance from
Transportation units was still, however, needed after this date, and all units were
not finally withdrawn until October, 1946.
Irrawaddy Services, 1945
For the first two months after the capture of Rangoon, in May, 1945, the •
main I.W.T. effort in the south of Burma was concentrated on lighterage in the
port of Rangoon and on rehabilitation of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company's
dockyard at Dalla (Rangoon).
During July a small tonnage, mainly of petrol
and Engineer stores, was carried from Rangoon to Pegu in country boats towed
by I.W.T. tugs, but this service was suspended in August owing to the fall in
the river level. A weekly service for passengers, carrying also 150 tons of
cargo at a time, was started in July from Rangoon to Bassein, and a number
of craft was provided for operational use in the Delta area and on the river
Sittang for police and administrative patrols. The demand for launches was
far in excess of supply, and an intensive drive was carried out to locate and
requisition motor launches known to be operating in the Delta area.
these were found, however, to be in a bad state of repair and continually broke
Owing to the shortage of powered craft it was possible to run only an
irregular up-river service on the Irrawaddy during May and June, but the
arrival of a L.S.D. (landing ship, dock) with steamers, tugs and launches at
the beginning of July, followed by two further trips by the same vessel, made
it possible to start a regular service from Prome to Myingyan. Later this
service was extended from Mandalay to Bhamo.
was over, a programme for bringing in craft from India by tow or under their
own power was put into effect.
The total number of craft to be provided by
the military authorities for military and civil needs in Burma was agreed with
the Burma Government in September, 1945, but additions had to be made in
the early months of 1946 owing to the needs of the rice export programme.
During the period from August to December, 1945, services on the Irrawaddy
and in the Delta were continually being expanded, and additional demands were
made on harbour lighterage for rice export.
The main difficulty during this
period was to find suficiagt cres to man the craft and dockyard facilities to
keep them in repair.
Many of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company's dockyard
employees soon peturn Many of the i NO civilians were employed at Dalla
within 6 or 8 weeks of the capture of Rangoon.
The dockyard was fully
engaged an maintenanes and on the reconditioning of salvaged craft. and a
second dockyard aenance and ou the also had to be brought into use.
craft which had been doing heavy duty in the hands of inexperienced crews
were breakind down in increa ced crews bers, and wooden hulls were suffering
WO 277/21:
27
WO 27 7/26
