(c) the operation of railway traffic in yards and depots handling British
traffic only, and later of main line traffic between ports and depots
up to and including Rennes.
On the German invasion of Holland and Belgium on 10th May,
pre-arranged plan for the advance of the B.E.F. to the line of the River Dyle
was put into operation.
Representatives of the Director General of Trans-
portation joined the Anglo-Franco-Belgian Railway Commission at Brussels
and the Headquarters of the Belgian Railway Group at Mons: a railway
operating company moved up to Ath in Belgium in readiness to take action
should the Belgian civil railway administration fail to function, and a railway
construction company was concentrated at Lille.
On 17th May Rear G.H.Q. moved from Arras to Boulogne.
from the Base Areas had been cut by the German advance from Amiens to
Abbeville, and on 19th May D.G. Tn. was instructed to organize the ports of
Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk for the import of supplies, ammunition and
Cut off as he was from his docks troops, the only personnel he had
available for this purpose were his Headquarters staff; they were accordingly
distributed between the three ports which continued to work until rendered
untenable by German artillery fire.
Meanwhile, on the old lines of communication, efforts were made to push up
supplies and ammunition in the expectation or hope that the French would
The gap was, however, never closed and nothing further could
Certain railway bridges were prematurely destroyed on the Charleval-
Serqueux line, north of the Seine, and had to be repaired by railway construc-
tion troops, but there was little other transportation activity in this zone until
the final evacuation, apart from repairs to bomb damage on railway tracks.
From the transportation point of view, the outstanding feature of the active
operations was the complete blocking of railway traffic, both in Belgium and in
France west of the Somme, caused by attempting to evacuate an excessive
number of engines and wagons to keep them out of enemy hands.
the Germans bombed stations, junctions and marshalling yards, the obstruction
caused by evacuated rolling stock was by far the most potent cause of delay to
traffic.
The lesson is that it is essential, at a very early stage in a retreat, to
decide how many locomotives and wagons are needed for use in the rear, and to
dispose of the remainder, preferably by concentrating them on running lines
no longer required for traffic and rendering them unfit for service.
More detailed accounts of the part played in this campaign by the diflerent
branches of the Transportation Service are given in succeeding sections of this
chapter.
SECTION 2-HEADQUARTERS-TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
The original Headquarters of the Transportation Service of the British
Expeditionary Force consisted of the Director General of Transportation, with
a small staff responsible for policy and finance, and with subordinate Directors
of Docks and Railways responsible for executive control in their respective
spheres.
A Directorate of Inland Water Transport was also provided for in
the establishment but was not set up until later.
D.G.Tn. was further respon-
sible for the technical work and for the Royal Engineer personnel of Movemen
Control, a responsibility which in subsequent campaigns was assumed by the
Q(M) Staff.
40
WO 277/21
27
NO 27 7/26
28
In the initial stages this comparatively small and compact organization
was adequate, but by the end of 1939 the load on the railway construction and
stores branches resulting from the depot construction programmes, the calls
for inland water transport to relieve the strain on the railways, and the variety
and complexity of financial relations with the French railways and others, led
to a considerable expansion and reorganization.
In January and February, 1940, therefore, a Directorate of Transportation
Construction was created, and was responsible for all new works on railways
and in docks; the Directorate of Inland Water Transport, previously authorized
but held in abeyance, was formed; a separate Transportation Stores Depart-
ment was established; and the Finance and Statistical Section of D.G.Tn.,
H.Q., was considerably strengthened.
SECTION 3.-RAILWAY OPERATING AND WORKSHOPS
As explained in the first section of this chapter, at the outset of the campaign
the French Railways were able to handle the additional traffic resulting from the
landing of the B.E.F. without British assistance; it was not until the end of
October, 1939, that it was agreed that the British should provide locomotives,
rolling stock and train crews and should gradually take over the operation of
traffic between their base ports and depots.
Accordingly, no British railway operating or workshop units crossed to
France until December, 1939; the small amount of railway operating that was
required in the meantime was done by the Operating Section of the 8th (Regular)
Railway Construction and Operating Company.
Locomotives to be provided by the British under the October agreement
were one hundred 0-6-0 shunting engines and three hundred 2-8-0 main line
The former were to arrive by the end of January, 1940, and
the latter were then to follow at the rate of forty a month from February onwards.
Deliveries of 0-6-0 were, however, delayed, and spread over a longer period,
and it was later agreed that the 2-8-0s would not be required until June. They
never, therefore, arrived in France.
In addition, the British were to provide 10,000 covered wagons of standard
French type for the French railways pool, but production difficulties prevented
the fulfilment of this part of the agreement before the evacuation.
agreed that the repair and maintenance of British locomotives
carried out by British personnel, and that French workshops facilities should
be handed over for this purpose.
Ambulance trains in the forward area, which
were to be operated by the French, were to be maintained by British Army
By the end of November, 1939, nine 0-6-0 shunting engines were in use in
France, and were being manned by personnel from the Railway Construction
and Operating Company.
As no more personnel could be obtained from this
source, a railway operating company was called forward and arrived in France
in December, 1939. During February, 1940, the new airfield sidings in Northern
France came into use, and a second railway operating company was therefore
brought to France in March, and a third in April.
By the end of April, British
railway operating companies were working main line trains between St. Malo
and Rennes, in addition to manning all the British rail-served depots and
marshalling yards in the Nantes and Rennes Bases.
7
