of the railway was menaced when the number of trains increased.
The tele-
phone system was, therefore, reorganized by the provision of a trunk line
as control circuit to certain principal regulating stations, and by splitting the
omnibus circuit into station-to-station
ringing for the control circuit was installed at the end of 1942 when supply
The freight time-tables were found to be theoretical rather than practical.
Combined passenger and freight time-tables were introduced, providing regular
Engine working diagrams, trainmen s rosters, pooled engine
diagrams and carriage working diagrams were also introduced.
became used to dealing with the increased trfic, special type freight trains
conveying urgent or important traffic were introduced.
These trains were
allotted special reporting numbers and designations.
They were given prece-
dence over other traffic and were worked from port to port in minimum time.
To make the greatest possible use of all stock by reducing turn-round, a Central
Wagon Control was set up, working through a Divisional Wagon Control
Divisional Office.
Later, on the arrival of Movement Control in
strength, wagon allotment was taken over by them from the Wagon Control,
The principal railway yards were well designed and more than adequate
to deal with the pre-war traffic, and it had therefore been unnecessary to adopt
any form of classification or regular yard working procedure.
tion became essential to deal with increased traffic, and when introduced
effected a considerable increase in yard capacity, a reduction in engine shunting
hours and a marked improvement in the marshalling of trains.
The railway had previously been worked on the Telephone and Ticket
system, without any fixed signals, and the rules were of a very elementary
nature, though suitable for the light peace-time traffic.
Publication of a new
Rule Book as a safety precaution was considered, but in view of the difficulty
in introducing it and the illiteracy of the lower grade staff, who could not read
it anyway, it was not produced and it was decided to work on the old Rule
Book amended and amplified from time to time by Operating Movement
Operating Problems
Language difficulties were always present to add to existing complications.
In H.Q. offices and principal stations, they were fairly easily overcome by the
use of interpreters, but not so easily for British engine and train crews out
The crews could, however, telephone the Control office and use
the interpreter there.
The most serious language difficulty was in connection
with the Line Clear Tickets issued by Persian stationmasters to British train
They were written in Persian and were therefore unintelligible to the
British drivers, which was a most serious matter especially when endorsed
with, for example, a speed restriction.
This was overcome in two ways.
Firstly, rubber stamps bearing the English identification letters for the stations
concerned were issued to stations and the Line Clear Tickets were stamped
with these so that drivers could see for which sections they were issue.
Secondly, each station was issued with four coloured cards printed in both
Persian and English.
These cards were endorsed as follows:-
White-There are no restrictions and you may proceed through l
section normally to the next station.
Pink— You are receiving a Caution Order instructing you to bring your
train to a stand at the point shown on the Caution Order.
Yellow— You will cross a train at the next station and you are receiving
a Caution Order to this effect.
Orange— You are receiving a Caution Order advising you that you must
reduce speed as shown between the points indicated on the Caution
When issuing a Line Clear Ticket or Caution Order the stationmaster at the
same time showed the driver the appropriate card. The driver, when signing
for the order, noted on the stationmaster's copy what colour card he had been
shown, thus protecting himself.
In the case of the pink and orange cards the
stationmaster had to write in the kilometre at which the train was to stop or
reduce speed, but there was no difficulty in this respect as the British crews
quickly learned to read Persian numerals.
The physical features of the railway imposed severe limits on the number
of trains which could be run and it was therefore decided to increase the size
of the trains by double-heading and to introduce banking where necessary
on the more severe sections.
The Persians had not previously had any great
experience of double-heading, but they were rapidly trained by British crews.
The practice of having one engine at the head and another at the tail of a train,
with the object of avoiding excessive slipping and as a protection in case of
a train dividing, was tried and abandoned following an accident due to lack
of co-operation between the two engine crews.
To avoid serious slipping on
the steeper sections a brake-van, with sanding gear, was propelled at the head
of the train to supplement the locomotive sanding gear.
There were two outstanding operating problems— shortage of water and
injector failures.
Only in spring and early summer is water readily available
south of Teheran: from June onwards it becomes scarce, and by midsummer
it is frequently necessary to reduce traffic to allow the water sources to recuperate.
In early winter, up to mid-December, such rain and snow as falls has little
effect on the water supply owing to the freezing up of water courses.
shortage is a limiting factor for steam operation of the railway and it is doubtful
if more than eight double-headed trains could ever be worked daily except
possibly in spring.
It was for this reason the Americans decided to rely largely
on diesel power after they took over the railway in 1943.
On certain sections of the line, especially around Andimeshk, the shade
temperature reached as much as 130° F. for days on end.
locomotive water supply became heated to as much as 100° F., causing much
trouble with British locomotives fitted with the normal type of injector.
Failure of locomotives on the road from this cause assumed serious proportions,
and special injector cones were flown from the United Kingdom in order to
convert the standard injectors to hot water operation: complete hot water
injectors were also obtained from India.
One of the greatest operating difficulties was provision of adequate brake
Owing to the heavy grades between Andimeshk and Teheran, it was
necessary to have a minimum of 25 per cent, braked vehicles, while north of
Teheran, where the grades are still heavier, 45 per cent. was ned under
each case half the braked vehicles had to be power braked and under the
control of the driver.
The railway had about 2,000 goods wagons of all types,
of which 600 were fitted with power brakes and a further 300 with hand brakes.
WO 277/2
WO 27 T/2
