(e) Services would be responsible for loading,
unloading and onwards
Three days were allowed for off-loading each barge, after
which period demurrage would be charged.
During January and February, 1940, a considerable traffic in bulk petrol
was developed on the Seine from Havre to Honfleur and Rouen, and from
In addition, there were occasional shipments of bulk
petrol by coastal tanker from Donges and Brest to the Seine.
conform to the French organization under which coastal tankers were con-
trolled by a branch of the French inland water transport organization in Paris,
it was agreed with the Principal Sea Transport Officer that arrangements for
British coastal moves should be made by the Director of I.W.T. who would
keep him informed of any movements involving a sea passage.
At this time a demand also arose for barge transport to carry 600 tons of
petrol a day from Dunkirk to the Douai area to supply can-filling stations in
After various meetings with the French authorities, it was agreed that they
could not spare any bulk petrol barges suitable for canal traffic.
was therefore sent to the War Office for the supply of 12 power barges and
24 dumb barges for the distribution of petrol in the Nord canals.
before the beginning of active operations, two power barges arrived at Dunkirk,
and one power and one dumb barge at Calais, but these were never put into
Before their arrival, as a special concession, the French carried a
certain amount of petrol from Dunkirk in French barges.
The French authorities considered that they would be able for some time
to provide sufficient barges and crews for the transport of gravel, sand, timber
It was therefore envisaged that, in the early stages, only
petrol barges would have to be provided from the United Kingdom and manned
by British military personnel, but it was apparent that if the campaign continued
in Northern France and Belgium there would be a very considerable growth
Other uses of inland water transport which, in this campaign,
did not get beyond the discussion stage, were ambulance barges for the evacua-
tion of serious cases and refrigerator barges for the carriage and storage of
SECTION 7.—STORES
At the beginning of the campaign, transportation stores personnel in France
consisted of one H.Q. transportation stores group and one transportation
stores company, both units of the Supplementary Reserve, Royal Engineers.
A second company arrived at the end of March, 1940.
Initially the Commanding Officer of the Stores Group, in addition to his
normal regimental duties, was called upon to take charge of stores matters at
As the work increased it became necessary to separate these
functions; in January, 1940 therefore, a separate Stores Department was set up,
under an A.D.Tn. Stores, thus relieving the Group Commander of policy,
provision and accounting which were not unit responsibilities.
The first task was to find temporary sites for the storage of transportation
stores until permanent depots could be constructed. In the Nantes area, use
was made of the railway station at Carquefou, on a little-used branch line.
This station had a large yard which served as a stacking area, and into which it
was aust posse to can bad les or da and a ceram amount of bridging
material and plant.
tional shed built by contract to house tools and small stores.
In addition, the goods shed was taken over and an addi-
In the Rennes base area, a site was selected alongside the shunting neck
of the marshalling yard at Braye.
It was hoped that this shunting neck could
be used for initial unloading, constru fiN.C.F, were unable to agree to this,
and a newly arrived raway construction company hurriedly laid a siding
alongside the neck, using second-hand French material and borrowed French
At this Depot there was a constant race between the intake of stores and
the development of stacking ground by siding construction, with the latter
generally a bad second.
At its peak period the depot held 110 miles of
permanent way material, and a large stock of bridging plant, water supply
stores and spares.
Tentage was used initially for small stores and tools, but
later store sheds were built by R.E. Works Department and by the Tn. Stores
A second section of the Rennes Base Depot was laid out at St. Jacques, a
few miles to the south of Braye. Profiting from experience at Braye, this sec-
tion allowed ample room for expansion, and was designed with double railway
tracks alongside each stacking area to facilitate inwards and outwards traffic
and to allow of the use of cranes when necessary.
Construction of the St.
Jacques Depot was not completed before the evacuation and a further depot at
Motteville, in the Havre Base area, was scarcely begun.
At first, the exact responsibility of the Transportation Stores Department
for the provision of stores to Transportation units was not clear. It was obvious
that all specifically railway items, such as track, should be a Transportation
An agreement was reached with the Works Department
that normally all R.E. stores and timber (excluding bridging timber) should be
drawn in bulk by Transportation Stores and issued to units as required, and
that Tn. units should not normally indent direct on R.E. Stores for these items.
The problem of Ordnance stores was not so easy, but after much discussion
it was agreed that certain "G 1098" items should be drawn in bulk by Trans-
portation Stores from Ordnance and issued to units as required.
was further clarified in March, 1940, when it was agreed that the quarterly
forecast of Ordnance stores for transportation units should be submitted by
A.D.Tn. Stores to the Transportation stores branch at the War Office who,
after checking, would pass and recommend the demands to the War Office
Ordnance provision branch.
Supplies of these stores would be sent direct by
Ordnance in the United Kingdom to Tn. stores depots overseas.
time, it was pointed out that any hastening action required would have to be
taken by A.D.Tn. Stores direct to the War Office, as the local ordnance pro-
vision section would not be in the picture.
This was agreed, as it was considered
that by submitting three-monthly demands direct to the War Office much time
would be saved, and that it would give the War Office Transportation Director-
ate an opportunity to keep a check on demands from various theatres of war.
Certain minor stores and special items of French manufacture were purchased
Some difficulties were, however, experienced when the bills for these
purchases came up for payment.
Coal for locomotives was received in bulk and handled at the ports by civil
contractors with grab cranes, and stored in various locomotive depots and
Just before the evacuation, a big contract was in hand for the discharge
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7/26
28
