CHAPTER IX
INDIA BASE AND CEYLON
SECTION 1.—THE INDIAN TRANSPORTATION SERVICE
Development
The Transportation Service, as it developed in India during the war, consisted
of Tn. troops of various types, controlled by a Directorate at G.H.O.
Service was responsible for planning the development of docks, railways and
inland water transport facilities required for military purposes; for the con-
struction and operation of these facilities, either independently or to assist the
ment demands; for raising and training the Tn. troops required for operations;
civil agencies; for collecting intelligence and formulating plans to meet move-
for the provision and holding of all the necessary stores and equipment; for
co-ordinating,
screening and supporting demands for stores and equipment
for civil agencies when required; and for regulating and controlling Tn. finance.
For the first two years of the war no Transportation Directorate existed at
Army Headquarters, India, although a start was made by the Engineer-in-
Chief's Branch in 1940 with the raising of a few Tn. units for possible use in
Persia and Iraq.
But the development of the war in the Middle East and the
German advance into Russia necessitated the formation of much larger numbers
of Tn. units of all types, and at the same time it became evident that, since
India was initially responsible for the operations in Iraq and Persia, a Tn.
Directorate was necessary at Army Headquarters (later to become a G.H.Q.
India).
This Directorate was formed in May, 1941, primarily to plan and
raise units for Iraq and the Middle East and to provide Tn. stores for these
tneattes.
Fall of Singapore and Evacuation of Burma
In December, 1941, the whole aspect was changed by the sudden entry of
Japan into the war, followed early in 1942 by the fall of Singapore and the
evacuation of Burma.
India, consequently, from being mainly a training ground
for the Indian Army and a base for Middle East and Iraq, became within the
space of a few weeks an actual theatre of war with the enemy on her frontiers.
During 1942 India was on the defensive, but planning for the offensive to come
was started at once, and throughout 1943 and 1944 the main plan was to prepare
India as a base from which Allied forces could launch an offensive.
This new
role tos Indis was further accentuated by the successes in North Africa, the
rotation of the surthed rae Command (PA. (P.A.L.C.), and the Soviet successes
in South Russia, all of which reduced India's responsibilities to the west.
Civil Organization
o here and den tie te in alay more on a cong it.
178
wer
WO 277,
controlling body.
The Railway Board exercised general control with regard
to policy,
characteristics.
but individual railways worked as separate entities and had many
The ports of India, with three exceptions, were
controlled by individual Port Trusts and were not state-owned. The exceptions
were the ports of Chittagong, Vizagapatam and Cochin, where there was dions
State control by the War Transport Department.
The War Transport Depart-
ment and the Railway Department each had one Member of Council, but there
was not in India any authority to co-ordinate all forms of transport. Inland
water transport was concentrated mainly on the rivers Ganges and Brahma-
putra and their tributaries, and was maintained entirely by civil firms.
Until
1942, there was no Government control over these firms, but in that year
the War Transport Department assumed a certain amount of control, and in
1944, following the general reorganization of the Assam L. of C., this control
passed to the War Department.
During 1944, Vizagapatam was transferred to the War Department, and
it was then worked as a military port under a port commandant.
This course
was taken in view of the inability of the civil organization to find labour to
man the port for the additional operational load to be placed upon it.
With the exception, therefore, of the river steamer services and the port of
Vizagapatam, responsibility for the operation of Transportation facilities in
India remained entirely with the civil organizations.
Transportation Directorate
As explained above, the Transportation Directorate was not formed until
nearly two years after the beginning of the war, and this late start proved a
constant handicap.
At the time the Directorate was formed India's commit-
ments were solely those of a base for the Middle East and Iraq, and few, if any,
problems of transportation had at that time arisen in India itself.
Conse-
quently, the Directorate was small and limited in its scope.
From the end of
1941 onwards, however, its task greatly increased and successive increases in
establishment were necessary.
The major difficulties were the vastness of the
area coupled with lack of efficient communications.
To overcome these
difficulties, it was necessary to create outlying sub-directorates at Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay and in Assam.
These sub-directorates carried out the
executive functions of the G.H.Q. Directorate in their own areas, in direct
contact with the civil agencies and with the armies and commands concerned.
They were made responsible for the direct control of Tn. units working in their
areas
At G.H.Q. considerable difficulty was experienced from the outset in relating
the functions of the Transportation Directorate to those of the Railway Board
and War Transport Department.
The civil organizations were based on a
system of complete decentralization, whereas the Army organization required
centralization.
The lack of a body equivalent to the British Ministry of War
Transport was badly felt.
One of the main difficulties was the planning of
A sub-section of the
railway developments required for military purposes.
In. Directorate was created in 1943 and attached to the Railway Board office
for the special purasse of planning these developments.
With regard to ports, in which considerable development work was necessary,
direct contact was made with the respective Port Trusts, and dealings with the
179
