American shop battalion: the metre gauge line south of Ouled Rahmoun was
also taken over, the British detachment of one oficer and 60 men being
replaced by a whole operating battalion.
This lavish use of American resources
was an eye-opener for the British, and a foretaste of things to come.
By February the peak of work possible with the British operating troops
available had been reached; all available reinforcements had been posted to
units and tradesman not required for work at their trades were being used as
Despite all efforts the shortage of spare parts was causing
a gradual reduction in the number of locomotives available for service, even
though American engines had started to arrive in small numbers.
the average number of trains worked east of Algiers fell to six daily.
As more American troops atrived the British operating troops were gradually
concentrated behind the First Army, and at the end of March were responsible
only for the main line east of Souk Ahras as well as the Bone-La Calle line and
Twenty-eight standard gauge and six metre gauge American
engines had arrived by the end of the month.
These, together with the large
increase in military personnel, enabled a better service to be worked, particu-
larly on the Philippeville-Constantine-Ouled Rahmoun route which had become
important as a line of communication for the American II Corps. The
Bone-La Calle line continued to be of value as a source of relief for road
transport, and, though both permanent way and locomotives were decrepit, a
considerable volume of traffic was operated under exceptionally difficult con-
At the beginning of April preparations were made for the final battles of
The month was one of intensive railway traffic east of Souk Ahras,
with a continual urge to move the maximum tonnage and to deliver it as far
forward as possible.
Simultaneously speedy evacuation of casualties had to
Operating conditions were not easy, one of the chief causes
of trouble being the Arab brakesmen who showed a strong inclination to disap-
pear on the sound of firearms in their vicinity.
With the greatly reduced area of responsibility it was now possible to start
building up a reserve for the operation of routes in the wake of the anticipated
advance and for controlling the Tunisian Railways (C.F.T.) when captured.
The final advance started early in May and by the 12th the war in Africa
Immediately after the capture of Tunis on 8th May, contact was
made with the Director and principal officers of the C.F.T. who displayed
unexpected energy and enthusiasm, and in a very short time satisfactory arrange-
ments were made for re-opening rail traffic.
The first train entered Tunis on
the 13th where it was greeted with jubilation by a large crowd.
opening of the line to Tunis was due to the surprisingly small extent of deliberate
On the other hand, telephone lines, water towers, station buildings
etc., had been heavily damaged by shell fire and, till they could be repaired, rail-
way operating was executed under difficulties and many ingenious improvisa-
Throughout the campaign the Railway Workshop Company and two Railway
Mobile Workshops had been fully employed on repairing and maintaining
locomotives, the former at Algiers and Sidi Mahbrouk, and the latter at Bone
and in the forward areas.
Operating troops had had the difficult, and often
irritating, task of assisting and urging the civilian railways to work their lines
to the best advantage for military purposes.
Military and civilian requirements
had often conflicted, and it was only after much importunity, long negotiation
108
and the exercise of unceasing tact that many of the military needs were met.
The operating troops had good reason to feel that, despite all obstacles, they
had made a valuable contribution to the successful outcome of the campaign.
The Campaign in Sicily
The units taking part in this campaign were:—
One Railway Operating Group Headquarters.
Two Railway Operating Companies.
One Railway Workshops Company (detachment).
The staff of D.D.Tn. included a small railway operating element headed by an
A.D.Tn. who was also commander of the Operating Group.
The campaign was planned on the pessimistic assumption that there would
be no railway traffic until at least 30 days after the assault.
as of little consequence since it would be possible to maintain the Army by road
over the comparatively short distances involved.
For this reason little thought
was given to the siting of installations in relation to railways, with the result
that when the railway system was captured virtually intact it was found that
many depots were badly sited from the point of view of rail service.
The campaign started on 10th July, and even before the first of the operating
troops arrived on the 15th, the Italians had started to operate trains in the
The first train ran from Pacchino to Syracuse on the 15th
and on the following day the narrow gauge line Syracuse-Palazzolo was opened.
Following the arrival of operating personnel, a military control was established
at Syracuse and the locomotive depot was put under military supervision.
Though there were no senior railway officials at Syracuse the junior grades were
soon organized and a regular railway service was opened. At first, the chief
difficulty was lack of communications and signal equipment, and until tele-
phones could be re-installed to provide a telephone and ticket system newly
opened routes were operated by pilot working. By the 22nd, a railhead for
30 Corps had been opened at Scordia, and as operations progressed railhead
was advanced successively to Bicocoa, Motta and finally to Catania at the
end of August, giving an overall route mileage of 106 miles.
main lines of communication increased steadily and early in August reached
seven trains daily, with a scheduled 1,500 tons. On the Picchino-Syracuse
section, however, with the cessation of beach landings, the traffic declined and
by the end of August ceased altogether.
In the absence of rail served depots there was serious delay at loading and
unloading points whenever road transport was short.
This might have had
serious consequences but for the abundance of locomotives and rolling stock
which allowed of trains being held under load and of the despatch of specials at
By the end of August 90 main line and 15. shunting engines and
900 wagons were in British hands, and though many of these were in bad repair
they were more than enough to operate the maximum traffic that could be
cleared by road.
The outstanding feature of this campaign was the willing co-operation of
the Italian railwaymen even before the Italian surrender.
sary to use the threat of force which many had looked forward to as a welcome
change after the prolonged negotiations of Africa.
WO 277/2
WO27 7/2
