Naples was in a very badly damaged condition when captured and work
was started on the repair of selected berths.
Rehabilitation of Naples was
soon taken over by the Americans, who were in a position to deploy much
larger engineering resources on the work.
The British units, however, con-
tinued to work on the tasks which they had begun, and on completion were
withdrawn from the port.
As they were due to return to the United Kingdom
shortly for the Normandy landings, they were not transferred to the east coast
but were employed on railway repair, and provided a detachment for the Anzio
landing, before leaving Italy.
On the establishment of centralized administrative
control at Naples it
became urgent to decide whether port engineering should continue, as on the
west coast, to be a Transportation responsibility or, in accordance with Middle
East practice already
followed in Sicily and Calabria, should be under the
Chief Engineer.
A review of the situation disclosed that the work envisaged
would be far beyond the resources at the disposal of Transportation and it
was therefore ruled that port engineering would be directed by the Chief
Engineer, the D.Tn. remaining responsible for specifying Tn. requirements
and for technical advice.
inns arrangement continued until the end of the
campaign and operated with complete satisfaction to all concerned.
With the
object of increasing the capacity of the four principal Heel ports to 15,000
tons daily, work was started on a number of improvements including the
construction of new rail-served lighter quays at Taranto,
Brindisi and Bari
and the completion of partially constructed deep water berths at Bari and
Taranto.
These tasks did not call for a profound knowledge of port engineering
or for specialized skill in execution, but they were sufficient to keep all P.C.
and R. and various other engineer units fully employed for some months.
Early in 1944 the main breakwater at Bari was breached by a storm, probably
as the result of damage already sustained when an ammunition ship had
exploded during an air raid on the harbour.
Although the breach was only
a small one it admitted a surprisingly large swell which interfered seriously with
ship discharge.
Emergency repairs were effected by sinking two ships opposite
the breach, but permanent repairs proved to be difficult and were not completed
until the end of the summer.
A port reconnaissance party entered Ancona on 14th July, 1944, and found
it had been extensively damaged by both allied bombing and enemy demo-
litions. All craft had been sunk, quay walls had been badly damaged and in
Large craters
and heaps of rubble were widespread. All available plant was applied to the
task of clearance and the port was soon able to handle the planned tonnages.
at Brindisi and Manfredonia, moved to Ancona, where it worked at first on
salvage and clearance of underwater obstructions and later on repairs to craft.
As the advance continued repairs were carried out, in conjunction with the
Royal Navy, at the ports of Senegallia, Pesaro and Ravenna.
At Ravenna
much unnecessary work was undertaken, for owing to unexpected developments
this port was not needed for military traffic.
Following the cessation of hos-
tilities in May, 1945, the port construction units, including a South African
Harbour Construction Company which had arrived early in 1944, were dispersed
over the ports of North Italy; but there had been few serious demolitions and
the work consisted mainly of the clearance of debris resulting from Allied
130
SECTION 6.-STORES
The North African Campaign
Company.
The Order of Battle of First Army included one Transportation Stores
At Directorate H.Q., 'Stores" was the responsibility of the Tn. 2
branch, which consisted of one lieutenant-colonel, one major, two captains and
eight other ranks.
This seemed an adequate establishment to handle stores for
the Tn. units participating in the expedition, but there was much apprehension
that it would be insufficient to deal with requirements of the civilian agencies
which, according to all indications, would have to be supplied from military
sources.
Planning began in August, 1942, in London.
Before appreciable progress
could be made decisions had to be reached on the following vital problems:-
(a) What stores would be needed during the first 90 days, both for current
use and for building up reserves?
(b) At what rate should these stores be shipped?
(c) At what ports should consignments be delivered?
With the guidance of previous experience and the advice of technical branches
it was not very difficult, though it was a long and tedious task, to prepare the
lists of stores required for military use.
A good deal of information was avail-
able concerning critical shortages on the civilian systems of North Africa and,
as far as practicable, provision was made to cover initial requirements for
civil use.
The decision about the rate of shipment was influenced by the prob-
able rate of consumption in the theatre, the capacity of the Stores Company to
receive and handle stocks, and the acceptance, or refusal, of bids for shipping
space.
The choice of ports depended on so many unknown factors that any
guess was almost sure to prove wrong.
However, relying on the best infor-
mation available, it was decided to ship two-thirds of the consignments to
Algiers and one-third to Bone.
In the event, this choice proved to be wrong,
for, as the situation actually developed, the best distribution would have been
one-third to Algiers and two-thirds to Bone, except locomotive coal, most of
which should have gone to Philippeville.
A salient feature of planning was the rigidity of shipping programmes for
months ahead, leaving little latitude for unforeseen eventualities.
By the date
of embarkation for the assault, stores had been ordered and shipping space
had been allotted for the first 90 days of the campaign, which meant that any
serious omissions could not be rectified in the theatre until nearly 4 months
after the landing, though minor adjustments could probably be made through
departmental channels.
On the other hand, certain heavy stores were scheduled
to be sent in the later convoys so that, if no need for them developed after the
landing (as proved to be the case), shipment could be cancelled.
On arrival at Algiers the most urgent tasks were the selection of sites for
the two transportation stores depots, the establishment of contact with the
Chemins de Fer Algériens (C.F.A.) to ascertain their stores position, and the
acquisition of whatever useful stores were available locally.
The choice of
sites for depots fell on Oued Omar (near Algiers) and Guelma (south of Bone).
Both of these were close to the main line, were suitable for development, and
lay adjacent to an existing siding where rail deliveries could be accepted pending
new construction inside the depots.
Guelma, however, although well located
131
W027
7/2
WO 27 7/2
2
