in their workshops for training in mechanical trades.
Also an 11-mile section
of their railway between Ashby Junction and Chellaston East Junction, carrying
a heavy colliery traffic, was taken over and named the Melbourne Military
This provided an excellent instrument for practical training in
railway operating and maintenance.
A site on this branch at Kings Newton
was used for the construction of a Transportation Stores Depot, and an adjoining
site was developed into a Bridging School.
The establishments of the two Training Centres were designed and later
adjusted so that between them they could in theory produce the necessary flow
of trained tradesmen of nearly all types. No. 2 Centre undertook all Movement
Control training, which at that time was still a Transportation responsibility,
and also the bulk of the training in mechanical trades for which it had better
In addition, each Centre had a Military Training
Battalion for the training of recruits on first arrival; these battalions were under
the supervision of the Director of Military Training and not of the Director
formation of units was mainly carried
Longmoor, but Derby formed Movement Control Groups and a few other
At the peak period of their joint existence, in the spring of 1940, the
two Centres each catered for an intake of 800 men a month, and their combined
establishments, including trainees and unit-forming battalions, amounted to
nearly 15,000 all ranks.
By the summer of 1941 facilities for training at Longmoor had been improved
and extended, and at the same time the manpower position was such that the
intake allotted to Transportation was insufficient to justify the retention of a
second large Training Centre.
No. 2 Centre was therefore disbanded in July,
1941, but part of its accommodation at Weston-on-Trent, the Melbourne
Military Railway and the Railway Bridging School were retained and taken over
by a newly constituted Collective Training Wing of the Longmoor Training
Centre and used for the collective training of railway operating, construction
and bridging units.
This Wing closed down at Weston Camp in December,
1944, and joined the parent Centre at Longmoor.
On the closing down of No. 2 Railway Training Centre in 1941 the Director
of Transportation ceased to be responsible for the training of Movement Control
personnel, which was taken over by a training unit under the direct supervision
of the Director of Movements at the War Office.
This unit was located at
Weaver's Down Camp, Longmoor, and maintained close contact with the
Railway Training Centre, using the facilities provided by the Longmoor Military
Railway for training purposes.
The mileage of the Longmoor Military Railway increased greatly during
the war with the creation and expansion of No. 1 Transportation Stores Depor
and with new track laid for the training of operating and construction troops,
and eventually reached a total of 71 miles, while the workshops were consider-
ably enlarged and were equipped with new machines.
Until the end of 1942 the training of stevedores and docks crane drivers was
carried out, not altogether satisfactorily, with a "mock up" of a ship's hold
At the beginning of 1943 it was decided to send these trades
for training to H.Q. 6 Docks Group located at Penarth Docks.
This arrange
ment continued until the mobilization and departure of the Group later in the
Year, when a Port Operating Technical Training Wing was added to the estar-
lishment of what was now the Transportation Training Centre.
took over the training organization at Penarth, but moved to Barrow-in-Furnes
in December, 1943 and again to No. 2 Military Port at Cairn Ryan in February,
1944, where it remained until the end of hostilities.
moved to Marchwood, on Southampton Water, as a part of the permanent
transportation training establishment.
Training in inland water transport trades was, of course, impossible at
Longmoor, and arrangements were made, through the Director of Military
Training, for courses in these subjects with civilian firms and organizations.
Later, as the numbers decreased, it became possible to give all necessary
training at No. 2 Military Port.
In addition to the training in railway bridging given to British units and
personnel at the Collective Training Wing, a number of American officers and
enlisted men were trained as instructors for the American Railway Bridging
School which was set up close to Weston Camp.
types of bridging equipment, and close contact existed between the two schools.
An American Transportation Corps railway shop battalion was for a time
stationed near Longmoor and a second at Weston-on-Trent, and the most
cordial relations were established with these units.
The two Transportation Stores Depots at Longmoor and Kings Newton
not only provided facilities for the technical training of storemen and other
tradesmen, but their heavy in and out and internal traffic provided excellent
training for railway operating tradesmen.
Military and field works training was carried out at Longmoor, and during
the life of No. 2 Centre at Derby also, by military training battalions.
introduction of Primary Training Centres in 1942, the Longmoor Military
Training Battalion assumed the status of a Corps training unit, and an eight
weeks' course was instituted, based on the War Office syllabus.
courses for N.C.O.s and cadre classes for potential officers and N.C.O.s were
Between July, 1941, and March, 1944, 26 Transportation units sent "Special
Sections," consisting of an officer and 15 men, for a 10 weeks' course which
aimed at providing each unit with a nucleus of highly trained, physically hardened
personnel to improve the fighting efficiency of the unit as a whole.
Special Sections were represented in the raid on St. Nazaire and in the Malta
Through the war Longmoor also functioned as the depot for all Transpor-
tation troops and the great majority of units was formed there, including 3
Regular, 12 Supplementary Reserve, and 111 other units.
1943 more than 20,000 men passed through the Centre and its average daily
ration strength was in the neighbourhood of 10,000.
The organization of the Centre before the war and at the peak of its expansion
in May, 1943 is shown in the Appendix to this chapter (page 28).
27
WO 277/26
28
