pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPIEATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PArA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(ini) Commanders of detachments of a unit:
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up
A.F. C.2118.
daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.--In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued.
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and descripfion of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metcorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ParA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by, the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iri) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the
fficer i/c
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information or ord
the unit concerned.
aenes
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Instructious regarding Wai
ummarie
ontained 1
Diaries. Res.
In lie.
War
Marles Wiil 06
enclosed in
this
BO
avarlable.
summaries.
the
cover
prepared in manuscrint
Month and Year. August. 7944+
Place
Date
Hour
Field
1 Aug 0630
0830
1000
2 AuE 0630
0830
WANT
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Informatio
Army Form C. 21is.
Unitrast. Riding Yeomanty.
Commanding UficerIt•Col.T.C.WIILTAMSON,DSQ.
References to IF
ndices
3 Aug 0630
08.30
1 Aug: 0630
0830
0900
5 AUg
0630
00.30
6 Aug 0730
0915
21,30
Reveille.
San parades.
One tank from ! A' Son was sent to the Canadians at VILIONS LES BUISSONS.
News was received that the regiment was to be equipped with Sherman Is
and Ics and would possibly be ready to go into action by the 10th or 13th
of the month.
One Sherman Mk. I was received into RHQ Troop.
Reveille.
San Parades®
The remainder of the regtl Sherman tanks together with the 6 AA Crusader
tanks were sent to 256 Army Delivery Sqn at SULLY.
2 Sherman Vos were
WAR DIARIES SECTION
sent to 8 Corps Delivery Son.
.5 Sherman Is were received and were sent.
-No
to RIQ
Tp 1.
B Sgn 1. C Sqn l. and A Sqn 2.
2 Sherman Ics were received
and were
sent to t3t and fol Sgns.
D & M Instruction classes were
1 OCT 1944
started under San arrangements.
Ite LeA. Wilson was appointed RHQ Ip Id
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
and Uto WoJ.M. CROCKHR was appointed to Recce Ip.
Reveille
Sgh paradese
Wireless and D& M Courses continued together with normal
routine
and recreation.
Reveille
San Parades.
The C.O, held a conference for Sqn Idrs on the subject of the Ard Regt
in
the role of Advanced Guard.
Appendix A is a sumary of the principles APPENDIX A ATTACHED,
di soussed and agreed upon.
Reveille
Son parades. Normal routine and recreation.
Reveille
Son parades. Normal routine and recreation.
The Padre held a service for all ranks in the regtl area.
W1.07724.998 2.000,.000 8/90 W.d.DO
51/5375

