400 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
was more of everything, from food and supplies to armaments and air support.
Sergeant Jack Shepherd of the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment described
France as "a totally different world" from Italy. "The most memorable [thing] was the
mile after mile of wrecked German transport bumper to bumper, caught by rocket
firing typhoon planes wed only heard about. It felt good; perhaps this would all
come to an end after all!"100 It would, but not without further fighting.
The two Canadian corps were to liberate the northern Netherlands and occupy
parts of Germany, where about 100,000 enemy troops remained. They had to move
fast. The Dutch were walking skeletons. Their meagre rations had been cut repeatedly
in the last year of the war by the Nazi occupiers, and now most were wasting away on
less than 500 calories a day. "I had never seen anything that moved me like the hun-
ger I saw in Holland," observed one shaken Canadian infantryman. 101 Many of the
Dutch were forced to eat flower bulbs
to survive. The elderly had begun to
perish, and soon the young would fol-
low. Gunner J.P. Brady, a Métis soldier
from Wetaskiwin, Alberta, recounted
saving his rations for the small chil-
dren, "some of them so hungry they
actually howl like little wolf whelps,
while others whine weakly from star-
vation."102 The Allies were now staving
off a humanitarian
disaster.
Trucks
that could be carrying
shells were
loaded with wheat; bombers dropped
supplies rather than high explosives.
Soldiers at the front chose to go
hungry, giving away their food to the
grateful civilians who greeted them
The liberation of the Netherlands by the
Canadians was a desperate race against time as
the Dutch people were on the verge of starvation.
not only as liberators but as saviours.
The Canadians pushed aside their
natural instincts for self-preservation
BATTERING GERMANY
401
and crashed forward against enemy positions to save the starving Dutch. Most of the
Germans surrendered with little bloodshed, and soon the Dutch were liberated in
Eden, Arnhem, and Apeldoorn. But there were also ugly cases such as the battle at
Groningen on April 15. With Dutch SS troops dug into the sixth largest city in the
Netherlands, a two-brigade Canadian assault, with the Essex Scottish and the Royal
Hamilton Light Infantry in the lead, broke the enemy, but it cost 209 Canadian cas-
waltes. Harry Fox, one observer of the resistance, believed that the "Dutch SS troops
knew there was no future for them but death. It was the very young ones, sixteen or
senteen years old, that were the most fanatical, however, and they would die before
Lieutenant-General Charles Foulkes, commander of I Canadian Corps, met with
German representatives to open up starving Dutch towns to food deliveries and to
crablish an agreed-upon temporary truce, but it was a slow process, and while much
of the fighting had ended by April 19, there was no ceasefire until the 28th. The
deten enemy, far from Berlin, did not have a lot fight left in him and tended to fol-
low the unofficial ceasefire from mid-month onward, but there remained fierce
dashes, such as Major-General Bert Hoffmeister's 5th Armoured Division's attack on
the Dutch port of Delfijl.
To liberate elzil, Hoffmeister began a series of probing skirmishes on April 21,
win more intense ones set in motion four days later. The Canadians were trying not
to use their artillery, in order to avoid killing Dutch civilians. but the result was akin
no ching with one hand tied behind their back. The Perth and Irish regiments, along
wich he Westminsters and British Columbia Dragoons, slowly reduced the German-
held perimeter defence. The most ferocious part of the battle commenced on April 28
and age for three days. Platoon commander Lieutenant Reg Roy of the Cape Breton
Highlanders penned in his diary. "It was horrible to see our fellows cut up so.... I
hope to ever se another battle like it. It was murder. "04 Hoffmeister's men took
4148 prisoners at the cost of 230 killed and wounded. The captives were added to the
First Canadian Army's total count since July 23 of more than 190,000 prisoners. 105
The lopsided victory at Delfzijl was a marvel of combined arms fighting on the part
of the Canadians, but the lives lost in the final days of the war were a testament to
the continuing sacrifice required against an enemy who refused to surrender
