322
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Wall. The multiple concrete gun bunkers were designed to repel an amphibious inva-
sion, so the German defenders had frantically been laying minefields and digging
anti-tank defences to protect against a push from the landward south or east. These
ramparts were not yet complete, but nor were they soft positions.
Crerar ordered I British Corps to liberate the coastal sector of the Le Havre pen-
insula, while Simonds's three divisions of II Canadian Corps advanced to objectives
up the coast. Simonds faced a challenge in that two of his three divisional com-
manders were new-with Harry Foster having replaced George Kitching after his
firing and Dan Spry taking over from Keller when he was wounded — and he did not
feel that the third, Foulkes, could do his job. Nor could he keep close watch over
them. The three Canadian divisions would soon be spread out over a battlefield that
ranged for more than 100 kilometres. On the far right, Foster's 4th Armoured
Division raced towards the Somme region, south of the Scheldt, covering the right
flank, while the central thrust, Spry's veteran 3rd Division, was directed towards
Boulogne and Calais. Foulkes's 2nd Division was to have its revenge by liberating
Dieppe and then moving on to Dunkirk. When the Channel ports were cleared, the
First Canadian Army would converge on the Germans in the Scheldt to open up the
approaches to Antwerp.
THE SEPULCHRE OF DIEPPE BECKONED. The disaster of August 1942 was forgotten
by no one in the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, even after the fighting in Normandy
had wiped out many of the veterans of that earlier, ill-fated raid. The advance to
Dieppe on the coast saw the Canadians pass through innumerable small towns
and hamlet. Wild cheering greeted the liberators, and many Tricolors and Union
lacks were waved. Long-hidden bortles of wine were uncorked. Songs of stilted
English were sung with gusto, including "The Maple Leaf Forever," Canadas unofi-
cial national anthem. "Occasionally a village, where the Boche makes a stand, has to
be blown to bits before we can get on,"
" shrugged a Canadian gunner, "but in general
it is lovely.'6 Jeeps, universal carriers, and even Sherman tanks soon resembled
parade floats with flowers and flags draping them. "Mothers held their children high
to catch a glimpse of the heroes from Canada" wrote Maior D.W. Grant of the
Toronto Scottish Regiment.
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
323
The celebration came to an end on September 1, as the Canadians girded them-
selves for battle. Lead reconnaissance units closed on the port, but instead of
encountering ambushes, they were greeted by more indebted crowds thronging the
roads. The German garrison troops had bugged out. It was a race against time to
cancel the Bomber Command operation that was set to flatten the defences around
Dieppe, and many French civilians in the process. In the end, the bombers were
called off with twenty minutes to spare.I8 During the celebration over the next
couple of days, the liberators were further feted, although more than a few Canadians
were uncomfortable at witnessing the rough justice that was meted out as the French
freedom fighters caught and punished collaborators. A few such traitors were hung
from lamp posts, and many more were dealt with in the shadows.
'Canadians, Dieppe is Yours," read one large sign from the grateful citizens.
On September 3, the Canadians held a ceremony to honour the memory of their
fallen comrades from August 19, 1942.
It was an opportunity to bury pain-
ful memories. General Crerar rightly
thought it was important for him to
attend, and he took the salute from
the entire division marching by in
columns. However, recently promoted
Fied Marshal Montgomery had ordered
Gretar to a crucial meeting on the
3rd at Second Army's headquarters.
Cretar replied tactfully but firmly that,
as Canadian army commander, his
duty was at Dieppe, unless the matter
was urgent. With no reply
from
Montgomery, he continued with the
cetemony. But communications were
dow, and when the field marshal-still
marting from having recently handed
command of all ground
forces to
The liberating Canadians are
greeted with celebrations.
