60 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
In this aggressive trench warfare, the 1st Canadian Division was called on to harass
the enemy, gather information, deplete his strength, and keep him focused on the
front. Intelligence patrols were small and meant to avoid contact with the enemy;
standing patrols and fighting patrols consisted of several dozen infantrymen who
ambushed or crashed the enemy lines. Prisoners were prized, and often headquarters
rewarded the fighting patrol with a bottle of whiskey if they came back with a Kraut.
The Canadians screwed up their courage for these butcher-and-bolt operations.
Badges and unit identifiers were cut from uniforms, bulky equipment was left
behind, and faces were blackened with burnt cork. The men of the dark were to
move fast and quietly, past barbed wire and metal pickets. A full moon, new snow,
or even frozen puddles around shell craters, could give away the raiders. Most nights
there was little contact, but the engagements when Germans were encountered were
bloody and costly affairs.
The survivors returned to a stiff shot of rum, while, as the Royal Canadian
Regimen's Captain Strome Galloway noted, the "unlucky ones stayed out and their
skeletons were recovered in the spring."? The spike of fear and danger made patrols
and raids unpopular with most of the soldiers. Part of the frustration with the raids
was that they were of questionable value to the front-line troops, with one Canadian
sneering that "most of the patrolling was worthless, morale destroying and wasteful
of manpower. The high command, from battalion commanders to the corps head-
quarters, thought differently. Lieutenant-Colonel Ronnie Waterman of the West
Nova Scotia Regiment even remarked candidly that "he was well aware that the
junior officers and the men hated his guts for ordering them out on nicht natrols
but there was no other way to obtain necessary information about the enemy and
their plans." 4 The view from the front was different from that of the commanders
PRIME MINISTER WILLIAM LYON MACKENZIE KING'S government was anxious to
send more Canadians to the Italian theatre of battle. During the late summer of
1943, the minister of national defence, ).. Ralston, had convinced King to approve
the transfer of I Canadian Corps headquarters and the Sth Canadian Armoured
Division to Italy. The Canadian Army in England consisted of two infantry corps
THE HITLER LINE
61
and supporting units totalling close to half a million men, but now Ottawa looked
to split them up. The prime minister had enjoyed the positive media reports of the
Canadians in the Sicily campaign, and he now hoped that Italy might also accrue
additional coverage for his government, while avoiding costly disasters like Dieppe. 15
It was not much of a foundation for a strategic approach to the war, although neither
Ralston nor King had mapped what such an approach might be—aside from setting
the guiding principle that domestic political expediency was always to trump an
overseas military strategy. King's primary motivation was to avoid casualties and
restrict commitments to avoid another conscription crisis like the one that had torn
the country apart in 1917. He was convinced that Italy would only consist of limited
warfighting, while Ralston, urged on by senior army commanders, wished the army
to forge a reputation in battle.
In direct opposition to Ralston, however, First Canadian Army Commander
General Andrew McNaughton was dead set against splitting his army. The charis-
matic, nationalist McNaughton, the face of the Canadian Army since he had led the
1st Canadian Infantry Division overseas in late 1939, oversaw the overseas army's
growth into the largest force ever fielded by Canada. Yet it was an army in waiting,
and it was broken up in 1943 when the 1st Infantry Division and 1st Canadian
Army Tank Brigade were sent to fight in Sicily. Such reckless action, McNaughton
argued, diluted the Dominion war effort, but Ralston felt he needed the short-term
objective of the Canadians fighting alongside their allies. McNaughton's fury was
redoubled in late 1943 when Ralston asked to send another armoured division and
a corps headquarters to Italy. The row permanently damaged their already shaky
relationship. With the British having lost faith in McNaughton after several failed
training exercises and his fierce objections to breaking up his army, the chief of the
imperial general staff, General Alan Brooke, conspired against the Canadian gen-
eral! The Canadian Army commander was edged out of command in late 1943,
and the 5th Canadian Armoured Division and a corps headquarters were committed
to the Italian theatre.
General Alexander did not need another operational headquarters, and
an
inexperienced one at that. He complained to London. Alexander was ignored, as
political motivations trumped military necessity, but in the end, to avoid the dangers
