314 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Italy may have been a forgotten theatre of war, during and after the fighting, but
Canadians serving there turned their sideshow status into a bleak badge of honour.
One of their popular songs was "The Ballad of the D-Day Dodgers," sung to the tune
of "Lili Marlene" and composed in direct response to a thoughtless comment by
Lady Astor (the first woman to sit as an MP in the British House of Commons), who
besmirched the reputation of all in the Mediterranean theatre by suggesting they had
dodged their duty by not fighting in Normandy.
We're the D-Day Dodgers out in Italy—
Always on the vino, always on the spree.
Eighth Army scroungers and their tanks
We live in Rome-among the Yanks.
We are the D-Day Dodgers, over here in Italy.
We landed at Salerno, a holiday with pay,
Jerry brought the band down to cheer us on our way.
Showed us the sights and gave us tea
We all sang songs, the beer was free.
We are the D-Day Dodgers, way out in Italy...
When you look round the mountains, through the mud and rain
You'll find the crosses, some which bear no name.
Heartbreak, and toil and suffering gone
The boys beneath them slumber on.
They were the D-Day Dodgers, who'll stay in Italy.
So listen all you people, over land and foam
Even though we've parted, our hearts are close to home.
When we return we hope you'll say
You did your little bit, though far away.
All of the D-Day Dodgers, way out there in Italy.
CHAPTER 12
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
On August 25, a few days after the Falaise Gap was closed and two enemy armies were
destroyed, Field Marshal Alan Brooke noted in his diary, "News of German decay on
all ronts continues to be almost unbelievable." The sense of impending victory from
Gild marshals down to privates, was electric. General Harry Crerar's army chief of
saff, Major-General C.C. Mann, recounted that "many people felt that the war might
be won in a matter of weeks."? With the Nazi economy in ruins, its cities pounded by
the bombers, and the Russians advancing in the east, Ultra intelligence based on tens
of thousands of decrypted messages suggested that the German people could not keep
on fighting into the new year. The terrible war seemed to be coming to an end.
General Bernard Montgomery remained the cocksure commander of the Allied
gound forces even though his reputation had been tarnished (at least among the
Americans) during the Normandy campaign. He would remain the senior general
for another week before Eisenhower crossed over the Channel to set up his head-
quarters Following SHAEF's pre-D-Day strategy, Montgomery ordered his Anglo-
American-Canadian armies to advance northward on a broad front, hounding the
Germans before them. The Allied formations outnumbered the Germans by a factor
cfat last to to one, with 2, 168.307 men and 49 divisions on the continent. They
sought to annihilate the feeing Germans before they could re-establish themselves in
new defensive positions to the north of the Seine River, but the Germans were run-
ning faster than the Allies could follow.
The Firt Canadian Army, on the for left of the Allied northern drive and closest to the
Chanel, was to cross the Seine and then clear the Channel ports of Le Havre, Dieppe,
