YUL
438
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
over his "unknown" status—a purgatory between life and death—and she suffered
through seventeen years of uncertainty until his body was finally discovered in 1960.
A widow at twenty-four years old, and with a young child, she never remarried.
Doug Craig treasured his grandfather's letters to his grandmother and he returned to
them time and time again. "As you go through your life you understand, even with
the three children I have, missing your grandfather is a constant reminder of war and
what happens when tragedy like that strikes. It affects lives for a long time."' The
bodies of the missing continue to be found to this day, disgorged from swamps, dug
up from farmer's fields, or discovered in heavily wooded areas. There is something
remarkably moving about Canadas dead from seventy-five years ago being given a
proper burial. But there is also something infinitely sad about loved ones having to
wait so long to know the fate of their family members.
CANADA DID NOT REPATRIATE ITS DEAD, except in the rarest of circumstances. Tens
of thousands of Canadians were left overseas, buried near to where they fell in com-
bat, and often alongside their comrades in arms from throughout the British
Commonwealth. When the battle moved on, and at the end of the war, the bodies
were disinterred from graves and gathered together in permanent Commonwealth
War Graves Commission cemeteries, first established in 1917. Battlefields in Britain,
France, Belgium, Italy, Germany, Burma, Japan, Hong Kong, and other sites contain
Canadians. These silent cities, with their headstones of carved maple leafs, are testi-
mony to the price of victory against Fascism.
The fallen are solemnly commemorated overseas, but grieving families also needed
memorials closer to home. Almost every town, village, and hamlet across Canada has
a memorial for the Great War, but the question raised in 1945 and after was whether
new memorials should be erected. " The voice of veterans, The Legionary, carried a
number of articles arguing that the Peace Tower and poppies, recognizable icons
from the Great War, must now become symbols for veterans of the two world wars.
Yet Canadians wanted to somehow mark the new war, even if there was little appetite
for buildino several thousand new stone monoliths Canadians instead embraced
functional memorials that would enrich the living and provide contemplative spaces
where they could reflect upon those who gave their lives in the war.!? Gardens,
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
439
libraries, and wooded areas were created, but also extended to the less sacred, such as
hockey arenas, symphonies, and beaches-and then crept towards the absurd in
including tennis courts and movie theatres. As early as 1946, The Legionary spoke to
a great controversy" over these new war memorials. Though some saw the monu-
ments of stone and bronze as being "outmoded," the Legion opposed suggestions
thatsporting venues and places of popular entertainment might become part of the
commemorative landscape. One editorial observed that these spaces would fail to
"inspire remembrance and reverence."18 While the debate continued, the Legion's
insistence that existing Great War memorials in the towns, villages, and cities across
the Dominion could be adapted to include those killed during the Second World
War ultimately won out, and so the names of the dead from those communities were
added to the sepulchres.
Some survivors of the war and their families felt there was a need for a new national
memorial, even as most veterans looked towards a bright future instead of dwelling
on the war's past.l' The national memorial in Ottawa, The Response, unveiled near
the Parliament Buildings by King George VI in May 1939, is so clearly a Great War
memorial, with its multiple sculptured figures in period uniforms, that a Second
World War memorial was thought to be required. There was little urgency to the
process, but periodic discussions were held throughout the 1940s and 1950s, about
what shape such a memorial would take. In 1955, for instance, The Legionary argued
that the national memorial in Ottawa did not fully embrace the sacrifice of Canadians
from the Second World War and the Korean War, and that family members of those
who died in the country's recent wars had "expressed surprise and disappointment
that the memory of their dead [had] not yet been commemorated visually by the
nation.' By early 1963, the Conservative government of John Diefenbaker appeared
ready to erect a national shrine of remembrance in Ottawa, at Nepean Point.2' But
the next year, the new Lester B. Pearson government, following through with the
seemingly safe suggestion of a memorial to be unveiled in 1967, the year marking
the country's 100th anniversary, found itself derided by letter-writing citizens who
claimed the money could be better spent on veterans in need, or that it was simply
not needed. What was the point of commemorating the last generation's war as
Canada looked to a bright future? The Legion was unwilling to vigorously defend a
