170 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The Allied air forces also played a role in suppressing German V-1 rockets, the first
of which was launched in the early hours of June 13, 1944, from Pas-de-Calais. The
inaccurate unmanned missiles contained a ton of high explosives and rained down
on London, and wherever else they landed in Britain. While the bombers saturated
identified V-1 sites, the Allied fighters were also tasked to shoot down the rockets-
known as buzzbombs or doodlebugs even though they reached speeds in excess
of 600 kilometres per hour. Aircraft that dove from a height on the missiles reddish-
orange exhausts could time their descent to blast the rockets, and many pilots took
on the challenge, with varying results. RCAF's No. 418 Squadron downed eighty-
two of the buzzbombs, and a few daredevils even used their wings to tip the rockets
of course and send them into the Channel Several thousand V-Is would be fired
over the summer, and they remained a terror weapon feared by the British civilian
population, but the RCAF and other flyers helped to reduce their numbers.
WHILE ALLIED FIGHTERS maintained air superiority against their enemy counter-
pars in the air and targeted vehicles on the ground, fighter-bombers sought out land
targets exclusively. Three fighter-bomber Typhoon squadrons arrived in mid-June:
No. 438 (City of Montreal "Wilder"). No. 439 (City of Westmount "Sabre-Toothed
Tigers"), and 440 (City of Ottawa "Beavers"), comprising RCAF's 143 Wing, part of
No. 83 Group. They were operational by mid-June and soon engaged in a tactical
support role. While the Tunhoon had been disannointing in air-to-sie camhat and
much surpassed by the Mustang or Spitfire IX, it found a new role as a form of fly-
ing arillery.
Ar seven tons and with a 24-cylinder Napier engine, the Typhoon was a monster of
an aircraft. Its screaming engine. five times as noisy as the elegant Spitfire cuited the
machine, especially as it dove from several rhousand feet, picking up searing speed
as it brought death to ground forces. There were two types of Typhoons--rocket
firing and bomb carrying. The bombers were typically armed with two 500-pound
bomb under their wings and unleashed a storm of fire from four 20mm cannons
that could hurl 760 shells per minute. The other variant was eaninondh eigh
rocketu with 60 pounds of high explosives in the warhead, as well as cannons.
Most of the Typhoons, or "Tiffies," as they were affectionately known, few at
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
171
8.000 to 10,000 feet before swooping down on a target. As one Typhoon pilot
remarked, "You scrunch yourself over the stick, to hold it for a vertical dive and
watching through your gunsights and at the same time watching your altimeter and,
ifI may add, also watching your comrades to see when they let go." Some airmen
screamed themselves hoarse in the dive, with the G-force pushing a man back into
his seat. At about 4,000 feet, as flak exploded upwards, they released their bombs
and pulled out, climbing back to normal height in about thirty seconds. "All of us
pilots on Typhoons were hit many times," said John Friedlander, a McGill University
graduate. The planes generally survived, and the Typhoon, in his experienced opin-
ion, "was a fearsome beast." 10
Tiphon fighter-bomber unleashing rockets at ground targets in France, summer 1944.
