244 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
victims, but the Spitfires and Typhoons continued their aerial assault against the
ground forces.
And the Allied air forces had spectacular triumphs against the Germans through-
our the Normandy campaign. On June 10, General Geyr von Schweppenburg,
commander of Panzer Group West, was wounded, and seventeen of his senior staff
knocked out, when Ultra intercepts identified his location and his headquarters was
bombed by seventy-one bombers and Typhoons. The decapitation strike disrupted
command and control, especially in the British and Canadian sector, leaving enemy
armoured reserves uncoordinated for a number of days. Other German senior offi-
cers, including the commanders of the 12th SS, 77th Division, and 243rd Division,
were killed by aerial bombs.
Arming up 4 Typhoon fighter-bomber. Note the
50-alibre shells being fed into the machine
guns and the rockets underneath the wing.
Typhoon fighter-bomber taking off and
looking for trouble in France.
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
245
Even more significant was the July 17 patrol by Charley Fox, a twice-decorated
Canadian Spitfire pilot, who flew with RCAF's No. 412 Squadron. As he circled the
French countryside looking for targets, he spotted a black German Horch staff car
maling at high speed along the road below: "I maintained steady, level flight until
de vehicle passed us at 9 o'clock. I then began a curving, diving attack to my left,
nich my number two following to watch my tail. The other two aircraft maintained
deir height, keeping an eye out for enemy activity. I started firing at approximately
300 yards, and hit the staff car, causing it to crash. At the time, I had no idea who it
is...just a large black open car ... gleaming in the sun without any camouflage,
nich was unusual." The next day, it was reported that Field Marshal Erwin Rommel
mas trafed by a Spitfire and severely wounded. It happened at, of all places, Ste. Foy
de Montgommery-the namesake of his arch enemy. The loss of Rommel, whose
shall was racked in four places, was a severe setback to the enemy high command,
and although other fighter pilots claimed to have shot Rommel, Fox was in the right
The Allies won command of the air before the D-Daw invasion. These Germans are
doing what most did in Normandy: scanning the sky anxiously for Allied planes.
