358 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
under shellfire. Some who seemed weak and insecure came through in a pinch."68 By
late 1944, II Canadian Corps headquarters tracked desertion numbers. One report
noted that in the infantry and armoured brigades, as well as among other divisional
troops, there were 870 deserters. The same report showed 571 English and 299 French
deserters, a far higher proportion of French personnel in comparison to their overall
numbers in the ranks." The report offered no clues as to why French-Canadian
soldiers were deserting at higher rates.
Sergeant Charles Kipp, a long-service veteran, was on the verge of a breakdown
during the Scheldt. "My nerves were nearly shot from stress and too much war. Most
men who prayed just prayed to stay aliv.... I prayed to be killed and get it over with.
I would say, 'God, make it today.' I was not afraid of dying.... It was the uncertainty
of not knowing when or how, and preparing for death every day, that was more than
people could stand."' Some soldiers took matters into their own hands. Medical
officer J.W.B. Barr observed after the Leopold Canal that morale dropped visibly
among the survivors, with distressing results: "The lack of progress and the stressful
climatic conditions affected the morale of some of the troops, and the incidence of
self-inflicted injuries increased slightly.'? At this time, the medical services, acting
on the First Army's orders, compiled statistics on the number of Canadian soldiers
with self inflicted wounds (SIWs) and found some 166 suspected cases from D-Day
to the week of October 6, although some were later ruled out as legitimate after
investigation.? Previous reports had warned that STWs were "difficult to diagnose.?
They ranged from a gunshot wound to the foot or hand, to stabbing oneself in a
Aeshy area, to having a vehicle run over one's legs, to ingesting poisonous liquids.
And all in an attempt to escape the front.
While the loss of hundreds of battalion mates could be treated callously, even with
little thought, not all deaths were considered equal. The demise of a close comrade
or a respected offcer could shatter a soldier who was hanging on by his fingertips.
Suicides particularly traumatized surviving soldiers, not only because they lamented
the waste of life but also because most lona-service men mulled over their own death.
in its multiple forms. including bu their own hand. Sergeant John Missons recounted
one scene that tronbled him for his entire life. A vound private received a "Dent
John" letter from his eirl. who sent him a piece of wedding cake and told him she
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 359
could no longer wait for him. The distraught private put his Bren gun in his mouth
"and pulled the trigger with his foot and blew his whole face off."74
WALCHEREN GUARDED THE ENTRANCE to the Scheldt estuary. Eleven gigantic gun
batteries watched for any ship foolish enough to sail to Antwerp. The saucer-like
island with a rim of 18-metre dykes had been reclaimed from the sea and it sat below
sea level. It was only accessible by passing over a 1.2-kilometre-long and 40-metre-
wide causeway that ran over salt marshes and mud flats. Even the hardened veterans
of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division blanched at crossing that shooting gallery,
which was sighted by enemy artillery, anti-tank guns, and mortars.
Long before the 2nd Division came to face the causeway, Lieutenant-General Guy
Simonds had studied the problem of capturing Walcheren and knew it would be
difficult. Simond's plan was to bomb the dykes and flood the island before sending
in a seaborne assault by British commando and infantry units. The swamp would
restrict German movement and force them to group defenders on dry land that
would be vulnerable to additional bomber strikes. He had coordinated and negoti-
ated with the navy and the air force to attack jointly, while holding off Dutch
representatives who petitioned him to avoid the catastrophe the flooding would
infict on the 30.000 or so civilians still on the island? In early October,
Montgomery supported Simonds, more fully willing now to do anything to open
up Antwerp. The request for permission to breach the dykes went all the way up to
Eisenhower and then to Churchill, who ordered the bombers to back the First
Canadian Army. After leaflets were dropped, warning the Dutch to evacuate the
island, 247 Lancasters blew a 75-metre hole in the western dyke on October 3. The
inrushing seawater submerged much of the island.
The allocation for using bombers on this mission did not mark a change in atti-
tude on the part of Harris and his senior staff, who continued to see city smashing as
the most effective means of wielding the bombers against Germany. Additional
requests by Simonds to destroy a number of bunker-protected gun batteries were
ignored, or the gun positions only half-heartedly attacked. Air Marshal Arthur
Tedder. deputy supreme commander at SHAFF and a former commander of the
Allied air forces in the Mediterranean, encapsulated the air forces' attitude towards
