C.
344 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
"Heavy casualties were suffered by both sides," wrote the war diarist for the
Royal Winnipeg Rifles, "and the ground was littered with both German and Royal
Winnipeg dead.'* The fighting dragged on for days, and the Regina's official war
diary for the 12th described the battle with candour: "Medical Officer advises us
there have been between 250 and 300 casualties go through regimental aid post
since 6 Oct, which is a grim reminder that this operation has been no push-over.
It is the opinion that the past few days have seen some of the fiercest fighting since
'D' Day."» After a week of combat, the Canadians had driven only 1.5 kilometres to
the northwest, in the direction of the small village of Eede on the border of the
Netherlands and Belgium. The 64th Division's committed battalions had been
chewed up, and one captured German colonel remarked under interrogation that
his troops stood firm despite the casualties from artillery fire and that he "attributed
the stiffer resistance to the fact that the hour was critical for Germany."16 It was, but
he also credited the Canadians who had withstood his multiple attacks. The deadlock
was eventually broken by the 9th Infantry Brigade's advances to the German rear,
which threatened their positions by October 13. On the southern Leopold Canal
front, the week of fighting cost the 7th Brigade 533 casualties, of which 111 were
fatal." Another 150 men were suffering from battle exhaustion. 18
WITH THE LEOPOLD CANAL operation checked from the start but drawing in crucial
German formations, the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade at Terneuzen, some 60 kilo-
metres to the east, planned to crash through the back door. Simonds ordered a water-
borne attack, with Buffalos tracked amphibious troop carriers, the larger version of
which were able to transport titty men carrying the infantry to land along the
northern edge of Breskens, near Hoofdplaat.
Moving in dayligh on October 7, the Canadians were shocked to hear the loud
noise of the Buffalos aircrafi engines that powered the vehicles along at a sitting-duck
three knots per hour.'" Jock Anderson, the chaplain of the Highland Light Infantry of
Canada, recounted his experience of chugging up a canal in one such carrier while "the
Dutch were out doing their Saturday afternoon shopping.
"20 Many young boys fol-
lowed the waterborne convoy on their bikes, shouting out encouragements. Anderson
and his comrades could only wonder, "Good Heavens, this is a surprise attack?" It gor
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 345
worse. Challenges in navigating the lock system around the Terneuzen Canal delayed
the operation for the better part of two days. Somehow secrecy was kept.
The plan was remounted for October 9, and ninety-seven Buffalos transported
the lead elements of two battalions-the North Nova Scotia Highlanders and the
Highland Light Infantry of Canada-onto the beaches near Hoofdplaat and at
the mouth of the Braakman inlet. The landing took the enemy by surprise and cut
of an escape to Walcheren across the Scheldt Estuary to the north, but soon the
64ch Division was unleashed against the bridgehead.? The Canadians were ready
and made the Germans pay with concentrated fire. Each side shelled the other relent-
lessly. Donald Pearce of the North Nova Scotia Highlanders described one terrible
pounding: "I felt with needle-keenness that my life was hanging by a thread.... I was
reduced to impotence or, worse still, to insignificance, and that there were no special
vitue about me which in any way made me more likely to survive this target than
anybody else.? Pearce survived, along with most of his companions, as the muddy
train absorbed most of the shells that exploded in the ground. But not all men were
Buffal amphibious vehicles carrying troops across the Scheldt River to Hoofdplaat.
