398 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
had been shot through the nose and was bleeding badly. Topham carried one critic-
ally injured man off the battlefield on his back, and rescued three more comrades
from a burning carrier. He survived.
Once the Rhine was breeched, and Canadians stormed across it in late March,
most of them relished a long-planned urination on the Fatherland. Nineteen-year-
old driver Jim Guy, from Carp, Ontario, remembered coming across a large sign that
advised, "You are conquerors now, not liberators. Use the people as such. Do not
fraternize."! The soldiers-turned-occupiers were warned about terrorist activities
being perpetrated by hardcore Nazis, but in the villages they usually found only the
cowed and compliant. While one Canadian officer suggested it would be "safer to
shoot the lor," the civilians were not executed.? But nor were they treated gently. The
Canadians had witnessed the murders of French and Belgian resistance fighters and
those who aided them. They had heard the stories of tortured civilians-women,
children, and the elderly. "Memories of their own dead comrades were also fresh in
their minds, recalled Brigadier Richard Malone. "Now for the first time, the people
of Germany would in some measure see and experience what fearful horrors of the
war they had unleashed on the world."93
"We continued to live off the land. claimed Private Donald Tansley, "occupying
a new farmhouse every night or so, enjoying commandeered cattle, pigs, chick, pre-
serves out of the cellar, and fresh milk, occasionally sleeping in a house."* Any sign
of confrontation was dealt with coldly. and enemy sniders firing at troops ofren led
to the razing of houses and buildings.
The order not to fraternize was difficult to obey when Canadian soldiers were
billeted in German civilian houses. or when they were asked for chocolate by chil-
dren who reminded them of cousins and vounger siblings left behind. but many of
their attitudes hardened as labour camps were encountered «T am not in the habit of
telling what I see over here but this is something that should be told to everyone,
wrote a private with the 3rd Canadian Division, describing a ghastly scene he and his
comrades happened upon. "It is about ten Dutch civilians that were murdered right
close to where we are now in a concentration camp. One of them was buried alive.
The others were all battered to pieces either with rides or sticks Some had their heads
bashed in, some their ankles were broke or twisted their chests bashed in. You should
BATTERING GERMANY
399
se some of the things that were used for torture." Recounting a similar discovery,
another corporal averred, "Never have I seen butchery or mutilated mankind of that
sot before.'s Elmer Bell witnessed one camp where Russian women were "starved
to death." While the Canadians distinguished between the Nazi thugs and the
German citizens, Bell noted perceptively that there was a "brutality" to the Germans
who had allowed such horrors to occur in the name of their nation, concluding,
"Here is a confusing picture of the people.")6
never-ending stress, and the dreary sights of the dead, noting, "Everyone considered
and feared the possibility of reaching a breaking point when he could no longer take
the ordeal of being constantly in danger, constantly under fire and constantly witness-
ing someone blown to bloody pieces.
"97 Captain Harold MacDonald of the New
Brunswick Regiment shared his cumulative exhaustion with his wife: "Nine months
of not knowing if the next 24 hours would be the last or not. Of living either in holes
in the ground, damp cellars or broken down houses, of seeing bodies & parts of bod-
is of friends, of burying them, of killing & helping to kill... Darling, I'm tired.... It's
a techness that a week or a month or two months won't erase."8
AFTER A DREARY WINTER IN ITALY, I Canadian Corps was only too happy to exit the
Madieranean theatre. Shortages of everything from shells to soldiers- had revealed
what everyone already knew: the Italian front had long since become a stagnant stra-
tegic backwater While the Canadians went over leaving their thousands of comrades
huried under white crosses, almost all were anxious to sail to Europe. In a turn of
crets pical of the sad-sack campaign, only days before the men embarked on
sips, the chronically undersupplied Canadian headquarters received over 100,000 pairs
abos, 4,00 trousers, and 1.5 million razors." Most of the kit was left behind.
The Canadians from Italy joined their comrades in Northwest Europe, arriving
it the an of March and April 1945 to be reunited under Crera's First Canadian
Amy. New and better equipment was issued, with the 5th Canadian Armoured
Division and Ist Armoured Brigade receiving upgraded Shermans and Fireflys. There
