PLANNING THE INVASION
105
104 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
remote-controlled missile packed with high explosives launched and directed
from aircraft, or an acoustic torpedo that sought out ships through the sound of
their engines-could not turn the tide.
The primary battlefield had shifted from the mid- and western Atlantic to the
waters around Britain and along the French coast. Yet convoys still sailed in an
unyielding tide. With the Royal Navy focused on preparing for Operation Neptune,
it gradually handed over all convoy duties the escorting and protection of civilian
merchant supply ships against U-boats to the Royal Canadian Navy, until by June
1944 the entire system was under Canadian escort.!" The "sheep dog navy" that had
tried to run circles around the merchant ships to keep the wolves at bay in the first
four years of the war was now delivering the supply ships on time and wich almost
no losses. It was an incredible contribution from a navy that had boasted a mere
handful of ships in 1939 and now numbered over 200, and was, with new builds, on.
its way to growing to 400 warships. Under the command of Rear-Admiral George
Jones, the chief of the naval staff, and Rear-Admiral Leonard Murray, commander-
in-chief Canadian Northwest Atlantic, who coordinated war shins and air Dower off
the east coast, and who was the only Canadian theatre commander of the war, the
RCN made a significant contribution to the grand logistics that were necessary fos
any invasion of France to succeed.
The Allies were winning the war decisively at sea, but they needed an absolute
victory for the invasion to succeed. The fear of the Kriegsmarine running amok
among troop ships was intensified when nine enemy torpedo boate nierced naval
defences in late April 1944 during an American exercise at Slapton Sands, a stretch
of beach along the south coast of England. Two troop ships were sunk and close to
750 soldiers and sailors killed. To minimize the damage of the raid to morale, the
dead were buried in mass graves and their deaths attributed to events later in
the D-Day campaign. There could be no more Slapton Sands. The Allied navies
wete going to take the war to the German surface fleet and U-boats.
The Allies had become far more efficient in destroying subs since the dark days of
1941 and 1942. New technology, tactics, radar, and weapons left the U-boats
hounded at every turn. While the U-boats still ranged all the way to Canadian
waters, Rear-Admiral Murray was persuaded that the best way to help the Allied
cause was to send his best warships to the eastern Atlantic to be involved in the
submarine hunt. Royal Canadian Navy support groups and elite submarine-killing
groups, involving teams of warships that worked together to hone tactics, took
the war to the U-boats. From late 1943 to early 1944, the Canadian C Groups and
EG Groups, making up about 40 percent of the Royal Navy's sub hunters, sank
seven of the thirty-one U-boats that met their end during that time. 16
Long, relentless pursuits marked many of the battles, and RCN commander Charles
Nixon was involved in one of the longest U-boat clashes of the war over the course of
March 5 and 6, 1944, about 650 kilometres west of Ireland. The Canadian submarine-
killing group C.2, which consisted of the Canadian warships Chaudière, Gatineau,
St. Catharines, and St. Fennel, as well as the Royal Navy's HMS Icarus, located U-744
wich an asdic (underwater radar detection) sweep. With the warships sweeping in for the
kill, the U-boat captain dodged and
evaded the depth charges in hour after
hour of frantic underwater manoeuvres.
The Canadians and British sailors were
no less obstinate. Depth charge attacks,
patterned grid searches, and systematic
pursuit kept the U-boat submerged.
Contact was lost and then regained by
the five warships seeking the enemy.
After thirty hours, the sailors were
exhausted and only managed to remain
at their posts since they knew that the
U-boat crew below was in an even more
desperate situation. Commander Nixon
of HIMCS Chaudière described how the
Canadians eventually got their prey:
"We used our new technique of creep-
ing attacks, of one ship guiding another
over the contact so that the sonar
would remain in contact while the
The Royal Canadian Navy engaged in
an extensive campaign against the
German U-boats in the summer of 1944.
Here, a depth charge is being fired.
