208 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
by tank fitters. The crews generally survived, taking only a 7 percent casualty rate
(in comparison to over 70 percent for the infantry). 4 At the same time, the wounded
tankers suffered unique injuries. Surgeon J.B. Hillsman wrote that "tank wounds
were horrible things to treat. They are always accompanied by more or less severe
burns and are multiple in nature. The wounds are not usually from shell fragments
but one digs out pieces of armour plate and large lumps of hard rubber and nuts
and bols."1
Goodwood achieved little ground and the British armoured divisions lost over
320 tanks in the fighting, but the offensive had drawn in more German reserves,
achieving is strategic objective even as it made future tactical success on the ground more
dificulr.® Eisenhower and his senior officers at SHAEF were, however, unimpressed
with the limited gains, and senior generals, air marshals, and staff officers were dis-
gusted with Montgomery's self-satisfied reports to the war journalists. Yet even
Montgomery's critics could see how Goodwood had begun to suck in the German
reserves and free up the Americans to the west, who faced far weaker forces and were
preparing their major breakout battle.
ONTHE CANADIAN FRONT, on July 18, the experienced 3rd Division pushed south-
ward through an industrial, built-up area, dotted with factories, buildings, and slag
heap. While the German defenders were outnumbered by the 8th Canadian Infantry
Brigade's advance, they held the main roads and villages. The Canadians would blast
their way forward. Captain T.J. Bell of the 12th Field Regiment recalled that the
hours before Operation Atlantic were a time to "Praise the Lord and pass the ammu-
Dition."" Thawands of shells were manhandled into place near the guns and fired.
Though shellfire stunned and suppressed the enemy, it allowed for no surprise, since
the first round telegraphed the forthcoming battle Still, it was terrifying to be on the
receiving end of a batering assault. One German private, writing to his parents of
the barage, described the punishment: "We hear the whole long day nothing but
artillery fire of all calibres.... Whoever succeeds in passing through thie hell without
beine killed an really be thankful to God»44 The soldier, intelligence records
revealed, was killed the next day.
The Queen's Own Rifles, on the left and in touch with the Bririch 11th Armoured
OPERATION SPRING 209
Drision, pushed along the Orne River and into the outskirts of the steel-mill town
of Colombelles, and then on to Giberville and Faubourg de Vaucelles. Meanwhile,
Le Régiment de la Chaudière cleared the German positions in Colombelles.
According to one Canadian infantryman, Colombelles was "just masses of twisted
iron and concrete rubble, white dust everywhere and men all look like ghosts."45
Arillery and mortar fire further smashed the machinery and masonry; the French
Canadians crawled through the ruins, killing with grenades, rifles, and Bren guns,
and methodically clearing pockets of resistance that held out throughout the day.
The Queen's Own found themselves fired on from the town and from their front,
but they eventually prevailed. Some 200 German corpses were found in the area and
another 600 prisoners taken. 46
Wich the battle raging in Colombelles, Major-General Rod Keller sent the 9th
Canadian Infantry Brigade on a flanking attack, bypassing much of the opposition,
nich lowed for the North Novas and the Highland Light Infantry of Canada
comet up with the Regina Rifles, Royal Winnipeg Rifles, and Canadian Scottish to
capture Vaucelles and the surrounding region. The imaginative operation, which
emphasized speed and manoeuvre over firepower, isolated the German resistance
opposite the Chaudières, and this combined weight and pressure ensured that its
stor of the enemy line was soon broken. The total cost for the 3rd Division was
386 casualties, of which 89 were fatal. The Canadians had cracked through the
Germans outer defences, although several kilometres to the south lay the enemy
strength around the Verrières and Bourguébus Ridges.
Major-General Charles Foulke's 2nd Canadian Division was confronted by fewer
Germans than the 3rd Division, but it was carrying out its first major action since
Dieppe. Foulkes, a dour prewar professional who had held staff positions and com-
manded the 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade in Italy, was not particularly imaginative
a aping. He had risen to the top through his friendship with Crera and by being
i jo' man who rarely pushed back against his seniors. He ordered a pincer attack
from the right flank. which was to join up with the 2ud Division at Vancelles The
primary obstacle on the 2nd Division's front was the Orne River, which snaked
tough Caen and then southwards The Royal Regiment of Canada, which had been
destroyed at the Puys beach at Dieppe, fought their way into Louvigny, north of the
