36 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
caterpillar signifying the silk parachute was worn on the left-hand tunic lapel or
pocket. An even more select group became members of the Goldfish Club. Their
badge was a winged goldfish, awarded to those who ditched their planes in water and
lived to tell the tale.
Despite the harrowing tales of escape and the bravery on the part of the under-
ground resistance, thousands of airmen did not find freedom. "For you, the war is
over," came the sharp observation from German captors, as flashlights danced on the
evader's faces and rough hands dragged them from hiding places. Yet the war was not
over. A new war had to be fought: one in bleak conditions; of no longer being a
combatant fighting for one's country but a prisoner behind barbed wire.
FLIGHT LIEUTENANT JOHN MAHONEY was shot down over Berlin in late August
1943 and seized almost as soon as he landed on the outskirts of the city that he had
just bombed. As he was transported towards an interrogation centre, his mind raced:
"What had happened to the rest of the crew? How would my wife take the news
that I was missing?... and our little six-months-old boy—how old would he be when
I next saw him."? The future was uncertain for all airmen in enemy hands, and some
did not even survive the first encounters with German civilians.
While most parachuters did not drop into the smashed cities, they often landed
among the rural population. Some of the Germans were surprisingly generous, pro-
viding drink and aid, while others wanted revenge. From the mid-part of the war,
rumours circulated among the aircrews that caught airmen were burned alive—
retribution for the fiery havoc they had wreaked on the cities!? There is little evidence
of this type of murder, although summary executions were carried out by German
civilians and military authorities. Condemned as terrorfliegers terror flyers- the
Allied airmen were cast by the German military, propaganda machine, and civilians as
criminals.* German sources estimated that 350 Allied Ayers were executed by vigi-
lante civilians during the course of the war.!5
All armen recognized that their bombing missions involved killing civilians, but
many took solace in never having to see those same civilians face to face. Pilot officer
Robert Rogers, a tail gunner with RCAF's No. 419 Squadron, was shot down on
December 29, 1944, near Essen. After flak ripped apart his bomber, he was blown
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
37
clear of the turret into the fuselage of the plane. He awoke as flames licked along his
body and face. Rogers stamped out the fire and then found his parachute amid the
smell of burnt flesh. He managed to escape the doomed aircraft, but did not get far
on the ground. Rogers was handed over to the police in the face of an angry mob that
was shouting "Bastard baby killer" and surging forward to, he believed, tear him
apart. Rogers survived his ordeal, though he endured multiple interrogations while
attempting to heal from his painful burn wounds.
Captives were prodded and baited for information." Any sort of trick or leverage
was used by the interrogators, including isolating prisoners in cells, applying heat
and cold to break their will, and bombarding them with bright light and noise. Most
airmen did not succumb, giving only name, rank, and service number, even as all
feared Gestapo retribution and whether they might face a quiet execution that would
leave their family forever wondering about their fate.!8 In the end, the flyer's know-
ledge was limited, and the interrogators rarely resorted to physical abuse.
Pilot Officer Earle White enlisted in 1940 after graduating from McGill with his
B.A., and then served overseas as a navigator and bomb aimer with No. 58 Squadron,
RAF. On June 20, 1942, while flying in his Halifax Mark II, the bomber was crip-
pled by flak over Germany. White grabbed his parachute and strapped it on, only
seconds before the Halifax exploded in midair. He had no memory of bailing out
and could only surmise that he had been blown through the Perspex in the nose of
the plane. Somehow he had pulled his chute cord before passing out. He landed with
a fractured skull and many broken bones. Captured by Germans after scrambling
16 kilometres in a haze of blood and blackouts, he was the lone survivor of his crew.
After a series of interrogations, he was transported through a number of cities and
villages in an open car, where civilians spat at him in rage."' From there, he began
almost three years of incarceration in POW camps.
Prisoners were put in boarded-up boxcar trains for the long trip eastward. It was a
crowded and uncomfortable ride, and it took two or three days to travel to eastern
Germany or Poland. The prisoners were given little food and water, and no place to
deposit human waste except for an ever-filling bucket that slopped its vile contents over
the floor and onto cringing prisoners. This was a period of self-doubt and open worry.
One RCAF airman, Grant McRae, described it as the start of his "starvation vacation."20
