168 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
sixteen Spitfire and Hurricane squadrons served in 83 Group, making up about half
of its strength, but this group was assigned to the Second British Army. While the
RCAF was given the option of holding back and waiting for the First Canadian
Army to be activated in late July, the senior RCAF officers did not want to squander
the chance of facing the Luftwaffe as early as possible.? And so Canada's army and air
force would not serve together for most of the campaign; this was a missed occasion to
create a more recognizable Canadian presence in Northwest Europe. Only a supreme
Canadian commander could have insisted on such a joint operation, and none existed.
The army commander General Harry Crerar had no control over the RCAF. The
defence minister, J.L. Ralston, had the authority, but by June 1944 the Canadian
government had few channels with British politicians or senior military officers, hav-
ing long ago surrendered any influence over the formulation of strategy.
Train-busting and flying escort for bombers were all part of the RCAF's duties.
By the fall of 1943, the Spithire Vs had their 303-inch machine guns augmented
with the deadlier 20mm cannon, thus making them more effective in ground inter-
diction. The .303 was the same round fired by a rifle, while the 20mm round was as
long as a man's index finger, and caused significantly more damage, especially against
An RCAF Spitfire Mik Sb from No. 401 Squadron.
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
169
soft-skinned vehicles such as trucks and cars. Al Harley of the RCAF's No. 401
Squadron observed the combined firepower of his Spitfire's 20mm Hispano can-
nons and four 303 Browning machine guns when he turned "all guns" on a convoy
of ten trucks carrying supplies and troops: "The results were devastating. Parts of
the trucks flew in all directions as drivers and troops dove for the ditches. Several
of the trucks blew up as we hit the gas tanks. Although we made only one pass at
the truck convoy, we left a sorry mess behind."4
But dogfights with enemy airplanes were the raison d'être of most of the RCAF
squadrons. The once-feared German air arm, which had done so much to contribute
to carly Nazi victories, was all but destroyed by the summer of 1944. Forced to rely
on poorly trained reinforcements, the German pilots were outclassed in aerial com-
bat? Even veteran Luftwaffe aces were suffering from exhaustion. The results were a
spectacular slaughter. The Spitfires and Mustangs flew in search of their prey, shoot-
ing up ground targets behind enemy lines and seeking to draw out enemy planes. In
June, RCAF pilots claimed more than a hundred German aircraft shot down. The
caim was likely exaggerated, as all kills were, largely because it was hard to keep track
ofa downed enemy fighter in the middle of an air battle, but the RCAF was doing
is part in the Allied air effort to bleed the Luftwaffe. By the end of the Normandy
campaign, the grand total of Canadian shot down enemy planes had risen to 239,
with No. 401 Squadron scoring the most kills
at 43.5 (the half being a plane shared
with another squadron). In turn, 58 RCAF Spitfire pilots were killed or captured.
21 downed by fak, 17 lost to enemy fighters, 12 crashed due to mechanical error,
and the other 8 lost to undetermined causes.®
The Allied planes not only harassed enemy ground forces but also disrupted the
movement of supplies and provided photographic reconnaissance. There was a
widely circulating joke among the Germans: "If it's white, it's American, if it's
black, is Brish, if you can't see it, it's the Lufiwaffe" Moreover, as the enemy's
forward radar and air control positions were slowly seized as the armies moved into
Normandy, the Luftwaffe's response to Allied aerial patrols was increasingly ragged
and uncoordinated. New Allied gyro gunsights also improved accuracy of shooting
and led to days like June 28, when the RCAF bagged twenty-six enemy aircraft
against the loss of only three Spitfires.
