312
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
ways to limp on. And so the offensive continued in Italy throughout the cold, rainy
season of November and December, with the Allies driving the Germans back. Both
sides had about twenty divisions to call upon, but since all of the units were depleted
and short of men as a result of the constant wastage, sickness, and desertions, the term
"division" - especially for the wiped-out Germans- is not terribly accurate. Nonetheless,
there still remained hundreds of thousands of Germans and Allied troops in theatre.
With the front all but stalemated, Allied airpower and firepower took a steady toll on
the enemy, but Kesselring's forces continued to use all the advantages of battling on the
defence. The fighting season closed down in early January because of the harsh weather,
and both sides knew that the war would never be decided in Italy.
The Canadian government's decision to send I Canadian Corps to Italy divided the
Canadian army and ultimately weakened Dominion influence in the primary cam-
paign theatre, Northwest Europe. However, the Canadians gained valuable experience
and proved they were able not to only match, but to consistently surpass, the effi-
ciency of their comrades in the vaunted British Eighth Army. The Canadian success ar
Sicily, Ortona, the Hider Line, and the Gothic Line contributed to victory in the poor-
cousin theatre of war. And the Canadians, as judged by German intelligence, were
widely regarded as shock troops: masters of all-arms warfare and hard in the attack.
Boch the Allies and the Axis were drawn into the prison of the Italian campaign,
but that cage was of the Allies' making. Hide's plan from 1942 to hold Tunisia,
Sicily, and then Italy robbed him of forces to be used on the Eastern and Western
fronts. The Italian campaien also allowed Churchill to forestall the invasion of
Europe until the invaders were ready, and even then success was a near-run thing.
Commentators at the time, and those since, have found it difficult to evaluate
the achievements of the Allies in Italy, with the conflict between the senior Allied
generals further mudying the water. But there were important strategic goals in
the campaign, and the Allied forces achieved them. The Germans were defeated
at the tactical and operational level. which ulrimarely led to a strategic victory. The
supreme Allied command, both civilian and military, kept the Mediterranean theatre
active to ensure that the German armies there-totalling twenty-two divisions in
August 1944 could not be withdrawn and transferred to shore up Germanys bor-
ders? The maintenance of pressure through battle also forced Hirler to deploy
THE GOTHIC LINE
313
significant divisions in the Balkans, for fear of an amphibious landing from Allied
troops in the Mediterranean. The Allied strategy in Italy was interwoven with that in
Western Europe, and Italy was the long right flank in the global war. In April 1945,
the Germans, 599,514 strong, faced 616,642 Allied soldiers in the Fifth and Eighth
Armies, albeit with an additional million or so in the long logistical tail that wound
hundreds of kilometres south through Italy and into North Africa. While it might
appear that the Germans were holding down the Allies, it was the Allies who could
better afford the draw and strain on manpower, although one can't be sure how the
dispersal of these forces would have shifted the balance of fighting in Europe. If Hitler
had deployed some of his German Mediterranean formations in France at a time
when the Allied divisions were most vulnerable after the invasion landings—he
might easily have tipped the balance in his favour. Such are the "what ifs?" of history.
Butt is also certain that the Mediterranean Allied forces could not have been immedi-
acy thrown into the clash along the French coast, because there was not enough
shipping to transport them across the Channel. These divisions would simply have
Kened in Britain, as German divisions fought for the beachhead. For the Allied high
command, it was a far stronger strategic case to stretch out the Germans and force
them to defend Italy, southern France, Greece, and the Balkans, which ultimately tied
down fifty-five German divisions that could have been used on other fronts.80
The casualty figures bear out the attritional nature of the Allied victory. The Fifth
Amy suffered 188,746 casualties, while the Eighth Army lost another 123,254, for
a toal of 312,000. The German losses were even higher, at 434,646, which included
48067 killed, 172,531 wounded, and 214,048 missing (captured or killed and with
no known graves) 8' Of the 92,757 Canadians who served in Italy, 5,399 were killed,
19486 were wounded, and 1,004 were taken prisoner.
There are few Canadian memorials to this day in the Sicilian or Italian theatres of
ra. Unlike in France or the Netherlands, where the liberated people still joyfully
timember the Allied soldiers who gave their lives to free their occupied countries,
de las were enemies first and then haplessly faced occupation. Much of their
county was destroyed in the Allies' defeat of the Germans. One should not be sur-
prised ther the few Canadian memoriale are rather chabby and ill cared for, save for
those in the Commonwealth War Graves cemeteries.
