268 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
cold shoulder. To his credit, Crerar took the snubs without complaining to his
political masters, who might have intervened and further bothered the already worn-
down British general. The Canadian army commander was also wise not to interject
himself deeply into the battle unfolding, and he continued to allow Simonds, who
had a very good grip on things, to plan and execute the operation. With Crerar's
agreement, Simonds ordered a renewed attack, pushing Foulkes's 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division to take Falaise, and Kitching's 4th Canadian Armoured Division
to the cast to catch those Germans who were fleeing the city and surrounding
region." Even farther eastward, in a widening half circle, the 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division punched forward, with the Ist Polish Division on the far left flank, to cap-
ture Trun.
The town of Falaise was defended by a garrison of 200 Waffen SS Grenadier troops
from the 12th SS, along with anti-tank guns and two Tiger tanks. They were to hold
on until death. As one Canadian official report noted of the 12th SS troops, "The Pte
(private) soldiers were fanatics, and had been convinced by their Offrs [officers) that
if caught they would be shot. They neither ran nor surrendered. "« Bombers had
already pulverized the town, but the Nazi survivors simply dug deeper into the rub-
ble. The Canadians closed on them in the late afternoon of the 16th, with the South
Sakachevan Regiment and Queens Own Cameron Highlanders fighting through
the suburbs and capturing key bridges to allow the tanks of the Sherbrooke Fusilier
to bring essential fire to bear. Throughout the night and into the 17th, the Canadians
deared house afier house. But it was not until the 18ch that the EMRs, in a final
grinding battle, broke the last resistance of the Waffen SS troops who had holed up
in a gin school in the southern part of town. The 12th SS fought almost to the
finch. Only two soldiers emerged. The taking of Falaise on August 18 opened up
the road to cut off Germans to the south - troops that were propping open the cor-
nets of the dosing trap against Anglo and American forces. Field Marshal Model
realized thar the clock was ticking for his overextended twenty-one German div-
bions in the pocket, which was now only 56 kilometres deep and 20 wide.
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
269
rockets, cannon-fire, and high explosives. From August 18 onward, hundreds of
Spitfires, Mustangs, and Typhoons flew operations over the battlefield, firing off all
chair ammunition before heading back to their airfields, where they refuelled and
ramed for another round of shooting fish in a barrel. The RAF claimed to destroy or
damage 112 enemy tanks and 3,057 transport vehicles in the third week of August.«
Though many of these vehicles survived the shellfire and bomb blasts, the carnage on
the roads was terrible. In the Falaise Gap, by battle's end, the Allies located 7,576
smashed or abandoned enemy vehicles and innumerable horse-drawn carts along the
funeral-pyre roads. While there were only 150 abandoned tanks and anti-tank guns,
and few appeared knocked out from the air, the wreckage of the soft-skinned vehicles
had dogged roads and shattered morale. This was how armies died.
The August sun baked the dead and
wounded, and the stench wafted for
kilometres.
The only escape route
for the Germans was along the valley
lading to the opening between Trun,
St. Lambert-sur-Dives, and Chambois.
It was here that the Canadian 4th
Armoured Division tried to close the
gap. The German forces, fighting for
their very lives, were not going to go
down without a battle. For those
who faltered, the discipline of the
trolver was a means by which to
siffen resolve, and Waffen SS troops
murdered hundreds of demoralized
aid deserting regular army soldiers. As
German turned on German (and on
the other conscripts from occupied
cations who were press-ganged into
the ranks), the now desiccated 12th SS
continued to block the Canadian and
German wreckage on the roads leading out
of the Falaise Gap. These trucks were caught
by Allied airpower.
