250 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
to death. As Mackereth was taken into a tent to be operated on, he wondered why
some of the more grievously injured were not cared for first. A stretcher-bearer
replied, "They're set aside because the doctor reckons they're past saving. They'll
probably all be dead by morning."' Mackereth survived his ordeal and even returned
to battle in August, as a stretcher-bearer. He understood that harsh choices had to be
made in managing the avalanche of bloodied men.
THE PROCESS OF EVACUATING injured soldiers to the rear usually involved a jeep
ambulance, although trucks and universal carriers were also used. The robust jeeps
had been used profitably in Italy to transport the wounded, and were later modified
to allow for stretchers to be placed on the roof. But this design was found to leave
already weakened men too exposed to the hot sun or driving rain, so an extended
canvas-covered rear area was added. Whatever the vehicle, the pitted and shell-
pocked roads left patients in agony from the constant jarring of broken bones and
internal injuries. Along the way were casualty clearing posts, where the stretcher-
bound patients might sometimes be deposited to allow the larger field ambulances to
transport more patients to the next link in the medical chain.
Field surgical units were the sites of desperate battles for life, and few days passed
without a steady trickle of the wounded. During sustained firefights, long lines of
bloodied soldiers formed outside the medical tents. Doctors, orderlies, and nurses
studied the casualies, and their rough notes were usually written on a wound tag. They
were ranked according to priority of treatment, with most of the pale-faced bleeding
cases receiving plasma or blood transfusions. Official reports noted that most patients
required an immediate two to three pints of blood to keep from slipping into shock!"
Patients often suffered from multiple bleeding wounds that looked as if someone
had taken a meat deaver to their Resh. Traumatic amputation from whirling metal
or high explosives required immediate surgery, Arms, legs, hands, and feet were often
blown away or remained attached by only a few strands of muscle. In other cases, the
Has from bich exolorives could iniure a man withour leaving a ceratch as internal
organs collapsed when struck by a wall of compressed air moving at several times
the speed of a tornado. Canadian nurse Nora Cook, from Lindsay, Ontario-one of
2263 nures servine overseas doilad he Rood of marianta, "Te was so troic, all
WAR AND MEDICINE
231
those boys with arms and legs blown off. You can't explain what it's like to try and deal
nich all these casualties. They were filled with shrapnel and had every imaginable
injury.? One study of 1,688 casualties in Normandy found that 15 percent of the
casualties had wounds to the head, 8.5 percent to the chest, 5 percent to the abdomen,
31 to the upper extremities, 28 to the lower extremities, and a mere 2.7 percent to
the back!' Captain W.W Middleton, a battlefield surgeon from Bruce County in
southwestern Ontario who served in a Canadian field hospital throughout Normandy,
noted of the men's injuries, "Every man seems to have at least three, and what wounds
they are! Great masses of muscle and flesh torn to bits. One wonders how the human
frame can stand so much." 14
Caked in gore and mud, with pants often filled with their own feces, patients
sipped in and out of consciousness, alternating between nightmare-filled delusions
and tir nev horror-filled reality. Dirty uniforms were cut off. Anaesthetists offered
some relief from the pain. Surgeons opened up men with precise cuts, searching in
body cavities to find steel fragments as
fres drained away. The ground was
son littered with bandages and gauze,
remnants of patients past and present.
Thousands of black lies, drawn to the
gore and excrement, swarmed the area.
By the time of the Normandy bat-
des, experience had revealed that
wounds should be excised freely, with
dead skin cut away and the area
cared of pulped muscle to reduce
the chance of infection. The Thomas
splint, developed during the Great
Ma, was useful in reducing fatalities
sit immobilized high breaks on the
femur. Abdominal and chest injuries
te operated on as soon as possible,
or wounds became infected the longer
Canadian surgeons operate on
a wounded Canadian.
