16 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
THE BOMBERS HAMMERED CITIES, but they also continued to harass the bottled-up
German navy and to target specific military sites. When intercepted coded messages
revealed that the Germans were close to perfecting rockets carrying high explosives
that would rain down upon Britain, the Anglo-American high command ordered a
strike against the main research centre, Peenem端nde, a rocket and research develop-
ment station on the Baltic coast north of Berlin. Known as V-weapons (short for
Vergeltungswaffen or "revenge weapons"), these missiles contained over a ton of high
explosives and were one of Hitler's many "secret weapons" for winning the war by
renewing the Blitz on the British people. A precision bomber attack on Peenem端nde
might delay the enemy's terror plans.
The crews selected for the August 18 sortie against Peenem端nde were sequestered
so as not to mistakenly reveal the target, and were even threatened with severe pun-
ishment should they talk to anyone. It was excessive security, but it impressed upon
the flyers the importance of the mission. Led by Pathfinders, who would scout
ahead of the main bomber force and drop flares to mark aiming points, and a master
bomber who directed the bombers using a high-frequency wireless communication
system to correct bomb drops in real-time-596 bombers flew in bright moonlight
to the concrete-reinforced site. Canadian Pathfinder Johnnie Fauquier, who had
already survived thirty sorties in his first tour of duty, was the tough and exacting
commander of RAF's No. 405 Squadron (part of the Pathfinding force). Acting as
deputy master bomber, he made a shockingly dangerous seventeen passes over the
enemy research facility, directing the bombers and assessing the damage. Against all
odds, he survived and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order, one of four
gallantry decorations he received during the course of the war.
The successful mission came at a cost. Ordered to fly at heights between 6,000
and 10,000 feet, the bomber force endured a nearly 7 percent loss, while RCAF's
No. 6 Group, assigned to the end of the bomber stream and therefore flying into
battle-ready defences, took an almost 20 percent loss rate with twelve of sixty-two
bombers shot down? Pilot Officer R.W. Charman, a navigator with No. 427 Squadron,
recalled of the operation, " had never seen such a night before. All over the sky, RAF
(and RCAF) planes were going down.* Despite the withering losses, the mission was
an outright success, killing enemy scientists and causing a two-month delay to the
AIR WAR
17
program. It was later calculated that the mission had reduced the number of rockets
launched against British cities by 740.'
WITH THE TERRIBLE FIRESTORM of Hamburg in July 1943 and the Peenem端nde
raid a month later, Bomber Command's stock continued to rise in Churchill's eyes.
Harris, with Churchill and Portal's blessings, ordered a new campaign against the
greatest prize. Big City, as the airmen called Berlin, was the most hazardous target
in Europe. Its distance from British bases of around 850 kilometres meant that the
bomber stream had to pass through a gauntlet of several lines of night fighter
defences, as well as taking fire from flak gun defenders that had been strengthened
after the burning of Hamburg. Germany's capital was defended by over 100 batteries
of 16 to 24 anti-aircraft guns each, and its enormous size of 200 square kilometres
meant that it could absorb significant punishment. While Berlin accounted for about
8 percent of Germany's total industrial output, it symbolized the Nazi regime and
strength. ' Willing to throw everything against it, Harris boasted to Churchill that if
the Americans agreed to a sustained air battle, "We can wreck Berlin from end to
end.... it will cost between us 400-500 aircraft. It will cost Germany the war." 11
Churchill and the other senior military and political leaders had heard these claims
before. But now the bomber war reached new levels of effectiveness and destruction,
and the British prime minister had long wanted to avenge the Blitz on London
by bringing the war to Berlin. While Britain's senior political and military high
command-
-save for Harris-had written off the claim that the bombers could win
the war on their own, it was easy to put such beliefs aside in the hope that a relentless
Anglo-American air assault might defeat Germany without having to unleash the
armies building up in Britain. Unfortunately, the Americans were in no condition to
send their bombers against Berlin. Following a series of high-level directives from
earlier in the year to wear down the Luftwaffe, the Americans had been flying aggres-
sively into German air space during daylight hours to better hit their targets and to
draw the enemy fighters against them. It was thought that the American bombers,
especially the heavily armed B-17 Flying Fortresses and B-24 Liberators, might be a
match for the Luftwaffe's Me 109s and Fw 190s. It was not the case. German fighters
were faster, and were battling over their homeland. The uneven combat led to terrible
