162 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and by late June about 40 percent of vehicles were returned to service. 4 Later in the
fighting, by the end of July, they also modified tanks to assist them to survive at
the front. Engineers welded old tank tracks to the armour to provide additional pro-
tection. The tracks did not stop an enemy shell, but they were found, on occasion,
to deflect them. And when the Shermans were nothing more than a scorched lump
of steel, they were replaced by new tanks that came in on the never-ending ships
ferrying war equipment from Britain to the slowly expanding front.
THROUGHOUT LATE JUNE, the 3rd Canadian Division remained exposed in the
farmer' fields, holed up in and around the small villages whose names would
become part of the pantheon of the nation's military history. The stone houses,
while beckoning with comfort, were too visible a target for German artillery, so it
was back into the ground like moles. Soldiers learned not to dig their slit trenches
under trees, for although the shade was welcomed. the trees were also aiming mark-
ers for enemy gunners.
Dig for your life. Every day and night,
Canadian soldiers at the front dug
their sit trenches to protect against
mortar splintens and bullets.
The Canadian battalions were ech-
eloned in depth, as were
companies
and platoons. The tanks tended to stay
to the rear, and every night they "har-
boured" in a stronghold, digging an all-
around defence where they refuelled,
rearmed, and recharged batteries. Like
the infantry, the troopers dug their slit
trenches, and usually under the steel
tank to protect against shell splinters.
Every day witnessed mortar and artil-
lery shells smashing into the fields, but
most never found fesh. The Queen's
Own Rifles reported on June 23 that
some 2,000 mortar bombs fell in the
battalion's area, causing one killed and
nine wounded 6s
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
163
Infantry platoon commanders situated two sections forward, about 140 metres
apart, with a third to the rear and the commander's small headquarters and mortar
team in the middle. They were backed by the hammer of the artillery. Forward artil-
lery observers were linked to the rear through wireless radio and able to call down fire
on grid references. The rearward gunners, whose accuracy was improved by survey
units, meteorological teams, and sound-ranging and flash-spotting technology, were
a formidable force.
The sunburnt Canadians did not feel much like conquering heroes. Lice had
begun to multiply in the filthy conditions, with the dirty insects burrowing into the
skin, causing men to itch and scratch as the little vampires drew blood. Burton
Harper, a northern New Brunswicker who served as a Canloan officer in a British
regiment, complained, "we were living in the same uniform, the same socks, the
same underwear, which is dried on the body, usually sweaty and dirty and grubby,
and after a number of days of that, you feel that every part of your body is dirty."66
Filth-spattered uniforms still wore the grime from D-Day. Shortages of water pre-
duded much cleaning, and so men used the powerful chemical DDT to powder
themselves to disinfect their uniforms. Mosquitoes tormented day and night. By late
summer, special anti-mosquito cream was sent forward with the rations. More than
a few men mistook it for margarine or a new paste, and a few commented that it
tasted better than most of the packaged food.
Behind the sparsely defended front, the division's logistical units pulled forward
food, water, ammunition, and fuel. The First Canadian Army would eventually oper-
ate 14,000 American-made jeeps, as well as thousands of trucks, including the CMP
(Canadian Military Pattern) vehicles. For those in the front lines, hot tea and the
occasional stew were a luxury; most men nibbled on the hard biscuits, learning
the sideways chew of grinding molars. Canned meat-the dreaded "M and y
and the occasional mush that was supposed to be porridge offered something a little
more substantial. Soldiers complained, as was their right, but few expected any
better until the precarious front was sorted out and the Germans driven back.
Adventurous soldiers hunted for potatoes and cabbage on abandoned farms and
graved them raw. Single-use cans of soup that heated upon pulling a tab were popular,
and cigarettes remained a staple, although men learned to smoke close to the ground,
