240 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
skin and fire-scorched extremities. Tannic acid assisted in the immediate recovery
process, with burned men spreading the jelly on their skin that soon hardened to a
cement-like substance; it lessened the opportunity for infection and offered some
relief from the pain. Yet many of the airmen and tankers, the two groups of warriors
most likely to receive burns, had little skin left that had not been burned off. Trooper
Al LaRose of the Sherbrooke Fusilier recalled with horror the fighting in Normandy
and his attempts to pull comrades from burning Shermans: as men cooked alive and
he tried to wrench them out of the turret, the burnt skin pulled off upraised arms like
plastic wrap."
Most of those who survived their ghastly wounds were treated at Queen Victoria
Hospital, East Grinstead, south of London, where reconstructive surgery attempted
to give them back some semblance of normality. Sir Archibald McIndoe, a driven and
short-tempered New Zealander, was a leader in the field, pioneering plastic surgery
and skin grafts for men who had lost large patches of their hair, ears, eyebrows, lips, and
skin." The cutting-edge facility at East Grinstead also had a fifty-bed Canadian section
run by Wing Commander Albert Ross Tilley, another expert in rebuilding burned
bodies, and a medical magician in rehabilitating claw-like burned hands. Tilley was
recognized with an Order of the British Empire in 1944, and after the war he set up a
practice in Kineston. Ontario, and taught the first plastic surgery course at Queen's
University. "Restoring faces and hands took as much as five years," wrote Tilley. "Five
to 40 operations were required."*S
The airmen's and troopers' burns were often catastrophic, reducing the skin to a
rubbery texture as the fire melted hair follicles, sweat glands, and nerve endings.
Often eyelids had burned away. Scarred and disfigured, and often in terrible pain,
warm saline solution baths reduced some of the agony and assisted in skin regrowth.
Undamaged skin from parts of the body were also grafted to burned areas. In this
way, noses were created from the skin of the forehead or the buttocks. One of the
stranges-loking techniques used the tube-like pedicle, made from a patient's own
grafted sin which allowed healthy blood to reiuvenare burned areas and those with
new gafts. After several weeks, the pedicle was cut away and the damaged area was
much improved. However, it took months, sometimes years, to reconstruct the shiny
skin, gnarled hands, and scarred faces. Many, of course, never recovered.
WAR AND MEDICINE
241
ANCE-BOMBARDIER LESLIE JAMES was badly injured in Italy while driving a truck
that set off a Tellermine, blowing the vehicle into a roadside ditch. The truck's fuel
anks ignited and James was pinned in the cab. He was finally rescued but was close
o death. Another gunner, John Matheson, found himself in the same hospital as
ames after a shell exploded over him and steel fragments tore through his helmet
and into his skull. Matheson sought out James to offer him some comfort. Despite
lis on terrible wounds, including paralysis from the waist down and with a right-
ided hemplegia (paralysis of the right arm and leg), Matheson was always badly
shaken by visiting the man he remembered as virile and athletic.
"With no nose, no
kai, no ears —his eyes and mouth were slits— he was terribly hard to look at. His
lands were mere stumps."46 These were not easy visits. Following his thirty-ninth
sugery, James died of his grievous burns and secondary complications. Matheson
parally recovered from his serious injury, although he wore steel leg braces his whole
lit: Returning to Canada, he practised law and served as a Liberal member of
Palament from 1962 to 1968, a position that allowed him to play a critical role in
the adoption of the Canadian flag. James was cruelly cut down in his prime; Matheson
helped shape Canada. That was their war.
