520
ENDNOTES
68. Terry Copp, "Canadas D-Day: Politics, Media, and the Fluidity of Memory," in
Michael Dolski (eds.), D-Day in History and Memory: The Normandy Landings in International
Remembrance and Commemoration (University of North Texas Press, 2014) 148-9.
69. lan McKay and Jamie Swift, Warrior Nation: Rebranding Canada in an Age of Anxiety
(Toronto: Between the Lines, 2012) and Noah Richler, What We Talk About When We Talk
About War (Fredericton: Goose Lane, 2012).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
YUL
Writing books is usually like attritional warfare: fraught with heavy casualties and
yielding few breakthroughs. This book was different. I wrote it alongside volume I,
The Necessary War, and like it, Fight to the Finish was an anchor in the storm for me.
During the long process of putting words to paper, I was battling a serious illness and
these books offered a coping mechanism for my own personal war. I took solace and
strength from the writings of Canadian soldiers, sailors, and airmen, even as I mar-
velled at how men, usually half my age, dealt with their own fear, anxiety, and strain.
Most faced death with a grim but resilient attitude.
As in my previous seven books, I have benefited from the generosity of fellow
historians who took time from their busy schedules to read the manuscript. Their
comments have saved me from errors of commission and omission, and have helped
to sharpen and shape key parts of the argument and text. I am indebted to Dr. Mike
Bechthold, Eric Brown, Dr. Terry Cook, Dr. Doug Delaney, Dr. Serge Durflinger,
Dr. John Maker, Dr. J.L. Granatstein, Dr. Stephen Harris, Dr. Peter MacLeod, Mike
McNorgan, Chris Chance, and Dr. Roger Sarty.
Doucette at the Canadian War Museum's Military History Research Centre, and
Sonia Doyon from the Ottawa Public Library, for their supply of books and access
to archival material. My colleagues at the CWM have offered ongoing scholarly
comradery, especially James Whitham, Peter MacLeod, and Andrew Burtch.
I would like to thank Sarah Cook and Matthew Walthert for researching into the
Canadian Images and Letters Project and the Dominion Institute's Memorial Project.
For the better part of a decade, Diane Turbide has been my champion at Penguin
