112 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
paybook and wallet, along with lighter, matches, and cigarettes. Their identification
discs were worn against the skin on a chain around the neck and provided critical
information in case of death. Even the non-religious soldiers often carried a small
Bible. As Farley Mowat wrote, "Innumerable tales have been told in every nominally
Christian army about men whose lives were saved because the Bibles they carried in
their breast pockets stopped what otherwise would have been fatal bullets. Who
were mere soldiers to argue with such widely held beliefs? Mowat had his life saved
not by a Bible but by a can of bully beef that stopped a bullet.
Riflemen were equipped with the dependable bolt-action Lee Enfield rifle and a
bayonet. Many of the infantry were also issued a wicked-looking knife, strapped to
the leg, which inculcated the fighting spirit, although most hoped not to be reduced
to hand-to-hand combat. Each infantry section of ten infantrymen had two special-
ists equipped with a Sten and Bren machine oun. The former was a dodou sub-
machine thar looked like it was made by a blind welder. It had a hairpin trigger and
a poor safety mechanism. Soldiers found it was liable to go off at any time. But it
offered automatic fire and it was usually used by the section commander The Bren
a larger and more robust weapon, consumed ammunition at a rapid rate. but the
Canadians had faith in its high rate of fire and all infantrymen carried their share of
30-round Bren magazines for the machine-gunner.?2 The PIAT (Projector, Infantry,
Anti-Tank weapon) was unwieldy and inaccurate beyond 100 metres, but the
Normandy soldiers would find like their cousins in Traly. that the baronto like
weapon could knock out an enemy tank at close range, even if it felt like a pea-
shooter against those metal monsters. Though infantrymen were used to being laden
down like Chrismas trees before the scale thou would bare to humn even more
grenades, ammunition, anti-tank mines, wite cutters, wireless sets, and long cylin
drical Bangalore torpedoes to cut wire. Only vears of minine and built-up core
strengh, mired with controlled fear and a surge of adrenaline, would push the infan-
try to run when they hit the landing beaches.
While mos infantrymen felt an affinity to the brigade and division it was the
battalion that defined a soldiers identity. In the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division,
thete wete nine infantry battalions
usually known, confusingly, as regiments- in
chree brigades. The 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade, commanded by permanent force
PLANNING THE INVASION
113
officer Brigadier Harry Foster, was formed from three western battalions, the Canadian
Scottish Regiment, the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, and the Regina Rifles. Brigadier
Ken Blackadder, a militia officer from Montreal, commanded the 8th Canadian
Infantry Brigade, which consisted of the Queen's Own Rifles, the North Shore (New
Brunswick) Regiment, and Le Régiment de la Chaudière, the only French-speaking
battalion in the 3rd Division. The 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade, led by Brigadier
D.G. Cunningham, held the Highland Light Infantry of Canada from Waterloo
County, Ontario; the North Nova Scotia Highlanders; and the Stormont, Dundas
and Glengarry Highlanders, which had initially recruited from and been formed by
communities around Cornwall, Ontario. The infantry numbered fewer than 8,000 in
the 18,500-strong division, but they comprised the sharp end of the spear. Three field
artillery regiments and an anti-tank regiment consisted of another 2,400 artillery offi-
cers and gunners. There was also an attached heavy machine-gun and mortar battalion
that used the Vickers machine gun and the 4.2-inch mortar. This increased fire-
power- in the case of the 3rd Division, from the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa—
could be grouped with the battalion's own support company, who were equipped with
mortars and anti-tank guns, to concentrate fire when needed.
An infantry battalion consisted of 40 officers and 812 other ranks, although after
any time in the field these numbers were reduced by casualties, illness, and postings.
The fighting strength came from the four rifle companies-A, B, C, and D, or Able,
Baker, Charlie, and Dog- each composed of 5 officers and 122 other ranks, and
commanded by a major. The companies had three platoons, which, at full strength,
consisted of 37 men: three sections of 10, each led by a corporal; as well as a platoon
headquarters, commanded by a lieutenant and supported by a sergeant, three mortar
men, and two runners. There was also a support company of 7 officers and 185 other
ranks that operated mortars, universal carriers, and anti-tank weapons, and engaged
in pioneer work. The added frepower from the sir 2 inch mortars and the six carrier-
towed &-pounder anti-tank guns could stop massed infantry and armoured attacks,
wich the G-pounders boasting a range of 2,500 metres and the ability to kill enemy
tanks at 800 metres. These large weapons were still out-gunned by German tanks,
but they ensured that, if used closely with the riflemen, a battalion had a fighting
chance against an armoured thrust. Thirteen universal carriers, also known as Bren
