ANCAVORMSION
HIGHRS
CAMERONS
ІттАск
SOUTH OF CAEN, JULY 18-21,
1944
OPERATION SPRING
211
Ome, on the 18th, in a fierce battle that lasted into the next day. On the other side of
the Ome, Le Régiment de Maisonneuve and a squadron of Shermans burst out of Caen,
running southward along the Orne in a smart manoeuvre that took the Germans by
suprise. The Maisonneuves were hit by their own artillery fire but reorganized and
pressed forward into Fleury-sur-Orne on the 19th; this put them behind the German
defenders across the Orne at Louvigny. The tanks of the Sherbrooke Fusilier, a Quebec
unit offered fire support. Sergeant John Taylor, who less than a month later was wounded
and invalided home, wrote in his diary, "Going was tough —killed several Germans."47
everal Germans
The 2nd Division had performed well in its first day of sustained battle in Normandy,
and by the end of the 19th, the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada
occupied the town of Ifs, about 1.5 kilometres southeast of Fleury. Another push by
the Calgary Highlanders was stopped by concentrated mortar fire coming from cam-
culaged enemy slit trenches along Verrières Ridge, combined with an armoured
cunteratack from Ist SS Panzer Division. With Verrières Ridge directly in the path
d/ the 2nd Division, the Canadians paused on the 19th, warily eying an enemy line
that was bristling with guns.
SMONDS TEED UP A NEW PUSH. This move was at odds with his mission of provid-
ig a protective flank for the British in Operation Goodwood, since the British were
to winding down the fighting on that front, having made little progress. But
Simonds wished to hound the Germans from the villages of Verrières, St. André, and
i Martin along Verrières ridge. St. André and St. Martin were situated on a wide.
open ridge, with a gentle 75-metre rise covered in ripening wheat to the crest, and
tries on the reverse slope below the crest. On the other side of the ridge's natural
hair, he Germans situated many of their tanks and counterattacking forces, mak-
i8, them relatively safe from Allied shellfire. Despite this strength, Major-General
fuks, commander of the 2nd Division, reported to Simonds on the 20th that "the
any ovard (defences) appeared softening up.48 This was nonsense. The general
vo repeating what he knew Simonds wanted to hear, with Foulkes having the
fotunate tendency to ingratiate himself to those in higher command positions.
imonds had told his senior officers only a fortnight earlier that it was "fatal to stop"
ad that he was willing to accept up to 70 percent casualties to achieve his objectives. 49
