326
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
AT SHORE REGIMEN
La Trésorerie
ENGLISH
CHANNEL
CODT DE
/A LA CRECHE
SEP Ti8 SEP
COLONNE DI
LA GRANDE ARMÉE
101
22 SEP
QUEEN'S OWN'RiFLES OF CANADA
STORMONT DUNDAS &
GLENGARRY HIGHLANDERS
Ron oone
I sur-Mer
ORTH NOVA SCOTIA MICHLANDEAS
HIGAARRONS
OF OTTAWA
1 MILES
CAPTURE OF BOULOGNE, SEPTEMBER 17-22, 1944
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
327
long to wait, although theirs would have to be a similar, methodical siege. Operation
Wellhit would see Major-General Dan Spry's 3rd Division snuff outposts along a
series of high hills that ringed the landward advances, before the attackers closed
on the town itself. Even though the fort's main armaments were directed out towards
the sea, the German hind-end defences bristled with guns—ninety pieces of at least
75mm calibre or higher-and were sheltered by concrete and steel, able to resist all
but direct artillery shell strikes.21 "The 25-pounder shells would bounce off those
fortifications like peas off a tin pan," lamented the Commander Royal Artillery
(CRA) of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, Brigadier Stanley Todd. These for-
midable positions would have to be reduced by artillery, bomber, and rocket fire, as
well as careful counter-battery fire based on gathered intelligence, but much of the
Canadian Corps medium and heavy artillery was assisting the British 51st Division's
siege of Le Havre, the second largest port in France and about 240 kilometres away
on the coast. Any assault on Boulogne and its 10,000-man garrison would have to
wait for these siege guns. In the meantime, the guns commenced their softening up
of the enemy positions outside the concrete emplacements, even as the gunners suf-
fred ammunition shortages.?3
Major-General Dan Spry, an Italian campaign veteran, at age thirty-one was
the youngest general in the Allied forces. He had a feel for battle and was aware
of the weak morale among the enemy garrison troops, but there was no easy way
to bring the fortress to surrender. A direct charge would be costly for his troops,
and Spry hoped that a punishing bombardment, combined with terror weapons
such as flame-throwers, would lead to surrender for the trapped defenders.
The Wasps- universal carriers fitted out with flame-throwers-spouted a napalm-
He liquid fire that burned through flesh and bone. The Germans were terrified of
Pame-throwers, and always called down artillery or mortar fire to knock them out.
Corporal Horace Tudhope of the Algonquin Regiment was torn between the act of
kling with fame and the need to end the war as soon as possible. Tudhope embraced
the Wasp, and even manned one for a time. but he still helieved. after seeing the
carbonized remains of the enemy, that using napalm "was a terrible thing."24
Throughout the week starting on the 5th. hundreds of demoralized German pris-
oners sneaked from their lines to surrender to the besieging Canadians. And in a
