378 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Brussels or England, but almost no one was sent to Canada. The "48s" were extremely
popular, and soldiers going on leave received their banked pay, pooled souvenirs from
mares to sell to rear-echelon types for extra cash, and went in search of "R and R'-
Rest and Relaxation—or "I and I"-Intercourse and Intoxication.
During this supposedly quiet period, between November 9 and December 31, 1944,
68 officers and 1,171 other ranks from the First Canadian Army were killed or
wounded. The Germans across from the Canadians suffered even heavier losses.
Many demoralized enemy soldiers voted with their feet, with the "line-dashers" sneak-
ing into the Allied trenches clutching leaflets promising safe passage. This they were
given, although they were interrogated, too, to determine what was triggering the
surrenders. Many of the prisoners claimed that their units were hanging together only
because hard-core Nazi officers and NCOs threatened the men with execution. But
prisoners eager to please new masters are not usually trustworthy sources of informa-
tion, and the Canadians found little rot in the enemy lines.
In late December, Hitler ordered a last-ditch offensive in the Ardennes, known
as the Bale of the Bulge. The Germans were always at their deadliest when they
seemed beaten, and they revealed an amazing ability to reform new formations from
the shattered pieces of old ones. Yet even with a reconstituted force, Hitler deluded
himself in thinking another miracle blitzkrieg could be unleashed by thirty or so
depleted divisions, with his forces crashing through to Antwerp and forcing the
Western Allies to the negotiating table. The logistical challenges of piercing the Allied
lines on a narrow front meant that the breakthrough would not likely get far, even if
his divisions ransacked Allied supoly dumps. Nonetheless. Fisenhower's command
had long surmised that the German army in the west was near death. The Allies sense
of surprise at the operation, when it was launched on December 16, was akin to that
of a group of doctors watching a terminal patient have his life support shut down and
then lurch out of bed. In this case, the patient even took a few wild swings. But a
shortage of Avis fuel a resilient American defence neund Ractanne Allied airpower
and a rapid shift by Patton's Third Army put paid to the last-ditch offensive. Hitler's
final gamble on the Western Front only resulted in eating up his remaining reserves
of armoured formations and leading to the death of 19 659 and the wounding of
38,600, with another 30,000 listed as missing.& However, the Wehrmacht's strike,
BATTERING GERMANY
379
which cost the Americans about 70,000 casualties and prisoners, caused Eisenhower
and his planners concern about the beast that refused to die.
AS THE WINTER LENGTHENED, the Allies planned their drive into Germany. The
battle for the Rhineland aimed to clear enemy defenders west of the Rhine and east
of the Maas, and to allow for the invasion into the heart of Germany. Montgomery
ordered Crerar's First Canadian Army to attack from Nijmegen, pushing southeast
along the Rhine River to meet a southern pincer moving northwestward from the
U.S. Ninth Army. This area, the German Siegfried Line, consisted of a series of anti-
cank positions and minefields protected by flooded fields and wide swaths of forest,
particularly the Reichswald and the Hochwald. A few good roads ran through towns
such as Goch and Cleve, both of which had been transformed into fortresses. The
Allies had hoped the ground would still be frozen, but the thaw came in late January
and the front was reduced to a morass of mud.
Wich the Luftwaffe unable to put up many planes, it was not until February 6,
two days before the operation, that the Germans became aware of the buildup
A Canadian artillery gun team fires its 25-pounder.
