12
INTRODUCTION
of veterans and the memory of the war are recounted here, as they are crucial for
providing the capstone to the meaning of the Second World War.
And now, in the twenty-first century, the voices of veterans are becoming muted
with time and age. This is the story of the survivors and the dead. It is about the war
at the sharp end in all of its complexity. Canadians sacrificed much in the struggle.
It is our duty to remember and to understand. This does not mean we must turn
to hero worship. Surely that generation would recoil. It would be an even greater
mistake, however, to misunderstand the past by judging it through the lens of
present-day values. The two world wars shaped the modern twentieth century and
forever changed Canada. Yet we need to understand war as an event within its own
time and place. It was a time of brutality and desperate survival; those Canadians
who enlisted had no idea how it would turn out, and for the first half of the war,
from 1939 to 1943, there was the very real possibility that the odious Nazi regime
would win, or at least force a draw and rule Europe. From 1944, there would be
many battles to bring down Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich. Tens of thousands of
Canadians never made it home in the fight to the finish.
CHAPTER 1
AIR WAR
"Each month brings heavier raids and heavier losses," recounted Royal Canadian Air
Force (RCAF) Flight Lieutenant Leslie McCaig of No. 426 Squadron in his diary in
late August 1943. "I can't help feeling that before many weeks a real push will begin
on the continent. German morale must suffer from the relentless pounding the RAF
is giving their cities."' The twenty-seven-year-old McCaig from Ormstown, Quebec,
was a keen observer of the air war and the part he played in it, and he watched as
Bomber Command added new planes and squadrons to its growing strike force. His
squadron was a part of No. 6 Group, the Canadian-led bomber group that would
eventually consist of fifteen RCAF bomber squadrons that were taking the war to
German cities.
The first three years of bombing, from 1939 to 1942, had little impact on German
wartime production or any measurable effect on civilian morale. Plans at the start of
the war to target German industry and command centres with daytime bombing
had quickly degenerated into a ghastly turkey shoot. The visible Royal Air Force
(RAF) bombers were blown out of the skies by anti-aircraft guns and German fight-
ers. The switch to night bombing saved some of the aircrews. It also complicated the
task of finding blacked-out cities and then hitting targets. Yet the struggling British
nation, losing on almost every front, had few other means of striking back at the
Germans, and so it built up its bomber force. Yet by late 1942 Bomber Command
consisted of only 11 percent of the entire RAF, with Fighter, Coastal, and Training
Command engaged in multiple operations around the world.? The losses of the early
years slowed the expansion of the bomber force, but throughout 1942 and 1943 the
