10
366 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
criminal to keep those reinforcements at home." Who could blame angry soldiers
like Pigott, Bell, and their mates for feeling betrayed by the nation and government
for which they fought?
THE DIVISIVE CONSCRIPTION DEBATE raged through October and November, but
by the time King made his decision, the Canadian Army was pulled from the line.
The immediate crisis had been averted. The Canadians suffered 6,367 casualties in
the Battle of the Scheldt, and an equal number of British soldiers serving in the First
Canadian Army were killed and wounded. In their complete defeat, the Germans
lost more, as the 64th Division was annihilated and other divisions were thrashed.
Some 24,000 became prisoners, and unknown thousands of additional Germans
were buried." One First Canadian Army document observed that the campaign was
"as bitterly contested as any operations have ever been."! Yet Simonds's army had
opened up Antwerp, and in few other periods in all of Canada's rich history did its
military force play such a crucial role in coalition warfare. Even though Montgomery
had made a self-admitted error in shorting the First Canadian Army of divisions
and resources, and in giving them too much of a job to do, the Canadians had
delivered victory.2
CHAPTER 14
BATTERING GERMANY
The German fronts were collapsing in the east and west, but the centre continued to
hold. And so it was battered by the Allied bombing campaign. Though General
Dwight Eisenhower had exerted control over the aerial armada in preparation for
D-Day and, by shattering the rail and road lines, had slowed the enemy's ability to
shift forces to shore up defensive positions, Sir Arthur Harris (and his American
counterpart) re-exerted control over their bomber groups before the Battle of the
Scheat was won. Harris reinstated his policy of city busting, believing that his
bombers could best degrade the German capacity to wage war by destroying factories
and urban centres, although this idea remained contested even within the RAF sen-
lor command. Harriss superior, Sir Charles Portal, had issued orders to focus attacks
on the petroleum industry, but Harris pushed back and used the bombers as he saw
fr. Peroleum was far down the list of targets. The oil factories were dispersed, and
Haris knew that his aircrews could not hit them with any degree of accuracy. Even
with the evolution in tactics and technology, sorties against targets in rural areas or
on the periphery of cities left too many bombs landing on empty farmland. But
Harris was not nearly as headstrong or disloval as some historians have suggested, for
abour 15 percent of the missions were directed against oil, which was not inconsider-
able given the wide range of targets available. from tactical biectives that would
support the land formations to transportation hubs and cities?
Bu the late fall of 1944. enemy ground defences were severely degraded. much of
the Lufwaffe had been shot down. and large sectors of its radar installations had
been overrun. The skies swarmed with Allied fiohters and hombers. The last of
