18 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
American losses. In August 1943 alone, the German fighters claimed 250 Allied aircraft
shot down, with most of these being American bombers. 2 These casualties culmin-
ated in a daylight raid against Schweinfurt on October 14, 1943, that saw 60 out
of 291 American bombers sent flaming to the earth. 3 Licking their wounds and forced
to rethink how to draw out the Luftwaffe on more favourable terms, the Americans
would no longer fly deep into Germany without long-range fighter escorts. The blunt
true-believer Sir Arthur Harris was undeterred. He would send his RAF and RCAF
forces against Berlin alone.
The RAF and RCAF push against Berlin began on November 18, when a force of
440 Lancasters struck, including 29 bombers from Nos. 408 and 426 RCAF squadrons.
K371
Lancasters of RCAF's No. 419 Squadron. The bomber in the foreground
was shot down later that same evening during a raid over St. Ghislain.
AIR WAR
19
Diversionary strikes were launched against other cities to draw away German fighters,
and they succeeded. Thick clouds and freezing temperatures over Berlin also made it
difficult for the Luftwaffe to locate the bombers, although this also meant that the strik-
ing of key targets was almost entirely impossible as high winds scattered the falling
bombs and incendiaries. Still, only 9 of the 440 bombers were destroyed, and Harris
was thrilled with the surprise attack, even if no industrial buildings or factories were hit.
Harris launched a series of offensives throughout the month, and on the nights of
November 22, 23, and 26, the Germans reported 8,701 buildings razed and 4,330
civilians killed. These attacks were painful stabs against the city, but not death blows.
As part of the November 22 attack involving 764 bombers, including 110 from
No. 6 Group, the first Canadian-built Lancaster, Rubr Express, took part in the raid,
but it had to turn back when its Packard-built Merlin engines lost power. ' The repor-
ter and photographer sent to get the story demanded an "exclusive,"
and so the crew
went through a fake debriefing, with the pilot, Flight Sergeant Harold Floren of
Weyburn, Saskatchewan, told to act the hero. Many other bombers made it through.
Those November raids pounded Berlin, and attesting to the broad swath of ruin,
bombs fell over 180 square kilometres, hitting key manufacturing areas such as the
Alkett tank factory that was damaged on the night of the 27th.'5 While precision
targeting of known factories or warehouses remained nearly impossible, the wide-
spread bombing terrorized much of the city.
Civilians were shaken on the ground, but morale also withered among the air
crews. RCAF No. 6 Group's losses mounted, hitting 6 percent per sortie in December
1943 and 7.3 percent in January, far above the 5 percent per sortie that Bomber
Command's senior staff had predicted was the critical level when squadrons
would be permanently shattered. In the case of No. 6 Group's January casualty rate,
a 7.3 percent loss rate per sortie meant that only 10 crews out of 100 would survive a
30-operation tour. On December 21, 1943, Flight Lieutenant Leslie McCaig con-
fided in his diary, after his best friend Tommy was killed during a sortie and two
more crews were lost over Frankfurt a few nights later, "The laws of fate, skill and
luck are constantly being defied but luck still seems to wear thin after a time."17
Nearly at the end of his tour, McCaig's luck ran out too, and he never returned from
over Berlin on January 20, 1944.
