206 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
battles and the constant air attacks, 9 generals and 137 commanding officers had been
killed or seriously wounded. Yet even with these losses, Hitler remained fixated on a
second landing in the Pas-de-Calais, even as his generals on the Normandy front gnashed
their teeth in frustration. But slowly the German reserves were shifting south, and in a
desire to reinvigorate the Normandy front, Hitler fired his commander-in-chief, Field
Marshal von Rundstedt, and replaced him with Field Marshal Günther von Kluge. But
even the optimistic Field Marshal Rommel warned, on July 15, of a coming crisis.
In preparation for a new offensive round, Simonds's II Corps shuffled eastwards,
with it front lines running through the southern part of Caen and curling up to the
northeast of the city. Directly south of Caen was the critical Caen-Falaise road, and it
was here that the Germans were struggling hardest against British attempts to push
south across the Odon River. The Germans, adapting to the Allies' huge advantage of
naval guns, bombers, and artillery, echeloned their defence in depth to diffuse the num-
ber of defenders holding the front. A forward buffer zone of machine-gun nests and
isolated, patchwork defences was meant to slow any assault, while another zone, usually
900 metres deep, was stacked with mortars, Nebelwerfers, and anti-tank guns. Given the
Alic' command of the air, the Germans were forced to fight in smaller groups, reducing
their knock-out power. These disadvantages were offset by the open, rolling French fields
that allowed the anti-tank guns to make mincemeat of any armoured thrust.
On the Eastern Front, a renewed Soviet offensive,
Operation Bagration, was
launched on June 22, and it tore a hole through the 800,000-strong central German
army group. More than 1.7 million troops, supported by over 4,000 tanks, crashed
against each other, and by mid-August the Soviets had advanced some 300 kilo-
metres and killed or captured 300,000 Germans. Hitler's forces survived the
onslaught only by relying on sacrificial rearguard divisions that allowed the rest of
the armies to retreat and because the Soviets outran their logistical system 37 The Red
Army's victory was chilling evidence to the Western Allies that Stalin's soldiers had
improved immeasurably and would likely be unstoppable in battle. Even as the
Allies in Normandy needed the Soviets to keep the Eastern Front open, there was a
growing wariness towards Stalin. The Allied generals were increasingly told by their
political magers to move more manidly, with the goal of marina to Ronin and holding
it fast against the Communists.
OPERATION SPRING 207
ON THE WESTERN FRONT, the Canadians, as part of Lieutenant-General Miles
Dempse's Second British Army (the First Canadian Army would not be activated
unil July 23), had the unenviable task of continuing to hold down the bulk of the
German reserves, especially the elite panzer divisions, with the Americans facing far
weaker forces. To keep up the pressure, Montgomery ordered an armoured assault
southeast of Caen, codenamed Operation Goodwood, with the goal of driving on to
Falise. As he had with Epsom in late June, Montgomery sold the plan to Eisenhower
a battle that would break the enemy's willpower. The operation was to kick off on
July 18 and coordinate with the Americans, who were to launch their offensive,
known as Cobra, around the same time, although poor weather eventually delayed
the American attack near St. Lô by a week.
The Canadian component of Goodwood, known as Atlantic, would entail
Simond's two divisions attacking through Caen southwards to protect the British
right flank. Simonds urged his forces forward, telling senior officers that the enemy
mas lose to cracking"38 While the epicentre of German strength was opposite the
Bitish to the east, where the wide flatlands there were considered good tank country,
-de Canadian front was defended by several enemy battlegroups and a battalion
of the most feared tanks in the world, Tigers. The massive 55-ton Tigers, with their
dick amour and 88mm gun, could kill a Sherman at 2,300 metres, and were nearly
vulnerable to long-range fire. As Private Bill Hennessy of the Stormont, Dundas
and Glengarry Highlanders remarked of his first encounter with the Tigers, they
Toted so trifying you were scared to death. '3)
Goodwood, with its armour-infantry-artillery fist, was aided by over a thousand
bombers that pounded the German lines and rear areas, as well as by hundreds of
guns hurling a quarter of a million shells into the enemy positions. Though these
bombardments obliterated large parts of the front, troops that were dug in often
survived even the most earth-chatterino of evolosions Within the smoke and dust.
German Tigers and 88s emeroed from the destruction to wreal havor on the advan-
i titors. The age of tanks blasting forward to victory in a blitzkrieg-like
romp was long dead.
Amid the landscape of hrewed-un Shermans and blackened armoured vehicles.
the only saving grace for the Allies was that manv of the Shermans could be repaired
