22 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
1,047 bombers lost-double the number Harris had predicted. The long Berlin
run had proved that the four-engine Stirling was a death trap because of its inabil-
ity to reach high altitudes, and those crews suffered a catastrophic average loss rate
of 12.9 percent per sortie during the operations. 4 The Stirlings were removed from
flying; so, too, were many of the Halifax Ils and Vs, which were replaced with the
more resilient Halifax III. The Battle of Berlin did not knock Germany out of the war,
as Harris had prophesized, and could not be considered a victory because of the high
bomber losses, but it had shown that Germany's capital could be punished by the
striking arm of the Allies. In the end, Harris's plan to destroy Berlin left him weak-
ened in the eyes of his superiors, who were angered by his overly optimistic claims
that the war could be won by the bombers. Perhaps most damaging, the losses were a
blow to morale in Bomber Command.
THE BATTLE OF BERLIN tested all the Ayers, coming as it did on the heels of years of
grave losses to the Bomber Command crews. There were few missions where planes
did not vanish in the night, and an unlucky operation could gut a squadron.
"You
never saw your friends actually die. They were just missing from the station the next
day, remembered RCAF Flight Lieutenant John Zinkhan, a No. 6 Group navigator
who flew in Halfaxes and Lancasters?5 Norman Emmott of No. 433 Squadron, a
prewar RCAF ground crew who re-enlisted as a navigator echoed Zinkhan. "The
airman practically never ses death at close quarters, never is required to advance over
dead bodies, and seldom ses his comrades illed beside him '26 After a sortie, lockers
were emptied. Names came of the roster board. And the war went on. Of course,
chums missed chums, but the distressing losses required a callousness for dealing
with those who never returned from the night-time operations.
Airmen who were killed in Aying accidents or were mortally wounded during
a sortie were usually interred in a cemetery near their base, RAF Ayer D.J. Matthews
was assigned the task of gathering and inventorying the personal effects of six crew
members whose plane few into a nearby hillside Ir was a mainful tash Me also repre-
sented No. 547 Squadron at the burial of several of his British comrades I+ mined
throughout the service and Matthews spent much of the ceremony watching the
mother of one of the slain airmen, a tiny woman with "pinched features" She had
AIR WAR 23
lost her first husband in the Great War, the second husband during this war, and now
her son.
"She seemed beyond tears." 7
Though the dead were buried quickly, the notification of the next of kin in Canada
was often mired in bureaucratic tangles. Multiple official letters were sent to families
to update them about a slain son or father. Far worse was the fate of a missing airman
over Europe. Most were killed when their planes exploded, but some parachuted
safely and were captured on the run from the Gestapo, the Nazi paramilitary police
force. Those at home agonized over the lack of definitive information. 8 As the
months stretched out, hope flickered and faded.
Desperate families needed details to reconstruct the last moments of their loved
ones in order to begin that process of healing. Possessions were usually sent back to
Canada, along with a letter from the commanding officer, the padre, and maybe a
few squadron comrades. With so many of the airmen listed as missing, grieving com-
munities prayed for a miracle, with the uncertainty lasting for months and then
years. While occasionally a flyer did turn up, having been protected by the French or
Dutch resistance, more often the missing were gone: atomized into vapour, burned
beyond recognition, or buried in graves by the German military or French civilians.
It was not until after the war, when investigators could examine crash sites, talk to
locals, exhume bodies, and exhaust all avenues, that they could declare an airman
killed. RCAF airman James Baker recounted to his mother in a letter, after comfort-
ing a grieving friend whose fiancé had been shot down over Europe, "I certainly
know now what tragedy and heart-aches lie behind that simple statement 'One of
our bombers did not return."?9
AIRMEN WERE GENERALLY not privy to the loss rates of their nightly missions, but
they could look around their own mess and see who did not return. The empty
disproportionately fell on the inexperienced crews. They succumbed to poor weather
dy el tria of the cos of the bombing resum, The empy
or made mistakes in the air that drew the attention of night fighters. They did not
know when to turn back legitimately or when to break formation to find cover in a
cloud. Moreover, RCAF Flight Sergeant B.G. McDonald observed during his thirty-
one sorties, "Novice crews didn't get the good kites. They were reserved for the
