316 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Boulogne, Calais, and Dunkirk. Theirs was very much an unglamorous role as the
British and American armies went charging off in all directions towards liberating
Paris and taking the war to German soil. But the Canadian left flank was crucial for
opening up the constricted logistical funnel from the Normandy beachheads. Liberated
ports would relieve the pressure on the Commonwealth's 21st Army Group and the
American's 12th Army Group, consisting of the U.S. First and Third Armies (and later
the Ninth and Fifteenth), which consumed more and more oil, fuel, and ammunition
with each step they took into France.
From August 22 to 30, Crerar's First Canadian Army-consisting of I British
Corps and II Canadian Corps-advanced northeastward, with the British hugging
the coast and Canada's 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Divisions surging ahead to close the
60 kilometres to Rouen and the Seine River. Running and gunning, the Anglo-
Canadian divisions found that rather than German defenders it was the shortage
of fuel, the poor quality of roads, and the crowding and confusion on them that
slowed the pursuit. Reginald Dixon, intelligence officer for the Stormont, Dundas
and Glengarry Highlanders, observed that one infantry brigade took up 27 kilo-
metres of road space, while a full division was strung out along 135 kilometres.* The
stop-and-start advance was annoying for all, but there were no grinding battles like
the attritional struggle in Normandy.
Above the snaking armies, air observers in their Austers scouted ahead, while on the
ground lead units like Il Canadian Corps armoured car regiment, the 12th Manitoba
Dragoons, rushed forward in a ranger role, sending back intelligence to commanders
and guarding bridges across the waterways. Behind the reconnaissance formations
came the main body, moving in "advance to contact" readiness, with troops shaking
out into combat positions at the first sign of enemy fire. Major Doug Mantyre of
the Essex Scottish said that although "not even the most duty-bound infantry sol-
diers relished the idea of acting as bai stuck out in front of a divisional column on
strange terrain and unknown countryside to draw enemy fire." the men followed
their orders. Moving in the opposite direction were thousands of despondent
Germans who gave themselves un to the feet Canadian thou coul cad aften fear-
fully dutching Allied pamphlets that promised safe passage, alone with pictures
of their parents or children to soften the hearts of their captors. Almost all the
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
317
prisoners kept their lives; just as many lost their wristwatches and wallets to light-
fingered victors.
Despite making giant bounds forward, the Canucks were reminded on August 25
that they were far from the campaign's centre of gravity, as Paris was liberated to
wordwide celebration. That was the same day that a large German force ambushed a
group of Black Watch and Royal Canadian Army Service Corps soldiers, who had to
fight off a determined attack. All along the wide front, skirmishes and shoot-outs
continued. "The Germans fought in several different ways," wrote Sergeant Charles
Kipp of the Lincoln and Welland Regiment. "Maybe they would leave an 88 sitting
ona corner or out in a field. When we would come down the road, they would knock
out one of our tanks and everyone would have to stop. Sometimes, it would be sev-
eil hours before we could move again.... The Germans would retreat up the road a
ways and do it all over again; or maybe they would leave a platoon of infantry or just
a machine gun."" The enemy still had the ability to turn and strike.
The next day, on the 26th, the scout platoons of the Lincoln and Welland
Regiment, one of the advance formations on the right flank from the 4th Canadian
Amoured Division, closed to the Seine and, encountering no opposition, crossed
the 80 metres of water using boats and shovels as paddles. The 60-kilometre advance
had cost hundreds of casualties due to enemy mines, shells, and bullets, but the
operation was a cakewalk compared to Normandy. While most of the Germans had
already fled across the Seine in their headlong retreat, even combat-hardened Allied
sodiers could not help but allow themselves to think, as the wild rumours predicted,
bathe campaign might be winding down. But not all were optimistic. Reginald
Dion warned in his diary, "We have to curb the tendency to feel too much like
Iberaing heroes. The war was not over."?
WHILE THE 3RD AND 4TH CANADIAN DIVISIONS cleared enemy stragglers on their
fronts which intelligence described as "confused and disoroanized"_-and provided
die cover for engines to build Bailey bridges across the water at Elbeuf for follow-on
forces, the 2nd Division ran up against two German battlegroups. The 2nd SS Panzer
Drision and the 85ch Division defended the high ground within the Forêt de la
Londe. Expecting a routed enemy, the 4th and Gth Canadian Infantry Brigades
