254
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
take over the division. He was lucky, however, to inherit some experienced officers
from Italy, who helped to calm the raw troops before their first battle. Nonetheless,
many were shaken as the units formed up in the apocalyptic remains of blackened
and twisted tanks and vehicles, and near the shallow graves of their comrades-in-
arms-all reminders of Operation Spring.
Totalize was set for midnight on August 7. Stockpiles of more than 150,000 gal-
lons of gasoline and 200,000 shells were stacked in mountains.20 The 51st Highland
Division and 2nd Canadian Infantry Division were set to attack along the Caen-
Falaise highway, driving to a distance of 7 kilometres before the second phase
commenced. Opposite the Canadians was the 89th German Infantry Division,
which had recently arrived from Norway and consisted of eight battalions, largely of
non-German troops (and therefore seen as less reliable). Yet it was backed by the
usual assortment of mortars, artillery, multi-barrelled Nebelwerfers, and about sixty
88mm anti-tank guns." This "ring of steel," noted Major D. W. Grant of the Toronto
Scottish Regiment, would be exceedingly hard to break through.? Equally troub-
ling, the Ist and 12th SS Divisions, both formidable forces despite the 12th SS being
down 85 percent strength to some 2,000 fighting men—although supported by
76 tanks and assault guns- were close enough to rush in reinforcements behind the
89th." Simonds was aware of the strong German defences, and he hoped that
the several planned bombing runs would "destroy or neutralize enemy tanks, anti-
tank guns, and mortars,"
while a rapid advance would close the distance with the
enemy guns and allow for the breakthrough. 24
Because of the limited number of roads, Simonds's corps would advance like a
steamroller, in six columns (four Canadian and two British), with about 200 vehicles
and tanks in each formation. Nose to tail, and only about 15 metres wide to accom-
modate four vchies abreast, the columns looked like gargantuan metal centipedes.
*As far as the eye could see were armoured vehicles stretching for two miles towards
the slopes behind Verrières," observed one officer of the Fort Garry Horse?" The
making lines were an enemy gunner's dream target, although wich the thousands of
motorized vehides churning up the earth, the entire front was covered in a gargan-
tuan dust doud.
As the last rays of the long summer day faded, engines started in an unholy clatter,
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
255
and the columns set off around 9 P.M. towards the start line, about 1.5 kilometres
any: Above them a roar filled the night sky as 1,019 Lancaster and Halifax bombers
passed over the battlefield, dropping the high explosive bombs on forward and flank
angers that were lit up by the Pathfinders. Around 11 p.M., the ground rumbled from the
impact, and dust was thrown hundreds of metres into the air; however, as with all bomb-
ing more trees died than enemy personnel.? In the aftermath of the aerial hammering,
che Allied guns opened up in a complex barrage at 11:43 P.M., allowing the Allies to push
cat Rocquancourt, Fontenay, and Cintheaux on the right side of the dividing road to
Falise, and to Garcelles-Secqueville and Lorguichon on the left.
The gloom of darkness, dust, and defensive smokescreens was cut by search-
lights and tracer fire. Into this destruction went the columns, almost blind, with
no idea if the enemy had survived and, if so, where he was located. Each column
bad fail tanks at the front beating the ground with their chains in search of mines.
The procession moved in lurching starts and stops in the lowest gear, trying to keep
up with the creeping barrage that marched off at 100 metres a minute towards
objectives more than 6,000 metres away. Some shells fell short into the columns,
due to faults in the rounds or worn-down gun barrels, leaving burning vehicles
aming up the columns until they were rammed off the road. Other vehicles that
ite pushed out of the line or that drove off mistakenly in the wrong direction
ite sometimes fired on by the column, which mistook them for enemy tanks.
Chaos ruled. All of the Allied soldiers were used to friendly fire, as demoralizing as
i sad ar perational reports found that at least 7 percent of identifiable
al fragments removed from British and Canadian casualties had come from
Mind ordance? Private Elmer Allard of the Algonquin Regiment, who was hit
wich shrapnel in the shoulder a few davs later. recounted that "it was just like the
tad of the world "28
The thre lead infantry battalions of 4ch Canadian Infantry Brigade of the 2nd
Dision-the Royal Regiment of Canada, the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry, and
the Essex Scottish Regiment-were borne forward in the armoured Kangaroos.
Men sat sweating, fingering their weapons, staring in silence or pravino While
sing in the armoured vehicles was safer than being outside, the infantry had no
arol over their destiny, could see nothing, and could only wait in dread for each
