284
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Soldiers found many ways to cope with the strain of service, and their embracing of
The Maple Leaf in Italy resulted in editions appearing by war's end in other theatres,
including England, France, Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands.
Away from the shells, the soldiers banded together to play soccer and baseball
games. Sports offered leisure breaks, kept the men fit, and integrated the new
reinforcements into the squadrons and platoons. Canadian mobile baths moved into
the field, and records revealed, in that chit-counting army way, that from May to
July, 60,458 soldiers benefited from the waters. l& There were demonstrations on how
to clear minefields and instruction in cliff climbing. Small-unit tactics were prac-
tised, especially sections firing and advancing together, as well as moving forward
within stimulated artillery barrages to close the distance on enemy positions. The
blade was being honed for another battle.
• Jerzt... Eves the kitchen sink !!! .
. A tank 2 _ 1 don't think so, Sir, but 1!
THE GOTHIC LINE
285
THE CERMAN WAR EFFORT WAS IN A SHAMBLES. Cities in the Fatherland were being
steadily reduced as the bombers carried out relentless missions. In the summer of
1944, the Eastern Front collapsed in the face of a series of Soviet offensives, and
by mid-August the clash in Normandy was almost lost. Eisenhower also opened a
new front on August 15, when the Allies invaded southern France. The Germans
retreated from this new threat, but lost tens of thousands of soldiers captured or
kille in the process. The Dragoon landings, as they were code-named, liberated key
Mediterranean ports at Toulon and Marseilles to partially alleviate the Allies' logis-
ical problems. And now, in Italy, the Germans faced another colossal blow, although
de Alied force there was much reduced from the Dragoon operation that had
siphoned off seven American and French divisions and more than half of the Allied
apower. Only the most optimistic planners in the Eighth Army believed a break-
through was possible through the German lines and further into the Alps towards
Viena. But success would be defined as destroying and drawing down the strength
of the German defenders.
Playing into the Allies hands, Hitler rushed a dozen additional divisions to the
lala front during the summer of 1944, despite their being critically needed in
the eastern and western theatres. While the Allies still had an enormous advantage
in the is the ground forces were approaching parity.!' A deep Allied thrust under
such conditions- and through the rocky terrain and natural barriers- seemed
mikely, but the goal was battle not breakthrough.
The German commander-in-chief in Italy, Field Marshal Albert Kesselring, was
prepared for another Allied offensive but remained unsure about where it would fall.
Hema way deception plans, having been caught off guard by the Anzio landings
air in the year. With probing attacks all along the line siphoning off his reserves
and acking in forces, he instructed his intelligence officer not to be distracted by
such overations and instead to focus on a number of elite formations that he assumed
would spearhead any assault. One of these was the experienced Canadian Corps.20
Her the Canadian' summer of rest, and in the wake of their victory at the Hitler
bie it were moved to a front, Kesselring felt sure that would be the place where
de Allies would attack.
