YUL
438 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
have been able to retrace my steps through the campaign and to put names to the
places thar had no particular meaning at the time just another place to run in, dig
in and prepare for the counrerartack."" William Victor Williamson, a sergeane in the
Algonquin Regiment, was taken prisoner at the Leopold Canal in September 1944.
As he penned in the preface to his unpublished memoirs, "As most POWs know,...
there is a certain amount of private conflict as one struggles with the memories af
such tragic events. Freedom from captivicy did not end my suffering, I've struggled
with it for the last forry-seven years. Without sounding too melodramatic, my per
sonal freedom would not have been achieved had I not embarked upon the telling of
this story." The reforming of traumatic experiences into words was summed up in the
nice of his memoir: "My Final Freedom.">
THE SECOND WORLD WAR stirs the imagination for many Canadians, and it has
been used as fodder for novels, plays, films, documentaries, and all manner of cultural
produce, Despite this fascination with che war, Canadian writers have produced fe
exceptional novels or plays on the subject. The Great War spawned Timothy Findle's
John en, lane Linguarts he Same Carver, and Joseph Boydenis The Day Alast and
John Grays Bily Bohe Goes as War and Kevin Major's Newfoundland play No. Man.
Land are stayed time and time again. In contrast, the most compelling of the Secand
Word War literay products are by those who served or who were deeply affected by
the war. Infantry officer Colin MeDougalls Execution is a little remembered elassie that
won the 1958 Governor Generals Avard. In the long tradicion of finding dark humour
in war. Earle Birney, a major during the war and one of Canadas most respected
poets, penned Turny, which won the 1950 Stephen Leacocke Award for Humour. Joan
Walker's wickedly funny book on her experiences as an English war beide in Canada.
Dand My Panta, received the same award four years later. In Quebec, Gracien Celinast
To-Coq, about a French Canadian soldier who loses his girl to another suitor during
she war while he is serving overwas, has been staged countlesa rimes since 1947, and
was made into a movie in 1953, Gelinas did not serve during the war. bur the wory of
disillusionment was one that resonared throughout Quebee, Other than these early
dasics none of which appear to be taught anymore in univeniry liceature clame
there are no touchsrone cultural products from the "good wat."
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
459
If the panoramie sweep of the Second World War experience has been a challenge to
apture in novels or plays, it has, however, been an influential impetus foe video games.
Gitia may scoff at one-man armies wiping our German divisions in coundless first-
person shooter games, bue the creators of these products often go to great lengths to
achieve hisorical accuracy in weapons and uniforms, and even devote time to includ-
ing the contexualizing history. These entertaining games have, somewhat surprisingly,
became an imperus for younger generations to engage in the war. There are online
reference guides for gamers to better understand the history they are enacting, and
surveys suggest that almost all srudents in North America, male and female, have played
vides games by the time they reach college or university," Interest and knowledge are
sparked in different ways, and the sales of video games dwarf those of history books.
While a slew of Second Woeld War films have been made, Canadians have never
produced one of any stature. This is a shame, as stories like the Great Escape of 1944,
which so many Canadian prisoners planned, orchestrated, and took part in, and in
which sie lost their lives, have been co-opted by Hollywood. The Great Evape (1963),
starring Steve MeQueen, will always be an American tale no matter how often
Canadian historians remind an amnesiac public that their countrymen were there
and held crucial roles, and all the groaning shelves of history books will never have
the same impact as a single blockbuster like The Longest Day (1962) or Saving Private
Ram (1998). Of che latter film, it could be said that Spielberg stole D-Day from the
British and Canadians in his powerful if focused telling of the American landing at
Omaha Beach. Canadians watching that film might be excused for being unaware
that a Canadian division landed on the D-Day beaches. There was a brief surge in
interest in Canada's Second Woeld War history in the film's aftermath, bur Saving
Private Run did nor strike deep into the nation's consciousness and no Canadian film
or CBC production has ever been able to build upon Spielberg' succews. Perhaps this
is because, as one Globe and Mail critie sniped, "A quick survey of Canadian film and
TV weatments of the Second Woeld War suggests that if we'd made Saving Private
Ryan, the Allies never would have gotten off the beach."" It is not Hollywoed' job
to portray a balanced account of che war, bur if Canadians do not take the time or
put in the resources to tell their own stories, we can rest assured that the Americans
or British will not do it for un, and they may even seize Canadian history as cheir own.
