222 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and he later testified that the mass of enemy MG42s was "extraordinarily well sited
for cross-fire." *
The operation to capture the summit of Verrières Ridge and then push into
Fontenay-le-Marmion, held by elements of the German 272nd Division, seemed des-
tined to fail. Into the breach stepped twenty-four-year-old Major Philip Griffin, a
former scholar who had enlisted having almost finished his Ph.D. He was described
by a fellow officer as a "brilliant officer of outstanding courage and ability." The Black
Watch, strung out along a lengthy front, faced heavy fire; Griffin nonetheless rallied
his men and corralled tank support? The nasty situation could hardly have been
worse, but Grifin was under pressure from Brigadier Megill and those higher up the
chain of command to push on to the objective of Fontenay. Griffin ordered a new
artillery barrage to adjust for delays at the front, although May-sur-Orne was still held
by the Germans, who were sticking like a thorn into the Black Watch's flank. Around
6:30 .м., not unaware of the grim situation, Griffin sent a patrol to investigate. It
found that the Calgarys had been unable to clear May-sur-Orne and that there was an
enemy machine gun there. Griffin sent a larger force to destroy it, but that too failed.
At that point, with machine-gun positions still active in May-sur-Orne and
St. Martin, Grifin should have called off the advance, but he felt he needed to
snatch some sort of victory. Griffin planned to continue the operation, even when
Brigadier Megill came forward to discuss the degenerating situation. Megill knew
the difficulies of pushing forward through a crossfire, but he did not douse the
ardour of Griffin. Megill might have gathered additional artillery resources or
delayed the attack until the front settled, but Griffin must have assumed that the
Germans would be off balance now, although there was no evidence of such a cir-
cumstance since the enemy had been fighting non-stop for days. Megill, for his part,
testified years later that Simonds pressed him onwards even though the situation
"was almost hopeless."
The Black Watch went forward shortly after 9 A.M., with the Ist Hussars' Shermans
covering the right fank, which was open to the Germans at May-sur-Orne.
"We
headed for the ridge with bayonets fixed," recalled Sergeant MacGregor Roulston,
who was shot in the thigh and taken prisoner. "Cruel 88 airbursts began to rain
down on us with their deadly load of shrapnel. Taking casualties even before they
OPERATION SPRING
223
rached the start line, the Black Watch found that their own barrage failed to sup-
pras the German fire, and most of the survivors thought that there had been no
bombardment at all?® A more perfect killing ground could not have been devised, as
the Black Watch-two companies up and two behind-moved up the gentle rise,
with enemy machine guns on the ridge and on the flanks, and German forward
willery observers calling down accurate fire in broad daylight. The Black Watch did
not panic, even as men were torn apart, thrown back, and taken down. As one of the
German 272nd Division officers on the ridge swore,
"This was a most unreal sight....
(i was sheer butchery."")
About sixty of the Black Watch, including Major Griffin, made it to the top of
the ridge, but then they found themselves surrounded by a dozen Panthers and
dedpanzer IVs, a mobile anti-tank gun, as well as hordes of enemy infantrymen.
They did not stand a chance. The Ist Hussars rushed forward to aid the infantry, but
te hull-down Panthers on the ridge, almost impervious to shellfire, took them
apart. The brave troopers died with their infantry comrades. Only fifteen infantry-
men made it back to the start line, and Griffins was not one of them. Griffin was
dit citized for leading the Black Watch into the killing fields, although surely
te lame must also fall on Brigadier Megill and General Simonds. Much of battle
ia gamble, with decisions based on unclear intelligence and the necessity of rapid
choices, but Simonds encouraged aggressiveness and never fired senior commanders
tor thrusting forward.
I 25 WAS REMEMBERED for the slaughter of the Black Watch, which suffered
23 dead. 101 wounded. and 83 prisoners of war. but all the infantry and armoured
sis were hashly handled, sustaining around 1,500 casualties. 0 This day of battle
ma scond only to ieppe in terms of worst single-day losses for Canadians in the
vie. Simonds men had tried to bite off the ridge and had got their teeth broken in
the process.
Lieutenant-General Simonds proved himself to be particularly intransigent and
-Resible in overseeing Operation Spring, refusing to modify the plan when intelli-
gence revealed German strength and failing to increase the available firepower. A
siming Simonds, who was largely out of touch on the 25th, could only order his
