392 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
questioned the orders that would see lead elements of the 2nd and 3rd Canadian
Infantry Divisions punch forward to the southeast at 3:45 A.M. on the 26th.
The Canadians got off to a good start, with the two divisions' brigades rushing
through the skeleton ruins of Udem. Opposition was overcome all along the front.
One of the many German strongpoints was the hamlet of Mooshof. The Queen's
Own Rifles, attacking as part of the first wave of seven infantry regiments, battled
through the surrounding fields that were reduced to porridge. Preplanned enemy
artillery, mortar, and Nebelwerfer fire pinned down the infantry, but a few tanks from
the Ist Hussars broke through, as well as a handful of infantrymen from the Queen's
Own Rifles. Led by Sergeant Aubrey Cosens of Porquis Junction, Ontario, who had
enlisted in 1939 as an eighteen-year-old railway section hand, the Queen's Own
destroyed a number of paratrooper positions, although more defenders remained in
three fortified farms. When the enemy struck back, the junior officers were killed and
Cosens assumed command of the remaining troops in his vicinity. At one point, the
Queen's Own were down to five men, and Cosens ordered that the four provide
covering fire while he raced across the open ground to direct one of the last Shermans
towards the camouflaged Germans, Somehow Cosens survived the death charge, and
the now alerted tank crashed through a farm. Cosens cleared the other two farms
on his own, wiping out a number of paratroopers. He appeared protected by a divine
hand, but later in the day he was shot through the head. His courage under fire
earned him a posthumous Victoria Cross.
A 3rd Canadian Infantry Division official report observed that the Queen's Own
Rifles advance, which suffered 101 casualties, "proved to be a slow costly business.
The enemy, basing his defence on maximum fire and the minimum number of men,
protested every gain. They supported these tactics with anti-tank and anti-personnel
mines and unusually heavy concentrations of artillery and mortar fire. Every advance
was counter attacked.* Dick Medland of the Queens Own remembered, "The
Germans contested every foot. They put up one hell of a fioht. They threw every-
thing at us. We did the same to them."7s But more than 300 paratroopers were
bagged by the regiment, revealing again that the best defence the Germans could
offer was no longer good enough.
While the Canadian infantry and armour crashed through the 47 Panzer Corps
BATTERING GERMANY
393
and 2nd Parachute Corps, the Germans threw reinforcements into the breach and
all were supported by a heavy concentration of artillery-over 1,000 guns and 700
mortars? Even as the Ninth Army was penetrating deeply to the rear, the Germans
continued to divert their reserves to block the Canadian advance. It was a clumsy
way to fight, but Allied airpower always made it difficult for the Germans to shift
forces to meet emerging threats. Nonetheless, the Germans almost cleared the path
for the Americans as they turned to face the Canadian thrust.
The Canadians continued to take villages and make ground. On February 27,
Lion Group- consisting of the South Alberta and Algonquin Regiments from the
4th Canadian Armoured Division-moved towards the Hochwald, a kidney-shaped
forest. Infantry-tank cooperation had vastly improved, with the infantry sticking
close to the armour to drive off enemy panzerfaust teams while the tanks provided
raking machine-gun and shellfire from the mobile gun platform. The assault cast out
the Germans from a series of crucial crests and ridges, and back-and-forth fighting
Gile to stop Lion Group. In the Hochwald forest, following an Allied barrage, an
insane asylum was damaged, and hundreds of inmates were found wandering the
shattered field. They must have been at home in the twisted wreckage that mirrored
the scenes in their tortured minds.
The German units were buckling under the pressure, yet still the defenders fought
c in smash-mouth battles. One First Canadian Army intelligence report noted
incredulously on the fourth day of combat, "It is impossible to rationalize the present
tactics the enemy between the Rhine and the Maas. Not those of an Army plan-
ung to conserve its forces to fight another day, they are more of the cornered-rat
variety.' The view from the front was no less perplexing.
"The bastards are fighting
maniacs, observed one long-service Canadian officer.78
The medieval town of Xanten, with its Roman amphitheatre, finally fell to the
Canadians on March 8, and Operation Veritable came to an end. The Germans,
baring crown ten divisions into the line to hold the First Canadian Army, had lost
22.239 soldiers who were made prisoners and about that many again in lilled and
rounded. The Canadian casualties were 5,304 killed, wounded, and captured -
slightly more than during the attritional battles of the Normandy campaion 79 As the
Canadian soldiers sang bitterly,
