298
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
battle on the right had revealed no victory, or in the case of the West Novas, grave
defeat, but the thrust by the Perths changed the outcome, attesting to how the aggres-
sion and sacrifice of small groups of men can shift momentum in combat.
The Perths sent in two more companies to widen the breach, but it was a precarious
hold. Confusion was widespread along the front, where all the Canadians were
involved in fierce engagements, with some units thrown back while others held their
ground. Hoffmeister's headquarters struggled to make sense of the shifting front. But
the same situation was plaguing the Germans, who rushed forward reinforcements
only to find them fired upon by the Perths, who were, in effect, behind their lines on
Point 111.
In this gunfight, the Canadians were faster on the draw. The Irish Regiment
and the 8ch New Brunswick Hussars pushed past the Perths propping open the
gap, and around noon on the 31st, they curled to the left and attacked the enemy at
Point 120 on Montecchio hill. The Irish passed over the dead Cape Bretoners who
A camouflage Sherman tank kicking up dust.
THE GOTHIC LINE
299
had gone up the ridge and been driven off the day before. Artillery, tank, and mortar
fire kept the Germans down in their trenches, and the Irish climbed the hill. Sergeant
F) Johnston, commanding one of the platoons, knocked out several machine guns on
hisown, leading from the front even as he was wounded. He was awarded the Military
Medal, and his bravery may have tipped the balance in favour of the Canadians.
Dozens of Germans were killed and another 121 captured at the cost of 18 Irish killed
and 32 wounded. 4 The superb Canadian fieldcraft had evicted the enemy from their
prepared positions, where they had enjoyed all the advantages.
THE GAP IN THE GOTHIC LINE widened as the Canadians unspooled their attack.
Sensing that the enemy defences might be wavering, Hoffmeister-who had proven
as a company, battalion, brigadier, and division commander that he had an innate
kens of batte ordered the 5th Armoured Brigade into the line under command of
the 11th Infantry Brigade and the trusted Brigadier Ian Johnston. The infantry and
amoured force, which numbered seven units, was to overcome three prominent hills,
including the primary objectives, spurs known as Point 204 and Point 253 (Mount
Peloso), about 5 kilometres deep into
the Gothic Line. The enemy was far
from broken and this new attack would
require jamming an armoured blade
into the German innards.
The 30-ton Shermans of the British
Columbia Dragoons put spurs to flanks
a little after 9:30 A.M. on August 31.
Tank commanders tried to coordinate
their four-tank troops, but although the
rudimentary wireless system allowed for
communication, it was easily and fre-
quently knocked out of action. None-
theless, the Canadians pushed the pace
on the Germans and continued to
widen the breach in the enemy lines.
Canada's best fighting divisional commander,
Major-General Bert Hoffmeister.
