YUL
454 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Gordon Francis Cook, a Canadian veteran who served in RAF Bomber Command,
is perhaps instructive in providing a window into one veteran's engagement with
personal memory and war. Cook had graduated from high school in Lethbridge,
Alberta, in 1933, during the worst of the Depression, and he kicked around in a
semi-skilled job in a hardware store while keeping active offering instruction at the
YMCA and winning Alberta-wide track-and-field events. Fit and sporty, with a mop
of curly dark hair, he was also a dead-eye shot, earning the Dominion Marksman
crest. Cook saw war coming in 1939. He visited his English cousins that summer
and enlisted in the RAF at age twenty-five on June 21, 1939. After training as a
navigator, he flew 200 operational hours with No. 601 Squadron on Blenheim two-
seater fighters, including sorties over France before it was conquered. After his long
tour, in mid-1940 he was sent to Canada to act as an instructor with the BCATP. The
instructor became a student, however, and he was retrained as a pilot. He also mar-
ried his childhood sweetheart, Olive Roper, who had been waiting for him. Her wait
would extend three more years. Cook was commissioned as a flight lieutenant in
November 1943 and he piloted Hudsons- usually his bird, "Dominion Castle" - in
the Mediterranean theatre wich No. 608 Squadron, RAF. He flew anti-submarine
patrols and bombing missions from early 1944 for six months before serving with
the South African Air Force from July to November 1944. In that capacity, he sur-
vived fry-six bombing sorties in Venturas over Yugoslavia and southern Germany,
before ending his war flving VIP officials. He survived one serious crash into a moun-
tainside in Yugoslavia on a bombing run and had numerous close calls with Aak. For
pension, health care. and administrative convenience. he was transferred from RAF
to RCAF before discharge.
Like most veterans, Gordon Cook did not know what to do upon his return to
Canada, but his exit interview records suggest that he thought he might like to pursue
civil aviation or work with the civil service. He was described as « mature, co-operative
and a pleasing personality"!! When he was discharged in September 1945, Cook did
not take advantage of the Veterans Charter and on to universit. or borrow money
for a house, or start a business, although he took his wartime gratuity for service and
purchased a small house in Vancouver He was soon hired bu Imperial Oil as a low-
level white-collar manager, where he marked his entire Doctor 1if. His wartime
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
455
service had resulted in the job. His brother, Allan, a veteran of the RCN, did go to
university courtesy of the government and became an architect.
While Cook remained proud of his service, he did not talk much about the war to
his family, which he started with two sons born in 1947 and 1953. But the war's pres-
ence was rarely far from him. Throughout his house, he displayed souvenirs, including
his flying scarf, leather pilot's helmet and headset, a book of aerial photographs, tourist
paintings, carvings, and woodcuts, and a shell splinter that during a sortie had lodged
in his cockpit inches from his head. Service, camaraderie, and even death, in the form
of the shell splinter, were with him daily. But these were not sacred objects, and his two
sons, Terry and Barry, frequently wore his flying helmet in make-believe games or
thumbed through the photographs. He kept his medals in a cardboard box in a dresser
drawer, though he placed enough value on them—and the memories they evoked of
service and friendships-to pursue a ten-year correspondence with the RAF-RCAF to
obtain a missing medal. He had an RAF uniform that he wore for several years on
Remembrance Day, but he grew out of it as he aged and never had it replaced. He did
wear his RAF peaked pilot's cap to the Vancouver Cenotaph every November 11, the
one day a year the medals emerged from the drawer. Closest to his heart was an official
logbook documenting his six years of flying, which, to judge from its crumbling pages,
broken binding, and many later-added notes and explanations, was evidently a living
record. It was his memory talisman, his war service, his proof he'd been there.
Two symbols of Cook's service included a tattoo on his left forearm of the No. 608
Squadron crest, and his moustache, which he grew during the war, RAF-style, and
never shaved off. There were other permanent reminders. While he did not receive a
pension for wounds, Cook suffered from a debilitating neck injury from his wartime
crash. He had to endure a few times a week sitting for an hour in the basement with
a medieval-looking rehabilitative collar brace, attached by ropes and pulleys to a
weighty bag of sand, which he used to stretch his neck, a bit like a man slowly hang-
ing himself. As the years wore on, he talked occasionally to his oldest son, Terry,
about his service, but he had very little interest in studying the war, and rarely picked
up history books. He did make model planes of the aircraft hed flown, painting
them meticulously, almost as if to recapture a vanished world. He very occasionally
went to the local Legion hall to have a few drinks there in the company of fellow
