356
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
had been killed or wounded. Those who were left were haggard, pale, and drawn;
most had lost more than twenty pounds from stress, poor eating, and being pushed
to the mental brink. 2 One Canadian observed of the officers and men in the field-
they all wore "grey masks of exhaustion and shock."63 Their senses were dulled; they
stumbled around in a stupor. Others slept with their eyes open or so deeply that
their comrades feared they had stopped breathing. And when groups of soldiers
slumbered, lying in strange contortions,
the snoring was interrupted by weird
moans, gibberish talk, and even shouts, as they fought private battles in the recesses
of their subconscious.
Everyone in the firezone had frequent brushes with death. Captain Joseph
Greenbatt, a doctor with the Royal Canadian Army Medical Corps, said to his wife
on October 12, 1944, "The last five days ... have been absolute hell on earth, and I
do not think I have ever had such a harrowing and nerve-wracking experience before
in this war. I can honestly say that I have never been more scared in my life...
Perhaps in a couple of weeks time l'l tell you all about it, but in the meantime l'l
lock it in securely?"* Like most soldiers, Greenblatt buried his worry, but over time
the vaults of the mind could not hold back the flood of experiences.
Crerar and Simonds worried about the high levels of casualties to their fighting
forces since Normandy, which were far bevond the proiected rates. Most worrisome
to Crerar was the number of battle exhaustion cases. This affliction was an uncontrol-
L ble bogerman. Crerar was uncertain if coldiere breaking down because of combat
were truly illo if they were faking it. These types of casualties were a significant drain
on manpower strength, with about one in four wounds during July being attributed
to mental stress. S
As early as July 15. Crerar had written to Simonds of hic fear. The general
believed that many of these men were malingerers rather than truly wounded, and
he ordered that the "processes of diciplinary sic action should be tightened up
and speeded up. Secondly, punishment should be as severe as the circumstance
permit. Thirdly, by 'education,' all ranks should be brought increasingly to the view
that 'escapism' is a shameful thing" While he acknowledoed that some soldiers
were afflicted with "real nervous breakdowns" he thought, most certainly errone-
ously, that most of the exhaustion cases were beino faked by men with previously
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 357
defective personalities or who were of "unstable mental character."6 Crerar's beliefs
would not be out of character for a blimpish Great War colonel, and they revealed
both ignorance and fear. Simonds was no better informed, and he took Crerar's
message to heart, writing to his divisional commanders in late August that there was
a noticeable and growing problem of battle exhaustion that "requires the close
antion of commanders to see that malingering is not only discouraged, but made
a disgraceful offence and disciplinary action to counter it."67 Simonds warned that
the situation would likely only get worse among the troops as the unkind living
conditions of the fall and winter months wore away on the men. He made no refer-
ence to the continued fighting also draining soldiers, not to mention the unending
casualties and low rates of long-term survival, all of which were more important
factors in declining morale.
Most of the infantry at the front calculated their chances in the life lottery.
Regardless of his level of combat experience, every man assumed that in the end a
shel, bomb, or bullet with his name on it was going to get him one way or the other.
This type of fatalism— a not uncommon belief that bomber crews embraced as they
t00 endured brutally high casualties allowed infantrymen to face the storm with
some serenity. But even as they continued in their duties, many soldiers embraced
minot wounds that would take them out of the line. In the last war, these had been
known as Blighty wounds. "Blighty" was the nickname for England, and an injury
that evacuated one there was to be welcomed, even if it meant losing a hand or facing
intense pain. The term "Blighty wound" had faded from use by 1944, but men knew
the concept and it was a measure of the difficult fighting in the Scheldt that many
had begun to hope for one.
Some desperate soldiers weighed the poor odds of surviving the battle, or the war,
and realized the only escape was to run away. Desertion meant abandoning one's
comrades. New recruits who had not fit into the ranks, or dispirited ones who had
winessed most of their chums killed or wounded, were less tied to the primary
group and more susceptible to desertion. But anyone could flee if he hit the point of
no return. Captain .S. Huckvale, the regimental medical officer for the Regina
Rides who served many months until he was blinded in one eye by a bullet, remem-
bered bow "Come men who seemed im nerturbable on the parade canare hroke down
