382 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Crerar's army leapt forward at 10:30 a.M. on the 8th, with three British, Welsh, and
Scottish divisions in the lead, along with elements of the 2nd and 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division on the left flank, behind a 1,200-gun barrage that was thickened
up with tanks, airpower, machine-gun fire, rockets, anti-aircraft guns, and anything
else that could deliver hell upon the Germans. The Anglo-Canadian forces nick-
named the brutal show of force a "pepper pot." Canadian Gunner J.P. Brady of the
50th Battery, 4th Medium Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery, witnessed German
prisoners stumbling around in the haze of smoke and fire: "Some reel drunkenly,
others stare vacantly; some shamble along in tears, while others laugh hysterically.*o
None had ever experienced such annihilating shellfire. In addition to the pepper pot,
over 850 bombers dropped their loads on the German-held towns of Cleve and
Goch, and on the Reichswald forest. Afterwards, according to infantryman Donald
Pearce the former woodland "was simply a tangled mass of chewed and broken for-
est trees, blasted trenches and smashed equipment."41
But even with the awe-inspiring firepower, the British advance was slow, as armour
foundered and was confined to a few road systems, all of which were mined and
defended by the Germans 84th Infantry Division. 42 Horrocks later wrote that there
was "no room for manoeuvre and no scope for cleverness."43 The minefields were
particularly effective in delaying the operation. As always, the Germans were ingen-
ious in these activities: their mines were often fashioned in a checker-board pattern,
with several visible to the eye while others were buried below the surface in the other
squares; so the infantry, walking gingerly, thought they were avoiding the visible
mines but actually stepped on the hidden ones. Trooper Al La Rose of the Sherbrooke
Fusilier remembered, "I was glad for the security of my tank. In the Hochwald, in a
minefield. there were a lot of wounded foot soldiers Iving on the oround. Fiven with
my earphones on I could hear them shoutina. 'Stretcher-bearer! Stretcher-hearer!
These guys screaming."44
But neither mines not guns could withstand the surge for long The Q/th Mivision
was overrun along the front, although it was backed by paratroopers who threw
themselves into the path of the Allies. Canadian sergeant Alex Trov of the 5th Field
Regiment, Royal Canadian Arillery, recalled that the Germans were always good on
the defence, but now they were "really tough because the enemy had always before
BATTERING GERMANY
383
been fighting in some other poor devil's country, [and] now he was defending his
own land."4s With the flooded terrain channelling the Allied soldiers towards the
more solid roads, these became natural kill grounds and allowed the outnumbered
German forces to concentrate their strength.
The veteran 3rd Canadian Infantry Division-known as the Water Rats after the
Scheld-mucked forward on the left flank. "The mud was unbelievable," reported
one Canadian infantryman.
deep, and all of our armour was being continually bogged down."46 Much of the
-mucked forward on The rus in the roads were up down.:" Much of the
front was submerged under water. Engineers threw down Bailey bridges to span
impassable fields, and one of them, a pontoon bridge nicknamed Quebec, was
390 metres long. One hundred and fourteen Buffalos, the amphibious tracked vehi-
des, ferried the troops, but they were lightly armoured and vulnerable to enemy fire,
which poured into the Canadian sector from the German-held side of the Rhine.
Veterans of the Scheld realized that there would be no rapid advance under such
conditions, but by February 10 the Siegfried Line was broken.
Wich the 3rd Division guarding the left flank, it was Major-General Bruce
Mathew's 2nd Division, fighting under Lieutenant-General Guy Simonds's now
engaged II Canadian Corps, that was given the best roads to advance on enemy pos-
itions. The previous commander, Major-General Foulkes, had been unpopular and
unimaginative, and he had been sent to replace the fired Burns in Italy, where he
could do less harm to the Canadian war effort. Matthews had accrued a fine record
in laly, Normandy, and the Scheldt, and his experience in set-piece battles would
siste infantry as they punched forward. In the first few days of combat, his infan-
ty and armour met little opposition and secured their objectives.
However, the American assault to the south, which was to have been launched
within forty-eight hours of the First Canadian Army's offensive, was delayed when
the Germans sabotaged dams over the Roer River. The Roer was transformed into
21,000-metre wide raging torrent. With the Americans unable to advance, the
Germans shifred their reserves especially good units such as the 15th Panzer
Grenadier and 116th Panzer Division— to the Anglo-Canadian front. Despite these
new defenders Cretar's army swent onward, capturing village after village. although
all of them cost a toil in attackerd lives Rehind the lines Nurse Harriet Sloan wrote
