306
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
afternoon despite the dust and smoke."63 The West Novas were outgunned by the
Germans and were forced to dig in below the ridge.
On the 15th, the Canadians, Greeks, and New Zealanders, with the British lst
Armoured and 46th and 56th Infantry Divisions on the left flank, cranked the vice a
little tighter along the front, capturing key bridges over several rivers. That day, the
Van Doos finally overran San Martino, with its balustraded 700-room Palazzo des
Vergers, while the West Novas evicted the Germans from the dusty village of San
Lorenzo. It was their fourth attack in forty hours, and it only succeeded when the
West Novas dragged forward their own 6-pounder guns at a crucial moment to blast
enemy trench systems at point-blank range. Nearly every Nova Scotian soldier was
thrown into the line, and skilful support was given by a battle-scarred squadron of
12th Royal Tanks that took on and defeated a German Tiger tank and other lesser
beasts. The 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade was now on a ridgeline and secure against
German counterblows, save for those enemy guns at the Rimini airfield, which was
now behind them. The brigade prepared to make the final push to San Fortunato,
about 5 kilometres to the northwest.
Though pockets of German resistance were encountered along the San Martino
Ridge, and some held out for hours, the Canadians prepared a secure jumping-off
point. Bur problems arose when, during the early hours of the 16th, the Seaforth
Highlanders set out to relieve the 22nd Regiment. Under fire, the two battalions
became mixed up, the handover was botched. and a number of Canadian machine-gun
positions and strongpoints were left empty. The Germans were too skilled to let the
opportunity pass, and about fifty soldiers infiltrated back into the inadvertently aban-
doned San Martino. The enemy force cleverly set up interlocking fields of fire amid the
ruble of the dozen or so houses, and forward artillery officers could now call down
painfully curate fire. The Scaforths moved into the village unaware early on the l6th,
only to be ambushed. Two days of patrols and three set-piece battles later, they still had
not driven out the enemy, who was defended by dozens of guns on the Rimini Line. 64
The Seaforths lost ninety men and San Martino remained in German hands.
By the afternoon of the 17th, the Canadian advance had ground to a halt. The
British on the flanks, near the border of the small Republic of Can Marino, were also
stalled. With the Germans still jutting into the Canadian line at San Martino. Vokes
THE GOTHIC LINE
307
could do little to situate his artillery for a new offensive. The Loyal Edmonton
Regiment was drawn into the battle for San Martino early on the 18th, but the Loyal
Eddies found the Germans were there to stay. Several attacks were turned back
sharply. The PPCLI, hoping to snake forward through the vineyards and fields as
the Edmonton Regiment kept the Germans busy at San Martino, were hit in a cross-
fire from all directions, which blew up half of their tanks. "How anyone survived the
enemy fire directed from San Martino behind us and San Fortunato ahead is a mir-
ade marvelled Lieutenant Syd Frost. The Carleton and Yorks had some marginal
success along the line, pushing northwestward and eventually forcing the Germans
our of San Martino, but the fight felt like a replay of Ortona the previous December,
with battalion after battalion fed into the maelstrom.
THE CANADIANS WERE SHOT THROUGH for their final attack on San Fortunato
Ridge, a promontory running along much of the front and more imposing than
idate Coriano or San Lorenzo ridges. It was also protected by the Ausa River, a
callow ostacle running from Rimini through the Canadian front. Vokes put almost
serything he had in the shop window. It would be a two brigade assault, with the
3d Bigade to engage in an unenviable frontal battering while the 2nd Brigade cut
of the garrison over the Marecchia River, thereby flanking Rimini.
The Canadian ground pounders received good support: the guns from the Eighth
Amy were methodically working over the defenders at San Fortunato and the Desert
Air Fore ombers flew hundreds of sorties against them. As part of the Ist Division's
operation at 5 A.M. on the 18th, twenty-two sites were selected for aerial bombard-
ael, and these were hit by 80 fighter bombers dropping 128 tons over the next
cuple of hours. At this point in the campaign, the DAF and the U.S. Fifteenth Air
Force outnumbered the Luftwaffe by at least ten to one, but it was never easy to
toi bombs on their targets, especially while harassed by flak. When the ground
top moved forward, interdiction artillery fire was directed against enemy rear
positions containing mortars and guns, and this was thickened up by devastating
tral shellfire from warships in the blue waters of the Adriatic.
The Canadians and British crossed the flat plain on the 18th in a series of costly
sales, but the formations remained short of the Ausa River. The grind continued.
