362
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
operation, but the plan was flawed from its conception since the Germans' lack of
mobility meant that they were largely incapable of transferring troops over the wet
ground. The attack on the causeway was little more than a senseless diversion.
Simonds's marshalling of resources to bomb the island and to organize the com-
mando raids was top-shelf, but his order sending the Canadians to their doom
showed a wasteful heartlessness.
By November 8, Walcheren fell to the British commandos and infantry, aided by
Canadian gunners. Four days before the German surrender, Allied minesweepers had
already begun clearing the West Scheldt. Three weeks later, on November 28, the
first convoys carrying war supplies entered Antwerp. Finally, thanks to the First
Canadian Army, Eisenhower's armies began to receive supplies in sufficient quanti-
ties to prepare for the final offensive into Germany.
The battle for the Scheld ended in total victory
for the Canadians but at a terrible cost in lives.
FROM THE FIRST COSTLY DAYS of the
Normandy battles, where the casual-
ties from the Germans frenzied attacks
and the Canadians gritty defence had
bled both sides white, infantry com-
panies were rarely up
to strength.
Major Ronald Shawcross of the Regina
Rifles described how, by the end of
campaign, combat had worn down his
120-strong company; the NCOs "got
thinner by the day and their faces got
gaunt and looked strained, they started
to tremble whenever a shot went off
or a gun boomed.... People came
and went like flies, some wounded
recovered and came back but we never
got above 65 men."s0 Army reports
revealed that by the end of August,
the 800-mann infantry battalions in the
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
363
2nd Canadian Infantry Division were short, on average, about 200 infantrymen. 81
The RCAF bomber airmen received a break after their thirty-operation tour, but
the infantry had to keep fighting until they were maimed or killed. It was not until
Seprember 1944 that the army brought in the "tri-wounded" program, a six-month
tourto Canada for long-service veterans with multiple wounds. But soldier shortages
limited this reward to a paltry three men per battalion per month. 2 There were sim-
ply not enough riflemen to do anything else, even though tens of thousands of other
army non-combatants were behind the lines or in England. The air force had even
begun to demobilize some of its surplus flyers.
The reinforcement crisis was a failure of the army command in England, who had
misread the potential destruction of their units in the unending violence of Normandy.
In battle periods, the normal attrition rates were planned at 48 percent for the infan-
try, 15 percent for armoured units, and 14 percent for artillery. In reality, Normandy
was far more vicious in terms of casualties and the intensity of combat had gone on
for much longer than anticipated, with attrition rates for the infantry at 76 percent,
while armour and artillery had lost 7 and 8 percent of their unit strength. 83
Despite the desperate need for men at the front, about 120,000 National Resources
Mobilization Act (NRMA) conscripts were kept in Canada for home defence, and
about another 90,000 non-infantry remained in Britain 4 Canada had brought in
the NRMA in June 1940 after the fall of France, and it led to limited conscription
for service in Canada. But King had promised these soldiers and the nation that they
would not have to serve beyond the Dominion's borders. In the divisive April 1942
patiscie, Canadians had released King from his promise of not conscripting NRMA
soldiers for overseas service, but the prime minister was shaken by the unrest in
Quebec over the question that French Canadians had overwhelmingly voted against.
Minister of Defence J.L. Ralston demanded that King bring in overseas conscrip-
tion; King resisted, believing it was not necessary at the time. And he was right.
Nonetheless, the NIRMA soldiers were shamed, bullied, and even physically abused.
Very few went "active."ss Even as rumours of infantry shortages circulated in the
summer of 1944 and following, King refused to force the NRMA soldiers into over-
kas service. In his mind, his duty was to ensure unity on the domestic front, and
bringing in conscription even if limited to the NRMA solders-would soli- tha
