408
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
As the new dawn pushed away the grim drabness of the last six years, a Canadian
summer bloomed. The grateful Dutch and Dominion troops drank, danced, and
enjoyed themselves. Canadian boys were taken into the Dutch homes, feted and cele-
brated, nurtured, and shown kindness, and they reciprocated with food, cigarettes,
and even surplus army uniforms. Many soldiers subsided on half rations. "Whatever
we were able to get our hands on we gave to the people," recounted Robert Sawdon of
the Saskatoon Light Infantry, whose older brother did not survive the war. "I have
never forgotten the sight of starving children."18 Other Canadians adopted entire
households, providing food, chocolate, and cigarettes, and handing over money,
working around the house, and acting as adopted sons.
A Canadian enjoying himself among Dutch women. The Canadian liberators mere heroes,
as they shared food and bonhomie among the Dutch population ravaged by war.
VETERANS
409
But armies of occupation, even liberating ones, can wear out their welcome. For
the Dutch-dispirited, humiliated, and starving—the Canucks were a breath of
frch air. Their passion, desire to celebrate, and access to money and goods made
them an appealing group. But as infantryman Lester Sugarman remarked after the
war, "The temptations for soldiers were fantastic."!' Few Canadians were without
gilfriends. Dutch campaigns were mounted that warned young women against
caroting with the Canadians, but they had little success. Dutch men took to
prasuring women to avoid the liberators in uniform out of patriotism, but this
transparent appeal by the shabbily dressed and church-mouse-poor nationals also
had lite impact. The young women made up their own minds and the Canadians
continued to benefit from all aspects of the liberation. As one contemporary Dutch
pumalist commented wickedly, "Dutch men were beaten militarily in 1940; sex-
ully in 1945."20
Most Canadians entered the war inexperienced and innocent; few remained so at
ted. espite the issuing of prophylactics, thousands of babies were born. Shotgun
marigs of both love and convenience led to lifelong unions; in other cases, weddings
fic unsited individuals who were not ready for a life together. Some of these new
Emi can back to Canada, but others were abandoned. Seventy years later, there is
pup of ederty Dutch, born in late 1946 or early 1947, who are still searching for
their Canadian fathers.
Fire i every soldiet had been a saint, friction between the Canadians and the
oa cilians would still have been palpable. Nonetheless, the Dutch have remained
forever grateful to their liberators and there were tearful farewells when most of the
Canadians left before Christmas 1945. The saving of the Netherlands remains a
crucial signpost in the Canadians' memory of the war, and the soldiers rightly took
pic in he feing and feeding of the Dutch. As signaller Norman Penner noted,
"Tate was no doubt that we had been fighting a just war?'21
ETHE LIBERATION revenled the nececcit of having fought in the brutal war to save
Europe, the stomach-churning revelation of concentration camps was further evi-
dence of the evil Nazi regime. Even after the war ended, these sites of mass death still
hed the evidence of the millions murdered, in the form of carefully documented
