164 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
covering the red embers at night to avoid a hoarse chewing out from their officers
or a sniper's bullet. Liberated French wine or the apple brandy Calvados of the
region was often shared clandestinely among mates. Captain H.S. MacDonald of
the North Shore Regiment wrote of the Calvados, "It didn't steady the nerves, it
deadened them."68
In this static phase of battle, infantrymen were cycled to the rear for a rest. Behind
the lines, the Canadians occupied barns or French houses. With the bridgehead so
shallow, there was no safe area, and the larger divisional kitchens and bakeries had
not yet crossed the Channel. But away from the front, the company cooks prepared
better food and men could stretch and walk freely. The many cows that meandered
over the fields were milked, while chickens were caught and cooked. Rabbits occa-
sionally enlivened a stew, although men ate carefully, using their teeth and tongues
to separate out pieces of metal.
After a day or so in the rear areas, the soldiers lost some of their haggard looks.
Each regiment had a medical officer to provide care and to engage in preventative
medicine that kept men healthy in the field. The front-line doctors found that many
of the Canadians had small wounds
from shell splinters, and some serious
cases of infection were discovered
among the tough infanteers who had
not complained when they were first
injured. The medical officers, often
attached to roving field hygiene units,
also ensured that water was purified to
reduce the opportunities for infectious
diseases. French wine took on new
value when the officially issued water
tasted like a modern-day swimming
Canadians resting with their universal carrier
in France. Note the camouflage on the
helmets of several infantrymen.
pool. Seemingly mundane
matters
such as latrines required detailed atten-
tion, as poor hygiene discipline could
invite disease. Nonetheless, the difficult
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
165
living conditions, not to mention the stress of being killed at any moment, led to
sickness, and in June alone some 451 Canadians contracted an illness (although not
all were evacuated from the front), with the numbers growing toward the end of the
month as fatigue deepened." In addition to the serious cases, most soldiers suffered
from the "Normandy Glide," a mild form of dysentery that saw men afflicted with
explosive diarrhea. This only added to the nightmare of living in ditches, especially
when some soldiers were forced by snipers or shellfire to deposit their own bodily
waste there. Others refused to endure such indignities. Men squatted over shovels
or helmets collected from dead Germans and then threw the ugly mess away from
their slit trench. It went against all sanitary regulations, but it was better than
chancing a sniper's bullet or bunking down in one's own filth.
During the quiet moments, footsloggers penned letters for those who waited at
home. While some men kept up a methodical correspondence, those to whom writ-
ing did not come naturally struggled to find the words to express their emotions or
experiences. Some asked mates to write a few lines. Most soldiers had someone
witing to them, and the receiving of letters was a boost for morale. Corporal Tom
Didmon felt that "between writing her [Jean, his wife] daily and receiving mail from
her frequently, (generally in batches), it was the only thing that kept me sane!"7o
Canadian officer Burton Harper remembered that "quite often chaps would get their
eters... and read and re-read [them] till the next one came."?! Lieutenant Paul
McCann of the North Shore Regiment recounted one care package, lovingly assem-
bled by his family. The treats were consumed, and McCann and a chum joked about
how among the goodies there were two pairs of flannelette pyjamas. For warriors
who barely took off their boots, let alone changed clothes, this provided "a good
riven with «
augh. Later that night, as McCann held the pyjamas in his filthy hands, he was
pangs of nostalgia." More than fifty years later, that deep yearning
was still raw and he believed it "will be with me to my dying day."72
bad jokes, manly ribbing, and dirty songs. No one at the front knew much of what
With rest and recuperation, the idle chat and rumours started again, as well as the
was happening elsewhere, and as one official report noted, "What's new?" is a query
rada hundred times a day. Musical instruments were smuggled forward or located
in ruined French houses and they added to the revelrv. Captain Harold MacDonald
