348 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
their cover. More devastating were the mines, which the Germans had buried in and
along the dykes where the infantry scrambled for cover. The devices exploded upwards,
shredding flesh and shattering bone. Men feared most for their genitals and their eyes,
usually in that order. Dead Germans and livestock fouled the water. "As the fight has
been from polder to polder and from dyke to dyke, all the homes, barns, villages, and
towns have been pretty badly shot up," witnessed Donald Pearce.
"The people are not
sure whether to cheer us or curse us."32
Rockingham's fought-out forces were relieved somewhat by the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division's thrust from south of the Leopold Canal northward on October 14,
which pressured the German defenders, especially those in the southeast who were
all but cut off. Wich the Canadians asaulting from three directions, the artillery
regiments were particularly effective as many were situated on the enemy's flanks,
allowing them to drop shells behind German lines.33 While the shellfire was much
appreciated by the Canadian infantry, victory came down to the sharp end.34
Lieutenant O.A. Robertson of the North Shore Regiment described the attack on
the 16th, in which he was wounded: "About 60 fanatical Jerries charged us but were
beaten off leaving half their number in the mud. Twice more they tried it, like mad-
men, and each time our guns simply cut them to pieces.
"35 The price was high for
both sides. Captain Harold MacDonald remembered the combat experience as one
of being "pinned down & having men die in your arms or screaming from mor-
phine, to lie doggo, unable to do anything but pray & say words of encouragement
to a shell-shocked case, or reorganize a platoon of men numbering 6 to 8 out of 35
or so who started out an hr. before." One could talk bravely of taking the battle to
the Hun, MacDonald told his wife, and make exhortations of "for God's sake kill
those bastards," but when "one is in the midst of the enemy with one chance in 100
of getting our alive, things are slightly different words can't be wasted & aren't
necessary. A pat on the back, a grin, and that's all. The old saying still holds good, we
who have seen a bit of the real thing, dislike & refuse to talk about it. "36
ABOVE THE BATTLEFIELD. the fighters and fiohter-bombere of 84 Group Drowled
almost with impunity. While mast of the RCAF saundrone were in 83 Groun worl
ing with the Second British Army, 84 Group consisted of a multi-national force of
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
349
Bitish, Polish, Norwegian, Czechoslovakian, New Zealand, Belgian, and French
squadrons. Poor weather limited flying to about every second day, but the Spitfires and
Typhoons still managed at least 1,600 sorties in support of Canadian ground forces in
the pocket." An officer in the Queen's Own Rifles-whose regiment had crossed over
into the Switchback battle on October 12—wrote that "According to PWs [prisoners
of war) they (Typhoons] are a great morale breaker as well as doing a lot of damage."38
The development of a workable doctrine that unified the land armies and air
forces was years in the making. Each campaign taught lessons. Through improve-
ments in communication equipment, the response time from target identification to
aerial engagement was reduced to as little as fifteen minutes. When wireless radios
falled, junior officers or men, seeing friendly Typhoons or Spitfires circling overhead,
waved their arms, got the pilots' attention, and, through exaggerated hand signals,
tried to point out the enemy strong-
points. It was dangerous for those on
the ground to expose themselves to
German snipers in this way, but there
was much satisfaction when a Typhoon
wagged its wings in acknowledgment
and then rained rockets or bombs on
the enemy. It was terrifying to be on
the receiving end of high explosives,
and the lack of vegetation in the water-
scape worked against the defenders,
whose positions were laid out to the
hawks above. General Eberding testi-
hed after his capture, in an interroga-
tion report, that Allied "air support had
caused him some casualties but that its
greatest effect was to prevent move-
ment by day and limited the activity
of his arillery. Eberding's opponent,
Typhoon rocket attack on
German defences in the Scheldt.
