2 INTRODUCTION
on the road to Falaise fewer than 50 kilometres away, and a third in Groesbeek
Canadian War Cemetery in the Netherlands? It was the route of Canadian battles,
soaked in blood and tears. And it did not stop with Northwest Europe. Families across
Canada saw their sons buried in Sicily and Italy, in the jungles of Burma and the rocky
ground of Hong Kong, next to the fiery remains of bombers along the route from
Britain to Germany, and in the dark depths of the Atlantic.
As in all Commonwealth War Graves cemeteries, the Canadian headstones in
Bény-sur-Mer display a maple leaf emblem, except for two, which also feature the
Star of David, for the Jewish-Canadian soldiers buried there? Almost all stones are
inscribed with the regimental number (for non-commissioned officers and the rank
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemetery at Bény-sur-Mer in France, near
Juno Beach, contains the graves of 2,043 Canadians who died during the Second World War.
INTRODUCTION 3
and file) that was worn on an ID tag around the neck along with rank, name, unit,
date of death, and, in most cases, age at death. Nineteen of the headstones are for the
unknown—"A Soldier of the 1939-1945 War; A Canadian Regiment, Known Unto
God." Standing before those headstones and contemplating the events of seventy
years ago, one quietly shudders at the thought of bodies so badly burned or dismem-
bered that there was no piece that could be used to identify the man.
The most powerful symbols of grief are the short epitaphs from parents, wives,
and children etched on the stones. These mournful farewells draw from scripture,
hymn, songs, literature, and raw sentiment.
To the world he was just another one. To us, he was our darling son.
Private Lawrence Burton Perkins, Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders, 7.6.44 (age 26)
Nous l'avons donné a Dieu pour le salut de France. Son pére et sa mére. Canada.
We gave him to God for the salvation of France. His father and mother. Canada.)
Private Leo Joseph Quevillon, Algonquin Regiment, 31.7.44 (age 21)
Life will never be the same now that we have lost you.
Ever lovingly remembered wife, son, mom and sister.
Rifleman Sidney Stephen Ryan, Queen's Own Rifles of Canada, 6.6.44 (age 27)
He died to save us all. In our hearts hell always be.
Never forgotten by his wife and five children.
Private Soloman Kline, Canadian Scottish Regiment, 8.7.44 (age 38)
I have only your memory, Dear husband, to remember my whole life through.
Rifleman George Alexander, Royal Winnipeg Regiment, 16.7.44 (age 21)
Every stone and sentence is a forceful reminder of Canadians taken before their
time. There would eventually be close to 45,000 of those headstones to mark Canadians
who fought for freedom and liberty, to save the oppressed and occupied, and to defeat
the evil of Fascism and Nazism. Canadian war hero Sydney Radley-Walters of the
