46
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and paid for admission: "A charge of one cigarette per person was made at the
door and the proceeds were used to buy new costumes."45
Young men took the opportunity to better themselves in the camps, either to
improve intellectually or prepare for a postwar career. Sixty thousand textbooks were
supplied by the Canadian Legion, Red Cross, or in care packages to give prisoners
an opportunity to study a new language, literature, or more practical skills, such as
farming or mechanics. " Most camps had well-stocked libraries. Westerns and detec-
tive novels were gobbled up, while the racy bits of Lady Chatterley's Lover were read
aloud and in secret. While some prisoners coped by living in the moment, others
pondered a postwar future. Lists were kept of future jobs or travel spots. And when
prisoners were fed up with studying or dreaming, some took solace in more potent
spirits. Murry Bishop of New Minas, Nova Scotia, who was shot down over Germany
Prisoners fought the strain of imprisonment and boredom. These Kriegies are tending to a garden.
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
47
in March 1943, partook of the temporary pleasure of distilling booze from sugar,
raisins, and yeast, which created a noxious alcohol to "break the boredom." 47
The trials of imprisonment were warded off in other ways. Even though they had
dull razors and little soap, prisoners tried to keep a clean face as per military regu-
lation. Uniforms were stitched together and boots worn thin, but there was pride
in appearance and a discipline of the body. Others passed the time by trying to
order their most inner feelings. RCAF Flight Lieutenant John Mahoney served
much of the war at Stalag Luft III. Like all POWs, he was thankful for the Red
Cross packages, although his "most precious possession" was a small "war log" in
which he detailed his experiences, providing him with the much needed opportun-
ity to make sense of his trying wartime incarceration. 48
DESPITE THE SPORTS, education, arts, and imaginings that sustained prisoners,
many struggled with their gloomy existence. "Kriegy life meant sharing minimal
living space under maximum stress conditions," witnessed downed navigator Ray
Silver. "Day and night, in fair season and foul, we were thrust together in such close
proximity that every skin blemish was counted."4) Malnourishment led to fights over
the division of food, while sick men with frayed tempers raged about minor slights
and aggravations. Straw-filled mattresses were infested with fleas, and prisoners
shared their already limited space with lice and rats. The daily inspections and parades
by the Germans were trying, as well as periodic raids on prisoners' huts to locate
contraband. Trooper Sam Dunn of Stalag IX C in Molsdorf recounted that the
uncertainty of the wider war effort left him demoralized: "We thought we could
be there five years. Could be ten years, or even fifteen. And that was what bothered
me. Not the fact that we wouldn't get out, but when. You know, when they send you
to jail, you even know that you're going to be there five years, or ten years. But we
didn't know that. The uncertainty was the worst part. It was a real strain on you."50
The prisoners tended to band together, but not everyone was chummy. Like in
all stressful environments, some men were unlikeable or did not pull their weight.
While most of the officer camps saw cooperation among the prisoners, the enlisted
men's camps were often divided. George Reid, a Seaforth Highlander captured in
Italy, wrote of the Liverpool, Glasgow, and Irish gangs among the British population
701A
