410
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
records, collections of personal effects, and open graves filled with thousands of
emaciated corpses. The skeletal survivors and mounds of ash were horrific to
contemplate.
Canadian private Gordon McLean was not a warrior. He was touring with an
entertainment group, the Army Show, when he visited the death camp at Bergen-
Belsen; he wrote, shaken, "what a horrible sight that was. Wholesale murder, effi-
cient, and well planned. When British troops arrived at Belsen they discovered
10,000 unburied bodies. Charlie Hancock had survived flying in a Halifax as a wire-
less operator with RCAF's No. 408 Squadron. At the end of the war, he was part of
a crew that flew dignitaries to the Belsen death camp, and was witness to the sicken-
ing sights:
Victim of a Nazi death camp. The discovery of the death camps revealed for many the
evil of Hitler's Third Reich and confirmed the justness of the war.
VETERANS 411
As my eyes surveyed this devastation —and as my mind came to realize the full
scope of the wickedness explicit here—I wondered how this had been allowed
to happen by a literate people, people who could build bridges and compose
beautiful music, who loved their children, and who could pray to a God they
recognized. The horror of seeing the victims, their nondescript bodies-or
what was left of their bodies-entwined in lime pits with the bones of their
friends, their parents, their children; of those dead eyes—if they had not yet
rotted from the sockets-without a fire left in them; the horror of that remains
with me to this day. The validity of the war could never again be denied, it
seemed to me, insofar as that war was fought to prevent or avenge a human
tragedy such as this one. 23
The Nazis murdered six million Jews by lethal gas, bullet, and deliberate starva-
tin. Hundreds of thousands of additional innocents, including Communists,
homosexuals, and the mentally disabled, were also exterminated. Allied Supreme
Commander Eisenhower ordered his commanders to march the local German civil-
in populations through the death camps so they could witness the disgusting actions
which they had lent support and turned a blind eye. It was not enough. The world
had to see the are Photoraphere cameramen and artiste created recorde
seri retable proof of the horror of what has come to be known as the Holocaust.
Tride he hired States, Britain, and Canada did not go to war to save the Jews, the
dach camps confirmed the truth that the war had been a struggle against a malevo-
lent and evil regime.
Een as the true nature of the Nazi Third Reich was exposed, Canadians were
almost immediately thrust into protecting Germans. An army of occupation marched
tito the Fatherland. Most soldiers went forward with hardened hearts, wanting to
make the civilians pay, especially if there was a hint of resistance. They encountered
quiet compliance. There were other dangers. Roving bands of now freed slave labour-
er and Russian prisoners of war were looting, inflicting serial sexual violence, and
atring out mass murder against civilians. John Bradley, a twenty-six-year-old
Mohawk serving with the Roval Canadian Artillery, remembered that he and others
were forced to offer protection as "the Russians were kicking the shit out of Germar
