270 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Polish advance, giving their lives to purchase time for the exodus. Notwithstanding
their fanaticism, one of the 12th SS staff officers recalled, "Nobody doubted any
longer that we were doomed to be killed or captured one of these days."69
Montgomery, Crerar, and Simonds would have liked to have seen a more rapid
advance by the Canadian and Polish forces, but those at the sharp end faced a tremen-
dously complicated and dangerous environment. The Germans had few coherent
units in the direct Canadian path, but pockets of resistance, from machine-gun nests
to snipers, claimed lives. Sergeant Doug Conklin of the Stormont, Dundas and
Glengarry Highlanders remembered sacrificial snipers who tied themselves up in trees
to "hold us up," and who required time-consuming stalking before they were elimin-
ated. After the war, Major V.O. Walsh of the Sherbrooke Fusilier observed, "We
were slow.— no question. The men were tired then and the infantry needed reinforce-
ments. But slowness if such a thing can be measured — saved lives. By August 15,
the Canadian infantry battalions, never numbering more than about 7,500 in a div-
ision, were short 2,644 men? Paul Fussell, an American soldier in Normandy and a
postwar academic, quoted one Canadian during the war, who said, "Who the hell dies
for King and Country any more? That crap went out in the first world war."? In the
face of the step-by-step costly engagements, the front-line soldiers and tank crews, in
regiments that were decimated and exhausted, quite rightly made their own decisions
on how willing they were to risk their lives to quicken the pace.?" There were no
mutinies, but caution was the watchword.
Trun fell to the Canadians on the 18th, and the next day Polish and American
divisions joined hands at Chambois, closing the gap on the Germans while the
Canadians were nearing their final objectives. Though it might have appeared on
the maps at the various national army headquarters as if the bag was closed, on the
ground only the lightest membrane of Canadians and Poles blocked the fleeing
Germans. Over the next three days, the Canadians, caught in the avalanche of desper-
ate humanity, captured and killed thousands of panicked Germans who flooded over
their lines.
Some of the most intense combat occurred at S. lambert, around 3 kilometres
southeast of Trun and a main escape route for the Germans, with two roads leading
to bridges over the Dives River. A battlegroup of the South Alberta Regiment, led by
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
271
Major David Currie, and a company of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of
Canada seized the town on the 19th. "There were thousands of Germans in various
rages of organization and disorganization struggling to get through," wrote Private
Athur Bridge of the Argylls, "and we were right in their way." 4 Clinging to key
crossroads and buildings, Curries men led a heroic blocking action against enemy
foes that dwarfed them in size and strength.? As the town burned, German bodies
piled up through and around the town. Major Currie was in the forefront of the
batte, directing the defence, situating machine-gun teams, and even using his
Sherman tank to lay down fire on the exposed enemy. In describing Curries fearless
kadership, one of the Canadians noted, "We knew at one stage it was going to be a
fight to the finish, but he was so cool about it."76
Tiro additional Canadian companies from the Lincoln and Welland Regiment
and the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada filtered in on the 19th to
withstand against the enemy horde. Currie narrowly avoided death several times, and
The outrumbered and outgunned Canadians fought a brilliant backing action in
S. Lambert. This is a burning Sherman, likely from the South Alberta Regiment.
