198 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
implementing his complex operations. Nonetheless, Simonds would emerge as
Canada's best general of the war.
The reinforcing 2nd Division took its place in the line, relieving the 3rd Division.
It was not easy to acclimatize to the front. Private Alexander Molnar of the Essex
Scottish revealed his anxiety: "In the back of my mind a gnawing question —will I
be able to meet the challenge and not let my comrades down?"' Molnar stood the
test of battle, if briefly, for he was captured in his first engagement and spent a year
as a prisoner of war. But Molnar was not alone in his worries, and every man won-
dered how he would fare when he faced combat. David Havard, a signaller with the
Sch Field Regiment, remembered feeling confident after years of training in non-
lethal environments. "We were lined up in convoy and moving along beside our
infantry and one of the fellows that I had been in training with was just across from
me. I was talking to him and all of a sudden, a shell dropped and a piece of shrapnel
killed him instantly. And I suddenly
became aware that I was no longer
invincible."« Shellfire and mortar bombs
claimed lives indiscriminately. So did
mistakes. Corporal Tom Didmon of the
Royal Hamilton Light Infantry
recounted that the first regimental
comrade he saw killed was a Dieppe
veteran. Well liked and a good soldier,
the sergeant was checking in on his
platoon, which was situated in a num-
ber of slit trenches
at the
front.
Creeping around in the dark, he was
confronted by his own men for the
nightly code word.' The sergeant did
not hear the demand and a trigger-
Lintenant-General Guy Simonds
inupect Canadian soldiers.
happy sentry gunned him down. It was
a bad way to die. But there would be
far worse over the coming months.
OPERATION SPRING 199
The 3rd Division was worn out and cut up. Grey with exhaustion, the front-line
soldiers in their late teens and early twenties looked like old men. The world had
diminished to immediate survival. Almost everyone who had fought through that
month of bartle had endured numerous exposures to death: shells that landed nearby
bur killed others in the vicinity, bullet holes through uniforms and kit, shrapnel
defected by helmets. The veterans developed acute survival skills, an almost sixth
sense of knowing when to drop to the ground and when to run like hell. Yet this
hyper awareness was matched by the bone-deep exhaustion that left men more sus-
ceptible to a mental breakdown. Constant exposure to stress often led to reckless
behaviour. There was both a sharpening and a dulling effect that occurred among the
battle-tested.
SLOVLY, WE MOVED FORWARD," recounted infantryman Charles Forbes of Le
Regiment de Masonneuve, "with casualties beyond imagination." In the first month of
combat, the infantry, making up less
han halfof a division's strength, had suf-
tered some 70 percent of the total losses.?
The swing of the scythe was arbitrary
and cruel. Trained men were killed in
trak accidents, the good died badly, and
the brave were felled. While experienced
soldiers found ways to survive longer
chan reinforcements, luck, chance, and
Gate ruled the battlefield.
Yet despite the losses in June and
lady, morale remained high among the
Canadians. An analysis of the letters
of over 2,000 wounded men revealed
dar most were eager to rejoin their
comrades in the field and end the
ra How was this high morale
shired, especially with the heavy
This was the war of the infantryman. At the front,
a soldier spent most of his time in a slit trench.
