156 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
settling on having one Firefly with three Shermans in a four-tank troop-but they
evened up the odds when facing German tanks. As twelve Panthers charged over
open ground and in broad daylight, they encountered fire from Canadian
G-pounder anti-tank guns, and they turned away to find easier targets. In doing
so, the Panthers opened up their flanks to twelve Shermans and Fireflys from the
is and firelys from he
Ist Hussars and Fort Garry Horse waiting in ambush. At 900 metres, the
Canadians pounded the Panthers, destroying seven of them in a matter of min-
utes."" After a muffled bang and a swaying, as if a track had been ripped off, the
vehicle came to a stop," one SS sergeant recalled, "When I looked to the left, I
happened to see the turret being torn off the panzer driving on the left flank. Ar
the same moment, after another minor explosion, my vehicle began to burn.... To
my left, other burning panzers." The surviving German tanks retreated from the
shooting gallery.
A Sherman Firefy The Firefy, were equipped with the 17-pounder gun that
fave them twice the striking power of a Sherman tanks 75mm gun.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
157
Another day of fighting left the 12th SS holding a wide front and unable to dis-
lodge the Canadians. With half a dozen Panther and Grenadier attacks thrown back,
and another 300 casualties to the Hitler Youth, the Canadians resumed their push,
wich the Queen's Own Rifles, supported by the 2nd Armoured Brigade, closing on
Le Mesnil-Patry on June 11. The Rifles were ordered to seize high ground a few kilo-
metres south of Putot, passing through scores of Winnipeg Rifles and 12th SS bodies
that still lay in the field. The Queen's Own and 1st Hussars had initially planned to
advance on June 12, but the operation was moved back a day to coincide with a
British attack on the flank. And so the front-line officers had little time to recon-
notre the position and they had no access to aerial photographs. Nor was any
arillery available. As one of the company commanders muttered, the plan was
conceived in sin and born in iniquity."48
On the warm and sunny afternoon, the attack went in at 2:30, with the Canadians
crossing 1,100 metres of level ground, and Dog Company of the Queen's Own Rifles
riding on the Shermans tank decks. From intercepted radio traffic, the Pioneer
Batalion of the 26th Panzer Grenadier Regiment, backed by tanks and artillery,
knew the Canadians were coming. They let the Shermans roll into the trap before
they opened up with artillery, catching the Canadians to the northeast of Le Mesnil-
Patry The 75mm Pak 40 anti-tank guns rifled shells into the Hussars. Within a few
minutes, six Shermans were on fire. Trooper Larry Allen of the Ist Hussars had his
Sherman knocked out. Allen remarked of some of his unfortunate comrades, "What
a mes they were in! [Many of the troopers were] burned beyond recognition ... their
udered ar the hoor findorm nother of the Hus a
backened Shermans: "In some cases the bodies were indistinguishable from one
another, simply a mass of cooked flesh welded together in the great heat."
When the firing started, the Queen's Own infantrymen jumped off the tanks
into the wheat, moving rapidly on knees and elbowe from tho tanke that invited
enemy fire. "The drivers," recounted one infantryman, "couldn't see the ground
directly ahead or under them, so a soldier on the ground had almost as much to
lear from his own raging tanks-twisting, speeding up, retreating, flames every-
whete-as from enemy fire"s! The Queen's Own officers tried to rally their men
