122 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
although even in the dark the mass of ships could be glimpsed. Slowly, for each man, the
truth was revealed: jaws were clenched, a silence overtook the boats, and men stared
straight ahead.
With the hope of landing at 7:45 A.M. on the 7th Brigade's front and ten minutes
later on the 8th Brigade's (the staggered times were due to the different depth of
the beaches and the incoming tides), the landing craft surged for shore through the
rough seas. The ungainly craft pitched wildly, with the blunt ramp bows scooping
into the onrushing swell, dropping and rising again, much like the soldiers' unwell
stomachs. "We were tossed about like a tiny cork," remembered Corporal Cecil
Lelonde of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, "and most of the group were sick. 3 During
the eighty- to ninety-minute run-in, water sloshed over the steel sides of the landing
craft, drenching men; some wrapped their rifles in their ground sheets to keep them dry.
Around 5:30 a.M., the first of the naval guns opened up in an ear-shattering
bombardment along the French coast. Two hours later, HIMCS Algonquin hurled
forty shells at a German 75mm battery east of Saint-Aubin-sur-Mer, obliterating
the enemy gun team. On Juno Beach, where the Canadians were assaulting, the
2nd Battalion, 736th Grenadier Regiment of the 716 Infantry Division, took the
brunt of the battering, while the German 441st Ost Battalion all but fled the naval
shelfire. Two British cruisers and eleven destroyers smothered the enemy front in fire,
although the Canadian beach received less naval gunfire than any other sector.!"
Amid this sonic and physical assault, the Canadian infantry instinctively ducked
low in their landing crafts, but one of the North Shore Regiment officers told Private
Ben Mackerth, "Stand up and look around. If you live you'll never forget this
sight. While the weight of shell suggested that all the defenders would be obliter-
ated, naval fire plans had long acknowledged that most of the bunkers many with
2-metre-chick concrete ceilings could not be knocked out with shellfire. The bom-
bardment was meant to neutralize rather than destroy" The infantry would face the
enemy guns in a headlong assault across the open beaches.
"WE HAD NEVER felt so alone in our lives, recounted Queen's Own Rifles Company
Sergeant Major Charlie Martin as his landing craft headed for shore." On the
Canadian sector, a port and two small French villages overlooked the expanse of
ANADIAN FORCES
GERMAN FORCES
DIVISION
sur Mer
N T
I N
l'Orgueilleuse
CAEN
CANADIAN ASSAULTS ON D-DAY
70k
