100
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
holding off the U-boats, the army interested in softening up enemy tactical defences,
and Bomber Command seeking to destroy German infrastructure and morale. In the
preparation for the Normandy landings, Eisenhower wielded his power to bring
the bombers under control of SHAEF so that his staff would now select the targets?
The bomber barons complained indignantly, but there was tempered steel behind
Eisenhower's
genial smile, and he
got his way in March 1944. Under
Eisenhower's unified command, the
bomber offensive shifted from Germany
to France, and the bombers were given
orders to target railways, bridges, road
networks, and canals in what became
known as the "transportation plan." The
bomber crews had no say in the matter,
although the closer targets offered a
much-needed reprieve from the pitiless
losses of the previous months and the
casualty
Lates
to
aircrews
dropped
significantly.
In early 1944, the German war
industry had dispersed as the bombing
campaign grew in ferocity. Through
the relocation of factories to rural
regions or to the outskirts of towns,
General Dwight Eisenhower, Supreme Allied
industry had often survived the blanket
Commander in Europe, took control of the
bombardment of the cities. While
bomber squadron before D-Day. He redirected
them away from city bombing towards targeting
those dispersed industries were harder
to target, the
German fortifications and French logistics
to degrade the enemyi ability to strike
works- especially
transportation net-
the rail and road
back as the Allied innation force.
lines that carried the war supplies
were immovable. The Allied bombing
campaign slowly destroyed many of the
PLANNING THE INVASION
101
French railways, bridges, and roads, thereby stranding war materiel while also slowing
any German military response to the invasion. Ultra intelligence kept the Allies
informed of the enemy's growing panic. Crushing the German economy by aerial
bombardment was impossible, but choking off the Nazis resources especially coal
and steel-and crippling transportation severely damaged the enemy's ability to
effectively wage war.?
took the fight more forcefully to the Luftwaffe. Though the bombers were protected
by their own guns which occasionally took down enemy machines—the long-
range P-51 Mustang was their saviour. The British had initially flown the Mustang
as a tactical reconnaissance plane, but with the addition of a more robust engine, the
Rolls-Royce Merlin 61, and armed with six .50 calibre M2 Browning machine guns,
the Mustang was transformed into a formidable weapon. When the P-51 was
equipped with additional drop fuel tanks, it could range deep into enemy territory,
pushing beyond Berlin by March 1944. The P-51 was faster than the Focke-Wulf
190 and Messerschmitt 109 at high altitudes and could turn tightly like the Spitfire.®
Hider poured enormous treasure and effort into superweapons— jets, guided bombs,
and snorkelling U-boats-—but the P-51 proved to be the only truly super weapon
of the war.
The Americans targeted Luftwaffe airfields and factories manufacturing ball-
bearings crucial in most machines and vehicles from early 1944. To protect these
sites, the Luftwaffe fighters were dragged into unfavourable battles in the skies
against the P-5ls, as well as P-47 Thunderbolts and P-38 Lightnings, and, to a lesser
arent, the RAF and RCAF's Spitfires and Hurricanes. The German first-line
defenders, the two-seater Me 110s and Junkers 88s, were no match for the faster
American fighter that acted as both shield and sword. In February 1944, the Luftwaffe
or one third of its planes and a fifth of its crew. In March, half its remaining aircraft
were shot down; and over the next three months, almost the entire complement of
Sigher pilots was killed or wounded? "Wherever our fighters appeared, the Americans
hurled themselves at them," reported one German "Nowhere were we so fe from them:
