28 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
often a seething mess, with involuntary leg jerks, stutters, and eye twitches. Worn-out
airman hid their tremoring hands by holding their beer at an angle so as not to lose the
contents. Many of these teenagers took on the appearance of old men, walking stooped
from the constant pain in their shoulders and necks. Flight Lieutenant A.G.
"Red"
Sherwood, who flew a Lancaster and never broke his temperance promise, slowly suc-
cumbed to weariness, stress, and the "constant living in fear.«3 He weighed 150 pounds
at the start of the war; by his fortieth sortie, he was a gaunt 120 pounds, all of the
weight lost through sleepless nights and never-ending dread.
"The effects of a dozen operations, or a score, were discernible from time to time
in various aircrew around the station," remarked Flying Officer Murray Peden. A
chum, Mickey Claxton, had "nightmares in which he dreamed he was on operations
and coming under fire. He would wake up in terror, often waking the rest of us in the
process, and then try to compose himself again." Others sleepwalked or suffered day-
time terrors. One experienced pilot grew so tense before flying that he could not talk,
only gasping out responses in a hysterical voice. He wept frequently over the slightest
inconvenience. Another respected member of his squadron, Jake Walters, vomited
repeatedly before and after operations. Eventually the wing commander-the officer
who commanded several squadrons- heard of Walters reaction and found him
doubled over after a flight. He gently put his arm around him and remarked quietly,
"I think you've had enough, Jake. Not all senior officers were so understanding.
Every man used different motivations to survive, but it is revealing that less than
1 percent of the total number of flyers were diagnosed with combat stress so severe
that they could no longer Ay. Even fewer were categorized as "lacking moral fibre." s
For those who showed cracks, station medical officers often gave them high doses of
sodium barbital to knock them out for a day or longer. The forced sleep saved many
men and, as was to be found in the Army, was an effective treatment. Those who
could not rest their imagination were a danger to themselves and their crews. Many
pulled themselves from flying, and when they did, were labelled "Lack of Moral
Fibre," a traumatic charge that registered with most airmen.
Lack of Moral Fibre (LM) was a broad categorization for those aircrew who could
not continue flying for what was deemed unjustifiable reasons. The bomber crews
were all volunters, but there was no volunteering out of Bomber Command. LMF
AIR WAR 29
was first employed as a term in September 1941, and it branded the condemned man
as a coward. The relatively few cases of LMF suggest that most officers quietly removed
troubled or broken airmen, reassigning them out of the squadron, but the impression
remained among crews that LMF was an inhumane stigma. Like in the previous war
with shell shock, LMF was applied out of fear that if humane treatment was given, the
"disease" of cowardice might run rampant through the remaining flyers and destroy
morale. In the words of RCAF pilot Douglas Harvey, the general perception among
his squadron was that "Bomber Command reacted with ferocious cruelty against
these unfortunates.
>47
Another Canadian, John Harding, a navigator in No. 103
Squadron, shuddered after watching one of his comrades publicly humiliated for his
mental breakdown: "I felt we were like cardboard pawns in the hands of these unfeel-
ing, la-de-dah, upper-class Englishmen who seemed to run the RAF.... They would
brook no battle fatigue, everything was blanketly labelled cowardice."48
The fear of LMF was a sufficient deterrent for some men. "There was no let-up in
operational flying," noted Flight Sergeant John Patterson, an RCAF bomb aimer
who flew in Lancasters. "We had a job to do and we were going to do it. What
choice did we have? We could refuse to fly, but that would mean we would be
classified LMF (lacking in moral fibre) and demoted, shunned by all our comrades,
and probably returned to Canada in disgrace. So we carried on."49 While LMF was
a motivator for some, the label was widely despised by airmen, and the unfortunates
were more objects of sympathy than of scorn. One 1942 RCAF report on morale
observed, "The term now used ("lack of moral fibre') is universally disliked and
should be dropped in favor of a more objective term such as 'Disciplinary demotion
and loss of flying badge."s0 The label remained. David Chance, a bomber pilot with
RCAF's No. 424 Squadron who completed thirty-three missions, believed that LMF
was "a terrible label to put on anybody.... And I think that some of these guys that
went LMF were quite brave, in a sense, in that they decided that they weren't going
to do it. In a sense, they had a sort of bravery, the courage to admit they were
scared. Of course, we were all scared at one time or another."51 It took until 1944
for the RCAF to draft its own Canadian LMF policy that was more humane than
the existing RAF one, and only applied when there was a "clear and willful evasion
of operational responsibility."52
