352
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
morale."48 Given the water-soaked condition of the fields, the only way to close the
distance was to slither forward, mostly at night.
On the morning of October 7, the Calgary Highlanders and Le Régiment de
Maisonneuve led the division into the forward defences south of Woensdrecht. Aerial
photographs and Dutch civilians warned them of a German force gathering for an
attack the next day, and this was stopped cold by the Canadians when the paratroopers
advanced recklessly with little artillery support. Ferocity could not defeat firepower,
and the Germans suffered an estimated 580 casualties.4 The German commander
admitted, "The Canadians-I say that as a German—fought brilliantly. To the rank of
brigadier, the officers stood side by side with their men on the front lines."5o
Delaying actions and ambushes by the Germans slowed the Canadians, but
they closed steadily on the enemy along Woensdrecht Ridge, as well as in the sur-
rounding towns. The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada led the
assault on the 13th, behind a shellfire barrage from three Royal Canadian Artillery
regiments, machine guns and mortars from the Toronto Scottish Regiment, and
Spitfires and Typhoons from 84 Group.
The Black Watch drove across beet
fields in broad daylight, but it was a rag-
ged advance, with one of the lead for-
mations, Charlie Company, caught up
in a firefight before even reaching their
start line. As at Verrières Ridge, most of
the Black Watch did not falter or flag,
but not did they get far. One of the
surviving officers, Lieutenant W.J. Shea,
blamed the failure on three factors: the
German position on the dykes, which
were 6 metres high and acted as nearly
impassable walls; the effective enemy
defence; and poor recent reinforcements.
Infantrymen of the Calgary Highlanders
advance in battle, October 1944.
With all four of the company command-
ers hit early, the new reinforcements,
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
353
many of them remustered service corps men, were not ready for the rigours. Shea
witnessed several of them dive for cover in craters or hide in haystacks and not
emerge until after the shooting stopped."' The officers knew they could not count on
these men and therefore had to expose themselves more often, resulting in casualties.
As Shea observed, "Against tough, seasoned, enemy paratroopers, these reinforce-
ments were more of a liability than an asset."52 The attack failed and the Black Watch
went over the top again later that day in what became known in the regiment as
"Black Friday." By the end of the 13th, the regiment had lost fifty-six killed, twenty-
seven captured, and sixty-two wounded, and had advanced the line only a little. 53
Three days of fighting saw the Canadians drive the Germans back, but it was not
until the 16th that the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry seized Woensdrecht. Lieutenant-
Colonel Denis Whitaker, the decorated veteran of Dieppe and former Canadian
Football League star, had returned after recuperating from a wound in Normandy.
Aggressive patrols gathered intelligence on the enemy, and Whitaker found too many
strongpoints for his liking. But the position had to fall. The Rileys went up in the dark
and behind a massive barrage supplied by five artillery regiments. Even then, sending
a single battalion into battle was risky, but the decision was unavoidable for the weak-
ened Canadians. Whitaker's men, along with reinforcements, seized the village and
held it against several assaults over the coming days.
Captain W.D. Stevenson, the forward observer for the 4th Field Regiment, was at
the front and was nearly killed by counterattacking German troops. He held his
ground and called in shells onto the Riley's coordinates. "The fire caught the enemy
in the open, whereas our men were deep in slit trenches having been warned," the
commanding officer reported. "Our troops cheered; the slaughter was terrific." 4
Serenson survived four direct shellfire strikes on his observation post and received
the Military Cross for his bravery The Rileys held the ground but suffered 21 killed
and 146 wounded.
By the 21st, the German blocking action was defeated, and the 2nd Division,
much reduced in strength, set off two days later to plunge westward into Walcheren
Island. On the division's right and northern flank, the 4th Canadian Armoured
Division was engaging the enemy and offering some protection for the 2nd Division,
but Major-General Charles Foulke's soldiers had fought non-stop for nearly three
