412
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
civilians."* There was no such protection in eastern Germany, where a human tidal
wave of over eight million German refugees was driven from their lands by the ram-
paging Soviet armies? While few records were kept, historians believe that more
than a million Germans were likely killed in the aftermath of the war, millions of
women raped, and hundreds of thousands of the survivors left as Displaced Persons
who eked out a grim existence in refugee camps for the better part of a decade?
Such was one aspect of the hard hand of war in the aftermath of the greatest conflict
in human history.
THE DEMOBILIZATION DELAYS were long, and soldiers were restless. "I urged the
commanders to see to it that their officers and men were kept mentally and physic-
ally active," noted General Crerar? Yet a combination of military training and
education courses or trade instruction, but most were too unsettled to crack open the
books. Sports and socializing remained popular, and there was generous leave. As
during the war, Canadians converged on London, but many also visited relatives
throughout England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland.
Al Armstrong, a veteran of the Italian campaign, was granted leave and was on his
way to visit a friend in Kent when he stopped into a pub while waiting for his train.
An elderly couple were enjoying a pint when they saw him, turning white at his
appearance. Armstrong tried to ignore them but noticed the woman sobbing quietly.
They eventually bought him a beer and he joined them. The father told him quietly
that he looked like their son, who had fought with the Eighth Army in North Africa.
Not fully aware of the situation, Armstrong asked if their son had returned yet.
"The man gave me a long look and said their lad wauldn't be coming back I was at
a complete loss for words." He gulped down his drink. The mother, who had uttered
not a word but continued to cry softly, gave him a tight hug as he got up to leave.
"For me the war was over, but for that English couple it would be a very long time
before they would know peace. Damn this war. 8
Amid the finality of loss there was also romantic love and an opportunity to start
anew. The long garrison years in England had allowed relationships to flourish, and
some 48,000 Canadians married during the course of the war, with about 94 percent
VETERANS
413
dite rides being British2 Thousands of Canadians decided to make their life in
Bitain, but given the depressed state of the nation's economy, most opted to move
their new families home to Canada. From August 1941 to January 1947, 41,251
wives and 19,737 children made the trip across the Atlantic. 30 Most of the women
and children travelled separately from their husbands, who were still in uniform, and
so English, French, Belgian, and Dutch war brides set off for the terrifying leap into
the unknown.
vining that would plague Britain for the next decade. Others sat day after day on
cain that chugged across the impossibly large Dominion until they were deposited
i small towns, picked up by strangers-in-law, and transported out into the wheat
fads. The glamour of wartime love was tested by the reality of postwar living.
Ouchouses, hand pumps, and isolation were everyday aspects of lives on a farm. As
one war bride lamented in Toronto's Globe and Mail: "Most British war brides who
lare traveled to Canada to begin the job of making new homes are received as
ramly as they deserve ... [but] in far too many cases the reception ranges from
polite hostility to studied rudeness. Particularly if she is setting up housekeeping in
amal community the girl from abroad is likely, sooner or later, to meet the girl her
busband left behind him, a thwarted
mohe-in-law, or simply a few third
paries who have no legal standing in
the discussion a all but feel that their
duty to a jilted friend compels them
i take sides."3! These new Canadian
nives waited for their husbands,
marvelling at the differences in food
ed culture, and shuddering through
siers so cold they could scarcely
date imagined them. As Olga Rains, a
inter-year-old war bride from the
etherlands, recounted, "I cried a lot
Canadian war brides and babies who are
soon to travel to Canada.
