148 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
with Shermans from the Ist Hussars, had made a fortress of the small villages of
Breteville, Norrey, and Putot by D+1, and had the full day to prepare their defences.
Though the infantry were steeled for the coming battle, there was no continuous line
of trenches. Brigadier Harry Foster, a no-nonsense professional soldier who would
eventually command a division, worried about the holes in his broad sector, and
how to plug them. The 7th Brigade was far better supported by British and Canadian
ailery and anti-tank guns than the overextended 9th Brigade, but having thrust
into enemy territory, as one of the Reginas, J.G. Baird, observed worriedly, "We were
out on a limb if the enemy could organize his forces for an attack."?3
Farthest from Caen, the Winnipeg Rifles held Putot, a nondescript French village,
with houses and farms built of Caen stone. It was the site of a whirling battle early
on the 8th, when the Ind and 3rd Battalions of the 26th SS Panzer Grenadier
Regiment hit the Canadians hard. The Winnipeggers were unlucky to be on the far
right of the brigade, the far right of the 3rd Division, and the far right of I British
Corps, with the British on their right not yet having advanced to close the gap.
Canadian infantry hold ground.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
149
Wilhelm Mohnke, the sociopathethic, morphine-addicted Nazi brigadier, ordered
the first assault around 3:00 A.M., but the Hitlerjugend were taken apart in the open
felds by the Winnipeggers rifle fire and backing artillery. Then came a second, even
more determined thrust, around 1:00 p.M., behind air-bursting shells from two bat-
talions of artillery, including the feared 88s. The Winnipeggers, who had lost close to
130 men on D-Day, had dug slit trenches in front of Putot as opposed to within the
target-rich village, but they were nonetheless dazed by the ferocity of the bombard-
ment. Firing up to twenty shells per minute, the 88 was anti-tank and anti-aircraft;
indeed, as one Canadian officer moaned, it was "anti-everything."6 Striking from all
directions, the Germans enveloped and cut off three of the Winnipeggers' forward
companies by early afternoon. Attesting to the ferocity of the battle, at one point the
Germans used Canadian prisoners as human shields, driving them forward into pos-
itions held by the remaining Winnipeg Rifles.? The Rifles did not surrender, even as
their pocket collapsed under the weight of the enemy's attack.
A Canadian artillery gun team feeds a 25-pounder.
1UL
