332
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
drove the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division onward, moving up the coast. Behind
shell-heavy attacks, the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade, which was held back from the
Boulogne fighting, burned and blasted their way forward in a series of battles against
coastal batteries from the 16th to the 18th, and then confronted the fortress at Calais.
The guns there had spent much of the war hurling 2,000-pound shells across the
English Channel, and now the Canadians sought to put an end to that harassment.
Allied intelligence estimates severely underestimated the strength of the Calais
garrison, which was nearly as large as that at Boulogne. It would never fall to a single
infantry brigade supported by limited artillery. The Canadians dug in and waited for
high-calibre guns to arrive, while the smaller ones, the 25-pounders, as one gunner
put it, "hammered happily away."32 A series of bomber sorties started on the 25th and
resulted in more than 6,000 tons of high explosives being dropped on the enemy-held
area, but it did litle to force a capitulation. The enemy could not be dislodged, even
as German defenders and French civilians alike were blown apart or buried alive.
In preparation for a climactic battle, 224 artillery guns engaged in destructive and
counter-battery shoots to destroy the enemy defences, but it was a slow way to demol-
ish thousands of tons of concrete. The Canadian infantry fought their way forward,
metre by metre. The huge siege guns at Cap Gris Nez, halfway between Boulogne
and Calais, and garrisoned by some 1,500 Germans, were netted by the 9th Canadian
Infantry Brigade on the 29th." The next day, the Canadians clawed their way into
Calaiss inner sanctum. German resistance collapsed. The victory was achieved, as
Rifleman Stan Creaser recalled, by "stepping over dead comrades."34 The Calais
garrison formally capitulated on October 1, and 7,500 Germans trudged to the
barbed wire prisoner camps. Another damaged port fell into Allied hands, but it was
not enough to feed the voracious Allied armies.?5
WITH ANTWERP IN ALLIED HANDS, but not the approaches along the Scheldt, and
with the Canadians steadily reducing the Channel fortresses, Field Marshal
Montgomery pounced. Even though he had a reputation for being careful, even pon-
derous, in planning bales remarking to journalists only a year before, "You must
never attack until vou are shenlutely read" —Montoomery darided on Sentember 4
that it was time to drive hard to Germany.3 Montgomery and his senior generals
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
333
knew that Antwerp was crucial to the war effort, but instead of allocating resources
lo dearing the Scheldt in order to open the crucial port, the field marshal was hell-
bent on crossing the Rhine into the industrial centres of the Ruhr.37 It was a risky
operation but not reckless, as some hindsight historians have painted it, and if the
German lines had been pierced, as it appeared they might be in the ashes of
Normandy, then the war might have been ended in 1944. Millions of lives would
have been saved. Yet the Master, as Montgomery was known to his staff, never fully
weighed the danger of failing to take Antwerp in a timely manner. He became a fierce
champion of his narrow thrust, which he code-named Market Garden.
His superior, Eisenhower, had long grown tired of the British field marshal, and
when the two met on September 10, they clashed again over the grand strategy.
Eisenhower, who had now crossed over into Europe to exercise overall command of
alforces, did not want to diverge from his broad front strategy, but the British terrier
refused to let go of the morsel that was so firmly lodged in his jaws. The two departed
the meeting intensely unhappy with one another, and the future Allied ground cam-
paign seemed very much uncertain, but Eisenhower eventually relented and cabled
a few days later to give Montgomery the green light for Market Garden.
Another possibility was open to the Allies. The British army could have pushed
north of Antwerp about 30 kilometres, which would likely have cut off three German
cops of the Fifteenth Army that were west of the city and south of the Scheldt, collaps-
ing the front on some 90,000 Germans, 600 guns, and 6,200 vehicles, and creating the
conditions for another aerial slaughter like at the Falaise Gap. Some historians have
citized Montgomery for failing to follow through with this manoeuvre, but a major
campaign to the north, against an enemy whose defences had already congealed into
a more coherent position, would have likely resulted in a long and costly battle.3
Nonetheless, because of Montgomery's fixation on Market Garden, the German
french Army was able to move most of its troops out of danger and into the Scheld —
where the First Canadian Army would have to fight them in a few weeks.
Despite the supply famine, Montgomery planned to drive to the Lower Rhine at
Anhem, which was about 150 kilometres northeast into the Netherlands and protected
by several canals and rivers, It would be a killing blow. However, since Lieutenant-
General Brian Horrocks's XXX Corps-consisting of some 20,000 vehicles-would
