308
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Through widespread skirmishes during the early hours of the 19th, the German
defences were broken in several places amid a haze of yellow dust thrown up by the
incessant bombardments. The Van Doos were ordered back into the line, having
been badly mauled over previous days but ready to storm ahead at last light. Hoping
to catch the enemy off guard after a long day of killing, the French Canadians drove
up the slopes of San Fortunato Ridge, which rose to 143 metres and had a large
reinforced villa on its crest. The two assault companies of Van Doos pushed hard and
fast, aware that they were in a race against an enemy that was recovering and satur-
ating the front blindly with mortar and machine-gun fire. The Van Doos won the
sprint. Fifty Germans were killed and 200 captured, against the loss of only a hand-
ful of men.
Mounting a well-coordinated attack, the Loyal Edmonton Regiment, the Seaforth
Highlanders of Canada, and the West Novas were on the Van Doos's heels, charging
to the right of them to the summit in the early hours of the 20th. The combined
force took the final parts of the ridge before the Germans could react, and enemy
reinforcements were ambushed as they marched forward to the already pierced line.
The enemy were completely disorganized and our troops were behind and among
them," recounted Brigadier T.G. Gibson. "There was plenty of hand to hand fight-
ing... One of the LER coys (companies) saw an enemy tank followed by infantry
coming towards them. They let the tank go by and copped the sheep behind. The
tank came back to look for its lock. This had been anticipated, so a string of 77 gren-
ades had been strung along the ground and the tank blew its tracks. Finito was put
to it by a Sgt with a PIAT."68
The German position was fatally compromised. While local enemy commanders
bravely pulled rogether a ragged force to launch a few desultory counterattacks dur-
ing the hot day, the Canadians now held the key terrain, and artillery fire broke up
the assults. Later in the day, Kessering upon being informed by Tenth Army
commander Heinrich von Vietinghoff that "something unpleasant has happened" -
ordered his troops to fall back across the Marecchia River. Vokes, anticipating the
German withdrawal. had already sent the PPCI I to cross it. Rimini was now cut off.
and the Germans abandoned it on the 21st. The city had been ruined hv fire mis
sions, acrial bombs, and demolitions, with 75 percent of its buildings destroyed,
THE GOTHIC LINE 309
although the 2,000-year-old Roman arch had somehow survived. The Allies and the
Germans had fought each other into the ground, but the enemy had finally been
broken and the battle closed down on September 22.
The twenty-six-day fight through the Gothic Line and beyond was the most diff-
ault for the Canadians in the entire Italian campaign. Of the Eighth Army's 14,000
casualties, I Canadian Corps claimed close to 3,900, including 1,016 killed. With
the Canadians having shattered the Gothic Line, captured 8,000 prisoners, and killed
several thousand additional defenders, one would think they would have been feted
for their spearhead role. But General Leese was still not convinced that Lieutenant-
General E.L.M. Burns was suitable corps commander material. While the intelligent
Canadian general had prepared his corps for the intense operation and then ably
handled the difficult breakthrough, he remained an uninspiring figure. Vokes, who
was a mediocre divisional commander but a fiery leader, believed that Burns was an
introvert" with little "presence."o He was right, yet surely the measure of Burns
should be his two major victories. Burns is always compared unfavourably to Guy
Simonds, his counterpart in Northwest Europe. The comparison is unfair, as Simonds
ladaces to countles additional resources, from troops to guns to bombers, and any
assment of Burns must acknowledge how the resource-poor I Canadian Corps
srambled successfully to find advantages against a determined enemy. The campaign
for the Gothic Line remains one of the most audacious and skilful operations carried
our by the Canadian army in all its military history.
THROUGHOUT OCTOBER, the Allies continued their advance on the Germans. The
train and weather were the enemy's best defences, with one Canadian report
amenting how the incessant rain "turned the ground into a quagmire of mud."!
Kiting in late 1944, one of the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment's infantry-
men fumed, "So help me, it's so Goddamned wet out here that even our hair is
axing Burns headquarters now commanded the 2nd New Zealand Division
and the 5th Canadian Armoured Divicion and the two formations faced a terrain.
it rosed by rivers, irrigation canals, and dykes, with all bridges blown and most
Posicions covered by mortar fire. The Allied trek northward slunk forward amid mud
and carnage.
