324
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Eisenhower, which some muck-raking journalists had erroneously reported as a
demotion- subsequently insisted that Crerar attend, it was not possible for the
Canadian general to make the trip in time. Montgomery saw this as the wilful
disobedience and overreacted. He had never liked having Crerar as an army com-
mander, feeling that he was little more than a political appointee and that he had not
driven his army hard enough in Normandy.l The field marshal intimated darkly
that Crerar might be removed from command for his disobedience. The Canadian
YUL
The Canadians return to Dieppe as victors. The 2nd Canadian Infantry Division
marches past General Harry Crerar, September 3, 1944.
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
325
had been the target of Monty's slings and arrows in the past, and might have reacted
with more anger at his renewed mean and misdirected ire, but he kept his head.
Crerar would not be bullied. While Monty could do how he saw fit, he warned his
superior that he would, of course, report the situation to Ottawa. Crerar was a
subordinate general to Montgomery, but he was also a national battlefield com-
mander and could, at any time, invoke his dual roles. Montgomery did not need
another fight with politicians, and he retreated in haste from his threats. Crerar was
the bigger man, and his patience with hotheads, be it superiors like Montgomery
or subordinates like Simonds, was a strength not often seen by others. The ugly
incident also revealed that the uncharismatic Canadian general, with his thirty years
of military experience, could twist the blade with the best of them.
British engineers had immediately begun to restore the port installations at Dieppe.
By September 7 the first vessel docked, and by the end of the month the port's daily
capacity of moving supplies rose to some 7,000 tons.ยบ Canadians would forever
remember Dieppe for August 1942, but the town would play a far more central role
in the Allied war effort as a supply port.
THE 4TH CANADIAN ARMOURED DIVISION faced the weakest German opposition in
their advance northward. As the armoured regiments made deep gains, the French
underground resistance provided valuable intelligence on the retreating enemy. The
armoured cars, vehicles, and tanks raced northward to the Belgian border, and on
Seprember 2 passed the Somme battlefields where thousands of Canadian soldiers
from the last war lay buried. They reached the southern outskirts of Bruges on
September 7. Throughout the advance, there were few stand-up battles, but night-
ine remained dangerous as German stragglers moved from their hiding spots and set
out again on the long march back to their lines. The lost enemy troops blundered into
Canadian formations and though manv surrendered. some of the more fanatical ones
fought to the death. At the same time, one of the welcome results of the northern
drive was the freeing of dozens of downed airmen who emerged from French farms
and atic after weeks and months of being on the run from the Gestapo.
Four hundred years earlier, in August and September 1544, Henry VIII had besieged
Boulogne and captured it afrer eight weeks. The Canadians of 1944 did not have that
