YUL
446 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
sometimes held up, especially in armoured warfare, as better than all, especially for
their forces' ability to absorb blows and keep fighting, pushing the pace with deep
operational thrusts. They learned this, of course, from the Germans on the Eastern
Front. What is often left unsaid by the admirers of the Soviets is that their casualties
were horrendous, with fast-moving units outpacing their supporting artillery and often
finding themselves smashed by counteratacks.? Neither the British nor the Canadians
could afford such a bloodletting, and it remains a truism that Fascist and Communist
armies fight differently than democratic ones - with the Communists and Fascists less
concerned about the welfare of their soldiers and more willing to accept losses.
It took a brave man to be a coward in the Russian Army, Stalin quipped ominously.
Tens of thousands were executed on the spot with no trial; the same occurred in the
German army, "pour encourager les autres." The Canadians were not willing to mur-
der their own men in the pursuit of victory. The senior generals in the Anglo-Canadian
armies were further aware of the need to ration lives as they suffered soldier shortages
by the first month of battle in Normandy. Given that the Canadian Army did not
have its junior officers shooting those who faltered, it is astonishing that its formations
were able to fight for so long through Normandy, the Scheldt, and finally into the
Netherlands and Germany. Canadians understood that they had a dirty job to finish
and that they were not going home until Nazism was destroyed. Any analysis of battle
reveals that in Normandy, and especially during the horrendous Scheldt campaign,
and finally fighting into Germany, the Canadian contributions have been badly
undersold. Cerars fighting men paled in comparison to no national force, and in
many campaigns often proved far more effective in delivering victory.
THE MOST SUSTAINED CRITIQUE of the Allied war effort has been directed against
Bomber Command, and here the focus has been not on Canadian flyers but on
the very morality and value of the bombing campaign. In this seventy-vear debate,
Royal Air Force, under whose operational command it served.
the Royal Canadian Air Force's bombing efforts have remained tied to those of the
Churchill's post-Dresden order of curtailing citv bombing was a visible walke back
from the bomber-inflicted carnage, and he completed his distancing from the aerial
campaign on May 13, 1945. In his victory speech to the nation, the prime minister
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
447
went out of his way to highlight the work of the many who contributed to defeating
Hiter: the navy, which kept the sea lanes open; the doggedly resilient merchant
navy; and the "few" in Fighter Command who held off the Luftwaffe hordes. The
hard-won victories by the army in North Africa, in the Mediterranean theatre, and
in Europe were also underlined. Churchill spoke of the determination and resolve of
the British people who withstood privation and direct attack. However, he slighted
the costly service of the bomber crews by excluding them from his speech—a hurtful
omission given that it was they who had struck back early in the war when no other
service arm could. The survivors of the bomber war were bewildered by their exclu-
sion from the verbal victory parade.
With the Labour Party's ascendance to power after the defeat of Churchill's coali-
tion government in July 1945, no new gratitude was shown towards the aircrews. The
bomber veterans found it especially hurtful that a unique campaign medal was not
struck and awarded to them for their service, like the medals that commemorated
those who served in the Battle of Britain, Africa, the Far East, France, and Germany.
The aircrews received a Home Defence Medal, although Bomber Command airmen
who served sixty hours or more with an operational squadron between September 3,
1939, and June 5, 1944, qualified for the Air Crew Europe Star, and those who
served after D-Day were awarded the France and Germany Star. But without a unique
medal, it appeared that the bomber veterans' Home Defence Medal was on par with
those who had not participated in front-line service? The lack of a specific medal—
and all that it connoted cast a deeper pall over the aircrews service. Veterans took
to calling their lack of formal recognition "The Great Ingratitude."34
What had gone wrong? While a handful of commentators have gone so far as to
consider the bombing campaign against German civilians to be morally equivalent
to the Holocaust, this idea of a mutual descent into barbarism is surely mistaken. 35
The bomber offensive was used to liberate an oppressed continent from the Nazi
regime and its willing followers— a regime that started the war (in addition to com-
mencing the direct aerial assault against civilians), but that also had as part of its
strategic objectives a policy of genocide. The Allies took advantage of their growing
technological and military superiority in the final two years, but such tactics are a far
cry from the Nazis wars of extermination. Even when posed from a historical
