52
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
pumped oxygen into the claustrophobic tunnels as half-naked men scratched at the
walls with home-made tools while lying on their stomachs. It was brutal work. Every
night, diggers went down into the three tunnels through secret hatches in their huts
that were covered by cement slabs in a kitchen, washroom, and under a stove. Sand
and dirt was pulled out on trolleys and dumped stealthily throughout the camp, usu-
ally in the cesspit under the latrine. An ingenious method of dropping dirt involved
specially constructed bladders, held in the men's wide pants, with which the prison-
ers, known as penguins for their stiff-legged waddling walk, released dirt throughout
3.т.
Memorial poster of the fifty Allied prisoners of the Great Escape,
who were executed by the Germans. Six were Canadians.
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
53
the camp, scuffing it into the existing soil and sand to ensure the colour of the exca-
vated dirt would not be noticed by the guards.
Despite the carefully camouflaged work, two of the three tunnels were discov-
ered; the third allowed seventy-six airmen to slip free late on the night of March 24.
All but three prisoners were recaptured. The Germans were livid, although the
prisoners had seen this before. With the new order, however, fifty of the escapees
were executed, including six Canadians. The ashes were eventually returned to
Sagan camp, and the prisoners wore black armbands and created a cairn to mark
their graves. 65
The number of escape attempts decreased in 1944, partially because the Allies
were clearly winning the war and also because fewer men wished to risk their lives.
After the calamity of the Great Escape, naval pilot R.E. Bartlett, a prisoner since
1941, "lost a lot of the enthusiasm for escaping.... I decided to wait it out."66
While modern films, television shows, and popular culture portray the prisoner-
of-war experience as one long goon-baiting exercise or a relentless desire to escape,
the true battle fought by all prisoners was against boredom and ennui, demoraliz-
ation and disease, hunger and humiliation. Cecil Loughlin, an RCAF flyer who
spent more than two years in Lamsdorf prison camp, during which time he dropped
from 165 to 110 pounds, summed up the prisoners' ordeal: "To come out alive was
our main objective." 67
VUL
