264 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
harboured a fierce mistrust of Montgomery, with bad feelings over the old slights
from the British general during the Sicily campaign and, more recently, believing
that the egotistical commander had not pulled his weight in the Normandy fighting.
Even though Patton's army was crashing ahead from August 10 to 12, on the night
of the 12th, Bradley ordered Patton to halt his advance at Argentan, the boundary
separating the American and Commonwealth forces."' Bradley might have finished
off the Germans if Patton had continued his drive, but he chose to be careful, per-
haps spiteful, and not a little bit stupid. Montgomery, too, was unsure of his own
mind and seemed little interested in what Bradley was doing. At this stage, he
expected many of the German divisions to escape, and he aimed to destroy them
further north when they were caught against the Seine River. Montgomery did not
provide Crerar with any additional British formations—not even the 7th Armoured
Division, which was within range to strike—-to close the gap.52 While all of this
muddling about was going on, the flow of information back to Eisenhower was too
slow for him to keep a tighter rein on his warring generals, who had lost sight of the
goal of the campaign in their mistrust of one another. In the end, it fell to the
Canadians to capture Falaise and the surrounding region to fully envelop the two
German armies.
In the lead-up to Operation Tractable, the Canadians scrambled to move into the
line and shore up shattered units, but they were ready at zero hour, a little before
noon on the 14rh Simonds had held a stormy pre-battle meeting, at which he
demanded that his armoured commanders be more aggressive. Betraying his ten-
dency to blame his troops, the general suggested that tank squadrons in Totalize
had been too cauricue 53 The harch rebuke from Simonds did not go over well with
the armoured officers, who well remembered the smouldering Shermans and the
fre shrivelled corpses of their comrades.
The Canadians continued to vastly outnumber the German 89th Division
opposite them, which was supported by the remnants of the 12th SS, with the
85th and Ist SS divisions in the vicinity. At the spearpoint were two Canadian
armoured brigades, the 2nd and 4th, followed by waves of infantry and self-
propelled guns. The rear-echelon formations would be cycled through to press
home the atack, but success at the front was needed first. The previous four days,
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
265
from August 11 to 14, had witnessed battalion-level skirmishes across the Canadian
sector, as elements of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division cleared a number of
enemy positions that jutted into the start lines and could have caused holdups by
laying down enfilading fire.
Simonds ordered another heavy bomber operation on the enemy lines, and at
1142 A.M. on the 14th, the Allied artillery guns opened up. The ground rumbled
and some 300 tanks leapt forward in a tight series of columns to overwhelm the
enemy gun screen before it could stop the assault. The artillery bombardment was
a sonic stabbing, and soon dust blanketed everything, with the bright noonday
sun reduced to a quivering red globe in the murk. The Canadians advanced en
mase in a steel charge. The German 88mm and 75mm guns took out a number
of tanks, but the weight and speed of the thrust soon overran the enemy lines. The
Canadians also used the feared Wasp, a flame-thrower mounted on a universal
cartier. The Wasp was especially useful for clearing defenders from fortifications,
and it caused widespread terror. Behind the armour, the infantry pushed head-
long foot to pedal, but were forced repeatedly throughout the battle to dismount
trom their armoured carriers to snuff out areas of resistance that were bypassed by
the lead formations.
The Canadians pushed on to the Laison River, but intelligence officers had mini-
mized the body of water as an obstacle, and the tanks soon found its steep banks
impossible to climb. Elements of the German 85th Division, a combat-hardened
wait formed around a nucleus of Eastern Front veterans, alongside Ist SS Panzer
Cops, were dug-in deeply. Many of their defenders and anti-tank guns were overrun
coth of the Laison River, but now the Canadian tanks milled about looking for
my cos the obstacle. The Fort Garry Horse found a crossing but lost eleven of its
isten tanks in the running battle." Follow-on tanks, armoured vehicles, and
self-pronelled guns became bogged down. forced to trade fire with the enemy's anri-
tank guns across the river.
The northern river bank became a tank graveyard. At the same time, a traffic jam
aended back from the I aison. The situation was made worse when the 4th Armoured
tigades Brigadier Eric Booth was killed by shellfire, and confusion reigned after his
tech. l aros the front, officers were knocked out, adding to the tumult over
