334 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
have to travel along a narrow road and cross several bridges, the Germans would
demolish the crossings long before the armoured cars and tanks could reach them.
So Montgomery planned a daring airborne drop to seize each of the bridges.
Horrocks's armoured thrust would crash forward to relieve the paratroopers and the
bridges, one after another. 39
Montgomery planned to employ the American 101st and 82nd Airborne Divisions
to seize several rivers and crossings between Eindhoven and Nijmegen, while the
Ist British Airborne Division, supported by the 1st Polish Airborne Brigade, was to
occupy the last, most northerly bridge over the Rhine. The advantage of using
airborne troops was that they could be dropped behind enemy lines to sow confu-
sion and disrupt the exposed lines of communication. But being lightly armed, they
were vulnerable to counterattack, especially from tanks. The operation was a gamble,
no doubt, but it might catch the demoralized Germans off guard long enough for the
Allies to bore a hole through their line.
Montgomer's plan was formulated in early September as German divisions were
falling back in confusion or holed up in fortresses, but now, ten days later, the enemy
had regained his balance. Intelligence officers warned that enemy armoured forces,
particularly the Ith and 10th SS Panzer Divisions, had moved to the area around the
British drop zone, the furthest one from Horrocks's advancing tanks and infantry.
But Montgomery and his staff allowed uncritical thinking to influence the decision
of going for what has become known as "a bridge too far. Everything had to fall
into place for Market Garden to work. Yet the Germans could read a map as easily as
the Brish- and they were aided by a full set of plans when an American officer,
disobeying orders, carried them with him to his death in a glider crash. The Germans
knew exactly what Montgomery hoped to achieve wich his audacious plan.
As 5,000 aircraft and gliders dropped the airborne troops on the night of Septem-
ber 17, the masters of the delaying action worked their craft. German resistance slowed
Horrocks armoured thrust northward, which shifted from a rapier-thin stab to a slow,
bashing rumble. Fighting against the enemy, time, and geography, the armoured con-
voy linked up with the 101st Airborne on the 18th but was delaved in taking the
second bridge held by the 82nd Division until the 20th. They were behind schedule.
Advancing the 150 kilometres without heavy concentrations of artillery went against
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
335
the British attack doctrine, and it was not surprising that they found it hard going
against the measured German retreat. All the while, the Ist British Airborne Division
and a Polish brigade were battling for their lives at the furthest bridge. With German
Tiger tanks converging on the exposed positions, and artillery pounding them, the
Brtish and Polish paratroopers were ground down in fighting over nine days, and all
but annihilated, suffering 7,400 casualties. The remnants of the Ist Airborne and
the Polish brigade—about 1,700 strong-were withdrawn on the night of the 25th,
in an assault boat crossing of the Neder Rhine, where two field companies of the
Royal Canadian Engineers-the 20th and 23rd—served with British engineers to
run the gauntlet of mortar and shellfire. They saved hundreds of paratroopers from
death or imprisonment. Montgomery's force had been guillotined.
The failure at Arnhem had a profound impact on the Allied strategy for late 1944,
and it ensured the war would continue into 1945. Montgomery suffered another
blow as he had bet heavily on Market Garden and now wore the failure, much to
the delight of his many detractors. But Monty remained the Allies' ablest and most
dynamic general, save for perhaps Patton, who was fighting in the south and frus-
trated by shortages of fuel. After devoting enormous resources to Market Garden,
Eisenhower tried to reinstate the shattered broad front plan, but southern, central,
and northern armies were now converging on Germany in widening and diverging
ats, ach lurching forward at a different speed due to enemy resistance and chronic
shortages of ammunition and POL (petrol, oil, and lubricants). Armies, corps, and
divisions were spread over France and Belgium, and the logistical nightmare mounted,
specially with all the rail lines devastated by the effective Allied bombing campaign.
Again Eisenhower ordered Montgomery even more emphatically — to open Antwerp
as critical objective for the continued Allied advance. But now the German Fifteenth
Amy was ready for a long campaign. Tens of thousands of German defenders had
reteated to Walcheren Island, South Beveland, and the Breskens Pocket. It was the
Fist Canadian Army, neglected on the left fank and now much weakened after
having lost three divisions to Market Garden, that had the decisive role of clearing
the enemy from behind daunting natural and military defences. The battle for the
Schedt would become one of the most important campaigns of the war.
