42
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
An angry Churchill bristled against the punitive actions and, without consulting
Ottawa, announced that German prisoners in Britain and Canada would in turn be
shackled. The Canadian government was nervous about the tit-for-tat manoeuvre,
but went along in the interest of unity. This led to a new round of binding the
Dieppe prisoners, who were manacled during the day, from eight in the morning to
eight at night. This manacling interfered with sports or leisure activities and was a
humiliating action since many of the men could not properly defecate with their
hands tied. After many prisoners' complaints, two medical orderlies per hut were
allowed to keep their hands free to assist prisoners in pulling down their trousers and
carrying out their bodily business.
The manacles were kept on for about two months and then replaced with hand-
cuffs that allowed greater movement. The ingenious Canadians were always trying to
pick the locks, and one of them discovered that the sardine cans in the Red Cross
package had a key for opening the can that also unlocked the handcuffs. The prison-
ers took to their huts when they needed to, using the cover there to free their hands
and rub down their wrists, though they rested the chains around their necks in case
the guards burst in. Over time, the Germans became haphazard about policing the
cufs, even though the policy continued for nearly a year, from December 1942 to
November 1943.
Many of the Dieppe prisoners, having been injured by shell fragments and small
arms fire, were cared for in German hospitals, albeit with little compassion. Shortages
of supplies, bandages, and pain medication meant that operations were often carried
out without anaesthesia. When the prisoners were stabilized, they were usually shipped
to the prisoner-of war camps, where there was little medical treatment. It fell to the
other prisoners to nurse their injured comrades back to health, both the soldiers and
the airmen, who often arrived with weeping wounds. Canadian Andrew Cox, who
Rew with the RAF and had his Hampden bomber shot down on September 8, 1940,
after more than forty sorties, wrote of the injured airmen in the camps. One of them
had no eyelids and his nose and ears burned off. They occupied the same sleeping
space. Cox watched his friend, who had other wounds and therefore had to be mon-
itored at night, sleeping with no eyelids, so that only the whites of his eyeballs were
visible. Another prisoner had much of his abdomen torn awav bu a shell blast "He
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
43
suffered great pain with the bandages sticking to the wound. A couple of enterpris-
ing prisoners were able to acquire through the German Luftwaffe some plexiglass
from a crashed Junkers 88 aircraft and constructed a cover for his wound."?) With
this plastic shielding, the prisoner was able to avoid a life-ending infection and even-
tually recover. Countless lives were saved through medical ingenuity.
"FOOD WAS ALWAYS in just short enough supply to replace sex as the dominant pre-
occupation," observed Ray Silver, who was a prisoner from mid-1942.3ยบ Everyone
was hungry, especially the young men whose bodies required a higher calorific intake
for sustenance. In the morning, prisoners often received ersatz bitter coffee made of
burnt barley, acorns, and chicory. Lunch and dinner was an assortment of turnips
and potatoes. Some horsemeat might be thrown into the mix, and any other scraps
that could be found. Pilot Officer Earle White described an incident of particular
desperation: "Food was scarce and a wandering cat was killed with a well-aimed stone.
As we tried to retrieve the frozen carcass from between the two wire fences, the
Germans played a game of firing down the line whenever anyone leaned across. After
three days they relented and allowed us to salvage the cat. It made a fine stew."3! Even
as prisoners became accustomed to horse and cat meat (although drew the line at the
thousands of rats), the bread was particularly trying. It was a heavy, sour black loaf
that seemed to consist primarily of sawdust. It probably did. Despite its unappealing
taste and texture, there were fights over the bread crumbs, and any division of food
took an excessively long period as each divided piece was weighed and studied by the
ravenous prisoners.
"Food is the most important thing in a prisoner's life," believed RCAF navigator
John Taylor. "It is for this reason that the Red Cross parcel is so important. Each
prisoner receives one per week, and with this can supplement his ration to achieve a
good diet."32 Packages included treats and sweets, cigarettes and canned goods, and
usually reading material and small games. If prisoners had been forced to subsist on
the German food alone, they would have starved to death, like the poor Russian
prisoners, who expired from starvation and disease by the millions. There were
interruptions to the Red Cross deliveries, with White lamenting a trying period
during the spring of 1943: "During the ten weeks we ate rotten potatoes and sawdust
