68 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
intercept them."" The parcels followed the soldiers in the field, moving through the
rear and logistical lines in an efficient snaking to the front. The occasional with-
drawal to the rear rest areas also brought a much-needed respite. Private Bruce
Walker, who served as an infantryman in the 48th Highlanders of Canada and a
dispatch rider with an anti-tank regiment, yearned for those breaks in service. At the
same time, he also feared going on leave and returning to find who had gone missing
in his absence: "We lost an awful lot. You'd go back, and say, 'Hey! Where's old Joe?
Oh, Christ, he gor killed two weeks ago. And where's Sandy? Oh, he got killed? It
was an awful low."4!
AS THE EIGHTH ARMY stewed on the right fank along the eastern, Adriatic coast,
General Mark Clark oversaw an amphibious landing up the western Italian coast at
Anzio, a series of holiday ports 50 kilometres south of Rome. The American Clark
was gangly and vainglorious, demanding, for instance, that he only be photographed
on his good side. He had been an indifferent commander to date, and he would soon
prove to be a liabilicy. The audacious Anzio operation of January 22, 1944, surprised
Kesselring: unfortunately, timid leadership on the part of American generals at the
front left the forces in a shallow beachhead, before the enemy sealed it off and seized
the high ground around it. The Germans were so perplexed at the American inability
to exploit their weakness that they believed the Anzio landing had to be a diversion-
ary attack meant to hold down their forces. It was not. Churchill remarked uncharit-
ably, "I had hoped that we were hurling a wildcat onto the shore, but all we had got
was a stranded whale.*"* In fact, the Anzio operation looked a lot like the failed
Gallipoli landings that Churchill had championed in 1915 during the war against
Turkey. At Anzio, the Germans had the ad
vantage of the high ground, while the
Allies could unleash punishing naval gunnery and heavy bomber strikes. The corpses
piled up.
On the other American front, south of Rome, a unique group of Canadians was
involved in taking the war to the enemy and knocking out his outer defences before
the primary attack through the Liri Valley. The Canadian and American Ist Special
Service Force (SSF), known as the Devil's Brigade, had been formed in 1942 from
the northern dominion and the southern republic to conduct operations in alpine
THE HITLER LINE
69
regions. Its soldiers were recognized by their distinctive shoulder badge illustrating a
devil and a red spearhead imprinted with the words USA-CANADA. The officers
had selected 2,500 fit recruits and trained them aggressively in the art of fighting,
mountain climbing, skiing, and parachuting. 43
The Ist SSF was thrown into a number of battles after its arrival in Italy in
November 1943. In the December 3 operation against Monte la Difensa, a snow-
capped mountain, the Devil's Brigade carried out a difficult six-hour climb up the
rocky face to the top, where they hauled their American weapons, supplies, and
water, before engaging the enemy. The battles were fought above the clouds, with
ghostly soldiers firing into the gloom and killing each other in driving sleet, rain, and
billowing mists. "They threw everything they had at us," said Lieutenant-Colonel
Tom Gilday." Over seven days- all the while exposed to howling winds, freezing
The mixed Canadian-American Ist Special Service Force was known as the
Devil's Brigade and fought in Italy from late 1943. This image captures members
of the unit, with darkened faces, about to set out on a patrol.
