150 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Foster ordered a reinforced battlegroup of the Canadian Scottish, with eleven
Shermans from the Ist Hussars and supporting machine-gun teams, to relieve the
Winnipe Ries. The Scottish had lile time to prepare for the operation and they
found their wireless sets jammed by the Germans, who played music to drown out
dialogue with headquarters. The Scottish set off at 8:30 p.M. with the sun dipping
low. Nerves were taut. They marched rapidly forward through wheat fields and
orchards behind a creeping barrage and a smoke screen from five field artillery regi-
ments. Private Harry Roberts of the Scottish had enlisted at sixteen and now, at age
twenty, felt nearly paralyzed with fear. As he closed in on Putot, he stumbled across
several Winnipeggers who had been executed by the enemy— hands tied and shot in
the back of the head. His resolve was stiffened by the horrible sight and now, in his
mind, "it was a case of fighting to the last round and the last man."28
After three hours of fierce confict, the Germans were driven back a little before
midnight, although, according to Lieutenant-Colonel F.N. Cabeldu, commander
of the Scotish, "at a terrible cost. Many of the Scottish infanteers remembered
witnessing a figure of Christ on the Cross in the village square bullet riddled
and shrapnel-scarred, as Canadians and Germans fought over the contested terain.
Captain R.M. Caldwell, the regimental medical officer for the Winnipeg Rifles,
remarked sady afier the war, "It was a battle of youth versus youth, for the average
age of the Riflemen was about 19."30
The survivors of the Winnines Rifles emerged from tho callare and sir ceonches thas
they had held at great cost. Most were down to their lact rounds of ammunition and
this after having rifled through the pouches of killed comrades for ammo clins. That
nigh, according to Tony Foulds, who served in the Brish 62nd Anti-Tank Regiment
that backed the Canadians with 17-pounder M-105 (mobile armoured guns), they
*sorted our the wounded from the dead, both Canadian and German.
»31 The Scottish
lost 125 men killed and wounded in storming Putot. while the Winnipeo P:Aes loss
nearly full chree companies, 298 casualties making the total for the barration nearly
450 casualties since D-Day three days earlier. The Germans reported 40 killed and
58 wounded, although those numbers appear too low considering the ferocity of the
bartle " The 124 SS had soughr to knife shrough the Canadians to the coact hur had
badly pierced the crust of their defensive lines before being thrown back.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
151
FURTHER TO THE EAST, the Regina Rifles faced four fierce attacks throughout the
night of the 8th and the early hours of the 9th, as they held the villages of Norrey
and Bretteville. At Bretteville, the Reginas created a series of strongpoints around a
handful of Normandy farms, their thick stone walls largely impervious to shellfire.
They defended against twenty-two enemy tanks from the 12th SS Panzer Regiment's
2nd Battalion, and supporting Grenadiers, who closed in on Bretteville around
10:00 P.M. on June 8. With no tanks and few anti-tank guns, the Reginas were
ourgunned, but they held on as dusk faded to darkness, with sharpshooters picking
off German officers, machine-gunners breaking up the enemy advance, and 3-inch
mortar fire scattering concentrations of 12th SS troops. Living on a steady diet of the
stimulant Benzedrine, the Reginas fought through the night. The PIAT teams snaked
forward to engage the Panthers in uneven actions. The Canadian bravery paid off.
Two Panther tanks were destroyed around midnight in close-quarters combat, with
Rifleman Joe LaPointe stalking a Panther on his own and killing it with a shot from
his PIAT. As one of the Reginas observed, "The dreaded Panther tank was not invin-
cible and could be knocked out by infantry who knew how to use their weapons."33
The Germans learned to fear the PIAT,
even though the bombs often failed to
penetrate the tanks' armour and the
brave teams of PIAT gunners were
amnihilated after exposing themselves
when they fired?* The Reginas turned
to laying necklaces of No. 75 grenades
along the roads to break the enemy
tank tracks and achieve a "mobility
kill' Six Panthers were eventually
wrecked in the mad melee, including
thre killed by the G-pounders of the
3rd Canadian Anti-Tank Regiment,
who were holed up with the Reginas
and fring new armour-piercing shells.
The ground was also covered with
Rifleman Daniel Corturient of the Regina Rifles
takes cover behind a stone wall in the defence
against the 12th SS attacks on June 8-10, 1944.
