152 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
dozens of slain 12th SS troops. "During this test of real war," declared Lieutenant
Frank Proctor, "we suffered many casualties and lost several Bren gun carriers, but we
had held against a powerful enemy attack, and had inflicted a heavy toll against the
enemy infantry."35
The fighting also raged at Norrey, less than a kilometre south of Bretteville and
therefore jutting into the enemy lines. Burning farms and magnesium flares lit the sky,
while tracer fire and muzzle fashes illuminated the gloom. The shadows of soldiers
darted across the battlefield. scrambling from cover to cover. The war diarist for the
regiment wrote that the riflemen of the forward companies "are beginning to resemble
the carth they live in and are feeling the strain."36 Panzers rumbled forward, firing
as they moved; and when they were unable to break into the houses and the stone walls,
they prowled outside for victims. Some of the Reginas were in slit trenches outside the
mansions, and the panzers took their revenge, grinding through the fields looking for
the trenches, whereupon they crushed to death or buried alive those men in the ground.
The screams of the doomed especilly those caught by the tanks as they spun on one
tread left the survivors within the stone walls shaken by the sheer brutality of facing
tanks. But even when the lch SS attarked in waves the Reginas never falrered as they
fought for their lives and for one another. There was no breakthrough.
The cost of war.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
153
Though the Germans proved dogged fighters, they struck piecemeal throughout
the battle, with their infantry often separated from the tanks. Brigadier Harry Foster
later characterized the swarming but clumsy assault as being "launched without any
semblance of tactical sense.... The enemy flung himself straight against the strongest
points and utterly failed to exploit the undoubted weakness of his opponents' pos-
ition. Hubert Meyer, a 12th SS divisional staff officer and historian of the division,
later said of the Canadians, "The enemy was especially strong in the defence and could
not be taken by surprise. He fought with determination and courage."38 After several
hours of combat, the 12th SS retreated, leaving behind many of their dead. Frustrated
and angry, the Germans switched tactics, and throughout June 9 and 10, according to
one of the Reginas officers, the Canadians were "shelled 23 hours a day."3 The Reginas'
defence was one of the finest Canadian holding actions of the entire war, and it drove
a stake through the German plans of driving the Canadians back to Juno Beach. It
came at a high cost. Gordon Brown, commander of D Company, wrote candidly that
"Most of the soldiers were in their late teens or early 20s, but they were aging rapidly
as the horror of what they had seen began to sink in."40
IN THE FIRST DAYS of the Normandy campaign, the Canadian infantry found that
the Le-Enfield bolt action rifle, the Bren gun, and the 3-inch mortar were the most
efective weapons for laying down fire against the enemy. The mortar, with a range
of 2,500 metres, provided close fire support. The Sten gun remained dangerous to
everyone user, victim, and bystanders— because of its poorly designed safety catch
and its tendency to fire at unwanted times. German snipers also learned to look for
soldiers carying them, as the guns were almost always wielded by NCOs and pla-
toon officers. The 2-inch mortar was not a key weapon for the infantry, and only one
ras ise for the platoon headquarters section. The crew of two could easily carry
the light mortar and its 2-pound bombs; yet with a rate of fire of eight bombs per
minute it was difficult to carry enough bombs to fire for any length of time. Captain
Donald Findlay, a Canadian serving with a British regiment, one of 623 Canadian
infantry officers to do so as part of the Canloan program, also observed that the
mortar tended to draw fire "because of revealing fash and sound at close range." 1
While the Great War infantryman had found great value in having, by 1918, about
