258 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
a number of camouflaged tanks to lie in wait for the advancing Tigers, each one
locked and loaded with an armour-piercing round "up the spout." Tension mounted
as the Sherbrooke Fusilier and Northamptonshire Yeomanry tanks, their com-
manders vision limited and their ambush site potentially jumped by other German
tanks moving through their positions, finally opened fire at 500 metres. The terror
of the Western Front, the Tigers, were caught in a crossfire, their superior guns and
armour negated by the skilful British and Canadian tactics. Wittmann, wearer of the
Knights Cross, was killed during the clash, likely by a Canadian shell, and four other
Tiger tanks were destroyed. It was a crippling blow.3s
Tank battles raged up and down the Anglo-Canadian sector, and not all were as
successful as the Radley-Walters ambush. Battle is fickle, and victory on one front
can occur while another group suffers defeat. For instance, a handful of Panther
tanks got into the midst of Bren-gun carriers of the Royal Regiment. The Canadians
suffered heavily and retreated, but an artillery forward observer with the Royals,
Captain William Waddell, guided a number of Sherbrooke Fusilier Shermans back
to the enemy and orchestrated the Panthers' destruction. Though these German
attacks had lite chance of reversing the advance, they slowed the Canadians, forced
them to dig in, and bought time for Meyer to form a new line of defence.
When the lead Canadian and Polish armoured divisions moved out again in the
cary afternoon, they faced a prepared enemy. Any chance of surprise was lost, but
Simonds hoped the second phase of the aerial bombardment, coming in waves from
1230 ₽. to 1:35 P.M., would again soften up the enemy. Three of the four groups
of bombers hit their targets. but the fourth one. composed of American B-17 bomb-
ers, dropped their loads short. right into the Canadian and Polish lines Twisted and
backened vehicles were strewn about the landscape. Dismembered bodies lay
unidentified. Among the post-bomber craters, a soldier, on fire, was seen by many
stunned survivors, running through the area 36 More than 350 Canadian and Polish
troops were killed or wounded, including divisional commander Rod Keller.
Rumours inflating these numbers and the impact of the bombing circulated through-
out the Canadian Corps." There were even stories that the Germans had hijacked
the bombers. "Tive seen blood and death on the barrlefielde but not as concentrated
as that day: wrote Captain Harold Macdonald to his wife after tallying the
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
259
thirty-seven killed and seventy-eight wounded in his North Shore Regiment. "When
we got up you could reach out anywhere and pick up limbs. It was frightful and I
know our men would have killed those pilots if they had been available.... However
that is just another of those bad dreams we go through and forget."38
This was a poor start for the Allies, and especially the raw 4th Armoured Division,
which had taken over after chainsawing through the enemy at Cintheaux, Gaumesnil,
and Hautmesnil. Advancing into the enemy lines, the division engaged in skirmishes
throughout the day. Black smoke rose from burning vehicles shrouding the sky and
infantry and grenadiers fought to the death in the wheat fields. Canadian tanks
charged to cover, either in undulations in the ground or small forests.
Herbert
Danter, a gunner with the 23rd Field Regiment, employing self-propelled guns,
recalled the "mad dash chasing the remnants of the German army (and they were
prefil remnants)" as well as the "oppressive heat, the choking, blinding dust, and
specially the stench of rotting bodies.",) While the sharp-end forces were awash in
violence, the traffic again snarled behind the lines; Bruce Hunt, another Canadian
gunet, admitted that the parking lot of vehicles created a "curious apathetic" situa-
con among the huge line of tail units that could not see what the teeth was biting.
Tree is no special feling of a surge to victory, no sense of impending triumph."40
The melee was confusing as the fog of battle descended over those farmers' fields.
Commanders in the rear barked over the wireless, exhorting the tanks to crash for-
wad, but that meant rolling into minefields and the anti-tank guns, which, as one
Canadian trooper remarked, "filled everyone with dread."4! By the end of the 8th,
de. Pit division was held up on the left flank by anti-tank fire from St. Sylvain,
which had wrecked more than forty tanks, and the Canadians- the Argyll and
Sucherland Highlanders assisted by the South Alberta Regiment-pushed to north
+ Humeni. The Canadians had not reached their final objectives, which included
Barterille, Quesnay, Point 195, and Potigny.
ENSATISFIED WITH THE DAY'S PROGRESS, and aware that the Germans were rush-
i rifrements to the front, the hard-thrusting Simonds ordered his friend,
Maior-General George Kirching, to attack through the niebt unril Bretterille on the
t sid of the Caen-Falaise road was in his hands, and then to press further on
