190 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
the motor torpedo boats, remarked on the nature of battle: "Your first purpose was
to get in and strike them, and then get away safely to live another day." 65
Lieutenant-Commander C.A. Law, commander of the 29th Flotilla, described
one attack against an enemy shipping convoy in the early hours of May 23. Eight of
the torpedo boats swept along the coast looking for trouble. They found it, around
2:30 л.M., and closed on the enemy. "Through my binoculars I could see four of the
low fak barges. The torpedo boats roared through the water ... heavy 88-mm [anti-)
personnel shells burst above our heads and left angry puffs of black smoke. Others
exploded nearby, sending up gigantic needle-shaped columns of water. Green and
red tracers, brilliant and terrifying missiles of death, flew through the air in graceful
hose-pipe arcs towards our vulnerable wooden vessels. They danced over the water,
then hit with a sharp resounding crackle. Amid the clamour of battle and the
strong smell of cordite, the two forces fired at each other and then quickly broke off.
The motor boats were useful against weaker armed vessels, especially barrage boats
that fired at aircraft over the Channel, but they had to be careful about engaging in
a fight that they could not win. The Canadian boats added another threat to dis-
rupting German coasta vessels, although many met a tragic end when a fire from
spilled fuel on February 14, 1945, engulfed the 29ch Flotillas eight vessels docked in
Ostend, Belgium, destroying five of them and killing twenty-six Canadian sailors.
Canadas larger destroyers, the Tribals, were also in on the hunt. In the early hours
of June 9, a number of British warships, along wich Huron and Haida- the latter
commanded by Harry DeWolf, known as "Hard-over-Harry" and the RCN's finest
warrior-captain-established contact with the enemy. The Germans turned to fee.
after letting loose torpedoes, but the British and Canadians bore down on the enemy:
Haid made radar contact with 2-32, a Narvik-class destroyer, which was larger and
better armed than the Canadian Tribal, and led the attack. The destroyers steamed
after the Narvik, which was laying down a smokescreen, making it difficult to track
and hit with long-range gunfire. Nonetheless, good gunnery delivered several hits on
2.32, even as it kept running. The Canadian and British warships, four in number,
continued to pursue, skilfilly manoeuvring in order to close with the fleeing enemy
ships. The 10ch Flotilla sank one German ship, ZHI, an ex-Dutch destroyer, but i
looked like the German warships would escape. Haida and Huron continued their
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
191
doged pursuit and caught Z-32 again at a killing range of 6,400 metres at 4:45 A.M.
They opened fire. The German warship fired off its torpedoes, but it was caught
square in a crossfire, and the Tribals' armour-piercing 50-pound shells raked it.
Fifteen minutes of fire left the Narvik's port engine out of action, and it was now
almost dead in the water, with much of the upper deck engulfed in flames. With no
hope of escape, the German captain drove Z-32 aground on the rocky shore of Île de
Bat. l was another significant victory for the Canadian Tribals, reinforcing De Wolf's
already stellar reputation as an elite captain.
The Tribals were also on the lookout for U-boats, and they destroyed U-971 on
June 24. While the convoys continued to be protected by warships, there were now
escort groups that patrolled on their own, seeking to kill U-boats. Ten escort groups
operated in the Channel, including four of the best RCN formations, which con-
isted of destroyers, frigates, and upgraded corvettes. Airpower from Coastal
Command bombers added to the Allies arsenal.
The best Canadian submarine killer,
James "Chummy" Prentice, was a
oty-five-year-old RN veteran who
had held key training and command
positions during the war in the attempt
to sharpen the RCN's ability to track
and sink submarines. Prentice often
wore his cap tipped over in a rakish
syle and, somewhat strangely, sported
a monocle. This left him a fascinating
odiry. He was known to flip his head
back, shoot his monocle up in the air,
and catch it neatly again in his eye.8
Despite these affectations, as one offi-
cer remarked, "he was a
орест "69)
captain to
Prentice led EG-11, an escort group
designated as an "A/S Killer Group"
Commander James "Chummy" Prentice,
Canada's expert sub-killer.
