340
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
sill unwilling to make Antwerp a priority despite Eisenhower's express instructions,
Simonds was left with not nearly enough men or guns to rapidly clear the Scheldt.
But Simonds was no whiner; nor did he want to appear timid as army commander.
And so he set to his task and ordered the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division to clear the
south bank of the West Scheldt, known as the Breskens Pocket, while the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division would drive north from Antwerp and then push westward into the
Beveland Peninsula. The 4th Canadian Armoured Division, on the far right, was to
charge east and north across Leopold Canal and offer a protective screen. Simonds
would rather have used the 4th Division to support the 2nd Division, which faced a
concentration of enemy forces, but he did not have enough troops under his com-
mand. Once the 2nd Division cleared its obiectives, it was to turn to the west and
assist British naval commandos in clearing the final objective, Walcheren Island,
which controlled the most westward entrance to the Scheld estuary. On every battle-
field, the Germans could wait for the attacking Canadians to come at them over
open ground.
THE BRESKENS POCKET consisted of flooded farmland bounded by the Leopold
Canal to the west and south, the West Scheldt to the northeast, and the North Sea
to the northwest. Within this 35-by-15-kilometre rectangle, the flat polder land-
scape was cut by innumerable canals, ditches, and dykes, and was swamped with
anywhere from a few centimetres to 1.5 metres of water. To close with the enemy,
every arillery piece and vehicle, not to mention the tens of thousands of shells,
would have to be dragged through the muck. The Germans called it Fortress South
Scheld; Lieutenant O.A. Robertson of the North Shore Regiment described it as a
"devil's dream of mud, dukes. and min "6 The occacional town and a few villages
groupings of farms, and church towers offered enclaves for the 14,000-strong bar-
detested G4th German Division. Their morale was high, they had good leaders
experienced men who had fought on the Fastern Front-and as one soldier later
testified, they had orders to "fight to the last man."
The swampy ground created natural obstacles that made it difficult for armoured
vehicles to make much headway, and the 4th Canadian Armoured Division's infantry
regiments had been repulsed in several costly reversals north of the Leopold Canal in
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 341
Seprember. And so the difficult assault fell to General Dan Spry's 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division, even though his brigades were worn out from the siege along the
coast. Spry planned a two-pronged attack that would include the main crossing of
the Leopold starting on October 6, and a second amphibious landing a few days later
10 the east. At the Leopold Canal, the frontal assault fell to Brigadier J.G. Spragge's
7ch Infantry Brigade, whose intelligence officers had only two days to prepare. The
easern half of the pocket was flooded, creating a formidable barrier, so the Canadians
focused on the area to the west, a narrow strip of dry land near the village of Eede.
The operation, code-named Switchback, began at 5:30 A.M. on October 6 with
no accompanying barrage, despite the presence of one of the largest concentrations
of Allied guns along a divisional front, with 327 barrels ranging from 25-pounders
to the super-heavy tractor-drawn 240mm howitzers that fired 360-pound shells.
Though the guns had harassed known enemy positions before zero hour, it was left
to twenty-seven flame-throwing Wasps to drench the enemy-held canal banks, cut-
ting the darkness with a terrifying display of flames and jellied fuel.® Most of the
Germans fled the onslaught or were burned alive, but handfuls of them survived.
The Schelat campaign' fooded polder fields through which the Canadians fought the Germans.
