82 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Further away from the explosions, bodies involuntarily spasmed, muscles jerked, and
men soiled themselves. Added to the horror, the rockets of the terrifying multi-
barrelled launchers, called Nebelwerfers but known more commonly as "Moaning
Minnies," crashed down in a scream of explosives that was, according to one
Canadian, "undiluted terror." S
Barbed wire 6 metres deep in places, minefields that blew off feet and legs, and a
string of craters 5 to 9 metres wide, provided a deep barrier that the Canadians had to
cross. Interlocking machine guns, panzerfaust teams, and the feared panzerturms-
the low-profile turrets of Panzer Vs with theit 75mm gun encased in concrete- were
a formidable defence. And still the Canadians pressed on, with one describing the day
as consisting of "a thousand wild, breathless, brawling, cursing, tiny battles erupted,
like spontancous fires exploding in a rags factory. And as fast as one flickered out,
another began..
The first waves of the PPCLI, attacking on the far right, made some inroads towards
their objective 1,400 metres away, but encountered a wooded area that made the barrage
difficult to follow. Oak trees were reduced to splinters and the infantry hung back or
were tripped up in the broken ground. Ar the same time, the British forces on their right,
from the 78th Division, were held up by fire, as the Allied bombardment on this front
had left most of the defenders unscathed in Aquino, When the PPCL emerged from the
debris of woods about 550 metres from the start line, they were cut down by machine
guns. Junior officers gathered up the survivors and tried to land them formal Around
7:10 A.M., the wireless contact was lost on the PPCLI front. The commanding officer,
Licutenant-Colonel Cameron Ware, roamed the battlefield, secking his men, rallied them,
and pushed forward. "He bore a charmed life" recounted one of the Patricias, "again and
again men were struck down around him." The PPLI inched their way forward.
On the brigade s left Rank, the Scaforths had pushed into the tangle of interlock-
ing machine-gun positions. When British Churchill tanks of the North Irish Horse
Regiment rumbled into their sector, at least five of the 40-ton beasts were holed by a
single, mounted 75mm turret gun. The Highlanders snaked past their British com-
rades, shuddering at the burning funeral pyres, and after the battle the Canadians
asked the Iron Horse to carry a small maple leaf on their remaining tanks as a sign of
the Canadians' gratitude
THE HITLER LINE
83
Within this devastation, training and instinct took over for most soldiers. Advance,
find cover, shoot, and advance again. One group, perhaps only a handful of men,
fired on the enemy, while another half section raced forward. Then they fired, and
another section rushed the enemy?& One of the Highlanders, Private Charles Johnson,
an American who had served with the regiment since 1940, recalled the fighting: "My
mind had but one thought; to get through the barrage.... No one except the wounded
or the dead stopped.... Over to the left a German jumped up and seemed to be raising
his hands when he was killed by one of our fellows. Directly ahead and about fifty
yards away a Jerry stood up and held his machine-gun in his arms. A long burst tore
into 8 Platoon to my right. I fired two rounds from the hip at the same time that
others must have fired. The Jerry folded up and fell. I stepped on his bloody head as
I passed over the position a few seconds later."7)
The Seaforth Highlanders continued to drive forward, with one wireless report
noting that the commanding officer of Baker Company had, by 8:40 A.M., picked up
the remnants of all four companies, a mere 100 strong, and was pushing on through
the defences. " Lieutenant-Colonel S. W. Thomson of the Seaforths noted, "There was
only one possibility of succeeding and that was for each individual to fight forward
until he dropped or obtained his objectives. Each man did just this and the line was
broken. Certainly, it was a battalion success, not [one gained] by overwhelming artil-
lery support silencing the enemy for this did not happen ... (nor by] brilliant infantry-
cum-tank tactics for the infantry had to go on and break the line without tanks. But
[the objective was gained] by bravery and sheer guts."8! This was an infantryman's
battle for survival, and at one point the Seaforths faced an enemy tank counterattack
with only their Bren guns and a handful of PIATs. It was a massacre, with the tanks
grinding over the terrified soldiers in shallow slit trenches.2 Throughout the day, the
2nd Infantry Brigade was hit hard with over 500 casualties.83
On the left Rank, the Carleton and Yorks and two squadrons of British tanks
from the 51st Royal Tank Regiment made good initial advances, even as "the
ground was boiling," according to Private Ernest Maller, a twenty-two-year-old
from Shippagan in northeastern New Brunswick. He would be shot in both legs
during the battle.* Soon the British tanks were knocked about in close-quarters
combat. Captain R.T. Currelly reported that a single enemy 88mm anti-tank gun,
