VETERANS 427
426 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
teenagers and young men he had once served with in a terrible war almost half a cen-
tury in the past.
WHILE VETERANS FACED their own personal battles and tried to make meaning of
their war experiences, not all who served during the war were recognized as veterans.
The merchant seamen suffered proportionately higher casualties than any other
Canadian military arm, yet because the mariners were not in uniform (save for a few
isolated cases) or organized as a fighting arm, and because of a series of government
and later veterans groups decisions, it took almost fifty years for the merchant mar-
iners to be recognized as veterans.80
Immediately following the war, the Liberal government set a policy of encour-
aging merchant mariners to stay in the peacetime trade. Ottawa did this in part by
denying the mariners the same benefits as veterans, but it also promised them con-
tinued employment in a national merchant fleet. Most merchant seamen shrugged
away the double standard of having served their country but being denied veteran
status. Men who had lived through the Depression and the war were not going to
give up good-paying jobs. And so while veterans were going back to school or setting
up businesses, the mariners continued to move Canadian goods around the world.
But in 1949 the Department of Transport radically cut the merchant fleet, casting
thousands out of work.
The merchant seamen were cheated. The mariners had been lauded by politicians
and the media during the war as the military's "fourth arm." but they remained small
in comparison to the worldwide Allied feet. And while the seaman casualties were
heavy, the losses were not only on Canadian ships; as a result, they usually did not
receive the same newspaper coverage as the wounded or killed uniformed personnel
who served on identifable Canadian shins 81 Moreover. in the postwar vears the
mariners had few champions, and fewer histories, to explain their role during the war.
They may have been the fourth arm, but they were easily forgotten and, save for a few
short-lived groups in the early 1950s, there was no merchant marines veterans organ-
ization until 1982. Slowly, throughout the 1980s, the Canadian Merchant Navy
Association tallied support for the cause of recognition and recompense. but it had
little impact in convincing Liberal and Conservative governments that mariners
ted reive veteran status. The fight for rights was made harder because the Legion
does veterans' organizations had long argued that the merchant mariners,
Hile serving their country, had been civilians in the war zone.
malin of merchant navy groups and asked to rectify their status as non-combat-
* The subcommittee's January 1991 report, It's Almost Too Late, recommended
ta verans benefits be extended to the mariners who had served in "dangerous
wes. The Merchant Navy Book of Remembrance was soon compiled. In 1994,
i Remembrance Day, the government was open to the idea that the merchant mar-
amb induded in the wreath-laying ceremony. The Legion's high command had
iced this for years, but it relented on the grounds that the Book of Remembrance
me big officially dedicated on November 11. However, the Legion insisted that the
at as not a precedent, even though
to years earlier, the Merchant Navy
Yen and Civilian War Related Benefits
i had given merchant mariners lim-
id veteran status®3 But even with
himal recognition,
the act did not
provide full veterans' benefits.
"We are the men that saved the
mid, aimed seventy-two-year-old
Archant Navy veteran Ossie MacLean
119834 Starting on October 1 of
eat year, he was one of several mer-
cant mariners who staged a hunger
side on the steps of Parliament Hill.
The stike embarrassed the govern-
Ten d hen the National Council
tea Associations in Canada
tally backed the merchant mariners
in her quest for full veteran status in
10, fly- ive years after the end of
The Halifax Memorial in Nova Scotia's Point
Pleasant Park, unveiled in November 1967, marks
the sacrifice of the men and women of the Royal
Canadian Navy and the Merchant Navy during
the world wars. The Cross of Sacrifice stands over
12 metres high and contains the inscribed names
of 3,257 Canadians buried at sea.
