SNO CANADIAN INFANTRY DIVISION
tubert Folle
2* CANADIAN INFANTRY DIVISION
10[S.S. PANZER DIVISION
NOISIAIG
272 NO INFANTRY
GERMAN
FRONT LINE
Contenay-le-Marmio
2 MILES
MILES ®
VERRIÈRES RIDGE, JULY 25, 1944
OPERATION SPRING 219
deliberate bouncing of searchlights off low clouds to create a ghostly, artificial light.
Unfortunately, while the light provided the troops with better vision, breaking the
shroud of darkness allowed the Waffen SS troops to open fire on the silhouetted
Canadians, * Surviving section, platoon, and company commanders rallied their
un, and they set off again across the battlefield. The North Novas snuffed out the
gradiers in the forward slit trenches but found themselves raked by concealed
guns, and were unable to advance into Tilly. Radio contact was lost, and the com-
manding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Petch, was cut off from his forces. He
fit he had little choice but to send forward the reserve company, which was also
son forced to ground. The situation went from bad to worse as the Fort Garry
Hine oled into battle and became easy pickings for the Germans anti-tank guns.
Elsten of the sixteen Shermans were left burning in the nightmarish scene."
The North Novas held the outer edges of Tilly around 5:25 A.M., but they were
arentually driven back from the village. The vulnerable wounded were spread over
de what fields. As stretcher-bearers tried to drag them to safety, snipers took no pity
ad ile those who stumbled to the rear in delirium or revealed themselves as they
trached about in agony. When Brigadier D.G. Cunningham of the 9th Brigade
wited another attack for late in the afternoon, both of the regimental commanding
rices Lieutenant-Colonels Charles Petch of the North Novas and G.H. Christiansen
dide somont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders (which had been rushed up to
ince the precarious front), refused to make the daylight assault. The war diary
le Highlanders noted frankly, "We are ordered to be on notice to move to assist
Be INS. his is indeed a mental blow and is felt by all ranks. We need a rest and
d" The th Brigade stayed put, avoiding another horrific slaughter that would
tare achieved nothing.
To the right of the North Novas, the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry had the
enviable rack of capturing the village of Verrières They would traverse much of
the same terrain as the South Sasks four days earlier. The veterans of Dieppe knew
dour killing grounds, and few went forward with confidence. Yet still they went.
The Rileys passed through the FMRs, who were tasked to clear German defenders at
Treval Farm, and they succeeded in doing so by throwing almost every rifleman
so at, huding cooks and officers batmen. Major Jacques "Mad Jimmy"
