FIGHT TO THE FINISH
waves was Private Ben Mackereth, who was "expecting every moment to be hit"; it
was so terrible that, in his words, I felt my "belly drawn into my backbone" in terror.
As a sniper got the bead on him, he had to make the difficult decision to use a dead
comrade's body as a shield.?" Enemy slugs thudded into and through the corpse as
he lay vulnerable until a sliver of mortar shell tore into his shoulder. Dazed yet aware
that the beach was a lethal trap, he crawled forward in a sideways crab movement,
passing through the mines and barbed wire that gallant men in front of him had
cleared with their bodies or Bangalore torpedoes.
"Into the jaws of death," described Chaplain Honorary Captain R. Myles Hickey.
"The beach was sprayed from all angles by the enemy machine guns and now their
mortars and heavy guns began hitting us... The noise was deafening. You couldn't
hear our huge tanks that had already landed and were crunching their way through
the sand. Some men, unable to hear them, were run over and crushed to death....
When a shell came over, you dug into the sand and held your breath... waited for the
blast and shower of stones and debris that followed. Then, when it had cleared a little,
right next to you, perhaps someone talking to you half an hour before, lay dead."36
The North Shore soldiers drove forward, aided by Sherman tanks of the Fort Garry
Horse that overtan several German positions But even for the enemy euerandered
to the North Shores, rifle fire continued to fell offers and men. "Soon the sniping,
recalled Lieutenant C.F. Richardson, "became the most demoralizing aspect of the
day as we began to lose one man after another?" The New Brunswickers sent out
patrols to scarch for the hidden enemy, only to discover a vast underground network
linking much of the defensive site. "There were more guns and well concealed
defences inland than were expected," noted one chronicler Lieutenant "Bones"
McCann remembered that enemy snipers popped up and "appeared at unexpected
place" to fire and then move back through the underground tunnel. A clearing party
of the New Brunswickers entered the subterranean maze, bombing, bayoneting, and
shooting their way forward. After two hours of claustrophobic battle, seventy-nine
Germans were made prisoner, with about twenty-five corpses left in the labyrinth.
THE CANADIANS EXITED the beaches by around 10:30 A.M., but the day was not yet
over. Behind the dunes lay the built-up French towns that were occupied by the
D- DAY
131
Germans. They had to be cleared in slow and vicious fighting. Throughout the towns,
enemy soldiers fired from upper-floor windows of French houses. A few shells from
the Shermans usually silenced the snipers, although some defenders held out until a
bullet or a well-placed grenade ended their stand. Captain Bill Harvey of the North
Shore Regiment attested to the fierce resistance at one road junction that held up the
advance until infantrymen skilfully flanked it. "Jerry began flying white flags but as
the assault moved in, they opened fire again, causing more casualties. But the boys
drove in and the tanks did their stuff. White flags went up again but the North Shore
had had enough of that trickery and went in with bombs, cold steel and shooting."3)
Allalong Juno Beach, the two reserve companies for most of the five Canadian battal-
ions with two more battalions coming in on their heels) spearheaded the attack inland.
No fewer than 1,500 men faced the German defenders of roughly half that number.
There was no single experience of combat on D-Day. Every man faced death:
some were claimed, while others survived by chance or skill, and often the combin-
arion of both. Infantrymen recalled only a few flashes of banality or horror, although
others ran through everv second, like a loopine film. forever burned into their minde
The fast clatter of the MG42 and the deliberate chug of the Bren that rose and fell
under the multiple explosions of high-calibre shellfire and crumping mortars were
nate forgotten. The beachhead battle and the push into the villages created for most
men a profound dreamlike unreality. Regimental Quartermaster James Sutherland of
the Canadian Scottish later described D-Day as a nightmare: "I was scared thought-
as as saw nothing but death and destruction."40
Tanks rumbled along the beach, trying to avoid the wounded, but some were
gound out of existence by the nearly blind troopers who were essentially driving a
mal buse by looking out through the mail slot. Those injured soldiers who could
put temselves to the safety of the seawall were treated there by medical personnel.
Copain Darius Albert, the medical officer of Le Régiment de la Chaudière, one of
tie te attalions to come ashore around a half hour after the first wave, spoke
of the ruined combatants he encountered. "It was awful Pa never seen so man
rounded men. In the first two hours, I must have attended at least 200 of them.
Ther didn't scream or swear or shout. They just moaned "41 Same of the wounded
moked calmly, while others stared off with morphine-glazed eves; many were
