172 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The screaming Tiffies, firing rockets or dropping high explosives, raised morale for
the Canadian infantry. While the army was frustrated by not having control of air
assets, and this often led to delays, communication between air and ground forces had
improved considerably since North Africa and Italy. The "cab rank"
system allowed
Typhoons and Spitfires to circle the battlefield and be ready to pounce on the enemy
when contacted by radio from ground forces."!
Spithre pilot Bill McRae wrote of the Typhoon fighter-bombers providing "excel-
lent close support to the Army and their efforts were noticed and appreciated.
Unfortunately, we Spitfire-types were usually engaged far behind enemy lines where
our contribution was not obvious to the troops. Consequently, when we occasion-
ally went into a cafe and were approached by Army personnel asking what we flew,
we always answered "Typhoons' and the drinks were on the Army!"!2 The ground-
pounders appreciated the fying artillery above them, but later operational studies
recaled that Typhoons had little chance of hitting targets from 4,000 feet, although
accuracy increased with a steeper dive!" So did fak. While the Typhoons were not
like snipers, they were murderous against groups of soft-skinned vehicles, to the
5V 0 P
figher bomber from RCAF No. 439 Squadron taking off for a sortie.
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
173
point where they could cripple a large formation in transit. While it is difficult to
quantify the Allies' command of the air, the Typhoons and other aircraft were a
significant deterrent for the gathering of Wehrmacht forces, who always had to make
a calculation that trucks, artillery pieces, and sometimes tanks would be lost if they
were moved from camouflaged sites. ' Canadian artillery officers also reported that
when the Allied fighters and Typhoons were in the air, many enemy guns stopped
fring so as not to give away their positions. The eyes in the sky were "an essential
adjunct to modern art [iller]y."15
Airpower was not as effective as either the Allies or Germans believed, but the
infantry loved the flyboys. "If I ever run into Typhoon pilots," claimed one Canadian
infantry officer to his wife, "I shall go down on my knees before them. They've given
us an awful lot of support and saved us from some bad attacks." 16 And on the receiv-
ing end of the bombs, shells, and rockets, one German frontsoldaten lamented,
*Unless a man has been through these fighter-bomber attacks he cannot know. You
lie there, helpless, ... pressed into the ground, your face in the dirt-and then it
comes toward you roaring.... Then the bird is gone. But it comes back. Twice. Three
times. Not until they've wiped out everything do they leave. Until then you are
helles Like a man facing a firing-squad. Even if you survive it is no more than a
temporary reprieve. Ten such attacks in succession are a real foretaste of hell."17
THERE WAS NO SHORTAGE OF BRUTALITY, savagery, or renditions of hell in France.
While the tactical fighters and fighter-bombers ranged over the front, the blunt ham-
nat of the bombers continued to pound the roads and rail lines. Since the blitzkrieg
of 1940 and the fall of France, the Nazis had occupied Western Europe and incor-
porate is factories, farms, and arms into the German war machine. From 1942
onwards, the Allied bombers regularly struck military and civilian industrial areas in
Belgium and France to disrupt the Axis Powers. Were they legitimate targets in a
coral war? The Allies certainly thought so, but there was a heavy price to be paid.
During the lead-up to the Normandy landings, the number of French civilian
casualties rose substantially. For example, Bomber Command struck over 100 rail-
roads, coastal installations, and airfields in France and the Low Countries between
April 17 and D-Day. Churchill pleaded with his air marshals to avoid civilian
