214 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
because of the great number of missing personnel, particularly from C coy."53 It
was a bloodbath.
The Germans were not done, and they rolled forward with armour on June 21,
overrunning the new front-line positions of the Essex Scottish, who had reformed at
the foot of the ridge. The situation was ugly, although a renewed drive by the Black
Watch later in the day, at 6 p.M., regained much of the ground. The infantrymen
from Montreal were aided by Sherman tanks and Canadian gunners. One gun team
from the 2nd Anti-Tank Regiment, firing a 17-pounder—the Canadian equivalent
to the powerful German 88mm gun— systematically traded blows with four German
Panther tanks. The Canadian gunners had expertly situated and camouflaged their
gun next to a burned-out Sherman, and the Germans were confused as to where the
shells were coming from. They thought it was the dead Sherman, which they pounded
relentlessly with shells. Firing every ten to twenty seconds in a mad race against
time, the gunners methodically knocked out the increasingly desperate tanks, even-
ually destroying all four. Most of the gunners were wounded, and the 17-pounder
was scarred and holed by shrapnel, but they were the only survivors on that part of
the battlefield."
The Canadians hung on to their minor gains, but they were still at the foot of
Verières Ridge. Foules later blamed his troops for their failure to advance far-
ther, claiming when we bumped into battle-experienced German troops we were
no match for them. In reality, few formations battle-hardened or green— would
have been able to punch through the enemy gun screens and defences in depth."
And somewha shockingly, the Canadian commanders, from Simonds on down,
had not insisted that tanks accompany the infantry, and little planning had gone
into how to withstand a German armoured counterattack. There was simply no
easy way forward, and it was a long way back if the Germans struck hard, as they
did. Operation Alantic, the Canadian arm of Montgomery's Goodwood cam-
paign, officially ended on September 21, and cost 1.614 casualties; these losses
were added to the 8,500 Canadians killed, wounded, and made prisoner since
D-Day." The removal of a few battalion commanders and the scapegoating of the
Essex Scottish colonel were little more than a panaces to a lost tactical situation.
OPERATION SPRING
215
VONTGOMERY WAS DISAPPOINTED with Operation Goodwood, which had made
line progress at the cost of 6,168 casualties. The armoured thrust had failed to
deliver a high-profile victory, and Eisenhower's headquarters continued to hound
kim to punch through the enemy lines. Monty also needed to tie down the Germans
on his front to ensure reserves were not moved to block General Omar Bradley's
US. First Army (and later the 12th U.S. Army Group, which would eventually com-
mand four U.S. armies), which was to break out in the west, in what was dubbed
Operation Cobra. To date, the Americans and the Anglo-Canadian forces had fought
completely different campaigns with little coordination. On the American front,
the Gils had finally pushed through the bocage—a series of lush apple orchards sur-
rounded by tall, thick hedgerows consisting of a tangle of trees, vines, and brush that
rated a series of fortresses-and were now ready for their breakout battle into
Bitany While Montgomery would have preferred to have had the opportunity for
gor, his shifting strategy had settled on the British and Canadian divisions holding
toe enemy around Caen. The disparity of the German strength on the two fronts
vas staggering: Montgomery's 21st Army Group were opposed by the 21st, 2nd, and
116ch Panzer Divisions, as well as the Ist, 9th, 10th, and 12th SS Divisions, while
die Americans stood against only two of the elite armoured units. In all, the British
and Canadians faced 14 divisions and 600 tanks, while the Americans confronted
9 divisions and roughly 110 tanks.»
Dspite this inequality of strength, Eisenhower was increasingly unsatisfied with
Mongomery, who was commanding the ground war on his behalf. The American
eneral was anxious to cross the Channel and take control. There was a worry among
soc of the American generals and at SHAEF headquarters that Montgomery talked
ipod game but was too cautious to give free rein to his forces in a breakthrough
ragement. Montgomery was indeed wedded to a "idly battlefield." where infantry
aid amour were protected by heavy firepower, but he ordered operations like this
to save British and Canadian lives He did not want to oversee an attritional. Somme
ke campaign, and there were far too few reinforcements in the shallow ranks behind
