YUL
452
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Veterans commissioned their own film, No Higher Purpose, which was far better
historically (if watched by far fewer viewers) than The Valour and the Horror, and they
increasingly wished for more control over how their history was to be interpreted. A
further row over how Bomber Command was presented to the public occurred at the
Canadian War Museum. Upon its opening of a new building in 2005, the museum
received accolades by visitors, the media, and veterans, but a public disagreement
rapidly developed over a sixty-eight-word text panel (in a museum of thousands of
artifacts and tens of thousands of words of text) that referred to— but did not take a
position on—the enduring controversy over the value and morality of the bomber
campaign. The single panel led to a two-year-long battle between several veterans
organizations and the museum.* After a Senate committee hearing all but insisted on
a change, the CWM and the veterans eventually reached a compromise to rewrite
the panel. The anger exhibited over the historical wording in the museum, and
even the seemingly harmless act of drawing attention to past controversies, was
just one more chapter in a longer narrative.
In June 2012, the Canadian government announced that Bomber Command vet-
erans would receive a special bar to be worn on their Canadian Volunteer Service
Medal, which all service personnel had been issued at war's end. This recognition
came just as a new Bomber Command memorial to the 55,573 killed flyers was
dedicated in London's Green Park. The memorials neoclassical pavilion houses over-
sized bronze figurative statues of a seven-man bomber crew. and the roof shove the
memorial is constructed from parts of a recovered Halifax III downed over Belgium
in May 1944. Unveiled by the Queen, with hundreds of Bomber Command veterans
in attendance, the pavilion was not universally appreciated, with one critic lamenting
its "architectural crassness" that was "like the nervously loud voice of somenne tring
to shout down obDosition."48 Yet the memorial is inscribed on hath the fallen and the
victims of the bombs. Surely that is more of a quiet gesture towards the horror of war
than a vigorous defence of old accusations. Jack Warts, then a ninetv-one-vear-old
Canadian veteran, noted, "It's just sad as hell that it came this late. and there are so few
of us now to see it."49
While the bravery and endurance of the bomber crews has never been in doubt.
the battle over the memory of tha her campion continues poet ith
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
453
broad-brush attacks or unbelievable denials mixed with heated rhetoric and polit-
ical posturing, and including few attempts by anyone other than historians to
understand the bombing campaign within the context of the time. The veterans
fmally received their memorial, medal, and respect, but these just recognitions will
not end the debate around the bombing campaign.
IF HISTORIANS HAVE QUESTIONED almost all aspects of the war, and especially the
effectiveness of the Canadian fighting services and their place in the war's constructed
memory, veterans have also struggled over their own personal histories of the war.
Gordon Cameron, writing in The Legionary in the war's immediate aftermath, shed
light on the place of memory in ex-service personnel: "One minute he wants above
all to forget what he has been through, the pals he has lost and all the miseries of war.
The next moment he knows that he can never forget. He won't ever forget, and
something within him cries out that the people here at home must be made aware of
the ghastly, bloody price paid by the 'few' for the freedom of the 'many."so
HM QUEEN ELIZABETH U
Queen Elizabeth Il at the Bomber Command memorial to the
55,573 killed flyers in London's Green Park.
