428 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
the war, the federal government announced a compensation package for the marin-
ers, of up to $24,000 for each surviving veteran. 85 In a final act of recognition, in
2003, Parliament declared September 3 to be Merchant Navy Veterans' Day.
The demand for full rights was also taken up by Aboriginal veterans. Even as they
were treated as wards of the state, some 4,300 First Nations and Métis served during
the war-—with several thousand more rejected because of medical reasons or racial
restrictions in the navy and air force. More than 200 First Nations soldiers lost their
lives on battlefields around the world. Those who served with their white comrades
usually testified that they were treated with respect, something they had never experi-
enced in Canada. Wilfred Westeste of the Bird Tail First Nation remembered after
the war, "In the fighting zone... we were all equals. The only time in my life I was
equal to the white society or anybody else."86 Nonetheless, these Canadians who
served their country came home to an indifferent nation. Though the Veterans
Charter applied to the First Nations soldiers who served, many veterans returning to
their bands and reserves were isolated and not informed of the many options open
to them. The Indian agents- the government-appointed civil servants on the reserves
who controlled much of the resources and finances- also sometimes actively dis-
suaded them from following up with
the Department of Veterans Affairs.
First Nations warriors, who had liber-
ated
nations and
oppressed
people,
continued to live in a country where
they did not even receive the right to
vote until 1960. "I don't expect the
government to grant me a fancy liv-
ing," asserted Russell Modeste.
"But
certainly treat me the same as you been
Three First Nations Second World War
veterans. First Nations veterans had to fight
for veterans benefits in the aftermath of the war,
and were granted them only grudgingly
by successive federal governments.
treating the white guy that done the
same service as I have."87 In 2002, after
decades of pressure and a series of
Royal Commissions and Senate stud-
ies, and under the weight of academic
VETERANS
429
caship and the persistence of aging veterans, the government finally agreed to
loquing veterans or their surviving spouses up to $20,000 each because of past
listensure that the Veterans Charter was made available to all veterans.8 That
is maste was so long in the waiting was another shameful legacy of Canadas
rament of its First Nations citizens.
VOR, MORE THAN SEVENTY-FIVE YEARS after the start of the Second World War,
traded of veterans are dying every week across the country, with their obituaries
Ming the papers. One studies the lined faces and white hair, although sometimes
aris contemporary wartime photograph of a young man or woman in uniform.
le itera" component of the individual's life is part of the obituary, but not often
a entral art. This is an indication of the full, rich lives these veterans led. While
asee remains one of their greatest life contributions, at the same time they were
cimand women who worked, loved, and lived. But we in the twenty-first century
ok at these former servicemen and women with new eyes. We see how their per-
ye princes shaped the narrative of the nation at war, and how the Canadian
soribution to that brutal conflict changed world history. In 2010, 163,000 Second
Tid War Canadian veterans remained alive, with an average age of eighty-six.®)
o, in 2015, fewer than 80,000 of the 1 million veterans who survived the war are
i lin and they have an average age of over ninety. No covenant was struck in
4), a other year, between those who served and those who stayed at home,
i tis a that must be repaid. At the very least, the nation must honour and
tomber both those who left and never returned, and those who left and returned
ire changed.
