144 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and high-velocity 75mm main guns. "It can be stated definitely that we are out-
gunned both by the long 75mm and the 88mm," wrote one Canadian officer. 3 The
Allies' Sherman tank was on par with the Mark IV, but the Panthers far surpassed it.
When the German tanks were situated in a hull-down position (with their forward-
sloped armour facing the enemy), they were nearly impervious to Canadian fire. The
only way to kill a Panther was to hit its mantlet, below the main gun, or from the side
and rear where the steel plating was thinner. Even when Shermans closed to spitting
range—500 metres —their armour-piercing shells. each as thick as a man's arm. often
bounced off the enemy's steel plating. However, the Shermans were not completely
hopeless, as is sometimes portrayed in history books. They could defeat enemy tanks
in duels, especially when the German tanks were on the move.
A Canadian M4A4 Sherman in Normandy The Shermans were on par with the
mon Mik TV wanks, but outgunned and outperformed by the enemy's Panthers and Tigers.
nechden, the Sherun 75mm pun could sonleash crucial firepower in support of an infantry attack
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
145
Though the North Novas were prepared for an attack, the ferocity of the assault
shocked them. They were also severely outnumbered by the 12th SS infantry, the
hifty tanks, and the fifty or so German artillery pieces. 4 Canadian outposts near
Carpiquet airheld were quickly overrun by twenty panzers. The Sherbrookes' fifty
tanks engaged in fierce battles, and soon they were fighting for their lives. "I spotted
seven or eight enemy tanks at 1,000 yards on my left," reported Lieutenant Norman
Davies. "I halted, stopped two of them with the 17 [pounder gun], advanced, halted
and fired again scoring another hit. Then all hell broke loose." 15 Tracers danced over
the wheat fields, followed by scything machine-gun fire. Enemy 75mm shells tore
through armour, igniting the Shermans. Major Sydney Radley-Walters, known as
"Rad" and destined to become a Canadian tank ace with eighteen destroyed tanks to
his credit, testified to the baptism of fire: "As a youngster going into action for the
first time, the thing that hits us all apparently, was that tremendous surprise. All of a
sudden there's a rain of fire coming down, tanks started getting knocked out, and
communications and the command and control started to break down." 16
Battlefield studies later revealed what all Canadian soldiers and troopers already
knew: thar the Shermans, with their higher profile and lighter armour, and with
high-octane fuel running through rear fuel cells, were dangerously vulnerable to all
calibres of enemy anti-tank shells. Sixty percent of the Shermans in Normandy were
wiped out by a single shot from a 75mm or 88mm shell. Moreover, two thirds of
al the aks "brewed up" when hit. Bursting into flames was so common that the
Shermans earned the ironic nickname of "Ronsons," after a brand of cigarette lighter
with the memorable slogan "lights first every time." Many crews burned alive before
they could bail out of the tank, usually through the top turret, although there were
to smaller escape hatches lower down in the hull for the driver and co-driver.
Troper Ray Lane of the Ist Hussars remarked, "On average, half the crew never got
ou? Most troopers estimated they had thirty seconds at best to get out of the tank
permeated the air.
afore the 250 gallons of high-octane fuel ignited 8 The smell of roasted humans
Ar Authie, the North Novas infantry were attacked by a large force, about six
ines that of the defenders. As the Hiderjugend came overland at them, and were
bucher supported by shellfire from the 21st Panzer Division, the Canadians laid
