200
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
casualties? At a basic level, the Canadian ground troops believed in their cause.
They knew that the Nazi occupying forces had to be driven out of Western Europe.
It was also evident that notwithstanding the high cost, victory was within reach.
One Canadian rifleman admitted in a letter that the combat to date had been
"damned grim"; but at the same time, he "wouldn't have missed it for the world."
For those who study combat motivation, it is an axiom that men in battle fight for
those beside them. The warrior' bond is strongest at the smallest level— the section
and platoon-where soldiers have known, trained, and lived next to their buddy
humping a Lee-Enfield or Bren gun for years, and where they rely on one another for
survival. As J.F. Swayze of the Lincoln and Welland Regiment noted, "All ranks are
held together by the fear of having their peers realize that they too are afraid.... What
is a soldier? He's thinking not so much of himself but of the unit to which he belongs.
Ar some stage, you re with this platoon or section and you're going to keep on because
you're part of that section.' However, while the Canadian soldiers fought for the
men in their primary group, those chums and comrades with whom they had trained
for years, this cohesion, as the military sometimes calls it, was blown apart in fight-
ing "Al of the infantry battalions were destroyed several times over by the end of
the war and had to be continually rebuil with replacements. 2
If a battalion was soon composed of men who barely knew half of their mates
names, how did it continue to fight coherently? One must conclude that the training
in England had welded together an effective system." Battle drill gave the soldiers
the common skills, training, and tools to engage in combat. Though some historians
have condemned the training in England for what it did not teach especially infan-
try and armour cooperation-battle drill provided a foundation for all soldiers.
Many veterans of the front nonetheless complained that the new infantrymen were
hesitant and unsure of themselves and their weapons, although this is not surprising
as no amount of training fully prepared a man for combat. The reinforcements, both
officers and rankers, "were not hard physically," griped Lieutenant Thomas McCoy
of the Ewer Scotish. "They did not know the tremendous capabilities of the human
body" Bur they soon toughened up, if they survived. This cycle of replacements
gave the batalion a resilience to rejuvenate itself after near-fatal losses, much the
ame way that the Getmans could amaleamate destroved unire and keen fabring, In
OPERATION SPRING
201
the latter stages of Normandy, and throughout the rest of the long war, it was com-
mon for two or three depleted Canadian platoons, or even companies, to serve
together under one junior officer during a battle, and to remain an effective unit.
A crucial factor in allowing battalions to rebuild effectiveness was the vibrant regi-
mental tradition among British and Canadian formations. Loyalty to the regiment
was complex and profound. Replacement soldiers were instructed in these sustaining
bonds. The colonel embodied the regiment, and the Canadians were lucky to have
forceful and magnetic personalities in command in almost all their battalions. Many
of these senior officers had risen through the ranks and understood the pulse of their
troops. But this did not make them the soldiers' friends. Good officers were firm and
Sit, and the rank and file understood that they were to follow orders without ques-
tion. This type of iron discipline-backed up by punishment—provided a structure
for men in times of terrible strain. Edward Borland, an American serving in a
Canadian armoured regiment, felt that with so much carnage, "you had to be treated
that way or you would go right stark raving mad."'s
The senior regimental officers, supported by junior officers and NCOs, exerted
control through discipline, rewards, and charisma. Captain Harold MacDonald of
the North Shore Regiment wrote to his wife after several costly battles in July 1944:
Checking the posts (during the night) and trying to boost morale after casualties,
that's part of our job can't think of our own hides when our boys are getting it."16
Tar kind of selfless action, of officers caring for their men, fostered and sustained
morale. Yet it exacted a price. Major Ronald Shawcross of the Regina Rifles landed
an D-Day in top shape, weighing 220 pounds; four months later, when he was
wounded, he had lost fifty-five pounds through unending strain, constant attention
i his men, and daily brushes with horror.!" Not all officers thought of their men
ton, are honourably, or even had the necessary skills to lead, but most of the poor
codes had been weeded out of the Canadian army during its long training period
a Bitan. The high loss rate among the officers, higher than that of their own men,
roved that they led their soldiers into battle, and usually from the front.8
Soldiers had to find ways to cope with death. They had to protect themselves from
eing comrades killed by shells, sniper bullets, or freak accidents. One unlucky
amber of the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders was stung to death in
