26 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
in their hearts that while death was an aspect of their everyday life, as one Canadian
testified, "everybody was sure that the other fellow would 'go for the chop,' never
themselves."37
Talismans and superstitions allowed some men to deal with the lack of control over
the flak or the other nasty elements of flying. One pilot screamed obscenities at the
Germans throughout the bombing run in an almost unconscious verbal shield. Jack
Singer, a bomb aimer, observed somewhat apprehensively how his pilot, Doug Tweddle,
coped with his fear. "He said that when things got really tough he would have an out of
body experience. He would find himself out on the wing of the aircraft looking at
a duplicate of himself flying the aircraft. He would offer words of encouragement to
his duplicate, such as, just hold it steady, ride it out, it's going to be ok.' He always
appeared to me to be very calm and in control, but I guess we all had our ways of achiev-
ing this outward calm."38 There were countless other rituals, techniques, and prayers
offered and embraced in hopes of passing unscathed through the storm of steel.
AIRMEN FLEW UNTIL it was "coffins or crackers."? Many believed the only way out
of the service was through death or going mad, but that was untrue, for unlike the
infantry and the seamen, airmen faced a finite number of sorties. For the first three
years of the war, the service career of an airman was to be 200 operational hours,
after which he was pulled from the front lines and made a trainer or staff officer. In
August 1942, Harris set the figure at 30 sorties, whereupon the aircrews were
"screened": pulled from flying into enemy territory, given a rest, offered a safer train-
ing job in Britain, and even sent back to Canada. In May 1943, Bomber Command
headquarters codified the service of aircrews into two combat tours, one of 30 oper-
ations and the other of 20, with a break of staff duties or training in between of not
less than six months. When an airman completed his first tour, he received his
Operational Wings. They were a gold-plated, double-winged "O" (for "operations")
and were attached on the centre panel of the left-breast tunic pocket. They were
worn with pride; they had been earned the hard way.
Gallantry awards were one method of sustaining morale and encouraging airmen
to keep Aying. While few airmen were on the hunt for "gongs," as they irreverently
called the medals, the decorations were a mark of service and survival. More than
AIR WAR 27
9,200 gallantry awards were bestowed upon 8,300 individual Canadian airmen dur-
ing the war, and most of these went to Canadians in Bomber Command. 40 Pilots and
navigators received the most awards, with the rear gunners almost always passed over
unless there was evidence of shooting down an enemy fighter, and ground crews, also
eligible, almost never receiving special recognition. In late 1944, bomber pilot Walter
Irwin felt that "Attrition was constantly wearing away at the squadron and at this
point, we had lost 17 crews. Promotions came faster than usual as a result and I
received a promotion to Squadron Leader." Having almost completed two tours, he
was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC). "One thing that has always
bothered me is that my crew members did not also receive decorations. After all, they
had shared every hazardous moment with me and performed their jobs well.... Brave
and dedicated as they were, it was difficult for a crew member to earn a decoration
unless it was for an individual act of bravery."41
The low rates of survival for bomber crews merited some recognition, but the same
might be assumed of the ground pounders, and they were far less likely to be rewarded
with a gallantry award, while naval crew members were the least likely to receive
medals. Though infantry soldiers at the front often sneered at the awarding of the
Distinguished Service Order to senior officers who commanded for long durations,
and not for specific acts of bravery, the issuing of the DFC to individual airmen was
more acceptable in the air force, and was frequently given for surviving a tour of oper-
ations. The navy rarely received the same recognition, even though its members, too,
had long and dangerous tours, but with much lower casualties. The distinction between
the RCAF and RCN hinged on the number of deaths, which is perhaps correct. It is
more difficult to justify awards for gallantry between the RCAF and the Army, except
that the former had more officers and they were always recognized with a higher rate
of awards than the non-commissioned rank and file. By the midpoint of the war, the
airman's DFC seemed like a standard medal for surviving flying operations.
Notwithstanding the awards or recognition, all flyers were worn down by the unend-
ing stress. The exhaustion was etched on faces, although most flyers, in the words of
one Canadian airman, protected themselves "in a veneer of denial."42 But there was
little chance of hiding the telltale signs of fatigue that the flyers irreverently called the
"twitch" or "fak happiness." A table of flyers coming upon the end of their tour were
