YUL
448 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
distance from the war, any suggestion of a moral equivalency between the Allied and
Axis powers, or that the bomber war was out of proportion to the endgame, is odious
and wrong. Such claims misconstrue that Germany continued waging war up to the
bitter end, withheld food from the starving Dutch, and went on murdering Jews and
others in sickening numbers through the death camps.
Despite the postwar slights against Bomber Command, Sir Arthur Harris continued
to brusquely defend the bombing strategy. Roaring that the bombers had been decisive,
he was, at times, his worst enemy, as his defiant and dogmatic vision allowed others to
scalpel away at Bomber Command's achievements. Bombing had not won the war,
even as it had clearly contributed to victory, but critics used Harriss own bluster to
further show that not only had bombing not achieved its goals, it had been a wasteful
or ill-used resource in the Allied arsenal. Harris retired as an air marshal in 1946, moved
to South Africa, and was made a baronet in 1953 when Churchill returned to power as
prime minister. The "Bomber" as he was known to his largely respectful aircrew veter-
ans, refused to be shamed by his wartime command, never recanted the strategy his
military and political superiors implemented, and remained unrepentant about the
necessity of city bombing. And on this last count he was surely backed by the vast
majority of Bomber Command veterans. But the images of the dead cities continued to
haunt. Over the years, as the stories of German civilians who survived the firestorms of
Hamburg and Dresden came to light, Harris remained a convenient scapegoat for the
actions of Bomber Command. 3 Air Marshal Portal Harris's senior officer- escaped
condemnation, perhaps because Harris was so impolitic in his demands of recognition
for his boys and in his refusal to question his own wartime tactics.
The threat of nuclear weapons led, from the 1950s onward, to growing dread over
strategic bombing. The new generation of long-range aircraft that would he unlessher
when the Cold War flared hot were now carrving planet-destroving bombs. The vocal
antivar movement turned, not surprisingly, to the bomber war as evidence of the hor-
ror of conventional weapons, and expressed fear about what atomic ones could do to
cities.'7 In some circles, especially academic and pacifist. the Second World War bomb-
ing campaign was conflated with the new nuclear threat, and this dread was stirred up
in the antiwar, anti-authoritarian consciousness emerging in the mid-1960s.
Most of the Canadian bomber veterans did not contribute to this memory
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
449
creation. Flyers were young men who had hardly expected to survive their wartime
sorties, and now they were raising families, working, and living in the society they
helped to make prosperous. The war began to recede and few felt the need to refight
old battles. At the same time, no veteran could forget. With regard to the bomber
war, RCAF navigator L. Ray Silver wrote of his experience: "Later-day revisionists
have described us as callow kids duped to do the devil's work innocent of the human-
ity on target below us. Of course, we knew there were people down there. We did
what we had to do and to do it we suppressed the human imagery.... We found no
glory and we still taste the ashes."38 Silver did not regret his part in the war, but his
words reveal that he bore both physical and mental scars. Silver's generation carried
the taste of ashes for years, as a result of what they had seen and what they had been
forced to do, and this applied to not just bomber crews but to all those who fought.
But the veterans of the bomber war seemed especially susceptible to second-guessing.
Lancaster pilot Douglas Harvey was burdened by his service, the memories of which
were stirred up after a return to Berlin in 1961. Within the rebuilt Berlin, Harvey
mused, "I could not visualize the horrible deaths my bombs had caused here. I had
no feeling of guilt. I had no feeling of accomplishment."") The trauma faded with
time, but it would return in shocking blasts from a trigger memory.
We'll never know if most, many, or just a few Bomber Command veterans were
troubled by their wartime deeds. Warrant Officer B.G. McDonald, who flew thirty
operations on a Lancaster in 1944, recounted how, over the years, family and stran-
gers asked him about his reaction to bombing German cities. "It may seem strange
but I have to say that I hadn' thought much about the subject," he admitted. "In the
intervals between raids I seldom thought about it and never discussed the subject
with other RCAF/RAF aircrew. I felt confident that the bombing of enemy cities
was winning the war against Germany. I considered it to be in retaliation for the
fire-bombing of British cities in 1940-41.... My instinctive main concern was one of
self preservation. Would I die or live to fight another day?"40 As one RAF air gunner
remarked, "Sometimes the only way to overcome a great evil is to resort to a lesser
evil. Such sentiments would have resonated with many who lived through the war
years. Flight Lieutenant John Zinkhan observed, "In retrospect some of the saturation
bombing attacks were deliberately and viciously planned with the thought of killing
