146
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
down a punishing fire from Lee Enfields and Bren guns. The SS troops were cut
down in sickening numbers. Major V.O. Walsh of the Sherbrookes, one of the regi-
ment's few officers to land on D-Day and to go through the entire war, described the
Canadian defence: "They used everything— machine guns; they threw grenades; as
well as firing all other guns. That finally stopped them."'9
While the infantry's light weapons found flesh, the Canadians' artillery, the 14th
Field Regiment, equipped with 105mm self-propelled guns, was trapped in the lines
of communication far to the rear and unable to advance through road congestion
and German mortar fire. When they arrived closer to the front, a number of the
forward artillery observers were killed or wounded, making it difficult for the guns
to target the enemy. Most of the Canadian and British anti-tank guns, especially the
effective 17-pounder, had also not yet made it off the boats or the beaches to strike
The 12th SS Hitlerjugend in action.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
147
deep inland. With no field or anti-tank artillery, and with communications cut to
the offshore warships, a renewed enemy attack, overwhelming in numbers and fero-
ciousness, pressed the Highlanders back. Confusion reigned, as sections of the North
Novas were cut off and destroyed while others held off the assault. Reflecting on his
combat experience in Normandy, one Canadian noted, "In addition to the over-
powering sense of sinister menace lying over the front, all soldiers in a battle zone
must learn to live in a dense fog of mystery."20 Highlanders were surrounded and
close to being wiped out in Authie, but the Sherbrookes came back through hell to
rescue some of their comrades on foot, charging into the pitched melee with their
Shermans guns blasting away at the enemy. Despite the heroics, few of the North
Novas from Authie made it back through the tall grain fields to the burning village
of Buron, which was also under heavy attack. By the time Authie fell, around 5:30 P.M.,
the Canadian gunners had come forward within firing range and were directed from
a forward observation post by Major N.B. "Ike" Buchanan, who called in crushing
defensive fire. The Germans were thrown back. Buchanan barely survived several
near-death bombardments and was awarded a second bar to his Military Cross for
his bravery.
By the end of the day, the Canadian survivors of Buron, waiting for another
counterattack, were pulled back to Les Buissons, where the Highland Light Infantry
and the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders had organized a robust
defence. The day of battle cost the Sherbrookes 21 tanks, although the Germans lost
17 anks." The North Novas were mauled badly, suffering more than 200 men killed,
wounded, or missing, including 37 Canadian prisoners murdered after the guns fell
sien? The 12th SS paid for their reckless assault with over 300 casualties.?3
Historians have often depicted the Authie and Buron battles as a clear-cut German
victory, but with the 12th SS outeunning the Canadians. and in view of the Germans
considerable losses, it was a draw at best. Brigadier Meyer had found that the "little
Sah' had sharp teeth, 24
ITH THE GERMANS AND CANADIANS bloodying themselves on the outskirts of
Chen, the th Canadian Infantry Brigade, on the right fank, had significant warning
of an impending attack. The Winnipeggers, Reginas, and Canadian Scottish, along
