PLANNING THE INVASION
103
102 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
we had to skulk on our own bases. During takeoff, assembling, climbing, approaching
the bombers, once in contact with the bombers, on our way back, during landing, and
even after that the American fighters attacked with an overwhelming superiority."0
The Lufwaffe was so badly ravaged that Hitler pulled experienced aces from the
Eastern Front and Italy, with 80 percent of the German fighters eventually serving on
the Western Front. The first half of 1944 broke the Luftwaffe, and by May 1944 it had
only 498 serviceable aircraft against more than 9,000 Allied planes, including 5,000
fighters!" This turning point in the aerial war ranks with the defensive victory of the
RAF during the Battle of Britain, although it had not been without its costs: the Allies
lost 2,000 aircraft downed and 12,000 aircrew killed in the first six months of 1944.2
THE AIR WAR WAS CRITICAL to the success of D-Day, but the sea lanes also had to
be cleared or the Allied troop ships would be sunk before they ever reached land
Royal Nary Admiral Bertram Ramsay oversaw naval planning for Operation
Neprune, the supporting naval component to Overlord. Operation Neptune would
Shipi compary of H.M.C.S. Athabaskan. RCN Tribal da destroyers Haida, Huron, Iroquois,
and Achabadan were involved in a series of baules in the Channel before the D-Day invasion.
be the largest armada ever assembled in human history, with some 6,900 vessels,
including 1,213 warships ranging from battleships to torpedo boats. One hundred
and twenty-six Canadian warships and vessels of all types, with no fewer than
10,000 Royal Canadian Navy officers and seamen, played a part. 13
Airpower from land-based bombers and aircraft carriers, when combined with
specialized hunter groups, chased the U-boats and enemy surface raiders. The
Germans had been defeated in the Battle of the Atlantic in May 1943, but they had
regrouped for a new offensive a few months later. Launching U-boats from the
Bay of Biscay, they hoped to sink the Allied merchant ships closer to British waters.
But the U-boat crews had a misplaced faith in their ability to fight off the swarming
Allied warships and Coastal Command's land-based aircraft. RAF and RCAF
squadrons in Coastal Command had
laid mines, patrolled against subs, and
had been shooting up shipping since
1940, but now, from mid-1943, with
Allied intelligence providing infor-
mation on the general location of
U-boats, and with Coastal Command's
bombers and sea planes further able to
pinpoint targets with new radar and
high-powered searchlights, they attacked
relentlessly. In just three months,
from June to the end of August 1943,
aircraft revealed their impact on the
naval war, sinking eighteen U-boats in
the Bay of Biscay, along with thirty-
two of thirty-nine additional boats
that the Germans lost during this per-
ind.!" This was another crippling blow
to the Kriegsmarine. And the German
introduction
new weapons—
such as the feared glider bomb, a
Coastal Command's squadrons, including
several from the Royal Canadian Air Force,
harassed the Kriegsmarine in preparation
for the invasion of Europe.
