20
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Flying during the winter of late 1943 and early 1944 led to other problems.
Stormy conditions cancelled many sorties, and even when the bombers got into the
air there was increased chance for mechanical failure from frozen instruments. The
electronic navigational systems, such as Oboe, provided some assistance in getting to
the targets, but the guiding electronic signals became fainter as the bombers flew
farther into Germany. Yet the mounting casualties and increasingly poor weather did
not deter Sir Arthur Harris. The offensive continued.
While Berlin, with its four million inhabitants, was so big that there was always
something to strike, any approach had to be rammed through the waving arcs of
The bomber war laid waste to German cities. More than half of all
German cities were destroyed by the end of the war.
AIR WAR
21
searchlights and sustained fire. Some bombers decided it was wiser to avoid the
concentrations of flak, and therefore rose high above the bomber stream or clung to
its outer edges. They acquired the derisive name of "fringe merchants," with their
bombs falling several kilometres off target. Flight Sergeant Vernon Hawkes, a
twenty-seven-year-old
pilot in RCAF's No. 419 Squadron, flew several operations
against Berlin in late 1943 and recounted the tendency of some aircrews to drop
their bombs short, either deliberately or unintentionally. These "drop shorts" were
partially unavoidable, as the sea of fire on the ground obscured targets, but other
crews, wise to the perils of the guns, deposited their bomb loads haphazardly to lift
several thousand feet with lightened holds to avoid flak.l8 In some cases, the creep-
back extended kilometres to the rear of the original target, as squadron after squad-
ron dropped their bombs shorter than the one that came before it. Like so many of
his comrades, Hawkes and his crew were shot down in the final stage of the cam-
paign on January 21, 1944, and he survived almost a year and a half in the prisoner-
of-war camp Stalag Luft III.
While Berlin was not the only goal for the Anglo-Canadian bomber offensive, it
remained the focus of battle, and from November 18 to March 31, 1944, there were
35 major raids on German cities, 16 against Berlin. This equated into 11,113 indi-
vidual plane sorties against Big City.l The casualty rate remained heavy for the
bombers, with 157 aircraft lost.20 When these casualties were added to those
sustained earlier in the summer, it meant that more and more inexperienced air-
crews were thrust into the front lines. Lancaster pilot Douglas Harvey of No. 408
Squadron, RCAF, observed of the frantic pace, "New crews arrived and went missing
before you had the chance to know them."?! It took time to learn how to survive in
the air. RCAF Flying Officer Len Sumak noted, "We lost as much as fifty percent of
our green crews when they went on their first trip."? He and his crew survived their
first operation; many others did not, with sprog (new) crews disappearing in fire
and flame.
The Berlin raids killed more than 9,000 citizens on the ground and made 812,000
people homeless23 These civilians were not collateral damage. They were deliberately
targeted, at least insofar as the entire city and everything in it was a target. In turn,
Bomber Command was nearly crippled, with more than 3,300 aircrew killed and
