234
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
from home. Many of the nurses took on the task of writing to families, informing
them of a man's injuries and, sometimes, his last words. It was heart-rending work,
and it couldn't have been more important. Sydney Frost, an Italian campaign veteran
who was in the hospital for malaria and later wounded in battle, felt that the nurses
were "a secret morale builder.... Not enough can be said about these angels of mercy.
Many a soldier survived the war due to their care and devotion, above and beyond
the call of duty."?
"SOME OF THE FELLOWS I know that have been on the wrong end of a terrific shell-
ing are now as jumpy as cats even at our own guns firing,
" wrote Cape Breton
Highlander Lieutenant Reg Roy. "It is only natural that a soldier is one hell of a lot
more nervous when he comes out of a shelling than when he went into it."23 Physical
A nune cares for Canadian patients at No. 1 Field Surgical Unit.
WAR AND MEDICINE
235
wounds were of immediate concern for the medical services, but the doctors and
nuses also treated psychologically traumatized patients. Each soldier had his break-
ing point. The medical literature from the Great War, the interwar period, and the
caly part of the Second World War tried to pinpoint mental inferiority or emotional
defects in those who succumbed to shell shock or battle stress. It was eventually rec-
ognized that even the most ardent warriors could break down under the unnatural
stain of harsh living, constant stress, poor food, lack of sleep, and appalling car-
nage. "Each time a man goes through an ordeal," reported one medical officer in
lily, though he overcomes fear and does his job, the memory or the effect of the
ordeal is pushed into his subconscious and the gate is barred and guarded by will.
But the day comes when there are too many ordeals; the will breaks and the gates
Ay open and fear and torment come swirling through."? Canadian medical officer
I.W.B. Barr claimed that the experience of battle was a "form of extreme bodily
and emorional stres" that had to be treated early with "physical rest, adequate
dit, and ample clean drinking water."?6 Yet even with this better understanding of
the stain at the front and its impact on soldiers, it was not easy to pull exhausted
men from the line when everyone was in the same state. Nonetheless, good leaders
andofficers watched out for those on the verge of collapse and tried to cycle them to
the rear. One study of American combatants revealed that large numbers of men in
nantry battalions - perhaps a quarter of the total strength-were unable to return
1 ative service but were not reported in casualty lists.? They did other less stressful
jobs behind the lines and out of the forward rifle companies. At the same time, cyc-
ing our exhausted but experienced officers, NCOs, and other ranks was a recipe for
foure dister, as these were often the most effective warriors at the front.
Over time, battle exhaustion diminished the fighting efficiency of Canadian units.
During the Iralian campaion. 5.020 casualties were labelled as "neuropsuchiatric,"
arounting to 16.9 percent of the total casualties 28 In Normandy, the psychological
coalisa cumulated from June 6, with two front-line doctors reporting that "a few
days of heavy shelling and loss of comrades brought home the grim reality of com-
ba, and in many cases brought on shakiness under fire."?) A soldier's limited reserves
of endurance began to seep out of him like sweat, and it was increasingly difficult to
so, with each new incident further wearing him down. By late July, 17 officers
