24 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
'old-timers who had developed the habit of returning them.""' A large proportion of
aircrews were shot down in their first couple of sorties; after some eighteen months
of training and tens of thousands of dollars expended, many crews were killed before
they even dropped a single bomb on an enemy target. RCAF flyer A.R. Sanderson
and his crew sought to finish several operations in rapid succession after their first
sortie because "We were all anxious to get to at least the ten op level," for it "was
widely supposed that one would be lucky to survive past seven."32 No one wanted to
linger for long as a rookie crew. Yet even experienced crews went down in flames
because of the solid walls of flak thrown up by defenders, or for any number of other
reasons, from mechanical failure to unmerciful weather to the deadly night fighters.
Experience saved lives, but luck eventually had to run out.
Good senior officers understood the strain that men faced. The commanding
officer's willingness to fly on sorties against the enemy provided him with moral
authority, and bomber crews could quickly turn on senior officers who exhorted
sacrifice but did not share the danger. "The Commanding Officer of 427 Squadron
was about the best kind of leader one could meet up with," believed RCAF naviga-
tor George Brown. "He was a friend to all the boys and did his share of the dirty
work. He went on the toughest targets and did all he could to help the crews to
safer flying. For social life he organized Alight parties every fortnight, each flight
taking turns, so that there was a feeling of comradeship that did not exist on many
of the other squadrons."33
Despite the pressure, most airmen kept flying and found ways to cope night after
night. Like their counterparts in the army and navy, they were young, fit, and deter-
mined. The desire to avenge the Blitz or their fallen comrades was a motivator. The
airmen also saw themselves as an elite force, as a result of both education and train-
ing. The rest periods were long and generous in comparison to other service branches,
and the food and drink were never scarce. But in the fight against the enemy, in the
cold ethereality of the night sky, all of these advantages dribbled away quickly as
Canadian airmen fought to survive and to keep their mates alive.
"Some aircrew, whose nerve ends may have become cauterized by the repetitive
exposure to danger, flew on in an almost robotic state,"
reported one Canadian
airman." Flight Lieutenant Warren Duffy, a New Brunswicker in an RAF squadron
AIR WAR
25
and destined to be killed, wrote to his parents of his many friends lost over Europe,
including one close chum, Mac: "It's amazing how one can make friends over here
and good friends, too. Mac (my wireless operator) was killed last fall after I had
finished ops... He got it flying with another crew, pretty hard luck, but that's the way
it goes."35 That was indeed how it went, and airmen learned that too many of their
comrades would go, as they casually remarked, "for a Burton" —a phrase whose
origins apparently revolved around a type of beer, Burton Ale, and meant that the
airman had gone for an extended drink and would not be returning.
Lancaster
bomber pilot Walter Thompson felt that "one had to learn to accept death and
become used to the idea of it. One had to consider oneself as already dead."36
That was the case for many airmen, although most also held the contradictory belief
Two Canadians in the cockpit of their Lancaster preparing to lift off for a sortie.
