124 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
sand: Courseulles-sur-Mer, the fortified port, on the right, Bernières-sur-Mer in the
centre, and Saint-Aubin-sur-Mer on the left "You're a phonev if vou're not afraid."
recalled Rifeman E.R. Butler of the Oueen's Own Rifes. In his mind. almost all tha
men were more worried about "letting the other fellows down."18 Vomit rolled in
the pitching landing crafts. Foam-flecked geysers erupted from the water as enemy
shelling crashed down. Bullets pinged off the steel hulls, causing an eerily musical
sound. Not all defenders were dead.
Above the Canadian beaches, RCAF Typhoon fighter-bombers from Nos. 438,
439, and 440 Squadrons dove on enemy objectives, dropping their 500-pound
bombs. Spitfires and Mustangs also blasted away at targets with their machine guns
and cannons. Although the Luftwaffe wisely refused to engage in battles where the
German fighters were outnumbered by at least fifteen to one, a few of the low-flying
Allied planes were hit in midair by rocket salvos or shell fire. They disintegrated,
spewing faming wreckage over Juno. The fighter-bombers did little damage against
the dug-in enemy forces, but added to the cacophony of destruction.
Though the minesweepers had deared their approach pachs of mines, the German
defences closer to the beaches could not be removed. The ICAs had to navigate past
Layers of wooden stakes and welded iron pyramids of jutting steel known as "tetra-
hydras." Many of these stakes were hung with mines that exploded on contact.
Eyewitnesses gave chilling accounts of landing craft blown out of the water, body
pars floating in the red bilge. Those who survived the blast were often drowned, as
they were weighed down with more than sixty pounds of equipment. The survivors
of the daring run-in crashed ashore at different times, and all late. They did so as
gunners and rocket-launchers fired over open sights from some landing craft, while
che naval guns to the rear continued their dance of death. One of the riflemen at the
waters edge remarked that he was struck by how the buildings in front of him
appeared to be "blowing up in slow motion.""
ON THE RIGHT SECTOR, agains Courseulles-sur-Mer, two lead companies of the
Royal Winnipeg Rifles, with a company of the Canadian Scottish Regiment, ran up
on the packed sand at about 7:50 a.M. Tanks of the Ist Hussars were delayed. The
waterproofed M4A3 Shermans, nineteen in total, had to "swim" into shore, except
D- DAY
125
for five that were landed directly on the beach. The 29-ton beasts churned through
the water, their crews filled with the anxiety that their DD (duplex drive) flotation
devices- an inflatable canvas bladder around the tank and a screen that extended up
far beyond the turret, along with two propellers—would fail. Several of the Hussars'
tanks were sunk by shellfire, but most made it ashore without being swamped, albeit
proceeding at a crawl of 4 knots per hour and landing about twenty minutes after the
"Title Black Devils," as the Royal Winnipeg Rifles had been known since 1885.
Courseulles-sur-Mer was a port, although a small one, and the Germans fortified
it more strongly than other waterfront urban areas. Five concrete gun positions
staddled the harbour, and these could be focused on the beach. The infantry hoped
that they had already been put out of action by naval gunfire. They were not. "The
bombardment having failed to kill a single German soldier or silence one weapon,"
wrote the war diarist for Royal Winnipeg Rifles, "these companies had to storm
their positions cold and did so without hesitation.... Not a man flinched from his
task. The two lead companies of Rifles- Baker and Dog-faced at least fifteen
MG 42 machine guns, each firing more than five hundred bullets per minute, as well
as ilemen, mortars, and 75mm and 50mm anti-tank guns.2
Baker Company ran into a bristling arsenal. The infantry were ordered to clear
the beach as quickly as possible, but many of the Winnipegers never had a chance to
set for on dry soil. They were gunned down as the landing craft doors dropped, and
bodied rags that were once men were hurled back into the open chasm. Others
took a few strides onto the sand before a bullet found them. Rifleman Neil McQuarrie
of Baker Company remarked of the frantic assault, "I'd never seen a dead man before
that day... and all of a sudden there were a lot of them around."23
Sweeping German machine-gun fire raked the open ground, and while soldiers
trew it was safer to move forward than to stay where they were, they had to draw
on reserves of courage to overcome the natural terror of running into the fire.
Some went to ground and dug; others crawled through the sticky sand, holding their
reach against the fear that a bullet might tear through flesh at any moment. Most
doned their training to take ovet, muscle memory overriding the brain, firing and
deep in places.
coming grenades, as they looked for gaps in the barbed wire that was up to 10 metres
