274 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
destroyed, badly mauled, or isolated in coastal garrisons.83 The Canadians took
18,444 casualties, including 5,021 killed. Operational research teams in the 21st
Army Group determined that the 2nd and 3rd Canadian Infantry Divisions were in
more "intense combat days" than any other British division, and suffered higher cas-
ualties as a result-— the most (9,263) and second most (8,211) of any of Montgomery's
divisions.* The casualties also fell disproportionately on the infantry battalions.85
Although the Allied infantry made up fewer than 8,000 of an 18,500-strong div-
ision, they absorbed about 70 percent of the total casualties and 76 percent of those
in the Canadian forces® Such crippling losses could not continue without serious
repercussions to the Allied divisions' fighting efficiency.
Much vitriol raged among the Allied high commands over the failure of various
national armies to break through the Germans more rapidly in Normandy. The
Canadians, in the vanguard of battle, bore some of that blame, with Montgomery
accusing them of being "badly handled and very slow."87 Montgomery was not happy
with the Canadians, but the British and Polish divisions, both armoured and infan-
try, had also been predictable and ponderous in their many failed operations. The
finger pointing was no surprise, but perhaps the focus should have been less on who
had failed and for what reasons and more on acknowledging the difficulties of pier-
cing the defences-in-depth. No army had found a way to break the fortified trench
systems and defenders until they were worn down in attritional combat.
Accusarions of Canadian slowness would have enraged those who faced the enemy
for the beer part of three months. The Canadian units bore the scars of relentless
battles. They were the ones who overcame the enemy opposite them-an enemy
who were on the best tactical ground and who employed all the advantages of their
substantial arsenal. The Allies were just a resilient when fighting on the defence in
their sir trenches protected by hull-down tanks and guns, as revealed through the
costly German assaults in June following D-Day or the German's failed attempts to
smash the Americans during Cobra, Most operations needed, according to the mil-
itary doctrine of the time, a three-to-one ratio of attackers to defenders to succeed.
The Canadians usually achieved this throughout July and August. with their advan-
tage in firepower but not in manpower. In fact, in many of the disastrous bartles,
such as Spring, the force ratios were often even, meanine that an equal number of
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
275
Canadians fought an equal number of Germans. This story is usually lost in the
popular memory of Normandy, where success has repeatedly been attributed to
the "brute force" of the Allied firepower and airpower overwhelming the enemy.88
The Anglo-Canadian approach to battle was also shaped by an appreciation from
the start of the campaign that few reinforcements would be on hand for the forward
uis." The Germans, who faced their own shortages of soldiers, remained wedded
10a reckless counterattack doctrine that demanded infantry and armour be hurled
into battle to hit the overextended force, now turned defenders, when they were
most vulnerable. This flair and drama have caught the attention of soldiers and his-
torians, who are drawn to seize-the-initiative offensive action, but it ultimately led to
much damage being inflicted on the Germans as the Allies learned to prepare and
repel such shock tactics. A soldier must be willing to die for his country, said Patton,
but it is better to make the other fellow die for his. The Canadians at times were
autious on the battlefield, but they much preferred to let the other fellow, careless
and at times fanatical, die for his country.
Throughout Normandy, the experienced 3rd Canadian Infantry Division had fought
well even with dwindling numbers of infantry, while the 2nd Division had been
uneven in battle and the 4th Division had shown aggression but could not put
ogether a series of sustained operations. Of course, no one could, with the British
and Americans facing their own cascade of failures when confronting the resilient
chemy. Nonetheless, necks were on the chopping block. Simonds fired his friend
Goge Kirching, commander of the 4th Armoured Division, who had been a fine
safer but had failed to inspire as a commander, and he replaced the 3rd Division
commander, Rod Keller, who had been iniured but likely would have been removed
tom command in any case, for perceived failures in the capture of Carpiquet. He
do boked to dump Charles Foulkes, a lacklustre commander who was disliked by
his saff but was protected hu Cree. Down the chain of command. six of nine briga-
dits and fourteen of twenty-four battalion commanders were gone. Some of these
had ben killed, wounded, or worn down, but Simonds also engaged in a major
housecleaning.
Simonds, too, might have been sent home for the failure of Spring, and for the set-
bie in lie and Tractable that resulted from the rigid battle-by-timetable, although
