232
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
they went untreated, and even the new antibiotics could not kill all the bacteria in
festering cavities.
For patients on the table, lacerated openly or bleeding internally, plasma and
blood transfusions were essential and saved countless lives. The technique of trans-
fusion was pioneered in the later part of the Great War and honed by Canada's
Dr. Norman Bethune in the 1930s in Spain and China. Blood transfusions saved the
lives of many exsanguinating patients at the field surgical units. Plasma—a dried
blood compound that looked like cornflakes before it was mixed up—was less effect-
ive than whole blood, but it could be stored for longer and it reduced the risk of
passing on infections such as syphilis or malaria. Life flooded back into the cadaver-
like patients; the wounded described how they shivered as the refrigerated blood
coursed through their veins. Nursing Sister Margaret Carruthers, who served at
multiple dearing stations and hospitals, remarked, "When you give blood to an
unconscious arient and you can't get their pulse and can't get their breathing, and
you wonder if you're wasting this precious blood, and half an hour later they sit up
and say, "When do we eat?" That's the most rewarding work you ever, ever do!"'s
Penicillin, which was first introduced on the battlefield in Italy in January 1944,
was a new super-drug. Jagged pieces of metal or bullets dragged filthy bits of uniform
into the body, and many wounds became infected. Throughout the war, anti-gas
gangrene serum, tetanus toxoid, and sulfanilamide were used to combat the spread
of infection, but penicillin, which consisted of cultured mould, was a significant step
forward in saving lives. At the start of the war it had initially been so rare that
patients in hospitals given the drug had their urine collected to extract the penicillin
for reuse; now, in Normandy, it was more readily available and thousands were saved.
The dark, viscous serum, injected wich large needles into the backside of a patient,
smelled like manure and caused considerable pain to recipients. As battlefield nurse
Betty Dimock remembered, the patients "just screamed. "6 The skewering was hard
on the patients and the nurses, but penicillin saved lives.
The RCAMC treated 84,000 patients, achieving a 93 percent survival rate for
wounds and 99.91 percent for victims of disease.' As in previous wars, many sol-
dies hemorrhaged to death before reaching medical care, but if they made it to the
operating table they had a high chance of survival. Infantryman Irving Penny
WAR AND MEDICINE
233
reced appreciatively on the critical role played by the doctors and nurses, noting,
"They gave life and a future back to the gravely injured men."18
INOST ALL OF THE SURGEONS AND DOCTORS carried out their work plagued by
ahaustion, and during the big rushes anyone who had ever held a scalpel operated
in the wounded. Medical officer Stephen Maley was no surgeon, but he soon quali-
fied for certain procedures and he worked on all who came across his table, often in
"8 to 20 hours shifts."1' At the height of the Normandy battle, Major Gerald Petty
d/No. 3 Field Dressing Station had only just sat down after three days of non-stop
surgery and care for the injured when a shell arrived in the midst of the tents. He
maggered to his feet and tried to kick awake his senior medical orderly, but the man
sept like he was in a coma. Walking like a drunk man because of the fatigue, Petty
noved towards the dust from the nearby shell explosion that had landed square on a
muck, later recalling, "I saw six bodies without heads, and scattered everywhere like
ama dentist's surgery there were bits of jaw with teeth attached, curved bits of skull
bon, bit of brain, with blood and hair attached to bits of scalp."?0 He steadied him-
if and set to work on the survivors.
Fied surgeon Angus Campbell Derby was part of the first Canadian advanced
magical unit to land in Normandy, and he witnessed the rush of casualties in the late
ity and early August battles. As the tents were filled to capacity, patients waited in
debts forming a checkerboard of stained stretchers. Derby noted candidly, "It
ra impossible for our staff to deal with this large group of wounded. Casualties died
bin lak of are from bleeding to death from lack of a tourniquet, from respiratory
Saur for need of a needle in their chest, from profound shock from lack of resusci-
die luds These were devastating experiences ones I shall never forget."21
Wich the doctors and surgeons so hard pressed, recovering patients were not
day monitored witch vigilance, and some men succumbed to their wounds because
of shortages in medical personnel. Those losses were slowed with the arrival of the
alicated nurses who assisted in surgery and cared for patients in post-op. Changing
sedge and watching for complications, they also administered morphine when it
rs available. For the injured who were stabilized, the nurses offered a smile, a kind
mord, or a cigarette. Such generosity profoundly affected the wounded, afraid and far
