90 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
shattered concrete, and gutted farmhouses, there was ample evidence of the warriors'
way: kill or be killed, and kill and be killed.
AT THE FRONT, the 11th Canadian Infantry Brigade continued to elbow its way
through the bridgehead, but running battles with pockets of resistance from trapped
German soldiers to the east of Melfa slowed the exploitation phase. If the enemy
could be hounded backwards, the slow-moving artillery, headquarters units, and
mountainous supply dumps might be captured. This would break the Germans
fighting spirit, even if their infantry and armour would likely escape destruction. But
in the battlefield of less than 65 square kilometres, an astonishing 20,000 Allied vehi-
des were trying to make their way to the front, or from front to rear. 06 Matters were
made far worse when General Leese pushed the 6th Armoured Division through the
Canadian sector to avoid attacking Aquino, which was now held by only 200 exhausted
paratroopers. This was a bizarre misreading of the tactical environment, and instead of
capturing the town, which would have opened up new routes, the British bungled up
the roads in a misguided attempt to manoeuvre around Aquino. °7 Those tanks and
infantrymen simply joined the back of a very large parking lot.
Burns should have refused the order, but he was intimidated in his first battle,
especially in the face of the experienced Leese, who was a veteran of the desert war.
Unfortunately, Leese proved grossly incompetent here, and while he remained a
charismatic commander, he and his staff were chronic mishandlers of the road sys-
tem. Gasoline shortages, mines, and rollovers left trucks, jeeps, armoured cars, and
tanks immobilized, adding to the congestion. If the Germans had not been reeling
from their losses or if they had held an air force ready to put into the skies over the
bartlefield, they would have easily punished the clumsy Allied advance. Frantic
British and Canadian headquarters tried to sort out the mess: blitzkrieg was replaced
by a self-imposed traffic jam.
It was not until the 26th, a blisteringly hot day, that the 11th Canadian Infantry
Brigade pushed its way through the bottleneck and gagging petrol fumes. The next
day, the Irish Regiment, supported by the Cape Breton Highlanders, the Perths, and
tanks of the 8th New Brunswick Hussars, seized Ceprano. They had advanced
through mortar and machine-gun fire, and withstood Moaning Minnies and high
THE HITLER LINE
91
explosive shells. This was no easy march against a broken enemy, as the official regi-
mental records make abundantly clear.'") At every step, men were shot down or
blown apart. Private Stanley Scislowski of the Perth Regiment watched one of the
unit's popular sergeants step on a Teller mine, the type that could blow the tracks off
a32-ton Sherman. "The blast from fourteen pounds of TNT threw Bob's body high
in the air... Bob's legs and arms were mangled and twisted in such a grotesque way
that they reminded me of a discarded rag doll." 110
Ar Hoffmeister's divisional headquarters, confusion reigned, and it was unclear if
the lead units were held up by poor traffic control, enemy fire, or hesitancy. The general
sensed the disorder even as he understood the inherent friction of the advance. Urged
on by Burns and Leese, Hoffmeister ordered his brigades forward, and even demanded
night marches to make up for the slow crawl during the day. The 5th Division had to
cose the distance with the enemy. One optimistic Canadian, Captain G.E. Broomhall
at cops headquarters, wrote to his wife that after the determined push, "It certainly
begins to look as tho we have had the honor of striking the first blow in the beginning
of the end."' The German defenders had been battered, but this was not the end, as
the enemy regrouped and was fighting a coherent rearguard action. The 5th Division's
amoured formations were gradually removed from the fighting front by the 30th,
a Bitish units took over, and the Canadians slipped into reserve on June 3. The
Sid Divisions spearhead role in breaking out of the Hitler Line was over.
With the German Tenth Army opposite Leese's Eighth Army withdrawing and
runerable, it might have been destroyed - or at least savaged— by the Anzio force
ta had scaped the confines of the bridgehead. But the Allies could not close
ie pir movement, and much of the German army fled to fight another day. The
Apt of this flute was American General Mark Clark. He had long been obsessed
with he ory of liberating Rome, to the point where he had threatened General
ander that if the Eighth Army attempted to beat him there he would order his
Sip to re on them.? Now, on the 25th, as his forces were preparing to savage
de Germans by cutting through their line of retreat, he redirected his Fifth Corps
" capture Rome. Instead of hounding the enemy. Clark pursued publicity The
hericans garnered the glory of liberating Rome on lune 4 bur Clark's manoeuvre
lowed most of the Germans to escape. Clark's reputation was made in newspapers
