248 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
worst. Some generals half-heartedly applied Hitler's insane demand that not only
should the German forces fight to the last bullet and last man; they should even
attack into the bulge that was forming in the Allied lines.
As the Americans were pressing into Brittany and St. Lô, Montgomery ordered a
multi-division Second British Army offensive on July 30, known as Operation
Bluecoat. Six infantry and two armoured divisions were cobbled together to blast
their way to Falaise in the hope of catching the Germans when they were off balance
and moving troops to the American front. But the British attacked on too narrow an
axis, and the armour did not make it far before lead units were devastated by anti-
tank fire. The infantry, now largely unsupported, did not thrust very hard past the
burning tanks. The thousands of resulting British casualties revealed that the German
guns and terrain favoured the defenders, even though they were spread thin.' While
Montgomery's army were unable to hack through the weakened enemy lines south
of Caen, the general felt he had the tiger by the tail, and on August 4 he advised the
First Canadian Army to prepare a new thrust down the main Caen-to-Falaise high-
way l the Canadians could break open the enemy lines, their hammer would smash
down against the American anvil, catch-
ing and destroying the two German
armies caught between them.'* Yet the
Canadians would have no more for-
mations available than the British had
for Bluecoat, and they would be fight-
ing against a far more desperate enemy
that was facing annihilation.
The Germans fought tenaciously in the defence,
although they were slowly driven back
in prolonged fighting.
THE FIRST CANADIAN ARMY was
ready to strike on August 8. General
Harry Crerar's army headquarters
was finally activated on July 23, nearly
a month after this had been planned,
as Montgomery had actively delayed
Crear's crossing over to France, hoping
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
249
that somehow Simonds would be given the army command." He was not, and now
Gera commanded three Canadian divisions, with additional British and Polish
divisions. Crerar had an uneasy relationship with his Canadian corps commander,
Guy Simonds. The two had clashed in Italy, and Simonds wore lightly his ambitions
lo rise to army commander. Crerar had no better relationship with his British I Corps
commander, Lieutenant-General J.T. Crocker. Taking his lead from Montgomery,
who openly disrespected Crerar as an inexperienced desk soldier, Crocker refused a
diet command from Crerar on his first day as army commander. Crerar, who was
trying to find his own feet in France while suffering from illnesses contracted during
his time in Italy, condemned Crocker's action in writing. 2 The usually politically
smart Crerar might have found a
more diplomatic way to deal with his
lificult subordinate,
but few army
ommanders would have tolerated
such insubordination. Nonetheless,
Mongomer's opinion and treatment of
Cerar were not improved by the inci-
cent Indeed, as one of Montgomery's
saff officers observed on a more
general level, "I feel Monty was aston-
shing in his relationship with all the
Dominion troops. He ordered them
around like British troops, ignoring
the devolution of the British Empire ...
he was completely out of date." 13 It was
Citrar who had to manage Monty's
diffult manners and ways, and he
did, although it was a bruising task
and there would be other challenges
the war progressed. * In the end,
Monty felt that Crerar was to blame
fa Crockers insubordination-surely
General Harry Crerar, commander of the
First Canadian Army. Crerar had little battlefield
experience when he arrived in France to
command in late July, but he was an able
manager of his generals and a key lynchpin
between the Canadian authorities in
England and his troops on the ground.
