62
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
of shipping hundreds of tanks that could be sunk by U-boats, the newly arriving
Canadians took over the machines from the outgoing 7th Armoured Division that
was moved to Europe. That made sense, but it meant that the 5th Canadian
Armoured Division inherited worn-out trucks and tanks that were described, in one
official report, as being "for the most part desert veterans and they looked it."18
Mechanics and engineers were forced to work day and night to keep the clapped-out
vehicles running.
The new Canadians arrived at the front throughout December and January, with
the Canadian Corps taking over the Adriatic sector on January 31. The corps com-
mander was Lieutenant-General Harry Crerar, who had advised the government on
military matters as chief of the general staff in Canada during the first three years of
the war. He was known to Canadians but had gained limited command experience
during his three decades of service, having held divisional and corps commands only
briely in Britain. General Alexander was distrustful of anyone who had not come
up through the Eighth Army, and even more so of a desk commander, and he much
preferred Major-General Guy Simonds, who had led the Canadians through Sicily.
Crerar was astute enough to tread warily among the British. He was not by nature a
glory seeker, but the new Eighth Army commander, General Leese, was as dismissive
of Cerar as Alexander, and he whined that he would have to "teach" the Canadians."
The fifty-three-year-old Cerar was intelligent and dedicated, but also shy and
uninspiring in bearing and speech. Lacking the easy ways of McNaughton, he fell
back on being a stickler for discipline and rules. Even among his own close staff, he
rarely used Christian names. His dour professionalism rubbed many of the 43,500
or so Canadians under his command the wrong way, especially when he tightened
up dress rules and ordered that the informal names painted on tanks and trucks
(much like the bomber' nose art) be removed? The Eighth Army had a rather
jaunty approach to these matters, which suited the Canadians, who had, during the
South African War and the Great War, embraced the notion of colonial warriors:
rough and ready for the fight but disdainful of discipline. Even Ist Division com-
mander Major-General Chris Vokes was unhappy wich the new Canadian Corps
headquarters that appeared more intent on fighting a paper war than the shooting
one. "Life became a sort of administrative hell on earth," he fumed with characteristic
THE HITLER LINE 63
ill grace. Reports and chits were demanded from every unit, and in Vokes's eyes,
Crerar "stood for shining buttons and all that chicken-shit."?! It took time for the
men of the Red Patch, who had served in Monty's Eighth Army at the height of
its worldwide fame, to adapt to being in I Canadian Corps, which contained the
Ist Canadian Infantry Division and 5th Canadian Armoured Division, and had
dedicated logistical, medical, and artillery assets. As in the Great War, the Canadian
Corps would fight together and not be divisible by the British army command.
This semi-permanent structure reinforced national pride and fighting cohesion
but angered the imperials, who railed that it made the Canadian divisions less
fexible. That was the case, but I Canadian Corps was now a national formation
and the British would have to deal with these challenges.
"THE INTENTION IS TO 'BREAK US IN EASILY," wrote one staff officer in the 5th
Canadian Armoured Division.
"We shall soon see whether it is 'easy' or not."22
Major-General E.L.M. Burns commanded the division and it consisted of the 11th
Canadian Infantry Brigade, formed by the Perth Regiment, the Irish Regiment, and
the Cape Breton Highlanders, and the 5th Canadian Armoured Brigade of three
Sherman tank regiments: Lord Strathcona's Horse, the 8th New Brunswick Hussars,
and the British Columbia Dragoons. The reconnaissance regiment was the Governor
General's Horse Guards. Another motorized infantry battalion was attached, the
Westminster Regiment, and it was equipped with half-tracks-lightly armoured per-
sonnel carriers. In January 1944, the division was fed into the line to gain experience.
In an effort to focus their attention on the east coast while General Mark Clark's
Fifth Army launched an attack south of Rome, the 11th Infantry Brigade under the
command of Brigadier George Kitching-a British professional soldier who sported
a handlebar moustache and had come to Canada in the late 1930s—was to assault a
German position about 2 kilometres north of Ortona on January 17.
The Perth Regiment, recruited from Western Ontario, and the Cape Breton
Highlanders, drawing from the hardscrabble regions of the east coast, sought to
prove their own aggressiveness and to distinguish themselves from the veteran 1st
Division. "Well show you Red Patch bastards how i's done," remarked one cocky
member of the division." Private Stanley Scislowski of the Perth Regiment, who had
