114 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Gun Carriers, provided important mobility for the battalion. The five companies
were commanded by a lieutenant-colonel, and his battalion staff interacted closely
with the company headquarters below him and the brigade headquarters above.
The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division had no tanks-unlike the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division, which consisted of an infantry brigade and a tank brigade-bur
it would be supported in battle by the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade. Commanded
by Brigadier R.A. Wyman, who was brought back from Italy to supply combat experi-
ence, the brigade consisted of three regiments: the Fort Garry Horse, the Ist Hussars,
and the Sherbrooke Fusilier. Though the infantry and tanks had rarely trained together
in England, the Shermans and the up gunned Firelys - Shermans equipped with a
mote powerful 17-pounder gun-provided crucial fire support to the infantry. The
Canadian infantry ordered to land on the beaches were going to need all the help they
could get.
A SHORTAGE OF LANDING CRAFT Constrained how many divisions could be put
ashote on D-Day, but eventually six Allied divicions were ordered into the assault on
an 80 kilometre front of five discontinuous beaches While most of tho German
radar stations had been knocked out by the bombers to mack the invacion it was not
easy to obscure thousands of ships carrying tens of thousands of sailors and soldiers
The lead assault force would be transported to their beaches in a dizzying array of
landing craft, and each division required a mixture of about 45 of these: the mam-
moth Landing Ship, Tank (LST). which could carry wenty tantre the landing
Craft, Infantry (LCI), which transported 200 men; and the smaller Landing Craft
Assault (LCA), which would run in about 25 men for the beach assaults. The
American 4th, Ist, and 29th Divisions would land at Urh and Omaha heaches,
while the British 50th Division was in the centre at Gold Beach, with the British
3ad Division on the far left flank, storming Sword Beach. In between the rwo British
divisions, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division would land at lunn Reach On the
flanks, the Allies would drop in three British and American airborne divisions.
including the lor Canadian Parachure Battalion. No one liked the prospect of lichtly
armed paratroopers holding off a panzer counterattack, but few other options were
milable for guarding the Brinh and American beach landings open Alanks.
PLANNING THE INVASION
115
In the Canadian sector, the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade would land on the
right, with the 8th Brigade on the left, and the 9th Brigade in reserve. However, for
the two forward brigades, the beach area allowed for only five battalions, and gener-
ally only two companies from each in the lead. And so on June 6, the first wave
consisted of nine infantry companies from the five infantry battalions, supported by
two armoured regiments, with two more infantry battalions and an armoured regi-
ment in reserve. There was also a substantial force of engineers, machine-gun forma-
tions, and medical personnel. Significant naval and artillery guns would hopefully
even the odds. With the planners worried about a sustained German counterattack,
the number of artillery field regiments was doubled for the 3rd Division, and con-
sisted of six regiments of 144 guns, a regiment of medium 4.5-inch guns, and two
self-propelled Royal Marine regiments firing 95mm howitzers. In fact, the number
of gunners in the Canadian division had tripled to 8,000, with the addition of many
British light, medium, and anti-tank guns, for a total of nearly 200 artillery pieces.33
All of this was in preparation for holding the beachhead against the feared enemy
attacks that were expected to land most heavily on the 3rd British and 3rd Canadian
divisional fronts, as they were closest to Caen. The Canadians would serve with
I British Corps until II Canadian Corps became operational, although this would
not be for several weeks and would depend on the extent of the Allied advance.
By the end of June 6, it was planned that more than 21,000 Canadians would be
ashore, with over 2,000 vehicles. They would join another 130,000 Allied soldiers.
It was critical for the Allied divisions to drive inwards, off the beaches, to allow for
follow-on forces to land and push forward into the space behind the initial strike,
and to link up with the paratroopers. The final Canadian objective on D-Day was
the Carpiquet airfield on the outskirts of the major city of Caen, about 14 kilo-
metres from the beaches. Canadian Rifleman J.L. Wagar spoke for many when he
pondered the momentous battle, "Invasion Day was going to be a test of things: a
test of me; the test of a Division; the test of an Army; and the test of an invasion of
Nazi Europe; and I was silenced by the whole tremendous thing, and scared."34
