34 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
AIRMEN WHO DIDN'T GET CAUGHT up in a tree or some other structure, or who
didn't land in water and drown, buried or hid the parachute and then moved away
from the landing, and always in the opposite direction from the burning remains of
the plane. "I's a dreadful feeling to find yourself on the ground in enemy territory,"
recounted Lieutenant-Commander R.E. Bartlett, born and raised in Fort Qu'Appelle,
Saskatchewan, and shot down in 1941 while flying in RAF's No. 803 Squadron?
However, since most RAF and RCAF bomber raids were carried out at night, the
hobbling airmen, known collectively as evaders, usually had a few hours of dark-
ness during which they might put some distance between themselves and enemy
search parties.
All Ayers were equipped with kits that contained foreign money, greeting cards in
several languages, and a silk map of Europe. Candy and chocolate supplied energy
for the long run ahead. The escape kits also had purifying pills for potable water and
Benzedrine tablets to keep men awake. Brass buttons had a secret compass in them,
and the sheepskin-lined flying boots had a hidden pocket containing a file for cut-
ting steel bars. But the most important tools for the evader were his feet and good
sense. He had to run.
No one got out of Europe without the assistance of French, Belgian, or Dutch
civilians, first farmers and then the Resistance-those groups fighting the German
occupation. Both non-combatants and the Resistance fighters aided flyers at great
risk to their own lives, as they were routinely tortured and executed when found out
by the Gestapo. Canadian navigator Flying Officer Jo Foreman was shot down over
France on July 25, 1944, with two of his crew slain in the initial night fighter attack
and another dying during the crash. Foreman spent days roaming the French country-
side, looking to connect with the Resistance. Most farmers fed him but were too
scared to take him in. "As one farmer said," related Foreman, "if (I were) captured
at his farm I would be a prisoner, but his entire family, including babies, would be
killed on the spot."
The Resistance groups operated in small cells to avoid the cascading effect of los-
ing group after linked group to the Germans. But despite such precautions, some
were exposed by spies and collaborators within the civilian population who sought
to curry favour with the Nazi occupiers, and others were outed through bad luck,
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
35
incompetence, or information extracted from torture. Airman Don Cheney of Ottawa,
Ontario, remarked, "I owe a huge debt to the French people who sheltered me at risk
of concentration camp, torture, and death of themselves and their families.")
The Resistance organized several escape routes, using a series of linked safe houses
and groups, to ferry Allied flyers to the coast for a clandestine pickup by the Royal
Navy, or to secluded aircraft landing sites, or even to neutral Spain. The most famous
escape route, the Comet Line, was established by Andrée "Dédée" de Jongh, a Belgian
teenager, living in Brussels. With her father, Frederic, and a small Resistance cell,
they smuggled airmen from attics and cellars to the countryside, eventually making
their way south to Spain. It was a race against time and the de Jonghs knew that they
would likely be compromised at some point. The Gestapo eventually broke into the
cell and in June 1943 they arrested Frederic. He was executed. On Andrée's thirty-
third trip to Spain, she, too, was arrested and sent to a number of concentration
camps, where she survived until her liberation in April 1945. However, the Comet
Line lived on, with others taking the de Jonghs' place, and by war's end, some
800 Allied soldiers and airmen were ushered to freedom. 1º
Kenneth Woodhouse, a RCAF Spitfire pilot, crashed in France on March 16,
1944, after his Merlin engine died in midair. He went on the run and was aided by
the French resistance. He witnessed first-hand the elaborate system used to avoid
detection, when he was taken to a secret office where a studious Frenchman forged
documents: "Here was everything for making up false identity cards or travel passes,
restricted zone passes and so on. There were piles of blank ID cards, legal papers, lists
of young men who lived in obscure places (whose identities we would assume),
specimen signatures of village mayors and German authorities, rubber stamps and
seals, various inks and papers, along with other materials."" Woodhouse, along with
several other RCAF flyers, was eventually smuggled out of France, carried by row-
boat to a motor torpedo boat off the coast, and returned to England. He had been
"on the lam" for seven days; others spent months in the care of the French or Belgian
underground.
Those who escaped German-occupied Europe were usually posted to a training
formation and allowed time to recover from their ordeal. They were also inducted
into the Caterpillar Club, receiving a badge and membership card. The little gold
