D-DAY
121
120 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
run the ship right up on the shore and keep firing our guns, until the last shell is gone."
The Allied armada overwhelmed the Kriegsmarine's small feet of U-boats and suface
raiders, most of whom refused the suicidal battle, but there was fear among the Admiralty
that the enemy might try some desperate runs to wreak havoc among the troop-carrying
ships. While the Royal Navy had prepared itself for this type of chaotic fighting, the
Germans proved unwilling to snap the cyanide. More dangerous was the mine-infested
water that might disrupt the choreographed assault. And so 247 Allied minesweepers
were engaged in dearing 10 approach lanes across the English Channel to the Normandy
coar, including 16 Bangor-class RCN minesweepers. Torpedoman E.A. Rudall of
HIMCS Blairmore was briefed thar the forilla could expect 75 percent casualties. The
room went silent.
In the dark hours of June 6, the minesweepers moved forward like a fleet of
Zambonis on ice, catching and cutting the mine tethers in their path, and allowing
them to rise up and be destroyed by gunfire. One officer in HIMCS Georgian remem-
bered, "We were to hold our course, no matter what was ahead there must be no
holes in our weeping as ships loaded with trops would be following on us, and
would be depending on us." Most of the Canadian ships were assigned to sweep the
American Omaha and Utah beaches, which disappointed some of the sailors, who
wanted to assist their countrymen assaulting Juno Beach.
As the minesweepers went about their dangerous business of clearing lanes to the
ten-fathoms from-shore line, the Channel filled up with thousands of ships, moving
toward the rendezvous point. RCA mid-upper gunner Gordon Cross, whose RCAF
No. 433 Squadron Halfax I was returning from a bombing mission, looked down
at warships and vessels through the broken clouds: "Row after row of them in near
lines all headed to the Normandy coast. It was an unbelievable sight, the largest
armada ever assembled, and we were getting a special panoramic view of it."
Despite the overwhelming force, Eisenhower and his staff remained worried that
the landings would be turned back. No one was sure if, despite their years of training,
the lack of real combat experience would leave the Allied infantry too soft to face the
enemy soldiers hardened in battle. The German high command, aware that an inva-
sion was possible due to favourable tides, was confident of victory, with most generals
echoing Romme's daim to his wife that "In the West: I believe we'll be able to beat
off the assaulr.''' Hitler, too, welcomed the invasion: if it was broken on the Atlantic
Wall, the Western Allies might withdraw from the war or at least lick their wounds for
months, allowing him time to deal with the Soviets in the east. The Allied high com-
mand knew there were many things that could derail the operation: poor weather
might disrupt combined service work, the likelihood of surprise could easily be lost,
and the inherent complexities of landing more than a hundred thousand men on
beaches while under fire would result in unexpected challenges. Even if the Allies
dawed their way onto the beaches, one American general calculated that the chances
of holding the shallow beachhead against counterattack were "only fifty-fify." 2
ABOUT 10 KILOMETRES OFF SHORE, the assaulting infantry scrambled down the
nets hanging on the sides of the large troop transports to their waiting LCAs (Landing
Craft Assaults. There were five for
each infantry company, and anywhere
between twenty-five and thirty-five
men per craft. Choppy water caused
delays, leaving NICOs barking orders
in a weird half-whisper as the infantry
tried to hold the wet, clammy ropes in
the dark, while carrying what felt like a
fridgeful of equipment on their shoul-
dets. One wrong footstep and the man
would be crushed between the hulls of
the vessels and sink to the depths.
The pale gloom was taking on an
tri, pre-dawn, green hue. Over 2,000
landing craft of multiple sizes set off to
cary the infantry, support weapons,
miller, and tanks towards the beaches.
The lack of shooting from the enemy
tomed to confirm the rumours that this
night be another training operation,
Canadians on a landing craft closing
in on Juno Beach.
YUL
