14 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
older two-engine bombers, such as the Hampden and Wellington, were phased out
of service. The new four-engine heavies, especially the Halifax and Lancaster, allowed
for a steady escalation of attacks, as they drove deeper into Germany and carried
bigger bomb loads.
Continual study and appraisal, high hopes and harsh failures, hand-wringing and
teeth-gnashing over the first half of the war revealed that despite all the improve-
ments to technology, to doctrine and tactics, the bomber crews- dropping their loads
from 18,000 feet in the dark and while under intense fire— rarely hit their targets. A
well-documented series of decisions from the senior civilian high command, espe-
cially Winston Churchill, and through the air marshals, charted the gradual shift
from the unpromising aim of bombing specific targets to plastering entire cities.
While the air officer commanding-in-chief of Bomber Command, Sir Arthur Harris,
claimed that the bombers could win the war single-handedly if he had the proper
number of bombers available, his superiors, Chief of the Air Staff Sir Charles Portal,
Chief of the Imperial General Staff Sir Alan Brooke, and even Churchill believed other-
wise? Harris was not deterred and he remained a fierce champion of the bombers; he
eschewed talk of "dehousing" the enemy (destroying their houses but implying that
civilians were not being killed and other euphemisms, and urged on his flyers to "kill
the Boche."4
The operations gathered in intensity each year, with 1943 seeing a large-scale
expansion and a continuous targeting of German cities, civilians, and industry. The
high-profile 1,000-bomber raid against Cologne of July 31, 1942, shook the Nazi
high command, while the July 1943 Hamburg firestorm left all Germans trembling.
For those beneath the bombs, rumours and speculation suggested an imminent
apocalypse, to be delivered by the bombers. Hitler and his minister of armaments
and war production, Albert Speer, had planned for a renewed push from German
industry in carly 1943, but the concentrated bomber operations had interfered
severely with this plan. Steel production was curbed and flatlined, thereby slowing
weapons production. At the same time, Hitler poured resources into aircraft
research and manufacturing, almost entirely of fighters, largely to defend German
cities against the Allied bomber campaign. This aircraft manufacturing reached an
astonishing 41 percent of the German total war economy; by way of comparison,
AIR WAR
15
only 29 percent of the economy was devoted to producing ammunition and pow-
der, 8 percent to naval vessels, and 6 percent to tank production. Aircraft were also
pulled back from the fighting fronts, especially in the east, where the land forces
were increasingly left vulnerable. Finally, thousands of anti-aircraft guns, many of
them doubling in an anti-tank role, were moved from the battle front to guard the
cities, further leaving the German army susceptible to Allied armoured thrusts.®
The bombing campaign of the Americans, British, and Canadians during the first
half of 1943—known as the Combined Bomber Offensive-curtailed German war
production and drew down on its already stretched military resources as Hitler
scrambled to protect his cities. And it would only get worse.
A Canadian Lancaster bomber on a sortie over enemy territory.
