296 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
became even more unbalanced. Furious and thinking unclearly, he sent his remain-
ing forces into the trap, rejecting the pleas of his officers who cautioned a with-
drawal. The West Novas fought into the 31st but were eventually forced to retreat,
leaving behind twenty of their dead comrades. Another fifty-six were wounded,
many with feet blown off or legs mangled.?7 It was a bad day for the regiment, and
Waterman was soon removed from command. He had been a good soldier, but the
strain of long service and the sharp reversal had left him a broken man. His Maritimers
paid for his breakdown.
Though the West Novas' thwarted attack was a low point for the Canadians, next
to them in the line, on the left flank, the PPCLI snaked forward in an aggressive and
successful drive by first passing through minefields and then stalking into the enemy
lines. "Colin McDougal's company went through a mine field 600 yards deep with
a mine every two feet," recounted one official report. "The pioneer Platoon raised
25 box mines within 100 yards, in addition to Teller and 'schu' mines."38 The Patricias
lost only three men. When they encountered firmer resistance in the small hours of
the 3lIst, the Patricias mauled the tough paratroopers opposite them and grabbed the
high ground known as Point 204. Major Edward Cutbill, who commanded a com-
pany in his first batle and would be awarded the Distinguished Service Order,
deared a number of hilltop positions, including at least one through a bayonet
charge. He reported, "In the initial stage, we took 42 prisoners including two off-
cers; after beating off local counterattacks, we captured 53 more, making a total of
95. In addition, some 20 Germans were killed "39 The PPLI eventually curled
around to seize Point 133 on a spur jutting into the Canadian lines, from which
much of the fire had been directed against the West Novas, Skilled junior leaders had
delivered a significant victory against a tough opponent.
ON THE FAR LEFT, the Perth Regiment and the Cape Breton Highlanders also ran
into concentrated machine-oun fire on the 30th, but they found waus to much c
ward, flanking positions and snuffing them out. Two strongpoints manned by
elements from the 26th Panzer Division held out: Point 111 and. 1.000 metres to
its left, Point 120. The Cape Breton Hiohlanders called in artillery fire and smoke
to smother the opposition and provide some cover, and they almost made it to the
THE GOTHIC LINE
297
dictive, albeit at the cost of sixty-five casualties 40 Overstretched and vulnerable to
atack, the Highlanders pulled back but prepared a new assault on the 31st.
Next to the Highlanders, a company of the Perths advanced on Point 111 during
the night of the 30th, close to a kilometre in front of the small town of Montecchio.
A number of infantrymen were lost to mines and an entire company was pinned
down by fire, but Dog Company briefly found its way clear and charged up the ridge
around 8:30 P.M. Private Stan Scislowski recalled the confusion:
Someone off to my left closer to the road had gone up on a mine. It wasn't an
earringing bang like the Teller mines made, so I knew it could only be one of
the small anti-personnel Schumines. A few more paces and two more men went
up, the lower extremity of their legs mangled by the searing blasts. We stopped
dead, afraid to go on. We were trapped smack in the middle of a mine field,
there was no getting away from it. Then I heard Blackie Rowe's stentorian voice
hollering from behind, "Get your goddamn asses moving! Come on! Move!
Move! Move! Haul your asses!" I turned to Gord and said, "Holy shit! The crazy
sonofabitch is determined to get us all killed!" We resumed the advance, but
with cold fear in our hearts. Again I turned to Gord, "I can't see us getting out
of here alive." He didn't even have time to agree with me when bang, down he
went. My first instinct was to stop and help him somehow, but Blackie kept
barking at us to keep moving, so I moved on. 41
Sadowski and his surviving comrades cleared the minefield and continued into the
tremy line. Such attacks took unbelievable courage, determination, and drive.
Supported by the 75mm guns of the 8th New Brunswick Hussar's Shermans and
cair king coaxial machine guns, the Perths fought their way forward for about
tine minutes and gathered themselves for the final assault around 10 p.M. The
pantry surged up Point 111 in a blood-curdling bayonet charge, driving the shaken
Germans through with cold steel. « Only thirty prisoners survived. Those Germans
who retreated. remembered Lieutenant Hunter Dunn of the 8th New Brunswick
His, were machine-gunned ... until they surrendered."' The Gothic Line was
pierced, with the Perths jutting into the German defences. Up to this point, the
