VUL
450 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
civilians." But these missions, in his mind, were a part of total war, and directed
against civilians producing weapons, food, and supplies for the front-line forces.
Noting his own limited view as one among millions, Zinkhan asserted provocatively,
"Maybe you can figure out what is right and what is wrong in a 'total war." 2 Some
have tried, but all with the benefit of hindsight and with the intellectual freedom to
do so that traces directly to the wartime victory of the Allies over Nazi Germany.
The uncowed and still belligerent Sir Arthur Harris died in 1984. Throughout his
postwar life, he had fought those who questioned the bombing campaign and had
backed the bomber crews unfailingly. Over time, he was tarred as the leader of the
"bloodthirsty bone-heads and blimps" — as one 1989 BBC production labelled the sen-
ior Bomber Command staff * Harris supporters fired back and his official biographer
condemned his critics in words that might have been spoken by Harris himself abour
the war: "Memories faded and soon the horrors and fears of Nazism receded, to be
replaced by a fanatical desire on the part of historians, sensation writers, some journal.
ists, and television writers and producers to degrade and assassinate the character of the
commander and the one Command to whom they owe their very liberty, and to pour
out, unchallenged and unchecked, their scurrilous and, more frequently than not,
inaccurate reports on the war which most of them never knew."44
How the bomber war would be remembered was shaped significantly in 1992, by
two controversial events. In that year, Harriss old comrades banded together to erect
a statue in his honour outside the RAF church of St. Clement Danes in the Strand,
London. Unveiled on May 31, 1992, the memorial was established in the face of
considerable anger. Several German mayors protested honouring the memory of a
man they characterized as a war criminal. The British media fanned the fames. and
many papers robustly defended Harris. The ongoing salvoes in the war of reputa-
tions were as much about fighting wars of old as they were about the economic and
political uncertainty in the aftermath of the fall of tha Coviet Union and L. remaking
of Europe. Yet it is telling that the Queen Mother, who lived through the dark days of
the war, refused to listen to her advisors and would not be dissuaded from attending
the event. She and many of her generation understood the daht nued to the aircrew
and Harris. Not all agreed. Guards had to be placed around the eight-foot-tall statue
as it was repeatedly defaced with red paint.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
451
In Canada, an equally polarizing event occurred that year: the airing of The Valour and
the Horror, a three-part documentary series on the CBC caused outrage among veterans.
Lauded by much of the media and viewed by record-numbers of Canadians, it was excori-
ated by the majority of veterans. The most contentious episode, "Death by Moonlight:
Bomber Command," argued not only that the Allied bombing of Germany was a stra-
regic failure but that it was a secret campaign to indiscriminately murder innocent civil-
ians. Directors Terence and Brian McKenna cited a moral equivalency between the Nazis
and the Allies, as both sides resorted to targeting civilians, but they refused to go so far as
to condemn the flyers as baby killers. Instead, the aircrews were depicted as innocent
dupes who did not understand what they were doing. The film suggested there was an
active cover-up, with government-issued
propaganda and compliant newspapers
BATTLE OF GERMANY
claiming the bombs hit only industrial
and military targets. "Few Canadians,"
the film emphasized, "would ever learn of
that plan," which was blamed almost
solely on the monster Sir Arthur Harris.45
The film's claims were ham-fisted and
erroneous on almost every front, and its
argument was unmistakably presentist—
a 1990s perception of the moral repre-
hensibility of bombing civilians projected
backwards onto the total war of 1939 to
1945. Historians lined up to condemn
the series, highlighting error after error,
both of commission and omission. 46 The
historical drubbing did not calm veter-
ans, who convinced the Senate to hold
hearings and even attempted to sue for
$500 million in a defamation of charac-
ter suit. The veterans' lawsuit failed. The
anger festered.
JOIN AN AIR CREMA
A 1944 Royal Air Force poster.
The bombing of German cities was no secret.
