38 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
IN THE FIRST THREE YEARS OF THE WAR, the limited number of Western prisoners
was spread through a series of camps. By 1942, the German military authorities
dealt with the growing number of Allied prisoners of war by ordering each of the
armed services to be responsible for its own prisoners. The Wehrmacht processed
all army prisoners in a Stalag, while the Luftwaffe incarcerated air force prisoners
in a Stalag Luft. Naval prisoners were interned at Marlag und Milag Nord, in north-
western Germany.21
Most of the camps were surrounded by a double fence about 2.5 metres high, with
the 2 metre gap between the fences filled with barbed wire. Inside the main fence was
a low wire, known as the warning wire, and anyone who passed over it was liable to
be shot by armed guards in towers. The camp consisted of a series of low barrack
buildings for the prisoners, with additional huts to store supplies and sports equip-
ment, or even house small theatres. The prison grounds were usually sandy, and
prisoners soon carved out space for football or other activities.2 While all the camps
were different, Flight Lieutenant John Taylor, an RCAF navigator shot down in late
1941 in Africa, wrote about the hard truth all men faced: "We were prisoners of war,
which was a fate I had never foreseen for myself.3 Warrior status was ripped away
and a prisoner was forced to embrace a new, emasculated role in which all aspects of
his life were governed by strict rules. A prisoner was now a "Kriegie," the shorthand
for a prisoner of war, abbreviated from Kriegsgefangenen.
Newly arrived Kriegies were viewed suspiciously by the prisoners since the Germans
often tried to insert their own spies and stooges into the camp. Subtle questions
about Canada, hockey, or geographical places, quickly revealed a sweating and nerv-
ous prisoner to be the real thing. The new prisoners arrived with few possessions. The
German authorities provided little, and it was the other prisoners who offered tooth
brushes, clothing, and essentials. After a few weeks or months, the regular shipment
of care packages from the Red Cross and loved ones augmented meagre supplies
and replenished the group stock for future prisoners.
While the Germans treated the Western Allies relatively well, there were sadistic
guards who took delight in taunting the men. As one Canadian prisoner remarked,
"Our relationship with our captors was variable. As individuals some were quite
decent and honourable within the constraints of their function and responsibility,
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
39
others were utter 'bastards.' It was quite apparent that the decent ones had served in
battle while the 'bastards' were substandard types who relished the authority they
could never otherwise have attained."4 No matter the guards, however, the rules
of imprisonment included multiple daily role calls and control over mail and food,
as well as restrictions over movement and action.
Prisoners had their own rules too. There was a hierarchy, and one of their own was
elected to represent their needs and pass on their complaints to the German com-
mandant running the camp. The "Man of Confidence" or "Senior British Officer," as
the non-commissioned officers (NCOs) and officers called their separate leaders,
held an unenviable job as the senior prisoner. He was usually held accountable for the
actions of the entire group and was liable to face screams of rage over escape attempts
or other perceived embarrassing events. The Germans nonetheless liked to deal with
a prisoner representative, and these tough men defended the prisoners' rights and
collective dignity.?5 The Allied prisoners also formed various committees, headed by
long-service prisoners, to monitor actions in the camp but also to arrange for sports,
education, and libraries, with the most secretive group coordinating escapes.
Information was rich currency for prisoners, and the new Kriegies were to share
what they knew about the war effort, sports teams in Canada, and the latest popular
songs. Occasionally, a German paper found its way into the camp, traded from a
Canadian airmen at Stalag Luft III. Note that they wear their uniforms.
