YUL
464
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Canadians paradoxically- or perhaps in opposition to their armed forces' scraping
barrel bottom-returned to their aged veterans. The years 1994 and 1995 marked
the fiftieth anniversary of the Second World War. Anniversaries focused the attention
of the media. Widespread celebrations in Britain, France, Belgium, and especially the
Netherlands honoured veterans. The Canadian warriors of old, some 15,000 strong,
were welcomed to the lands they liberated. Everywhere, signs and banners flew, bear-
ing the message "Bless You, Boys." To wear a Maple Leaf flag was to be greeted with
hugs of thanks and tears of joy. Day after day, CBC and CTV, under the steady hands
of anchors Peter Mansbridge and Lloyd Robertson, offered coverage of events from
the old battlegrounds. The stories of Canadian veterans, their courage, and their
history were broadcast into millions of living rooms. The nation's leading historian,
J.L. Granatstein, who participated as a television commentator on the events,
described the moving scenes at Apeldoorn, Netherlands: "I shall never forget the
Canadian veterans were honoured in 1995 in the Netherlands,
the nation they liberated fifty years earlier.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
465
sight of young mothers in their twenties, weeping and cheering simultaneously while
holding their babies up to get a sobbing veteran's kiss. Nor will I forget the Dutch
mothers telling astonished and typically blasé Canadian reporters that they were
doing this because they wanted their children to be able to say that they had been
touched by one of the men who liberated the Netherlands a half-century before."67
Canadians woke up abruptly to find much of Europe thanking their veterans for
their service and sacrifice, though they themselves had been ambivalent to these same
veterans for decades.
Something changed in Canadian society as nationalism mixed with nostalgia.
And since the fiftieth anniversary of the Second World War, Canadians' have shown
a greater appreciation for veterans. This change was also spurred on by the near
dissolution of the country in 1995, with the Quebec referendum on whether to
separate from Confederation provoking an existential gut-check for many Canadians
who realized that they had for too long drifted from the anchors of the past, and who
recognized the power of history to provide shared stories.
The public buildup and commemoration of the return home of Canadas Unknown
Soldier in May 2000 raised the profile of all veterans, even though Canadas fallen
soldier came from the Great War. Questions surrounding the commemoration of the
Second World War were heightened again three years later when there was a furor
over funding for the Juno Beach Centre and the embarrassing revelation that the
museum in France had only opened because the American mega-company Walmart
had donated $1. 8 million to its completion.«* Even normally complacent Canadians
averted their eyes a little at the shame of having to go palm out to the Americans in
matters of national history and heritage. The federal government was more generous
in providing funds for a new Canadian War Museum that opened in 2005, and it has
attracted about half a million visitors a year to learn about the nation's military hist-
ory. This new interest was in keeping with increased participation in Remembrance
Day ceremonies across the country; these events had been heavily attended for at
least a decade before the museum's opening and have continued to be so to the
present. As grandfathers and grandmothers passed away, their surviving family mem-
bers often paid homage to them and their service to the country on November 11.
This renewed desire to honour has only increased as a new generation of Afghanistan
