158 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and to coordinate a defence, but there was mass confusion. As the firefight thick-
ened, mortar shells ignited some of the hay, with flame and thick smoke adding to
the chaos. Major J. Neil Gordon, Queen's Own D Company commander, observed,
"We didn't know where the firing was coming from. The Germans were all nicely
dug in those fields and they were just sitting there potting us off.".2 Gordon was
shot through the mouth, although he later returned to the front and commanded
the North Shore (New Brunswick) Regiment. Seven more of the Hussars' tanks
were blown up by a single German tank, and the Shermans raced back and forth
firing at the enemy. This in turn separated them from the infantry who were pro-
recting them and it made it easier for the panzergrenadiers to kill the Shermans with
anti-tank weapons.
The order went out for the Queen's Own and Hussars to retire. As the battlegroup
tried to pull back, the Germans broke into the wireless network and put a call in to
bring down Canadian artillery fire on the vulnerable infantry. For twenty minutes,
the guns shelled their own men until the trick was recognized. As the Canadians
withdrew, the S troops continued to fire into the wheat and then sent out patrols to
shoot the wounded. Beating the bush, listening for the cries and moans, many of the
and murdered after interrogation.
Queen's Own were found and executed on the spot, while others were led to the rear
The bade for Le Mesnil-Patry cost the Hussars 38 tanks, all but gutting the regi-
ment. The Queen's Own suffered 103 casualties- killed, wounded, and prisoners-
and the battle was thereafter known to some as "Mess in the Pantry."53 Others found
it too painful to talk about. A few more engagements like that would wipe out the
bantalion. The surviving officers instigated the Grear War practice eventually adopted
by all units of preparing an LOB list: a core of 10 to 15 percent of the men who
were to be Left Out of Battle in order to rebuild the unit should it be badly shattered.
Such precautions were a reflection of the harsh realities at the front.
COMBAT IS VICIOUS AND DEHUMANIZING, and some have dismissed it as sanc-
tioned murder. But it is sanctioned within a defined set of rules. While the 12th SS
was known informally as the "milk bottle division" because of the young age of ire
soldiers, many of these adolescents were wilful executioners. At Aurhie rwenty-sever
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
159
of the thirty-three Canadian prisoners were murdered after the battle. At the Abbaye
d'Ardenne, nineteen Canadians were killed in cold blood. Neither of these mass
executions was a case of soldiers being cut down in the confusion and fury of com-
bat, in which some unarmed men were trying to negotiate surrender while others
were still fighting. These cases were the premeditated murder of Canadians who had
surendered: their hands were bound and they were shot in the head or bayoneted to
death. Many of the dead were thrown in the street and run over by tanks until the
bodies were ground into the mud. Nor was this an isolated incident perpetrated by
rogue officers. Both Nazi brigadiers, Kurt Meyer and Wilhelm Mohnke, interrogated
a number of prisoners and then, hours later, ordered their execution. From June 6
to 11, 156 Canadian prisoners were murdered by the 12th SS, including 66 soldiers
trom the Royal Winnipeg Rifles.'4 One out of seven Canadians killed during this
time were victims of post-battle execution.
Many of the Canadians realized that the Hitlerjugend had never had a chance to
develop their own belief system outside of the crazed Nazi regime that had indoctrin-
ated them at a young age. Of course, the Canadian infantrymen were often not much
older: eighteen-year-old boys from the Prairies were killing and being killed by
sixteen-year-olds from Munich. Though the Canadian high command sent out an
order to avoid "retaliation in kind," the 12th SS executions of Canadians led to reprisal
killings» The fanatical German resistance only added to the savagery, as there were
numerous accounts of Nazis pretending to surrender and then throwing a grenade, or
sting up an ambush with a white flag to draw out the Canadians and working with
other comrades to gun them down in the open. The Canadians promised no mercy.
Yet there were many like Charlie Martin, who witnessed his comrades executed and
promised the same revenge on the enemy, but found, when he had helpless prisoners
in his hands, that he "couldn't follow through with that kind of revenge." It was no
cay thing to execute a man when staring into his cringing face and while he held up
pictures of his family. Others hardened their hearts. Sergeant John Missons of the
Queen's Own Rifles testified, "We didn't take SS prisoners till we were ordered to do
•* While the Canadians still accepted hundreds, and then thousands, of prisoners
tomall the nits they faced, there were clearly unwritten rules among the Canadians
Going the Hiderjugend." Little quarter was asked or given.
