58 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
between the opposing sides, abandoned by day yet active at night. Robert Thexton
of the West Nova Scotia Regiment, who returned to his battalion after recovering
from a bullet to the chest, found that the "landscape was bleak and reminded me of
pictures I had seen of the battlefields in World War I." Shell-damaged, skeleton-like
trees were shrouded in the dreary rain. Slit trenches for two men and more perma-
nent trenches dissolved into a slurry of slush and mud. Unlike the Great War's
Western Front trench system, the defensive lines north of Ortona were generally
unconnected, based on weapons pits, with gaps protected by thin concentrations of
barbed wire. Pestiferous sniper fire snapped back and forth, although only the fool-
hardy tempted fate by showing their heads above the fortifications. And it was cold.
After a long night of sentry duty, woollen battle dress was often thick with frost until
a man's body warmed it up, leaving it clammy and sodden. Rough army blankets
draped over shoulders brought some relief, but were soon fouled and wet, and
remained that way for weeks. Sentries scowled at the enemy lines; officers checked
on them periodically, sometimes bringing body-warming rum. For the fought-out
Ist Division, morale was tested over the coming months of battle that were marked
by boredom, deprivation, and death.
The Allies were stopped well short of Rome. Attesting to the secondary nature of
the front, Eighth Army commander General Bernard Montgomery and Supreme
Commander Dwight Eisenhower had departed for Britain at the end of 1943 to lead
the assault on Europe. Monty was much loved by the Canadians in the Eighth Army,
and they lamented his loss. Farley Mowat of the Hastings and Prince Edward
Regiment of the Ist Canadian Division, and no great friend of senior commanders,
remarked of Montgomery, "There were those who hated him, but they were not
amongst the fighring troops. There were a good many who were angered by him, but
there were few men in the infantry who did not trust him, as they had never in the
past, and would never in the future, trust another general officer." With the best and
most recognizable generals moved to Britain, it was evident to all that Italy was fur-
ther pushed to the periphery, an unwanted drain on the main assault but still useful
in holding down the enemy forces in battle so they could not be transferred to shore
up the Western or Eastern fronts.
The new theatre commander, General Harold Alexander, inherited the stalemated
THE HITLER LINE 59
battlefield. He was a decorated veteran of the Great War, who, as commander of the
ground forces in Sicily and Italy, only lightly controlled his American and British
generals. The cheerful British general was always overshadowed by George Patton,
Mark Clark, and Bernard Montgomery, even though there is little evidence to
suggest that a more dominating commander would have got more out of his sub-
ordinates. Alexander had spent much of the war as "mediator-in-chief," sorting out
his quarrelsome generals, but he knew in early 1944 that his role was now to tie
down the Germans in Italy and wear them out in combat.
Adolf Hitler played into the Allied strategy, ordering that the "Gustav Line, [south
of Romel, must be held at all costs for the sake of political consequences."' Hitler sent
more of his steadily dwindling formations to Italy, and by late 1943, Field Marshal
Albert Kesselring had 400,000 troops—in 25 divisions (with additional support and
logistical elements) —in Italy. Another 37 Axis divisions were situated throughout the
Balkans and Southern France to protect against invasion. While strength on the
ground in Italy was about equal, the Allies had colossal advantages in the air since
most of the German air force had been pulled back to defend the homeland against
the Allied bombing campaign. Offsetting the Allied airpower, the enemy had all the
benefits of fighting on land of his choosing, employing high ground or choking off
narrow road networks.
Few expected a breakthrough in the difficult terrain that one American general
dismissed as a "blind alley."'' But while both sides committed resources and forces
into the theatre of battle, it was the Nazis, hemorrhaging badly on the Eastern Front,
who could ill afford the maelstrom in Italy.
OVER THE WINTER, with the Americans attempting an advance to Rome in a January
offensive, it was up to the Eighth Army, with the Canadians as one of the key forma-
tions in the line, to probe the enemy positions, raiding and patrolling aggressively in
order to prevent them from sending reinforcements to the main battle front. The
Eighth Army was now commanded by General Oliver Leese, a tall, breezy former
guardsman who had orchestrated several victories during the desert war in North
Africa and had been commander in Sicily of XXX Corps, in which the 1st Canadian
Division served.
