THE LONG LEFT FLANK
329
328 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
humane move in an inhumane war, the Canadians worked with their German
counterparts to allow French civilians to pass through their lines, with some 8,000
Reeing between September 11 and 13.25 With most of the civilians cleared, and siege
guns now brought forward after the fall of Le Havre on September 12, Spry planned
for the infantry assault. There was little intelligence on the enemy fortifications and
few reliable maps, and even the obliging civilian occupants of the city were of limited
value. The Canadians had lost some of their edge, too, as the last two weeks had
consisted of more liberation than battle. Many of the vehicles still contained flowers
thrown by jubilant citizens. A bomber strike might induce a hasty surrender, but
with all of the ground commanders spread along the hundreds of kilometres of front
anxious for the limited aerial support, the Canadian request for such an attack was
turned down. General Simonds took matters into his own hands and flew to England
to convince the air marshals he needed bombers. They were given.
The artillery bombardment thickened from the 12th onward, and a steady series
of aerial photographs provided a number of targets for the gunners. New sites were
also added daily by infantry patrols and prisoners who provided a fuller picture into
the enemy defences. As the 8th and 9th Canadian Infantry Brigades prepared for the
assault on the early morning of September 17, aware they were facing a dug-in force
that outnumbered them considerably, 762 bombers dropped more than 3,232 tons
of high explosives on enemy positions starting at 8:25 A.M.2 One Canadian infantry-
man remarked, "The explosions of bombs were very great and quite unlike artillery-
fire. The latter crack and pound with individual reports. Bombs make a deep, raging
and roaring sound, as if some vast thing in the distance were shaking a vast piece
of tin; sort of a rushing noise... Though the bombs probably fell in succession, the
percussions came in one heavy roar... You could feel the noise on your eyeballs." 27
With the dus still switing, the infantry advanced over the cratered roads and
fields. Behind them, 328 artillery pieces laid down crushing fire. In a clever man-
oeuvre, another wave of bombers passed over Boulogne as the Canadians started
their advance, driving the German defenders back into their bunkers to escape the
fallof the non-existent bombs. Hugging the artillery barrage closely, the Fort Garry
Horse Shermans and FireAve blasted away at any sion offif. Rohind the armoured
thrust came the infantry riding into battle in Kangaroos and half-tracks. Lieutenant
The bombers bit the German defences around Boulogne before the infantry assault.
