66 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
the Cape Bretoners were on fat ground with little cover. Then they opened up. Some
of the Germans, it was later found, were firing from below ground, simply sweeping
the Canadians by using periscopes to guide machine-gun fire and never even putting
their head above the slit trench?» Sergeant Fred Cederberg, a lanky twenty-one-
year-old high school dropout from Cape Breton, witnessed how, "All afternoon,
unnerved and numbed, the remnants of the two assault companies clung to the
soggy ground, pounded relentlessly by German mortars that churned the mud and
water into great spouts.""' There was very little aid from the Three Rivers' Shermans,
and Major Herbert Fulleston, a forty-year-old company commander, complained
after the battle, "[We) did not see the tanks until we were withdrawn."3! The tanks
were there, but their blasting guns were lost in the roar of German fire.
By the end of the day, the two bloodied regiments had suffered 157 casualties and
another 28 men were taken prisoner.? Some of the wounded, like Private Toasty
Macintyre of the Cape Breton Highlanders lay out injured and delirious for four
days, praying to God that someone might find him." He was eventually rescued,
although gangrene and the severe nature of his wounds meant that one leg had to be
amputated. He figured he got off easy, as he lay in the hospital while his comrades
lay rotting on the battlefield.
It took some time for the 11th Brigade to live down the drubbing from the veter-
ans of the Ist Division, who cruelly taunted them for their earlier bravado. Along
with the shallow graves and bruised egos, the Germans were so unimpressed by their
foundering opponents that the enemy high command moved the elite Ist Parachute
Division to the American front, situating the troops in the Benedictine abbey atop
Monte Cassino, where they would fight tenaciously for another five months.?4
THE STATIC WAR continued throughout the winter, with Canadian units cycled
through the front lines to rear areas. For the infantry, the war was reduced to sitting
in a wet hole, scanning empty ground where the "square heads" were sitting in their
own wet holes. Other minor operations were carried out, both failures and successes,
but most of the time, at the front, soldiers stamped their cold feet, scratched at their
boils and lice, and kept constant watch. Even the hard-bitten faces of combat veter-
ans sagged under the weight of fatigue. The food was awful, and living conditions
THE HITLER LINE
67
worse. Officers knew morale was low when the usual banter and singing were muted
orabsent, even though the rank and file still had enough piss and vinegar to grunt
to one another, "Come to Sunny Italy for your holidays."35 The losses from sniper
and mortar fire ate away: between February 1 and March 7, 120 Canadians were
killed and 585 wounded. The deaths were in ones and twos and occasional unlucky
bunches. The Perths' Baker Company, while lining up for meals on February 5, was
hit by a stray single mortar bomb. Thirty-seven men were flung across the ground.
Sanley Scislowski, who rushed to assist the wounded, described the scene: "Bodies
were scattered all over the muddy floor of the wooded ravine. Many of these were
almost completely dismembered. Others were twisted so that they looked unreal."36
The horror of that moment was etched into Scislowski's mind. And the war went
on and on. Illness removed some 3,466 from the line.?7 For the survivors of this
trench warfare, one infantryman summed up the stress of the static front, noting
that he and his comrades did not "know what it was like to relax and draw in a few
easy breaths. "38
Soldiers looked out for one another. They shared food, they passed on good news
from home to their mates, and there was always a card game to kill time. "Those men
ite your real true friends, remembered infantryman Jack Currie. "The friendships
you make in battle are different from any other kind of friendships... Perhaps it's just
that you both faced death together and during that time a special bond was welded »39
Some of the more adventurous and innovative of the "poor bloody infantry"
lane to isi a cohol in forward or rear areas, bribing and buying off senior NCOs
ind ofirst ok the other way, and finding some pleasure in the rotgut known as
ran. The occasional scrawny chicken or pail of milk liberated from Italians also
tened the burden. Hunting for loot was the favourite pastime for most soldiers.
War trophies were lifted from German prisoners or corpses, with Tron Cross decora-
tions and Luger pistols among the most prized. The search for souvenirs and artifacts
could extend to looting abandoned Italian mansions and villas, although there were
mrict rules against this.
Letters and care packages brought lov and relief Tieutenant Sudney Frost of the
incess Patricias Canadian Licht Infantry (PPCT) scoffed «If Hitler had realized
how much these parcels boosted morale, he would have intensified his efforts to
