84 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
protected by concrete, had accounted for thirteen Churchills before it was
destroyed.?" The tanks lay like great dead beasts. Others blew up in spectacular
metal bonfires as the tanks' ammunition caught fire, flipping the machines over,
sending the turrets Aying through the air like up-ended spoons, and shrouding the
battlefield in black, oil smoke. The charred remains of the tank crews lay in and
out of their machines, some having made it halfway out of their turrets before
succumbing to the terrible heat and fire. Tanks were reduced to twisted steel and
Aesh rendered into ash.
"Field Marshal Fickle Finger of Fate," was how PPLI lieutenant Sydney Frost
described the personal element ofluck on the battlefield, as well as the all-encompassing
confusion of the fog of war." Within the blistering fire zone, the Canadians
continued the advance against the enemy: some men shielded themselves with the
knowledge that they would survive, no matter the cost, while others wrote off their
lives so that they could continue to do their duty. "Many times during the fighting
in Italy," recalled Lieutenant Robert
Crozier of the Irish Regiment of
Canada, "I considered my life as lost.
You knew absolutely that you could
not continue to go into battle engage-
ments
where
you
were
constantly
exposed to artillery fire, machine guns,
snipers, mortars, schu-mines, tanks, or
booby traps, without eventually catch-
ing a packet. And death had become a
familiar occurrence, among your serv-
ing comrades, and in the forward areas
where German soldiers lay stiff and
A wounded stretcher-beaver caring
for an injured infantryman from the
Wet Nova Scotia Regiment.
cold after every battle. You knew it was
only a matter of time until your own
number came up." Crozier survived
the war, although he ended it in a pris-
oner camp.
THE HITLER LINE
85
The second wave, the Loyal Edmonton Regiment on the right flank, who pushed
through the PPCLI but could not breach the Hitler Line, and the West Novas on
the left, faced a still not yet broken defensive grid in depth. In the afternoon, the
Germans mounted an armoured and infantry counterattack against the 2nd Infantry
Brigade. The Canadians held off the enemy tanks with their anti-tank guns, and the
Shermans of the Three Rivers Regiment chewed up the Germans. Around 10 A.M.,
the surviving Churchill tanks of the 51st Royal Tank Regiment and the Carleton and
Yorks fought their way into the Hitler Line. Within the enemy's defences, they were
safer from sweeping machine-gun fire, except that now they took the full force of
artillery and mortar fire that the Germans levelled on them to contain the assault.
Vokes worried about the New Brunswickers in the Carleton and Yorks getting too
far ahead of 2nd Brigade, but later in the day he took advantage of the hole they had
burrowed in the line by shifting over the Three Rivers Sherman tanks and the Van
Doos, who along with the West Nova Scotia Regiment crashed through the gap.
While Vokes would have saved lives by better masking the German defenders on
the British front, the Canadians at the spear thrust had fought with unbelievable
courage in breaching the Hitler Line. "There were dead Germans everywhere; many
prisoners were taken, completely demoralized by the speed of the attack," indicated
one historical report. 8 Hundreds of enemy soldiers were killed and 540 were cap-
tured. The cost to the Canadians on the 23rd, and in repelling counterattacks in the
early hours of the 24th, was 879 killed and wounded.? The strain was tremendous
for all survivors, and Lieutenant-Colonel Cameron Ware, the commanding officer
of the PPLI, was one whose health was broken. Captain Howard Mitchell of the
Saskatoon Light Infantry, a machine-eun and mortar unit, witnessed Ware as he was
ordered to the rear for a rest, his eyes reddened with tears, clutching dozens of iden-
tity discs from killed soldiers. "Those were fine boys. They're gone. I haven't anybody
left. They are all gone?"' Roy Durnford, chaplain of the Seaforth Highlanders,
remarked of May 23, "I can't begin to tell all I have seen, but it has been our best and
our worst day."91
THE ATTACK AGAINST THE HITLER LINE shattered one of the most formidable
enemy positions in Italy. That same day, on the morning of the 23rd, the Americans
