432
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
unknown how many combatants and civilians were wounded during the Second
World War, but the number is more than 100 million.
In the aftermath of the war, the worst of the Nazi leadership was rounded up and
tried, although many committed suicide rather than face justice for their crimes. The
Nuremberg trials were derided by some as victor's justice, and perhaps they were, but
the judges showed restraint and, in the process, exposed the criminal Nazi regime.
The trials also rendered visible the horror of the Holocaust, even if most Nazis dir-
ectly involved in the crimes avoided punishment.? It was not until the 1960s that
Jews and other victims of the Holocaust finally began to publicly share their experi-
ences and thus begin the long process of coming to grips with what they had endured.
The Second World War was a death blow for Fascism, but Stalin's total victory
in the east created new conditions for the spread of Communism, such as endemic
poverty, war weariness, and a repressive internal security apparatus. The invasion
of Poland was ostensibly Britain's impetus for going to war, but that nation was
abandoned to a cruel fate behind Stalin's Iron Curtain as the helpless Allies could
do nothing but heave a sigh of regret at their own impotence in relieving the
Polish people's ongoing suffering. Stalin emerged stronger from the war, with the
Soviet Union occupying new nations and claiming 90 million souls as war booty."
It could have been worse for the war-weakened democratic nations of Western
Europe, and the threat of the atomic bomb kept Stalin's armed forces at bay. Stalin
escaped the justice he was due for his alliance with Hitler and his murder of mil-
lions before the war. It was only after his death in 1953 that the Soviet dictator was
revealed as the monster that he was.
Europe went from a hot war to a cold one. The threat of atomic weapons hung
over al, and these— as the bomber war had shown— now extended the war from
the fighting fronts and slit trenches to home and hearth. Yet unlike after the Great
War, when the United States had retreated into isolation, the Americans, under the
quidance of President Harry Truman and Secretary of State George Marshall,
showed strategic foresight and generosity in rebuilding Europe by loaning and giv-
ing billions of dollars in capital and goods through the 1948 Marshall Plan.
United States injection of capital saved many blighted nations from a generation
of destitution and from succumbing to internal Soviet-directed Communist
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
433
sons and Moscow-backed political parties. The ideological battlegrounds were
lady to rmly set for the U.S. to give aid to the Soviet Union, and the rapidly
srin rimony would set the foundation for the next five decades of wars, cold,
ligand by proxy —but not atomic.
THE CANADIAN HUMORIST and economist Stephen Leacock had captured the
call of English Canadians in an article only a few months before the start of
trond World War: "If you were to ask any Canadian, 'Do you have to go to war
'igand does.' hed answer at once, 'Oh, no.' If you then said, 'Would you go to
wif ingland does?' he'd answer, 'Oh yes.' And if you asked, 'Why?' he would say,
dately, Well, you see, we'd have to.""' Six years later, through war and anguish,
tate had not evolved much. Canada would almost certainly have gone to war
& tai's side again in the late 1940s had the Cold War with the Soviets gone hot.
isomething had changed among Canadians. Many saw themselves differently as
arut of the wartime exertions.
Dare Mcintosh flew forty-one sorties as a navigator in a Mosquito with No. 418
yato, CAF. As an intruder squadron that patrolled the skies over known
say as to shoot down fighters when they left or returned from their sorties,
lo 418 was isolated from other RCAF squadrons, both fighters and bombers.
Aaron noted that in the shared messes with other squadrons or while on leave, he
« is mates rarely proclaimed themselves to be Canadian, especially among the
and so rish or Americans, but they felt "different." As one surprised American
i he quadron observed of McIntosh and his comrades, after spending time with
ten, "Why you bastards, voure not American at all "6 Indeed they were not. Nor
mas the Roval Canadian Navv the same as the Roval Navy, or the soldiers in the
Canadian Army the same as their British counterparts. While Canadians had long
en themselves as having a separate identity from the British, during and after the
mar it was asserted more fiercelv. It is not easy to put into words, but symbols con-
tributed to a growing sense of uniqueness. The maple leaf was important, as was the
Canada badge worn bu all There were other intangible factors such as fighting
ogether as a coherent national formation. Regimental, ship, and squadron traditions
tostered unity and morale, and were intertwined with local communities across the
