154 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
a fourth of the platoon issued a rifle that fired a grenade to a range of 100 metres, the
same did not occur in Normandy, where the 2-inch and 3-inch mortar took the
grenade rifles place on the battleield. That said, grenades remained an essential
intantry weapon, with all soldiers carrying them, and while there were many types,
the No. 36 fragmentation grenade, with its four-second fuse, was useful in clearing the
enemy from their defences. Its explosion had a range of about 18 metres. Infantrymen
learned to throw it from cover so they did not have to expose themselves to either
enemy fire or the grenade's wide and lethal blast radius. The No. 77 phosphorous
smoke grenade was useful for obscuring troops from enemy eyes and fire, but it was
scary to wield as there were a few cases of grenades exploding in the thrower's hands
and causing according to one Canadian officer, "very severe phosphorous burns™?
The initially unpopular PIAT had proven essential in the early Normandy battles,
and would continue to be one of the few infantry weapons that could be used against
tanks, while also, in the words of one officer, proving useful in "housebreaking.
Even though the Canadians took heavy losses, they unlocked the secret to the
German tactical doctrine. The Germans were fierce in the attack: indoctrinated,
ideologially driven, and willing to absorb high casualties as they hurled themselves
at their opponents. However, they launched these offensives with the aim of shock-
ing the Canadians, and they often did so without proper planning or coordination
with other arms. These immediate counterartacks were sometimes verv effective. and
always unnerving for those on the receiving end When the defendere were drive
back, they usually bore signifcant casualties- men killed in combat. the wounded
splayed on the ground, and large numbers captured. These losses ofren overshadowed
the German's own casualties, which were in comparison to their duerrun opponent
fewer in number. But when the defenders stood resolute against the assault. the
Germans absorbed heavy losses. The German doctrine was a gamble-when the
attacks worked, they paid off big, but when they failed, there were grave casualties.
It was unsustainable over time. Moreover, the fighting arms of cho 2od Canadian
Division had begun to plan more methodically for both the initial operation and the
holding of positions. The Allics turned increasingly to firepower to stop the enem
counterantacks. In the finst days of Normandy, the Canadians proved not only shar
they could take a punch but that they could, in turn, stagger their opponent. As one
A BATTLE FOR
SURVIVAL
155
Canadian artillery officer sneered, "The Germans thought we were fucking Russians.
They did stupid things, and we killed those bastards in large numbers."44
THE PANTHER TANKS surged forward again in the early morning of the 9th, seeking
to drive the Reginas out of Norrey. The Reginas were exhausted, but they had been
reinforced by Sherman tanks from the Ist Hussars that had rolled forward to
strengthen the line. Several of the tanks were the newly issued Fireflys equipped with
the 17-pounder gun, which fired an armour-piercing Sabot shot. The round con-
sisted of a tungsten dart embedded in a full-bore shoe that was discarded as the round
sped downfield. At 90 metres-per-second muzzle velocity, it had double the power of
a standard 75mm Sherman gun.4 When the dart penetrated through the tank's steel,
it ricocheted in the interior, causing terrible damage to all inside. The Fireflys had only
been delivered to the armoured regiments in May, and the troopers were still working
on tactics, doctrine, and how they should fight with the 75mm Shermans— eventually
One of the German Panther tanks destroyed by the Canadians at Bretteville, France.
1UL
