318 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
walked into a large-scale ambush in the early hours of August 27. Within the
4 kilometre-wide forest, the Germans were cleverly hidden, having fortified a series
of ridges that allowed them to rain down fire on the few roads that wound through
the dense trees.
When the front-line battalions-Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal and the Royal
Hamilton Light Infantry—were fired upon, they wisely went to ground and retreated.
The divisional commander, Major-General Charles Foulkes, urged on by an impatient
Lieutenant-General Guy Simonds, demanded another operation on the 27th. It
failed, as did new attacks on the 28th. Bullheaded and bloodthirsty orders continued
from the high command. The Canadians could easily have waited out the Germans,
who had no capacity to storm out of the woods, and Simonds's insistence for action
came from a general looking to the horizon instead of paying attention to the losses
mounting in the forest. He was also urged on by Montgomery, who characterized the
Canadians as too slow "and prone to bellyaching."
The wooded terrain hampered movement and coordination. When tanks were
thrown into the mix, they were diverted along open roads and cleared spaces,
where they were minced by anti-tank guns. Corporal Richard Bryant of the
Sherbrooke Fusilier remembered, "The brass kept sending us in every day against
the same thing. We could have bypassed right around them." Bryant's Sherman
took four his from 88 shells, two of which sliced through the steel armour from
front to back of the tank and miraculously did not kill the crew. The situation
was, in his mind, "unreal. Every time we moved, we were getting it."° Gunners
tried to assist their beleaguered comrades, but inaccurate maps made it difficult
to pinpoint enemy positions, and the forest provided cover from the prying eyes
of forward artillery observers. Even as the commanders of the Royal Hamilton
Light Infantry and the Royal Regiment of Canada objected to the renewed attack,
arguing hat this task was beyond the powers of a battalion composed largely of
reinforcements personnel with little training," Foulkes ordered a renewed push."
The Rileys from Hamilton were carved up again, and more Canadian units were
thrown into the cauldron, with territory won and lost in confusing see-saw
encounters. The Calgary Highlander' war diarist for August 29 recounted frankly,
"Today has been a nightmare. We were subiected to constant fire and had little
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
319
prorection.? Three days of fierce fighting saw six battalions take 577 casualties, 13
Late on the 29th, when the Germans were in danger of being overwhelmed on
the flanks, they retreated safely across the Seine. The Canadians were badly
outfought.
Was the stiff resistance in the Forêt de la Londe an anomaly? The Canadian high
command hoped it was, and that this outer crust of defenders could be swept aside
and the rotten core of the German army pierced. But if the enemy had proved mas-
ters of anything, on battlefronts from North Africa to Italy to the Russian steppes, it
was of a phoenix-like ability to rise from the ashes. And now, in late August, as they
enjoyed some breathing room between Allied attacks, the German high command
combed out new troops, young, old, and decrepit, from home defence units and
conscripted civilians, with slave labour increased to fill the gaps in work and produc-
tion. In early September, the Germans could have been routed, but with every step
away from the Normandy beaches the Allied lines of communication were stretched
a litte longer to reach the forces at the front. The enemy was getting away, although
Allied fighters and bombers exacted a fearful toll in lives. The German retreat was
chaotic, with little water or medical care available for their suffering soldiers, but a
beaten army that is not ready to surrender can go a long time on starvation and
panic, especially when its soldiers are threatened with execution should they try to
surender. This was the discipline of the revolver mixed with fanaticism and fear. The
Germans still had fight in them.
ITH FRANCE WELL ON ITS WAY to being liberated, Eisenhower, who was preparing
to take over command of the ground forces from Montgomery on September 1, was
encouraged by the headlong German retreat from Normandy. Eisenhower's plan,
kon as the "broad front" strategy, ordered the Allied armies to advance on a
wide front, with thrusts to the north and northeast that would take them into the
industrialized Rubr area of Germany and to the south to overrun the resource-rich
Saar region. The broad front was a steamroller that was safe and methodical, and
bad be the pre- invasion plan. However, in early September, with the Germans on
the run, the enemy appeared rine for a knock-out. Monteomery believed now was
the time to strike more aggressively.
