404
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The Canadian Army had suffered 44,339 casualties since D-Day; 961 officers and
10,375 other ranks had been killed.? Captain Jack Martin, an historical officer at the
front, witnessed his comrades reactions to the end of the war, remarking,
"The effects
of the cease fire order is difficult to explain. Many were almost incapable of realizing
that the war was over for them. All were mindful of the many problems of the
immediate, and more distant future."3 Charlie Martin (no relation to Jack, above),
who was in the first wave to land at Juno, declared, "That any of us had survived
seemed like a miracle."! This sentiment would have been shared by most of the
service personnel at the sharp end, be they in Sherman tanks, behind a 25-pounder,
in a Halifax, or in the belly of a corvette. The news of the war's end brought little
excitement to the exhausted Canadians in the field. Theirs was a long and costly war,
with relentless combat sapping strength and claiming comrades. Most flyers in the
bombers and in the infantry wrote off their lives to cope. Now, these dead men won-
dered what they would do with the rest of their lives.
IN CANADA, six years of pent-up fear and anxiety came to a boil. Across the Dominion,
wild celebrations broke out in the streets, even though the war against Japan still raged
in the Far East. But, as in Europe, not everyone embraced the wild release, and at least
44,000 families who had lost a loved one, as well as countless additional others related
to the fallen, must have been unsure of how to mark the end of the nightmare.
Lieutenant Barney Danson, who was blinded in one eve during the Normandy fight-
ing, remembered his profound sadness on VE Day "when, with the memories of my
dead friends still resh in my mind, I could not bring myself to join the crowds rejoi-
cing on Toronto's streets... Since then, hardly a dav has gone by that I haven't thought
of one of my friend "s Kathleen Lvnett. the voungest of three siblings. grieved for her
eldest brother, Sergeant John Grifin, who was killed while flying a Stiring in July
1942. Three years later, on VE Day, she allowed herself a smile now that the war was
finally over. but the cessation of hostilities alen "brought it home that Tohn wasn'
coming back.""
The police and authorities turned a blind eve to some of the raucous behaviour
across the country, but in Halifax the community leaders closed the bars and liquor
#tores. For the celebrating civilians and sailors, this would not do. Sailors already had
VETERANS
405
an ambivalent relationship with the city and its inhabitants, feeling that Haligonians
had exploited the servicemen with high prices throughout the war and had never
ecomed them into the community. Halifax, remarked Lieutenant Fredrick Watt,
commander of the Naval Boarding Service, the body that inspected the merchant
ships cargos and tried to sooth poor relations with ships' crews and their captains,
mas" an overcrowded hellhole." On May 8, the joyous gatherings soon degenerated
into out-of-control riots. When the government liquor stores were found closed,
sailors opened" them by kicking down doors. The alcohol-fuelled mayhem led to
loting. The deliriously happy folk dancing around burning cars or kissing in front
of shattered windows created, as one sailor described it, "an atmosphere of total
chaos. Some sailors were wearing dresses and some women were wearing nothing
atal. In the riot's smoking aftermath, the navy was blamed for losing control of its
sailors, although civilians and other service members had taken part in the destruc-
cion and the city officials had been extraordinarily inept in planning for war's end.
Nonetheless, the navy received a black eye and its sailors were labelled hooligans.?
Admiral Leonard Murray, Canada's only theatre commander of the war, became the
capegoat. It was an inglorious end to Murray's career as Canadas most distinguished
lag officer, and after having spent the war fighting the U-boats, he was taken down
by his own countrymen in victory. Unceremoniously removed from command a few
cat'after the riot, Murray lived out his remaining days exiled in England, almost
entirely forgotten by Canadians at the time of his death in 1971.
THE CHALLENGE OF DEMOBILIZING the million-man Allied armies was night.
arch in complexity. "'T had done my job, recalled one Canadian. "I was looking
forward to just getting hack to mu wife and child. That war all I was interested
in"0 The overseas soldiers sailors and airmen had enlisted to fight a menace and
they had prevailed. Now, impatient, angry, and lonely, these citizen-warriors wanted
lo get home. But the Allies needed their units in the field to ensure the German
nation would abide by the surrender agreement and, even more worrisome, to ensure
that the Soviet forces did not keen pushine wesrward to occupy all of Germany,
Shortages of transport and shipping also ensured that the demobilization of several
million men would not be timely.
