YUL
460
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
IF FEW CULTURAL PRODUCTS inspired by or grounded in the Second World War
have resonated over time with Canadians, a few recognizable symbols do remain.
Vimy has become a national icon. The four-day battle of April 1917 emerged over
several decades to be woven into the very fabric of Canadian history, identity, and
society during the second half of the twentieth century, with some claiming it marked
the birth of the nation. Such lofty ideas are ascribing too much to Vimy, but when we
talk about this battle, we are in fact talking about the traumatic and nation-shaping
Great War writ large, and about Canada's slow maturation to full nationhood. But
nations can't be born twice. So what is the touchstone of the Second World War?
Judging by the history books, documentaries, and national discourse, at least up to the
mid-1990s, this appeared to be the Battle of Dieppe, an unqualified defeat, or the
tragedy of Hong Kong, or even the evacuation of Japanese Canadians from the west
coast to the interior because of the misplaced fear that they were fifth columnists who
would aid a Japanese invasion of Canada. In Quebec, the war was seen differendy,
as all wars are, and the celebrated fighting units including the Royal 22e Regiment,
Le Régiment de la Chaudière, No. 425 "Alouette" Squadron, or HMCS Dunver
(supported by the people of Verdun, a suburb of Montreal) — are often devalued for
political reasons, in favour of the debate over conscription and its limited implemen-
tation in late 1944. It says something about the Canadian psyche that we focus on
defeats and injustice rather than the victories at Ortona, the Scheld campaign, or the
Battle of the Atlantic-or munitions production at home, massive patriotic war work
the BCATP, or the host of other ways that Canadians banded together behind their
armed forces auerseas What do these thor hattles programe or evente lack in con-
trast to Vimy so that they have not been mould a into a nation maling and
nation-building muth? While such muthical status perhaps should not be the ultimate
destiny of any historical event, the Second World War. from the 1960s to the mid
1990s, in our classrooms and in national discourse, was portrayed as little more than
a series of disasters and disaraces In 1906 veteran Doud Fisher raged :. The Terion
about the lopsided, even wisted. memory that Canadians had of the war. and he
wondered why so many of his countrymen and women took "such little pride in the
mighty achievements of WW II."60
Perhaps some of the impact of the Second World War is loet because so manu of the
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
461
symbols of remembrance remain intricately linked to the Great War. The community
memorials, first erected to honour the Great War's dead, contain the names of Second
World War fallen almost as an afterthought, especially on memorials that include
inscribed lists of battle names from 1914 to 1918, which is often the case. The poppy,
Remembrance Day, the Books of Remembrance, and even the national memorial are
all deeply associated with the First World War. There are some new ceremonies and
symbols that were born of the Second World War, such as the Battle of the Atlantic
Sunday (the first Sunday in May) and Ottawa's Tulip Festival (which originated when
the grateful Dutch people sent tulips to their liberators), but the absence of recogniz-
able and stand-alone monuments, symbols, and icons remains remarkable." Moreover,
while the Vimy memorial in France is a towering site of remembrance, no Second
World War overseas equivalent exists. There are numerous regimental plaques and
modest markers, as well as a memorial garden in Caen, but these all pale in comparison
to Vimy 62 Even the Juno Beach Centre, opened June 6, 2003, and the closest thing we
have to a window for Europeans into Canadian Second World War history, is clearly a
site of education rather than reverence. Perhaps this centre will take on a greater pres-
ence over time, but at the moment it falls short.
THOSE WHO HAD FOUGHT, served, and sacrificed during the Second World War
knew that it was a necessary conflict. The ultimate triumph over evil had been worth
the loss of comrades, dislocation from family, and the wounds to bodies and minds.
But this generation of veterans and their families did not dwell on the war. Almost
all were too young to retire, and save for a small minority that remained in the armed
forces, the civilian-warriors returned to civvy street to build up the newly revitalized
nation. Canada, too, was young and changing, and looking forward instead of back-
ward. Ted Barris, a journalist and author, remembered of his education in Canada in
the early 1960s, "By edict or accident ... the school curriculum virtually eliminated
war as a subject worth studying.... I never heard of the words war hero' or 'Canada
in the same sentence. It just wasn't done. Those weren't names or facts worth acknow-
ledging, much less celebrating "63 Young Canadians coming of age in the 1960s chose
a different path from their parents, and one that pushed back, perhaps not surpris-
ingly, against some of the things that the older generation held dear. A greater voice
