292
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
firmed up his belief that the Gothic Line was the true objective. Kesselring ordered
two of his elite formations, the 26th Panzer and 29th Panzer Grenadier Divisions, to
the Gothic Line, although it would take at least two days for them to arrive. The field
marshal was not worried, since his experience with the Eighth Army told him that
its commanders preferred, as per Montgomery's teachings, a slow-forming set-piece
battle based on heavy firepower rather than a hell-for-leather charge.
In the meantime, the Canadians drove through the Red Line and on to the Gothic
Line. With the German defenders fighting stubbornly, it looked as though the third
phase of the operation would require both the lst and 5th Canadian Divisions, and
so Burns ordered Hoffmeister to prepare for combat on the night of the 26th. The
Canadians continued to tangle with German defenders, while also pushing forward
relentlesly, marching day and night. In one audacious move, Able Company of the
Loyal Edmonton Regiment seized the hilltop of the Monteciccardo-Ginestreto ridge
Infantrymen of the 48th Hiahlanders of Canada carving a stretcher under fire
at Gothic Line, near River Foglia, August 28, 1944.
THE GOTHIC LINE
293
during the night of the 26th and the early hours of the 27th. German reinforce-
ments arrived just as the Canadians set up a crossfire of Bren guns, and about
seventy Germans were cut down.?' Stunned at the depth of the Canadians' pene-
tration, the enemy counterattacked with elements from their elite 1st Parachute
Division, supported by armoured mobile guns. Able Company was thrown back,
resulting in some forty Canadian casualties. The other companies of the Loyal
Edies converged on their exposed comrades the next day, eventually driving the
Germans from the ridge with the assistance of British Churchill tanks and Royal
Canadian Artillery M10 self-propelled anti-tank guns. Another thirty-four Eddies
were killed, but an important position overlooking the Canadian advance had
fallen. There was no rest, and the Ist Division continued to march forward, with the
Sth Armoured Division mounting up.
Burn's men rubbed up against the Gothic Line on the morning of the 29th.
The Germans were on the other side of the Foglia valley— known as the Green Line
to the Germans and the Gothic Line to the Allies-behind which was a series of
fortified towns and ridges. The enemy's defences consisted of some 3,604 dugouts,
2375 machine guns, and 479 anti-tank guns, all of which were protected by
72,127 mines, 117,370 metres of barbed wire, and 8,944 metres of anti-tank
diches.' Major Howard Mitchell, who commanded a company of machine-
gunners with the Saskatoon Light Infantry, studied the objective and shivered at
the prospect of confronting the fortress: "This could only be a stupid slaughter."31
THE VALLEY FLOOR was a daunting 900 metres of open ground overlooked by
shaply ising hills. To create a killing ground, the Germans had cut down every tree,
caed every house, and used Italian slave labour to fill in many ditches and depres-
sons that might be used for cover. As an official Canadian report noted, the enemy
bad cler fields of fire. 2 A 4-metre- wide anti-tank ditch blocked much of the
ale and the area was strewn with mines and tangles of barbed wire. On Hoffmeiste's
front, to the left of Vokes's division, aggressive patrols by the Perth Regiment and the
Cape Breton Highlanders revealed that the Germans had not yet fully manned
the position, although intelligence had pinpointed that two German divisions, the
98ch Infantry and the 26th Panzer, were moving toward the Canadian sector. Leese
