8 INTRODUCTION
bombing force that had begun to crack the German defences through relentless
assaults. The six bomber groups and a specialized pathfinder group from 1943 tipped
the aerial assault in favour of the Allies, as the Lancasters and Halifaxes killed tens of
thousands of civilians; forced the pull back of precious anti-aircraft guns, fighter
planes, and hundreds of thousands of defenders from the fighting fronts; lowered the
output of war materiel; and interfered with the movement of troops within occupied
Europe. Bomber Command and its American counterpart formed the Second Front
that Stalin demanded and that Hitler feared, and the bomber storm was a shrieking
gale force wind of retribution by mid-1943.
The ride was also turning in the land war, with the Germans on the Eastern Front
absorbing a stunning defeat at Stalingrad in January 1943. An entire army of a quar-
ter of a million men was destroyed. A few months later, in May 1943, General
Bernard Montgomery led his Eighth Army-with newly arrived American forces-
to victory in the desert war in North Africa against General Erwin Rommel and the
Afrika Korps. While the return to France remained the priority for the Allies-and
the only way to overthrow Germany-the gathering of British, American, Canadian,
Free French, and Polish forces was not yet strong enough to first pierce the German
defences along the coast and then sustain the invasion against the massed enemy
counterattack. And so, as the planning and preparation for amphibious attack con-
tinued, along with the naval war on the Atlantic and the bombing of German cities,
in July 1943 the Allies invaded the German- and Italian-defended fortress of Sicily
in the Mediterranean. The Allied armies were tested here, with the Ist Canadian
Infantry Division and the Ist Canadian Armoured Brigade fighting in the vanguard.
Major-General Guy Simonds led his untried Canadians in their first major cam-
paign and they contributed mightily to the Allied victory.
While the Allied forces in Sicily under command of American general Dwight
Eisenhower had stumbled at times, especially in corralling the three services-
army, navy, and air force- to fight together and with one goal, the victory put the
final nail in Italys coffin. The Allies always struggled to work together in the life-
and-death environment of campaigns, but their coalition was far more effective
than that of the Axis Powers, which featured the Germans treating the Italians
with open disdain and fighting separate wars from the Japanese. Italy surrendered
INTRODUCTION
to the Allies in early September 1943,
and the Germans easily transitioned from
scornful ally to cruel occupier. From that
same month, the Canadians continued to
fight with the British Eighth Army and
clawed their way up the rough and hilly
Italian terrain, with a series of battles cul-
minating in the hard-pounding victory at
Ortona throughout December 1943. But
the Allies could not break through the
German lines anywhere in Italy as both
sides fought tenaciously. The body count
rose with no end in sight.
From land, sea, and air to the home
front, Canada had proved from 1939 to
1943 to be a committed and crucial ally
to Britain. Its forces earned a fierce repu-
tation at the cannon's mouth. While Britain
was on the front lines of battle after the
BUY VICTORY
BONDS
A Canadian war poster exhorting the purchase
of war bonds to support the war effort.
fall of France in June 1940, for a year and
half before the Americans entered the war, Canada was Britain's ranking ally. The
nation of fewer than twelve million had shaken off the lingering effects of the
Depression and moved fully to a war footing. Its war industries produced thou-
sands of tons of military weapons and equipment, and its farms fed the allied
nations of the war. The air training plan was a major contribution. Fire, steel,
fodder, and grain—this was the Canadian war effort. And flesh. Thousands of
Canadian soldiers, sailors, airmen, and merchant mariners lost their lives in the
great effort against totalitarianism from 1939 to 1943, and hundreds of thousands
of Canadians grieved for their fallen loved ones, kin, and community folk. And all
knew that the only path forward, towards final victory, was paved with sacrifice,
sorrow, and more fighting.
