376 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
were killed in all the other RCAF commands or were lost as prisoners of war, and
an equal number died in training accidents or from other causes, for a total of
17,101 killed.3° Only 1,555 airmen were wounded, which is a far lower number
than the army casualty figures, which usually reveal a four-to-one ratio of wounded
to killed. The comparatively small number of wounded attests to the all-or-nothing
nature of the air war, in which most crews died together in fiery crashes. But some
got out. Hundreds of evaders made it back to England, although 2,475 became
prisoners of war.?" The prisoners had to fight their own battles that will never be
codified in statistics. The weight of losses fell most heavily on the bomber crews as
opposed to those in the fighters, but also on those who flew during the crippling
years of 1942 to 1944. Aircrews who served later in the war benefited from improved
bombers that could fly at higher altitudes, and from better technology, fighter
escorts, and sorties against weakened German defences. Such evolutions of technol-
ogy and tactics never made it easy to fly a Lancaster or Halifax into enemy territory,
but the losses were far less severe in the final full year of the war. While the total
number of casualties inflicted on air crews was a far cry from those accrued in the
worldwide land campaigns, Bomber Command suffered, proportionately, worse
than any other military arm save for the German U-boat fleet and the Allied mer-
chant mariners.
The price paid in civilian lives was even more terrible. In Great Britain, some
60,000 civilians were killed during the Blitz and by the V-rockets. They were the
markers held by Bomber Command as they carried out their vengeance agains
German cities. Even seventy vears later. no one is certain of the total number of dead
Because of the years of bombing, there were large numbers of transitory refugees' bod-
ies who were uncounted in the twisted metal and charred remains of the urhon areas.
Others were slaughtered bu Russian armies sweening in from the enct Adding to thi
fog of war, German propagandiss inflated or deflated the number of slain depending
on their message or agenda. However, best estimates suggest that 593,000 Germans
were killed on the ground and 675,000 were wounded, with the majority being
uniform. This was indeed the cruel hand of war.
women, children, and the elderlv. since almost all available men of military age were in
BATTERING GERMANY 377
AFTER THE BATTLE FOR THE SCHELDT in November 1944, the First Canadian
Amy was put into reserve. Over that winter, most of the weary Canadians were
iF the wethe Fina Can dien
given a rest, although the front was never quiet, with patrols and large-scale raids
remaining constant.
"The combination of danger, monotony and poor living con-
dions during less active periods," warned one report, "can have a deleterious effect
on fighting spirit." Once soldiers were out of the line, measures were taken to
restore morale. The first day, they were left alone, to write letters, sort out kit, clean
up and "have a really good sleep." The daily routine was reintroduced, with tight-
ened-up discipline and saluting on the second day, and then over the coming days
a general smartening up and physical training.
"33 In these ways, the high com-
mand made a conscious effort to cultivate and restore morale among the fighting
units that had absorbed heavy casualties over the previous half year.
In what the soldiers dubbed the
"winter war."
Canadian troops were
stationed along the Nijmegen sector,
the area fought over during Operation
Market Garden in September. The for-
ward trenches were held rather loosely,
with the bulk of the infantry, armour,
and arillery men living in houses,
sheds, and barns behind the lines, and
often billeted with Belgian and Dutch
families who welcomed them with
baths and fresh linen. The Canadians,
in turn, shared their rations or care
packages, and often partook in leisure
activities. The cold weather allowed ice
skating reminding homesick Canadian
boys of their own frozen ponds back
across the Atlantic. There were forty-
tight-hour leave passes to local towns
and occasional week-long furloughs to
Throughout the winter of 1944-1945,
the First Canadian Army was dug in along
the stalemated front at Nijmegen, Netherlands.
In this image, a camouflaged Queen's Own Rifles
sniper waits for his target.
