302 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
renewing his fears of an amphibious attack up the coast. The seaborne pressure forced
the Germans to rush reserves to the crumbling front, and these formations were
harassed, fired upon, and bombed by the Allied air force, which made life miserable
for those wearing the field grey uniforms.
Even as they were beaten at the Gothic Line, the Germans recovered quickly. A
rainstorm over the night of September 1 slowed the Allied advance, and the two
Canadian divisions were close to exhaustion. British V Corps on the left, with its
mass of divisions, remained largely out of the battle, caught up in the rough terrain
and the spider web of German defenders. The strongest position on the British front
was the G-kilometre-long Coriano Ridge, held by the 29th Panzer Grenadier Division,
which stopped V Corps cold with massed fire.
Kesselring ordered four divisions to the now shattered front, as well as eighty artil-
lery batteries. Rimini, on the Allies' far-right flank, looked like Ortona, so stacked
was it with defenders and guns. It was to be held at all costs. The new front beyond
the Gothic Line was a coastal plain cut by several rivers and interrupted by occupied
ridges allowing the Germans a clear view of any advance. The enemy artillery, accord-
ing to Lieutenant Zeke Ferley of the British Columbia Dragoons, had prepared a
ruthles "killing ground."" The Canadian infantry, caught in a withering fire of artil-
lery shells and mortar bombs, scrambled to carve out slit trenches in the sun-packed
earth. The plunging mortar fire was particularly deadly, and one Canadian medical
report calculated that 66 percent of all casualties from August 25 to September 30
were caused by it." As the Germans gathered in strength, the Canadians prepared
for the onslaught. There were enemy infantry assaults day and night, and an enemy
armoured counterattack on September 3 was destroyed by the Sth Canadian
Armoured Regiment, with eight Panthers left in ruins and not a single Sherman lost
in return." Further German actions on September 4 convinced Burns, who had
Hown over the bartlefield to survey the enemy position, to order a Dause until British
V Corps could catch up.
There was no break in the air war. The Desert Air Force (DAF) struck the enemy
repeatedly. At least 50 percent of the DAF attacks by medium bombers and fighter-
bombers were directed against "gun positions," as one official report noted, because
*the enemy had concentrated an unusually larger number of guns on our front." The
THE GOTHIC LINE
303
RCAPS No. 417 Squadron, flying Spitfires, took part in the operations. Equipped
with 500-pound bombs, they flew multiple sorties every day against strongpoints
while shooting up targets of opportunity to the rear, especially vulnerable trucks
carrying supplies and ammunition. Despite the bombing, the Germans clung to
their trenches like ticks. Prisoners testified that, in their opinion, although the
bombers and fighters slowed the movement of supplies to the front, "they caused
very few casualties to troops actually in position in the forward areas, and seemed to
regard their effect as negligible in comparison with that of artillery and mortars."53
Asof September 4, the Canadians were forced to entrench on the left flank, facing
Coriano Ridge, while the right flank continued to probe in the direction of Rimini.
The ridge was about a kilometre away, a position that, according to one Canadian,
"bulged out of the rolling land like an elongated groundhog, dominating vineyards
and bristling with the guns of the 29th Panzers."54 Any movement on the Canadian
front required, as one official report observed, "running the gauntlet of his guns."ss
Hoffmeister appealed through Burns to Leese to let him attack Coriano from the
Rank and rear, but the British general refused the order, hoping that V Corps could
dislodge the enemy. However, momentum was now lost and the British made little
badway, especially when rain fell on the Gth and continued for several days, reducing
the already poor roads to gluey mud.
Afer days of bombardment, Leese was finally ready for another assault on the
ridge. At 11 P.M. on September 12, V Corps swept forward from the south and the
Canadians surged from the east two hours later. Through darkness, clouds of dust,
and enemy fire, the 11th Canadian Infantry Brigade's Cape Breton Highlanders, Perth
Regiment, and Irish Regiment followed a creeping barrage from almost 900 guns into
the enemy lines. Two squadrons of Sherman tanks from the 8th New Brunswick
Hussars further assisted.
In the course of the confusing night attack, during which the fragile wireless sets
broke down, the lead formations tried to keep pace with the barrage, but the effects
dí the explosions and dust, combined with enemy fire, made the assault a ragged
one. i semed to work in favour of the Canadians, as they crept about in small sec-
tions, flushing out the surviving enemy troops. Lieutenant Robert Crozier of the
Irish Regiment passed through the German and Canadian artillery and mortar fire.
