350
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Major-General Dan Spry, believed that the effect of the Spitfires and Typhoons was
"of NO greater importance than the encouragement given to our own troops."41
THE GERMANS WERE slowly pushed back towards the sea in the west, with positions
slammed by artillery shells, infantry fire, and rocket-firing Typhoons. However,
there were few tank attacks, as the ground was too soggy for the weighty armour to
make any headway. A few of the troopers learned about the dangers of sodden earth
the hard way. At night most of the crews had taken to sleeping under their Shermans
for protection from shellfire, but at the Scheldt, recounted Trooper Bill Cullum of
the Sherbrooke Fusilier, "some of the guys got under their tanks and the next mor-
ning, the tank had sunk on top of them."4 Frantic digging saved some, but not all,
of the suffocating men.
The Canadian infantry continued to swarm forward, and were supported, as of
October 18, by the British 52nd Division. The British soldiers that had trained as
mountain specialists for an invasion of Norway now found themselves fighting below
sea level. Along the coast, the port town of Breskens fell on October 21, and four days
later Fort Frederik Hendrik, an ancient stronghold, was cleared. To the south, in the
interior, Oostburg was overrun by the Queen's Own Rifles and the Chaudières in
house-to-house skirmishes on October 26. The Canadians fought among frightened
civilians, who crouched in cellars, ditches, or drains as the liberating force swept over
them. At one point in the fight, the Queen's Own fixed swords and routed a number
of defenders who never expected a bayonet charge. About 200 prisoners were taken 43
The Germans finally surrendered on November 3 and Operation Switchback
ended in victory. The fighting had been exceedingly difficult and the Germans
resolute, despite their isolated position. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division lost
2,077 men, including at least 314 killed and anothet 231 "missing" -almost all of
whom were dead, with their bodies ost to the bog, An official report stated that 18
percent of total casualties were due to battle exhaustion, noting,
"The extremely try-
ing conditions and the number of repeat cases were contributing factors to this high
figure. Attempts must be made to spot likely battle exhaustion cases early and to find
employment for these men in the rear areas. True batle exhaustion cases will
undoubtedly break down again and, therefore, steps should be taken to keep such
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 351
personel from returning to the fwd areas."4* Despite the Canadians' significant
losses, their victory was total. The 64th Division was annihilated and the Canadians
took more than 12,700 prisoners. 4 The clearing of the Breskens Pocket became a
proud battle honour for the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, but most combatants
would have echoed the nameless officer at divisional headquarters, who upon being
informed that the battle was over, wrote in the operations log,
"Thank God!"46
ASTHE 3RD DIVISION bled through the Breskens Pocket, the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division was fighting to the east. Though Antwerp had fallen to the Allies on
September 4, the Germans were dug in on the northern outskirts of the city. For two
weeks in mid-September, the 5th and 6th Canadian Infantry Brigades were part of
the Allied force that probed the enemy lines in what was dubbed the "streetcar war."
The unconventional battle saw Canadians and British troops enjoying the bars and
brothels in the city and then moving into the forward lines before returning again to
the rear areas, often riding streetcars. The 5th Brigade finally turned the enemy pos-
ition in a daring flanking movement across the 30-metre-wide Albert Canal during
the carly hours of September 22, but fighting by Allied troops continued until the
end of the month. On October 2, the Canadians set off northward towards the east-
em end of the Beveland isthmus, beginning the 25-kilometre advance to the village
of Wensdrecht, which sits astride the peninsula to South Beveland. It had to fall
before the Canadians could turn westward towards Walcheren Island.
The 2nd Division slowly floundered towards the enemy. The stretch of land had
been reclaimed from the sea, but the Germans had deliberately flooded it. As on the
other Scheld battlefields, the farmland was criss-crossed by 4-metre-high dykes—
raised roads that were the only way across the fields. "Movement along the dykes
mas almost suicidal," recounted one infantryman.* And when the Canadians
danced along the low, drenched farmland, its flatness afforded few places to hide.
Near Woensdrecht, the Germans had all areas under observation and could bring
corn fre on the approaching Canadians. They had also rushed forward an ad hoc force
di defenders, known as Battle Group Chill, which consisted of about 1,500 young,
indoctrinated. and fanatical parachutists whom one intelligence officer described ac
the "cream of the crop ... fine physical specimens, keen to fight and with excellent
