204
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
to go to those who deserved them. General principles of allotment in the First
Canadian Army followed 21st Army Group regulations, with at least one decoration
provided for every 250 men during each six-month period. The prolonged fighting
in Normandy and later in the Scheldt, and the incredible bravery of soldiers on the
battlefield, resulted in the Canadians exceeding the normal six-month quota,
although the lull in intense combat from November 1944 to February 1945 helped
to restore the balance. For the entire campaign, the First Canadian Army awarded to
personnel under its command 3,636 Commonwealth decorations and medals, as well
as 6,422 Mentioned-in-Dispatches and 1,060 foreign awards. At headquarters, there
was an understanding that some units received more awards than others, as they
were more fully committed to combat, but "sustained efforts were made throughout
the campaign to ensure that inequalities which arose were straightened out."26 Also,
it was not surprising that the infantry arm consisted of 25 percent of the total strength
in the army yet received 38 percent of the decorations. It also sustained 73 percent
of the casualties.
Religion remained a central method of providing some calmness in the chaos.
"There are no battlefield atheists" remarked Lieutenant Eric Marion of the Cameron
Highlanders of Canada." And even those who did not trust in God or organized
religion often found solace in the sympathetic regimental padres.
The padres pro-
vided spiritual guidance, acted as a conduit between the men and their officers, and
even penned comforting letters to loved ones 28 The battalion's padre, believed one
major, was " tower of strength to all the troops. Jewish-born Lieutenant Barney
Danson, a future Canadian cabinet minister, recalled, "I once canvassed my platoon
to see who wanted a Bible, (and) I found that every single man carried his army-issue
Bible in his top left pocket, over his heart, me included." A belief in a higher power,
for Danson and his men, was "a lifeline to sanity amidst the insanity of war. 3o
There were other forms of belief that guided and protected soldiers. Stanley
Sciloki wrote about his experiences during the Italian campaign, but they were
cqualy applicable to Normandy. He scoffed at all the talk about angels, magic
charms, and ritualistic mantras that his comrades embraced, especially when "so
many of our guys were geting killed or maimed." Yet after one particularly harrow-
ing battle, reflectine on the barrage of bullets that cut the air bur somehow spared
OPERATION SPRING
205
him, he "became a convert, a believer in the angel that must have been running
songside of me as I sprinted and flopped my way towards the promised land. She
did one hell of a job, let me tell you. By all rights I should have been dead."31 Having
emerged from the gauntlet of fire unscathed, he could only attribute his survival to
some kind of higher power. Another private in the Cape Breton Highlanders, in one
suicidal charge, with bullets "going between my legs and around me," concluded
that he survived because "There just had to be someone up above looking after
me. A third soldier-although there were more-offered his views: Sergeant
Charles Kipp of the Lincoln and Welland Regiment, who also had numerous brushes
with death in Normandy, twice heard a spectral voice instructing him at dangerous
moments on how to escape his fate. In his mind, a supernatural presence "was look-
ing after me." 33
I never thought I'd survive," remembered Private Elmer Allard, who was wounded
in Normandy but returned to serve in October with the Algonquin Regiment and
ma later captured.4 Another Canadian, Burton Harper, a Canloan officer in a British
rgiment, recalled, "T knew the law of averages was going to work out, and I couldn't
stay end to it except by becoming a casualty because there was no end to the war."
Afterseveral months of combat, and aware that all the other Canloan officers in his
regiment had been killed or wounded (with the 623 Canloan infantry officers
fring a 5 percent casualty rate from D-Day to the end of the war), Harper could
se stop pondering his own likely death. "I began to take risks that weren't logical,"
orn as he knew he was courting danger." He was wearing down, was easily irritated,
and was constantly haunted in his sleep by the sights of dismembered bodies. Soon
Haper envisioned himself torn apart by a shell burst or sniper fire. Harper sur-
in it months at the front before a mortar bomb shredded his face, but vast num-
betso others only found a final resting place in France.
ATER CAEN WAS WRESTED from the enemy during the second week of July, the
Coman high command worried that the front opposite the Anglo-Canadian armies
might collapse entirely without the citv as an anchor for the overall defence. Moreover,
eman alties had surpassed 100,000, and only a trickle of 9,000 reinforcements
had been sent from the central reserve.36 Attesting to the severity of the wide-ranging
