174 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
casuaries, and fretted over the "cold-blooded butchering" of enslaved civilians, but
he also consulted Charles de Gaulle, leader of the Free French, who said that his
countrymen would have to bear the blows of liberation.l8 On D-Day, the Allies
struck the German defences along the coast and in fourteen French towns. The tar-
gets in the urban centres were bridges and rail lines, which were to be destroyed in
order to slow the German counterattacking forces, but thousands of French civilians
were also killed. Later in the campaign, French cities-such as Caen on the British
and Canadian front - were also bombed when the Germans organized their defences
in them. The Allies often dropped leaflets urging French civilians to evacuate the
cities, and thereby put their own bomber crews in danger by alerting the enemy to
their intentions, but an estimated 60,000 French civilians were killed nonetheless!'
Though the aerial attacks on the canals, railway yards, and trains killed civilians,
they also profoundly damaged the Nazi war machine, as well as curtailing much of the
fighting forces ability to move large concentrations of troops or armour without losses.
Transport remained a vulnerable link for the Germans, and one American postwar
report came to the conclusion that the bombing campaign against units on the move
*was a decisive factor in the breakdown of the German army.20 Any movement of
troops led to casualties, although it is important to note that the Germans were rarely
unable to shift their divisions-albeit sometimes in piecemeal formations— to their
desired positions.
NAVAL GUNFIRE CONTINUED to pulverize the German lines, even as the Anglo-
Canadian ground forces slowly pushed forward and out of the range of the smaller
ships' guns. The huge naval guns could deliver a devastating weight of fire from a
30 kilometre distance, with the salvos of shells falling like freight train cars and leav-
ing craters several metres wide and deep. One bombardment killed the commander
of the 12rh SS. General Fritz Witt, on June 14. With orders to give no around the
Gemans wete forced to dis in wirhin the range of naval ouns. and they continued
to lose men every day.
On the Canadian front, the 12th SS. now commanded by Kurt Mever. had situ
ated a forward line of defences along a large east-west ridee. a few kilometres south
of Caen. This geographical formation allowed German forces on the reverse slope
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
175
(the back side) to avoid much of the shellfire, which sailed overhead, while machine-
gun teams along the crest or on the forward slope could sweep the ground to the
north and northwest. The German lines encompassed Caen, Authie, and Buron,
with the Waffen SS dug in around the hangars, bunkers, and control buildings of
Carpiquet airfield. Backed by 88mm anti-tank guns and hull-down tanks, the enemy
held a fortress.
After the stalemate of Operation Epsom, General Montgomery planned a new
offensive to capture Caen in early July. At SHAEF headquarters, Eisenhower was
urging him onwards. Air Marshal Arthur Coningham, a New Zealand air veteran of
the Mediterranean and commander of the 2nd Tactical Air Force, was a vocal critic
of Montgomery, especially of his failure to advance beyond Caen, which in turn had
constrained his squadrons from getting established in Normandy. Montgomery
shrugged off his opponents and assured Eisenhower that he was making progress.
He even boldly claimed that the stalemate around Caen was part of his plan-that
he was drawing the German strength to his front to allow the Americans to break out
of the Cotentin Peninsula. Even though memories were short, most of Montgomery's
detractors well remembered his other promises that he would make much deeper
roads into Normandy before pulling the German forces towards his divisions in
the feld." Montgomery's questionable claims made him look petty to the eye-rolling
SHAE staff, and he ordered new campaigns to avoid what was beginning to look
like a First World War Western-Front-type stalemate. In the words of one German
general, the coming battle would be nothing less than "a monstrous bloodbath. 22
THROUGHOUT LATE JUNE, Canadian infantry probed the outskirts of Carpiquet
in nightime patrols, looking for weaknesses in the enemy lines. In the dark, one
Canadian remarked, "You learned to live like an animal: by instincts, by sense, smell
and everything else." Rank body odour could be detected on a light summer breeze,
aong with the German tobacco and food. When flares went up, the stealthy warriors
froze under the erie whitish glow, as any movement might be detected by enemy
sipes. Unless one has led night patrols in a weird and utterly strange no man's
recounted Lieutenant C.F. Richardson of the North Shore Regiment, "the
fetings are hard to describe. 24 No Man's Land was a place where mistakes cost lives,
