108
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
turn away, but Haida and Athabaskan quickly regained radar contact. As they closed
the distance, starshells lit the sky and soon a salvo of shells pummelled the enemy
vessel, T-29. After a fierce hammering, the German ship was ablaze and the crew
eventually scuttled it. The other enemy vessels barely survived their full-tilt flight
from destruction. The victory was a much-needed boost to morale, and T-29 was the
RCN's first enemy surface vessel sunk.
Three nights later, in the early hours of April 29, the 10ch Flotllas Haida and
Athabaskan caught scent of the German warships T-24 and T-27. There was another
fierce cash. The enemy fired torpedoes and the Tribals blasted away with their guns.
A German torpedo found its way to Athabaskan at 4:17 A.M. and the destroyer suf-
fered catastrophic damage, with 10 metre flames and ammunition exploding below
deck. Haida laid a smokescreen to cover the wounded Athabaskan and continued to
pursue the enemy, punishine T.27 with accurate gunfre until che was run aground h
her crew. With the other German T-boat Reeing, Haida returned to assist Athabaskan
However, within ten minutes of the first torpedo strike, Athabaskar's magazine
exploded, shooting, 200-metre-high flames that were witnessed from over 40 kilo-
metres away. For many years, conspiratorial accusations circulated that a British motor
torpedo boat had mistakenly torpedoed the lame Athabaskan, but the case of friendly
fic has been proven conclusively to be wrong 23 Nonetheless, the second explosion
was fatal to Athabaskan, and the ship took on water and settled by the stern.
After the second explosion, André Audet, who served on B oun. reacted to the
order to abandon ship. With the fire out of control and fearing additional explosions
below deck. Audet jumped in the water, but not before putting on his coat an ail kin,
and a hife jacket over top. Even then, the water was freezing. As the ship went down,
darkness shrouded the last resting place of the destroyer, with only the red blinking
Nights on the life jackets providing some indication of the sailors location in the water.
Auder later recounted, "We swam and swam and swam. It was cold like hell. Holy
Jerus Chris. And we could see the coast of France.* Dozens of crew members died
in the burning oil that polluted the surface water or succumbed to the freezing cold.
Leading Seaman Jim Esperance was in the sludgy surf holding a friend who was
burned and paralyzed from damage to his back. The skin was hanging from his
face. He prayed for rescue as his comrade succumbed to hypothermia.
PLANNING THE INVASION
109
When Haida finished off T-27, it steamed to Athabaskan even though the destroyer
was vulnerable, as U-boats were likely converging on the conflagration to sink rescue
ships. Athabaskan's captain, Commander John Stubbs, the victor of the August 6,
1942, battle with U-210, was even heard giving the courageous cry of "Get away,
Haida! Get clear." Haida's crew tried to gather survivors by lowering life rafts and
scramble nets, but dawn was breaking and it would soon be even more exposed to
stalking enemy ships. The captain, Harry DeWolf, gave the agonizing order to sail at
first light. Haida steamed away with only 42 men from her sister ship, including
Audet and L'Esperance. When the survivors were counted, it was found that 129 were
lost with Athabaskan, including her captain, Stubbs, while 83 were picked up by
German boats and sent to prisoner-of-war camps.26 The Canadian Tribal destroyers
grieved the loss of Athabaskan, even as they continued to play a key role in clearing
the Channel for the coming invasion.
GENERAL HARRY CRERAR prepared the Canadian forces for the seaborne assault,
although he had no role in the strategic planning of the operation. The First Canadian
Army had been formed in April 1942 and it was the largest land formation ever
fielded in Canadian military history. It had been commanded by General Andrew
McNaughton, but he had worn out his welcome with both the British and his polit-
ical master, Minister of National Defence J.L. Ralston, with whom he warred openly.
His replacement, Crerar, had openly campaigned for the job and actively under-
mined his commander. He took over the army in early 1944 even though he had
only the most limited command experience in Italy. Yet Crerar was a survivor, who
had somehow escaped unscathed from the debacles of Hong Kong and Dieppe, with
which he was intimately involved. He had noteworthy strengths, including a keen
mind, an agreeable attitude, and relationships stretching back to the Great War
with many British senior officers, particularly Chief of the Imperial General Staff
Sir Alan Brooke.
was at full strength, made it clear that he did not want untested commanders, and
