FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
189
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
comparable to those on D-Day. Bodies were wrapped in blankets, until there were
no more blankets. Then the remains were carried by hand to dark holes in the
ground: a stark indication of the cost of liberating Europe.
THE CAPTURE OF CAEN allowed for follow-on divisions and air force squadrons to
be unleashed against the enemy. But each yard advanced took the ground forces
farther out of the range of the Allied warships that laid down shellfire.
Wich their fire support role diminished, the Allied warships turned to defeating
the Kriegmarine. They also had to keep the sea lanes open, as thousands of tons of
supplies flowed daily into the Normandy beaches and mulberries. If the Germans
could prevent this materiel from reaching land, they would not have to face it in
bade. This meant the warships were constantly sweeping for mines and acting as
armed protectors of the convoys."
"The invasion feet is to be attacked with complete recklessness," demanded
Admiral Karl Dönitz, commander of the U-boat arm, on June 11.62 One estimate
from the Royal Navy Admiraly warned that if the entire U-boat fleet was set against
the vessels ferrying supplies across the Channel, the Allies could lose a crippling
240 ships per week." But the German U-boats could not pierce the thick naval
defences assisted by the bombers and fighters of Coastal and Fighter Command, and
in the wecks following lune 6, twentv-eight U-boats were sunk for the loss of just ten
ships. This was another shattering defeat. Thereafter, U-boats were forced to hide on
the periphery, hoping to shoot and run before the British, American, and Canadian
warships destroyed them.
The Allied naval forces sought out the enemy. Two Canadian flotillas of motor
torpedo boats patrolled the Channel. The 29ch MITB Flotilla operated 71½-foor
motor torpedo boats that rinned across the water at a maximum speed of 41 knots and
had as their main armaments rwo 18-inch torpedoes, a number of machine guns, and
20mm Oerlikon cannons on the stern. " The 65th MTB Flotilla was equipped with
swift boats, 115 feet in leneth and armed with a 6-Dounder, sir heavy machine guns
and 18 inch toredoes. The motor toredo boats, with a crew of about wenty-five
to thirty, were an aggressive force, violently clashing with the Germans in the dark-
new. Malcolm Knox, a native of Pointe Claire, Quebec, and commander of one of
HMCS Algonquin's Bofors 40mm anti-aircraft gun crew at action stations.
