342 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Two companies from the Canadian Scottish Regiment and one from each of the
Regina Rifles and the Royal Montreal Regiment ferried across the water in assault
boats manned by the North Shore Regiment. At least one of the boats was ripped
apart in a crossfire of enemy machine-gun fire, but the rest of the Canadians scram-
The gunners waited expectantly, ready to open fire at the first signs of enemy
resistance. On the right, the Scottish surged forward a few hundred metres, but the
Reginas, who were further to the west, almost immediately ran into fire. Using
PIATS, the Johns hammered a pillbox and continued their scramble up the slick
canal banks and then into the sodden ground. While there were countless acts of
bravery, the actions of Corporal Sammy Letendre, a Métis rifleman, became the stuff
of regimental lore. Letendre had joined the Reginas after D-Day, and Major Gordon
Brown remarked that "he was completely fearless in combat and rapidly gained a
reputation for bravery." At the Leopold, he defended against several enemy counter-
attacks, to the point that he picked up unexploded German potato masher stick
Canadian flame-throwing Wasps at the Leopold Canal battle.
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT 343
grenades and threw them back at the enemy. Letendre was recommended for the
Victoria Cross but was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal, the only one
received by the Reginas during the course of the war.
The Germans responded rapidly to the incursion, with the divisional commander
throwing at least three battalions against the threat. 1º As one Canadian artillery war
diarist recorded laconically, "Apparently the Germans have a lot more stuff over
and in places the Canadians were only 50 metres deep from the canal. But the vul-
nerable infantry were supported by the rearward artillery that now opened up in
crushing defensive fire from two large groupings on the flanks. Using sound ranging
and flash spotting techniques, whereby sophisticated listening devices and observers
triangulated the enemy's gun blasts and muzzle flashes to locate the guns, enemy
positions were smothered in shells. With only two dry approaches to the battlefield,
the enemy lost fearful numbers of men as Canadian guns fired airbursts of shrapnel
over these roads.
The Royal Winnipeg Rifles, the follow-on force, pushed through those on the other
side of the canal on the morning of the 7th, eventually closing the gap between the
Reginas and the Scottish on the Ith, but they made little further headway. "Enemy
parties were frequently encountered," noted one Canadian report, "and violent skir-
mishes ensued. But Spry's assault force, supported by their guns and by Typhoon
fghters that few hundreds of sorties against the enemy, could not be dislodged. As one
Canadian observed of the enemy's counterattack doctrine, "At least [the Germans) are
our in the open and it is always easier to kill a rat out of his hole than in it.'13
Under constant small-arms and shellfire, the Canadians spent every day digging
into the ground, their slit trenches filling up with water before they had dug even a
mette into the mulch. Officers and NCOs slithered through the mud to visit their
men spread out in the flooded area, and the steady pounding of guns threw up gey-
st of fith Hot meals from the rear were a thing of the past, although experienced
infantrymen used candles and taos to heat the tinned meat that came their way by
re-supply men who. on improvised sleds nulled forward food, ammunition, and if
a platoon was lucky, rum.
