HOCHWALD
CANADIAN FORCES
TAk
- CLEVE
FOREST
S.D. & G HIGHI
FLOODED
REICHSWALD
NISHOREE
AId ANI NOD
LE SCOTR
CANADIAN
INFANTRY
DIV
1,5TH (Scottish)
INF DIV
53RD (Welsh)
INF DIV
BATTERING GERMANY
381
opposite them.?" The 84th Infantry Division, backed by over 136 artillery pieces
and self-propelled guns, and the 2nd Paratroop Division, one of the best remaining
enemy formations, and up to a strength of about 12,000, stood across No Man's
Land. The paratroopers were expected to fight hard, and other divisions were in
reserve-such as the 7th Parachute Division and the 15th Panzer Grenadier
Division- although it was too late for the enemy high command to shift strategic
reserves to meet the initial thrust.
The Canadian offensive-Operation Veritable-was unleashed on February 8,
1945. The First Canadian Army, under the command of General Harry Crerar, had
thiten national divisions, over 470,000 troops (albeit far fewer for combat), and
was supported by 1,200 guns and 3,400 tanks. It was the largest force ever com-
manded by a Canadian. Veritable was Crerar's first major set-piece campaign, since
he had left much of the planning of Tractable and Totalize in August to Simonds and
he had been ill for the Scheldt campaign. Now, in early 1945, Crerar was re-exerting
control over his army, and in an apparent snub to Simonds-who had been a diffi-
cult subordinate and, perhaps, as temporary army commander during the Scheldt
campaign, had grown a little too big for his britches he gave British lieutenant-
gunera Brian Horrocks, the commander of XXX Corps, control of the first phase of
the bate, and of Simonds's II Canadian Corps. Simonds was not happy. Of course,
Horocks was an experienced and respected general, comfortable with the men and
tently optimistic. Brigadier J.A. Roberts, commander of the 8th Canadian Infantry
Brigade, had the pleasure of seeing first-hand his qualities of leadership, later
bemoaning, "Why, I wondered, rather guiltily, were our senior officers not of the
same personality; and we were supposed to be Canadian, less stiff and formal than
the British. In this, Roberts spoke for many Canadians who were unimpressed
by the lack of charisma and warmth from Crerar and Simonds, and most of the
other senior commanders.
Crerar hoped his juggernaut of an army would steamroll the enemy, although he
anticipared a long, drawn-out battle. He advised his officers,
"In spite of all the dif-
faulties of weather and tetrain we should continue to fight the enemy hard, wear
down his strength at a greater rate than our own, and then, by securing an important
militarv objective, wrest the initiative completely away from his possession "39
