442
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
from survivors or the official records, and subsequent generations of historians have
used the regimental and official histories as foundations upon which to build their
narratives and analysis. The opening of the official archives in the 1960s also facili-
tated the writing of new books.
The official and regimental histories were mostly guarded in assigning blame, but
other historians, veterans, and filmmakers felt no such constraints, and the Canadian
war effort has been dissected almost from the first days of peace to this very day. The
battles for memory were fought and refought, and since this book has explored the
effectiveness of Canadas formations in combat, it is necessary to come to grips with
some of the conclusions that have emerged over several decades.
"The only thing more melancholy than a battle won," wrote the Duke of
Wellington after defeating Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815, "is a battle lost." Every
single Second World War campaign, engagement, and battle has been contested and
dissected over time. As part of this process, several key assessments of the fighting
capabilities of Canadian units remain touchstones of controversy. The Dieppe raid is
an open wound. Even though it took place on a single day in a long and costly war,
the blunder weighed on the nation. Many of the raid's veterans shared a firm belief
that they had been sacrificed by their own Canadian commanders and the British
generals. While the planning was shoddy and there was more than enough blame to
go around, concrete explanations informed the decision to execute the raid-from
the need to open a Second Front to the desire to explore the viability of a large-scale
multi-service operation against a fortified port even if these reasons were difficult
to understand or unsatisfying for the soldiers on the beaches. While the Dieppe plan
was flawed in conception and the forces failed in its execution, few have ever
questioned the fighting abilities and commitment of the soldiers.
The disaster at Hong Kong was different. The Canadian battalions in that theatre
of war were accused of lacklustre morale bu the senior British officer Maior-General
Christopher Maltby. His official report was started in the prisoner-of-war camps but
finished after his freedom With, frm eve on his renutation and his nlace in history
Maltby divided the blame for defent among many. but was particularly harsh in
accusing the Canadians ae cuffering from noor training and canhat delle He was
wrong, and the Canadians fought with enormous bravery and endurance. And se
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
443
when advance news of the accusations reached the Mackenzie King government
shortly after the war, senior ministers were rightly outraged and complained, first
informally, through official historian C.P. Stacey, and then formally, threatening to
cause a diplomatic row over the matter.?7 The report was released in an expurgated
form in 1948, although it was still overly harsh towards the Canadians.
Some forty-five years later, in early 1993, Maltby's official dispatch was finally
made public by the British government in its entirety. 8 Canadian veterans lashed out
against the British for their own failures during the battle, and especially for Maltby's
poor generalship. Nationalistic journalists, engaging in new skirmishes for honour,
reminded their readers that the British military high command had also blamed the
Australians for their own pitiful performance in the 1942 surrender of Singapore. At
the same time, Mackenzie King and his government were excoriated for ordering
their countrymen to their doom. The tenor of the debate was summed up by Globe
and Mail columnist Michael Valpy, who opined that it was "a toss-up who posed the
greater threat to [Canadian troops]-the British and Canadian generals and polit-
icians who sent them, or the Japanese."?)
Over the years, Hong Kong and Dieppe have been portrayed as senseless operations,
and their orchestrators charged with incompetence and deceit. The clear-cut defeats
over a short period made the memory of the battles even more painful to bear, and
while the odds for the pilots of Fighter Command during the Battle of Britain or for
the merchant mariners during the worst years of the Battle of the Atlantic, or for a
rifleman in an infantry company in Italy or Northwest Europe, offered not much
better chances of survival, these campaigns delivered or contributed to the victorious
endgame, while Hong Kong and Dieppe are seen as sacrificial throwaways. But, of
course, staving off war with Japan through an aggressive reinforcement of a forward
base was thought to be a viable strategy at the time, and the need for large-scale raids
to give the impression of a Second Front to appease Stalin was necessary in a war of
uneasy alliances. This is not to say that Hong Kong and Dieppe should be viewed as
victories-only that we must understand such events without imposing hindsight. We
should attempt to place ourselves in the mindset of those commanders, military or
political, who were fighting a colossal war over several continents and oceans, and were
forced to make unimaginably difficult decisions concerning the lives of millions of
