250
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
an odd reading of the situation— but he told the two generals to get along. They did.
In early August, Simonds's Il Canadian Corps planned the operation to strike
southward. Confident in his well-honed abilities, Simonds gathered intelligence
documents and appraisals from his staff officers and subordinates and retreated to his
private caravan to forge the plan. Operation Totalize was audacious and aggressive,
much like the general who conceived it. It would manifest as a deep armoured thrust
through the guts of the Germans. The drive from Caen to Falaise would take the
Allies through rolling farm land, winding roads, and small villages, all protected by
German guns and tanks. The Canadians were trained by the British to engage in a
planned set-piece battle, often on a limited front that emphasized firepower over
manoeuvre, but in response to the debacle of Operation Spring, Simonds shuffled
the tactical cards and looked for a better hand.
Simonds planned for a surprise night attack. But this was no engagement of sur-
gical cuts. The Canadian general ordered bomber blows against enemy defences,
and a continuous pounding during each phase of the action. While Bomber
Command was wary about conducting any sort of tactical bombing, Crerar's head-
quarters convinced the RAF to assist in softening up the enemy lines and cordoning
off the battlefield with bombs. When Simonds explained the plan to his senior
staff, especially the nighttime armoured thrust, they sat in stunned silence. One of
them finally remarked that this had never been done before; to that, Simonds
sharply replied, "That's why I'm doing it."7
An attack through darkness might initially surprise the enemy, but Crerar and
Simonds still struggled with how to get their ground forces through the enemy
defence-in-depth that was protected by multiple gun screens. To assist in closing the
distance with the enemy rapidly, Simonds arranged that improvised armoured per-
sonnel carriers would transport the infantry into battle. First Canadian Army's Royal
Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers converted seventy-six Priests- the
M7 self-propelled 105mm howitzers- into armoured personnel carriers that carried
a ten-man infantry section. With the gun removed and an armour plate put across
the aperture, the carriers were known slyly as "defrocked" Priests or "Holy Rollers,
and later as Kangaroos (suggesting empouched infantry). A comparison of casualties
sustained by infantry regiments riding in the Kangaroos and by those that travelled
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
251
2NO CON CORPS
21° CDN INF DIV
JO CON ARMO BDE
Tilly, la-
cranesmi
Bourguébus
Garcelles-
Secqueville
Sècqueville-.
• la-Campagne
QUARRY,
CALG
Cintheaux
ARMD
Grainvilla
-Cramesmil
ARMD
POLISH
St!Sylvain
28TH CDN ARM
1D RECT WTH ALO R. (WORTHINGTON,
lanaanneric
Ectréoc.la.
POINT 140
St. Germain
le-Vassor
MIL FC
FARM
CANADIAN FORCES
BITISH OR OTHER FORCES..
Potian.
OPERATION TOTALIZE, AUGUST 7-10, 1944
