142 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Authie, which was cleared, according to Major Don Learment, "under intense mor-
tar fire."' The Highlanders destroyed pockets of enemy resistance in small farms, as
well as several 88mm guns. These battles revealed that the Canadians' training had
paid off, as they skilfully drove the Germans before them, using fire and movement
tactics to engage elements of the panzer grenadiers, flank positions, and reduce them
with grenades. But as the day's shadows lengthened, the North Novas readied them-
selves for the full onslaught, having spotted the enemy massing at about 1 p.M. The
infantry dug like mad for cover and Shermans tried to find some shelter. Around
2 P.M., a fanatical force rolled over the Canadian front.
IN NORMANDY, the Canadians fought a personal battle with the 12th SS Panzer
Division Hiderjugend. Wearing camouflaged smocks, the 12th SS Hitler Youth were
commanded by a cadre of hardened NCOs and junior officers from Ist SS Hitler
Division who had served on the
Eastern Front. In that savage fight to
the finish, prisoners were rarely taken
and, as a result, almost everyone fought
to the last bullet. Rarely has such ruth-
lessness been witnessed in the history
of warfare. The survivors brought these
experiences back to the Western Front
and, in the 12th SS, they led totally
indoctrinated Nazi youth. Teenagers
who had been inundated with the Nazi
mychos of the master race and racial
purity since childhood proved willing to
throw themselves into battle heedlessly
and endure horrendous casualties. The
SS stormtroopers (Schutzstaffel, or
protection squad," a term that had its
origin in the prewar military link to
SS Reichsfuhrer Henrich Himmler's
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
143
Brown Shirts) revelled in sacrificing for the Führer. The division was close to full strength
with 17,000 ranks and 202 tanks (94 Mark IVs, 67 Panthers, and 41 tank destroyers),
and anxious for combat."
Much of the German high command hesitated in committing its reserves to
Normandy, for fear of another Allied landing in Calais, but Major-General Fritz
Witt, commander of the 12th SS, recognized the perilous nature of the invasion and
within a few hours of the beach landings, his first units had set off for Caen. Led by
thirty-four-year-old Colonel Kurt Meyer's 25th Panzer Grenadier Regiment, a three-
battalion formation of mechanized infantry, they arrived in Caen early on June 7.
From the outskirts of Caen, atop an observation tower at the Abbaye d'Ardenne, a
12-century monastery surrounded by thick stone walls, Meyer could see the activity
on the beaches in the British sector,
and he studied the Canadians in
Auchie and Buron a mere 2 kilometres
away. Meyer, a Nazi veteran of Eastern
Front fighting who had broken out
of Soviet encirclement three times,
had orders to wait and consolidate
with forces from 21st Panzer Division.
But "Fast Mever."
as he was known,
spied the advance and threw two of
his three infantry battalions, as well as
about fifty Mk IV tanks, against the
overstretched Canadians. "Little fish!"
floated Meyer. "We'll throw them back
Into the sea."12
German tanks, divided into two
groups, attacked shortly after 2 p.M.,
wich the 12th SS infantry in support.
The Canadians faced the Mark IV and
Panther (Mark V) tanks in Normandy,
both of which had formidable armour
German 12th SS Colonel Kurt Meyer.
An Eastern Front veteran, Meyer was aggressive
and bloodthirsty. His forces tried to drive
the Canadians back to the beaches during the
first days of Normandy. They failed.
