FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
187
186
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
low on one of the Canadians' most costly days of combat. The Canadian Scottish
drove the Germans from Cussy, while the Reginas marched on the Abbaye
d'Ardenne around 6:30 P.M. Regimental medical officer Captain W.S. Huckvale
remembered the nervous tension before the battle, although not all men were
worried. Huckvale watched as one of the Reginas attempted to entice a French
woman into a last-minute sexual rendezvous." She declined his not-so-subtle ges-
tures, even as the artillery shells screamed down.
Captain Gordon Brown of the Reginas observed, "The advance was awfully slow
because of the relentless machine gun and rifle fire. The two forward platoons began
to use fire and movement effectively, but it was heavy going. We had already lost
several men and were forced to crawl and run in short bursts to avoid heavier
losses... We had heard First World War veterans describe the infantry as 'cannon
fodder Now we were realizing what an apt description it was!"S Brown and his men
Canadians dearing Car of the German defender in bitter house-to-house battles on Ilv 10. 1944.
making the 12th SS position untenable.
As dawn broke on the 9th, lead elements of the Glens and the Sherbrookes pushed
tentatively into western Caen. Scarcely a building was undamaged by the bomber
attack and artillery bombardment. From under the rubble, civilians could be heard
crying out for rescue. The smell of the rotting dead — estimated at about 2,000—was
already overpowering. Lieutenant-Colonel C.D. Stewart Leef of the 15th Canadian
Field Ambulance would recall that the "stink in Caen could be almost tasted."57 The
Bitish push from the north was driving the Germans before it, and the Glens, sup-
ported by the North Novas, eventually infiltrated to the centre of the city, where a
Canadian flag was erected. Emerging from the rubble, the liberated French brought
out lowers and wine for the grimy and dust-covered Canadians. One padre lamented
the losses of civilians caught in the crossfire and bombing-"It made my heart bleed
to se little children injured" -but with
the Germans turning the French cities
into battlegrounds, there were few
other viable options.8 Captain Harold
McDonald, a newly arrived officer of
the North Shore Regiment, summed
up his thoughts about the enemy's
use of civilians as shields in a letter to
his wife: "The Germans-all bastards,
tuten, sneaking, back-shooting, double-
crossing devils. Only one thing good
for them."")
The Canadian dead were gathered,
their possessions sorted, dog tags col-
kated, and last rites given by the
padres. The battle for Carpiquet and
Caen was over. It cost the Canadians
330 killed and 864 wounded, losses
Exhausted but victorious.
A Canadian infantryman surveys the
destruction of Caen, July 10, 1944.
