286 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
GENERALS ALEXANDER AND LEESE prepared for the upcoming offensive in late
summer, but they remained wary of working closely with the American commander,
General Clark, for whom they had built up a healthy distaste. To break through the
enemy lines and take advantage of the Allies' armoured strength, Alexander and
Leese sought a less hilly and mountainous battlefield. They found it along the Adriatic
coast, which was relatively flat, although criss-crossed with rivers and defended by
the Gothic Line. Leese convinced Alexander to give him the lead role in the offen-
sive, and to let Clark follow up in the second phase through the mountains north of
Florence when Kesselring had used up his reserves or shifted them to block the
British advance. Clark accepted the secondary role, partially because it appeared that
any attack on the Gothic Line would be difficult and costly, and largely because,
after the Dragoon landings, he no longer had the forces to deliver anything but a
flanking attack.
Despite the strong German defences in the Gothic Line, which were even more
daunting than those in the Hitler Line, Leese devised an ambitious plan that required
an initial rapid advance through the outer crust, followed by a sustained armoured
drive. The grand goal was to push on to the River Po and, should the enemy break,
to thrust into the key industrialized sectors of northern Italy. The Germans, it was
hoped, would be hurled back to the Alps. But given the force ratios at play, the oper-
ation was unlikely to succeed in such an ambitious manner. That said, generals are
meant to drive their forces on, and most of them like to dangle red flags in front of
their charging-bull armies.
Opposite the Eighch Army's British, Polish, and Canadian forces in the Gothic
Line was the Tenth German Army, along the north bank of the Foglia River.
Although only four German divisions held the trench system (with more divisions
further to the rear), Allied aerial photographs revealed that these formations, assisted
by slave labour, were fortifying the positions daily. There was a rush to attack before
the Germans made any more progress, and the Allied operation with nine divisions
had to go ahead sometime in August, for late September would bring rain and
reduce the roads to a quagmire. Yet even with the earth baked hard by the sun
and with their sienificant superiority in ground forces, this was no easy battlefield
for the Allies. The Germans had a 15-kilometre defence-in-depth in front of the
THE GOTHIC LINE
287
main line-between the Metauro and Foglia Rivers—in which to engage in a
delaying fight before the Allies arrived at the 4-kilometre-thick main Gothic Line
bristling with guns and anchored on concrete dugouts. And behind that was the
Rimini coastal plain, cut by several dried-up rivers and streams that would hinder
ce armoured breakout and allow defenders, backed by anti-tank guns, to smash
armoured units.
The Tenth Army had two corps consisting of 81 battalions of varying strength:
about a third were considered effective with over 400 riflemen, a third were under-
trength with between 300 and 400, and another third were exhausted and with fewer
than 200 men. While the infantry regiments were between a half and a quarter the size
of Allied battalions, the defenders were protected by 566 guns of all calibres, from
howitzers to anti-tank pieces.?! The ground also favoured the Germans, as the Allies
moved along a northwest and then
western axis that followed the Adriatic
coastline but saw the plains narrow and
the flat land become foothills. With
mountains to the north, and the towns
of San Marino, Cesne, Forli, Ravenna,
and Faenza along the road system, this
mas ideal territory to defend.
Against this fortress, Leese's Eighth
Army consisted of three corps along a
35 kilometre front: the Polish II Corps
of two tired divisions that had been
fighting since June; the Canadian Corps
dono divisions and the 21st British
Tank Brigade; and V Corps, an over-
ined British formation of five div-
sions and two tank brigades, including
the very good Ist Armoured Division.
Brich V Corps, as befitted its size, was
i have the central position, where the
A steel and concrete 75mm fixed artillery gun
on the Gothic Line. With a low profile and
a high striking power, these guns were
devastating against advancing armour and
difficult to destroy with artillery fire.
