180 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
flies blanketed their decomposing corpses. A burned-out tank lay as a blackened
memorial to the failed German attacks, its gun barrel pointing to the sky like a grave
marker. But the shelling never let up, and the Canadian casualties mounted. The
wounded came out on stretchers and the replacements went in. "Often there would
be a dozen (men) arrive at a company in the evening,"
said one infantryman of the
North Shore Regiment, "and before morning half that dozen would be casualties."42
The Canadians held on and would not be driven from the airfield, even as the battle
cost 377 casualties, with most of the infantry battalions losing about one in five men
from their forward rifle companies. 43
Canadian 3-inch mortar team supporting an attack Nat the sir trenches bohind the morta
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
181
While the Canadians cleared much of Carpiquet, they could not dislodge the
resolute defenders in the southern hangars, who held on until July 8, when they
withdrew on their own. Despite the victory, British Second Army commander
General Miles Dempsey complained to Montgomery that Keller had lost his grip on
the division and should be removed. 4 Though Keller was a lacklustre commander
who had turned to the bottle, it is hard to see how he could have fought a better
battle. It is not clear what Dempsey assumed Keller might have done differently
during the five days, as throwing a larger force at Carpiquet would only have crammed
more soldiers into the artillery and mortar-fire kill zone. Moreover, the rest of Keller's
division was preparing to attack Caen on the 8th, and it made no sense to dilute that
force. The problem, in fact, was that Crocker had ordered a rather limited attack,
which had put the Canadians into a salient that was heavily shelled by the Germans.
As in Italy, the British continued to have little faith in Canadian commanders, and
even in triumph they assumed that more could be accomplished. Montgomery
barely knew Keller and readily accepted Dempsey's assessment, but he delayed action
since he wanted a Canadian to deliver the coup de grâce. He also had more pressing
matters: Eisenhower and Churchill were desperately urging him onwards.4s
AS THE 8TH CANADIAN INFANTRY BRIGADE fought a bite-and-hold battle over the
aifed the rest of the division was preparing for Operation Charnwood. This was
Mongomer's plan to capture Caen and the bridges over the Orne River. The main
asault was to be carried out by the British 3rd and 59th Divisions, with Keller's
Canadians anchoring the right fank and maintaining pressure on the enemy from
their sector. The 9th Canadian Infantry Brioade would return to the villages of Buron
and Authie from which it had been ejected a month earlier and then the 7th Canadian
Infantry Brigade would secure Cussy and the fortified Abbaye d'Ardenne.
The lies had hoped to occupy Caen on June 6, needing the large city for head-
quarters, hospitals, and the movement of supplies, but the enemy had held it against
veral atacks and systematically turned it into a fortress. Frustrated by the German
defence, Montgomery called for a thundering artillery and aerial bombardment to
ked the cry. While most of the French citizens of Caen had wisely fled by this
pi, several thousand remained. On the night of July 7, hundreds of aircraft
