YUL
462 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
in politics, an embracing of change, a valuing of new symbols like the Canadian flag,
multiculturalism, reforms in gender and sexual relations, and a host of other issues
became the standard bearers of the new generation. Prominent in the 1960s, and
indeed throughout the length of the Vietnam War, was a strong revulsion towards all
war. While large parts of Canada supported U.S. military involvement in Southeas
Asia, there was much questioning of American foreign policy by intellectuals, students,
and indeed all Canadians. Intensifying protest in Canada against the war saw the
nation welcome more than 30,000 draft-dodgers coming north and even more body
bags going home to American families.
Against this societal backdrop, the slow shunting of Canada's Second World War
history to the irrelevant periphery or the dusty past was amplified in the latter part
of the 1960s, and there is ample evidence that Canadians' disillusionment and anger
over the Vietnam War was directed against all soldiers and veterans « Moreovet, with
the Cold War following on the heels of the Second World War, turning the former
Soviet ally into an enemy, the Second World War-—like the Great War-had its own
futile narrative thread. The war was fought against a heinously evil regime, but it had
been replaced, according to Cold War propagandists, by an equally malicious one.
What had been the point of the Second World War? What was the point of any war?
Lester B. Pearson's Nobel Peace Prize for his deft work during the 1956 Suez Crisis,
in averting a worse rift between the principal Western allies--the United States,
Britain, France, and Israel-ushered in a new era. Many Canadians took pride in
Pearson's award, Darticularly as the saw their one-time impoverished colonial. and
ignored country finding a role on the world stage. " Peacekeeping became an import-
ant symbol. It was also much cheader than predating for conventional or nuclear
warfare. Over decades, the defence budgets were cut and Canada's military role abroad
shifted in public perception from protecting Europe or North America against Soviet
attack to worldwide peacekeeping, even thouch the latter remained a small commit-
ment for the Canadian Forces, with the vast majority of resources put towards
Canadian military contributions in NATO and NORAD. Yet there was scarcely a
peacekeeping mission from the second half of the twentieth century to which Canada
did not contribute service Dersonnel. A new Deacekeepina image was embrared by
Canadians, and traditional warfiohtino fell out of fovour in the public eve. To th
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
463
1970s, it was not uncommon for members of the Canadian Forces to avoid wearing
their uniforms while travelling on Canada's city streets for fear of being the target of
verbal assaults; by the 1990s, the members of the Canadian Forces were so few in
number that they appeared entirely absent from the streets of almost every major
city or town across Canada, save for those few that had military bases. Veterans took
to publicly pleading that Remembrance Day was not a day to celebrate war but to
mark sacrifice. It was sad that they even had to say such things in the face of misplaced
antiwar sentiments that had given rise to a questioning of the need for commemora-
tion. Major A.J. Hamilton, who served with the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry
Highlanders, wrote at the beginning of the 1990s, "Our ranks are thinning fast. The
veterans will never forget, but at times we worry whether our children are taught the
price for the freedom they take for granted." 6
BY THE EARLY 19905, the Canadian Forces was at its nadir. Years of cuts to the defence
budgets had rendered the military a hollow shell. While peacekeeping was esteemed
by Canadians and the media, the Canadian Forces was losing its military capability.
Its lowest ranks were paid starvation wages. There were few resources for those mil-
itary personnel who served on traumatic missions to receive any counselling. Among
the officer corps, obtaining a graduate degree was not only anathema but was dam-
aging to one's career in the anti-intellectual armed forces. The rot was deep. The
disintegration of the Soviet Union from 1989 to 1991 hastened in a new age of
Western power, which was then used by politicians to justify further cutbacks to the
military. But soon the new world order slipped into chaotic disorder. Peacekeeping
missions in Somalia, Rwanda, and the Balkans during the early 1990s went disas-
trously wrong, and despite the Canadian Forces' saving of lives through protecting
the helpless and rebuilding shattered societies, the message as reported in the media
was one of incompetence, loss, and futility. In Somalia, a handful of rogue soldiers
murdered a Somali teenager, after which their unit, and then senior defence officials,
perpetrated a cover-up. The subsequent investigation badly damaged the image of
the Canadian military.
In the mid-1990s, even as the Canadian Forces were being openly splayed in the
media as a relentless freak-show of cover-ups, hazings, scandals, and embarrassments,
