262
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
overran the ragged Canadian force. Small groups of Algonquins snuck away in the
twilight carrying wounded comrades. For the dozens more who surrendered to
the 12th SS, it must have been a terrifying prospect, considering the take-no-prisoners
history of the Nazi youth, but there were no recorded cases of post-battle executions.
The final casualty figures are stark evidence of the relentless battering the Canadians
endured: 47 tanks wrecked, 112 casualties sustained by the British Columbia
Regiment, and 128 Algonquins killed, wounded, or taken prisoner.47
It was not until late on the Ith that Kitching realized that Worthington was
fighting his own separate and now lost battle, and that the reinforcements he had
ordered to support them were now in the vanguard to seize Point 195. It would be
wrong to blame Kitching for losing his soldiers, but more bad luck followed, and
the Governor General's Foot Guards that Kitching had sent forward were held up
by snipers and then also got lost in the Normandy countryside. With Point 195
needing to fall to remove German observers directing their guns from the sur-
rounding area, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, drawn largely from
Hamilton, Ontario, crept onward in the early hours of the 10th without a back-
stopping barrage. The battalion commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Dave
Stewar, personally led his men up the hill, surprising and defeating a small German
garrison. As Stewart recalled later, "You can't win battles being behind. "48 It helped
that Worthingron Force, during its fated stand, had siphoned off enemy strength
and arillery power." The Argyll' capture of Point 195, which was occupied and
fortified during the 10th, also revealed that not all operations required the artillery
hammer. Innovation and drive still counted for something in the killing fields of
Normandy although the Argylls relied on their guns from the battalion's support
weapons, the Governor Generals tanks, and artillery-—to hold off several enemy
excursions during the rest of the day.
"Everything in war is very simple" goes the old maxim, "but the simplest thing is
difficule" Such was the case with Simonds's plan for Totalize. The destruction of
Worthingron Force exposed the profound confusion of battle and the danger inher-
ent in confronting the 12th SS, but other Canadian units continued to gain ground
on the 10th. However, by the next day, German defences stiffened and all hope for
surprise was lost. Any attack would now be more costly in terms of lives expended
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
263
In Totalize, the Canadians advanced some 13 kilometres until Simonds called the
operation off on the morning of the 11th. The battle saw some 600 Canadians killed,
but it was estimated the enemy lost more than 3,000 men.5°
Simonds was frustrated by the inability of his divisions to achieve a breakthrough.
He studied and attended to his maps, calculating and measuring the Germans' abil-
iy to hold out, almost willing victory into being. He felt let down by his soldiers. Yet
i was the plan that was too complicated. Perhaps an all-out blitz southward, with no
sop or pause for rigidly timed phases, might have allowed the Canadians, British,
and Polish to take advantage of the momentary confusion in the German lines. But
that type of armoured spearhead might also have met its doom in other ways had it
ben held up in the German defensive grid, especially if the Canadian infantry
bad been left behind. Simonds hoped to give the troops at the front a better chance
than those who had been mangled in Spring. While the friendly-fire bomber attacks
sowed the full potential for exploitation, Totalize also achieved one of the deepest
penetrations of German lines in Normandy to that point.
PATTON'S ARMY WAS MAKING good progress as it swarmed southeastward towards
Agentan. It was coming around the southern flank of the Germans, which were
norasingly trapped in a pocket on three sides, shaped like a squashed letter "C"
ited upwards, with the Canadians and British exerting pressure from the top. If the
buth side could be closed by the Canadian, British, and Polish divisions driving
vouch to Falaise, two German armies of twenty-one divisions would be encircled and
astroyed. acting to Hitler's demented order that his two armies stand their ground
and not etreat, Montgomery urged the ground forces onward. Generals Crerar and
Simonds planned another operation this one known as Tractable which would see
the Canadians steamroll to Falaise through the Laison River valley, a depression that
tad some rough, wooded areas but was generally open ground and suitable for
in amoured thrust. Infantry carried in Kangaroos would support the 2nd and 4th
humoured Brigades that were formed into two large 150-tank squares, which were to
Luch forward on August 14.
Even with the Germans in a desperate situation. the Allied inter-army rivalry reared
is ugly head. General Omar Bradley, commander of the US. 12th Army Group,
