44 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
bread and ended up having to be counted in our beds, so many were too weak to
stand outside. The hot meal was a weak soup or stew containing bits of turnip or cab-
bage or barley, and very rarely bits of meat. My meat portion one day consisted of a
dog's paw with hair still on it.33 RCAF gunner Sergeant Jim Finnie, who was captured
when his bomber went down in France on July 4, 1944, remarked, "The Canadian
Red Cross ... were very, very good, and a lot of thought had gone into preparing these
food parcels." Without them, "you would have starved." Nonetheless, the incarcera-
tion, boredom, and lack of food, even with the Red Cross packages, meant that
"When you went to bed at night you thought of food, when you wakened up in the
morning you thought of food, it was always on your mind, that was the most impor-
tant thing, food, food, food."34
A critical component of the Red Cross package was the cigarette ration. "Cigarettes
were the medium of exchange in the camp," said George Brown, and they could be
used to secure food, items, and almost anything? A black market system emerged
between the prisoners and guards, as well as with civilians outside the wire. There
were even traders prisoners who moved freely in the camps, securing material for
one man, perhaps a chess set or a notebook, conducting the exchange, and making
a commission (in cigarettes) for the transaction. Those men with fierce nicotine
habits faced difficult choices, and many traded their food or small pleasures as they
smoked through the most recognizable source of currency in the camps. Sergeant
Tom Crandell, a navigator with No. 419 Squadron who was shot down on April 20,
1943, wrote of his love for hockey and sports in the camps and his need to curtail his
nicotine habit: "I smoke few cigarettes but they are money in this place."37 Flight
Sergeant Arnold Hanes was one of the smokers, a habit he had started at eleven years
old. Even as he was "starving to death," he still dealt his hoarded scraps of food for
cigarettes. In his mind, "A cigarette was more of a pacifier than a piece of bread."38
BY THE VERY END OF MARCH 1942, after less than half a year as a prisoner, RCAF
Flight Sergeant Erle "Dusty" Miller of Refrew, Ontario, wrote in his private diary,
"Nothing new. Life so hellish boring, Getting used to this half-starved state."" All
prisoners faced whar they called "barbed wire disease." 0 This malaise was a combin-
ation of restlessness and depression, and prisoners counselled one another through
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
45
the dark periods that came to every man at some point during the long months and
years of incarceration. Within their confined grounds, and always under the watch-
ful eyes of armed guards, prisoners walked in circles, sharing old stories and future
dreams. Talk was vital, as were the stories and gossip that circulated through the
camps on everything from food and mail to the eventual end of the war. "It's amaz-
ing the way men will repeat rumours that they know in their hearts are too good to
be true," penned one Canadian prisoner in his diary. "There is no place on earth so
full of wishful thinking as a P.O. W. camp. I's like drowning men grasping at straws,
or like men repeating things as if the mere repetition could make them come true;
make facts out of fancies."41
The YMCA eased the lives of thousands, and likely saved many too, through the
donation of books, sporting equipment, and art supplies. Most of the leisure activities
that prisoners engaged in to pass the time came through Canadian donations. Sports
were popular with the young men. The various nations excelled at their own games,
with the Aussies and English fighting it out on the cricket pitch, and baseball the
obsession for Canadians and Americans. Everyone liked to kick the soccer ball around.
Pathfinder Tom Lane of St. Boniface, Manitoba, who was shot down in the summer
of 1943, described himself as a "Three Games a Day" man, willing to play anything
with anyone in order to take his mind off his imprisonment.42 Homesick Canucks
during the winter months created ice rinks, although the cold might be sufficient to
maintain ice for a few weeks at most. The desire for hockey would not be denied.
Most camps received musical instruments from Canada, and small orchestras were
formed. "The quality of the music was excellent as we had some of the best musicians
from the great orchestras of England and from Polish masters," felt Flight Sergeant
George Brown 43 After two years in an Italian prisoner-of-war camp, John Taylor was
moved to Stalag Luft III at Sagan in Poland. He remembered fondly the rich theatre
life there, with his comrades putting on a new play every week. They ranged from
Noel Coward's Design for Living to Shakespeare's Macbeth, as well as original plays
written by prisoners.« The troupe scrounged material for costumes and wigs, as well
as the sets, which were often constructed from the sturdy Red Cross parcel boxes. By
1944, Stalag Luft III had a theatre that sat an audience of 360. Somewhat bizarrely,
as one Canadian remarked, the German prison guards often asked to attend the show,
