32
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
crews survived being shot down, while 29 percent lived in the Halifax, although
both statistics were damning in comparison to those of the American B-17 Flying
Fortress and B-24 Liberator, which had about 50 percent of their crews survive a
fatal blow to their plane.?
After the pilot gave the order to abandon the crippled bomber, he stayed in the
cockpit, keeping the plane steady to provide his crew with extra minutes to escape.
The pilots usually paid for their bravery with their lives, with statistics indicating
that pilots and rear gunners had the lowest chance of escaping a plane in flight.3
Sergeant Clifford C. Reichert of RCAF's No. 408 Squadron was one of the unlucky.
In the early hours of June 22, 1943, his Halifax was hit by flak, causing the
Image of a Canadian bomber attack on Wangerooge Island, April 25, 1945.
Some 2,475 Canadian airmen were captured during the war.
EVADERS AND PRISONERS 33
dismemberment of two crewmen and nearly tearing the leg off G.F. Pridham, the
bomb aimer. With the wind howling through the gaping holes in the fuselage, fire
was soon sweeping down the plane. The skipper, Reichert, stayed at the controls to
provide the time for his friends to bail out. Pridham, parachuting to the ground,
saw the bomber explode in the skies above him. The injured bomb aimer survived
his wounds and later wrote to Reicher's family that the pilot was the "bravest man
I ever knew." Reichert received a Mention in Dispatches award, and his self-sacri-
fice was not unique among the pilots.
As the doomed bombers plunged downward, the crew members tried to navi-
gate against the centrifugal force that glued flyers to the inside of the fuselage.
Crawling along the walls or ceiling to the escape hatch, they grabbed their para-
chutes. Wounded crew members had to be assisted with their parachute and thrown
out first. In the confusion, and sometimes on fire, flyers panicked and tried to step
through the hatch, which, at a velocity of 200 kilometres per hour, usually meant
that their lower body went through but their upper body slammed against the
metal siding. Those who kept their head knew to roll into a ball, with their backs
to the slipstream.
Very few airmen had ever jumped with a parachute. They had been trained on
what to do in case of an emergency, but in the frantic situation of a plane going
down, we'll never know how many flyers lost their lives because they did not know
how to jump, or pulled their cord too soon or too late, or suffered the many other
mishaps that plagued scared men jumping out of hurling and usually burning
machines at thousands of feet above the ground. One Halifax pilot, Stan Coldridge,
asked for parachute training once, but his senior officer replied, "We have spent
$20,000 to get you this far. There is no way we are going to endanger your lives."5
Descending in a freefall from anything above 10,000 feet meant that the airman
was in an oxygen-deprived environment, disoriented and often unconscious."
Moreover, a descent in winter would likely lead to some form of frostbite, especially
as the slipstream frequently sucked off boots, slippers, and socks. The parachute's
ripcord was to be pulled at several thousand feet, but injured flyers were often in no
condition to do this. Parachutes malfunctioned or caught fire. There were many
factors working against an airman ever safely landing.
VUL
