330 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Reginald Dixon of the Glens described the scene: "one big bunker turned on its side,
and the huge craters which had been made. Also, there were great blocks of concrete
planted by the Germans across and beside the road to prevent movement of our tanks
and Bren carrier. They had been tossed around like toy building blocks."?)
When the minefields and bomb craters-some of which were 15 metres across
and 6 metres deep- stopped the Kangaroos, the infantry dismounted and pushed
forward on foot. The North Shore Regiment advancing to the north at La Trésorerie
were held up by a series of thick concrete fortifications, bunkers, and gun positions,
but they stabbed their way through the Germans, capturing three artillery batteries
by the early hours of September 18. PIATs blew the enemy out of strongpoints, and
phosphorus bombs burned out the die-hards. One Canadian officer commented,
almost in tears, "It was inspiring and awe-inspiring to watch the attacking companies,
like ants, moving up the slope under heavy fire and over mines. With every puff of
smoke and dirt you wondered what fellow had got it."30
Canadian medium artillery guns firing against the
German positions to soften them up before the attack.
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
331
Further to the south, Le Régiment de la Chaudière, the Queen's Own Rifles of
Canada, the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders, and the North Nova
Scotia Highlanders ground their way into the town, with the Novas having to pass
through a least twenty minefields. The outer defences were cleared, but the Germans
were holed up in the ancient limestone citadel overlooking the port. The Canadians
might have been forgiven for feeling like crusaders of old. The Glens surveyed the
bartements and, coordinating with tanks, raked the walls with machine-gun fire and
high explosives. The enemy refused to surrender. Castles can be taken in many ways,
however. Major J.G. Stothart, aided by a sympathetic civilian, led a platoon through
an underground tunnel. Emerging within the garrison, Stothart's Highlanders
gunned down the surprised German defenders as artillery blew in the portcullis.
Some 200 German prisoners were taken.
Scrambling through the city, the Highland Light Infantry of Canada and the
Glens drove the rest of the way through Boulogne on the 18th, curling southward.
The ast German defenders in Boulogne surrendered on the 20th, and a garrison to
the north at Wimereux - where Great War Canadian poet John McCrae is buried—
finally succumbed on the 22nd. When
the last Germans ran up the white
fag, 634 Canadians had been killed or
wounded. In return, the two brigades
had bagged 9,517 prisoners, about the
same number as the British had taken
at Le Havre 31
Boulogne provided another
port
for the Allies, but their own bombard-
ment and German demolitions had
ruined much of the harbour, and even
with an urgent rebuilding effort, ships
did not begin unloading cargo until
mid-October. The port's capture did
not alleviate the Allies logistical chal-
lenge, and the continuing desperation
Private F.J. Coakley of the North Shore Regiment
sitting on a captured German coastal artillery
gun, Boulogne, France, September 21, 1944.
