226 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and the army for failing to uphold their unspoken end of the bargain: we will
fight and possibly be hurt, but you must care for us. There has always been military
medicine in Canada, with surgeons attached to units while on campaign. As civilian
medicine evolved, along with a greater understanding of germ theory, military medi-
cine also improved. On August 1, 1901, the Canadian Army Nursing Service was
established, and after the South African War, the Canadian Army Medical Corps
(CAMC) came into existence. Then the Great War changed everything. The mobil-
ization of resources and manpower over a period of more than four years eventually
saw upwards of half of all Canadian doctors serving overseas.? Within that war, med-
ical personnel encountered traumatic wounds, infectious diseases, and chemical
agents. New techniques were developed in the field for cleaning the gaping holes in
bodies to slow the life-threatening secondary infections prevalent in the age before
antibiotics; to treat compound fractures of legs and difficult brain and abdominal
injuries; and even to carry out blood transfusions. Behind the lines, clearing stations
and hospitals cared for the masses of wounded. In recognition of the critical work of
doctors, nurses, and orderlies, "Royal" was added to the title of the CAMC in 1919.
During the Second World War, the Royal Canadian Army Medical Corps
(RCAMC) was based on a structure similar to that established during the Great War.
The medical element of the division remained intimately tied to the fighting forces,
with each 18,500-strong division served by three field ambulances, a main dressing
station, an advanced dressing station, and casualty clearing stations. Closer to the
front, each battalion had a regimental medical officers, who, with his team of stretcher-
bearers, was responsible for front-line care and preventative medicine. Further to the
rear were hospitals.
Physicians had learned lessons in Italy, and brought them to bear in caring for the
wounded in Normandy: Despite the improvement in surgical techniques and drugs,
abdominal injuries were still fatal more than 50 percent of the time, with death
resultine from both the initial wounding and the subsequent infection 3 And there
remained the ongoing challenge of transporting casualties to the rear medical for-
mations, with delays from fighting, lack of vehicles, poor roads, or overwhelmed
stretcher-bearers. One of the solutions was to move critical care closer to the front,
and feld surgical units tried to remain 3 to 5 kilometres behind the forward lines.
WAR AND MEDICINE
227
Wich about three times as many soldiers hurt as killed, the thinly stretched medical
instem showed the strain.
FOUNDED MEN WERE BOWLED OVER IN BATTLE. Some described the effects of
being hit by a bullet as akin to being bashed with a sledge hammer. Agony did not
come first; most felt only numbness. For those soldiers not killed outright, and still
conscious, the surprise of being struck down was soon replaced by dread regarding
where they were injured. Men patted down their groin area to ensure, as one wounded
Canadian put it, that they had not been reduced to a "eunuch."4 If an artery was hit,
a soldier could bleed out in less than a minute; there was no hope of survival. More
often bulles and shell fragments tore through muscle and shattered bone, but did
a deliver an immediate fatal blow. The entry wounds were often quite small, but
the internal damage was extensive, and exit wounds could be as large as a clenched
Sit. For those who escaped a rapid death, there was a race against time to obtain
radical are before they slipped into shock from loss of blood. When that happened,
the final destination was likely death.
Suetcher-bearers, remarked one experienced Canadian infantryman, were the
unsung heroes of battle. In the midst of shrapnel and bullets, they went about aid-
ag and parching up the wounded, evacuating them to safety on their stretchers.
Duing every action, day or night, under any and all circumstances the cry 'stretcher-
bet rought them running. It took a special kind of man to do this kind of mercy
vodk" The stretcher-bearers, known as "medics" in the American army, exposed
deceite to fire when racing across the battlefield to offer front-line care. When
if und a downed man, they rifled through his pouches to find his dressing,
knitering their own morphine and a sip of water or rum (if there was no stom-
dal nuy. The gashes and contusions were sprinkled with sulpha powder, which
reduced the chance of infection.
"The men expected us to look after them," believed Private Gerry Campbell of the
Scomont, Dundas and Glengarry Hiohlanders, who was awarded the Military
Medal for rescuing his comrades under fre 6 The wounded were left behind as the
hops pushed forward. The stretcher-bearers tried to cover the broad terrain, but in
Normandy finding the casualties in the wheat fields was no encu task. A crushed and
