338 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
terminate the sites, known as Crossbow targets, from which some 10,492 rockets
would be launched by the war's end. Harris had objected strenuously to these mis-
sions because of the difficulty of hitting such positions, especially the mobile
launchers, and because they diverted resources away from city bombing. Calculations
would later reveal that the bombing resources used to strike these targets amounted
to 73,000 tons of bombs, the equivalent of eight Eiffel Towers' worth of stacked
explosives? And so the First Canadian Army's overrunning of these positions was
welcomed throughout military and political high commands. With some 6,000
Londoners having been killed and another 18,000 injured in the rocket bombard-
ments, Lieutenant-Colonel J.A. Roberts, commander of the 12th Manitoba
Dragoons and a former ice cream salesman, remarked, "We felt especially happy to
have contributed to the easing of the load carried by the long-suffering and gallant
British civilians."4
The battles throughout September were long and costly, but the First Canadian
Army had captured over 46,000 prisoners and killed countless thousands of Germans?
Lieutenant-General Simonds was temporarily in command of the army as of
September 27, after General Crerar was felled by illness. Having reached the pinna-
de of the command structure, Simonds took over an army that had proved adaptive
in its fighting methods, having shifted from the slow grind of early to mid-August
to close the Falaise Gap to the open warfare of late August, and then, in September, to
its engagement in three weeks of siege. Yet while the stalemate of Normandy had
been left behind, the attritional combat remained front and centre. After a pause to
regroup and integrate reinforcements into the depleted ranks of the infantry battal
ions, whose companies were down by almost half strength, the Canadians were
ordered to clear the Scheldt estuary to open up Antwerp.
The Breskens Pocket, the South Reveland Peninsula and Walcheren Iland-all
interconnected and with German gun batteries able to fire throughout the defensive
triangle-would have to fall before Antwerp could receive shipments. Genera
Simonds found himself on the horns of a vexing dilemma: he had to fight on thre
wide battlefields, extending some 75 kilometres, with only three tired divisions. And
with Montgomery still pulling British formations, including all of I British Corps,
towards the failed Market Garden front to achieve some sort of victory there, and
NORTH
BEVELAND
1 MILES
MILES i
ALLIED FORCES
HIGHRS
Bergen op Zoon
SOUTH
BEVELAND
Hoofdplaat
Dragi CON INF ROC
WES
sur-Mer
Terneuzer
Biervliet
LEOPOLD:
Watervliet
6 OCT
Bruges
SCHELDT, OCTOBER-NOVEMBER 1944
