310
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The late fall and early winter stalemate was hard for everyone to take, and the
constant shelling by both sides accounted for hundreds of lives. Morale plummeted.
Crime rates rose in all Allied armies, as British, American, and Canadians deserted
in high numbers; more than 5,000 British troops were serving sentences in brutal
military prisons during 1944 alone.? The dispirited soldiers voted with their feet and
weren't willing to die in a now meaningless campaign. These desertions only further
hurt units that were already critically under-strength. Chaplain Laurence Wilmot,
who served eleven months with his beloved West Nova Scotia Regiment, wrote after
the Gothic Line, "The Regiment was not in good shape. So many of the old hands
were done in and weary and in need of a thorough rest and reconditioning. New
men coming in under those conditions became infected with their spirit."74 By late
1944, the Italian front appeared perilously similar to the Western Front of the Great
War—but unfortunately with all the horror and none of the poetry.
General Burns was finally done in by the British, though it was his own divisional
commanders who pulled the trigger on him. On October 8, Burns ordered an attack
Canadian infantrymen in wet and muddy Northern Italy.
THE GOTHIC LINE
311
across the rain-swollen and mud-slick Fiumicino River, and both Hoffmeister and
the New Zealand divisional commander objected to the plan. A miffed Burns, who
was often accused of not being forceful enough, demanded that his generals comply
but they refused again. This led to an unseemly row, with Hoffmeister insisting on
being paraded before the new Eighth Army commander, Sir Richard McCreery, who
had replaced Leese on October 1 after he was transferred to the Pacific theatre.75
Hoffmeister was right in his objection to the plan, but he handled it badly. He knew
that Burn's career was hanging by a thread. McCreery had no more sympathy for
Buns than Leese, and now, with discontent voiced publicly by an experienced div-
isional commander, the wheels were set in motion to relieve Burns of his command.
Burns was victorious on the battlefield, but McCreery declared, "... he does not
kad... His manner is depressing, diffident and unenthusiastic and he must com-
pletely fail to inspire his subordinate officers."6 With the British looking to rid
themselves of Burns, the Canadian high command in London and Ottawa-situated
fat from the backwater theatre, and now fully engaged in Northwest Europe-
rised to expend much energy on his behalf. Burns took his dismissal with resent-
ment, rightly noting, "We went farther and faster than any other corps."7
Burn's career seemed over, but he reinvented himself, remaining an active figure
in postwar Canada as a senior civil servant, historian, and, at the end of his career,
returning to the military. Could such a successful commander be truly as inarticu-
bre and uninspiring as many have claimed over the years? Whatever the case, he, like
so many generals, has been forgotten by Canadians, although modern papers occa-
sonally acknowledge his role in establishing the roots of peacekeeping, in which
Canadians take justifiable pride.
THE DRAGOON INVASION of southern France in mid-August all but put a bullet into
the emaciated body that was the Italian campaign. While Churchill ordered that the
lalian ampaign should continue with the goal of seizing Italy's northern indus-
urial region, which was still feedine the Nari war machine-the Americans were no
longer willing to play along, especially with the Normandy campaign won and the
Germans in Western Europe on the verge of collapse. The Americans were now
calling the shots, but an obstinate Churchill demanded that General Alexander find
