4 INTRODUCTION
Sherbrooke Fusilier wrote eloquently of his comrades and their families: "Many a
nome across the country had been darkened by these tragic losses and as time passes
these losses subered in WW 2 are little understood by those who have inherited the
git of peace. A quier walk through the Cemetery at Bény-sur-Mer soon brings time
to a halt and the words inscribed on the gravestones tells it all, and fills one with
sorrow and painful recollections but also tremendous pride. Here is a tiny part of
Canada where Canadians lie buried side by side regardless of rank, religion, or col-
our* Notwithstanding what has been remembered or forgotten, those Canadian
soldien, salors, airmen, nurses, and other service personnel who served during the
Second World War understood that it was a war of necessity.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR was a war to prevent the total domination of Europe by
Adolf Hider and his Nazi Third Reich. The battles and campaigns fought by the
Fascist, Communist, and democratic nations spanned the globe and unleashed fero-
city, barbarism, and mass murder. German dictator Adolf Hitler had started the war
to expand Germany's power, prestige, and geographic boundaries after the humiliat-
ing loss during the Great War of 1914 to 1918. War was also a means for Hitler, with
his heinous Nazi ideology, to carry out his plan of subjugating the Slavic people of
Eastern Europe and of removing and then annihilating the Jewish people of the same
lands. The invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939, provoked the European war,
although Hider had already moved against his European neighbours before that, and
Japan was engaged in a vicious struggle with China from 1937. Despite France and
Britain having desperately tried to avoid war with Hitler in the late 1930s through
appeasement and the sacrifice of democratic nations, actions that represented the
will of most of their citizens, the move against Poland revealed that Hitler would
never be satisfied and that he would continue to seek new campaigns to conquer and
enslave millions.
Hide's war dragged in almost all of Europe, and then much of the world; in the
Pacific, Japan and the United States fought their own series of naval, aviation, and
land campaigns from December 1941. In all theatres of war, clashing armies, navies,
and air forces made targets of civilians, but it was only Nazi Germany that carefully
crafted an official policy of genocide. With entire nations harnessed for prolonged
INTRODUCTION 5
war and their citizens indoctrinated into believing that only victory rather than
negotiated settlement was a suitable outcome, the Second World War rapidly became
a total war of domination, where defeat meant the destruction of one's society and
way of life. The stakes were never higher and the nations of the world proved, in
almost all cases, willing to accept millions of casualties and untold anguish in the
pursuit of victory or the staving off of defeat.
Germany's victory over France in June 1940 shook Great Britain and the
Commonwealth, and there was more misfortune when Fascist Italy, under the
leadership of Benito Mussolini, joined its Nazi allies to pick through the spoils of
war. The Battle of Britain in late summer and fall of 1940 inflicted the first reversal
on the Germans in the war, and then the British people withstood the sustained
bombardment of the Blitz that pummelled their cities until May 1941. Hitler had
hoped that the British people would fold in the face of his bombers-which up to
that point had unleashed the worst onslaughts of aerial bombing in human
history—but they were made of stern stuff. Nonetheless, some 43,384 British
people were killed and 52,370 seriously wounded and maimed.' "We can take it,"
was the rallying cry, and British citizens proved they could. Hitler would have kept
ratcheting up the killing except that the Führer was distracted by his new war in the
east against the Soviets in June 1941.
Predating the Blitz, and rising in intensity throughout 1940, the Battle of the
Atlantic saw Hitler's U-boats seek to cut the lifeline from North America to Britain
by sinking merchant ships during their ocean crossing. The Royal Canadian Navy's
protection of the merchant ships carrying food, supplies, munitions, and all manner
of war materiel meant living to fight another day. When Japan attacked the United
States at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the American giant was dragged fully
into the conflict, although Hitler's declaration of war on the United States a few days
later allowed President Franklin Roosevelt to ensure that it would be a two-front war
against Germany and Japan. The weak Allied positions in the Far East were rapidly
overrun by the Japanese forces, who trounced the decrepit, myopic, and poorly
led British and American defenders. Close to 2,000 Canadian soldiers were caught
up in the Japanese assault, fighting in the hopeless defence of the British colony of
Hong Kong. In seventeen days of battle, 290 Canadians were killed and 493 wounded
