40
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
guard or a civilian. A prisoner with language skills would translate it and his
comrades could spend hours trying to decipher the propaganda and multi-layered
messages. Hitlers forced guests were also adept at building contraband radios from
scrap pieces collected or exchanged in the camps, often with the help of bribed
guards. Every night the radios picked up the BBC broadcast. The news was taken
down in rapid shorthand and then written out in fuller prose, to be distributed
throughout the camp huts. When it arrived, lookouts watched for the guards while
the prisoners huddled around an orator who read out the news; the best announcers
made an art of it, using rhetoric, flourish, and some biting commentary on the Axis
defeats. "Attempts were frequently made by the Germans to locate and confiscate
the radio but they never succeeded," observed RCAF Flight Sergeant George Brown,
a prisoner as of late August 194326 Not all prisoners were so lucky or wily in hiding
their radios. When the devices were discovered, the prisoners set to building new
ones. Camp newspapers were also created, often by compiling information from the
radio broadcasts and letters. The direction of the wider war effort brought the men
together, providing optimism that the conflict might someday come to a close.
Upon an airman's failure to return to Britain, the military authorities sent letters to
the next of kin on the status of the missing Canadian. No one knew—not the author-
ities nor the family if the airman was dead, on the run, or in a prisoner-of-war
camp. Often the German authorities withheld letter privileges from a prisoner for
some time as a bargaining tool in the hope of extracting useable intelligence from
him. And so it might take months for a family to learn that a loved one was alive.
Prisoners were allowed to write two letters and four postcards a month, which
were sent through the Red Cross, and so there was the ability to get word home,
albeit in sanitized form. Maimed prisoners- usually crippled with amputations or
horrific burns were also repatriated to England and brought news from behind
barbed wire. Squadron Leader George Hill - who wore the DFC with two bars and
had shot down fourteen enemy aircraft before he crashed in April 1944-had a
repatriated friend write to his wife, "Don't name the baby until I get back!'7 His
wife probably went ahead with the naming since it would be more than a year before
he was reunited with his family.
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
BEFORE THE INVASION of Europe in June 1944, most Canadian prisoners were air-
men, except for those who were captured during the failed Dieppe raid of August 19,
1942. Some 1,946 prisoners were marched into captivity. As they were moved east
towards their new camps, word got around quickly that officers and NCOs, under
the Geneva Convention, did not have to work, so most Canadians removed their
rank from their uniform and provided their jailors with new ones, as corporals and
sergeants. The Germans shook their heads, wondering how all the privates had been
killed on the beaches! Many men kept their new rank for months, even years, and
the Canadian government did not offer corrections.
The Dieppe prisoners faced a challenge unique from other Allied prisoners. After
the operation, the Germans were furious to discover on the beaches the bodies of a
few German prisoners with their hands tied.28 The victors also seized orders stipulat-
ing that prisoners were to be tied to prevent their escape and the destruction of
documents. This was not terribly nefarious, considering the nature of the raid that
was planned as a hit-and-run affair in which prisoners would be dragged back onto
the boats with the retreating forces. But the outraged Germans in early September
ordered that, in retaliation, the Dieppe prisoners be manacled.
Canadian infantrymen captured during the Dieppe raid of August 19, 1942.
Some 1,946 Canadians were made prisoner.
