220
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Dextraze, a future chief of the defence staff, led the FMRs and secured the farm for
the Rileys.
The advance parties of the Rileys pushed forward past Troteval but ran into a
number of Panthers. A fierce battle ensued, with the Rileys making good use of the
ground and their PIATs to blast the enemy tanks. "There wasn't the slightest reason
in the world why I wasn't killed three or four times," wrote Tom Didmon, a clerk
who was pulled from the headquarters company and thrown into the offensive.® He
and a comrade, scared out of their wits, faced a German tank and knocked it out
wich a PIAT, a weapon neither one of them had faith in. Biting back their fear,
Didmon and his comrades continued to move forward.
The new colonel, John Rockingham, who had replaced the much-respected and
recently wounded Denis Whitaker, worried about the German strength in front of him
if the enemy was using Panthers so recklessly, but the attack went forward a little after
4.м. Three companies of Rileys swept up the ridge through the firestorm from at least
four German machine gun teams. The surviving Rileys methodically cleared out the
sit trench defences and then occupied Verrières, before holding off several counter-
attacks of grenadiers and panzers." Throughout the day, Rockingham ordered forward
British anti-tank guns, Shermans from the Ist Hussars and the Ist Royal Tank Regiment,
and even rocket firing Typhoons. A Canadian infantryman eyewitness remembered,
*One Sherman burst into fame... The hatch flew open, emitting clouds of black
smolkc... One man came out backwards, catching his knee on the edge of the hatch,
and hung there for a moment, blazing like a torch, before he fell to the ground.""
With most of the regimental officers down, Rockingham advanced into Verrières
to see the situation first-hand and reorganize the wobbly defence. Tom Didmon,
who had a view from a sit trench, commented on Rockingham's fearless walk
through town, even as bullets and shells were striking all around: "He was either very
brave and cool or completely nuts."?1 "Rocky" was awarded the first of his two
Distinguished Service Orders for his leadership during the bartle. 72 The Rileys held
the village, spraying the enemy forces that came overland at them. The men from
Hamilton had made a remarkable attack and defence, but with the Germans com-
mitting reserves, the follow-on unit, the Roval Regiment of Canada, had little chance
of pushing on to Rocquancourt, about 1,5 kilometres down the ridge.
OPERATION SPRING 221
On the right flank, the Cameron Highlanders of Canada had to pass through
bawled through farms, sunken roads, buildings, and cellars. A patch of mud or a
sone wall was fought over as though it were Paris or Berlin. Grenades were the
napon of choice in the close-quarters fighting. As one officer said of battle: once
contact with the enemy was made, "you lose control so damned fast."73 The Canadians,
surging forward in section-level attacks, smoked out the SS troops in the area several
cine, only to find the persistent Nazis emerging from subterranean hideouts and slit
trenches to begin shooting again.
The Germans were finally cleared and the Calgary Highlanders pushed on to the
mal vile of May-sur-Orne. The Highlanders struggled to keep formation in
the dak, as German sniper teams harassed them. As dawn broke, the Calgarys were
shot of May-sur-Orne. The tactical situation was very unclear, and the brigadier,
R) Megil, had little concrete intelligence because so many of the Highlanders
shoes had been killed and wounded. The exploitation battalion, the Black Watch
Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada, were ready to go, but Megill feared sending
them into the unknown.
No one knew what was happening at the front, but Simonds wanted to smash
te remy again. Though the Canadian general was receiving updates in his
ghound armoured car, he remained overly optimistic about the hold his sol-
is had the ridge, which was in fact very precarious. The most challenging
mation was that the Calgarys had failed to secure May-sur-Orne and the
aron of Canada had not entirely cleared the village of St. Martin. Both pos-
tions were held by enemy troops and machine-oun teams. The Black Watch,
nose forward companies were already advancing into the fight, was to thread the
readle between the positions.
The Black Watch soldiers had left their rear trenches at 3:30 A.M., and the men
se under fire as they weaved forward over the next two hours. They kept up the
arance through enemy machine-gun fire, mortars, and snipers from St. Martin and
lay-sur-Orne. Soon most of the company and regimental officers were down.
geant Benson, of the scout platoon for the Black Watch, was part of the attack
