360
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
aiding the infantry in his comment,
"The Army having been drugged with bombs, it
is going to be a difficult process to cure the drug addicts."6 It was an ungenerous
assessment to say the least. Lacking additional bombers, Simonds planned an amphib-
ious assault to avoid the strongest German fortresses, working closely with the Royal
Navy and Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, Eisenhower's naval chief. The Royal Navy
understood the importance of defeating the Germans on Walcheren to open up
Antwerp, and it supplied the warships and Royal Marine commandos to do the job.
But Simonds had no success in convincing airborne commanders to land troops
along the western end of the causeway. It looked too much like another Market
Garden disaster, with the Canadians unable to cross the causeway, the amphibious
operation denied, and paratroopers likely drowning in the flooded polders.
As Walcheren lay largely submerged, Simonds spent the rest of the month wait-
ing for his divisions to complete their operations throughout the Scheldt to allow
him to better position this final battle. While the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division
was in the final stages of clearing out the Breskens Pocket in Switchback, Simonds
ordered the 2nd Division to cross the causeway to distract the Germans from the
amphibious landings to the south at Flushing and to the west at Westkapelle on
November 1.
The 1,200-metre-long causeway was a death trap. The Germans had blocked both
ends with concrete bunkers protected by barbed wire. All of the German mortars and
arillery guns in the area were focused on the narrow bridge. The Black Watch drew
the short straw and was ordered across on October 31. Even the normally stic brig-
ade and divisional headquarters were not pleased with an operation uncomfortably
similar to the Charge of the Light Brioade hut with less chance of victory.
Seeking a solution to the likely slaughter, the Calgary Highlanders tried to sail
across the flats under the bridge but found there was not enough water. On the
causeway, the Black Watch advanced with three commanies around 10.20 A M. on
October 31 It was no surprise that they ran into sheete of machine-oun call arms.
and mortar fire. They did not get far.
That night, on All Hallow's Eve, the Calgary Highlanders attempted to bounce
the causeway behind a bombardment that obened up twentv minutes hefnre mid-
night. The Germans were aware that the Canadians were likely to turn to their guns
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
361
to shoot the infantry across the bridge, and so they moved their front-line defenders
forward onto the causeway and laid down murderous fire. "The heavy shells were
the worst," recounted Signaller Frank Holm. "The explosions would send a shock
through you that would reach the very depths of your nervous system and put in
doubt your ability to take it.... I swore that if I ever got out of this hellish place alive
Iwouldn't mind eating dirt for the rest of my life."77
The Highlanders retreated but were sent back across the causeway a few hours
later, on November 1, for a pre-dawn storming behind a creeping barrage that lifted
50 metres every two minutes. With shells tearing through the enemy defenders, the
Highlanders sprinted into the fire-shrouded darkness. An official report observed
that the enemy mortar fire was devastating, while "an 88mm gun firing directly
along the Causeway, also caused numerous casualties."8 With incredible bravery, the
Highlanders made it across and spread out on the western side, where they were
hammered by enemy fire and burned with flame throwers. The position was untenable
and the Canadians were forced to pull back late in the day. However, elsewhere
on the island, British commandos and infantrymen were landing at Flushing and
Werkapelle, and overcoming the static German defences.
One final drive was made in the cold rain early on November 2, with Le Régiment
de Maisonneuve ordered to pass through the Calgary Highlanders, who were still
dinging to their battered positions. A seventy-two-gun barrage opened up, rendering
the causeway, according to Lieutenant Charles Forbes,
"like a steel beam being
pushed into a hot furnace."? Heavy cloud cover, obscuring rain, and poor intelli-
gence caused much of the bombardment, delivered by the guns of the 52nd British
Division, to come crashing down on the unlucky Calgary Highlanders. Some of the
Highlanders withdrew through the barrage, but in the smoke, dust, and fire they
looked like attacking German troops, and some of the Maisonneuves cut down their
own brothers in arms.
Around the perimeter of Walcheren, the commandos converged on the Germans,
while the British 52nd Division, taking over from the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division, found some hardened trails across the mud flats and outflanked the
Germans to the south of the causeway on the night of November 2. The futile frontal
assault on the causeway was bait to attract the Germans away from the amphibious
