74 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
was the 25-pounder, a better gun than the Great War's primary field piece, the
18-pounder. The crew worked as a team, methodically feeding the gun. One gunner
laid the shell in the breech while another used a wooden rammer to jam it in. A third
gunner put the cartridge containing the propellant into the breech, and then closed
it. Finally, a gunner, responding to a senior NCO or an office's gun-laying (aiming)
instructions, pulled the fring ever. Canadian gunnery sergeant Alan Troy recounted
that the 25 pounder was a "magnificent piece of artillery." An experienced crew was
supposed to fire five rounds per minute, but Troy's experience was that "with a good
layer and a bit of fiddling with the return valve, the oil feld run up system, you could
manage nine rounds"" The 5,5 inch medium guns delivered an even more devastat-
ing punch, and each time the gun fired, those in the vicinity could feel their teeth
rattle and their bones vibrate. It was far worse to be on the receiving end of the
82-pound shell filled with high explosive.
Canadian artillery gun team hauling a howitzer into position in preparation
for a bombardment of the enemy lines. Note the camouflage netting.
THE HITLER LINE
75
The Indian division followed its creeping barrage to the Gari and, under enemy
fire, prepared a difficult river crossing in assault boats. By dawn on the 12th, the
Indians had established a bridgehead, but it was shallow and under fire. Nonetheless,
it allowed sappers to begin the process of rushing forward tank-bearing bridges that
would allow tanks and vehicles to cross the watery obstacle. But the Germans
smashed the narrow bridgehead with shell and mortar fire, forcing engineers and
infantry to dig for cover. The situation was bad. A few hours later, Canadian engin-
eers came up with an innovative plan. A Sherman from the 14th Canadian Armoured
Regiment, better known as the Calgary Regiment, was driven forward into the water,
with the crew jumping out as it submerged. With the turret removed, the Sherman
had a 24-metre Bailey bridge firmly secured to its body, and the bridge remained
above water. It was a model of ingenuity, and Shermans from the Calgary and
Ontario regiments backed the Indians, knocking out artillery and machine-gun pos-
itions. The Indian advance continued.
On the left, a robust and over-strength Corps expéditionnaire français, consisting of
Free French forces, broke through the Gustav Line, forcing Kesselring to throw in one
of his few Panzer divisions, the 90th, to blunt the assault. It slowed the French,
although they continued to make progress. On the right flank, however, the Poles were
turned away from the German bastion at Cassino. With that anchor, the paratroopers
were able to mount an aggressive defence, even as Allied bombers pounded known
positions behind the lines and isolated the Cassino garrison from reinforcements.
The Gustav Line was broken, but the Allies could only inch forward along the
pulverized road system. Traffic jams slowed the advance to a crawl. The Ist Canadian
Division was thrown into the line to relieve the Indian division, and in the early
hours of the 16th, it set about closing the eight kilometres to the Hitler Line.
With the ground opening up, the 17th saw Vokes order a two-brigade advance.
Behind a light barrage at 6:30 A.M., three regiments overran a series of enemy strong-
points, employing aggressive platoon-level manoeuvres, in which the Canadians
pinned the enemy down with machine-gun and rifle fire and dashed forward on the
Ranks to winkle out Jerry with grenades, guns, and bombs. One trooper remarked of
the Quebec-raised Royal 22e Regiment infantrymen in the advance: "It was a real thrill
to se the battle-wise [R22 el march straight forward, spread out and half crouching.""
