192
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
after D-Day, against the new snorkel-equipped U-boats. These boats ran fast under-
water, up to 20 knots, recharged batteries while submerged, and were adept at
hiding in the wreck-strewn Channel waters. They were a tough opponent. However,
by the summer of 1944, the Allied anti-submarine warships were assisted in
attacking the U-boats by more effective underwater radar such as the 144 asdic, and
new weapons like the Hedgehog.
The Hedgehog was a variation on the depth
charge that fired ahead of a ship. The cone of missiles, which numbered 24 in a full
set, were projected about 180 metres, and only exploded on contact with a sub's
hull. While this removed the chance of the depth charge detonating at a depth that
might damage a U-boat, it also meant that the asdic radar was not thrown off by
multiple explosions and gasses in the water. The Hedgehog allowed for more con-
sistent contact wich the U-boat. The evolving sub-killing tactics dictated that when
a warship located a submerged U-boat, it kept its prey in its sonar, directing other
vessels onto the echo, which then dropped their depth charges or projected their
Hedgehog bombs. The two or more surface ships alternated their attacks, with one
always trying to keep the U-boat from slipping away and the others saturating the
depths with explosives.
The tide named against the German U-boats
from the summer of 1943. In this photograph,
«nether submarine dies at the hands of the Allies.
There were also more
mundane
patrols to find U-boats lurking on the
bottom of the Channel. EG-11 became
very effective in the disciplined tactic of
mapping the wrecks, where the U-boats
rested in silence, waiting for the war-
ships to pass overhead before rising to
launch torpedoes into supply ships.
With the U-boats hiding among the
many sunken ships, "it boiled down to
us literally having to assume that any
contact we made was a bottomed sub-
marine,"
noted one Canadian sailor.?
Each contact with sonar was investi-
gated, usually by plastering
it with
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
193
depth charges or systematically checking with a grappling hook on a wire. A depth
charge was slid down the wire to detonate and ensure the wrecks were dead ships
and not lurking U-boats." In EG-11 this was known as "tin opening," and it was
an effective if unglamorous method of hunting the U-boats and occasionally kill-
ing them.
Prentice and his warships destroyed U-678 on July 7 after a long hunt and sent
U-621 to a watery grave in the Bay of Biscay on August 19. On the return trip to
England, Ottawa II, Chaudière, and Kootenay discovered U-984 and sank it with depth
charges. The U-boat battles were not entirely lopsided, and the new Type XXI sub-
marine continued to claim victims, including the RCN corvettes Alberni and Regina,
both lost in August. On August 8, the Flower-class corvette, HMCS Regina, stopped to
pick up survivors from an American merchant ship, Ezra Weston, which had struck a
mine. In the gathering twilight, the lurking U-667 unleashed a torpedo at Regina and it
went down in less than a minute. One of the crew, Thomas "Spud" Malone, had acted
o hisown initiative and set the on-board depth charges to safe; if he had not, the explo-
sions would have killed the men in the water. Malone was one who did not survive.
Doug Tope was on the starboard bridge when Regina was hit. He was blown
vet the rail and dropped onto the gun deck. The corvette was already going down,
and the dazed Tope barely had time to kick off his weighty sea boots before going
no the drink. He survived but was forever haunted by those sailors who could not
aut the ships interior before it filled with water. Stoker Don McIntosh remembered
the explosion of the torpedo: He was hurled into the water, but fortunately he always
tore his life vest because he could not swim. Bunker oil soon smothered him, as it
si his comrades, to the point where they could not recognize each other in the tarry
budge, and only later did he learn that he had lacerations to his face and head. In the
Guled water, men gave up the struggle and sank beneath the waves. Others strug
ed on, even those with broken limbs or puncture wounds, gulping in thick oil,
coming up, and struggling to find something to cling to as waves smashed against
hem. "Those remaining," wrote Surgeon-Lieutenant G.A. Could the ship's medical
hoer who was also in the water "June to life with that grim tenacity known onlv
to those who have had to fight against the hunory sea "72 Some sixtv sailors were
stanually rescued; twenty-eight men were lost.
