256 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
lurching stop, at which point they hoped the Kangaroo was not being sized up by an
enemy gunner. It was the stuff of bleeding ulcers.
"We had fought our way through the night under incredible conditions," remem-
bered Corporal Bruce Evans of the Ist Hussars. "Tanks were on fire; smoke and dust
from the fields clouded our vision."? Delays were inevitable as commanders were
knocked out, wireless radios were rendered useless with maddening frequency, and
formations were scattered in the firefights. But the armoured thrust continued
through the wreckage until dawn at about 5 A.M. The 4th Brigade had secured its
objectives with few casualties.
On the 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade's sector, the enemy put up a stiffer defence,
and the winding and cratered roads were difficult to navigate. Enemy anti-tank guns
fired into the column and forced a mad scramble and dismounting of the infantry.
With little time to organize the attack, the South Saskatchewan Regiment was shot
onto the target by Canadian gunners, and the Regina Rifles swept through the vil-
lage of Rocquancourt. Elements of the German 89th Division, fortified on Verrières
Ridge, especially in strongpoints on the reverse slopes, escaped the worst of the artil-
lery bombardment. Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal (FMRs) and the Cameron Highlanders
of Canada were forced to dear May-sur-Orne and Fontenay-le-Marmion in fierce
fighting. Battles over the same villages that had eluded the Canadians' grasp during
Spring were now won. Wich the Canadians blasting forward, Lieutenant-Colonel
Mel Gordon, commander of the Sherbrooke Fusilier Regiment, wrote after the war
that the road to Falaise looked open "and we had more Germans behind us than we
had in front of us.""
THE FIRST PHASE of Totalize was a success, with much of the German front lines
broken by 6:30 A.M. on the 8th, including the previously impregnable Verrières
Ridge. Hundreds of prisoners trickled back to the rear, and more than 2,000 from
the 89th Division were in Canadian hands by the next day." The armoured forma-
tions saw daylight and looked to roll down the Falaise highway, but traffic congestion
slowed everything and eliminated the chance for a hell. for- leather charge. Simonds
second phase, the armoured thrust. was set for about sir hours after the completed
first stage, and was to follow another bomber operation a little after noon. The pause
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
257
mas too long. While Simonds had felt it necessary to build in time for potential
delays, as well as to clear the road for the new Polish and Canadian armoured div-
ions passing through the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, the Allies now had no
means of exploiting the situation without advancing down the road and being hit by
the bombers. It was also too late to call off the aerial strike. The exploitation phase,
based on set-in-stone plans, prevented Simonds's forces from capitalizing on the
initial shock, and one Canadian armoured officer described the delay as akin to
iropping to water the horses in the middle of a cavalry charge."32
The delay gave precious time to the Canadians' old nemesis, the 12th SS Panzer
Division. The Hitlerjugend had been decimated in fighting since June, but it
remained an elite force, equipped with over a dozen self-propelled guns, a brigade of
Lufwaffe 88mm fak guns, and more than fifty tanks, including ten formidable
Tigers. Even as fuel shortages plagued the panzer divisions by late July— a testament
1o the effectiveness of the Allied bombers in damaging trains, roadways, and
bridges_ the Germans gathered what they had for short counterattacks. Moreover,
much of the artillery from the shred-
ded 89th Division survived and was
now at the disposal of 12th SS com-
mander Kurt Meyer, who set about
shifting units on the morning of the
Bit to block the advance southward 34
By 12:30 P.M., battlegroups had
altady begun to throw themselves at
the Allied drive to slow it down, with
German tank
ace Major Michael
Wittmann-one of the most cele-
bated tank commanders of the war,
wich 143 kills- leading seven Tiger
tinks against the Canadians. The Tigers
ad supporting Mik IVs were a terrible
threat, but Major Radley-Walters of
die Sherbrooke Fusilier had organized
The Germans feared Tiger tank. Larger and
more powerful than anything the Allies could
put into the field, the Tigers were relatively
few in number but fierce in battle.
