176 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and Charlie Martin of the Queen's Own Rifles observed laconically, "Patrols are not
for the faint-hearted.s Slowly, the German strongpoints and guns were mapped out
from the ground and with aerial photography, and information was collated at bat-
talion, brigade, and divisional headquarters. The targets were then given to the artillery
to reduce with shellfire. At the same time, the Germans, aware that the increased
activity on the Carpiquet front likely portended a large-scale operation, were increas-
ingly at the ready.
In order to destabilize the German defence of Caen, Montgomery ordered the
Canadians to seize the village of Carpiquet and the surrounding airfield, which
held a commanding view of the countryside?" Operation Windsor was to kick off on
July 4, four days in advance of the main Anglo-Canadian operation against Caen,
and the day when the one millionth Allied soldier landed on the Normandy beaches.
The terrain and defences favoured the enemy, and the Canadians predicted
Operation Windsor would be a tough "show." Major-General Rod Keller Organized
the largest set-piece battle to date in the Normandy campaign. All three of the
8ch Infantry Brigade battalions were ordered into the attack, and they were sup-
ported by the Shermans and Fireflys of the Fort Garry Horse To the south, a fourth
battalion, the Royal Winnipeg Rifes, was to secure three hangars. The Canadians
would have to cross 2 kilometres of open farmers fields, alchough they were to be
backed by 21 arillery regiments of 760 British and Canadian guns, and further
supported by the punishing naval guns of HIMS Rodney, Roberts, and Belfast? This
would be a set-piece firepower-driven battle not dissimilar to those fought by the
Canadian Corps during the later part of the Great War, and the concentration of
arillery was far heavier than, for example, the Canadian offensive at Vimy Ridge in
April 1917. On this narrow front, the artillery would saturate enemy positions wich
fire and lay down a creeping barrage roughly 1,750 metres wide and 300 metres deep
and lifting 100 metres every three minutes, while the naval guns, mortar teams, and
machine guns targeted other front and rear areas. Despite this ferocity, the barrage
was meant only to stun the enemy because dug-in troops were rarely killed, even by
ucmendous curtains of shellfire."
The plan to capture Carpiquer village called for the North Shore Regiment t0
advance on the left and Le Reviment de a Chaudière on the riche, wirh the Queen's
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
177
Own Rifes in reserve, and to pass through the two lead battalions in the second
phase. Each battalion had two companies up and two back, and these companies
were also echeloned, with the two platoons up and another back. There were about
1,000 men in the forward thrust from the two forward battalions.
"The whole horizon in a semi-circle behind us became a blaze when the artillery
opened up," said one Canadian. The infantry battalions crossed the start line at 5 A.M.29
The shells screamed overhead and the ground buckled. The infantry moved forward
cautiously, many shielding their eyes from the terror churning up the fields in front
of them, stepping around small fires in the grain and the black, smoking craters.
Almost immediately the Canadians were met by a counter-barrage by the 12th SS
defenders. The Hiderjugend had spent weeks plotting out every sector of the front—as
Canadian infantry attacking Carpiquet airfield, July 4, 1944.
