422
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
spite of missing limbs, blindness, or chronic pain. Private Bill Hennessey, who had
enlisted at age sixteen and was hit through the spine with shrapnel at the end of
1944, entered the Christie Street Veterans' Hospital in Toronto as a paraplegic. He
was discharged twenty months later, after painful physiotherapy and surgery; but he
left under his own power. Ronald Shawcross, an infantry officer with the Regina
Rifles, fought from D-Day to the end of the war. It took a lot to stop the hulking
six-foot-chree man of 220 pounds, and during the war he was hit several times by
shell splinters. Years later, x-rays revealed that many pieces of jagged steel splinters
were sill embedded in his body." It is chilling to think that among the ashes of the
many veterans who were cremated after their deaths lay twisted steel. These men of
war carried the metal of the battlefield in their bodies for decades.
Veterans also carried the weight of the war in their minds. Bernard Finestone, a tank
officer from Montreal who fought through Italy with the British Columbia Dragoons,
recalled the savagery of combat, and how the Germans fired on the wounded to further
demoralize survivors or draw out more soldiers to be gunned down as they sought to
help their vulnerable comrades. In his words, Canadian troops "started to behave
the exact same way." Battle brutalized men. Finestone, like countless veterans, was
haunted by the war, and he believed, "There isn't anybody who was in real battle who
came out unmarked, * Archie Marsh survived the torpedoing of two ships on the
Atlantic. His last ship to go down, the corvette HIMCS Regina, left him badly shaken
by the trauma, and throughout his long life he could not stand to hear an alarm
clock ring." The sound brought back devastating war memories, especially of the last
Action Station alarm before Regina was hit and sunk. Private Ted Patrick of the Irish
Regiment of Canada was affected by nightmares of being locked in hand-to-hand
batte with Germans, and would awaken to find himself choking his wife. Patrick
was plagued by his "war dreams" all his life and it took decades before he was for-
mally diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder for which he received a partial
pension. Many veterans suffered "recurrent, invasive memories" that built in force,
leading to many suicide attempts. One such case was that of RCAF Rear Gunner
Richard Puves, who few in the sortie against Dresden Each time he read about the
"occasional arguments in the media about the role of Bomber Command," Pyves
slipped into a depression, and he eventually succeeded in taking his own lif 67 Frnest
VETERANS
423
Vale of the Carleton and York Regiment, who was shot in both legs and survived a
but of jaundice, revealed forty years after the war, and shortly before his death in
98 trage sixty-eight, how war-inspired terror stalked him day and night: "It some-
times surprises me from behind, my skin crawls."68
Surivor's guilt plagued many veterans who mourned the comrades they lost, and
manswered questions plucked at the mind. Bomber Command veteran Howard
Hever survived his two tours and continued to serve in the postwar RCAF.
Throughout his life he enjoyed the company of fellow veterans, often at the Toronto
hanch of the Aircrew Association of Great Britain. As former fighting mates came
nether over the years to reminiscence and share the joys of life, Hewer thought
about his friends who never had a chance to grow old. Why was his life spared? "We
-gaftl, but there is a trace of guilt; we have no answers."t It would take most
eras years to let go of the painful, tightly held memories.
The war lingered on in the mind, replayed at the conscious and subconscious
ares, but not all veterans were in turmoil. Most, in fact, were not. We must not
at ris of everyone who served, and indeed, innumerable men took strength
tum the challenges they faced and overcame in the war. The stories of three must
sad here for those of the many. Frank Curry harkened back to the battles in the
Atlantic. "Those first few months of operations in the North Atlantic in winter were
tie ashed deep into my bones, my being, never to be lost or forgotten, even all
Ete a later. They tested me in a way which shaped my life, and my future." o
Cury had faced the sea and the enemy and he had won. Lancaster pilot Donald
Cheney survived thirty-nine sorties, including the one on which his bird came down,
and he was awarded a Distinguished Flving Cross. Cheney went to university and
made a career in the civil service In reflecting on his war experience, he understood
de aged me tremendously. I had always been very shy. I was a little fellow...
developed an awful lot of confidence that gave me tremendous amount of personal
pride and I felt that I had really achieved something very important in my life to
sart with.... The confidence staved with me although terrible memories have always
been with me"?! John O'Prien grew up poor, fighting and scrapping on the Halifax
docks. He had dropped out of school in grade ten and was told by one teacher that
le would never amount to more than a ditch digger. He served with the West Nova
