10 INTRODUCTION
THIS IS THE SECOND OF TWO VOLUMES, and it continues where the first left off. It
can be read in isolation from the first, but there is much contextualizing information
in the battles and campaigns of 1939 to 1943. While all three services fought in
those years, the Battle of the Atlantic against the U-boats was the fundamental cam-
paign if the Allies were to survive and then mount the invasion of Europe. The tide
turned against the Kriegsmarine in May 1943, but the convoys across the Atlantic
remained essential to the Allied cross-Channel invasion, even as the number of ships
lost decreased. By the summer of 1943, when this book picks up the story, the aerial
war against Germany had reached a frenzied pace, with hundreds of bombers flying
nightly to pound cities. The war on land was also reaching a decisive point with the
ongoing campaign in Italy and the coming D-Day invasion of June 1944. And while
this book focuses more on the army and air force than the navy, as Canadian land
forces fought in two major theatres of war, the Royal Canadian Navy continued its
work in supporting the multiple Allied fighting formations on all fronts and in shep-
herding supplies across the Atlantic.
Victory over the Nazis in the worldwide war required moral compromise: from
accepting and carrying out the strategy of starving nations of resources to mounting
direct attacks against non-combatants with bombers. It also necessitated an alliance
with Stalin- a mass murderer of millions of his own people. When dealing with
Hider, a dictator bent on conquering and carrying out genocide, only armed might
could restore freedom to a doomed continent.
This total war involving millions fighting on continents and oceans spanning the
world must be understood and reconstructed in its totality, with grand Allied strategy
feeding down into national decision making and further down to wartime operations.
Within this maelstrom are the tactics, weapon systems, logistics, and countless other
factors that shaped warfighting capabilities. And often forgotten or pushed to the
periphery in writing about the worldwide war is the role of combatants struggling
for their lives. They made decisions to continue to fight, to go forward. Sometimes
they were mowed down by scything machine-gun fire, or blown apart by flak, or
sent to their graves in dark waters. Others succeeded, against the odds. This was the
war of the infantry section, of the ship's crew, and of the Halifax bomber. It was a
world made small, where the group banded together to carry on.
INTRODUCTION
11
This book examines the Canadian fighting experience, from the challenges of
command and control at the level of generals or admirals, to units in battle, and
finally to the personal, terrifying, and at times exhilarating experience of servicemen
in combat. Women in uniform played a part in the conflict, usually behind the lines,
except for nurses who cared for the wounded within range of the guns. The book
follows the fighting of Canadians on all three fronts— at sea, in the air, and on the
ground— and tries to place the combat experience in the context of the Allied war
effort without losing sight of the truth that battle is about individuals.
The war was a kaleidoscope of events and experiences. No one's war was the same,
although there were commonalities. I have tried to draw these out, basing my research
on seventy-five years of scholarship, newly uncovered archival documents, and pub-
lished and unpublished Canadian eyewitness accounts and interviews. Rifleman
J.L. Wagar of the Queen's Own Rifles stayed in touch with his former comrades in
arms after the war, and found much in common with all veterans. Yet there were
aspects of the war that only he had seen and felt. In those cases, he described such
experiences as "my own private folklore of the war." In this book, I aim to reveal the
private and previously ignored, and to provide a narrative and collective biography
for the more than one million Canadians who served in uniform. There is much here
that should resonate with Canadians today, and in our own uncertain times. But
history is also a foreign country. There are some things that should remain strange to
us; there are some things the historian should not attempt to link to the present. The
motivations for war and the ability of ordinary men to endure horrendous strain can
be both grasped by and lost to the modern reader.
While the Second World War has rightly been called "the good war," insofar as it
was fought against a regime of bestial evil, there were unwholesome elements to it.
To beat an experienced and callous enemy, the Canadian soldiers, airmen, and sailors
fought almost as ruthlessly. The killing of opponents in land battles and the bombing
of cities, industries, and civilians were all elements of a "
'good" war that had to be
won. We should not be surprised that when we send men into a violent environment
they will likely be scarred by the actions they must carry out on behalf of their nation.
Yet for much of the twentieth century, Canadians largely left veterans to deal with
their own personal demons and were often not eager to hear from veterans. The story
