70 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
rains, and with little shelter-—the Canadians and Americans captured la Difensa,
owning the mountain on December 9, and later Monte Rementanea. During these
intense engagements, the unit suffered 511 casualties.45
The Devils Brigade continued to be used in mountain-clearing operations into
early 1944, especially in preparation for Clark's drive to Rome, and they acquired an
elite reputation. One of the most famous of these irregular soldiers was twenty-eight-
year-old Sergeant Tommy Prince, a former lumberjack turned scout. He was fearless
on the battlefield and eventually earned the Military Medal and the United States
Silver Star. There were others like him in the elite formation, although soon their
numbers were much diminished by combat. The Ist SSF was so badly cut up in
fighting that it was disbanded later that year. It lived on in reunions and was later
immortalized in a 1968 film, The Devil's Brigade, in which the Canadians were
portrayed as sticklers for drill and discipline and the Americans as loose-cannon
cowboys. A few miffed Canadian veterans remembered their role differently.
GENERAL MARK CLARKS U.S. Fifth Army, consisting of American and Common-
wealth units, launched three attacks from January to March 1944, each time attempt-
ing to advance northward to Rome by breaking into the Liri Valley. Clark had little
success. The mountain fortress of Monte Cassino and fierce German resistance shat-
tered the American, Indian, and New Zealand-led offensives, 46 With the forces at
Anzio up the west coast contained in what the Germans sneered was the "largest
self-sustaining prisoner of war camp in the world, General Alexander considered a
new operation through the Liri Valley, hoping that it would relieve the Anzio beach-
head and secure the prize of Rome." More importantly, Alexander was under orders
from London and Washington to turn the screws against the German forces in Italy
to ensure that the enemy high command could not siphon off divisions to protect
against the Allied D-Day landings, which were then planned for May 1944.
Aleander's forces were to hold down the enemy on the cheap. The vast bulk of new
equipment and war supplies was earmarked for the invasion of Europe. The Allied
forces in Italy were also constrained in fighting since the reinforcement tap had drib-
bled off, again to favour the D-Day invasion. As Alexander acknowledged in early
1944, "We cannot afford heavy casualties."" And so Alexander was forced to fight
THE HITLER LINE
71
with the few advantages that he had. Airpower and firepower would even the odds,
and Alexander planned an intensive, artillery-centric battle to slowly grind down
enemy forces.
The most direct route to Rome was through the Liri Valley in the centre of Italy,
bordered by the Abruzzi Mountains in the northeast and the Aurunci Mountains in
the west. While the valley was narrow at only 6 to 10 kilometres wide and 20 kilo-
metres long, and cut with four significant rivers-Rapido, Liri, Gari, and Gargliano—
this gateway allowed for a direct thrust along the main Naples-to-Rome road. It was
far from an easy strike. The valley was dominated by heights on each flank, including
the mountain fortress of Cassino on the Allies' right, which had been pounded by
bombers and reduced to rubble but remained defended fiercely by the 1st Parachute
Division. Blocking the Allied advance lay two German barriers: the Gustav Line
long the fast-flowing Gargliano, which defended the entrance to the Liri Valley,
and then the kilometre-deep Hitler Line, which was a switchback position about
8 kilometres to the rear, and anchored on the villages of Aquino in the north and
Pontecorvo in the south. Concrete pillboxes, reinforced redoubts, barbed wire,
minefields, and all manner of anti-tank guns and machine guns made both trench
systems formidable.
General Alexander ordered the Eighth Army to transfer to the west, cross the nar-
row spine of Italy, and then assault northward against the German Tenth Army. With
luck, they would break through to Rome. If they failed, they might hold the enemy
in place long enough for the Anzio forces to break out, punch southeast through the
tight divisions of the German Fourteenth Army that surrounded the beachhead, and
destroy the ten divisions of the Tenth Army from the rear. With the Germans aware
dia likely operation through the Liri Valley, the Allies tried to deceive Kesselring that
coher amphibious landing was in the cards through purposefully leaked radio
chatter and other counter-intelligence tricks. Overwhelming Allied airpower 4.000
an so aircraft against the 700 of the Axis made it difficult for the Germans to use
their interior lines fo shift forces alono chorter internal roadways to meet threats or
even reinforce sectors in a timely manner), but there was no way for Alexander's
forces to dislodge the enemy from its main defensive trenches except through the
maled sto infantry, artillery, and armour."
