212
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The Canadians would now engage in a new drive forward to achieve Simonds's
objectives, even as the British offensive on the left flank was drawing to a close. This
would allow the Germans to shift artillery to the Canadian front. Simonds ached to
show that his green corps could deliver in battle and elevate Verrières Ridge into the
history books.
Brigadier Hugh Young's three battalions of the 6th Infantry Brigade would assault
across the Verrières Ridge front, with the Cameron Highlanders of Canada attacking
St. André-sur-Orne, while the South Saskatchewan Regiment (in the centre)
advanced on the ridge southeast of St. André, and Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal (FMRs)
aimed to punch through Beauvoir and Troteval Farms on the left flank, before mop-
ping up the village of Verrières. The reserve battalion, the Essex Scottish, attached
from the 4th Infantry Brigade, was to leapfrog the South Sasks over the crest of the
ridge and ram home the victory. The Sherbrooke Fusilier's and 1st Hussars' Sherman
tanks were ready for battle, but they were held back to protect them from anti-tank
guns and to be thrown into the line to shore up weakness. This proved to be a poor
idea, and the infantry needed their support closer to the action during the break-in
phase. Wich litte room to manoeuvre and no chance to surprise the enemy that
looked down on them, Brigadier Young ordered an intense barrage. Yet even with
this gun power, the Canadian operation was too light given the enemy strength in
the region, and it was an oversight that Simonds headquarters did not arrange for
air power to assist in blasting the enemy positions behind the ridge.º
The Canadian guns opened up at 3 P.M on July 20. Following the barrage laid
down by 25-pounders and heavier guns into St. André, the Camerons cleared it in
hard fighting. They knew they were not finished and they prepared for the enemy
reaction that was unleashed later in the day. Several additional attacks followed and
were destroyed by the combined guns of the Camerons and Able Squadron of the
Sherbrooke Fusilier, commanded by Major Radley-Walters.
On the far left of the line, sweeping south ward, the MRs ran into concentrated
fire from Beauvoir and Troteval Farms, where elements from the Ist SS Panzer
Division had cablished themselves behind the thick stone walls. The Fusiliers
bounded forward, moving and firing. Those who were hit appeared to have been
yecked backward by a rope, their bloodied bodies failing in mid-air. When the enemy
OPERATION SPRING
213
mas eventually broken, the Canadians pushed on. Unbeknownst to the FMRs, how-
at, contingent of Germans survived in the farm-house cellars, emerging after the
som had swept through and taking the FMRs from behind. With the Fusiliers caught
in the open, and under fire from several directions, they were forced into a chaotic
ita to the north of Troteval, leaving behind corpses, holed anti-tank guns, and
buming Shermans, some with flames shooting out of the hatch like a blowtorch.
In the centre, the South Saskatchewan Regiment was handled even more roughly.
Though waist-high wheat, the Johns advanced on the enemy, although they felt
naked without tanks. Exhibiting the firm fire discipline the Canadians had witnessed
orer the last six weeks, the German defenders of the 2nd Panzer Division waited
mail the prairie soldiers were in the open. The South Sasks' 6-pounder anti-tank
Bas and the Royal Canadian Artillery's larger 17-pounders had to be unhitched
from their towing vehicles before they could be brought into action. Catching
die Canadians on the move, the enemy's tanks and gunners massacred them. As the
chanty and gunners took cover, the creeping barrage moved off without them, leav-
i chem exposed, overextended, and unsupported. An enemy tank attack around
Se. broke the already savaged infantry, who had lost their commanding officer
ad two company commanders in the crushed and blackened wheat. Major John
Edmondson recalled, "One tank came right into my left forward platoon driving
igh over top of people it didn't shoot. I was hollering at the platoon sergeant when
he a feda: high explosive shelll which struck him in the back, and he dis-
argated into pieces before my eyes.! The demoralized Sasks retreated rapidly
in the rot to a reverse-slope position. They were later accused of a rout, but it
Ns more controlled than that, although only barely.
The reserve battalion, the Essex Scottish_ wet, tired, and hungry because their
cons had not come up provided support for their Saskatchewan comrades. They
bad moved forward and dug in around 6:20 p.M., but the Scottish were shaken when
the Sasks streamed back through their lines. Shortly thereafter, a number of enemy
inks ground through the Essex position. Without anti-tank guns or tanks, which
should have been organized by Gth Brionde headquarters, two companies of Essex
Scots retreated in haste from their precarious position 52 The official report observed
"tis difficult to tell the exact details of what happened to these coys [companies)
