372 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
only eight machines.!3 While aircrew fatalities crept up from the low rates prior to
D-Day, they never returned to the nearly crippling figures from 1940 to early 1944.
In this new environment, the nighttime stab was increasingly replaced by the day-
light run. From August 1944 to the end of the war, the RAF and RCAF carried out
153 daylight raids! These raids brought different challenges to the air forces, as
targets could be better located but ground flak guns could also see the planes without
radar. Walter Irwin, a bomber pilot who was on the verge of completing his second
tour in February 1945, remarked, "It was an eerie experience, flying in daylight,
when all our previous missions had been flown at night. We felt completely exposed,
as though we were naked."1s
In No. 6 Group, the losses continued at manageable levels, and by the end of the
war they were the lowest of all the groups in Bomber Command. Much of the credit
went to Air Vice-Marshal Clifford "Black Mike" McEwen, whose inspired leadership
and willingness to share the dangers with his crews raised morale.!" More robust
aircraft helped too. By wars end, ten squadrons in No. 6 Group were equipped with
Lancasters, which were far more resilient than the two-engine planes the Canadians
had started with in January 1943. Flight Lieutenant John Patterson, on his second
tour of operations, observed on July 19, 1944, "The losses in RAF have not been as
heavy as had been expected, which is a sign that we have gradually obtained mastery
of the sky.'' A few months later, Patterson allowed himself to express the fleeting
hope: "I felt that I might survive the war."18
Of course, the war was not over, and while Patterson did survive. many of his
comrades did not. The first months of 1945 saw the heaviest tonnage of bombs up
to that point in the war fall on German cities. In fact, it was Churchill, furious about
the ongoing V-2 rocket attacks goninet Rich ivilians who suched Corn renewed
focus on the saturation bombina of enemy citier He wrote to his secretary of crate
for air on lanuary 26, 1945. wonderine forcefully whether «Porlin and no doub
other cities in eastern Germany should not now be considered especially attract-
ive."" Churchill had also toved with the idea of incorporating chemical weapons
into the bombers arsenal in response to the uce of V-weanone hut he ume diceunded
by the chief of the general staff, Field Marshal Alan Brooke, and others because of
the difficulty in delivering the chemical agents from a great height and because it
BATTERING GERMANY
373
would be condemned in the future as another step towards the precipice of unparal-
lled barbarity. Eisenhower was right to note,
"I will not be a party to so-called
retaliation or use of gas. Let's for God's sake keep our eye on the ball and use our
sense." Churchill backed down, but he wanted blood.
The Anglo-American-Canadian bomber offensive did not need to turn to chemical
weapons to carry out its task of punishing Germany, and the last five months of the war
saw enemy cities saturated with high explosives and incendiaries. Many old, majestic
towns such as Hildesheim and Nordhausen, with limited war production facilities,
were gutted and burned. More than 50 percent of the urban areas in Germany were
destroyed — not damaged, but destroyed. 2! The aerial assault was relentless, and Germany
at this point in the war had no chance of winning, with the Luftwaffe on its last legs, the
Russians closing in from the east and recapturing the breadbasket of the Ukraine (and
the raw materials of other occupied nations), and the Allies on the Western Front driv-
ing towards Germany. Yet Hitler and his band of criminals were unwilling to surrender,
knowing full well that most of them would face a death sentence for their crimes against
humanity. And so the Nazi leaders demanded that the German soldiers, and the civil-
ians who supported them, fight to the end. And they did.
THE MOST INFAMOUS BOMBER MISSION of the war came late on
the night of
February 13, 1945, against Dresden, a picturesque baroque city that was also a site
of watime production. With Soviet armies nearing the Elbe, the Germans were using
Deden as a jumping-off position to send reinforcements to shore up the crumbling
front The Russians asked that the city be struck.? Seven hundred and ninety-six
bombers, including sixty-seven from RCA's No. 6 Group, drove hard to the city,
mothering it with a mix of high explosives and incendiaries. Another firestorm
erupted, as at Hamburg two years earlier. As the flames swept through the devastated
buldings and houses, many of the refugees who had flocked to the previously unhit
ciy had no access to the bomb-proof shelters or did not know where they were located.
Thousands died in the initial confaration and in two American bomber assaults
over the following days. In reports to neutral countries, German propagandists
inflated the losses to highlight the horror. and each generation returned to sifting
through the ashes to recount the dead. The number of civilians killed was likely around
