OPERATION SPRING
203
202 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
July when enemy shelling enraged several hives of bees. ' But there was no shortage of
ways to die at the front. The artillery barrages were, according to Sergeant Lloyd Pauli,
"the hardest part of the whole war."' At the same time, studied nonchalance and an
acquired toughness allowed soldiers to cope with the strain. The war diarist for the
Royal Hamilton Light Infantry witnessed one occasion during the constant shelling at
the front: "Two D Company) lads were sitting in their slit trench when an 88mm
shell passed between them. Neither one spoke for a second then one of the lads calmly
pulled himself to his feet and said 'I think I'll write a letter' and walked off."?1
Men necessarily became callous, and this extended to the soldiers' slang. Sergeant
Louis Trenton of the Royal Regiment of Canada claimed, "We never used the term
he was killed or died of wounds' and no elaboration. If one was sure his buddy was
killed, he would say: "He bought it or 'He went west and drop the subject and never
speak of him again."* Such defence mechanisms were required in a world where
deach daimed friend and foe. Soldiers found new and interesting ways of expressing
their discomfort and displeasure through vulgarity and profanity. Other than the
padres, around whom language was usually toned down, few cared what came out of
the soldiers mouths.
Rum, letters, cigarettes, and the occasional leave were minor rewards that lightened
the mencal load. Though some men were motivated by the prospect of medals, most
respients seemed positively bashful about being awarded them. Almost all award-
winners knew thar they had succeeded in battle usually through the assistance and
sacrifice of others. Captain Joseph Greenblatt, a medical officer in the Royal Canadian
Army Medical Corps, told his beloved Fran, after surviving several close calls with
denh, "Haven't won any medals, but then you don't get any medals for doing your
job. Actually the only medal I'm interested in is the Victory medal, as long as I am
here to teceive it personally"? Survival was reward enough Lance-Corporal Bil
Saunders, who served with his brother in the Irish Regiment (who was later killed),
was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for carrying five wounded soldiers off
the bandefield and then leading a small contingent back into the fight. He was unfazed
by the award since, he noted, "I didn't even know what a DCM was!"24
The high command knew that an award custem according to one official report,
had "'a most advantageous effect on the morale of the army." But the awards also had
4215
The infantry had to find ways to cope and endure.
These cheery Canadians, bosing in a staged chot enion letters from hom
