134
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
legs blown off. Surviving officers and NCOs studied maps and recollected the aerial
photographs that they had burned into their brains; then they gathered whoever was
still standing and set off to their objectives. Lieutenant Stan Biggs, commander of
the carrier platoon for the Queen's Own Rifles, had been ordered to take ten men,
meet up with two tanks, and knock out an observation post several kilometres
inland. Biggs completed his mission, although on the way he encountered two
Germans, one unarmed and looking to surrender and the other with an automatic
weapon. In an instant, Biggs fired his Sten light machine gun, dropping the armed
German. His instinct had taken over: "In the stress of the excitement when theres
no time to think, the necessary action has to be automatic. Kill or be killed."5
Despite the harrowing experience and the cruel nature of combat, the thirty-one-
year-old Biggs felt odd abour taking another man's life at fewer than 3 metres, and
he never forgot that dead German, even as he was wounded at the end of August and
returned to Canada to make a life for himself, have four children, and practise law
for sixty years in Toronto.
As the Canadians fanned out from the beaches, they faced frightened French civil-
lans, for whom D-Day was the 1,453rd day of German occupation. It was also the
Last. The French Canadians in Le Régiment de la Chaudière greeted the civilians in
their own language, one of the few delights for the French men. women, and chil
dren who witnessed their small villages become a battleground. Most understood
that this destruction was the price of liberation, and Captain Hector Belton of the
Sherbrooke Fusilier later remarked. "I's rather amazine to see peanle whace homes
you have just blasted to bits coming our with tears in their eyes to welcome you."si
A few of the brave civilians celebrated their new freedom by handine out wine or
fRying previously hidden fags, but most French families wisely scurried for cellars, as
German snipers continued to pick off Canadians or anyone who moved in the open.
New headquarters were evablished past the beaches, with company commanders-
or whoever was left rallying troops, organizing a forward defence, and even, when
their radio set worked, calling down naval gunfire to knock out enemy positions.
Because of the range and angle of fire, the naval guns were more effective now, and
alvos of shells made mincemeat of a few enemy counterattacking forces. More
Canadian units went forward, passing dirty, dishevelled, and scared German prisoners
D-DAY
135
of war who were marching, hands raised and without weapons, to the beach. Some of
the prisoners lost their lives there from their own shells. Most found protection where
they could and waited to be directed. The Allies had other priorities.
The 8th Brigade's reserve, Le Régiment de la Chaudière, took the lead on the left,
punching forward to secure Bény-sur-Mer, a few kilometres inland, by mid-afternoon.
The Germans gave up the village easily, although three German 88s west of Tailleville,
more than 2,000 metres away, knocked out three of the 14th Field Regiment's self-
propelled 105mm M7 Priests in less than a minute. As the field guns burned, their
newly formed ammunition dump caught fire, setting off a tremendous explosion,
with shells cooking off in all directions for over an hour. 2 The "Chauds" inched their
way towards the enemy guns, with officers eventually able to contact HMCS Algonquin.
Lieurenant-Commander Piers and his crew were pummelling the Germans all morning
with their 4.7-inch guns, from a distance of 4 kilometres. As they bracketed the enemy
gunners, with each shell corrected by a British artillery forward observer, the Germans
knew that doom was upon them. They were obliterated by the naval gunfire.
THE CANADIANS WERE ORDERED to push on to their objective of Carpiquet airfield
6 kilometres west of Caen and 14 kilometres from Juno, even as the 21st Panzer Division
surged in the opposite direction in an armoured drive to the 3rd British Division's
beaches on the afternoon of the Gth. The panzers were handed a crushing defeat,
stopped cold by airpower and a robust British defence of tanks, infantry, and anti-
tank guns. Losing 70 of the 124 tanks, 21st Panzer was thrown back on its heels. The
surivors dug in to hold Caen, denying the Allies the vast plain to the south that
could be used for air bases." Even as Caen was steadily reduced to rubble by artillery
fre over the coming weeks, it remained the rock of the German defence. The defend-
ers there soon drew in other infantry and armoured forces from which to launch
attacks against the British and Canadian lines.
By the end of the day, the Canadians had advanced farther inland than any other
Alied formation- to a depth of 11 kilometres and the 9th Brigade's North Nova
Scotia Highlanders fought until after 8 P.M. At that point, they were ordered by
cops commander Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey to halt on the intermediate
objectives and dig in to protect against additional German counterattacks from
