56 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
passed the bodies of about a dozen members of the Royal Canadian Regiment,
wrapped in blood-stained tarps and awaiting burial. The complacency of training,
with its make-believe battles, was left behind in that appalling moment, to be
replaced, in his words, by "a dark blanket of dread."3
The new reinforcements, almost all of whom were infantrymen, were instructed
by the long-service officers and NCOs on how to survive, but the experienced men
viewed these green soldiers, who now outnumbered the veterans, with an unspoken
wariness. "The old-timers, including me, wouldn't fraternize with them, but rather
stayed within our own group, even though they would try to engage us in conversa-
tion, card games, and the like," recounted West Nova Scotia Regiment infantryman
John O'Brien. "They didn't realize that we wanted no new friends to later grieve
over ... we had been hurt inside far too
many times in the past."4 Over time,
the new men were accepted, although
the months following Ortona witnessed
a test of morale. Fallen comrades were
grieved, and an undercurrent of grum-
bling ran through the ranks about the
divisional commander, Major-General
Chris Vokes, who had commanded the
Ist Canadian Infantry Division in relent-
less frontal attacks against the Gully,
and then Ortona, throughout December.
Aggressive and unimaginative, the red-
headed and frequently swearing Vokes
and his brigadiers had rightly relied on
firepower to pound the enemy's lines,
Vickers machine-gunner of the
Saskatoon Light Infantry (M.G.)
laying down harassing fire north of
Ortona, Italy, January 1944.
but had failed to prepare follow-on forces
to support success.
Some of Vokes's
infantrymen had begun to call him "the
butcher." However, the general's options
had been limited in the battle, and it
THE HITLER LINE
57
would not have been easy to bypass the defended city, as some suggested at the time
and have ever since. The open ground to the west of Ortona was held by the Germans
in strength, with dense artillery formations positioned to punish those forces that
advanced towards crossroads that snaked through the interior leading to Rome. And so
Ortona had been reduced to an attritional slugging match, with both sides battering
each other until the Germans withdrew their mauled divisions." The debates over
Vokes and Ortona would periodically flare up after the war, but in the early winter of
1944, all Canadian infantrymen were far more focused on survival in their slit trenches.
THE CANADIANS WERE ABOUT 2 KILOMETRES NORTH OF ORTONA, which was
now an important winter headquarters and seaport for supply. They faced the enemy
dug in along a series of ridges. There was an empty and blasted No Man's Land
17
The price of battle. Canadians sing a bymn at a mass burial
for their fallen comrades in Italy.
VUL
