346 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
so lucky. Lieutenant Hugh B. Hall, wearer of the Military Cross and a signals officer
with the Glens, was present at the landings and within a few metres of a friend who
was cut down. He was left to wonder, "He had a wife and kids and I asked myself
many times: why him, why not me?"23
The Buffalos gathered more reinforcements-the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry
Highlanders and the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa, and then other units—and
gunners across the southern Leopold Canal laid down tens of thousands of shells.
The Glens took the lead on Hoofdplaat, a small village on the Scheldt, where the
Germans had two large bunkers. Deadly accurate artillery fire, directed by Royal
Canadian Artillery forward observers who were fewer than 200 metres from the
enemy, plastered the position and it fell on the 10th.
Brigadier John Rockingham, a superb and brave officer, tough and willing to
engage the enemy, took control of the defence. Over the next couple of days, with
"Rocky at the helm, the Canadians defeated several German attacks, thus breaking
the enemy's back. The Germans pressed again on the 12th but could not penetrate the
Canadian lines. When they retreated, they left behind dozens of their dead." The
next day, 530 Germans surrendered in the face of new assaults, persuading divisiona
intelligence that the enemy's morale was cracking.?
Major-General Knut Eberding, commander of the 64th Division, was surprised
by the audacious landing and he was never able to recover the initiative. But there
were no bloodles victories. The Germans regained their balance and Eberding even
invoked the "kith or kin" law— a directive from Hitler that any soldier who surren-
dered would find his family prosecuted by the Gestapo in Germany, as punishment
for the soldiers lack of willpower?" As the 64th Division was hounded, Eberdings
forces allied around camouflaged concrete pillboxes painted to simulate small houses,
to the point of including fake bricks, doors, and curtained windows, as well as fake
trees from which forward observers spied on the Canadians and directed fire 27
Machine-gun teams were hidden in hay stacks, which the Canadians soon learned to
set alight with burning tracer fire from their own machine guns The Germans were
also experts at directing their 20mm high erplosive anti-aireraf, shells into the trees
that lined the dykes. "This had the effect," one report noted, "of extremely accurate
air-bursts. for fragmentation occurred directly over the slit trenches dug into the
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
347
bank.8 Reginald Dixon, the intelligence officer for the Stormont, Dundas and
Glengarry Regiment, was handed an artillery map showing that "every road in the
whole area had been registered and numbered as a German artillery target. It was not
comforting to look at it.")
Simonds reported that the 64th Division had the advantage of "fighting a bitter
defensive battle from interior lines," and that it "made the most of the flooded and
diffcult country ... and was able to render our advance both slow and costly."30 Closer
to the front, Company Sergeant Major Charlie Martin of the Queen's Own Rifles
described how farm after farm was seized through methodical attacks. All were sur-
rounded by open fields and dykes. "Deep water had collected at the sides of the dykes
and it took courage for the men to move along them. There was no cover. It was what
we called a section job. Each section—a corporal and a few riflemen usually—would
leapfrog forward.... Wed do this five or six times a day—tense, stressful manoeuv-
is All the while, the enemy sharpshooters tried to bag the Canadians moving from
The Scheld campaign, with its water and mud, made fighting, logistics,
and simple survival all the more difficult.
