418 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
King's cabinet was severely weakened during the war, and the party seemed vulner-
able due to its handling of conscription. Complaints were heard from both those
who thought King had not acted fast enough in implementing conscription and
those who felt the government should have stood against the reckless decision
and kept to its early promises of no conscription. But somehow the old warhorse
held on. King's turn to the left in the previous year, with the introduction of family
allowances (the "baby bonus," as it was known, offering monthly payments of six to
nine dollars per child), as well as his skilful if unglamorous guidance of the nation
through the war, left Canadians shaking their heads but deciding ultimately that he
was better than the socialist Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) and the
out-of-touch Conservatives who had run on a platform of conscription for the war
against Japan. Not necessarily King, but King if necessary, was the weak battle cry of
the Liberals. It was enough. Quebec again sided with the Liberals, and sufficient
voters across the country were willing to give King a renewed mandate to lead the
country into the years of peace and prosperity. Roosevelt was two months in his grave
and Churchill would soon be thrown out of office; somehow, King had survived
against the odds, as he had done through three decades of political dominance.
King could not have done it without the vote of the overseas forces. While the
prime minister was the butt of many jokes among service personnel, a plurality of
them voted for the Liberals. Why did they do so after suffering through the reinforce-
ment shortages in late 1944? Perhaps because the King government had publicly
announced that it would reward veterans for their service. No one wanted veterans
to be lost to sociery. Public surveys in early 1945 revealed that Canadians were con-
vinced that the government had olanned efficiently and generously for the return of
veterans." King had been willing to sacrifice the soldiers overseas during the course
of the war-by not enacting conscription in a timely manner to meet the need for
reinforcements but he sought to reward those same survivors in nostwar Canada.
The most important assistance to the re-establishment of returning service personnel
was the Veterans Charter.
THE VETERANS CHARTER, a compendium of legislation and benefits, offered return-
ing service personnel a university education, vocational training,
land grants,
VETERANS
419
hondants' benefits, and low-interest loans for businesses or houses. The federal
ail service was instructed to hire veterans: first, those who had war-related disabil-
its second, those who had served overseas; and third, the widows of killed service
reone. The gratuities to veterans, when augmented by the new family allowance,
aloned households to spend and to build new lives. ° While some veterans slipped
through the new social security net, and others, such as First Nations, were treated
unequally or, like the merchant sailors, even denied veterans status, there was a sense
tar Canadians were repaying some of the debt owed to those who had served their
cunty, The Veterans Charter was one of the most significant groupings of legis-
ein ever passed, and it allowed Canada to win the peace after having paid such a
dear price during the war.
The Veterans Charter sent returned service personnel to university for free. Many
dice veterans could not stomach returning to their prewar Depression jobs and
othe opportunity to better themselves in the universities that were previously
regarded as sites only for the elite. The educators, to accommodate the veterans,
fred sagered start dates as service personnel came back throughout late 1945
and atly 1946. Temporary buildings were thrown up to house the young and not-
joung warrior-scholars, and by February 1947 almost 35,000 veterans were
cole a cross the country. That same year, at the University of Toronto, veterans
around for 49 percent of the student body.S' Gregory Biefer, an RCAF ground
te radar mechanic, enrolled in October 1945 at Sir George Williams College
in Montreal. He was, in his words,
"ahead of the flood from overseas, so there
te oly ev other war veterans among the hordes of chattering youngsters."52
lthough ill at ease in thic new setting Riefer was determined in see it through. And
te d dew universities, such as Carleton in Ottawa, benefited from the rapid
inhur of students. All universities moved to accommodate the experienced, earnest,
older, and often scarred scholars.
Though the three women's wartime formations were disbanded, some of the
50.000 who served in the Canadian Women's Armv Corns (CWAC.). the RCAF's
Momen's Division (WD), and the RCN's Women's Royal Canadian Naval Service
as took advantage of the Veterans Charter. Many used their wartime experience as
springboard to enter the iob market, while others benefited from access to veterans'
