436 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
profound legacies, although there were 44,000 fewer Canadians to experience it and
the renewed nation was poorer for it.
CORPORAL JOSEPH NORTON enlisted in London, Ontario, with the Royal Canadian
Regiment and was killed at age twenty-three in Sicily. The inscription on his head-
stone reads, "In the prime of life I left this world, my beloved wife and dear little
girl.' His brother, John, was killed in action later the same year. The world's ghastly
death toll far outnumbered Canada's 43,637 dead, but each of those fallen Canadians
left behind a pool of anguish, starting with their families and seeping out through
communities of neighbours, schoolmates, and church members. It is callous to tell
devastated widows and orphans, as they look to an uncertain future without a loved
Grosbeck Canadian War Cemetery contains 2,610 Commonwealth burials, most of whom
are Canadians who were killed in the winter battles of February and March 1945.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
437
hahand or father, that their nation got off easy in comparison to wartorn Europe.
fice grief-stricken, the war would only—and could only —be viewed through the
as los and despair.
The Dominion of Canada, some 12 million strong, put 1,086,343 men and women
in uniform. A total of 96,456 were killed or wounded, not including the merchant
mainers The total number of deaths remains somewhat uncertain due to the use of
fer methods of accounting, but Canadas 1970 official history, Arms, Men and
mements, notes that 2,343 were killed or wounded in the Royal Canadian Navy,
1559% in the Canadian Army, and 18,517 in the Royal Canadian Air Force. Those
mo lost their lives numbered 2,024 in the RCN (a figure that has been modified to
19 in the most recent official history, No Higher Purpose), 22,917 in the army, and
1,101 in the air force. Since these calculations were made, in 1970, the Merchant Navy,
i chich some 1,629 Canadian and Newfoundland merchant mariners lost their lives,
a ben formally acknowledged as the fourth arm of the military.!2
Theny-one-year-old Flight Sergeant George King was killed on September 23,
98,w when his Sirling Mk III bomber was shot down over Hanover. His nephew
it wrote that the pall which my uncle's death cast over those who had known him
vanal-e compassing one. In his small hometown of Summerberry, Saskatchewan,
delf holind many grieving friends and of course hic family including my aged
ganparents whose poor health left them ill-prepared to cope with the death of their
younger child... The grief which my family experienced after George's death has
ten a longstanding one, since for the next six decades it was not only shared by his
anadiate family, but also passed on to me and my siblings through my father's
memories of a younger brother whose life was tragically cut short in 1943"13 From
time immemorial. one of war's arentest burdens has been the forcing of parents to
buy their sons. Frank Périard, who served with the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry
Highlanders, recounted that his parents died in their fifties, unable to recover from
the loss of their youngest son, Corporal Aimé Periard, who had been killed on
April 4, 1945. "They were never the same again."
Doug Craig was the grandson of Pilot Officer Walter Craig from Timmins,
Orrario, who served with the RCAF in North Africa during the Sicily campaign
and was listed as missing in action on August 13, 1943. Walter Craig's wife agonized
