VUL
388
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
as were British and American forces, who combed through their rear echelon com-
munication and logistical units to convert those soldiers into infantry. The Western
Allies were feeling the sting of six months of combat.
But Hitler's armies were far worse off. Germany was being beaten on all fronts.
And still the German people refused to lay down arms in a lost war. Some fought for
the Führer, others for the Fatherland, while many knew that they had caused or sup-
ported mass atrocities that had been unleashed on numerous nations and their
peoples, and now they had to hold out until some sort of negotiation might be made.
It was a delusion of the damned, especially since the Allied high command's demand
for unconditional surrender had not wavered. And even those Germans who wished
for a cessation of hostilities found themselves conscripted. Hitler established the
Volkssturm-"People's Storm" —in September 1944; it was a desperate attempt to
alleviate the shortages of military personnel by drafting all males from the ages of
sixteen to sixty. With almost no training, few uniforms, and cast-off weapons, this
ragtag army was no match for the soldiers on the Eastern or Western Front, and no
fewer than 175,000 were killed in the final months of the war.os
Having kicked in the rotten German door, the Allies expected the house to cave in.
But the Germans again surprised all and continued on in their doomed cause. Crerar
even lamented in an official report in the final months of the war how the enemy con-
tested with dogged relentlessness: "Our infantry suffered heavy casualties from shelling,
mortaring and rockets. This was consistent with the enemy's tactics throughout the
whole of the operation. His firepower, particularly from machine-guns, mortars and
cannons, had been more heavily and effectively applied than at any other time in the
Army' fighting. The enemy's refusal to surrender angered Allied soldiers, who were
frustrated by the prolonged war that was killing off their friends, keeping them from
home, and requiring that they continue to battle through cities and towns that were
often ruined during liberation. Private Tom Didmon of the Rileys remembered talking
to one enemy prisoner for several hours: "He told me that he was looking forward to
being sent to Canada. Imagine that! A bloody German prisoner going to Canada and I
was in his country with the prospect of getting killed. How is that for rotten?" 67
This frustration was also occurring among the air crews. who flew through Aak as
thick as hail, bombed unremittingly, and watched as their comrades were shot out of
BATTERING GERMANY
389
the skies. Surely those on the ground would give up now that the aerial war had
reached a crescendo of destruction. Yet even in the dead cities such as Hamburg,
opinion surveys revealed that there was no indication of a pending insurrection or
surender. ® This resistance, in its many forms, saw 1.4 million German soldiers and
countless hundreds of thousands of civilians killed in the final five months of the
the steady march of the armies from the west. 9
enemy. Canadians in uniform were taught to kill but also to exercise restraint,
although all knew that the hard-core Nazis had a despicable history of giving no
quarter or exerting uncommon brutality on those who fell into their clutches. The
relatively humane treatment by the Canadians of their prisoners enticed more
wavering troops from the opposite side to decide that a prisoner-of-war camp was
preferable to a shallow grave. Soldiers would usually fight to the last bullet if they
knew that their fate, as soon as they downed their weapons, was death at the hands
of the enemy. While adrenalin, fear, and even brief fury might lead to the killing of
prisoners attempting to surrender on the chaotic battlefield, these cases were isolated
in number. In fact, at this stage in the war, Corporal Bruce Evans of the Ist Hussars
rounted that the Canadians felt pity on the adolescents and old men they encoun-
ired in combat. "The prisoners we took were boys of 16 and 17 ... they were not
taly denough to have ever shaved properly? The Allied soldiers harboured no
gear hatred of the enemy, save for the despicable Waffen SS troops.
The Germans executed at least 20,000 of their own soldiers- and most of them in
the final year of the war, as a warning to other soldiers to not give up the fisht 72 One
German prisoner noted that many of his comrades were willing to surrender but were
to scared the Army had been infused wich very young Nazi officers who were will-
i de for their country and these Officers knew they must watch their men and
thor them if necessary to stop them from surrendering."3 The Canadians executed
none of their soldiers for desertion: the Americans, only one. This was the difference
between demperatie armies and ruthless totalitation ones. but it meant that the Nazi
forces would continue to fioht in their doomed defence.
