228 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
blood-soaked trail might reveal an unconscious man, but in the chaos of battle a
fallen soldier might be lost for some time. The greatest danger to the wounded came
when an offensive was driven back in a counterattack. Fighting formations would
move across the same battlefield where the injured lay vulnerable and where the back
lines became the front lines; and then, even worse, the Germans might surge past
them. These see-saw engagements were rare, but in the defeats of Operation Spring in
late July, the wounded were often left behind if they could not be dragged to the rear.
The stretcher-bearers were non-combatants, but no one was safe from shelling.
Corporal Norman Selby of the Queen's Own Rifles testified that on D-Day the
stretcher-bearers were equipped with armbands and white helmets bearing the
Stretcher-bearers with Red Cross armbands bandage up a wounded Canadian.
Rapid care for injured men was often the difference between survival and death.
WAR AND MEDICINE
229
Rad Cross. Nonetheless, many of the medics thought, rightly or wrongly, that they
mere being targeted by malicious enemy snipers. Like the officers who soon learned to
remove all distinguishing marks to avoid the attention of marksmen, the stretcher-
bearers also sometimes removed their Red Crosses and tried to blend in with their
comrades? Shooting stretcher-bearers left more wounded at the front, contributed to
dhe chaos there, and required units to either divert riflemen into caregivers or leave the
casualties to slowly die in the forward zone. While some of the front-line caregivers
neinvolved in emergency surgery-often tying off severed arteries— most sought to
shite the wounded, offer some pain relief, and, if possible, organize parties to carry
the injured to the rear. Prisoners were a source of raw labour, and while it may have
fit odd to put a comrade in the hands of the same men who had been trying to kill
in only minutes earlier, most prisoners were anxious to assist because it made them
shut on the battlefield. As unarmed prisoners moved to the rear through smoke
ad fire, many were cut down by oncoming waves of advancing Canadians-who in
the confusion, and with adrenaline pumping, shot first and rarely asked questions.
Pines arrying the wounded were clearly distinguished from combatants and, at
the same time, were an unmistakable asset. The destination for the wounded, no mat-
tea but he got there, was usually the battalion's medical officer.
The medical officer, a trained doctor, tried to stabilize the wounded and prepare
them for evacuation to the rear. Mangled bodies, fractured skulls, and crushed legs
we bound and splinted to reduce pain, but battlefield amputations were rare, and
patien had a greater chance of survival if such work was done in surgical formations
i the rear. The screams, moans, and cries rose and fell in the make-shift medical
as a cud be anything from old barns to a protected reverse-slope dugout. It
ra common, remarked Private George Couture of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, for
Kin to ali or their mothers.' Private Ben Mackereth of the North Shore Regiment
re hot in the leg and hit in the shoulder with shrapnel on D-Day. Left in a collec-
don are and largely abandoned because the medical services were overwhelmed,
Mackereth recalled. "Two of our small group died in the early afternoon. It was a
if to trest of us when one of them passed away. His moans and groans were
pring on our nerves." Mackerethis callous observation rings with authenticity. It
ank all day for the wounded to be cleared, and by then several other men were close
