98 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Von Rundsted spread his divisions along the Atlantic Wall in a perimeter defence,
with a strong crust facing the Allies and with a concentration of counterattack for-
mations grouped in the north around the Pas-de-Calais. This was the narrowest
point from Britain to the continent, a mere 30 kilometres. An invasion there, under
maximum air cover, would give the Allied armies a nearly direct route into Germany.
The nineteen divisions of the Fifteenth Army were situated here and set to repel the
invasion, along with an elite reserve of ten motorized and panzer divisions in Panzer
Group West, further to the south, which could be rushed forward to drive any invad-
ers into the sea.
A fierce debate smouldered within the German high command, especially between
Rommel and von Rundstedt, over how to employ the panzer divisions in reserve.
Von Rundsted believed that even if the Allies gained a foothold on the beaches, the
mobile reserves could be formed up into an armoured counterattacking force within
days. He was backed by the commander of Panzer Group West, General Geyr von
Schweppenburg, who also felt that a counterstrike could be unleashed after a few
days as the vulnerable Allies left the beaches and moved away from the devastating
firepower of the warships waiting off the coast. Rommel thought differently, and in
keeping with his aggressive nature, he wanted a strong defence along the coast and
a hard and fast strike by units close to the front. Rommel was willing to risk the
losses from naval eunfire because he feared that Allied sirower would never allow
the panzer divisions to form up for a massed assaule several days after the invasion.
Better to stop the landings on the beaches or attack swiftly to decapitate the Allies ar
the carliest opportunity. The generals received little assistance from Hitler, who was
chausted, drug-addicted, and despondent from the avalanche of bad news. He
found most military decisions challenging, especially major ones like this. The Führer
characteristically waffled and then decided to split the reserve into three parts:
Rommel and Schweppenburg would control three divisions each, and OKW
(Oberkommando der Wehrmacht), Hitlers headquarters, would retain control over
four divisions. To the generals, this was the worst of all possible decisions- it diluted
the impact of the panzers and made any concentration of force more difficult.
Eisenhower and his staff were aware of the German indecision through their Ultra
decryptions, which provided top-secret intelligence of enemy communications. Still,
PLANNING THE INVASION
99
few were certain that the invasion formations could overrun the German defenders
on the beaches. Eisenhower shuddered at putting a handful of divisions on the con-
tinent where they, largely alone, might face the full might of the panzers.
To forestall this epic battle, an elaborate Allied deception plan, Operation
Fortitude, was conceived, involving turned German spies in Britain supplying false
facts back to their handlers. To reinforce the misinformation, dead bodies washed
ashore on the continent with fake plans. The Allies even created a phantom army
under George Patton's command, as the Germans had profound respect for the
hard-thrusting American general and assumed he would lead any assault. Finally,
deliberately sloppy wireless communications indicated that the First Canadian Army
was preparing to invade Calais, and the Germans were wary of the Canadians because
of their reputation as shock troops in the Italian theatre. All of this subterfuge kept
the German high command fixated on the north of England, across from Calais.*
The true landing site was to the south in the Normandy region, specifically the
Cotentin-Caen sector.
The Normandy coast around Caen had no deepwater port, but it had long beaches
with good exit routes for moving men and material to the interior. The area was
more lightly guarded, too, although the Calvados coast of Normandy was a penin-
sul that could be sealed off by the enemy. However, to give the invasion force a
fighting chance, the soldiers at the front needed mountains of ammunition. Each
dision required about 500 tons a day of supplies, and to feed the machine, hun-
deds of merchant ships would run materiel to the beachhead daily. SHAEF also
trentually decided to build its own "Mulberry" harbours, using pre-made construc-
tons consisting of multi-thousand-ton concrete caissons linked together. This critical
supply chain was contingent on the Allies having command of the air.
THE FAILURE OF SIR ARTHUR HARRIS'S bomber offensive against Berlin in early
1944 had left a frustrated Churchill again questionino his confidence in Harris.
who argued incessantly that bombing could win the war on its own. It could not,
cd the carnage above the German capital raised the challenging question of how
the bombers should be deployed for maximum effect. Throughout the war, the
three services clashed over targets, with the navy asking for bombers to assist in
