94 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
D-Day landings on June 6, 1944. On that day, as momentous events were happen-
ing in France, Captain Strome Galloway, then in the Royal Canadian Regiment
headquarters, heard about the landing of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division in
Normandy. He repeated the information, absent-mindedly, to one of the clerks,
who, without missing a beat, looked up wickedly and remarked, "I's time those
bastards did something, Sir.19
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING THE INVASION
On D-Day, June 6, 1944, all three military arms of the Canadian forces—the navy,
air force, and army —came together as the Allies prepared to claw their way back
to France. The long shadow of Dieppe shrouded the complex invasion known as
Overlord, and many of the Allied planners wore brave faces but worried in their
hearts that the cross-Channel attack might be repulsed. Several successful Allied
amphibious operations had been carried out since Dieppe-in North Africa, Sicily,
the southern toe of Italy, Salerno, and Anzio, as well as American campaigns in the
Pacific but the spectre of the Dieppe slaughter haunted the high command. Almost
allo the victories of the previous two years were achieved against weak enemy
defenders. Now, for the return to France, all expected the fight to be a ferocious
struggle from the first minutes of battle.
Stalin had demanded a second front almost from the start of his war with Hitler,
to siphon off the German forces that were marauding through his country. The
bombing campaign was an important marker in meeting Stalin's increasingly desper-
die pleas. Yet the Soviet dictator wanted more: a full-scale invasion of Europe. Up to
194, Churchill had played a skilful shell game in keeping both the anxious Russians
and the naively optimistic Americans at bay, waving the Mediterranean theatre oper-
zions as a red fag, He had rightly claimed that any invasion of France would only
tad in un if the Allies did not first win the Battle of the Atlantic and then gather a
refier number of warships, landing craft, and bombers.
The planning for the invasion had begun seriously a ver earlier in March 1043.
but had stalled because of a lack of oversight and a supreme commander. In early
