140 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
his baggy, unpressed corduroys, turtleneck, and black tanker's beret, urged the Anglo-
Canadian force to continue biting off German-held terrain before the enemy
responded in strength.
While Montgomery's headquarters dealt with the confusion inherent in coordin-
ating more than 150,000 soldiers on enemy soil, the Germans reeled from the
invasion. Having believed that the inclement weather of early June would spoil any
operation, many in the German high command had taken brief holidays or attended
war games at Rennes. Closer to the front, von Rundstedt-the commander of the
German armies in the west surveyed the sporadic intelligence filtering into his
headquarters. He had deployed most of his best formations, including six mobilized
infantry divisions and two panzer divisions, in the northern Calais region, and now
he only had three static divisions, two mobile infantry divisions, and one armoured
division, the 21st Panzer Division, in Normandy. But two more elite armoured div-
isions, Panzer Lehr and the 12th SS, were on the march to Normandy, with the latter
having units already in place to strike by June 7.
On D+1, the Canadians were spread out to the northwest of Caen. The plan was
simple: advance to contact with the enemy. On the Canadian right flank, furthest
away from Caen, the 7th Infantry Brigade (the Winnipeg Royal Rifles, Regina Rifles
of Canada, and Canadian Scottish) was to occupy a number of small villages, includ-
ing Purot, Bretteville, and Norrey, and set up a loose defensive line. They were in a
race against the coiling attack that they knew was coming, and they had to be dug-in
on ground of their choosing before the storm swept over them. On the left, the
9ch Infantry Brigade continued to drive south towards Carpiquet, 6 kilometres from
Can. This was a bad situation, with the Canadians left Rank open since the British,
wary of another 21st Panzer Division strike, were moving cautiously and were unable
to kcep up to provide a solid defensive shoulder.
And so, carly on June 7, on the 9th Brigade's front, the North Nova Scotia
Highlanders and Sherbrooke Fusilier tank regiment pushed on to Carpiquet. To get
to the important airfield, the battlegroup would first have to clear the villages of
Les Blissons, Buron, and Authie. Stumbling forward, the blind leading the blind.
Charlie Company of the North Novas drove the German defenders from 21st Panzer
Division out of Buron in the late morning and then pushed on a kilometre south to
SO BRITISH INFANTRY-DIVISION
JIO CANADIAN INFANTRY DIVISION
ANADIAN INFANTRY BRIGADE
SILIOS.
Rot
J MILES
MILES
Abbey
THE CANADIAN FRONT, JUNE 7-8, 1944
Le Mesnil-Patry
IST BN LI
PATH S, 5. PANZER GRENADIER REGIMENT
