136
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
21st Panzer. Pre-battle assessments had identified that the German counterstrike
would likely fall on the British and Canadian divisions, and Dempsey now feared
having his forces rolled up by a determined attack hitting the divisional seams.
All Allied divisions made it ashore. although two American divisions were needed
on Omaha Beach, where they suffered about 40 percent of the total 7,500 Allied cas-
ualties on June 6. The British lost fewer men, but the veteran 3rd British Division was
unable to take its objective on the far flank, Caen, while the Canadians did not reach
Carpiquet airfield. The Americans also failed to reach their final objectives, meaning
that all of this terrain would be fought over for another month. Nonetheless, some
150,000 Allied soldiers had breached the Atlantic Wall and were ashore by the end of
D-Day, along with 900 tanks and another 5,000 guns and vehicles. While there was
pride in the accomplishment, no one was naive enough to believe that the war was
over. The next few days would be critical, with Eisenhower's command hoping that
the concentration of the German reserves remained around the Pas-de-Calais waiting
for the phantom invasion that would never come." Yet even with the Germans focused
on the noth, they had or were massing three of their best divisions- -2Ist Panzer,
12th SS, and Panzer Lehr-around Caen, and these would soon hurl themselves
against the Canadians and the British. The goal for the Allies over the coming days
was simply not to lose.
At Juno Beach, the acrial bombardment and rocket fire, when combined with the
naval bombardment, had done little to destroy or even suppress the enemy defences.
The Canadians had clawed their way forward, sacrificing their lives on the beaches
and fiehrine skilfully to overcome the fortified defenders. They paid for their brav-
ery and endurance on June 6, with 359 soldiers killed and 715 wounded, although
that was about half of what was predicted by the operation's plannine cers 56
Such figures were of litle consolation to the survivors, many of whom reflected on
the sad irony of training with comrades for four years only to have them knocked
out in the first minutes or hours of combat. Not were the lighter-than-expected
lowes any consolation to hundreds of families who would soon be receiving the
telegrams that informed of the death of a loved one.
CHAPTER 6
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
"There was that beach, and us, and nothing in between," wrote tank officer Frederick
Baldwin! All along the tenuous front, the Allies waited for the enemy counterattacks,
aware that if they were driven back their fate was assured annihilation at the water's
edge. But few looked over their shoulder. The Queen's Own Rifles' Doug Hester
wanted revenge for his dead and wounded comrades and, in his words, he became "a
killer with a single purpose."? Other men felt the same, although their anger was cut
with grief. Lieutenant Clifford Chadderton had witnessed many of his friends in the
Royal Winnipeg Rifles die on Juno Beach. A distraught Chadderton had a chance to
return to the wreckage-strewn landing site to pay homage to his close friend, Corporal
Lawrence Scaife? In a symbolic act, he exchanged helmets with his fallen chum,
carrying his memory and the burden of his death through the fighting in Normandy.
The night of the oth reminded all the planners that even though the Luftwaffe was
nasty outnumbered, just a few fighters and bombers, Aying in darkness, had a target-
ich environment. The Luftwaffe paid for these operations, however, and RCAF's
No. 401 Squadron intercepted a dozen Junkers Ju 88s heading for the beaches and
thor down six of the win-engine light bombers, while forcing the rest to break off."
But other brave Germans made it through the aerial screen. It took a lot of ordnance
and firepower to kill a man on the battlefield, but there were always chance deaths,
angularly and by groups. Reinforcements from the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa
coming off the beach on June 7 were hit by a bomb dropped in the dark. Amid the
alch of bodies, three officers, two sergeants, and nine other ranks were killed, while
acher fourteen were wounded.' Such was the chanciness of war.
