96 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
1944, with the appointment of American general Dwight Eisenhower, the planning
took on a new urgency. Eisenhower had risen meteorically throughout the war, with
his agile mind and congenial manners soothing many of the tempestuous generals,
admirals, and air marshals under his command. He was a careful leader who had stum-
bled in his first large-scale engagement in Tunisia when his American divisions were
roughly handled by the combar-hardened Germans in early 1943. The general had
also been timid in corralling the necessary forces to cut off the retreating German gar-
rison from Sicily in August 1943. Since then, however, his triumphs had outweighed
his defeats. Commanding millions in a battle for the survival of democracy brought
unimaginable strain, but Eisenhower had tremendous endurance and inner strength,
both of which he would need to all upon in the following year of non-stop warfare.
While there was a significant degree of mistrust in the senior echelon of the Anglo-
American high command, Eisenhower's Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary
Force (SHAEF) began to hammer out the complicated plan that he would label the
*Great Crusade." The riming of the operation shifted, as the planners sought low
The Allied high command, including Supreme Allied Commander Dwight Eisenhower
in the centre, seated, and speaking to British General Bernard Montgomery.
PLANNING THE INVASION
97
tides for the landings and a full moon for the airborne division drop behind enemy
lines. They eventually settled on June 5, with the next suitable window not being
until the period of the 17th to the 21st of that same month.
Though the American general had to lead the operation because of his nation's
massive contributions to the war effort (and for the purposes of home front con-
sumprion), the land armies would be commanded by the British hero of the war in
North Africa, General Bernard Montgomery, until a sufficient beachhead was estab-
Is Army Group, consing of Grish, Canadiane, Money wer
and other national formations. Eisenhower was esteemed and genuinely liked by
almost everyone, and he in turn respected Montgomery's talents, but he was wary
of the British general's abrasive personality and absurd hubris. "Damn it," spoke
Eisenhower once, "Montgomery is the only man in either army I can't get along
with. Eisenhower would suffer over the coming months from Montgomery's
chronic acts of insubordination and arrogance, but he understood the importance of
maintaining the Anglo-American alliance, and he had that rare ability to swallow his
pride for the greater good of the coalition.
Hider's forces had fortified the French coast for four years with thousands of defen-
sive installations, from concrete bunkers to hundreds of machine-gun and artillery
encasements, and some 4.2 million mines. When General Erwin Rommel was
defeated in North Africa, he moved to France, and by December 1943 he was strength-
thing the defensive wall. Rommel commanded Army Group B, consisting of the
Serench and Fifteenth armies, and he reported to Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt
at Oberbefehhaber West, or OB West. The Germans Atlantic Wall, as the 4,500 kilo-
metes of French coastline was called, was defended by sixty infantry divisions; how-
set, any were burned-out husks that had endured churning battle on the Eastern
Front? The German garrison divisions had also been stripped of many of their trucks
and armoured vehicles to shore uD the remaining Eastern Front divisions which num-
bered 239 in June of 1944. Nonetheless, Field Marshal von Rundstedt assumed that
te logica challenge of supporting Allied invading armies would require a major
per to fload supplies, and so static divisions with little mechanized transport could
be dug in behind concrete defences and still fight effectively.
