64 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
grown up in Windsor, Ontario, observed, "I don't think there were many that looked
to the fact that men died, often in droves, and in the most brutal and gruesome ways.
And very few of us dwelled on the possibility of our own death in battle."24
The regiments prepared for the coming fight with two nights of patrols to locate
mines and map out the terrain. Several of these stealth operations failed to achieve
their missions, as the Canadians' old nemesis-the German 1st Parachute Division-
had their own patrols in No Man's Land, and were on a steep ridge overlooking the
wide-open Arill valley and river. Brigadier Kitching hoped that the support of six-
teen artillery regiments might even the odds for the two battalions who would soon
advance over open ground, although he unwisely ordered a staggered attack, with the
two battalions advancing hours apart.3
In a misty rain, the pre-battle artillery bombardment consisting of more than
14,000 rounds had little effect on the enemy, except to alert them to a likely oper-
ation. After a pre-dawn breakfast at 3:30 A.M., the Perths moved forward an hour
later and were ready for the assaul at 5:30 A.M. on January 17. Optimism melted
away rapidly as the lead units of the Perths crossed the stream at the bottom of the
valley only to be plastered with mortar fire and forced to go to ground. Mortars
remained a simple yet deadly weapon that lobbed explosives into the Canadian lines,
or, in this case, at troops as they were spread out along the valley floor. The German
81mm mortars fired a 3.5 kilogram bomb that could kill with its high explosive blast
and by hurling shards of steel over a wide radius. Experienced crews could saturate
an area with twenty bombs per minute.
The attack became unglued from the start and the Perths were in danger of being
wiped out, with added fire from a fortified house from which a German machine-
gun team raked the front. Junior officers tried to rally the men. Yet anyone moving
beyond their cover, a limited as it was, soon became targets for the machine-gunners
and snipers who ringed half of the valley. At one point, Lieutenant A.J. Clements led
a small party from Able Company to assault the house, but it was cut to pieces. A
second desperate attempt by Major Robert MacDougall of Charlie Company gath-
ered a group of six riflemen and another officer, and they also charged the Spandau
machine gun in the house. It was a doomed drive, and all of the Canadians were
gunned down before they made 20 metres. "The attack died at this point," said one
THE HITLER LINE
65
of the Perths. "It was impossible for anyone to move through the killing ground
without meeting a like fate."?6 Snipers targeted men carrying wireless radios to fur-
ther add to the chaos.2 With the Perths exposed to snapping fire in open daylight,
the rearward gunners attempted to mask their positions with smoke. 8 It offered only
limited reprise from the German snipers. The Perths tried to extricate themselves
from the trap, with machine-gun fire from the Brens, the PIATs (Projector, Infantry,
Anti-Tank weapons), and even the 75mm guns of the Three Rivers Regiment
Shermans directed towards the enemy, but the vulnerable Canadians still took a
grievous pounding.
Despite the Perths being stopped cold, the Cape Breton Highlanders were ordered
into the battle about a kilometre downstream on the right, in broad daylight, at
12:45 p.M. While it was initially planned that they would support the Perths dig-
ging in on the ridge, now the goal was to draw off some fire-which they did.
However, the operation was long past the point of being salvaged. The "Boys from
the Bay" advanced across a river stream, with the Germans holding their fire until
Mortar teams from the Princess Louise Fusiliers firing at night.
VUL
