76 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The West Nova Scotia Regiment passed through the Van Doos, as the 22e were widely
known, at around 10:30 A.M., and with tank support they closed with the enemy,
according to one historical report, "like wildcats."6 The Nova Scotians fought for much
of the day, with the Carleton and York Regiment leapfrogging them and driving for-
ward through the night, all the while under the fall of "nerve-shattering" artillery fire."
On the left, the Ist Canadian Infantry Brigade surged over broken ground, streams,
wooded areas, and gullies. One of the infantrymen from the 48th Highlanders of
Canada breezily recalled that it was "like grouse hunting; we flushed [Germans) now
and then and everyone let Aly at him."'$ Of course, it was an exercise where the
"hunted" could fire too, and the 190ch Panzer Reconnaissance Battalion launched
several counteratacks against the Canadians. By the end of the 17th, the Ist Brigade,
with the 48th Highlander in the lead, had crossed the Forme d'Aquino, a rapid-run-
ning stream abour S kilometres from the Hider Line. The Canadians sent more than
300 prisoners to cages and more than 400 Germans to their graves or to hospitals.59
WHEN THE SHATTERED MONASTERY FORTRESS at Monte Cassino finally fell on the
18ch, the Germans retreated to the Hier Line, General Leese ordered the British
36th Infantry Brigade to attack the enemy trenches, with the aim of bouncing it
before the defenders could solidify their positions. The Canadian 3rd Infantry
Brigade, with the Carleton and Yorks and Royal 22e Regiment in the lead, were to
broaden the front, draw fire onto themselves, and perhaps find a way through the
enemy defences. The operation had little chance of success, as Vokes put only two
battalions into the attack and offered limited artillery support.
The two Canadian regiments advanced at 6.30 A.M. on the 19ch into the enemy's
prepared defences, with anti-tank guns savaging the supporting British tanks. On
she Canadian front, the Germans stacked five battalions, one of them composed of
dite paratroopers." Snipers were particularly deadly. With no regard for the rules
of war, the snipers even fired on stretcher-bearers attempring to pick up the wounded."
When it became dear the enemy was holding the front in strength, the Carleton
and Yorks were ordered off the hopeless attack. The Van Doos pressed on, ultim-
ately losing fifty-seven men in the fruitless operation. Their commanding officer,
Licutenant-Colonel Jean Allard, was furious at being sent off without adequate
THE HITLER LINE 77
intelligence or artillery support, complaining, "I felt that my regiment had been
the victim of recklessness of the High Command."62 It had been the Van Doos's
unpleasant role to act as bait for the German forces, although this was clearly not
well explained to Allard. Neither the Canadian nor British attack succeeded.
With the Hitler Line reached, General Leese ordered a pause to arrange for a new
set-piece battle. Kittyhawk and Hurricane fighter-bombers harassed the enemy, and
at least one Canadian infantryman wrote that "it was heartening to know that our air
forces controlled the skies over the battlefield."63 The Luftwaffe still had a presence,
however, and its fighters and bombers often flew under the cover of darkness. They
found easy targets in the thousands of vehicles crammed on the roads or the large
ammunition and fuel dumps behind the lines. Gwilym Jones, a trooper in the Three
Rivers Regiment, described one aerial attack while standing near a petrol dump:
"There is no more terrifying sound than a Stuka dive bomber coming straight down
on you with its sirens blaring, firing phosphorus shells. As these shells landed, they
bounced, like rubber balls, with glowing white lights. We scattered in a hurry."64
The 48th Highlanders of Canada knocked out this
German Mark IV tank near Pontecorvo on May 19, 1944.
