216
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
crushing the Germans in the east. Nonetheless, for the sake of unity and to avoid the
friction that had damaged relations in Sicily and Italy, Eisenhower withstood
demands from American papers, his own senior staff, and Churchill to harass or
remove Montgomery because of his perceived reticence in pulling the trigger on a
big offensive. An impotent Eisenhower was reduced to smoking four packs of ciga-
rettes a day and aging visibly before the eyes of his concerned staff. Montgomery, in
turn, not liking the rapping on his knuckles, exhorted his generals to renew the
battle. From every direction came the need to attack.
The Germans had furiously built up their defences in the region south of Caen,
incorporating anti-tank guns, machine-gun pits, and mortar teams into the naturally
A German morar team preparing to fire. Mortars were the primary killers of infantrymen
in Normandy, with 70 percent of casualties attributed to their bombs.
OPERATION SPRING
217
defensive landscape. Verrières Ridge was no mountain, but its long slope and ridge
in provided an uninterrupted view of the surrounding countryside. The Germans
could see that it was the exact place where the Canadians would form up to launch
tenext phase of the offensive, known as Operation Spring. The Canadian attack was
we for July 25, to be followed three days later by a new push by British XII Corps.
Mongomer's orders to Simonds and his other generals emphasized caution, and
depire the growing agitation from SHAEF, he knew there were few opportunities for
a breakthrough.
Simonds's Canadians had fewer than three days from the end of Atlantic to plan
for Spring. The objective was a series of strongpoints on and behind Verrières Ridge.
OnJuly 23, Canadian intelligence reported that the enemy front was held in strength.
This could not have come as a surprise, but Simonds did not let the appreciation
change his plan of attack, except to widen the front to 6 kilometres to allow two
cisions into the battle. In fact, the new German commander in the west, Field
Nahal von Kluge, believed that the Anglo-Canadian front was the centre of the
Alied offensive (when in fact it was the American Cobra breakout set for July 25),
and so he crammed five Waffen SS panzer divisions, three army divisions, and three
Tige tank battalions into the battle space.* Simonds was the only Canadian general
i face with the killer instinct, but sometimes this left him failing to sniff out the
chemys intentions in his pursuit of victory.
The operation took the form of a typical Anglo-Canadian phased attack, in which
defit waves would push forward at 3:30 A.M. on the 25th, while secondary forces,
auding the 7th British Armoured Division and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade,
apoited gains through the shattered front. On the 3rd Division's left flank, as it
koked south, the 9th Infantry Brigade's North Nova Scotia Highlanders marched
Som Burguebus, crossing about a kilometre of open wheat fields to close on Tilly-
*Campagne. The two dozen stone houses were about 1.5 kilometres from Verrières
dage hich was on the reverse slope of the ridge, a little below the crest. The clus-
i of bus at Tilly were held by a reinforced company of 1st SS Panzer Division,
backed by well-situated anti-tank guns and Ml. TV tanks, with fallback positions
around stone houses and protective cellars. The North Novas set off at 3:30 A.M.,
drancing under a ceilino of Allied shelle made all the more otherworldly bu the
