300
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The British Columbia Dragoons crashed forward with two squadrons of tanks
through the rolling, treeless countryside, wiping out at least one platoon of terrified
Germans caught in their path. Using streams and sunken roads to hide from the
screen of German anti-tank guns, the Dragoons ran the gauntlet of fire. 4 Only twelve
Shermans arrived at Point 204 at 12:30 P.M., many with hulls scarred and blackened.
The commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Fred Vokes (brother of 1st Division
commander Chris Vokes), led some reinforcements to the advance guard later in the
afternoon but was killed shortly thereafter by mortar fire. 46
The Dragoons had made an impressive assault, but now their heads were deep in
the enemy noose. Without Canadian infantry,
the troopers were vulnerable to
Germans who skulked around with panzerfausts— the hand-held anti-tank launchers.
In a show of aggression, and refusing to let down their comrades, a number of the
Canadian tank crews that had jumped free of their burned-out Shermans raced for-
ward armed with Thompson machine guns to assist in holding the hill. As the
Canadians blazed away at the enemy, many of the tank commanders were forced to
open their hatches to survey the front. A few were sniped through the head by sharp-
shooters and one crew was blown apart when a German soldier threw a grenade into
the open hatch. But even with the losses mounting, the Dragoons held off the enemy,
raking the areas of advance.
Around 8:45 P.M., some fiffy tanks of the Strathconas passed through shellfire and
obscuring smoke, arriving in time to defeat a counterattack in the early hours of
September 1. Three companies of the Perths also closed the distance after having been
pinned down by severe shelling; they now fought on the Dragoons' perimeter, retreat-
ing slowly back into the protection of the Shermans' guns. It was a skilful defence.
Dozens of Germans were killed and wounded and thirty taken prisoner!* Canadian
PIAT cams were especially effective in harassing several German field guns that were
being dragged forward, some by Italian tractors. To the reat, 25-pounder guns manned
by the 17th Field Regiment dropped their shells outside of the britle Canadian perim-
eter as the becaguered garison coordinated with the rear gunners. The Canadians held.
ON SEPTEMBER 1, with the Gothic Line pierced, Hoffmeister's Sth Armoured
Division and Voke's Ist Division drove deeper The Ist Division's Van Doos and
THE GOTHIC LINE
301
Carlton and Yorks flexed their muscles and snatched a few key points, but the main
obiective was the twin towers of Mount Peloso and Monteluro, which would all but
They girded themselves for a frontal assault.
Advancing behind a heavy barrage at 1 P.M. on September 1, the Dragoon Guards
engaged the enemy in classic fire and movement tactics: two companies of infantry
moving forward in leaps and bounds, directing small-arms fire to keep the enemy's
head low. Through grit and tactical skill, the Guards took Peloso, although the com-
manding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Bill Darling, reached the objective with a mere
15 infantrymen left from the nearly 200 who had started at zero hour. Darling was
awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his leadership in battle, and the citation
red: Ignoring the continual shelling, machine-gun and sniper fire, [Darling] visited
each company in turn, urging his men on, and by sheer gallantry and personal example
let them towards the objective. 48 Flanking advances by the Loyal Edmonton Regiment
forced the Germans to abandon the 285-metre-high Monteluro without much of a
fight, and other ridges to the east fell to the Van Doos and the Seaforth Highlanders.
Bylate on September 1, the Gothic Line was broken. General Leese crowed about
the Canadians, writing officially that much of the credit went to the "leading div-
ions that by active and aggressive patrolling and by the quick follow-up of these
patrols... gate-crashed' the enemy."49 The German Tenth Army commander had
«pected the Canadians to lumber forward, stopping to wait for their guns to catch
up, but instead they had raced through his lines, engaging in close-quarters combat
and boldly driving through the confusion that plagued both sides.
HOFFMEISTER'S AND VOKES'S DIVISIONS were in a position to thrust to the next
German line of defence. Twenty kilometres away lay Rimini on the Adriatic, boast-
ing historic sites that included a Roman arch dating to 27 B.C. Anchored on Rimini,
ning in a southwestern direction, was another major defensive system. While
these positions were now firmly defended, an intense naval bombardment by Allied
machip along the coast shelled them continuously and kept Kesselring on edge,
