126 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The five Hussars tanks that landed on the beaches were effective in crawling up and
down the sandy expanse, firing their twin 30 calibre machine guns and 75mm main
gun to blast enemy positions?* Supported by the tanks, the infantrymen surged for-
ward, overcoming the German resistance. The last of the enemy were snuffed out
around 10:30 A.M., by which time most of the Winnipeg Rifles lead and follow-on
formations, Able and Charlie, along with the Canadian Scottish on the far right, had
fought their way into the interior villages of Sainte-Croix, Banville, and Colombiers.
Baker Company of the Winnipeg Rifes was reduced to a single officer and twenty-six
men, while Dog Company was not much stronger.?5
TO THE LEFT OF THE BLACK DEVILS, the Regina Rifles landed around 8 A.M. against
the eastern part of Courseulles-sur-Mer. During the run-in, two LAs carrying
twenty-five men each struck mines and were blown apart. The beach was swept by
ten enemy machine guns in a concrete bunker with I-metre-thick walls, as well as
by mortar fire and riflemen positioned in dunes. " It was) a gruesome landing for my
A German machine gun emplacement along the Atlantic Wall set to repel the Allied invasion.
D-DAY
127
platoon" remembered Bill Grayson of the Reginas. "A couple of my buddies were
lying dead and wounded in front of me- some of our men were still moving, but
not too many. That made me realize we were playing for keeps." 26
A hail of bullets clipped the open area, but the "Johns" —as the Reginas were
known—wormed forward, with Able and Baker Company shooting and advancing.
Some sacrificed their lives to draw fire so that others could continue closing the dis-
tance with the enemy. Major Ronald Shawcross of Able Company led only four out
of twenty-five men across the beach, with the rest shot down as they exited the land-
ing craft. His small band followed him closely, and Shawcross covered the ground by
running and dropping to the sand on a "1, 2, 3, 4" count, synchronizing the advance
with the machine-gunners' reloading, and trying to scramble over the 350 metres of
open ground to get to the sand dunes. "There were two kinds of people on the beach,
the already dead and those that will be killed there," he would write after the battle.
"It was better to press on and get away from the predetermined gun, and mortar fire,
aso machine guns. 27
The Reginas made it off the beach after about thirty-five minutes of fierce fight-
ng although Able Company encountered more guns as they pushed into the streets
of Courseulles-sur-Mer. Both companies were ably supported by the tanks of the
Ist Hussars, who methodically shelled enemy strongpoints until there was nothing
left but mangled defenders and broken concrete 28 The Reginas continued forward,
dearing the town; it was, in the words of one of the riflemen, "grim going."?)
ON THE 3RD DIVISION'S centre and left flank, the 8th Brigade's Queen's Own Rifles
of Canada faced Bernières-sur-Mer, with its church steeple rising over the battle-
feld, while the North Shore Regiment crashed onto the beaches in front of Saint-
hubin-sur-Mer. The Queen's Own Rifles went in after a delay of thirty minutes,
dieding far from shore, in the hope that their tanks would catch up to them. The
Shermans of the Fort Garry Horse arrived late because of the rough water, and so
the Riles faced the fire alone. "Had we been able to hit the beach on time, we could
have taken out all the machine guns that were firing at them," reflected Bob Grant
cí the Fot Garry Horse. "We would have saved dozens and dozens of lives. But we
ite late and those poor guys in the Oueen's Own were beat to hall »30
