138 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Closer to the front, the infantry regiments lay low in their slit trenches and drove
off several probing enemy assaults. "Every night dig deep," was the warning given to
the infantry, "it may be your grave."" The memorable road signs, "Maple Leaf Up,"
pointed in the direction of the front, although the lack of fixed lines meant that
trucks manned by the Royal Canadian Army Service Corps (RCASC), running for-
ward ammunition and supplies, blundered into ambushes. The enemy did the same,
and a truckload of Germans drove into the Canadian lines near Anguerny. All were
taken prisoner.
With the enemy lurking somewhere in the dark, infantrymen were edgy and
trigger-happy. "What a bastard of a night-no time for sleep; no time to eat; no
time for anything but looking into the dark and wondering what is ahead," worried
Sergeant T.C. Reid of the Sherbrooke Fusilier, whose Sherman tanks were slightly
behind the front ines but ready to spring into action? Just before midnight on the
6th, Lieurenant James Doohan from Vancouver, British Columbia, went forward to
find the guns of the 13th Field Regiment, only to be shot six times by a nervous
A Canadian Bren gunner is dug in to a slit trench and ready for an enemy attack.
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
139
sentry. Doohan survived his wounds to become an actor, best known as "Scotty,"
the chief engineer on the starship Enterprise in the original Star Trek TV series.
•FANYTHING SHOULD HAPPEN TO ME, do not feel sad or burdened by it, but take
the attitude of 'He served his country to his utmost." Such was the last letter of
Private Leslie Neufeld from Nipawin, Saskatchewan, who jumped into Normandy
on D-Day with the Ist Canadian Parachute Battalion. His parents never saw him
again. Many others were lost in the jump into enemy territory. Battered by the
weather and blown off course by the wind, the parachutists landed throughout the
drop zone. Some were shot as they floated to earth; others were tangled in trees; some
drowned in water, their eighty pounds of kit dragging them down. Lance-Corporal
H.R. Holloway described how those who survived the drop were scattered "all over
hell's half acre.")
The paratroopers were vastly outgunned, with almost no heavy weapons such as
artillery, but they had been bred tough. They moved through the enemy rear area
shooting up sentries and detonating bridges. The paratroopers' confused the German
high command, who knew that almost 25,000 enemy troops might be behind their
ines but could not pinpoint their exact location. After a night of skirmishing, the
Ist Canadian Parachute Battalion gained its objectives of capturing a German gun
position and garrison at Varaville and bringing down bridges over the Dives and
Diette Rivers to delay enemy counterattack forces. Then they dug in and held the
crossroads at Le Mesnil high ground between the Dives and Orne Rivers and almost
within sight of the beaches. The Canadians paid a steep price for their daring actions.
Of the 541 who jumped from the C-47 Dakotas, 116 were killed, wounded, or
taken prisoner. The survivors joined up with the units moving off the beaches and
into the interior.
LEAD ELEMENTS OF THE 3RD CANADIAN INFANTRY DIVISION marched forward at
his light on the day after D-Day, known as D+1. On the Anglo-Canadian front, a
sip had appeared on the left flank between the Canadians and the 3rd British
Drision, which had been unable to seize Caen, a significant city of around 55,000
inhabitants. But there was no time to wait and consolidate. General Montgomery, in
