FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and magazines across the Western world; in reality, he should have been tried by
court martial for gross dereliction of duty. His actions in late May would result in the
deaths of thousands of Allied troops later in the campaign.
THE CANADIANS RECUPERATED from the battle and cared for the dead. Captain
R.T. Currelly observed how "The burial parties deal with our own dead first, and
then the bloated, fly-blown bodies of German soldiers have become an everyday
sight. One gets so used to seeing them that one forgets the horror and tragedy and
thinks of it primarily as a sanitation problem.1' The regimental padre, usually with
a few men, gathered the fallen for burial, collecting their personal effects, such as
paybooks, photographs, and letters, and passed them on to the regimental head-
quarters. As one officer observed, "We had to make sure that nothing incriminating
was sent back, such as a photograph of an extra girl friend or love letters that were
not appropriate. All personal effects were returned but care had to be taken to make
sure feelings, already saddened by the death of a loved one, were not unnecessarily
hur.' Rough crosses were erected, and the details of the buried men — name and
regimental number were placed in tins at the foot of the cross, often under a steel
helmet. Warrant Officer Vic Bulger recalled the sad story of one fellow gunner, who
had heard that his nineteen-year-old brother had arrived as a reinforcement to the
48ch Highlanders of Canada. "As if drawn by a hidden fear, he inspected several of
the new graves and found to his shock and sorrow, that his younger brother's 'ID'
Tag was nailed to a makeshift cross."''' He barely had time to process the discovery
before his unit moved out.
The crashing of the Hider Line cost the Canadians almost 800 killed, 2,500 wounded,
and another 4,000 listed as sick, with at least 400 of those diagnosed as battle
cahausted. Lieutenant Ken Smith of the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment
served at the front for 144 days. Ar the Hider Line in May 1944, he recounted how
the regiment was preparing: "Lance-Corporal Jim Gillan had often said to me that
his main ambition was to get safely home to a Manitoba farm and behind a plough.
That afternoon he died instantly right behind me as a long burst from a heavy
machine gun cur us down together."" Smith survived with an agonizing leg wound.
For every Canadian lost, and there were thousands by mid-1944, grief washed over
THE HITLER LINE
93
immediate families— parents, wives, siblings, and children—but also friends and
community members in church, local businesses, schools, and factories. At the same
time, those deaths galvanized Canadians towards victory in a war that had to be won.
Too much had been sacrificed to give up. Hitler's regime was on its back foot by late
May 1944, reeling from defeats on land, in the air, and on the oceans. But it fought
on. Tens of thousands of additional families across the Dominion of Canada would
face unimaginable loss before the war of necessity was ended.
During the course of the battle, Alexander's forces suffered 42,000 casualties, with
the Germans losing about 30,000.17 Perhaps the Canadians and their comrades
were lucky to get away with those losses since the Allies attacked into the teeth of a
defence-in-depth bristling with guns. Yet hard on the heels of the Hitler Line victory
camescapegoating and accusations: why was the victory not more decisive? Somewhat
surprisingly, General Leese was disappointed with the performance of the Canadian
COrps, and even tried to have Burns fired and the corps command given to a British
general. ' Burns thought he had soothed matters over with Leese by sacking some of
his most senior staffofficers - the corps brigadier general staff and the chief engineer—
but the British general had it in his head that the Canadian had to go. Leese's com-
plains were especially capricious considering the success of the Canadians. While
come of the Sth Division's poorly coordinated actions had revealed inexperience,
most of these issues were endemic throughout the Eighth Army, and a good portion
of the logistical breakdown could be attributed to Leese's headquarters. In England,
Conadian authorities supported Burns and he survived as corps commander, but he
was a marked man.
Dspite the Allies failure to annihilate the Germans, the Liri Valley campaign was
artin, in breaking the enemy lines, freeing the trapped Anzio forces, liberating
Rome, and destroying Kesselrings strategic reserve. Driving the Germans back was
sode low in the global war against Hitler. One advantageous knock-on effect
as the ability now of the Anolo-American bombers to hit the Pipesti oilfelde in
Romania, destroying precious supplies and siphoning off additional flak batteries
Son the sten Front and German cities to protect this crucial oil asset.
The breaking of the Hilet Line was overshadowed by the liberation of Rome,
touch both victories were almost immediately forantren in the aftermath of the
