86 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
launched their Anzio beachhead breakout. The pressure from the British front left
the Germans vulnerable to being enveloped, although American General Mark
Clark was unimpressed with the speed of the Eighth Army. After a meeting with
Sir Oliver Leese on the 21st, the ungenerous Clark had sneered in his diary, "All
their actions are alvays dictated by their desire to save manpower and let someone
else do it?? He felt the British and Canadians were too cautious, which was a
strange sentiment since he had overseen the foundered Anzio landings that had
wilted under fire and then been stalemated for months. The tension between the
principal allies remained significant. It also revealed the British and Canadian way
of war that remained predicated on the set-piece battle of careful lanning and
application of firepower, with an
emphasis on protecting the infantry's
lives. Not only was there a shortage of
reinforcements in the Eighth Army,
but both the Canadians and British
wore the scars of the Great War deeper
than the
Americans. Perhaps most
important, there was no other credible
method of breaking enemy positions in
frontal assaults than through the heavy
application of shellfire. The challenge
was in transitioning from the sledge-
hammer break-in to the exploitation
phase, and few British or American vic-
tories of that sort had yet been achieved
in the war.
With the Ist Canadian Infantry
Division having clawed open a hole in
Troopen on a Sherman tank.
the Hitler Line by the end of May 23,
Major-General
Bert Hoffmeisters
Sch Canadian Armoured Division-
nicknamed Hoffys Mighty Maroon
THE HITLER LINE
87
Machine because of its coloured shoulder patches-was ready for the armoured
thrust. A prewar Vancouver militia-man who had proven his mettle as a company,
battalion, and brigade commander, the charismatic Hoffmeister nonetheless had an
inexperienced headquarters staff. Even as Hoffmeister was trying to get his division
through the break, the attack was slow in forming as the lead units shifted left to
better hit the hole in the line. It took time, and rain slowed all movement on the
"third rate roads," so that the attack was delayed about twelve hours. Brigadier
G.A. McCarter, a senior staff officer at corps headquarters, penned in his diary, "It
is a hopeless task to try to get any information out of HQ 5 Cdn Division. They are
behaving like complete amateurs in every way."'4 It was an ungenerous statement,
but it was accurate insofar as 5th Division's headquarters was in chaos.
The next morning, on the 24th, lead elements of the 5th Armoured Brigade were
ordered into the line to cross the Melfa River—a broad, shallow, slow-moving stream
with steep, 6 metre banks, about 7 kilometres from the Hitler Line. Two battle-
groups consisting of infantry and armour were to turn the break into a rout. Speed
was of the essence.
At 8:30 A.M., the Canadians drove on to the Melfa, which ran from north to south
across the battlefield. The first of the armoured and infantry formations, consisting
of the British Columbia Dragoons and the Irish Regiment of Canada, pushed for-
ward, about halfway beyond the Hitler Line to the Melfa, to act as a forward base.
The area was teeming with the enemy moving away from the Hitler Line. Many
sought to surrender, while others still had fight left in them. The orchards and vine-
yards contained concealed guns and mines, and the roads were reduced to mud
through overuse and rain. Areas of resistance were hammered by Allied artillery. One
of the troopers remarked that the bombardment left German soldiers reeling: "They
wandered about, neither surrendering nor fighting effectively. Most were machine
gunned, but a few were taken prisoner."5
Further to the south, the second battlegroup, consisting of Lord Strathconas
Horse (LASH) and the Westminster Regiment (Motor), had an equally difficult time
as they raced to the Melfa. On the 24th, the reconnaissance unit of the LdSH—
lightly armoured Honey tanks armed with 50 Browning machine guns crossed
the river first, with the Westminsters' scout cars close behind them. While being in
