THE GOTHIC LINE
289
288
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
terrain was fattest and where the enemy's defences were best able to be broken by its
armoured divisions. The Poles were to their right, along the coast, and the Canadians
were given the rough terrain on the far left to guard the flank. The Canadians had
acquired a reputation as a hard-pounding force. As one wit observed of them, "if 'fuck'
and 'frontal were removed from the military vocabulary, the Canadian army would
have been both speechless and unable to attack."22
In early August, Polish senior officers warned Eighth Army headquarters that they
would likely face stiff opposition, and that a swift advance was likely out of the ques-
tion. Leese pondered the dilemma and settled on a bizarre change of plan. Instead of
assisting the beleaguered Poles on the right, Leese shifted his gaze to the left flank
and moved the Canadians to the centre, in a spearhead role against the best-defended
part of the Gothic Line." Leese professed to have little faith in Burns, but he para-
doxically now gave him the most important battleground, and placed V Corps into
rougher terrain on the far left. Far worse, Leese did nothing to bolster the Canadian
Corps in the centre. Leese left little evidence of why he made the odd decision, and
he should have, at a bare minimum, shifted a division or two from V Corps to Burns.
And so the Canadians were given the key role in the battle but with only two div-
isions to carry it out.
Wich the plan worked out, as Rawed as it was, Burns's headquarters turned to
the monumental task of moving troops to the front. The Canadian engineers cut a
150-kilometre road through the Appenine mountains to provide a route for the
tanks and vehicles. Under an umbrella of air cover from the Desert Air Force and
the U.S. Fifteenth Air Force, the rest of the Canadians, with other components
of the Eighth Army, used rough roads to move 11,000 wheeled vehicles, 650 tanks,
1 million shells, and 50 million litres of fuel?* It was a dust-choked, frustrating voy-
age that required constant improvisation and consummate professionalism when
trucks and carriers broke down, ran out of gas, or rolled down culverts. R.T. Currelly,
historical officer for the Sth Armoured Division, wrote of the journey, "In all this
filth, fatigue and bodily discomfort the same old time-worn humour and perpetual
good nature persist. Someone's truck slips on a soft shoulder and rolls over.
driver is sitting deiected in the burning dust waiting, perhans hours. for a Recovery
Lorry. Nearly everyone who passes has something to shout, such as 'Wotcha thinkin'
MOLINI
TREBBIC
SLURO®
Monteluro
Tomba
Di Pesaro MOUNT PEL
253)
PRINCESS PATINAS CANADIAN
POINT
8TH BN ROYAL TANK REGT WITH
HSITO d/ON Z
MOUN
MARRONE
Montelabbate
A MILEC
SA CANARION
DRED
DIVISION
THE BREAKING OF THE GOTHIC LINE, AUGUST 30-SEPTEMBER 3, I944
