440
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
new memorial, and the government slunk away from the project, eventually burying
were added to the existing national memorial.
The Second World War was not entirely forgotten, however, and it remained
memorialized in other ways. Formal and informal naming programs occurred across
the country, with the most prominent being an official federal program started in
1947 to designate geographical features such as mountains and lakes after killed
servicemen. In 1960, the program was devolved to the provinces, and those in
Saskatchewan and Manitoba were the most ambitious, with several thousand lakes
in those provinces named after servicemen. For example, Flight Lieutenant Leslie
McCaig, DFC, from Ormstown, Quebec, who was killed in January 1944 when his
Lancaster was shot down, had a bay at Ananngiarjuk Point on the northeastern coast
of Nunavut named in his honour. Thousands of other geographical places carry the
names of service personnel, revealing another way that these Canadians have been
honoured and, perhaps, have come to occupy the vast uninhabited parts of Canada.
Naming commemorations also extended to veterans' offspring. Robert Skipper sur-
vived a tour with No. 424 Squadron, RCAF, and ended his service as a signals officer
with No. 415 Squadron, RCAF. He made a pact to remember his dear chum, Jack
Kerry. Skipper named his son, John Kerry Skipper, after his friend who is buried
overseas and never had a chance to start his own family,.23
AS SOON AS THE FIGHTING OVERSEAS STOPPED. the sniping began in the war of
reputations. While some senior Allied generals, such as Eisenhower and Montgomery,
produced memoirs to mee the demand of an adoring public, Canadas senior officers-
Cierar, Simonds, McNaughron, Vokes, Foules, Nelles, Murray, and Mcwen— were
silent. The senior military high command showed little ouard inclination to refight
the war in print. That did not mean, though, that they wanted their reputations to be
open to all comers. The army generals used the official army historian. Colonel Charles
Stacey, in a historical war by proxy to ensure that their version of the past was the one
presented in the official histories. Cretar and Simands had grown to dilike one
another during the stress of the war, and especially after Crerar had used his influence
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
441
ndey Simonds the postwar chief of the general scaff position, recommending instead
te mediate Charles Foules who was revealed to be a surprisingly adepr political
feel in the wars afermath, Simonds was particulanly nasty and came at Crerar
rid dagger damn, insisting repeatedly that he be blamed for the Dieppe raid. * Scacey
reed a rightrope between the two warring generals, and his official histories remain
during works, although largely non-judgmental studies of the high command.
La Canada, as in al nations, official history programs were developed, in which
sue historians in uniform started the laborious work of sifting through the millions
a pages of official records to reconstruct the war. The Canadian Army was lucky to
Lare Colonel Scacey, who led a team of narrators and historians. Unlike the Great War
ofail history program, which had failed to produce more than a single volume after
menty years of work, Stacey delivered a series of brief histories during the war and
inmediately afterwards, and then published technically brilliant books in the 1950s.
The nary was less well served by its historian, academic Gilbert Tucker, but he was
Santed of resources. Two administrative accounts were produced, although he refused
to write the war-fighting story of the navy until the German archival documents were
idease. He was dumped by the government for his sensible stand, and a breezy and
readable monograph, The Far Distant Ships, was penned in 1952 by the prolific play-
wight and author Joseph Schull. The air force history crashed on takeoff, due to
neglect from senior air marshals who were more focused on the future than the past.
The Canadian Forces eventually recognized the value of its own history and funded a
robust official history program from the late 1960s onward. Over the years, the mil-
ita's Directorate of History and Heritage also encouraged the study of academic
hitory in Canada and produced numerous critical works. These first generation of
oficial histories laid the foundation for the study of the army during the Second
World War, and a second generation of historians produced other works of synthesis
and original research, with three volumes on the Royal Canadian Air Force and three
volumes on the Royal Canadian Navy, histories covering the period from their origins
to the end of the Second World War, with the last published in 2010.36
Most regiments and regimental associations were fast off the mark to codify their
war efforts in commemorative history books, which were meant to glorify service
racher than pass condemnation. The histories were usually enlivened by insights
