132
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
slumped over, unconscious, bleeding out, or dead. A number of hurt Canadians lying
along the wate's edge were dragged out to sea, too weak to fight against the tide.
Blood stained the water red, and Canadians floated lazily face down in the swill.
The dead lay curled up and spread out. Some seemed to have died without a mark
on them, while others were little more than eviscerated meat. The bodies of tank
crews were often burned so badly when their Shermans exploded that the corpses
could not be moved without their blackened skin sloughing off and legs and arms
separating from the torso. After the battle, the medical personnel poured a hot, gluey
pitch over them that hardened and allowed for the grisly task of movement and bur-
ial. Charlie Martin took mental stock of the firestorm through which he had passed,
and where he had left so many comrades: "Four years of training and living together,
a common purpose, friends who became brothers, only to lose more than half of
us... What could we do? Carry on and do the best we could, that's what."*2
Beach masters from the RCN directed trafic and tried to ease congestion, hurry-
ing the chousands of men and vehicles off the beaches that continued to be under
shellfre." "Monster was the first thing that went through my mind," said one
Canadian infantryman when he saw a Flail tank-equipped with chains that beat the
ground for mines," The Flails were joined by the fame-throwing Crocodile tanks
and armoured bulldozers." The Americans eschewed these specialty vehicles - known
as "Funnies" — and paid the price on their beaches.16
The stench of cordite continued to lay heavy on the beach, while the buzzing black
flies, drawn to the blood and body parts, descended in shimmering flights. War cor-
respondent Ross Munro, who had scooped the world with his story of the Canadian
invasion of Sicily eleven months carier, now did the same at Juno. As one of nine
Canadian corespondents, Munro waded through the water around 10 A.M wich his
precious typewriter held overhead." Moving past the dead and wounded on the
beach, he settled down to write in Berniere village, amid a rush of Canadian vehicles
and with French civilians crying in joy and thanking their liberators. Nearby, the
sdf propelled guns of the 13ch Field Regiment were banging away, lifting the "type-
writer off my knees" with every shot fired." No stranger to writing under pressure,
Munro gor the story back to the beach, after which it was carried by a sympathetic
naval officer to London. It was another worldwide scoop.
D- DAY
133
Munros missive was joined by iconic footage from the Canadian Army Film and
Photo Unit, established in 1942 to send photographers and cameramen into the field
to shoot the war on film. None of the soldiers armed with cameras were killed at Juno,
although some would fall later in the campaign. Amid the chaos, the Canadians sent
their flm back to Britain, where it was soon developed and sent around the English-
speaking world. It was the best footage secured from any of the five beaches. 4) More
would follow, but the surviving footage is intensely moving, documenting the Canadian
landing on Juno, and offering us a glimpse into the face of battle.
HAVING BROKEN THROUGH THE DEFENCES, the Canadians pushed inward, linking
up with units beside them and continuing the slow grinding sweep of clearing pock-
ets of resistance. The ground was thick with mines, and many soldiers had feet and
Canadian medical officers and stretcher-beavers care for the wounded on the beach.
Note hou the injured have been pulled near to the seawall to shelter them from mortar fire
and remove them from the path of tanks and vehicles.
