184 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
the tanks were useful on their own-raking the enemy lines with machine-gun and
cannon fire, and grinding out slit trenches with their tracks. Flail tanks using whip-
ping chains thrashed the ground to set off mines, and some of the fail tanks went
after Germans in their slit trenches, pounding the earth, caving the ground in on the
terrified occupants, and tearing flesh from limbs. Even the most hardened Canadian
soldiers were shaken by the site of the dead defenders, who looked like they had been
fed through a wood chipper.
The Highlanders cleared a series of German positions in ditches-"My platoon
had a field day," wrote Lieutenant Donald Todd. "They just mowed 'em down"—
and then moved through the village tossing grenades and rooting out the enemy, 48
Though the Highlanders had suffered dozens of killed and wounded, with its two
lead companies losing half their strength in the initial attack, they knew to prepare
for the counterattack that was preceded by a mortar bombardment. 4 A battlegroup
Sherman tank of the Ist Hussars, June 28, 1944.
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
185
of tanks struck back at the Canadians, but the German counterstrike was blunted by
anti-tank fire from a British artillery regiment that had expertly situated their
crite was bunted by
self-propelled M10 17-pounders. Much credit and fear was given to the enemy's
88mm anti-tank guns, but the Allies' 17-pounders were just as effective, especially
when armour advanced in the open. Throughout the late afternoon, fierce fighting
saw thirten panzers left on the smoking battlefield, with eleven Shermans destroyed
in turn.°
As the tanks and artillery hammered each other, the greatest killer of the infantry
remained mortar fire. German mortar teams were usually situated about 900 metres
behind the lines." Operational research conducted by the 21st Army Group would
later conclude that a shocking 70 percent of all casualties in the first seven weeks of
the war were caused by mortars, although the number of fatalities from mortar fire
maslower than that from small arms.? If one could not find cover, a mortar bomb
exploding in all directions was particularly deadly. Padre John "Jock" Anderson
recounted with anger that "many of the wounded were killed by the mortar fire as
they lay out in the field."5" The Highlanders held Buron but lost 262 men, including
the commanding officer. The 12th SS lost even more men, with 272 casualties and
another 46 prisoners. 54
It wasalile easier on the right flank, where the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry
Highlanders, along with B Squadron of the Sherbrookes, charged Gruchy, which
was in sight of Buron. The Glens overran much of the enemy defences in two hours
a filing, but they were held up in places by stubborn pockets of resistance. At one
point in the battle, the division's reconnaissance regiment, the 17th Duke of Yorks
Roval Canadian Hussars, rushed forward ffreen universal carriers Crashing
trough the enemy lines, with Brens firing until they were red hot, the Canadians
saw the Hitleriugend collapse. Less than a kilometre to the south. Authie fell to the
Norch Nova Scotia Regiment, which had passed through the Hiehland Licht Infantry
to capture the village around 9:45 A.M. It was a bittersweet victory for the North
Novas, who returned to the sire where, a month earlier. they bad been overrun and
forced to leave dozens of comrades behind who had been executed in cald blood.
Ith Infantry Brigade punched through the newly won terrain as the sun was setting
Winch the Ith Infantry Brigade clearing the outlying fortified villages, the
