224 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
men forward in futile attacks, stewing afterwards in the broth of the failed battle.
Much to his discredit, Simonds fired Lieutenant-Colonels Petch and Christiansen,
who had saved their soldiers further losses by refusing to order a new advance in the
suicidal assault on Tilly; the brigadier, D.G. Cunningham, who had already been
criticized by senior British generals for his supposed caution in seeking out the
enemy, was also sent packing, and replaced by the very successful and charismatic
Rockingham of the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry®' The divisional commander,
Keller, was almost fired, and the British had already lost faith in him, but Simonds
held off, worried that such a move would further damage the low morale in the
division." Simonds also wanted to oust Foulkes, who had proven useless and dan-
gerous, but he was talked out of it after surveying the brigadiers and finding no
better replacement. Simonds's fury extended further downwards too. He heaped
blame on his junior officers, which was, to the say the least, ungenerous, and it
revealed his misunderstanding of the cold realities of the battlefield. 83 Simonds was
hell-bent on showing his own bellicosity. However, throwing away soldiers' lives in
fruitless battles made him appear careless to British army commander Dempsey and
to Montgomery, who had previously cautioned Simonds about charging blindly
into the enemy's strength."
A handful of successful Canadian actions surfaced from the sea of defeat during
Operation Spring - particularly the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry's defence against
repeated enemy counterattacks. The limited gains also allowed for the unlocking of
German positions in future battles. At Verrières Ridge, in the cauldron of combat,
no force-American, British, Polish.- could have done better. And no force should
have been ordered to do what the Canadians did.
CHAPTER 9
WAR AND MEDICINE
Bartefeld surgeon John Burwell Hillsman recalled the mayhem of combat medicine
in Normandy, under the fall of shells, in tents close to the front:
We saw the tragic sights from which we were never to be free for ten long
months. Men with heads shattered and grey, dirty brains oozing out from the
inged margins of skull bones. Youngsters with holes in their chests fighting for
airand breathing with a ghastly sucking noise. Soldiers with intestines draining
fecs into their belly walls and with their guts churned into a mess by high
explosives. Legs that were dead and stinking— but still wore a muddy shoe.
Operating floors that had to be scrubbed with Lysol to rid the Theatre of the
sench of dead flesh. Red blood that flowed and spilled over while life held on
by the slender thread of time. Boys who came to you with a smile and died on
the operating table. Boys who lived long enough for you to learn their name
and then were carried away in trucks piled high with the dead.
Himans depiction of the maimed and dying provides stark insight into the horror
and destruction of combat. Shrapnel, bullets, mortar bombs, and shell splinters broke
bone and tore the Aech Those who cared for the battered Canadian soldiers "became
de possessors of bitter knowledge that no man has ever been able to describe. Only
i going through it do you possess it."
All modern armies require medical svstems. Without an efficient method of clear-
ag the battlefield and providing forward care, a soldier loses faith in his superiors
