78 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
There was no rest on either side of No Man's Land. Canadian infantry and engin-
eering field companies tried to mask the buildup of war materiel for the new assault,
while reconnoitring, clearing mines, and cutting paths through the barbed wire. " All
was done under the German' noses. Soldiers died by shot and shell, a few at a time,
but everyone knew a new round of mass slaughter was in store in a few days. As
Vokes grumbled, "The Krauts we were facing were very determined."66
THE EIGHTH ARMYS OPERATION was to be launched by half a million soldiers from
ten national forces on May 23. Rain brought misery and mud as the Canadians pre-
Pared for their largest set-piece battle of the war to date, in Operation Chesterfield
Opposite the Canadians were the 90ch Panzer Grenadier Division and the Ist
Parachute Division, the defenders of Ortona, now ravaged by the last year of fight-
ing. These once elite divisions were reduced to a motley collection of shot-up units
and new reinforcements, but they were dug in and fortified behind an effective
trench system. The Ist Canadian Division's intelligence estimated that berween the
towns of Aquino and Pontecorvo the Germans had several thousand defenders and
nine Panther turrets with 75mm guns on concrete bases, with living quarters
below each protected by two to three towed 50mm anti-tank guns, as well as
machine-gun pillboxes and conventional trenches.
As befiting the Great War set-piece battle that Chesterfield was shaping up to be,
the Canadians would advance behind a complicated creping barrage laid down by 288
guns, while another 522 guns were tasked with counter-battery fire and the destruction
of dozens of rearward strongpoints and crossroads. The Allied guns which were in
quantity almost on par with the number of arillery pieces backstopping the Canadian
Corps during its historic battle at Vimy Ridge in April 1917-outnumbered the
Germans by at least four to one. With the moving wall of shelfire pounding the way
forward 90 metres every five minutes (and later every three), the infantry and armour
advance was tied to it, with timed lifts and smokescreens. "We do not expect to kill
many enemy in a prepared position even with a dense barrage," warned one artillery
document. "It does, however, numb their senses for a time. Even with the massive
weight of shellfire, the infantry would have to stick close to their barrage and follow it
through the enemy lines to overcome the stunned enemy before they recovered.
THE HITLER LINE
79
Canadian Corps commander Lieutenant-General Burns ordered the infantry of
the Ist Division to hack open the line, and the 5th Armoured Division to punch
through it. As Burns was later to write of control in battle, "When he orders an attack
against an enemy in position, a general knows that some of the men he sends forward
are going to be killed, and more will be wounded.... It would be idle to deny that
professional training and temperament has given most successful generals a capacity
to shut their mind to the inevitable 'butcher's bill."6) While Burns suppressed his
anxiety over the coming battle, he also ensured that the plan was sound and that he
had done all that he could to contribute to the victory. It was out of his hands now.
In the early hours of the 23rd, the front-line forces snatched a few hours of fitful
sleep and then munched on cold food and sipped tepid tea cut with rum. Weapons
were checked and rechecked. Most men stared wide-eyed into the darkness, mouth-
ing silent prayers, running through the next few hours in their head. A few cheeky
infantrymen took bets on how long it would take to crack the enemy line. Most
soldiers realized the serious nature of what was in store and did not partake in such
bravado. Would they march across the smoking, desolate battlefield, or would the
Germans, entrenched in their concrete bunkers, be ready for them?
AT SA.M. ON THE 23RD, the guns opened up in the first Canadian corps-level oper-
ation of the war. The opening phase saw a two-brigade attack of three infantry
regiments: the PPCLI, the Seaforth Highlanders of Canada, and the Carleton and
Yorks, with three more battalions in close support. Vokes should have put a stronger
force into the sharp end (and had been forced by Burns and Leese to change his plan
from a single brigade attack to a double), especially since his division was not respon-
sible for the exploitation- breakout -phase of the battle. At the same time, even
though the general believed that the artillery hammer would smash the enemy
defences without the need to throw more flesh against fire, he had failed to sort out
the boundary issue with the British 78th Division on the right. The British had not
accounted for the town of Aquino in their sector, and its many defenders were able
to shoot into the Canadian front with little impediment.?0
For the infantry at the front, the air was filled with the howling, banshee wails of
various calibres of shells, while the hurricane bombardment shook the ground. Field
