272 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
even took on and killed a feared Tiger tank. When Currie and his small force were
finally relieved on the 2lst, they had fought for three days and nights straight. "Tired
and hungry, we left behind a scene of death and destruction that is hard to imagine,"
recalled Arthur Bridge, who would continue to fight with the Argylls along with his
older brother Ralph. Both survived the war." As Canadian trooper Ray Lane testified,
"It is hard to get a clear, intelligent picture in my mind of the events.... I can't get it
all in proper sequence. It was such a blur of burning tanks, dead bodies, wounded
being carried off on stretchers, desperate faces of Germans wanting to surrender,
angry faces of SS soldiers trying to prevent it-shooting their own countrymen. For
our own safety, there was no time to be selective. We had no choice but to shoot
everything that came at us. There was killing and being killed at an unprecedented
rate. The enemy, however, was the big loser." 8 Major Currie, lean, tall, and haggard,
never let up. His battlegroup captured and killed some 2,000 Germans, and Currie
was awarded the Victoria Cross.
Major David Currie, on the left holding the revolver, led the Canadian battlegroup
in St Lamber that illed, wounded, and captured some 2,000 fleeing Germans.
For hi inspired leadership, Currie was awarded the Victoria Cross.
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
273
German units coordinated attacks from outside the Falaise trap in a breakback
operation to cut through the Polish sector and allow thousands of troops to escape on
the 19th, but by the 21st the cauldron was reinforced and the will of the enemy to
fight had been smashed. After seventy-seven days, the Battle of Normandy was over.
CLOSE TO 8,000 DESTROYED, damaged, or abandoned German tanks, trucks, and
guns lay in the Falaise Pocket. There were also about 10,000 dead Germans. General
Dwight Eisenhower visited the battlefield, and while he had seen much death in his
life, he was shaken: "It was literally possible to walk for hundreds of yards at a time,
seping on nothing but dead and decaying flesh."80 It would take teams, largely
composed of prisoners of war, weeks to bury the thousands of dead. Some of the
digusted soldiers in the area took to wearing their gas masks to deaden the stench.
The Canadians' hated adversary, the 12th SS-known even among German troops
as the "murder division"-was wiped out, reduced to ten tanks and a few hundred
men. Meyer escaped, but he was taken
prisoner in early September and would
later be convicted of the execution of
Canadian prisoners, for which he
received a commuted death sentence.81
Two German armies were written off,
wich only about 40.000
Germans
scaping the pocket, although about a
quarter million more were left in
Northwest Europe.
The Allies suffered about 206,000
casualties from the D-Day landing to
the end of the Normandy campaign,
about equal to the Germans.
The
chemy lost another 200,000 as pris-
олes." In total, some 11 panzer div-
sions and panzer grenadier divisions
song with 36 infantry divisions were
The Germans were defeated in Normandy on
August 21, 1944, after seventy-seven days of
combat. It was a brutal attrition campaign,
but resulted in a decisive victory for the Allies.
