118 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
important weather forecasts in history. To gain some leeway, he pushed the invasion
to the 6th, hoping to ride out the storm. The soldiers knew none of this, intent as
they were on their own final preparations: chain-smoking, poker and dice (playing
for the French francs that most men were issued), and all the while scratching at raw
skin beneath their new baledress uniforms that were impregnated with chemicals
to counter gas attacks. Foldable bikes were secured with a sneer, as officers explained
with little enthusiasm that they were meant for a rapid exploitation. Bikes against
Panther tanks: even the most naive private knew that was a bad joke.
Canadian infantrymen Privates Art Robertson and Ken Mardon,
abound a landing craft before the assauls on Juno Beach. Nineteen-year-old Mardon
wa morally wounded on July 8, 1944, and died two days later.
D-DAY
119
The infantry were roused from their fitful sleep around 3 A.M. on June 6. Final
preparations were made. Lieutenant John D. McLean, a platoon commander in the
Queen's Own Rifles, met with his sergeant and a corporal to make a list of all the men
in his platoon, with names and home addresses, so he could write to their next of kin
if they were killed. He created three copies, with the hope that between himself and
his two subordinates at least one of them would survive. As it turned out, McLean was
the only one of the three to be alive at the end of D-Day. He was shot through the
shoulder and during his recovery he made the effort to write the eighteen letters to
the parents of those lads in his platoon who were killed. 4
Most Canadians were like Private Dutch Ramsay of the Canadian Scottish, who
wrote, "We knew some of us were going to die but we didn't know who."' Others were
so shaken by the enormity of the coming events that they foresaw their own deaths.
Private Ben Mackereth of the North Shore Regiment observed one distressed comrade
who had a premonition of his certain demise: "I can feel it in my bones. It's going to
happen and there is nothing I can do about it." A concerned Mackereth had few
words of comfort, as uneasy as he was too about the coming events, and the man was
inded killed on Juno Beach. So were dozens, perhaps hundreds, of others who had
cold themselves over and over again that they would survive.
ON JUNE 6, Canadian warships sup-
ported the invasion force in the largest
naval operation in the history of war-
fare. Destroyers such as Algonquin and
Sioux would bombard German fortifi-
cations along the coast, while RCN
corvettes protected the landing craft
that ran the troops in to the beaches.
Lieutenant-Commander D.W. Piers,
commanding officer of Algonquin, had
ordered his crew to man the destroyer's
‹ inch guns no matter the cost.
our ship gets hit near the shore we will
Lieutenant-Commander D. W. Piers,
commanding officer of Algonquin,
promised to fire his destroyer's guns in support
of the invasion to the bitter end, and even to
run his warship up on the beach.
