236 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
and 506 men from the 3rd Division, which had been in battle since June 6, had been
diagnosed with battle exhaustion. No. 1 Canadian Exhaustion Unit was overrun with
patients, especially during the supposed "down time" after the major engagements,
when survivors had time to reflect on the accumulated mental trauma. One of every
four non-fatal casualties in Normandy was attributed to battle exhaustion. 30
Mild cases of battle stress were largely the result of sleep deprivation; however, more
intense cases included concussions to the brain or severe psychic damage. Jack Leddy,
a medical officer in a casualty clearing station, was an eyewitness to the behaviour of
psychologically traumatized men: "Some of them had seen their buddies blown to
smithereens. They would be picked up wandering around on a road or huddled by
some tree. They were brought into the station, where we had set up a special ward for
them. They would be crying hysterically or just sitting and staring into space. There
were those who trembled and shook
uncontrollably. They were in shock but
with no visible wounds."31
While "shell shock," "battle stress,"
and "cracking up," all served as short-
hand for the condition of succumbing
to the stress of sustained combat, the
military and medical command settled
on "battle exhaustion" as the official
term. It relieved the need for a soldier
to prove whether he had a legitimate
injury, and it suggested that soldiers
might be returned to the front after
some rest. Sleep was a chief component
of healing the bodies and spirits of the
warriors. Sedatives such as sodium amy-
tal could knock a man out for 24 hours
An injured Canadian is evacuated back
te England. Note the wound tag on him,
providing his medical information.
or longer. Lessons from earlier in the
war had
revealed that patients kept
close to the front-within earshot of
WAR AND MEDICINE
237
the explosions— recovered more rapidly than those sent far to the rear. The soldier
could regain strength and return to his unit; far to the rear, the sacred link with the
mit was broken, and there was less incentive for men to recover. The medical offi-
cars and padres offered therapeutic talks to the worn-out soldiers, in order, as one
Canadian officer remarked, to "restore courage to go back and take part in a dan-
geous and deadly existence."32 There were some malingerers-men avoiding their
dury and the danger —but most patients were genuinely depleted. Yet even when
bale exhaustion was identified and treated, it was not easy to overcome. Statistics
hifted between theatres of war and intensity of fighting, but only about 40 percent
of the soldiers returned to full duty.33 Those who could not regain their mental
health, or who had received a shock to the brain, were sent to the rear, usually in
te Canadian Army to No. 1 Neurological and Neurosurgical Hospital, also known
a "No. 1 Nuts."
As in the Great War, both the stick and the carrot were used to restore men. The
miliary, with its hierarchical system based on obedience, was inclined to threaten
ad punish those who could not function. As the number of battle stress casualties
ox, the R CAMC was criticized by the army command, and especially by Crerar and
Simonds, for being too lenient with the men. The generals wanted the soldiers sent
back into the line, particularly since the Normandy fighting was so costly among
te infantry battalions and there was now a shortage of trained riflemen. Many of the
cos rested the orders and evacuated hundreds of men they judged unable to
aum to combat. There are no records available on how many soldiers were returned
o trunts only to break down again. As one eight-month veteran of the Italian
apaign testified after being sent back to his regiment, "I just never could be respon-
able in a tight place again and I know it »34 He was not alone A tension remained_
& is pressed in open disputes between the medical services and the high
mand, as many medical officers saw the soldiers' responses to death or maiming
& entirely rational.
TE BE NOT CONCERNED with the ulcimate reconstruction of the patient," said
we Canadian front-line surgeon. "We are only concerned with getting the kid out
where alive enough for someone else to reconstruct him."35 Men with severe wounds
