320
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The normally cautious Montgomery had proposed a new plan on August 23: a
narrower and more focused northern drive using his 21st Army Group, along with
elements of General Bradley's 12th Army Group. A sharpened stab to the northeast
across the Rhine River would take the Anglo-American armies into the industrial
heartland of the Ruhr more rapidly. Like a needle puncturing a balloon, a thrust like
this would compel the Nazis- especially the relatively untouched Fifteenth Army in
the Scheldt area- to pull back to cover the Fatherland, thereby leaving themselves
open to destruction from the mass of airpower. It was an audacious plan. For it to
work, Montgomery required colossal amounts of ammunition and fuel, both of which
were in short supply. It also required difficult choices. This single thrust would starve
the American southern advance especially Patton's Third Army—of resources, even
though his formations now appeared to have the greatest opportunity of breaking into
Germany proper.
Montgomery had formulated his "narrow thrust" plan in the final days of the
Normandy campaign. At a meeting of Eisenhower and Montgomery on August 23,
the two wilful commanders, encumbered by their past unease over the perception
that the British general had been too cautious in Normandy, did not see eye to
eye. Many of the SHAEF senior commanders briefing Eisenhower thought that
Montgomery's new plan was unworkable due to logistical stretch. There was also
a widely held feeling at SHAEF that the much-disliked British general was simply
trying to feather his own nest by commanding this new Anglo-American lunge,
despite the fact that the number of American troops outnumbered British and
Commonwealth ones by a ratio of three to one. Moreover, a single thrust, no matter
how concentrated, could be more easily stopped than a broader and more method-
ical advance north and south of the Ardennes.
While SHAEF was uneasy with
Monty's new plan, Eisenhower was willing to consider it if only to keep the Anglo-
American alliance intact. He was also pleased to see Montgomery go for the jugular
instead of following his usual inclination to deliver body blows. Eisenhower was
inclined to back Montgomery. but he knew that the Allied advance would break
down if supplies had to be rushed along the roads from the Normandy beaches, as
each division needed about 500 tons of material a day. And so he demanded that
Montgomery devote and diver significant forces towards liberating the Belgian
THE LONG LEFT FLANK
321
inland harbour of Antwerp. '4 Antwerp's 50 kilometres of docks and established rail-
way facilities, and its discharge capacity of 100,000 tons a day, would allow for the
feeding of the Allied armies and would support either the narrow thrust or the broad
front advance.
Antwerp was fundamental to the Allied war effort in Europe. The city was at the
mouth of the Scheldt River, some 70 kilometres inland from the sea. Chalking up a
significant victory, British armoured units from XXX Corps had thrust hard to cap-
ture Antwerp on September 4. It was such a stunningly quick advance that the city
fell almost without a fight and with the docks largely intact, although the Belgian
resistance had paid a heavy price in stopping the retreating Germans from demolish-
ing key structures and emplacements. With the enemy ousted, it looked as though
the German Fifteenth Army might be destroyed if the British kept pushing north-
ward. Yet XXX Corps had sprinted to the finish and then stopped on the line. With
the British exhausted, fought-out, and low in fuel, the Germans, driven out of
Antwerp, realized that there was no longer pressure against them and simply dug in
on the outskirts of the city, north of the Albert Canal. Their position proved, once
the bridges were blown, to be a perfect anti-tank ditch. While Antwerp was in Allied
hands, the port remained closed because the long estuary leading to the sea was still
bad by German gun batteries along the South Beveland Peninsula and Walcheren
land, and to the south along the enclave of Breskens. Antwerp was useless until the
Scheat estuary was cleared of enemy forces.
Even with the deepening logistical crisis, Montgomery was focused on his auda-
cious narrow thrust to cross the Neder Rhine at Arnhem, in the Netherlands, and he
barelv maid attention to Antwero. He ordered Crerar's Pirst Canadian Armv. all hu
abandoned on the far left flank, to begin the process of clearing the coastal fortresses
of le Havre. Boulogne, Dieppe. and Calais. but continued to ignore the need to
open the Scheld. ' This was a significant oversight for Montgomery, who prided
himself in his careful planning. After the slow sludge of Normandy, Montgomery
was going for broke.
Montgomery allowed General Crerar to plan and execute the coastal battles to
dear the Channel ports. These fortresses were built around hardened positions of
concrete and steel. and defended by seaward naval guns as Dart of Hitler's Atlantic
