384 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
of the terrible wreckage she witnessed: "It was just, again, like early France. Just end-
less streams of wounded."7 Resistance stiffened, and by February 13, the day the
Reichswald was finally cleared, the Allied drive had stagnated.
AFTER A BRIEF PAUSE to bring forward guns, ammunition, and supplies, the offen-
sive was renewed on February 15, with four British divisions and the 2nd and 3rd
Canadian Divisions forming a formidable spearhead. The ground forces were ably
assisted by the Second Tactical Air Force, which flew 1,500 sorties that day, shooting
up anything along the enemy roads,48 Canadian pilot Hedley Everard recalled that
the Spithres and Typhoons roamed all over the battlefield, like a "gathering of vul-
tures at a carcass. Everything below was a war-legitimate target."«)
Though some significant advances were made, especially through the placement
of infantry in armoured Kangaroos, the enemy troops were resilient as they fought
to defend against the invasion into Germany. The Canadian Scottish and the Regina
Rifles, for instance, engaged in a fervent struggle at Moyland Wood, a forested hilly
region. On February 16, the Canadians moved through the edge of the woods, step-
ping over and around the unburied bodies of the 15th Scottish Division, who had
assaulted unsuccessfully days earlier.
Throughout the forest were camouflaged paratroopers from the 6th German
Parachute Division, who ambushed the Canadians. Artillery observers could locate
few targets, and the tanks, unable to make progress in the woods, were forced to fire
from the perimeter. The Germans, in turn, were backed by artillery from the east
bank of the Rhine. The Regina' war diary noted, "Coy (Company) Commanders
agree that the shelling and fighting in these woods have been just as bad as anything
encountered in NORMANDY."S0
After trading fire over several davs. the under-strenath Reginas mounted an attack
from the south on the 18th, supported by Wasps. With the Canadian Scottish sweep-
ing in from the east, the paratroopers were overwhelmed in several clashes but always
found ways to filter back to other positions. "Fighting in the Woods." remembered
one gunner, "was extremely dificult for no sooner would the enemy be chased our
of one sector than they would turn up in another"51 The paratroopers showed
according to one Canadian report, "fanatical resistance."52
BATTERING GERMANY
385
The worn-out 7th Brigade commander, Brigadier Jock Spragge, who had com-
manded the unit since August 1944, was relieved on the 20th. Lieutenant-Colonel
A.S. Gregory, who had led the Reginas, took over the formation and a new phase of
the operation was planned for the 21st, when the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, Sherbrooke
tanks, and a number of Wasps would saturate the southern part of the woods in fire.
The Little Black Devils from Winnipeg had captured a difficult position to the
south at Louisendorf a few days earlier, and had taken a cage-bulging 240 prisoners.
Following a concentrated barrage, the Devils stalked their way through the woods,
defeating the Germans. The Royal Winnipeg Rifles took 105 casualties, adding to
the 380 other Canadians lost during the six-day battle.53 The Germans lost even
more men, often in wild counterattacks, and the combat here added to their crip-
pling casualties, which numbered, on the First Canadian Army's front, approximately
12.000 killed and another 12,000 made prisoner. 54
There were other costly engagements. On the 19th, for instance, one of the most
biter struggles occurred on the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade's sector, as the Royal
Infantrymen of the South Saskatchewan Regiment during mopping-up operations.
