246 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
place at the right time. Rommel never recovered from his wounds and he committed
suicide on October 14, 1944. The field marshal wanted to avoid a show trial and
death sentence after he was implicated in the July 20 plot to assassinate Hitler.
Command of the air gave the Allies an enormous advantage, and while the vast
majority of sorties did not lead to the shooting of German generals, every damaged
train and blasted truck demoralized the enemy. "The fighters were good," observed
Lieutenant Ronald Shawcross.
"We loved to see them coming in over us." The
Typhoons and Spitfires buoyed the morale of the Canadians on the ground, who
cheered wildly as they witnessed enemy positions strafed with fire or blown skyward
by high explosive bombs or rockets. Such attacks, one officer wrote with genuine
feeling, were "a beautiful sight."
Airpower did not win the battle in Normandy, but in combination with the
ocher arms it eroded German combat effectiveness. John Fitzgerald, a decorated
RCAF gunner who flew in a Lancaster
in No. 166 Squadron, RAF, apolo-
gized in an August 17, 1944, letter
home for not having written more
over the preceding
months,
claimed it had
"been absolutely
impossible to write [since] we have
been operating steadily with no time
in between flights except to sleep. We
are on now but there is a time between
take off so I can dash off this letter....
We have been doing a few battle front
trips and it was really a pleasure to do
them." Fitzgerald and his crew were
killed before the end of the month,
but he was right in noting to his par-
A French train destroyed by Allied airpower.
ents that they had been "knocking the
living daylights out of Jerry."
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
247
ATMES IT SEEMED that the Normandy battle would never end," felt a weary John
Gay an intelligence officer at II Canadian Corps.® The horror show at Verrières
Ridge revealed that the enemy was far from breaking. Following orders from Hitler
so to give an inch of ground, the German forces in Normandy prepared for the
eneed Allied onslaught. Too weak to drive Montgomery's armies back, and unable
logive up terrain to gain advantage of time or space, the Germans seemed doomed.
Bu dislodging them would entail a bashing, especially on the Anglo-Canadian front,
mhere most of the best German divisions were situated. Matters were made worse for
de Germans when the long-delayed American Operation Cobra was finally launched
co July 25 against weak opposition. After a week of fighting, on July 31, Bradley's
US. First Army captured the important town of Avranches, through which ran
many crucial roads. General George Patton's newly activated Third Army, on the
matern flank of the Normandy battlefield, kept the momentum going. The long-
get of being enveloped.
To meet that threat, the German commander in the west, Field Marshal von
Klug, ought to retreat to more secure positions, but Hitler denied his request.
astead, the Führer ordered his generals to shift forces from the Anglo-Canadian
Got to core up the crumbling defence against the Americans. In early August, von
Kuge moved several of his elite panzer divisions to form a six-division corps to stop
Paton. However, Ultra intercepts and aerial intelligence revealed the manoeuvre,
and the Americans hammered the Germans from the air as they were forming their
amoured fist. When the Germans finally attacked on August 7, there was no panic
among the Gils. The Germans were butchered and broken at Mortain and other
battlegrounds. Patton galloped off again, his army eating up kilometres of terrain in
the big push to encircle the remaining Germans.
With Patton sweeping south and eastward and the Anglo-Canadian divisions
pied advance southward, the two major Allied pincers were closing in on the
Germans. The German armies—the Seventh and the Fifth Panzer—-had to retreat,
i hi. in the war the generals were thoroughly cowed by Hitler, who, after
the failed July 20 assassination plot by his own officers, had blood in his eyes. Those
enior staff who spoke of retreat were considered defeatist at best and traitorous at
