106 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
depth-charges were being dropped, instead of having to lose contact when she ran over
the target and dropped her own charges." The relentless dropping of depth charges-
metal canisters filled with 300 pounds of TNT or amatol shook the Canadian war-
ships, but wrought havoc on the submarine, which suffered small leaks, electrical
shortages, and fires. Finally, after the gruelling battering, the U-boat surfaced. It was mer
with a hail of gunfire and soon surrendered. "The U-boat surrounded by five stopped
ships presented a strange sighr," Nixon recounted, "rather like a wild animal at bay."'?
IN THE CHANNEL OPERATIONS OF EARLY 1944, RCN Tribal class destroyers Haida,
Huron, Iroquois, and Athabaskan were involved in a series of battles along the French
coast. The Tribals were larger than the River-class destroyers, the first having been
commissioned in November 1942. Equipped with six 4.7-inch guns in three double
turrets, two 4 inch guns, and four 21 inch torpedo tubes, the Tribals could unleash
formidable firepower. Although they had some hirthing mains they were outremely
fast, at 36 knots, and equipped with modern radar for locating vessels on the surface
or underwater. RCN commander Harry DeWolf commented that the Tribals were
"a fighting destroyer.""*
The Channel operations were welcomed by the Canadians warshine Athabachan had
returned after suffering glider bomb damage the previous year-when a "Chase me
Charlie, as the gliders were known, had struck and passed through it, luckily without
exploding and several Canadian destroyers had recently finished their tour serving on
the frigid Murmansk convoys to deliver crucial supplies to Russia. That convoy run-
six to cight days along 3,000 kilometres was the "most hazardous and horrible place
for naval operations, wrote one officer. The danger from U-boats and the German
surface Ret that were concentrated in Norwegian waters, the inhospitable harbours
and bases, the long periods of darkness, and the nearly instant deach for anyone who
went into the icy waters made it unpopular with all sailors!" Lieutenant P.D. Budge,
the first lieutenant on HMCS Huron, described the conditions:
It seemed that gales were forever sweeping over the dark, clouded sea. The dim
red ball of the sun barely reaching the horizon as the ship pitched and tossed,
the musty smell of damp clothes in which we lived, the bitter cold, the long
PLANNING THE INVASION
107
frequent watches that seemed to last forever. This on a diet of stale bread, pow-
dered eggs and red lead [stewed tomatoes] and bacon. The relief to get below
for some sleep into that blessed haven—the comforting embrace of a well-slung
hammock. There was no respite on watch for gun, torpedo or depth-charge
crews as every fifteen minutes would come the cry, "For exercise all guns train
and elevate through the full limits" —this to keep them free of ice.... The watch
below would be called on deck to clear the ship of ice.... Each trip out and back
seemed to last an eternity with nothing to look forward to at either end except
that perhaps mail would be awaiting us at Scapa Flow.20
One of the few redeeming features of the Murmansk run, according to Able Seaman
Gordon Dunlop, who had enlisted at age eighteen in 1943, was the chance for HMCS
Siou's hockey team to play against various Russian teams.21
The Canadian Tribals had moved south in January 1944 to more fulfilling action
in the Channel as part of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla. Based at Portsmouth, the flo-
till guarded the western approaches to the English Channel. While Allied fighters
and bombers harassed and sank enemy vessels during daylight hours, the battle at
night was far from won. The Germans had a formidable force of torpedo boats and
destroyers that laid minefields or struck Allied shipping under the cover of darkness.
Since February 1944, the 10th Destroyer Flotilla had been engaged in Operation
Tunnel, anti-shipping sweeps, which, in print, the Canadian sailors described as "fool-
ing around the French coast" —a sanitized version of their common reference to it as
"fucking" around the French coast. The operations initially met little success, with one
embarrassing "battle" seeing the heavily armoured destroyers pounding an enemy ves-
sel located by surface radar, only to find that it was a group of small islands.2
After about twenty operations, the 10th Flotilla finally found their enemy in the
carly hours of April 26, when they intercepted three German torpedo boats near
St. Malo. In a running gun battle, the Tribals-Huron, Haida, and Athabaskan—
illuminated the sea with starshells while the Germans laid smokescreens to escape. It
was not a fair fight. The German ships were outclassed and at a disadvantage as they
were not equipped with flashless cordite, so that each round fired gave away their
position anew. The German boats let loose their torpedoes, forcing the destroyers to
