YUL
456
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
veterans and away from the prying eyes of his wife, a devout teetotaller, but he never
formally joined the Legion. When he got together with his brother, Allan, the two
often talked about the war, and while Gordon was a gentle man—soft-spoken and
deferential, eager to please—he reserved a bit of vitriol for his sister's husband, who
had chosen not to serve during the war and instead made a significant amount of
money as a businessman in Montreal. He did not bear ill feelings towards his wife's
brothers, who were conscientious objectors, apparently because they had stood their
ground and shown their own moral courage. In Gordon and Allan's minds, their sis-
te's husband had not done his duty in the war against Fascism, perhaps because he
had profited from the war.
Gordon retired at age fifty-eight in 1972 and passed away two years later. He
never regretted his service and remarked more than once that it had been the "peak
of his life." His overseas ying symbolized in his memory that interlude between
prewar Depression and postwar office work, the only time in his life when he saw
castes and palaces in England, Roman antiquities across Italy, the pyramids near
Cairo, the alwavs romanticized Isle of Capri These were the subieets of the paintings
and woodcuts he brought back from the war, and they became the images central to
his memory of the best times of his life, of excitement and adventure and travel, a
momentary escape in time from a life otherwise ordinary.
Like my grandfather, Gordon Cook, all of Canada's million veterans had their own
war legacy. Each veteran shared commonalities of experiences as well as having his
own unique narrative. Few of the stories follow the traditional traiectory of what we
might think equates with veteran's status: the Veterans Charter, the Legion, and an
abiding interest in the war. Yet nor were many Canadian veterans unaffected by the
war or unable to escape its long reach over the many years of their remaining lives.
Donald Pearce who served in Marthwest Furone beliered "No Ana haa rarly hap
in the same places as anyone else: and I refuse to play the game of comparing experi-
ences. The whole war seems to me a quite private experience "52 Tragedv. hardshin
and loss were mixed equally with camaraderie, profound experiences, and the need to
mature in a hurry. Every Canadian found a different war, and then, as veterans,
experienced it differently again in memory. For some, it was the defining moment of
their lives, while for others it was just a brief interlude. In almost all veterans,
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
457
however, the war was also something that resurfaced over time, and often unexpect-
edly. And it tended to gather in strength as age brought the natural tendency to
regret, celebrate, and reflect on a life lived.
AS THESE ONCE-YOUNG WARRIORS AGED, they looked upon their lives. Many chose
to draw out their personal narratives of war. Gerald Bowen, more than fifty-five years
"A lot of the horror that you witnessed or you experienced
gets locked away in the back of your head.... I's very hard to get it out.... For years
and years and years, the boys never spoke out because, you know, people had families
and people had mortgages and that was the concern. Reestablishment and going to
school and getting jobs. It has only been in the last couple of years that the guys
have rally started talking."3 Over time, most veterans shared their war experiences
and some put pen to paper, seeking to exorcise the war that prowled through the
corners of their minds.
Using wartime letters, regimental histories, and diaries to augment their mem-
ories, many veterans at the end of their lives left a legacy for their children or grand-
children. Others wrote to set the record straight, feeling that historians had ignored
their war experiences by focusing on senior commanders or the actions of divisions
and brigades. For some it was a more personal journey.
"The process has been a
catharsis,"
observed Hal Lawrence in capturing his five and a half years on the
Atlantic in a corvette. "Setting down at last the inchoate thoughts and daydreams,
the nostaloi fear hone and despair. that the period arouses "54 Revisiting the ghosts
of the past put some of them to rest. "Writing this memoir has been like looking at
a diorama in a department store window," penned Robert Crozier, a veteran of the
Irish Regiment of Canada.
"The figures and events are familiar, but this time you
are standing outside looking in detached, observant, but no longer involved. It's a
nice, safe feeling."'' In writing about the war, many veterans found it was the first
time that they truly understood what they had taken part in, and how their service
had fit into a national or international Allied war effort. Arthur Bridge, a private in the
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, recalled in 2000, "We low rankers seldom knew
what was going on, where we were, where we were going, or what to expect when we
got there. It has only been since the war, and with the help of history books, that I
