304 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
"We kept going, never looking back ... there were dead Germans by a stone fence,
caught in our artillery barrage, sprawled in strange poses, figures in a wax museum."56
Through an eerie mist, the Cape Breton Highlanders and Perths rushed up the ridge,
leaving behind wounded soldiers crying for help and stunned prisoners scuttling to
the rear. By dawn Hoffmeister's men were on the ridge, along with British troops
from the south, and the Hussars tanks and the Irish Regiment soon thereafter cleared
the "sniper-infested town" of Coriano."
In the battle's aftermath, the survivors contemplated their fate. Private Ted Patrick
of the Irish Regiment, who survived thirty-six hours of mortar and shellfire, recalled,
"I was dehydrated and emotionally and physically exhausted.",8 Lieutenant Crozier
wrote, "I have been through just about the works now-heavy shelling, mortaring,
mine fields, German Tiger tanks, Spandau machine gun nests, snipers in the fields
and buildings, street fighting and house clearing-and even aerial strafing (our own
planes). While you are in it, you are so keyed up and busy ducking, dodging, dig-
ging, running across open gaps, that you don't have much time to worry, except
occasionally you have to fight the jitters. Only when it's over do you think: 'My God!
How bloody dangerous! "s)
"IT WAS A HARD FIGHT," Sir Oliver Leese said of Coriano,
"and a decisive action in
the battle." The Germans had been driven back and the 29th Panzer Grenadier
Division reported "considerable losses in men and materiel.?60 The 5th Canadian
Armoured Division needed a rest. It was pulled from front-line service after hav-
ing lost 320 of its tanks (although many were repairable). One German corps-level
report observed, "Enemy armoured formations, particularly Canadian tanks, are
no longer sensitive to artillery fire, but carry on even under heaviest fire
concentrations."6)
Three weeks of grinding combat had left the Canadians in a bad way, but the
Germans were even worse off. The offensive continued as Burns's I Canadian Corps,
now strengthened wich the 4ch British and 2nd New Zealand Divisions and a Greek
brigade, joined the much-reduced Ist Canadian Division. Leese, seemingly won over
by Burn's rupturing of the Gothic Line, recommended him for a Distinguished
Service Order, which he received.
THE GOTHIC LINE
305
Major-General Chris Vokes was still grieving the death of his younger brother,
Fred (who was killed while leading the British Columbia Dragoons against Point
204), when he drew up the 1st Division's operational plan for September 14. The
Ist Canadian Infantry Brigade, on the right, was ordered to snatch Rimini airfield,
and the 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade, on the left, was to capture San Martino
Ridge, with the ultimate goal of pushing on to San Fortunato, an anchor town on
the major defensive system known as the Rimini Line.
The attack went in on September 14 and was the start of a week of headlong bat-
te. On the right, the 1st Brigade's Royal Canadian Regiment and 48th Highlanders
of Canada clawed their way south of the airfield but were denied its capture by a
hail of mortar fire. On the left, the 3rd Brigade had to advance 6 kilometres to the
1,500-metre-long San Martino Ridge,
which ran south to north, with the
fortified villages of San Lorenzo in the
south and San Martino on a northern
spur. The Van Doos and the West
Novas drove forward in the early hours
of the 14th, overcoming numerous
machine-gun nests, but they were hit
hard by enemy counterattacks and rak-
ing long-range fire. The next morning,
the Van Doos tried three times to cross
the heat-baked fields to reach San
Martino; each drive was shot to
pieces, and the French Canadians suf-
fated twenty-nine killed and sixty-one
wounded in their most costly day of
the war.? The Novas had an equally
shaly time in reaching the southern
village with its stone church. As one
of the regiment's chroniclers noted, "It
was a murderous place in the broad
Private Stanley Rodgers of the 48th Highlanders
of Canada, with a PIAT anti-tank weapon.
He has seen the face of battle.
