FIGHT TO THE FINISH
164,783,921 tons of cargo were escorted across the Atlantic. Between September
1942 and May 1945, 99.4 percent of merchant ships reached their destinations
intact." The battle cost 1,990 RCN personnel killed, while another 1,629 Canadian
and Newfoundland merchant mariners lost their lives.?"
"The war," observed Lieutenant John Kilpatrick of the Royal Canadian Naval
Volunteer Reserve, was "won by youngsters. Many of whom aged very quickly."80
Canadian Frank Curry characterized the battle at sea as one of "survival of ship and
crew. The strength to go on, hour after hour, day and night, until we reached a port,
a safe haven for ship and sailor alike. These were the experiences to test and try us to
the limits of our young lives.""! The survivors of the North Atlantic carried a signifi-
cant burden, but by any assessment, the seamen of the RCN and the merchant mar-
ine helped to win the Battle of the Atlantic, the war at sea, and the worldwide war.
CHAPTER 8
OPERATION SPRING
I cannot tell you much about what is going on over here," wrote Private Arthur
Wilkinson of the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada, to his mother
o)uly 10, 1944. "I can say this much though: it is a gigantic business and we are
fighting a tough enemy."' Private Wilkinson would be killed eight days later, as the
Canadians renewed the push against the Germans.
Wich Caen in Allied hands, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division was sent across the
Channel in early July to join Lieutenant-General Guy Simonds's newly established
I Canadian Corps. The battles of June and early July were fought by the 3rd Canadian
aty ivision and supporting tank regiments, and Simonds had been aching to
aet control over the ground war. Simonds was Canada's most experienced com-
mander, having cut his teeth during the Sicily campaign during the summer of 1943.
A profsional soldier who had studied war intensely, he was confident, cold, and
calating. His analytical mind impressed officers, and his chief of staff, Brigadier
NE. Rodoer, believed. "e reduced arblems in a Aach en hacie facts and variables
picked out those that mattered, ionored those that were side issues and made up
li mind and got on with it." He had a shrewd eye for good and poor officers,
al fred the latter freely during the war. Well liked by Montgomery for his
trience and precise manner, the corps commander was also detached, at times
trogant, and not a great communicator with the average soldier. Simonds
done oved by his own troops, who found him both physically and emotio
core from the front lines. And despite his agile mind that sought new ways t
sis soldiers, he also had an ungenerous tendency to blame his junior officers for !
