48
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
in several camps in which he was incarcerated. Beatings were not uncommon.
Eventually, the Canadians banded together and sent a delegation to each of the three
leaders. If any Canadian was hurt, they promised that the next victim would be
the leader of the gang. At the latrine, in the chow line, or out in the yard—they
would find him and kill him. "After that, we didn't have a problem with them."s!
"POW life was a real mental shock," remembered Pilot Officer James Smith, a navi-
gator with RCAF No. 432 Squadron who was imprisoned for almost two years.
"The
complete loss of freedom, anxiety about the future, thoughts about family and loved
ones so far away, inadequate food and sheer boredom" all ate away at the prisoner.
"Most managed to cope, but a few cracked up. It was called going around the bend."52
Pilot Officer Earle White saw that "The grim situation was too much for some men."
White testified that suicide attempts were frequent but rarely successful for it took too
long to bleed to death after cutting the wrist with a safety razor blade."53 He observed
one soldier who jumped from a second floor window and led with his head, while
another demoralized airman, having made his decision, walked calmly to the inner
wire fence and climbed it in front of guards who promptly shot him dead. Flight
Lieutenant Al Aldridge observed that many of the men were "very despondent."54
Flight Lieutenant John Fry, a twenty-seven-year-old university-educated flyer from
Jordan, Ontario, who was shot down in April 1943, described the static environment
of the Kriegies after thirteen months of imprisonment: "It sometimes seems hard to
realize that the rest of the world has gone on turning just the same since April last
year." While the home front support, care, and love sustained many men, Pilot
Officer Harry Jay recounted how a number of fellow prisoners received "Dear John"
letters from girlfriends and wives who would no longer wait for them. The men, in
a show of masculine grit, often posted the painful letters on a message board, for all
to see. Dark humour helped many prisoners deal with their painful conditions.
Squadron Leader George Hill was imprisoned at Stalag Luft I at Barth, Germany,
on the Baltic Sea, and he kept track of some of the pointed letters that circulated
through the camps in a small scrapbook:
"... 'm living with a private, darling, but please don't stop my allotment because
you make more money than he does!"
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
49
"I'm living with an artillery captain now—he's a swell chap, I know you'll like
him...."56
Such painful realities may have brought some comfort to Hill, although there was no
doubt deep unease in those sayings and cartoons, and in Hill's own need to write
them in his secret notebook. Pilot Officer Harry Jay was shaken by one long-time
British airman prisoner whose girl wrote to him that she had met an American, assert-
ing meanly, "I'd rather marry a 1943 hero than a 1941 coward.",7 Prisoners carried
many unspoken burdens.
"BECAUSE WE WERE BEHIND BARBED WIRE did not mean that we were out of the
war," claimed Flight Sergeant George Brown. "Many of the boys spent most of their
time planning ways to carry out sabotage, stealing coal, and anything else that was
not under lock and key.", Prisoners felt it was their duty to disrupt work activities
or to escape. The Germans accepted this attitude in the first half of the war, treating
escape attempts almost like a game. However, by early 1944 the desperation and
hardening effects of the losing war effort led to much stiffer penalties for attempted
escapers, including execution.
Officers and NCOs were not required to work, but most prisoners took the
opportunity a work detail gave to pass outside of the wire for a change of pace and
scenery, and the chances it afforded for interacting with civilians, who often supplied
illegal material for cigarettes. Many of the labour projects were in local factories,
mines, or farms. Machinery was jammed, tools dulled, broken, or stolen, the work
done haphazardly and with much inefficiency. Everything at the prisoners' disposal
was put to use to slow or disrupt work done on behalf of the Nazi state.
Prisoners outside of the camps had opportunities to escape. But an individual
Kriegie, in weakened physical condition and usually ill-equipped, needed assist-
ance from the collective. And so it was made clear to all prisoners that any plan
had first to be cleared by the escaping committee. These committees were set up
in all the camps. If the decision was given to allow a prisoner to go, food was gath-
ered, papers created, and maps issued. Flight Sergeant George Brown wrote that
the "escape club ... had cameras, which were forbidden, and procured film on the
