88
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
an armoured car in the middle of a tank battle felt like bringing a knife to a shootout,
"Our job was to get to the river and get there fast," recounted Major John Mahony,
commander of A Company of the Westminster Regiment and a former newspaper
reporter from New Westminster, British Columbia.®
Though the Westminsters lost a few of their armoured cars to enemy fire, they
reached the Melf after passing by burning Shermans from the Strathconas who were
battling it out with enemy forces on the west side of the river. In a whirling melee
amid dust and burning vehicles, the Strathconas eventually lost seventeen of their
Shermans but destroyed five German Panthers, two Mk IV tanks, eight self-propelled
guns, three more field guns, thirteen Nebelwerfers, and fifteen additional vehices?7
The Shermans, one of the Strathcona's officers noted. had a tendener to «hrew up'
quite quickly?" Often one shell from the German guns pierced through the tank's
armour, setting their gasoline stores on fire. Yet despite the grim tally, the Shermans
were not useless in battle and could fight it out with the best of the German tanks
and self-propelled guns in Italy.
On the other side of the Malfa, from about 3:30 p.M. on the 24th, the LdSH recce
tanks led by Lieutenant Edward Perkins- were hull down with their sulnerable
tracks and wheels buried in the earth, and exchanging fire with the enemy. Their
50 calibre machine guns were outmatched by enemy cannon fire, but the bullets
could still make a mess of a man. One soldier, in comparing the 303 rifle round to
a 50 calibre, remarked, "Both bullets enter cleanly. But the heavier round on exit
take about a foot of material with it.?" When the Westminsters cars arrived, they
aided the reconnaissance tanks. The Germans, aware of the threat, threw an armoured
force, strengthened by self-propelled guns, against the vulnerable Canadians. Out-
numbered, outgunned, and surrounded on three sides, the Westies, under command
of Major John Mahony (described by Peter Sturberg of the CBC as" a nice guy, mild
mannered, soft-spoker), threw back two German counterattacks, destroying three
enemy self-propelled guns and a tank. ' As part of the lopsided battle, a German
Panther turned towards the overextended force. One of the Westminsters, Private
John Culling, a farm boy from Swift Current, Saskatchewan, skulked forward. When
the German tank commander opened his turret to survey the battlefield, Culling
sprang from a nearby hiding spot and tossed a grenade that landed on the tank,
THE HITLER LINE
89
shredding the officer. "The Gods of War were smiling on Culling that afternoon,"
remembered Mahony, as Culling lobbed another grenade into the turret, exploding
inside the tank.101 The Panther was forever silenced and Culling was awarded the
Military Medal for his bravery.
The gods of war were also smiling on Perkins and Mahony, the latter of whom
was thrice wounded in the battle but refused to rest. With the company reduced
to sixty men and all officers but one wounded, Mahony led the fight, determined to
hold the position, even as he bled freely from his many wounds. His riflemen
exhibited astonishing tenacity as they held out against tanks. At one point, with
Panthers massing for another attack, Perkins, who led the steadily dwindling num-
bers of Strathconas, swore that "We fired everything we had from point fives to
tommy-guns."102 The Canadians bluffed the enemy with their frenzied fire and the
Germans retreated.
"No one can really know himself until he has felt the all-searing heat of the cru-
cible of terror," wrote one Canadian padre. 103 Mahony, Perkins, and their men had
faced that terror, and they had not been found wanting. Mahony was awarded the
Victoria Cross for his gallant leadership, and Perkins received the Distinguished
Service Order, an award rarely given to junior officers.!04 The Canadians had sur-
vived five hours of ruinous fire and armoured assaults but had carved out the
bridgehead that allowed follow-on forces to keep driving into the enemy's vulner-
able rear. With the shallow bridgehead across the Melfa, lead elements of the
Strathconas and the Irish Regiment also crossed at several points late on the 24th.
Canadian forces funnelled through the bridgehead, passing cratered meadows
speckled with red poppies. Within this apocalyptic landscape,
"bloated carcasses
of cartle and horses, lay in the fields, their legs pointing skyward," witnessed Robert
Sawdon, a twenty-one-year-old who followed two brothers into the service, one of
whom would not make it home. "Nearby was a German pillbox, mounted with an
88mm gun. The remains of three Germans soldiers were inside." Others were buried
under a few inches of soil. "I noticed, with a sickening feeling, the earth moving in
an undulating manner, due to the action of maggots performing their life func-
tion. ' Around the dead Germans were four burned-out British tanks. On the
broken battlefield, with its sickening stench of rotting flesh, buzz of millions of flies,
