178 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
evidenced by remaining lengths of white tape—-thereby allowing their mortars and
gun teams to fire indirectly from map coordinates adjusted by forward observers. One
official Canadian report noted that the enemy use of mortars was highly efficient, with
the bombs aimed to land behind the creeping barrage where the infantry were advan-
cing." Some of the Chaudières believed, for example, that they were being shelled by
their own guns, while other Canadians hugged their own barrage too closely to
escape the bombs and therefore were torn up by their own shells." As Private
Abraham Feldman of the Chauds later remarked of the shelling that seemed to
come from every direction, "all Hell broke loose."32
Captain Bernard-Georg Meitzell, a German staff officer with 12th SS Panzer
Division, later wrote, "I watched the fighting and movements of the British [sic,
Canadian) and German tanks from our Divisional Observation Post and was
impressed by the close co-operation of Canadian tanks, British fighter bombers and
arillery.™ By noon the main Canadian force had cleared the enemy-—numbering
about 150 troops from the village, the bunkers, and the airport control buildings
that were reduced to wisted metal. It was less promising to the south. There, the
Winnipeggers faced a tenacious enemy around three hangars, including five Panzer
Mk IVs. Far fewer Allied guns were devoted to the Winnipeggers front, and the
12th SS soldiers, backed by MG4)s. 88s, and Panthers as well as by artillery south
of the Odon River, held up the advance with withering fire "They look like babies "
remembered one Canadian corporal of their youthful opponents in their oversized
coal-scutle helmets and field grey uniforms, but "they die like mad bastards.
The Litle Black Devils from Winnipeg took refuge in the metre-high wheat and
were forced to retreat, but they were ordered back into the battle in the afternoon.
The Hider Youth was blasted wich shells and bullets but continued to hold out. After
the outer enemy positions were cleared, it looked like the tide was turning, but a
Getman counterattacking force of Mark IVs and Panther tanks drove the Canadians
out. During the day of fierce fighting, the Winnipeggers suffered some 40 killed and
132 wounded."
Carpiquet was an anchor on the German front. and with ir under Canadian control
they would outflank the German-held Authie and Buron and encircle a good portion
of Caen. It did not take long for the Waffen troops from Ist SS Panzer Division
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
179
positioned to the north, to launch a counterstrike, which washed over the Canadians
from dusk to midnight on the 4th. Keller was prepared for it and had rushed forward
Vickers machine guns from the Cameron Highlanders of Canada. "We sucked wave
afer wave of enemy infantry into the hollow where the withering crossfire of the
Camerons cut off any hope of escape," recalled Lieutenant Paul McCann of the North
Shore Regiment." The infantry added to the storm of bullets, and the enemy soldiers
were, according to Major Bill Harvey, "cut to pieces."37 The SS troops were supported
by Panthers and Mark IV tanks, but these too were knocked out by the Canadians'
anti- tank guns firing at a range of 500 metres. The considerable artillery support
from the 3rd Division's rearward batteries also shattered the enemy formations with
Mike and Uncle calls, in which, respectively, either the twenty-four guns of the artil-
lety brigade or the division's entire seventy-two guns were brought to bear on limited
targets. The results were devastating.
With several enemy counterattacks broken between the 4th and the Gth, the
Germans turned to their artillery, mortars, and Nebelwerfers. Captain T.J. Bell wit-
nessed that the rocket fire was "shattering to nerves and morale but did not cause
many casualties."38 However, as the Germans had observers in the high points of Caen
directing fire, Carpiquet was pulverized, and the flatness of the airfield made it diffi-
alt for the Canadians to find cover. "I don't know if we ever got shelled worse than at
Carpiquet airport," recounted Rifleman Bill Bettridge.* Another Canadian infantry-
man remembered, "We were in a world of shell fire at Carpiquet with shelters being
mashed in and nobody safe."4 Dozens of Canadians were buried alive, and it fell to
air comrades to excavate them from their tombs before they ran out of oxygen.
American studies of Normandy soldiers revealed that about 20 percent admitted
to losing control of their bowels during drumfire bombardments, so alien was the
experience that assaulted them sonically, physically, and emotionally 41 Experienced
trans of battle warned new reinforcements to plug their ears and open their
couchs so their eardrums would not burst as the high explosives rained down. For
many men, there was no avoidine the concussions from these multinle blasts—
aprilly from the Moaning Minnies - but the Canadians managed to pull them-
shes together each time. blood oozing from noses and ears, to defend against the
SS troops over the next three days. The dead fouled the ground, while countless
