260 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
5 kilometres to Point 195, a high point overlooking the town of Potigny. It was the
right call by Simonds, who knew the lead elements were tired but had to press on to
give the next day's operation some chance of success. Two battlegroups set off, with
Halpenny Force, consisting of the Lake Superior Regiment and the Grenadier Guards'
tanks, capturing Bretteville by dawn. The second formation, Worthington Force, was
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Don Worthington, commander of the British
Columbia Regiment, whose Shermans, along with two companies of infantry from
the Algonquin Regiment, set out for Point 195.
Worthington Force pushed off in the dark, with few landmarks to guide its way
and with a heightened fear of running into an enemy ambush. Long-range fire
occasionally raked their line of tanks and trucks. They moved quickly toward their
objective and turned east to avoid German guns in Bretteville, which was being
deared by Halpenny. But in the confusion, the column lost its way and mistook one
dirt road for another, sending Worthington east of Point 195 to Hill 140, about
3 kilometres beyond the Caen-Falaise road. Without the benefit of aerial observa-
tion, Worthington and his officers had no way to correct themselves in the gloom.
The armoured and infantry force dug in on Hill 140, in a rectangular laager, weapons
pointing outward on the high ground, a little before 7 A.M. The contingent was
lost —about 6 kilometres from their objective at Point 195-and, even worse, they
had penetrated the front line of the 12th SS.
Meyer reacted to the news of a large Canadian tank force in his lines by immedi-
ately ordering a sustained attack backed by every available gun and mortar. The
Canadians had set up a slit trench defence in the 90-by-275-metre rectangularfield,
and had tried to get the Shermans hull-down to present less visible targets, but they
had no arillery. Throughout the morning of the 9th, the German guns hurled high
caplosives and shrapnel at the isolated position. Outgunned, Worthington called in
arillery fire, but it was directed against non-existent targets at Point 195, because
that was where both the gunners and Worthington thought he was located. Later
in the morning, while he continued to take heavy fire, Worthington's communica-
tion was severed, leaving him further isolated.*2
The Canadians held on, even as they were hammered with shells from three sides.
They defeated several counter tracks by Panther tanks and orenadiere but took heavy
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
261
Loses. German staff officer Captain Bernard-Georg Meitzell observed, "One Canadian
rank after another was knocked out and ended in smoke and flames."43 By about
1030 A.M., half of the Canadian Shermans were burning and the entire hilltop was
scored with shell craters and blackened grass. With Worthington's force bottled up,
the enemy artillery fire simply smashed back and forth. Even slit trenches offered
lide protection. Twenty-four-year-old Private John Patterson of the Algonquin
Regiment, a former CPR clerk in Fort McNicoll, Ontario, described the tanks burn-
ing around him: "It was a horrible thing to see. Once they were hit they would brew
up, and you could see the guys trying to crawl out of them, and a lot of them were
on fire. The smell of burning flesh wafted over the front. Morphine for the
wounded was soon used up; and then the water was drained too. The infantry clawed
deper, shrapnel bursting above their heads, hedges and trees exploding around
them. Patterson and his chum Larry O' Callaghan, a string-bean of a man, were
huging the earth in the same slit trench: "One minute he was there," wrote Patterson
of 0 Callaghan,
"and the next I looked over and he was lying dead."45
Wothington Force endured the blitz throughout the day, fending off Panthers
and then Tiger tanks. Never had a unit faced such armoured strength on such a lim-
ind sector. To add to the misery, two roaming Typhoons were attracted to the
confagration and fired on the Canadians, unsure of what was happening in the chaos
and smoke below. Worthington's officers were eventually able to call them off with
icifying smoke, but the Typhoons, who returned throughout the day to fire at the
Germans, did surprisingly little damage to the enemy. Moreover, with the Germans
bunched up in a target-rich area, the failure of cross-service communication is clear
in a more fighter-bombers were not sent against the enemy position.
By at afternoon on the Ith, most of the Canadian tanks were in ruins, with shells
coking off in a deadly display of fireworks. Worthington sent the last eight Shermans
in tad un the gauntlet to safer ground. It was clear the softer-skinned vehi-
des had lite chance, as a few hours earlier half tracks displaying Red Crosses and
aping the wounded had been fired upon and several destroyed." The garrison
detenders slowly used up their ammunition and rooted among the dead and wounded
be ahing that could be used in the Alamo-like last stand. Worthington was killed
«ond 530 .. by a mortar bomb, and a final push by the Germans at last light
