368 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Hitler's superweapons, the Messerschmitt Me 262, the world's first jet fighter,
proved not to be the game changer that the dictator had hoped it would be. The
pilots were too inexperienced, and not enough of the jets were produced to reverse
the inevitable Luftwaffe defeat. The Me 262 was a technological wonder, but it was
too little, too late.
The Allied air forces became even more effective as the armies liberated France.
Airfields were built, and Gee and Oboe stations were established in Europe to pro-
vide more accurate navigational guidance to the bombers. With a steady increase in
the quantity of aircraft available, crewed by airmen emerging from the various air
training programs, the number of tons of dropped bombs increased significantly in the
last year of the war. In rough figures, the RAF dropped 13,000 tons on Germany in
1940, 32,000 in 1941, 48,000 in 1942, 200,000 in 1943, and, with the added weight
of the Americans, nearly 1 million tons in 1944. In the first three months of 1945,
BATTERING GERMANY
369
despite poor flying conditions, Bomber Command alone dropped 200,000 tons of
high explosives and incendiaries.' During the last full year of the war, the Allied ord-
nance also became more effective, as aluminum powder was introduced into the high
explosive bombs, making the blast effect up to ten times more powerful than that of
conventional explosives.* As a consequence of these Allied advantages, large portions
of the German cities were reduced to rubble, and rubble was pounded to dust. "It
seems our job at the moment is to pulverize the Ruhr so the army can move in,"
observed Flight Lieutenant Millar Brittain on November 8, 1944, who would survive
thirty-four sorties, be awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, and later became an
official war artist. "There is only little left of either Cologne or Duisburg after our visit.
But I regret to say they in turn have accounted for some of my friends."" From the air,
the German cities looked like gutted animals, their blackened and broken innards
juting up like desiccated rib cages.
The Allied bomber offensive battered German cities in relentless sorties night after night.
By late 1944, Germany's economy was in ruins, its cities reduced to rubble,
and its citizens killed by the hundreds of thousands.
A gutted German city after prolonged Allied bomber raids.
