276
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
his methodical approach to fighting the enemy was in line with British doctrine,
and, furthermore, he was a favourite of Montgomery. It was not all failure, of course.
Simonds's plans were innovative and aggressive. His use of armoured personnel
carriers was brilliant and saved lives. But after surveying the Canadian general's
operational career from Sicily to Normandy, one must conclude that he was not
nearly as effective a general as historians have given him credit for: he did not under-
stand what soldiers can and cannot be asked to do in battle; he blamed subordinates
for the failure of his overly complex plans; he fired senior officers too quickly; and
he showed in Sicily and Normandy that he often did not have an innate grasp of the
enemy's potential reaction to his plans or of enemy strength concentrations.
Simonds's battlefield accomplishments in the summer of 1944 revealed an agile
mind —albeit one that too easily overreached tactical realities—-but he would con-
tinue to learn and improve in the coming months. And he was one of those rare
senior officers who got better with each level of command he assumed, reaching his
peak of efficacy as temporary army commander in October 1944.90 While Simonds
made mistakes, it is also clear that every other senior Canadian commander (save for
Major-General Bert Hoffmeister) was decidedly average, and no one was even
remotely suitable as his replacement. The lion-like Canadian soldiers at the front
deserved better.
The Canadian-Anglo method of battle was condemned by the Germans- who
ironically were defeated by it-and then by generations of historians. The Canadians
marshalled men and resources before attacking behind artillery bombardments and
airpower. They did this, quite simply, because they could. Some of the soldiers initia-
tive was sapped in the multi-phased, planned battles, but supporting fire suppressed
the German defenders, saturating their positions with shellfire and bombs, and
helped to ration Canadian lives. Even with the gift of hindsight and decades of study,
not to mention a good deal of coniecture and outright fantasy. few viable suggestions
have been offered as to how the battes could have been fought differently against a
dug in enemy on ground of his choosing and backed by defensive firepower.
In seventy-seven davs. the Allies destroved tWO armies and inflicted some 400.000
casualties on the Germans, who had had nearly five vears to prepare for the cam-
paign. If the Allis were blamed for lacking speed and dash, certainly such a criticism
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
277
mould not have come from their surviving fathers and uncles, the Great War veterans
nho had fought at a crawl's pace at the Somme and Passchendaele. In assessing the
Canadian performance in the battle to close the Falaise Gap, it might be best to leave
the final word to gunner George Blackburn: "Armchair strategists writing of those
days-whether British, American, or Canadian—have all spent too much time won-
dering why we were so slow getting down past Falaise to meet up with the Americans.
They should have spent more time wondering how men ever summoned up the
necessary moral courage and physical stamina to get there at all."91
