194 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Despite these successful U-boat attacks in the Channel and along Canada's east
coast, the tide had turned forever against the Germans at sea. All the U-boats, many
captained by inexperienced officers and tired crews, were under constant threat by
the submarine killer groups and Coastal Command bombers and fighters, including
RCAF's Nos. 404, 407, 415, 422, and 423 squadrons. Rocket-firing Bristol
Beaufighters from RCAF No. 404 Squadron shot up German merchant ships and
sank two destroyers, while Wellingtons, Short Sunderland Aying boats, Liberators,
and other bombers accounted for almost half of all U-boat kills during the course
of the war.
In port and at sea, the German vessels were hounded, and while the warships and
U-boats could throw up thick anti-aircraft fire, they were at a disadvantage in any
contest. On June 24, 1944, for example, Flight-Lieutenant David Hornell of the
RCAPs No. 162 Squadron, a former Sunday school teacher, sighted a U-boat while
in his Canso flying boat at the end of a twelve-hour patrol. U-1225 was on the
surface about 150 kilometres north of the Shetland Islands, and the Germans fired
bursts of shell as Hornel tried to position the unwieldy Canso for a bombing run.
The starboard engine caught fire and soon the fabric of the wing was burning, leav-
ing nothing but the exposed wing. The plane jerked violently, but Hornell continued
the attack run on the sub, eventually dropping four depth charges. The U-boat was
hit and sunk, and Hornell brought the flaming plane down in the water, skipping
along a series of waves, bucking violently skyward, until it finally came to a rest. The
cight-man crew evacuated the plane and crammed into a small dinghy built for two,
wich several of the airmen taking turns holding on to the side. They were spotted
after five hours, but the sea was too violent for a rescue. The exposed crew had to wait
sateen more hours for a ship to find them in the rough and cold water, by which
time two airmen perished from hypothermia and Hornell slipped into a coma. He
never awoke from it" Hornell was awarded posthumously the Victoria Cross, one
of only two for RCAF members during the Second World War.
The U-boats wete pushed back on all fronts and, in September 1944 as the Allied
armies drove through France, the submarines were forced to abandon their bases on
the Bay of Biscay, It was a severe blow to their ability to interdict Allied shipping
While the U-boat threat could not be ignored, never again would the Cermans
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
195
threaten the crucial lifeline from North America. The RCN continued to provide
about a quarter of the escort ships for convoys transporting goods from Britain across
the Channel through the newly liberated ports and harbours along the coast. And
convoys from North America sailed throughout the war, although with few losses in
comparison to the first four years of the war.
The minesweeper HMCS Esquimalt, lost on April 16, 1945, was the last Canadian
warship sunk in the war. Louis Audette, who rose to the level of commander in the
Royal Canadian Navy Volunteer Reserve during the course of the war, wrote of sail-
os and ships and the tremendous loss felt by the men for their vessels: "Those who
have never beheld the dread moment of the death of a ship can hardly imagine the
enormous drama of such an occasion, doubled of course for those who served in
her...I never witnessed such a spectacle without deep emotion.... Few non-seagoing
men will ever understand the strange bond of love for a ship on the part of men who
sened in her or even a ship in which they have not served." 4
THE BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC— the longest-running campaign of the entire war—
ended on May 5, 1945, when the U-boats were recalled to their ports. The advanced
Te XI U-boat was another of Hitle's super weapons that came too late to affect
the outcome of the war. It was also staggeringly expensive, with one estimate indicat-
ung that the research and production of the XXIs amounted to 10 percent of all
Ceman war production in 1943 and 1944.75
The I hoars had suffered crippling casualties during the course of the war, with
proximately 30,000 submariners killed out of 40,000 in the service; 749 U-boats
mere lost at sea. This was the highest casualty rate of any army on any front during
die wa. Airpower had threatened the submarines, often guided by Ultra intelli-
gance reports, but it had taken several years to bring its full force to bear. By war's
end the RCAF had destroyed twenty-one submarines, almost as many as the entire
RCN, at thirty-three.?
But it was the navy that bore the brunt of the U-boat war. From a prewar navy of
dou 300 permanent and reserve sailors, the RCN had grown to 96,000. The navy's
primary job was to protect the merchant vessels carrying war supplies. And they suc-
mod he CN and RN were a story of success: 25,343 merchant ships carrying
