FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Ar this stage in the narrative, before returning to the final land war campaign into
Germany, it is worthwhile to reflect upon the bombers' contribution. Perhaps the
most heated debate during the war and to the present day has been about the effect-
iveness of the bombers against the Nazi war machine. Critics of the campaign argue
that the cost to the Allies of using the bombers was too high in terms of both
airmen's lives lost and resources wasted. This accusation is false on both counts. The
casualties to the aircrews were frightful, but they were far fewer, in the case of the
Canadians and British, than those expended in the ground battles. Moreover, through-
out the war, Bomber Command never absorbed more than 10 percent of Britain's war
effort: about 7 percent from 1939 to 1943, and rising to 12 percent in 1944-1945.
And while some of these bombers would have been better used by Coastal Command
in its war against the U-boats in the Atlantic, especially during the desperate year
of 1942, it was Churchill who ordered that the Halifaxes and Lancasters remain in
Bomber Command to strike back against Germany and keep open the Second Front.
This was a decision he made, and with the knowledge that the heavy bombers were the
only means by which he could hurt Hitler.
German production rose until early 1943 despite the bombing, but this increase
was more a result of ingenuity and of wringing blood from the stone of industry. The
economy was far more robust and resilient than the Allies had anticipated, and the
Nazi military dictatorship's shift to using slave labour, which offset some of the dam-
age and losses wrought by the bombing campaign, had not been foreseen.' Mitigating
the most crushing effects of the acrial attacks, the Germans learned to save key parts
of their cities. Firefighter crews were instructed to direct their attention to factories
and plants, and to let the residential areas burn. The Germans also dispersed their
factories to the periphery of their cities or to more rural areas to reduce the effects of
area bombing. Despite these preventive measures, recent studies suggest that German
industry was irreparably damaged by the bombing campaign, with manufacturing
curtailed in mid-1943 when steel production fatlined.®
The Halifaxes and Lancasters opened and maintained the Second Front against
the German war machine, which Stalin had pleaded with Churchill and Roosevelt to
do since 1941. Throughout the war, the bombers succeeded in reducing pressure on
the Soviet armies that were bearing the brunt of the Wehrmacht. In January 1944.
BATTERING GERMANY
371
for example, 68 percent of Germany's fighter aircraft were committed to the Western
Front and to defending the targeted cities, leaving just 17 percent of the remaining
force to face the Soviets? Moreover, the best field gun in the German army was also
the most effective anti-aircraft gun, the 88mm flak gun, and some 19,713 88mm
and 128mm dual purpose flak/anti-tank artillery pieces were pulled back from the
fighting to defend the Reich against the bombers, along with 25,000 20mm and
30mm guns. ° Manning these weapons were 900,000 defenders. Even though many
were teenagers or overage soldiers, by the end of the war these Germans would have
been pushed into front-line service; instead, they were tied down defending against
the bombers. Tens of thousands of Allied soldiers' lives were saved by their not hav-
ing to confront the 88s. Even a few dozen guns on a divisional sector could inflict
carnage on advancing forces, as had been discovered in Normandy, on the Russian
steppes, and in Italy. Further, the air war had other less tangible knock-on effects, not
the least of which was the diversion of German resources to the building of fighters
and anti-aircraft guns, thus preventing their use in producing tanks or munitions."
For all of these reasons. the Second Front represented a significant contribution of
Bomber Command to the Allied victory.
The bombers' blows also had a profound effect on civilians, who suffered the full
terror of the aerial onslaught night after night, month after month. The war was
brought home in the shattered cities. Wartime surveys revealed that the bombing
campaign, more than anything else, showed the German people in no uncertain
terms that they were losing the war. We can never know how many more shells,
planes and tanks the Nazi economy might have produced without the aerial cam-
paign's disruptive effects, but the bombers unequivocally hurt enemy production
and morale while meeting several key Allied strategic objectives.
ABOVE THE BLACKENED CITIES, the bomber crews continued to face the strain of
Aying, and although the Luftwaffe fighter threat was all but gone, the flak guns still
daimed their victims. But the numbers lost were far fewer than during the bloodbath
ore Berlin in late 1943. In just one week in October 1944, for instance, the RCAF's
No. 6 Groun sortied four times againct Wilhelmehaven and Stuttgart. and twice against
Duisburg; 677 aircraft were involved in the operations, resulting in the destruction of
