280 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
corps slow exploitation through the choked roads beyond the broken enemy defences.
The congestion was due more to the crowding caused by Eighth Army commander
General Sir Oliver Leeses own headquarters that had put too many divisions through
a limited road network, and the questioning of Burns's competency seemed little
more than an attempt to make him the scapegoat.
The Canadian general was an intelligent student of war who sought to innovate and
study previous failures to improve upon the fighting capacities of his Canadians. At
the same time, Burns lacked charisma, was cold and diffident, and failed to motivate
his troops. He was also excluded from the tight group of British senior commanders,
who were all known to each other and who respected above all else their shared experi-
ence with Montgomery through the North African desert war. In the aftermath of the
battle, Burns survived Leese's attempt to have him removed, receiving the full backing
of senior Canadian commanders in Britain who refused to throw him to the wolves,
but he was never accepted by the senior Eighth Army commanders? There would be
further friction between the British and Canadian senior leaders in Italy.
Canadian infantrymen laden down with bit and bassing throuch the village of Pancrazio, Italy.
THE GOTHIC LINE
281
The Canadian Corps emerged battered but victorious after the Hitler Line cam-
paign. While some of the Canadians smarted at being kept from the prize of Rome,
which was deemed out of bounds to them but not the Americans, they started the
sow process of rebuilding regiments, promoting promising NCOs to officers to fill
the casualties at that level, and replacing worn-out kit. The corps had passed through
abloodleting, with 789 killed and 2,463 wounded before and during the battle, and
there were few replacements in the reinforcement system.3
As part of the process of rebuilding, Burns hunted for answers to tactical prob-
ems, ordering all units to conduct investigations into successes and failures.* This
analysis extended up to his corps headquarters and even to Eighth Army. Leese took
the citicism badly, even if it was implicit rather than explicit, and the study of events
at the Hitler Line appears to have further soured him on Burns. The Canadians
continued to learn and evolve, using their lessons as a stepping stone towards greater
professionalism. Their lives depended on it, for everyone knew there would be more
bates in Italy before the enemy admitted defeat.
ASTHE GERMANS RETREATED NORTHWARD, the Allies nipped at their heels but
were unable to bring them to battle before they fortified along what became known
ache Gothic Line. This was the last trench system before the Alps, and the defensive
ine bristling with guns was anchored between two mountain ranges, across the
Po River valley and along the Adriatic coast I+ was here that the Allies would attack
in August against the reconstituted Tenth and Fourteenth Armies, backed by new
panzer divisions.
The Canadians spent much of the summer out of the line in a valley of the Volturno
River, about 150 kilometres southeast of Rome, though the Ist Canadian Armoured
Brigade fought some costly tank battles, especially around Lake Trasimeno. These
ampoured engagements reminded the Allies that while the Germans had been defeated
a the Hider Line, they still had fight left in them. Lessons of the Liri Valley campaign
continued to be processed. The Reitich and Canadians had found after study that
their armoured divisions were too light in terms of infantry, with only a single brigade
of three barralions, and so another brigade was added to the 5th Canadian Armoured
Drision. But attesting to the pinched-off reinforcements, Burns was instructed from
