354 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
weeks and were in desperate need for a rest. One 5th Infantry Brigade officer had
lamented in the official pages of the war diary, "Cannot understand why they do not
put more troops in the area and finish the job once and for all instead of playing
about shifting first one battalion and then another."56
AS THE 2ND DIVISION turned westward for more fighting, the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division on the right flank continued to clear a number of Belgian towns,
the largest being Esschen. It then pushed north into the Netherlands to liberate
Bergen-op-Zoom on October 24. The cost of these battles is starkly evident in two large
Commonwealch War Graves cemeteries 3 kilometres east of the city, one of which,
Bergen-op-Zoom Canadian War Cemetery, contains 1,087 dead, most of whom are
Canadian. The inscription on a monument in the cemetery reveals the sentiment of
the people in the region: "Aan onze Canadeesche bevrijders-To our Canadian liber-
ators." While the 4th Division left behind a trail of bodies, there was also a sea of
Belgian and Dutch flags that flew for the first time since 1940.57
The Canadians were dead-eyed and worn down. Since D-Day, the infantry battal-
ions had been entirely gutted, some with over 100 percent casualty rates. This did
not mean that every man from June 6 onwards had been killed or wounded, since
many of the subsequent waves of reinforcements were rendered casualties, but there
was a steady loss of experienced men. As officers and NCOs were knocked out, pro-
motion also came from the ranks, with experienced men rising to take the challenge.
And although this brought the battle-tested into command positions where they
were desperately needed, often these soldiers were sent away on courses to be trained,
denuding the battalion of experienced warriors for several months. The four French-
speaking regiments, the Maisonneuves, the Chaudières, the Van Doos,
and the
Fusiliers Mont Royal, were out of replacements and had already turned to unilingual,
English officers to fill the gaping holes.
The reinforcement crisis would only get worse, especially as the last of the trained
infantry in England were now being drip-fed into unite Rottalions reduced from 800
to 400 riflemen could not achieve the same recults or be as effective on the bartlefeld
and ordering under-strength companies, platoons, and sections into the combat led
to more strain, stalled attacks, and higher casualties. One method of flling the ranks
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
355
was by combing out some of the rear echelon formations, making fighters out of
derks, cooks, or remustered artillery and transport men. But often these soldiers
were in rear positions for a reason: they were not as robust as the riflemen and were
likely to have outdated training. The front was especially bewildering for these men.
As one Canadian veteran of battle opined, "If you stay alive a week, you're learning
all the time and you've got a chance of staying alive."& Many experienced soldiers
believed that the new recruits stood little chance of survival; Major John D. McLean
of the Queen's Own Rifles shared the view that these remustered soldiers "were just
bodies... and I felt sorry for them."s)
Wichin this bleak environment, made all the worse by the wet and cold weather of
late October, there was a dawning realization among those in the field that the dec-
larations of an impending death for the German army were grossly exaggerated. It all
led to a deepening exhaustion among Allied soldiers who knew they had to continue
on with no end in sight. Stretcher-bearer David Gordon recalled, "There were many
soldiers who could not handle the stress after weeks, or maybe even a few days of
combat." The dread deepened to debilitating levels. "You have no control over your-
self but you fight to keep control. Your stomach is tight and does not want to accept
God. You are in a constant state of anxiety and your mind races with all sorts of crazy
thoughts, Should I dig my slit trench here or over there?'.. It used to give you a safe
feting to be in any old slit trench until the guy next to yours caught one." 60
Major Robert Gregory, the 3rd Division's field psychiatrist, reported that during the
long bade for the Scheldt the number of exhaustion cases had risen dramatically.
Hundreds of soldiers were removed from the lines for breaking down mentally, although
an undisclosed number of soldiers were sheltered by sympathetic regimental officers
who discretly rested tired comrades in rear positions. Gregory recorded that most of
the patients he treated were plagued with a sense of "futility" and a "lack of volition to
cary on... The men claimed that there was nothing to which to look forward to no
isi, no leave, no enjoyment, no normal life and no escape. The only way one could get
out of battle was death, wounds, self inflicted wounds and going 'nuts."61
Around this time, Queens Own Rifles officet John D. McLean rejoined his regi-
ment, having taken a bullet in the shoulder on D-Day. He found himself a stranger,
noring bleakly that almost all the officers with whom he had trained for five years
