128 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
The Rifles landed under fire at 8:12 P.M. A 4.5 metre wall faced the invading
force, with the entire beach —a mere 275 metres wide and 180 metres deep from
water to wall swept by interlocking fields of fire. A German 88mm anti-tank gun
was camouflaged and it survived the bombardment; its fearsome shells smashed
Able Company, to the west, causing horrendous casualties. The 3rd Division's sol-
diers learned quickly what their comrades in Italy had already experienced: that the
88s were the most feared weapon in the German arsenal. Yet the Germans also had
the Pak 38 (which fired a 50mm shell) and the Pak 40 (which fired a 75mm shell,
both of which could knock out tanks at close range. The cost to the Queen's Own
was terrible until brave riflemen scrambled forward and destroyed the guns.
Baker Company had been blown off course during the run in and several of the
LCAs landed in front of enemy machine-gun positions that had survived the bom-
bardment unscathed. Despite what looked to be a slaughter, the Queen's Own
charged forward. "We were the best trained troops," recounted Rifleman Bill
Bettridge, "but there was one thing they didnt teach us it strikes me very strongly-
they didn't reach us how to react when someone suddenly becomes a lot of pieces in
front of you.""
Infantrymen of the North Shore Regiment
his the beach under fire.
Undulating
sand dunes provided
some cover for the advancing Rifles,
but it was death to go to ground and
stay there for long in the fire-swept
zone, especially
asI
many German
machine guns were firing enfilade
along the beach rather than sweeping
forward, side-to-side. Riflemen were
hit and sprawled lifeless, or lay stunned
from the violence of steel tearing
through their bodies, the pain more
numbing than excruciating. Shrapnel,
bullets, and all manner of whirling
metal created an almost surreal level of
violence, but many
soldiers
never
D- DAY
129
forgot the sight of Rifleman George Grout being set alight when the phosphorous
bombs he was carrying were ignited by a bullet. He burned at the water's edge, his
screams rising above the explosions until someone pushed him back into the
ocean. Somehow Grout survived, although he faced years of recovery and many
skin grafts.
Uncut barbed wire and mine fields channelled the Canadians into a killing ground,
which was soon revealed as the bodies of soldiers accumulated at certain spots on the
beach. Bill Bettridge watched three of his comrades running with a ladder. The mid-
de man stepped on a mine and was transformed into "a piece of raw meat; I could
hear him screaming for several minutes afterwards; it took him such an awful long
time to die. 2 The survivors, scratching for concealment in the sand or held up by
barbed wire, knew that they had to reach the sea wall. "That first rush—racing across
the beach, scaling the wall, crossing the open railway line that ran parallel to the
beach, all under heavy MG fire-claimed a lot of us in the first minute or two,"
restfied Charlie Martin, who made it off the beach only to have a bullet strike his
helmet. He was left dazed but not dead.
Sergeant John Missons (considered "pretty old" by his mates at age twenty-two)
survived the massacre in a landing craft that had dropped its door in front of a
German machine-gun bunker. Only 6 of the 27 men on the craft staggered out, and
Missons believed that about 85 percent of the 127 Queen's Own casualties on D-Day
happened in the first fifieen minutes. Running and firing, the infantrymen crossed
the murder zone and cleared the enemy pillboxes by throwing grenades through
apertures and then spraying the interiors with Sten and Bren gun fire. About twenty
minutes later, the reserve companies landed, and all four companies pushed into the
southern outskirts of Bernières-sur-Mer.
On the far left, the North Shore Regiment faced a 90-metre-wide beach in front
of Saint-Aubin-sur-Mer. It had a vast concrete bunker housing a hundred-man gar-
ison that had survived the naval and aerial bombardment. With bullets striking the
sted landing craft from hundreds of metres out, few of the North Shore riflemen
sumed the beach would be anything other than an abattoir. The soldiers found
their courage as they exited the landing craft, wich platoons and sections rushing
orward in sprints before dropping to the coarse sand that felt like salt. In the lead
