416 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
food laid before them. There was a sad irony in that few loved ones could readily
identify the inhumane abuse the prisoners had endured.
Hong Kong veteran and prisoner of war Frank Christensen wrote, "The world, as
I had known it, was no longer there. Everything around me had changed. I couldn't
understand it, or adjust to it."3" He eventually married and re-enlisted in the army.
But as George MacDonell recounted of his four years of imprisonment,
"No one
escaped the emotional and physical trauma of Hong Kong and the starvation, mal-
nutrition, and humiliation suffered in Japanese camps."40 Medical studies conducted
years later proved that most of the Hong Kong veterans endured lifelong illnesses,
went blind at an early age, and died prematurely young, their malnourished and
disease-ridden bodies never able to fully recover from the wartime ordeal. 41
The Hong Kong survivors, along with their fellow prisoners in Europe, had to
adjust to a very different life upon returning to their homeland. The overseas service
personnel were greeted as conquering heroes. But what was it like to come home as
a defeated warrior, one who had been ripped from his own service arm and made to
be a Kriegie? If the fighting soldie's experience was difficult for civilians to under-
stand, the prisoner-of-wars experience was entirely alien. One postwar study
revealed that 48 percent of Dieppe prisoners had psychological problems in adjusting
to life back home, with most prisoners from other battles similarly traumatized.43
However, only 5 percent of the former prisoners were allotted a pension, illustrating
the challenge of the medical and military professionals in recognizing mental trauma
as a wound. In 1976, after years of lobbying, the federal government provided the
Hong Kong veterans with compensation for their wartime ordeal that had led to
long-term disabilities." Further pensions and payouts followed in 1998, but nothing
could make up for almost five years of brutal incarceration.
BY MARCH 1946, close to 600,000 women and men were discharged from the
Canadian forces. They arrived in Canada, mainly docking at Halifax, and then trav-
elled on by rail to cities and towns across the Dominion. Jack Shepherd, who had
served through fraly and Northwest Europe, was greeted by his mother on the train
platform at Maple Creck. The normally reserved woman held him in a death grip for
a long time, and Shepherd admitted. "I was ashamed that I hadn't written as often as
VETERANS 417
might have Shepherd saw his mother more over the next year and a half, but
ker vists to him were in a sanatorium for tuberculosis at Fort Quappelle. Nora
Cod, a battlefield nurse who would forever be shaken by the "unbearably tragic"
ichs she had witnessed, described her reunion with her parents, seven siblings, and
atended family, remarking, "I was treated like a hero. But I didn't feel like any kind
ohero"' The war weighed heavily on all the survivors.
with men and women given opportunities to receive counselling. Few warriors
cided to talk to the psychologists for fear it would delay their return to civvy street.
Upon their discharge, they were issued $100 for clothing and a war service gratuity
d 87.50 for each thirty days of service, plus an additional 25 cents for each day
dress, with the average total payment being $488.47 War-service buttons and
desertificates were part of the final transition; the demobilized were allowed to
train their uniforms but were to hand in all weapons. Most did, but not all, as the
instinct for mementoes was strong.
The country had changed. Those
WURISELLURS
who had enlisted early in the war had
let a destitute nation struggling in the
BACK to CITY STREET
THEN ?
grips of the Depression. But under the
leadership of William Lyon Mackenzie
ANSWER OU OUR
Kings fient Liberal government, and
sported by the patriotic and profit-
ele work of Canadians, the Dominion
dad become a wealthier and more
confident nation. Canada could afford
lo treat veterans with care and respect,
and to find proper recompense for
their service.
Few had expected the Liberals to
vin the June 1945 election. Mackenzie
Canadian veterans waiting to process papers in
preparation for their return to civvy street.
