394
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
If this war isn't over
And pretty damn soon
There'll be nobody left
In this old platoon. 80
AS THE CRERAR'S FORMATIONS clawed their way forward onto German soil, another
group of Canadians was trying to escape. Allied prisoners behind barbed wire were in
a desperate situation. By the last full year of the war, almost all the prisoners were
suffering from systemic malnutrition. With the German economy crippled under the
multi-front onslaught, prisoners' rations had been cut significantly, usually to less than
750 calories a day, about one quarter of the requirement for adult males. The Allied
bombing of the transportation lines added to the struggle, as Red Cross package deliv-
eries were disrupted. By early 1945, the German POW system collapsed, along with the
rest of the economy The hundreds of thousands of prisoners became a tremendous
burden on the wavering state. With the Russians advancing in the east, the prison and
death camps in Poland and eastern Germany would soon be overrun or evacuated. The
order went out from Berlin to begin a forced march of prisoners to the west?!
To stay ahead of the Russians, wasted prisoners, almost all of them inadequately
dressed, were hounded under threat of execution through snow drifts and freezing
conditions. Often not fed for days on end, the long parade of lice-ridden and sore-
plagued men was herded along by bayonet-wielding guards, allowed to stop only ar
night in barns. Fat melted away rapidly and then the body began to consume itself.
It was not uncommon for gaunt prisoners during the unending march to drop 30 or
40 percent of their weight. leaving only shuffing skeletons with sunken faces and
xylophone ribs.
Prisoners used the few goods or items they had left, especially cigarettes, to bribe their
guards, and many of the prisoners quietly crept out from the barns at night to trade with
or rob local farmers. The exhausted guards did litle to stop them because there was no
place for them to go. Even the Allied prisoners were warv of encountering the marauding
Soviet troops. This exodus of prisoners westward added to the overcrowding on roads
thronged with tens of thousands of refugees. Starving prisoners shared the road with
starving civilians Despite his misery, Pilot Officer Farle White shuddered with sadnes
BATTERING GERMANY
395
as ne young German mother with two little children tried to keep up with the strag-
ging prisoners whose feet were tramping down the snow. A nearly physically broken
White gave her his last pack of cigarettes, noting sadly that "One child had frozen to
death and I hoped the mother would be able to barter the cigarettes to help save the
other one." 2
After three years of imprisonment, Roland Carlson, a wireless air gunner, recounted
the march westward. "One day in a severe snow storm, we had just left the town Jena,
when we passed a convoy of German soldiers moving westward. Their personal equip-
ment was being hauled in larger wooden wagons pulled by Hungarian and Russian
women. We tried to share with them some of the food we had, but one of the guards
smashed his rifle into the face of one of the women who accepted a piece of bread.
That stopped our philanthropy... One woman, wearing sacking on her feet and
mapped in a ragged blanket, shouted to us as she passed-'Courage, Englander."
During those fifty-one days of marching some 650 kilometres with little food,
Carson often thought of that brave woman who had offered him solace. He was
determined "to be no less courageous."83
With blodied and blistered feet, gnawing hunger, and diphtheria-riddled
excrement running down their legs, the prisoners stumbled on. Frostbite ate into
eatemites. The death march pushed the already battered prisoners to the brink of
survival. Alexander Molnar, a signaller with the Essex Scottish captured in July
194, described the horror of seeing sickeningly thin Russian prisoners executed
by the side of the road. The Canadians refused to let that happen to their com-
rades, banding together to aid the helpless. Those who could no longer walk were
caried by mates or put on makeshift sleighs, even though this weakened the
already maciated men still upricht. Despite the prisoner' despondence and weak-
as the bonds of comradeship remained strong, although Molnar winced that
*e sak cheapness of life was horribly depressing."8 Clement Pearce of Toronto,
who was shot down as an air gunner from No. 101 Squadron RAF nearly perished
o the road. "T remember one point on this dreadful march, curling up in the
snow, and iust wanting to die. T was in agonv and couldn't move and frankly didn't
care what happened to me" But two army comrades-who had listened to his life
story over and over again in the camps--came along and pulled him to his feet,
