294 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
had planned for a pause until September 2 to bring the guns forward, but now the
Canadians were aching to gate-crash the line.
As more intelligence filtered in during the early hours of the 30th, the Canadians
pleaded with Leese's headquarters to be allowed to attack. After some soul-searching,
Leese gave the order. The 5th Division commander, Hoffmeister, had already acted
on his own; and the 11th Brigade was preparing for battle. Brigadier lan Johnston,
the former commanding officer of the 48th Highlanders of Canada, a prewar
Toronto lawyer and a director of Maple Leaf Gardens, told his 11th Brigade bat-
talion commanders to crack the line. All of this took time, but by late on August 30,
the Cape Breton Highlanders and the Perth Regiment had reconnoitred in strength
on the far left flank. On the right, the Ist Division's Princess Patricia's Canadian
Light Infantry and West Nova Scotia Regiment had already let loose a company
each to cross the open valley to exploit the seemingly unmanned enemy positions
along the far ills that gradually sloped upwards to a great height. As speed was of
the essence, no barrage was deployed, although the Canadian gunners were ready
to lay down counter-battery fire if enemy guns opened up. The plan was hurried
and, as Burns was later to observe, "From this point on, it may be said that the
battle to get through the Gothic Line and to seize the commanding high ground
about two and a half miles beyond it ... was mainly a battalion and regimental
commander's battle.""3
The valley floor was festooned with mines, so the Desert Air Force was called in to
drop bomb loads across the terrain to detonate them. Many of the German mines were
destroyed, but nor all of them. The schu-mines, in their deceptively miniature wooden
boxes, carried a seven-ounce explosive. This was powerful enough to blow off a man's
fect, fracture legs, hips, and pelvis bones, drive bones and metal fragments up into the
groin, and reduce the genitals to mush. As one stretcher-bearer wrote, "the blast from
these tiny wooden mines would tear off the foot but seemed to sear the blood vessels."3
Most victims lived but were crippled for life. These mines were tremendously frighten-
ing devices, maiming rather than killing.
The four lead batalions pushed forward: from right to left, the West Nova Scotia
Regiment, the PPCIL he Perth Regiment and the Cane Breton Hichlanders. Around
4 p.y. on August 30, the West None sent Baker Comnany acrose the valley Abor.
THE GOTHIC LINE
295
hill uneasily. Something was wrong.
Baker Company advanced until they set off the schu-mines, as well as the
S-mines (Schrapnellminen), which sprang several feet into the air before spraying
ball-bearings in all directions like a shot-gun blast. As the first of these mines
esploded, German paratroopers emerged from concealment and opened fire, send-
ing the North Novas diving off the narrow roads into ditches and folds in the land.
Chaplain Laurence Wilmot was close enough to the front to witness the massacre:
As soon as the mines started going off, the enemy opened up with machine-gun
fre from the adjoining hills on both flanks, accompanied by a barrage of shells and
mortars... It was agonizing to hear the cries of the wounded."35 These ditches
and depressions were mined by the Germans, and a number of Maritimers were
blown apart, their torsos, legs, and arms scattered in all directions. In the carnage,
most of the radio men were knocked out, as were the two company commanders,
both of whom had their legs ripped off. Pinned down by fire, unable to move for
fear of mines, and with their leadership wiped out, the West Novas were at the
mety of the Germans for several long hours. The butchery was only relieved by
the fall of darkness.
As the news filtered back to battalion headquarters, Lieutenant-Colonel Ronnie
Waterman, the experienced commander of the West Novas, became unhinged. Stunned
by news of the losses at the front, he ordered a renewed advance. Even though there
vas an opportunity to coordinate an artillery and tank attack to provide crucial aid,
Natman blustered at an emergency briefing that his infantrymen could overcome
the enemy on their own. Chaplain Wilmot, who was present, recounted being
'hocked" at the reckless claim by the commanding officer. Why not wait for tanks
io provide support? Waterman refused to be deterred. "I feared disaster and felt help-
kis to d anything to prevent it" wrote a shaken Wilmot. The padre went to the
regimental aid post where he knew he would soon be needed.
Waterman ordered two more companies forward to extricate Baker Company, but
they too got sucked into the battle as they crossed the minefield and were forced to
go to ground in the face of enemy fire. With most of his battalion cut up, Waterman
