424 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Scotia Regiment, maturing, surviving, and emerging as a leader. Having passed the
test of fire, O'Brien applied himself to school on his return to the Maritimes, as a
twenty-seven-year-old veteran who entered grade eleven?? He eventually went on to
receive a degree at Dalhousie University in 1951. A wife and ten children were in the
cards, too, as well as running his own pharmacy for twenty-five years. There is no
doubt that the war put O'Brien on a more determined path. Curry and Cheney
walked with him along it, as did hundreds of thousands of their comrades.
"THE LEGION IS MY CLUB-a shared experience," described Bill Bettridge of the
Queen's Own Rifles? Though many wives and children caught a glimpse of the war
that continued to rage in the minds of veterans, most ex-servicemen would not talk
about the internal struggle. They came from a generation that was not given to shar-
ing their emotions, and many, even if they were so inclined, could not find the words
to capture the swirling stories and hurtful images. Who could understand? What was
there to say about battle that encompassed the all-out chaos and carnage? Who wanted
to tell their young children or wife about bombing cities or killing other men, or
losing control of their bowels in combat or holding a bloodstained hand while wait-
ing for a friend to die in agony?
Hundreds of thousands of veterans took solace by turning to one another. As the
wartime history for the Governor General's Horse Guards of the 5th Canadian
Armoured Division observed, "The war has been fought on an island, suspended in
the time and space, that had litle relation to the life we left or to the one which we
were now returning, That, after all, is true of any war. Those who have taken part
belong to a fraternity that is forever closed."* Most veterans stayed in touch with
at least a handful of their former comrades, while others joined the Legion or
attended the Legion halls that marked the small and large communities across
the country. More than 300,000 veterans were members of the Legion in the late
1960s, although this number included those from the Great War and Korea. In the
two decades after the Second World War, there was some tension between the ver-
crans of the two world wars, as the 1914-1918 veterans held most of the key
administrative positions but this changed slowly over time and harmony held
sway more than discordance as the veterans found more to bind them together
VETERANS
425
lian chiselt hem apart? "The Legion," remarked one veteran,
"is an organization
of survivors.
Buce Walker, who served as an infantryman in the 48th Highlanders of Canada,
moke of his satisfaction in attending the regimental club in Toronto: "Everybody
roud get together. Any night of the week, you'd go in, and there'd be forty or fifty
guys in there. You could fight the war over again." Veterans groups also produced
power newspapers to link men across the country. At the same time, The Legion
razine has been published, under various names, since the early 1920s, and it
hrought together veterans and shared their stories. As the years marched on, men
moved across or out of the country, raised their families, and took on new jobs.
lany ost touch with former mates, although stray encounters on the street or at
a huch could renew long-lost relations. In the 1980s, RCAF veteran J.K. Chapman
cried his relationship with his wartime companions: "We remain friends despite
tie pasage of forty years and despite following widely differing careers and living in
iren countries... But when we do meet, the decades contract to weeks and it's as
though we are still comrades in arms."78
Reunions were arranged for units, ships, or squadrons. Here the aging warriors
wild come together, lift a glass to the dead, and recount the outrageous fortunes of
d. Most focused on the humorous or ironic events of the past, choosing to let the
ramatic ones lie buried. Men discovered those they thought had died. B.G. McDonald
aried hity bomber operations during the war, and witnessed dozens of airmen
Supar throughout his service. He was married in 1946, had three children, and
spinda mining company, where he worked as an advertising manager. One of his
de risinged with affer th
pat ges was his inability to track down those he trained with after the war.
Information as to the master her at of Camer ROAD dearer comrades was
end had to come by after the wwatr... In many cases, it was not known whether or
not the airman had survived." Reunions allowed him to re-engage with some old
companions, but not all attended, as "veterans were busy settling into civilian life and
bringing up their young families in these years, long before the advent of instant com-
unication."" It was not until the 1992 publication of They Shall Not Grow Old, a
ompendium of those RCAF Avers killed during the war, that McDonald knew the fate
of seven chums some had survived to grow into old age: others had remained the
