386
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Hamilton Light Infantry and the Essex Scottish, moving forward in armoured
Kangaroos in an attempt to open the road from Goch to Calcar, ran into a force of
panzers. Canadian infantrymen dug in and, supported by Fort Garry Horse
Shermans, held off two German battlegroups from Panzer Lehr and the 116th Panzer
Division. Corpses littered the fields and forests. Lieutenant-Colonel Denis Whitaker
of the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry, who would be awarded the Distinguished
Service Order, described the fierce defence: "The Germans fought like hell-like
demons. This was their last stand for their homeland, and they were not giving an
inch." Both sides were mauled over two days, but the Canadians held the ground.
The Esse suffered 204 killed, wounded, and made prisoner; the Rileys lost 125; and
the Royal Regiment, which had been rushed from reserve, had 64 casualties.56
Major-General Dan Spry, commander of the 3rd Division, agonized over the losses
and the pressure from his superiors to keep sending his men through the German
buzz saw. "They really didn't understand the sharp end of battle. They had a mental
block; they'd never been there. After serving in Italy and Northwest Europe, and
having seen too much destruction, General Spry, deemed not aggressive enough, was
relieved of his command on March 22nd. The view from the front was just as agon-
izing. Corporal Tom Didmon of the Rileys returned from leave to find most of his
friends stacked like cordwood in piles, while the survivors waited for the ground to
thaw before burying them. "T had spent all winter with these fellows and now half of
them were dead after I thought that the heaviest fighting was over.",
THE CANADIAN INFANTRY SHORTAGES of 1944 carried over into 1945. Private
Donald Tansle of the Reoins Rifles daccrihad the commosition of hic ever-chifrine
batalion in the final four months of the war: "In my platoon, which was always under
strength - 18 or 20, instead of 33-35- the most common age was 19 or 20... Our
NCOs (corporals, sergeants, and company sergeant major) might have been 22-26
years old. Our officers were not much older——23 and up. I recall how shocked I was to
discover that one of my heroes, a captain, was only 23. 1, at 19, always thought of him
as a very senior adult." Of his comrades, Tanslev said, "Many were farm bovs, strong
tough, used to hard work and hardchin loul to one anathar with an hich exnectation
of their life ahead." In his estimation, most had no more than grade four or five
BATTERING GERMANY
387
education. Tansley was impressed with his officers, noting "They were involved in the
front lines of battle as were we. They led, they fought, they endured the same shit, mud,
lack of sleep, danger, irregular food and casualties of the men they commanded."59
With all infantry units devastated in the fighting and at skeleton levels, new
reinforcements trickled into the formations. Many of the old-timers knocked out
during the Scheldt battles also returned around this time, adding an injection of
experienced men. "To a battalion which had by now come to consider an 'old friend'
one who had been with you for a week, this was a welcome change," remarked one
chronicler of the infantry.60 The conscripted NRMA soldiers also came on strength.
There were many complaints about them, but as Lieutenant Donald Pearce of the
Notch Novas observed, "for some reason they have made excellent soldiers." " Recent
studies suggest that most of the new reinforcements, either NRMA or infantry con-
verted from other arms, had received
adequate basic training. 62 Few infantry-
men carried a grudge against volun-
teers or conscripts; it only mattered
ifa man could carry his share of the
load. Queen's Own Rifles officer John
D. McLean noted of the reinforce-
ments, "A lot were killed in their first
action because they didn't know what
to do. If a person survived his first
action as a reinforcement then he
could go on and be a good soldier."63
Some 2,463 conscripts saw service in
the battle zone; of these, 313 were
wounded and 69 killed. 4 Such figures
suggest that far fewer conscripts were
lost in their first week of combat than
is often stated. Yet even with conscripts
Privates Raoul Archambault and Albert Harvey
added to the Canadian rifle companies,
of Le Régiment de Maisonneuve firing a
they were consistently under strength,
2-inch mortar in battle. Harvey was killed
on February 26, 1945.
