FIGHT TO THE FINISH
black market from the Germans. They developed forged passports for those who
tried to escape.' Civilian clothes were acquired, German money stashed away, and
even train tickets manufactured. John Fry, a graduate of the University of Toronto
who spoke Spanish, French, and German, gave language classes to his fellow pris-
oners at Stalag Luft III camp in the weeks before they planned their escape. Joseph
Asselin, a flight lieutenant shot down in 1941 and imprisoned in eight camps over
five years, made three failed escapes, and learned how to compromise his German
guards by gaining illicit material through "stealing parties" and then blackmailing
them to aid the escape.« An enormous amount of energy went into these plans,
even though very few escapers got far, as they had to travel through thousands of
kilometres of Germany and then through German-occupied Western Europe. Only
30 of the 10,000 British and Dominion air force personnel imprisoned in Germany
found freedom." Nonetheless, the planning kept the prisoners active, engaged, and
obstinate in refusing to succumb to the malaise of their prison experience.
The most common method of escape for prisoners was the digging of tunnels.
The tunnels took months to construct, and a constant cat-and-mouse game went on
between the prisoners and their jailors. The guards, known as "goons," were gener-
ally middle-aged men, adolescents, or wounded veterans from the front. They took
to their jobs with widely differing levels of engagement. The apathetic and bored
guards were easy to deal with, and could be bribed with chocolate bars, according to
Flying Officer John Anderson, who flew thirty-nine sorties with No. 405 Squadron
before being shot down.? Not all guards were so compliant. Aggressive goons
sought out the tunnels, inflicting night-time raids on the barracks to catch prisoners
at their tunnelling work. Downed RCAF airman Andrew Cox worked on one
underground passageway at Stalag Luft I. The prisoners burrowed a tunnel under
the stove and foorboards. It was only half a metre high and wide, narrowing even
further in parts, Reinforced with wooden bed-boards to shore up the roof, it was
permeated by water during the spring thaw, yet still the prisoners pushed forward
in the muck. At the entrance to the tunnel was an encouraging sign: "England,
350 miles this way. Two French prisoners eventually informed on the men after
half a year of work. Because of the length of time it took to dig the tunnels, most
were eventually discovered: a mistaken tool left in the open or a slightly ajar cover
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
51
to the pit, another prisoner attempting to curry favour or a spy within the ranks.
The German acceptance that it was the right of prisoners to attempt to escape
changed in March 1944, when the Nazi high command passed their secret "Bullet
Decree" (Kugel-Erlass). Those who were caught escaping would be transported to the
Maulthausen concentration camp near Vienna, where they were either immediately
executed or worked to death. This new directive was enforced after the "Great Escape"
from Stalag Luft III in Sagan, Poland, in late March 1944. The tunnels at Stalag
Luft III were engineering feats, as the prisoners-many of them Canadians, includ-
ing Wally Flood, the "Tunnel King,"
who orchestrated many of the engineering
feats- dug dozens of feet down through shifting sand, and then pushed out horizon-
tally, seeking to go beyond the camp wire. One of the tunnels,
"Harry," was more
than 100 metres long. Wooden beams prevented cave-ins, while a bellows machine
The Great Escape
Tunnel 'Harry'
Diagram of "Harry," one of the three tunnels dug at Stalag Luft III,
as part of the Great Escape on the night of March 24, 1944.
VUL
