374 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
35,000, although it has been quoted as high as 120,000.23 The whispers of "Coventry'
and "Blitz" —of Dresden being revenge for these early bombings against Britain—
lost some of their ability to persuade in the face of such an Armageddon.
Yet Dresden was just another mission for the airmen involved, and it would not
become a symbol of the unfettered obliteration of Germany until long into the
postwar? Six weeks later, at the end of March, the always warlike and frequently
vengeful Churchill retreated from his aggressive stance on targeting urban centres and
wrote to the chiefs of staff that the "moment has come when the question of bombing
German cities simply for the sake of increasing the terror, although under other pre-
texts, should be reviewed.... the destruction of Dresden remains a serious query
against the conduct of the allied Bombing.' Churchill, as war leader, could change
the bombing policy at any time, either because city-blasting was no longer needed
or because he was aware of the need for postwar re-industrialization of Germany, or
because of his ever-watchful eye on history, but his use of the term "terror" was an
unfortunate one that rankled the RAF senior command. Even though he later with-
drew it, the term has since been used by later generations looking back on the war and
knowing how it ended, to question and even condemn the bomber offensive?6
We now know that the Nazi war machine was only months away from collapsing
but the view at the time was far less clear. The First Canadian Army, for example, was
still battling in the Rhineland by the time Dresden was hit, and it would endure two
and a half gruelling months of combat, often against fanatical resistance and at the
cost of 5,000 more Canadian dead. Those at the sharp end certainly did not see a
defeated enemy, and for them it would have been unthinkable to stop bombing the
cities and enemy fortifications. And of course the issue went beyond the fighting
armies. The Jews continued to be assed to death in sickening numbers, the Durch
continued to starve, and the horrible list of atrocities and madness went on and on.
None of these factors can be separated from the final bombing campaign against
Germany that might, with hindsight, have seemed
punitive. It was not. And so
RCAF's No. 6 Group continued to fly until April 25, 1945, while the last RAF Bomber
Command attack was carried out against Kiel on Mau? To tatal No 6 Groun Hew
40,822 sorties during the war, dropping a total of 126,122 tons of bombs and losing
814 aircraft 27
BATTERING GERMANY 375
THE BOMBERS WERE the only means by which to strike back at the enemy for much
of the war. Germany had unleashed its aerial bombardment against Britain first, and
would have continued to do so until it brought that island kingdom to its knees.
Hide's decision to turn his attention to the east in his long-standing desire for terri-
tory and war against the Communists had bought time for Britain. But having been
forced into retreat from Europe, and after Japan entered the war, the British faced
another string of humiliating defeats. When these catastrophes were considered along
with the Battle of the Atlantic, which at several crucial points was in danger of being
lost, and the war along with it, it was clear that the bombers were the only means
of harassing the Germans. And it was but mere harassment from 1940 to 1942. In
1943, however, the increased numbers of four-engine aircraft, carrying heavier bomb
loads, took the war to Germany and never stopped. It was not realistic to curtail the
bomber offensive-nor was this suggested by any influential politicians or military
men (save for a few in the clergy) until the final months of the war.28 Moreover, Allied
planners well remembered the Great War, when Germany was beaten on the battle-
fied and strangled of food by the naval blockade, but its cities were left untouched.
In the years following that war, uninformed citizens were too willing to accept the
propagation of the "stab in the back" theory, and the idea that the German nation had
been undermined by Jews and saboteurs, not by fighting and blockade. Throughout
the Second World War, German propagandists continued to claim victory, but in the
thated cities there could be few other than the demented or delusional who believed
such lies. It was Bomber Command, not the navy or the land forces, that was deliv-
ering that hard truth.
Iris necessary, nonetheless, to determine the cost of the aerial campaign. Bomber
Command consisted of 125,000 airmen, and of those flyers 55,573 were killed. The
12330 aircraft that were shot down account for many of these, but 8,305 airmen
wee killed in training accidents or in other non-operational environments? Next
to Britin Canada was the largest contributor to Bomber Command and nearl
40.000 Canadian airmen made un almost a third of the force's strength. Canada's
cresion and administration of the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan meant
that more Canadians were drawn into the Avino services, and the total casualties reflect
this fact, with 9,919 losing their lives in Bomber Command. Another 4,000 Canadians
