110 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
he was unhappy with Crear leading one of his two armies. In the months leading up
to the invasion, Montgomery had weeded out generals he saw as unfit, replacing
them with his Eighth Army veterans. In his cheery words, "The Gentlemen are out
and the Players are in. With every single corps and divisional commander having
carned more experience in battle than Crerar, the Canadian general seemed little
more than a desk soldier. However, Crerar was cautious and competent, eschewing
dash and daring but also rarely making an error. Also, as a national army commander,
he had military and political responsibilities, the latter to the Canadian government.
At any time he could, technically, refuse the use of his divisions in an operation that
he felt might be against national interests. Canada was an ally, not a colony -even
though Montgomery refused to acknowledge such constitutional evolutions.
The First Canadian Army remained a Canadian army only in name. with about
half the divisions made up of Polish and British formations, McNaughton's earlier
warning that the spliting of the Canadian Army would weaken it for the invasion of
France had come true, with 1 Canadian Corps stuck in Italy despite requests from
Ottawa to bring it back to England. The British, having other worries, roundly ignorei
the pleas until early in 1945. Cerar commanded the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Canadian
Divisions, of which Major-General Rod Keller's 3rd Division- about 18,500 strong-
would be in the vanguard of the assault on D-Day. It was to be supported by the
2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade. While the forty-four-year-old Keller was a hard-
living, slightly pudgy soldiers soldier, no one mistook him for a brilliant commander.
In England, he had proved himself a fine trainer of men, and had focused enormous
time on the amphibious operation, to the point that he described his division as "web-
footed, but he, like his infantrymen, was without combat experience and no one
knew what to expect after the beaches.»
Most of the Canadian infantrymen were chomping at the bit for battle. They had
trained for years and now they would finally take part in the liberation of Western
Europe. The riflemen were, as a group, very young. Two thirds were between eighteen
and twenty-five years old, and junior officers wete not much older. The officers were
better educated than the enlisted men, with most of them having a high school dip-
loma, while about two thirds of the rankers, children of the Depression, had left school
before grade seven?" All were fit, muscular, and healthy after years of training.
PLANNING THE INVASION
111
As the invading force was placed in quarantined camps in preparation for the
assault, they were issued new kit. The Canadians wore the 1937 British-type battle-
dress, but the colour was distinguished by its olive-green tint. Live ammunition and
grenades were handed over carefully, to be stored, before battle, in the various
pouches on the webbing, with its braces, straps, attachable canteens and mess kits,
and a place for the 1908 pattern-entrenching tool. French francs, maps, chocolate
bars, and cigarettes were stuffed into battledress pockets. New assault helmets, cov-
ered in fishnet and able to hold a wound dressing, were studied with interest, as the
Mark Ill was deeper than previous models. It soon acquired the nickname "tortoise."
In the weeks and months to come, the helmet was the sign of a D-Day veteran, as
newly arriving reinforcements were issued the flatter, Mark II helmet. On their
backs, the infantrymen had a small pack jammed with a personal hygiene and toilet
kit (in a "hold all"), a camouflage/anti-gas cape, spare socks, and perhaps a few sheets
of paper for writing home." Closer to the chest, inside the jacket, men stowed their
Some of the Canadians spent four years in England training for battle.
The infantryman on the left carries a Bren machine gun while the man in the centre
holds a Sten gun. The two on the right are armed with the Lee Enfield rifle.
