290
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
about Jock?, or "That's a stoo-ped place to park!'"25 The Canadians delivered on the
difficult logistical task, and Burns's corps was in position for the set-piece battle in
the last week of August.
THE CANADIAN INFANTRY BATTALIONS were up to a full strength of around 845 offi-
cers and men. They would need every last one for the long campaign ahead. Burns
organized a four-phase operation: the first would see Major-General Chris Vokess
Ist Canadian Infantry Division stealthily cross the bed of sand and shingle of the
Metauro River and secure the ground on the other side. In the second phase, new
units from the Ist Division were to close the 15 kilometres to the outskirts of the
main Gothic Line. The third phase, the dogfight, was more flexible. If the 4-kilometre-
deep Gothic Line could be breached, Vokes's warriors were to blast through it; if
it was held too strongly, there would be a pause to allow Major-General Bert
Hoffmeister's 5th Canadian Armoured Division time to move forward, with the two
divisions striking in a major set-piece operation. The fourth phase was a breakout
into the open ground behind the Gothic Line, with Hoffmeister's armoured forces
driving to Rimini.
The Ist Canadian Infantry Division sent two brigades, the Ist and 2nd, in a night-
time assault across the Metauro on August 25-26. The lead formations moved
silendy, 90 minutes before the corps' 350 guns opened up along a series of German-
occupied ridge lines to the west. The sheet of fire lit the skyline, at 11:59 p.M.
Sergeant-Major Gordie Bannerman of the 17th Regiment, Royal Canadian
Arillery, remembered, "The fashes of the guns lighted up the sky so you could read
a paper it was that bright. What a relief to send some back as being on the receiving
end was geting a bit nerve wracking, You never forget the sound and sight of a bar-
rage of a few hundred guns all firing at once Whether vou think so or not, at the
time you still have to think of the poor devils that you are shelling. T often thought
just give up and go home while you still can. Mind you this thought depended on
whether they had just killed one of yours—-then you thought a little differently."6
The le Division's senior gunner, Brigadier William Ziegler. confused the enemy
about the direction of the attack by laying down pulverising fire far from the advan-
cing Canadians The German doctrine was to follow such barrages wich their own
THE GOTHIC LINE
291
counter-bombardments, and to rush reserves to that section of the front in prepara-
tion for battle. The tricky bombardment worked and there was little fire directed
cowards the lead Canadian units. Vokes's infantry pushed northwestward through the
night and carved out a 3,000-metre salient from which to launch additional attacks.
The operations on the next day, in the crippling heat of late summer, were more
dificut. The German 71st Division stiffened along the series of outposts in what
they called the Red Line, and reinforcements were raced into the breach. Eighth
Amy intelligence had anticipated that the Red Line would not be held in force, but
the Germans intended to fight a delaying action there, for up to seven days, in order
to better garrison the Gothic Line to the rear. Throughout the 26th, the Canadians
encountered growing resistance, but they continued to drive forward, backed by
ariller. The guns hammered enemy machine-gun outposts, many of which were
on hills and ridges. As there were only dirt roads to travel on, which soon dissolved
under the weight of armour and thousands of army boots, the engineers cut new
roads, particularly for the tanks. A city of soldiers had to be moved under fire, but as
Bigadier T.G. Gibson, commander of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade, observed
proudly, the men covered the ground very quickly." 7
The Canadians battered their way across the parched earth, passing vineyards and
dire groves. Rear-guard German units fought to purchase time for their retreating
comrades, while combat engineers blew bridges and blocked the roads with debris
from topple buildings. German gun teams waited for infantrymen or tanks to be
camelled into kill grounds through the road network or narrowing terrain. Every
tell or sipr disrupted the Canadian charge, as the sections, platoons, and com-
panies went to ground, searching for the enemy's camouflaged positions to direct
There was confusion on both sides. With unclear intelligence coming from the
ton, Kessering was not sure if the Canadian operation was a diversion or the main
cock, ice the Eighth Army had planted information about an amphibious land-
a northward along the Adriatic coast. But Kesselring felt he had time, with his
tops holding the Red Line, so he demanded that a prisoner be taken, to interrogate
i. He pointedly told his subordinates that if they really are Canadians ... then it
will be a true oberation »28 When they captured a Condian a day later Kesselring
