72
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
OVER THE WINTER, Generals Crear and Simonds returned to England to prepare
for the Allied invasion of France. I Canadian Corps was taken over by Lieutenant-
General E.L.M. Burns, another Great War veteran and professional soldier. In the
chronically underfunded prewar army, Burns had remained one of the bright lights,
having written about armoured warfare in the pages of the professional journal
Canadian Defence Quarterly. Though Burns exhibited a keen mind, he had little
charisma, saying litle and inspiring few. One senior Canadian professional officer
who never advanced as far up the rank as Burns sniped that he was "one of those
dever fellows who writes articles and passes examinations with 90-100% but is not
fit to command two men and a boy."s Burns was a complex man, a better academic
soldier than fighing general, but not a bumbling fool. He understood industrialized
warfare. And he was no cardboard
character. His meteoric wartime career
had almost been derailed when, as a
married brigadier, he had unwisely
shared military secrets with his mis-
tress. The affair could be forgiven, but
the disclosure of secrets was a national
crime. Disgraced, his career seemed to
be over, but he excelled in several com-
mand positions, returned to England,
and was soon commanding an armoured
brigade and later a division.
As Burns found his footing in Italy,
the collective Canadian outlook im-
proved as the weather warmed in
Lieutenant-General E.L.M. Burns,
1 Canadian Corps commander in Italy
Burns was an intelligent senior officer,
but he had linke charima and was never
acupied by hu Britth military superion.
March and rumours of a forthcoming
offensive circulated. General Vokes of
the Ist Division felt that the extended
period of trench warfare had left the
division "morally and physically soft."s
Incompetent officers and NCOs were
THE HITLER LINE
73
to be weeded out. Several weeks of intense training from late April toughened up
Vokess division, with emphasis on long marches and mountain climbing as well as
combined infantry and tank operations.
The 5th Canadian Armoured Division also had a new commander. The dynamic
Major-General Bert Hoffmeister, who had risen through the officer ranks in the
Seaforth Highlanders of Canada and then as an infantry brigadier, now had to learn
how to wield an armoured division, with its infantry, tanks, and artillery working in
conjunction. How to coordinate tanks and infantry in battle was still a work in prog-
ress, and experienced soldiers knew that tanks provided much-needed firepower but
that they also drew fire, and so it was not wise to stay too close to them. The relation-
ship of the two arms was not as harmonious as one would expect, and the infantry and
tanks had little opportunity to train together in England or in the campaign theatre,
although the Ist Division had learned the value of tanks in Sicily and at Ortona.
Hoffmeister, who often fearlessly led from the front, knew that his untried formations
would have a steep learning curve as they faced their first divisional battle.
IN EARLY MAY, a massed force of French, American, Polish, Canadian, and British
armies were set to drive north through the Gustav Line. Kesselring remained off
balance and looking over his shoulder at a phantom amphibious landing, although
there was no masking the buildup to the south of the Liri Valley. The Germans were
ready for the frontal assault. 52
At 11 P.M. on May 11, an Allied 2,000-gun bombardment and counter-battery
program opened up to reduce the enemy lines and especially the Monte Cassino
defence. The 8th Indian Division and 4th British Division in the centre, the French
Expeditionary Force on the left flank, and the Polish Corps on the right advanced into
the enemyfortress. Most of I Canadian Corps was in reserve, although the 1st Canadian
Armoured Brigade, an independent unit not under Burns's command, supported the
Indian division in its perilous crossing of the Gari, an 18-metre-wide and 2-metre-
deep rapid-flowing river.
The guns from both Canadian divisions supported the Allies at the front by work-
Ing over the German lines in a drumfire bombardment, destroying strongpoints, and
blanketing the arterial roads with fire. The workhorse of the Royal Canadian Artillery
