266 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
where the armoured formations should engage, which was further exacerbated by
poor inter-unit communication.
After the disaster of Totalize's short-bombing, a new system was put in place that
called on ground forces to alert the bombers with smoke. But in a cringe-worthy
mistake, the Pathfinders leading the bomber stream were not informed of the army's
use of yellow smoke to warn off the bombers, and their own target markers were
yellow. A little after 3:00 p.M., at 15,000 feet, the bombers could not distinguish one
from the other, and seventy-seven Halifaxes and Lancasters, including forty-four
RCAF bombers from No. 6 Group, dropped their payloads short. 56
Nineteen-year-old Corporal Jack Martin of the Queen's Own Rifles watched the
bombers fly towards them, and then, to his horror, saw the bomb doors open.
Thousands of men dove for cover, finding ditches and holes, or digging into the
ground with bleeding fingernails. As the terrible seconds ticked off, those who
remembered their training opened their mouths so their eardrums did not burst
when the bombs detonated. As the bombs struck, the ground for kilometres around
the zone buckled and the oxygen was temporarily sucked out of the entire area.
Groups of soldiers and vehicles were wiped out of existence. A regimental aid post
near one of the bomb blasts was buried by a mushroom-cloud of debris: "There were
legs, and arms allover the place, recounted Corporal Martin." Dazed soldiers stum-
bled among the dismembered bodies. Other soldiers were killed with barely a scratch
on them as the explosion ruptured internal organs. A number of soldiers had their
lung collapse, in one medical unit, sixteen of the twenty soldiers died as they slowly
asphyxiated from what the doctors called "blast lungs."8 Around 150 Canadian and
Polish soldiers were massacred by the aerial fratricide, and another 241 were
wounded." Captain T.J. Bell of the 12th Field Arillery, who received the Military
Cros for bravery reflected on the disaster that killed 21 of his comrades and injured
another 46. "It is difficult to write coherently about the catastrophe as only those
who have seen from a thousand feet bomb bavs open and bombs head straight for
them. can appreciate the fear with which most of us cowered in our trenches "60
The Laison bombing was not an isolated event, although it scarred almost all
those who survived, leaving many soldiers "bomb-happy" and unable to function."
A First Canadian Army report issued in the aftermath lisred 52 cases of friendly fire
THE DRIVE TO FALAISE
267
by RAF, RCAF, and American air forces between August 16 and 18, which resulted
in 72 men killed, 191 wounded, and numerous vehicles demolished. 2 The bombing
enaged the ground soldiers, but it also provided some indication of the effectiveness
of the bomb loads against the Germans when they were caught in the open.63
DESPITE THE BOMBING INCIDENT and the struggle at the Laison, the Canadian
advance southward continued on the 15th. The Shermans of the Grenadier Guards
and the British Columbia Regiment almost made it to the prize of the long ridge to the
noth of Falaise, but they were driven back in combat. To the west, the 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division's infantry regiments surged forward, also closing on Falaise, metre
by metre.
The German high command knew the Allies were slowly pinching their forces
out With Patton's divisions set to encircle them from the south and the British,
Canadian, and Polish army driving southward to Falaise, Field Marshal von Kluge
mas rantically trying to pull back the remnants of the Seventh and Fifth Armies.
Vet the Führer continued to refuse to hear any talk of retreat for the 100,000 or so
Germans in the Falaise Gap. Questioning Kluge's commitment to finding a way
to deliver a victory, Hitler sent one of his most trusted commanders, Field Marshal
Water Model - known as the "Fire Man" because he raced from one compromised
kor to another - to stiffen the defence. Kluge committed suicide as the debacle
played itself out, and the fierce Nazi Model soon confirmed what all the other gen-
tas knew. He ordered a retreat from the slow-forming trap, and on the 15th, the
Cemans began their race to avoid annihilation.
As Models armies finally started to run, Montgomery did nothing to urge on the
Americans in the souch to close the trap. Nor did he commit his three divisions the
Ith Armoured and the 59th and 53rd Infantry Divisions-all within striking dis-
ance, as were other American and French divisions, to support Crerar. Exhibiting a
grand failure of vision. Montgomery did not grasp that tightening the noose on the
Germans was possible. Matters were not helped by Montgomery remaining out of
touch with Crerar, whom he had largely ignored throughout the campaign and
hom he had consistently condemned in reports to his seniors as not "fit for com-
mand." While Crerar was not privy to Monty's damning assessment, he noticed the
