6
INTRODUCTION
before surrendering on Christmas Day 1941. The survivors faced unimaginable hor-
rors in the Japanese prisoner-of-war camps. Over the next four years, 264 Canadians
died in captivity through neglect, systemic malnutrition, and outright murder by
their cruel Japanese overlords.
The German forces that invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 had seemed
destined for another rapid victory. Hitler had harboured a lifelong hatred of
Communism and of the Slavic people of Eastern Europe, and he planned to crush
the Soviet Union in an ambitious campaign. The first weeks and months of the
German invasion staggered the Soviets and appeared to portend a rapid collapse,
but they survived to keep fighting even as millions were killed and captured. Soviet
dictator Joseph Stalin allied his battered nation and his forces stopped the invad-
ing Wehrmacht at the gates of Moscow in December 1941. Thereafter, snow and
ice ravaged the Germans, although most survived to fight into 1942. The Soviets
were again hounded relentlessly and defeated at almost every turn. Yet like some
battered fighter, the Soviet Union refused to go down, even as its people underwent
unimaginable hardship.
For behind the waves of invaders, German special groups systematically exter-
minared Jews, Communists, and others whom Hitler and his high command, with
the compliance of most of the armed forces, viewed as subhuman or a threat to
their total dominance. The Einsatzgruppen, as they were known, executed hun-
dreds of thousands by bullet, by asphyxiating victims in specially constructed vans,
and by all means of cruel torture. But the process was not efficient enough for the
Nazis. By early 1942, the Nazis planned for and carried out an even more efficient
and wicked form of mass murder. The names Auschwitz, Sobibór, Dachau,
Treblinka, and Bergen-Belsen will forever haunt history— the concentration camps
where millions of levs and others deemed undesirable were systematically annihi-
lated in the Holocaust.
In the face of this terror, first on the battlefield and then in the depraved cam-
paign against civilians, Stalin pleaded with his allies, American president Roosevelt
and British prime minister Winston Churchill, to open up a second front to relieve
pressure on his forces by siphoning off German strength. The Americans and British
were too weak to do more than fight in peripheral theatres, and even then the
INTRODUCTION 7
British campaigns in North Africa throughout much of 1941 and 1942 were a ser-
ies of bloody tug-of-wars, with the British and German armies lurching back and
forth in the desert achieving no knock-out blows.
Closer to the German centre of gravity, Allied raids along the west coast of France
were mere pinpricks against the enemy, and even when these operations escalated
in size and scope, such as at Dieppe in August 1942, they carried with them inher-
ent dangers. The Dieppe raid, conceived with unwarranted optimism and plagued
by shoddy planning, saw some 5,000 Canadians led to the slaughter. The 2nd
Canadian Infantry Division fought with courage and skill, but it never stood a
chance: 907 were killed, 586 wounded, and almost 2,000 taken prisoner. The raid
revealed debilitating service rivalries, the inherent challenges of an amphibious
landing, the many ways that coordinating operations on multiple landing sites
could go wrong, and the effectiveness of German defenders in a fortified port. If
Dieppe served any purpose, it was to highlight how difficult it would be for the
Allies to carry out a full-scale invasion of France.
The Allied bombing campaign was a more prolonged means of striking back against
the enemy. While prewar theorists had predicted that civilian morale would collapse
in the face of massed aerial bombardment, the British people who withstood the Blitz
had put paid to that notion. So too had the Germans, who were bombed with growing
ferocity during the course of the war. With the need to open the Second Front, draw
down German military strength and resources from the east, destroy war industry,
and enact revenge for the Blitz, the Royal Air Force's Bomber Command took the war
to the heart of the Fatherland. Joining the Brits were the thousands of new flyers from
Canadas British Commonwealth Air Training Plan, which would eventually train over
131,500 airmen. The heroics of the Battle of Britain and the exhilaration of flight drew
tens of thousands of Canadians to the air war, and by war's end nearly a third of
Bomber Command consisted of Canadian airmen.
Up to early 1943, the shortage of heavy four-engine bombers, effective guidance
systems, and accurate bombsights, when combined with the resiliency of enemy
industry and citizens, ensured that the bombers had little impact on the Nazis' abil-
ity to wage war. However, the Royal Canadian Air Force's No. 6 Group, which was
established as a unique bomber group on January 1, 1943, added to the weight of the
