444 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
civilians and military personnel. That said, I am aware that these admonitions, sensible
words of caution and context, may be delivered easily by an arm-chair historian, even as
they ring hollow to veterans and their families who still wear raw the memories of war.
THE RCN'S SUSTAINED EXERTIONS during the Battle of the Atlantic helped keep the
lifeline to Britain open, and Canadian sailors, those in uniform and the Merchant
Navy, made significant contributions to victory. But the RCN's massive expansion-
thirty-three-fold in terms of manpower, and growing from a handful of ships to become
the third largest navy in the world at war's end — brought growing pains. Equally dam-
aging was Ottawas eagerness to spread its forces thin in assisting the Royal Navy's
combating of the U-boats. This strain was further exacerbated by the Americans, who
steadily drew off strength to the Pacific War. That the Royal Navy was ungenerous in
sharing the latest technological advances in radar in a timely manner may not come as
a surprise, but perhaps, then, the British navy's accusation of the Canadians' not meet-
ing their standards was more than a little unfair. Captain Donald Macintyre of the
Royal Navy was one of the most vociferous critics of the RCN during and after the war,
describing Canadas expanded wartime fleet as "travesties of warships.30 Few would
deny the challenges the RCN Faced, but Macintyres broad dismissal of the naval con-
tribution did a grave disservice to the Canadian seamen during the Battle of the
Atlantic RCN veterans were milled at the meannece but it coal, decade before naval
scholars came to grips with some of the reasons for the navy's overstretch, and despite
newer scholarship that highlights the enormous success of the Canadians during the
Battle of the Atlantic, the approach generally taken outside Canada is to either entirely
downplay the RCN or dismiss it as the Royal Navy's ineffectual cousin.
All of this condemnation hinges on how victory in the North Atlantic is defined.
For many sailors and scholars, it was framed by how many U-boats were killed, and in
that deadly field, the RCN achieved fewer tangible results for its enormous efforts than
the Royal Navy. But surely that was not the point of the Battle of the Arlantic, and the
question of victoty in fact turned on the number of merchant ships guided to safety.
About 99 percent of merchant shins carrving war material arrived safale in the United
Kingdom. For much of the war, the Canadian warshins were involved in amne balfof
the convoy protection in the Mah Atlantin and then from mid 1944 anuard they
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY
445
a sumed even greater responsibility for the protection of all convoys across the Atlantic.
The RCN helped to win the Battle of the Atlantic, a victory it shared with the roving
Cansos and other aircraft of the RCAF's Eastern Air Command.
The British and Canadian land forces have also not fared well over the years under
historian' microscopes. The Mediterranean theatre of war has been portrayed by most
of them as a sideshow theatre at best, and even as irrelevant, and so the success of the
Canadian Corps there has gone largely unnoticed. At the same time, the Canadian
land formations in Normandy have been condemned by chroniclers for their slow and
tentative fighting against the outnumbered Wehrmacht.31 With the Allies reinforced
by a mass of industrial might from the United States and in absolute command of the
ait, it was widely believed for several decades after the war that they should have been
able to break the German armies more rapidly and with fewer casualties. But as we
have seen in the detailed analysis of warfighting in this book, the defenders enjoyed
tremendous advantages when dug-in on terrain of their choosing, with good fields of
fie for their machine guns, mortars, and anti-tank weapons. Allied firepower - from
concentrated artillery barrages to high explosives deposited by bombers-almost
never annihilated enemy positions, and even a few machine guns, tanks, or anti-tank
guns could punish advancing troops. All had to be destroyed in frontal assaults.
Over the years, the Canadians were accused of relying too heavily on rigid set-
piece battles. Others found fault with the junior officers leading the companies and
platoons. For example, the respected official historian, Charles Stacey, in searching
for answers to the seemingly long Normandy campaign (which was won in seventy-
seven days, twenty-three short of the pre-battle planners estimates), blamed the
junior officers for not aggressively pressing home the plans of senior commanders.
Stacey was wrong to assign blame at that level, but the accusation of carrying out
safe and unimaginative operations continues to dog the Canadians. No plan sur-
vives contact with the enemy, as the old military adage goes, and rigid set-piece
battles limited the ability of forces to manoeuvre and exploit the shifting nature of
combat of Normandy. Yet these types of battle were part of the Anglo-Canadian
approach to war, with their origins in the war-winning tactics of the latter half of the
Great War. The Americans fought differently, albeit with an equally heavy emphasis
on the application of fire in their quest for battles of annihilation. The Soviets are
