160 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
AFTER SURVIVING THE GERMAN COUNTERATTACKS in the days following D-Day,
the Canadians were strung out in an arc northwest of Caen. The 12th SS, stronger
and better equipped than the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, had been not only
stopped in their attempt to drive the Canadians back, but delivered a resounding
rebuke. There were no bloodless victories, however. By June 11, the Canadians had
lost 2,831 killed or wounded. The 3rd Division was in need of a rest, and a short
pause developed at the front. While the Canadians were shelled and mortared by
the enemy, the hinge of Allied fighting shifted to the British front, where new forma-
tions came into the line to press the battle against the entrenched Waffen SS forces
in and around Caen.
Not all was well in the Allied high command. The air marshals were furious with
Montgomery's slow progress in pushing his armies deep into France. The struggle
around Caen meant that few new airfields could be constructed for squadrons, and,
at the moment, the long fight from Britain consumed so much fuel that the Spitfires
were left with lite time over the battlefield. Montgomery urged on his army, but it
was slow progress as the Germans converged on Caen. Having survived the first
week of Normandy, Montgomery organized a new three-division thrust —Operation
Epsom employing Lieutenant-General Richard O'Connor's British VIII Corps to
the west of Caen. He told Eisenhower it would be a "showdown" with the Germans,
and implied through bold talk that the Germans would be driven back. But in
reality Montgomery planned a fairly safe, methodical battle.
The Canadians, on the right of British 1 Corps, were to patrol aggressively to pre-
vent the Germans from shifing reserves to block O'Connor's main thrust. The
operation was set for June 18, by which time the Allies had put twenty-one divisions
in Normandy to face eighteen German divisions. However. a wicked storm hit the
next day, on the 19ch, forcing the delay of Epsom for a week. The storm severely
disrupted the naval loeisrical line from Britain for five davs, as gale-force winds
whipped the supply vessels that snapped at their anchorage like frenzied dogs.
One of the Mulberties--the giant artificial harbours off the D-Day beaches—was
destroyed, greatly hindering the unloading of supplies from the daily run of 150 to
200 ships that crossed the Channel. The effects of the unusually bad weather slowed
the already creaky Allied offensive on the ground, with supplies temporarily cut of
A BATTLE FOR SURVIVAL
161
and the Axis able to move reserves forward without weather-grounded aircraft
reporting on their disposition.
The Germans, aware of the buildup opposite them, rushed anti-tank guns to the
now revealed Epsom front. Some of the best German divisions-Panzer Lehr and
the 12th SS, backed by elements of the 1st SS, 9th SS, and 10th SS-were defending
the battle space, and O'Connor's divisions did not advance very far when the offen-
sive was finally launched on June 25. The rolling hills and plateaus were turned into
a kill zone. The slaughter was appalling, forcing Montgomery to shut down the
offensive on June 28, although several days of additional skirmishes ensued.
Montgomery's enemies at Eisenhower's headquarters criticized him, arguing far
from the front that he should have pushed longer and harder. His forces could not.
Montgomery knew that no breakthrough was possible but that the Germans were
being sucked more deeply into the Anglo-Canadian front, which would allow the
Americans to pursue a breakout. While the British casualties exceeded 5,000, the
German high command was demoralized and
panzer commander Geyr von
Schweppenburg wrote to Hitler that he could not hold out much longer. 2 He was
removed from command.
The bales ground up the infantry and armoured divisions on both sides. The
Anglo-Canadian forces found that the vast majority of casualties fell on front-line
fighting units. For example, the Regina Rifles lost 17 officers and 360 other ranks
from D-Day to June 22, a casualty rate of 44 percent.3 New men filled the ranks of
cums who had been like brothers and now lay broken in hospitals or buried in
hallow graves. But the regiments showed an incredible resiliency in rebuilding
themselves, and even a few core leaders usually NCOs and junior officers could
hape the new reinforcements, instill morale, and lead by example. They had to, as
there was no end in sight.
Almost allof the tank regiments had taken grievous losses too, although many of
the Shermans were reclaimed by the squadron fitters and motor mechanics who
repaired them in the field. The mechanics of the Royal Canadian Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers, known affectionately as "Reme," slipped onto the battlefield
a night, using armoured recovery vehicles to pull the broken tanks back to safety.
Behind the lines the tanks were rebuilt using parts cannibalized from other tanks.
