414 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
the first few months.... It was a difficult period for everybody but I knew that it
would work out all right in the end."32 It did for Rains, and for most of the other war
brides, who, with their new families, helped to build a postwar Canada.
AS CANADIANS OVERSEAS were preparing to return to a welcoming nation, the
American war against Japan was entering its endgame. U.S. bombers smashed
wooden cities in a unyielding campaign that fired the night skies. Japan was already
soundly beaten by late 1944, but the Japanese army and people vowed to never sur-
render. An American invasion of the Japanese homeland would be a costly affair, and
casualty projections were in the hundreds of thousands for the Allies, in addition to
the millions of civilians who would be cut down. Women and small children were
being trained to contest every foot of terrain, often armed only with sharpened sticks
against American marines wielding automatic weapons.
The Canadian senior military command wished to be in at the final fight. While
Prime Minister King did not want to send any troops to the Pacific theatre of war, he
was pressured by his ministers and he eventually relented as long as the force was
composed only of volunteers. Experienced service personnel in Britain and Europe
were given the option of serving in the Pacific, and 20,000 had volunteered from
Europe by mid-July, many enticed to do so because they would first be allowed to
return home to their families for a brief visit."' Though the United States needed
little assistance, the plan was for Major-General Bert Hoffmeister to command an
infantry division structured and equipped like American formations and supported
by RCAF squadrons and RCN warships. The RCN's cruiser, HIMCS Uganda, was
steaming towards the Pacific battles in late July when its crew heard that Canada
would send only those who volunteered. Much to the surprise and embarrassment
of their officers, the crew voted against continuing the voyage to the war zone, and
despite threats and offered prizes, the vessel turned around and returned to port. The
nary's top brass was humiliated; Uganda's sailors shrugged and looked to reunite
with their families.
All hope for lapan ended with the atomic bombine of Hiroshima on August Gand
of Nagasaki three days later. The initial blasts, fireballs, and radiation killed about
200,000 people from the first second to four months a frer the detonations. with tens
VETERANS
415
ofthousands more dying from radiation illness over the coming decades. 35 A terrify-
ig new age had arrived. Nonetheless, the casualties from the two atomic bombs,
despite their horror, were far fewer than if the Americans had fought their way
though the Japanese towns and villages 36 The atomic bombs were also a political
-a significant and tested threat to use against Stalin to negotiate with reason in
the wars aftermath.
A few hundred Canadians in Japanese prisoner-of-war camps witnessed the fire-
bell. Close to death from starvation and fearful that the camp guards would murder
lim and his friends after the American invasion, William Bell, who had served with
and lost his younger brother Gordon during the Battle of Hong Kong four years ear-
ir, lived, "If it weren't for the use of the atomic bomb, as horrible as it was, I would
no have survived.3? Even with the bombs threatening the annihilation of the Japanese
pope, it was not until the Allies signalled that Emperor Hirohito would not be held
reponsible for the actions of his war leaders that Japan agreed to the unconditional
surender. The Pacific War ended on August 14, and V] Day led to new celebrations.
In Canada, there was little sympathy for the Japanese in the aftermath of the
tonic bombs, and even less after news spread of how prisoners taken at Hong
Kong had been beaten, starved, and
erecuted. Of the 1,685 Canadians cap-
qued, 264 had died at the hands of the
cue pase prison guards through
abuse, torture, malnourishment, and
trecution. When the prisoners were
cally fred after Japan's surrender,
American and British forces fed and
wed for the scarecrow-thin men. One
Canadian left Japan weighing 79
pounds; when he arrived in Winnipeg
conchs later, he was up to 179 pounds.38
The Hong Kong veterans set foot on
Canadian soil in October 1945 and all
sad put on weight from the abundant
Captain Stanley Banfill, a Hong Kong prisoner,
meets his son for the first time on returning
to Montreal, October 13, 1945. Banfill had
been in captivity for almost four years.
