434
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Dominion. Most Canadians chose survival over flag waving, but they did not like
others lumping them in with the Americans. The BBC gave a 10 p.M. nightly report
that was surprisingly frank in its descriptions of the previous day's aerial operations,
the damage inflicted on the enemy, and the number of planes that failed to return.
Douglas Harvey remarked that at his RCAF No. 408 Squadron mess there was
always a "howl of protest from the enraged Canadians.... Never a mention of the
RCAF; that we had taken part." But sometimes a sense of national character
flourished in the absence of recognition. Stretcher-bearer David Gordon described
his fellow Canadians, from different regions, races, and religions, who formed the
24ch Field Ambulance: "We learned to accept and respect our differences in back-
ground and enjoyed heated arguments over any subject you could name. The East
taunted the West and the Maritimers the rest of us and the French Canadians held
their own with all. There was Canadian unity and we were all proud to have that
Canada badge on our shoulders and God help the Yank who called us Brits."" Norman
Penner, a wartime signaller and later a professor of political science at York University,
reflected upon the war's meaning: "When we went overseas, for the first time in our
lives we felt that we represented Canada. In Europe the badge on our shoulder meant
something. The nationalism of these Canadian boys was a direct result of their par-
ticipation in the war... It was widely recognized that we had taken our place among
the soldiers of other nations and helped to win this great world struggle."
Canada emerged from the war battered and weary, but also wealthier and more
confident as a self-governing nation. The government had intervened in the lives of
citizens ar unprecedented levels, by rationing food, imposing wartime taxes, control-
ling wages for workers and the price of goods, and stimulating industry. The control
lessened after the war, but the government never fully loosened its grip on society, and
the Baby Bonus and the Veterans Charter were a firm foundation upon which to
build what would become the welfare state. The Dominion had entered the war a
broken nation, in debt and with a despondent people. The war effort pulled the coun
try out of is yawning slough, even though the total cost of the war was calculated at
$21.786 077 519 which did not include medical evnences and pavments to denend-
ants, or the pensions for 122,077 veterans) * No one had fought Hitler to restore the
economy, but through industrialization, the British Commonwealch Air Training
THE SECOND WORLD WAR AND MEMORY 435
he BCATP), and the immense exertions on farms and in factories, a new
inda had emerged. At the same time, while Canada went into the war with
man, motivated by ties of blood and belonging, it emerged financially linked to
La hited States.
Canada had stood with its allies, and though often taken for granted by Britain
and the United States, it had done its part. But perpetually wary Prime Minister
Mam Lyon Mackenzie King did not ache to stride onto the world stage. Instead,
terent-ve-year-old prime minister inched his way forward cautiously, terrified
feting drawn into a war against the Communist Soviet Union, but aware that he
tal no choice but to back Britain and the United States at the dawn of the Cold War.
i Canada demobilized its military, its new wealth allowed it to send several billion
blast Britain in the form of direct loans and favourable trade agreements. Canadians
mped up the shell-shocked mother country even as they turned their gaze firmly to
Nich America by seeking new financial markets to the south. Some felt that Canada
gendered is chance to exert authority as a middle power, but King selected his well-
se pal of cution and kept his eyes firmly on building up the Dominion. By the
te King red in 1948, he left a prouder and more prosperous nation than the one
e adi red. The unglamorous and stodgy Mackenzie King, who preferred the
cement the monumental, was the father of modern Canada.
King' hand-picked political successor, Louis St. Laurent, took a different path on
te wond sage than that of his party's respected former leader. The new prime
it d his lose advisor at external affairs, Lester Pearson, were energized by
He Canada had done in the war and the evil it had prevented by emerging from its
Sainis position in North America. Canada embraced more meaningful involve-
ment in were and me a faint meet in 199 Canadians.
wee surprised to find that they liled to coe themselves as heloful fixers, even if the
lation's forcien policy was guided by its own interests rather than altruism, and by
an understanding that a strona military defence of Western Furope might stave A
ocher war. Appeasement in the 1930s had allowed Hitler to rise to power and
lech his terrible madness now Canada alone with its allies, pursued a harder line
vich the Communists, while still working towards peace in multiple ways and through
back channels. A wealthier and more confident Canada was one of the war's most
