406 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
Almost from the start of the war, the King government had planned for its finish.
Committees were struck in late 1939 to prepare for demobilization and postwar
economic recovery." A system based on points, which took into account length of
service and prioritized men, attempted to ensure that there was a "first in, first out"
policy tempered by suitable exigencies for men with families. Yet, as individuals were
sent to Canada, the overseas units were slowly denuded of their most experienced
rank and file. This also meant that individual service personnel were welcomed in
their communities, but that the regiments, squadrons, or ships, for the most part,
could not be celebrated or feted as a whole. The process of demobilization began
shortly after Germany's surrender, but most Canadians realized that it would be a
long wait.
The Canadian liberation of the Netherlands
was a time of joy. The Dutch welcomed their
liberators with tears of celebration, and the
Canadians fully understood that the terrible
sacrifice and suffering of the previous year of
combat had saved lives and banished evil.
In the Netherlands, the Canadians'
arrival was proof positive to the Dutch
that the long war was over. Town after
town was freed by the Canucks in the
final weeks of the war, and the young
Dominion soldiers had encountered
near-hysterical crowds throwing flowers,
waving flags, and passing out kisses.
Captain T.J. Allen wrote of the pande-
monium, "Whatever their routes, the
convoys were greeted with the wildest
enthusiasm by the hysterically happy
crowds lining the roads.... To a liber-
ated Dutchman
that day it was a
privilege even to touch the sleeve of
a Canadian uniform. Each Canadian
private was a Christ, a saviour." 13
The nine million Dutch had passed
through a cruel ordeal. The brutalized
civilians were starved of food and fuel
in the final winter of 1944-1945, and
VETERANS
407
cousands of already weakened Dutch men, women, and children died from the
it neglect of their Nazi overlords. Records would later show that 104,000 Jews
kadeen murdered and another 150,000 or so Dutch had died during the occupa-
ton. Hundreds of thousands of others had been deported and forced to work as slave
Abourers. The Dutch had survived on about 500 "official" calories a day in the last
ninter, and anyone who remained strong had been forced to steal, trade on the black
market, find ways to augment their meagre rations. Much of the country's popula-
in was only months away from mass starvation.
There were also some 150,000 German soldiers in the Netherlands when the
ligh command surrendered on May 5. What were the Canadians to do with
am? ting them in huge camps guarded by battalions of troops would have
siphoned off resources, and so the Germans were disarmed but allowed to keep
thrown commanders, who exerted discipline, occasionally through firing
squads! The Canadians did not interfere with the sometimes brutal discipline.
Tis handing of control to German officers was a necessary pill to swallow, but
the Allies also hunted down senior Nazi officials to put them on trial for their
verin actions!' Remarkably few revenge killings occurred, of Germans by the
Duch, even though General Crerar warned his superiors that the Dutch under-
pound was "eager to deal with the defeated enemy."1 Retribution was, however,
tingn by the resistance and others against their own countrymen who had
elaborated with the Nazis. Summary trials and executions were carried out;
ven who had taken up with German occupiers were publicly humiliated,
ely by volenty shearing their hair and dying their bloodied heads orange.
Mary Canadian soldiers were uncomfortable with this rough justice, but they
rarely interfered.
food was rushed into the cities. RA and RCAF bombers carried out Operations
Fast and Manna in late April and early May, which involved dropping thousands of
a of od to suring Dutch communities. The relief flights brought pilot Colin
Frise enormous satisfaction as Dutch families raced out of their farms, waving and
tering as the bomber bay doors opened to drop essential supplies. "As the mission
ent on, we saw that every harn over which we few had painted on its roof the
Had Tak you, Canadiy barn
