396 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
scolding him that his mother had already buried one son. "And with that, they
dragged me between them, slept with me one on each side, and generally hauled
me along on this march, and so saved my life."85
With almost no food provided, grubs and bugs were eaten, as was grass or bark
from trees after digging through the snow. Local German civilians sometimes offered
what little they could through trades for cigarettes, but they too were often danger-
ously underfed and were packing up their own households, having caught word of
what the Russians did to anyone in their path. There was little sympathy for the
prisoners at the highest levels of the Nazi command. After the unyielding bombard-
ment of German cities in early 1945, a raging Hitler considered executing thousands
of Allied prisoners in retaliation.8 He was talked out of it, but while the prisoners
did not know of Hiter's rage, they understood that their lives were on the line in the
final crumbling months of the 1,000-year Reich.
Flight Sergeant George Brown wrote that "During the last four months of our con-
finement we were kept alive only by the knowledge that the Americans were on their
way." During his two years of incarceration, but especially during the marches, Brown
dropped 65 pounds. ending at a bone-rattling 117 pounds Andrew Cox, imprisoned
for five years, was an emaciated 80 pounds when he was finally freed. Most of the pris-
oners were in equally dire health, victims of disease, malnutrition, and starvation.
In the last weeks of April, the German guards overseeing the prisoners disappeared.
They did not want to be around when the prisoners gained access to guns. Most of
the Canadians were liberated in late April or early May. Had the war gone on a few
more weeks, it is likely that large numbers of prisoners would have succumbed to
starvation or disease.
In all theatres, 9,724 Canadians became prisoners of war. Flyers made up 2,475 of
the prisoners, the navy claimed 98, and the rest were from the army.8 Some men
spent more of the war behind barbed wire than in combat, but they fought a battle
of the flesh, mind, and spirit. Attesting to the inner strength required to survive, one
Canadian airman inscribed in his secret prisoner log. "Tethered but not tamed »g9
ON THE EASTERN FRONT, the 2,5 million Rusians were now unstoppable. Under-
strength German divisions were fed into battle and consumed within davs. At the
BATTERING GERMANY
397
Führers headquarters, Hitler was reduced to moving around now-destroyed armies
ona map, planning counterattacks with non-existent forces, and raging impotently
about how the German people had failed him. In London, Churchill worried that
Salin's armies would sweep over all of Germany and then refuse to relinquish the
teritory. With the Soviet Union having bled for its victory, Stalin was in no mood
o negotiate over occupied territory. The Soviets were shifting from ally to rival in the
final months of the war.
After the fighting of late February attrited much of the German combat capacity
across the Rhine, the U.S. First Army crossed the Rhine Bridge at Remagen on
March 7. A bridgehead was secured, but inroads were not made until the end of the
month, as Eisenhower held back the Americans to allow Montgomery's forces to
jump the Rhine and save some face. This they did, on March 23, after an overly long
preparation and buildup of military might that was accompanied by a spectacular
paratroop airdrop. Most of the Canadian units were in reserve at this point, but the
9th Canadian Infantry Brigade crossed the Rhine and the Ist Canadian Parachute
Batalion dropped into a hot zone on the morning of March 24.
Though the Germans were vastly outnumbered and outgunned, they put up a
fierce reristance and hoth the Oth Brigade and the baratrooders fought for their lives.
The Canadian paratroopers swarmed
through German defences just north of
Diersfordt Wood, clearing their object-
nes. " Germans were killed by the
hundreds," recounted the 1st Canadian
Parachute Battalion's war diary. The
Canadians twenty-three killed. includ-
ing their inspiring commanding offi-
cer, Lieutenant-Colonel J.A. Nicklin, a
former Canadian Football League star
wich the Winnipeg Blue Bombers. 20
One of the battalion's
orderlies,
Corporal EG. Topham, was awarded
YOU
ARE
-ENTERING
CERMANY
BE ON YOUR
CUARD
the Victoria Cross for treating a num-
ber of wounded men, even though he
A Canadian on the road to Cleve, Germany.
