420
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
education programs. Sergeant Norma Walmsley, who as a WD spent much of the
war in the RCAF Records Station, attended McGill University, eventually teaching
as a university professor in Brandon, Manitoba. Corinne Sevigny, who enlisted in
Montreal as a WAC, was fiercely proud of her accomplishments, remarking,
"We
were the pioneers. We were the ones who could show them that women could take
on any serious assignment."53
were "hungry to learn."* Flight Lieutenant Douglas Humphreys of the RCAF wor-
ried, like many of his comrades, about the "nagging question of what one would do
after the war." He was determined to make a new life for himself, and he did, at the
University of Toronto. "At the age of twenty-five I, like many others, had a lot of
catching up to do and a lot of hard work lay ahead. But it is difficult to put into
words thar thrill felt when on a warm September day I first walked up the steps of
Victoria College and realized that a dream was finally coming true. The future would
take care of itself."ss
Canadas Veterans Charter was far more effective than the mishmash of poorly
conceived and even worse-funded British veterans programs, and in terms of impact
it ranks with the American GI Bill, which was highly instrumental in propelling
forward the U.S. economy and people. The fair treatment of veterans in both Canada
and the United States went some way towards forging the idea of the Second World
War as being the last, and possibly only. "good war" Canada had committed to
a fight to the finish, and beyond.
BUT THERE WAS NO EASY ROAD ahead for veterans. After years of fear and discipline,
confessed jim Brown of Fredericton, New Brunswick, who served on HIMCS Monnow,
his demobilization from the services left him feeling lost, it was "just like starting to
live over again."56 Gerald Bowen served three vears in the Rattle of the Atlantic, and
noted, "It was a very, very tough life." He was only twenty when he was discharged,
but he felt "old before (his) time.»? Almost all veterans had to remake themselves.
1.K. Chapman returned to his wife in Fredericton after two vears of service overseas
with Bomber Command. "I had left her as a boy and returned to her as a man and
VETERANS
421
aa very nice one at that." He swore and drank, and visibly wore the strain of com-
bat in his final tour of operations, he had lost thirty pounds from six months of
ismia, and he was "nervous, travel-worn, and weary." Chapman was also a stran-
gat his wife. "She knew only that I had changed and I had difficulty explaining
my Ihad." But after a few months, they learned to reconnect, and, as he was to
mie in his memoirs, "to draw closer together and to build a marriage which has
nored more than forty years."$8
While there was romance in reunion, many of the servicemen were surprised to
End how their wives had coped and survived in their absence. Not all had done it
alone, and infidelity and sexual suspicion tormented many relationships. Children
do struggled to know or reconnect with their fathers. Andre Bernard wept as his
so, who knew him only from photographs, jumped into his arms and exclaimed,
Now, I have a real Daddy, instead of a cardboard Daddy."60 Not all greetings were
vouching. Egg-shell walking was the order of the day. Those on the home front
alide understanding of the ex-serviceman's experience, but nor did the overseas
varios have much sympathy for the trials of those who had gone on in their
ance War is death and destruction, but it is also infused with dislocation and
Giance Some families were strengthened by the war; others disintegrated under the
man. The return to normalcy took time and patience, and often forgiveness.
THE WAR NEVER ENDED FOR THOUSANDS. Of the 54,000 Canadians wounded in
bate, more than 29,000 were listed as seriously disabled from their wounds, and most
round years of care, surgery, treatment, and rehabilitation. Men who were once
apro-ecky youths with full futures now faced a dark path. Many of the severely
wounded never married. turned to alcohol and found little stability ourside of veter-
do altis 1946, the newly formed Department of Veterans Affairs was running
more than thirty hospitals, many of them recently constructed, the largest being
Sunnybrook in Toronto. Four facilities offered specialized treatment for paraplegics;
new prosthetic limbs were manufactured and distributed; and veterans had skin peeled
i and grafred onto other parts of their bodies in the hope of healing burn wounds.
Yet even service personnel with serious injuries rejoined the workforce in high
numbers. They learned to operate machinery or work in an office environment in
