166
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
observed of his batman Dickie Knowles, "He's a comical cuss and good for morale." 4
There were many men like Knowles who uplifted the spirits of their comrades.
Sergeant Tom Carney of the Canadian Scottish Regiment enjoyed the "battal-
ion paper called The Tommy Cooker and every once in a while one of the boys will
come out with a poem that is very good indeed."s A series of regimental papers
were published in the summer months-—the North Nova's Fish Billie Express, the
Queen's Own Rifles Big 2 Bugle, the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry's Section
Post containing news from the front, humorous accounts, and even odes to fallen
comrades. One combat veteran wrote that "a few digs were taken at anything and
anyone."" The papers were popular and good for morale, although they faded
from the scene as editors were illed and wounded, and after The Maple Leaf first
made popular in Italy —began publication at the end of July?
In those first two months, however, men with deft pens found an outlet for their
poetry. Jock McAuger of the Can Scots penned "C'est La Guerre," capturing the
exhaustion and fatigue of the poor bloody infantry, and even employing the popular
phrase from the Great War, which was meant as an ironic quip.
Cheer up boys, when the war is won
We can talk of all the things we've done
Of weather, folks and "compo stew"
That miracle food for me and you.
When the mortars fall
And bullets whiz around,
Just dig in, boys
And hold your ground
C'est la guerre?»
McAuger's poem was no cry of despair: it was a humorous if fatalistic view into the
soldiers hard world, but one infused with the hope that they would survive to some-
day look back on it. The now hardened campaigners faced the coming battles with a
grin and a grimace, and there would be no stopping until the job was done.
CHAPTER 7
FIGHTING ON ALL FRONTS
The Anglo-Canadian ground forces survived the first month of battle, and now pre-
pared for their own offensive. General Montgomery had two goals: first take Caen
and push south to Falaise, and then draw in enemy reserves to give the U.S. First and
Third Armies the opportunity to break out into Brittany and crush the German
armies in a massive envelopment. Hitler's armies, in turn, continued to defend the
Normandy bridgehead and wait for what they thought was the main assault to fall
farther north at Pas-de-Calais. While the Germans were masters of the rapid strike,
their command structure remained split over how to respond in Normandy, with
Hider determined to contain the bridgehead but not releasing all of the armoured
divisions. German generals at the front were increasingly frantic about using their
mobile reserves, especially those in the north, to destroy the Normandy beachhead.
With each dav, the Allies grew stronger-reachine 500.000 boots on the ground
within the first two weeks and Hitler's generals pleas to release the reserves were
ignored! The Führers strategic oversight had been largely reduced to a fierce deter-
mination to give no ground, which became a straightjacket for his generals, who
could no longer manoeuvre to trade ground for space or time. They were left with
the choice of charging into the Allies guns or waiting on the defensive and reacting
to the Anglo-American-Canadian attacks. Neither side could drive the other from
the fed, although it was the Germans who could not make good the losses.
The Allied air forces wore down the fortified Germans. The 3rd Canadian Infantry
Dision was supported by the Second Tactical Air Force, which had squadrons
based in Normandy a few days after D-Day. Somewhat strangely, most of the RCAF's
