282 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
London to find the necessary troops from those in theatre.' To augment his numbers
and provide a reinforced striking arm, Burns tried to bring the orphaned 1st Canadian
Armoured Brigade back into the corps, but the semi-independent brigade had no
desire to serve under I Canadian Corps, due to clashes between commanders and
the Ist Brigade's success in fighting throughout the Eighth Army. Leese blocked the
transfer, wishing to keep the brigade a more mobile unit. He also observed of the
Canadian troopers, "They are acknowledged by all as the best brigade out here and
every division asks for them." And so, the creation of the 12th Canadian Infantry
Brigade was done within the corps, draining the already shallow reinforcement pools
and cannibalizing the armoured cars of the Westminster Regiment and the division's
reconnaissance unit, the 4th Princess Louise Dragoon Guards, as well as two light
anti-aircraft batteries, who had nothing to shoot at.® There was little time to trans-
form the reconnaisance forces and gunners into infantry, but the new units, such as
the Lanark and Renfrew Scottish (formed from the anti-aircraft gunners and showing
their displeasure by calling themselves, informally, the "slaughterhouse battalion"),
would prove themselves on the battlefield.'
While reforms kept the officers busy, the soldiers had time to relax. There was
increased leave to a number of cities, primarily to the sanctioned Canadian rest
camps at Bari and Salerno, where sol-
diers could enjoy wine and beaches.
Entertainers also came into the field.
Artilleryman Gordie Bannerman, who
for months after the Hitler Line battle
had nightmares about friends killed,
remarked that morale was raised
when No. 1 Canadian Entertainment
Company, consisting of male and
female dancers, singers, and musicians,
visited the area. Though some of the
performers had become physically sick
Watching and waiting for the enemy.
while travelling through the devasta-
tion of the battlefield, with its gagging
THE GOTHIC LINE
283
sumer stench of shallow-buried bodies, they put on a great show. For Bannerman
and his mates,
"They were a touch from home. WE LOVED THEM."10 Some
25000 Canadians would eventually see the rollicking performances." Throughout
the Talian campaign, the soldiers' spirits were also buoyed by their own in-house
productions, which involved the ever-popular cross-dressing, lewd humour, ridicu-
ous songs, topical jokes, and even outrageous skits that, according to Stanley
Saislowski of the Perth Regiment, provided "the only time a private could unload on
oficers and not be put on charge." 12
Another pleasant distraction was the army newspaper, The Maple Leaf, which
had published its first issue on January 14, 1944. It was filled with stories from
Canada about politics, war-related work, and, most popular with the men, sports.
The paper highlighted Allied victories and Canadian deeds of valour, and it became
a mainstay with the troops. But it also offered frank accounts of combat, inter-
rieved survivors who spoke of their near-death experiences, and even addressed the
callenge of battle exhaustion. 13 While the paper could have become a voice-piece
for the army, its editor, Canadian journalist Brigadier Richard Malone, refused to
elow it to be reduced to a source of pablum or propaganda. He knew this would
are be accepted by the soldiers in the field. Malone, who was a friend of Minister
Ralson and a future publisher of The Globe and Mail, used his authority as com-
mander of No. 1 Public Relations Group-which was responsible for the army
prasad public relations - to shield the newspaper from political or military inter-
Ferne. is was no easy task, but Malone succeeded, partially because The Maple
Lef was such a hit with the soldiers and no officer dared to interfere too deeply
with the editorial direction.!4
"The life and soul of the paper," noted one Canadian, was Sergeant Bing Coughlin's
Harbie cartoon. ' Its intellectual origin was in Bruce Bairnsfather's popular Great War
catoon. Old Bill whose anti-hero displaved fear. anger, and petulance towards the
absurdity of war. Herbies great appeal was that he represented the common soldier,
eating he dements, the enemy, and his own generals. The sad-sack soldier, accord-
i one admiring Canadian officer, was "the little guy" in the army, dismissive of
discipline and courageous acts.' Regimental Sergeant Major Harry Fox believed that
humour was, and is, essential to survival in the Army and especially in combat."17
