30
FIGHT TO THE FINISH
AIRMEN NONCHALANTLY OBSERVED that former comrades had "gotten the chop"
or "gone for a Burton." Their chums were reduced to kit bags and chalk names in the
operations room, to be gathered up in silence and erased from memory. The losses
were particularly high in No. 6 Group. The group's commander, Air Vice-Marshal
George Brookes, was a strong nationalist, but the uneven performance and high loss
rates of the Canadians over the previous year was blamed on him. Brookes was not
loved by his airmen, and his ouster in February 1944 was commented on by very
few of the front-line flyers, although he remained an active champion of the RCAF
after the war.
Air Vice-Marshal Clifford "Black Mike" McEwen took the helm. A Great War
veteran, he acquired his name from his dark complexion and occasionally fierce
tirades. McEwen was a stern disciplinarian—"a demon for standards and training" —
who even demanded unpopularly that his airmen wear the wire in their cap to give
it the formal stiff look of regulations and not the nonchalant appearance that the
airmen projected.* McEwen backed up his discipline by accompanying crews on
dangerous missions, where he earned their respect. Sill, the casualties were terrible
during the Battle of Berlin, and the loss rate of the Halifaxes of No. 6 Group in
January 1944 was a staggering 9.8 percent, which, when extended out over a tour of
thirty operations, meant that 95 out of 100 Ayers would be killed or shot down. 54
Such casualty levels were unsustainable. Experience drained out of the squadron,
morale was hammered, and sprog crews had no one from which to learn. Over the
deadly winter of 1943 and into 1944, RCAF pilot Douglas Harvey saw more and
more of his friends lost to combat. "I began to wonder if I would survive my tour."
All Ayers did the math and realized that the law of averages worked against them.
"I watched as my chums disappeared into the night."
CHAPTER 2
EVADERS AND PRISONERS
Almost every operation saw bombers disintegrate in fiery explosions, torn apart by
night fighter cannons or ground-based flak guns. A doomed machine that did not
immediately disintegrate in mid-air lost power and height as the pilot fought against
the steady drop in altitude. If control could not be regained, the order went out to
abandon the bird, often in a forced cheery quip: "Lads, time to hit the silk."
The rush out of the plane, which was likely on fire and shaking uncontrollably,
possibly in a terminal spin, was not easy. As the stricken bombers went "down like
a bomb," as one shot-down pilot remarked, the oxygen and the intercom soon cut
out.' With no communication, the crew was isolated from the pilot and might not
even know when he gave the order to jump. Some airmen waited too long and were
not able to get out of the escape hatch; others dove out too quickly, and watched
helplessly as they floated down to earth in their parachute, while the skipper and his
chums righted the plane and headed home.
Though the Lancaster was a robust machine that could absorb terrible punish-
ment, it had awkward escape hatches. The main wing spar ran across the body of the
aircraft and it was a test to cross at the best of times when in full equipment, and far
more difficult in a plummeting aircraft where the aircrew battled G forces. The Lanc
crews were advised to go through the emergency hatch in the front nose, which was
a long way for the tail and mid-upper gunner to travel. There was an escape hatch
closer to the rear, but often the escapee, upon exiting the stricken plane, impacted
with the horizontal tail surfaces and was killed or injured by the blow. Attesting
to the challenge of slipping through the narrow hatches, only 11 percent of Lancaster
