364 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
country as Borden had during the Great War. It was important to avoid such a
schism, but King showed far less concern for his countrymen overseas who were
more likely to be killed because of shortages of trained infantrymen.
Canadians had suffered very little at home. While European citizens were put to
the sword and the British faced aerial bombardment and tens of thousands of fatal-
ities, Canadians, at most, had to deal with shortages of tires, rationing of sugar or
liquor, and frozen wages (offset by stabilized prices of goods). Almost every Canadian
was wealthier than in the previous, depressing, decade.% The conscription debates
had raised passions, but very few men had been affected to date, and none had been
sent overseas. The burden of the war effort had fallen to those serving in uniform,
and now they needed assistance.
In mid-September, when rumours of infantry shortages turned to outright revela-
tions in the nation's papers, the conscientious defence minister, James Ralston, a
former battalion commander and a long-time supporter of veterans, went overseas to
investigate. He first visited the Italian front and interviewed soldiers about the crash-
ing of the Gothic Line and the chronic shortages of supplies and reinforcements. He
was badly shaken, as every infantry battalion he visited was under-strength. Ralston
next few to Northwest Europe, where investigations again revealed the dire situa-
tion. Canadians were dying for want of comrades in the line, with the burden of
fighting, sentry duty, patrolling, and all the other tasks falling heavily on the surviv-
ors. He was told how ill-trained reinforcements were put in the line and often killed
or wounded before the end of the first day at the front.
Ralson returned to Ottawa on October 18 and informed Prime Minister King
that now was the time for conscription. King was horrified. He had spent the entire
war trying to rein in the conscriptionists in his cabinet and across the country. To
bring in conscription now, with the war all but won, was madness. King character-
ized it as a great betrayal of French Canadians, Moreover, it was clear to him after
some digging that it was the army high command who had failed to properly plan
for the casualties and allocate enough replacements to fill the ranks. This was true,
but it did not alleviate King' responsibilities to the overseas soldiers.
In late October, the King government faced its greatest crisis. The prime minister
tried to appease the persistent Ralston but dav after dav of neontiations proved
BATTLE OF THE SCHELDT
365
fruitless. The cabinet was tearing itself apart, trying to squeeze the necessary 16,000
army reinforcements from the 120,000 NRMA men in Canada and the 90,000 or
so uniformed Canadians in Britain. To King and his ministers' fury, they were
informed that most of these soldiers were not suitable for the infantry, being medic-
ally unft or untrained. King raged at the army's failure and considered resigning, but
the political survivor found it ingrained in him to first push others onto their swords.
During the 1942 plebiscite, a frustrated Ralston had tendered his resignation. King
had talked his minister down but had kept the letter. On November 1, as Canadians
were dying overseas in the attack across the causeway in the Scheldt, King fired
Raston, using the pretext of the earlier resignation letter. King won the political
batle, but the army still needed reinforcements.
After Ralston's removal, the newspapers condemned the government relentlessly,
especially after King's new defence minister, former army commander General
Andrew McNaughton, was unable to convince the NRMA soldiers to enlist voluntar-
ily. They were known as "Zombies," for their apparent lack of soul. The government
was called worse: murderers, complicit in the killing of overseas soldiers. King finally
semed out of luck. But on November 22, the prime minister flip-flopped in the
House of Commons- after having told his caucus only hours earlier that he would
never waver — and ordered that 16,000 NRMA soldiers be sent overseas against their
will" Me Naughton was thrown to the wolves. The enraged opposition shredded his
reputation as he was forced to defend King's sudden change of policy. The slippery
King largely escaped censure, as he had done countless times over his uniquely long
political career.
Ar the front, the infantry were dismayed by the delays. Major Joe Pigott recalled,
"We had only feelings of disgust, of contempt for the prime minister and the polit-
icians who were not facing the realities of the crisis, and most of all, we felt anger.
The feling was becoming very deep-seated in all the troops that they were being
used and being sacrificed by their government in order not to face public opinion."88
Another infantryman, Elmer Bell, wrote to his parents in late October, of his com-
rades bearing the brunt of the fighting: "It makes me mad every time I think of those
fellows here who go on and on and on without a weels rest even and 75.000 Zombies
in Canada Ir is building un a hatred that wont be erased in a generation. I+ is
