238 FIGHT TO THE FINISH
were sent back to Britain by air lift or by hospital ship. Nurse Harriet Sloan, who
served in France wich No. 8 Canadian General Hospital, recounted the devastating
sights, with some of the worst being maxillofacial injuries.
"These were dreadful
wounds to the face. They would have a part of their jaw shot away. They wouldn't
have a tongue. Theyd, perhaps, be very badly burned in a tank."36 Soldiers with
trauma to their bodies often required multiple surgeries, needed time for bones to
heal, and ran the risk of secondary infections.
By March 1944, there were 10,000 Canadian hospital beds in England in a ser-
ies of stationary hospitals along the coast, in towns on railways lines, and in rural
areas. There were also long-term convalescent homes. The goal of the military was
to return the men to health, and then to their units. Some, of course, would never
fight again, and would face a new battle in rehabilitation. William Newell of
London, Ontario, a mere nineteen years old when he was wounded in Normandy,
reflected on his time in hospital: "A young lad was in the bed beside me. He was
seventeen. He had his right leg off. The fellow on my other side had both hands off.
Those were the kind of things you ran into in the hospital. The young lads with
shock in their eyes.""?
Nursing Sister Mary Bray was shaken by the broken boys she cared for, describing
many as "like young children." She hated the dawning awareness "that even with
surgery some wounds were too horrific to ever heal. It was hard to accept what war
can do." Kay Poulton, a twenty-three-year-old nurse from Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan,
who aided the recovering Canadians, recalled, "It was rather earth-shattering for me.
There were these young boys wich the arms and legs off and all sorts of other horrible
injurics... Despite this, we had few deaths in our hospital, and we were proud of the
record. We had a group of dedicated doctors and nurses who worked like dogs and
of course by this time, we had the new wonder drug penicillin.""" In the Great War,
even minor wounds often became infected, and therefore soldiers were lost to their
units for lenethy periods. Now, with penicillin staving off most infections, the
wounded men were more rapidly returned to the front."
Comrades in the field wrote letters to the injured. When Queen's Own Rifles
infantryman Stan Biggs was shot through the leg at the end of August 1944 and
recovering in hospital, one of his decorated mates told him that he should not
WAR AND MEDICINE
239
hury back: "You've got a wife and two kids to think about. You've done your bit
for the infantry. If you did get back to the unit you wouldn't recognize anyone.
Most of the comrades we knew are either dead or wounded or promoted higher." 41
Bigs injuries were serious enough that he never returned to the firing line, but
chousands of other Canadians did, to support their mates, to follow orders, or to
Gnish the war.
THE GUINEA PIG CLUB was an organ-
iation of which no one wished to be
a member. It consisted of burned
servicemen of the Commonwealth air
forces and some tank crews, and the
name came from the multiple oper-
ations that members underwent to
gat new skin over their burns. In
My 1941, as reported by a doctor, one
of the burned patients, "who'd had ten
operations and perhaps was feeling a
bit down, said they were nothing but
1 pastic surgeon's guinea pigs."42 The
came stuck and the Guinea Pig Club was
tomed, eventually claiming 590 mem-
be, induding 170 Canadians.
The colossal advances in medicine
and care ensured that many men sur-
ined what before the war would likely
date been fatal wounds. In the Great
Ta, burned soldiers often succumbed
i infection and gangrene. Now, new
rament and drugs kept many alive,
and the halenge was to remake faces
ad bodies out of the melted-wax-like
A member of the Guinea Pig Club,
as pictured through several restorative surgeries.
