doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00•011
WO 171/524
14622852
AR Duan
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
creation of the partie dir co mill ho kep pon duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and c.
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(v) Nature and description of field
vi) Changes in establishment or st
(fi) Unit commanders.
(ili) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
want occurrences, factor trooping
(r) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTe A. —In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
None bey quest, the doubt whether or not to that dider shorld by kett ta ai,
The War mi, order, S. Wrough the usual channels, to the Under Secretary of S
PARA. 2.—A war diary is secret..
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up daily, hath en
och entry initialled by the oncer derallea to keep 1l, vi
traction and retenuon or depenuices, there, cue
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTT.—It should be made clear that the officer
or other pest mont he made dear, that the officer he initials the he dier is to commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
ParA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
prepanne & aldry .
(i) Ind decisit os tas, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Pay location. Movement during the ot torenty-ons he ut as present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important infory
NoTE.—Events should be entere
occur, or come to notice. At the clo
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under
1) A copy of each feld return
routine order or instruction.
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instrus
(iii) A copy of each narrative
furnished in
lumbered, and each will i
to appendices will be ma
. 6.—All diaries will
See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS
Disposal will be made mot
(i) Unless otherwise order
forwarded on the fir
of the diaries of unil
ne unit concern
Month and Year JANUARY, 1944.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
Erase heading not required).
Army Fom
Unit 50TH (NORTHUMERIAN) DIV. ORD, FL
Commanding Officer MAJOR.D. CAH, MERE
Place
Date
ummary of Events and Information.
Reterences to Ap
SUDBUIRY
1 - 30
Nothing of "Tar Diary" importance to warrant daily entries.
Sipu
Unit waiting to reorganize to new War Establishment 111/290/1, but no
mobilization order yet received.
Training and educational programnes in progress, and leave proceeding
normally.
Complete unit receiving protective inoculations and vaccinations and
attending for dental treatment throughout the month.
31
Capt. C.E. Carrington posted to 107 Armd, Ord. Sub Park.
2118.
1022, P.MEA/1-500.000-9/41.
26/W.D./A.
