pg_0073.pdf:
V07793 (72) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
60
[Chap. VII. Sec. 28.
of the refugee problem will all require careful consideration.
The co-operation of the local civil authorities should be
enlisted to deal with the refugees when these are numerous.
If possible, the evacuation of the civil population may be
begun before the withdrawal; but, if this is not practicable
for reasons of secrecy or otherwise, measures must be taken
to prevent their hampering the withdrawal. These may
include the allotment to refugees of special roads and camp-
he is at police mastest taken in cons too mand
areas.
6. The principal duties of the air force during a withdrawal
will be reconnaissance, especially of the flanks, action to
prevent the enemy air force hampering the retreat, and
bombardment of the enemy pursuing columns when oppor-
tunity offers. If any part of the force is very hard pressed,
the air force may sometimes be called on to relieve it by
attacks on the enemy columns, including low-flying attack:
such action, however, withdraws fighting aircraft from their
normal duties, and
thus allows enemy aircraft greater
latitude to interfere with the withdrawal; it is also likely
to involve heavy casualties in aircraft and should therefore
only be employed as an emergency measure.
The movement of aerodromes will require careful considera-
tion when a withdrawal is being planned.
7. To sum up, a commander who contemplates with-
drawal on a large scale must in his preparations consider
the following problems: the programme of demolitions,
which requires plenty of time if it is to be effective; the
reconnaissance of successive lines of defence; the places
where anti-aircraft defence is likely to be specially important,
e.g. at the passage of defiles; the improvement of roads and
other communications where necessary, and their allotment
to subordinate formations; the removal in good time of
the heavier impedimenta of the army without advertising
the intention to retreat; the disposal of refugees; and
other administrative problems.
During the withdrawal, his chief occupations will be to
ensure touch and co-ordination between his columns; to
assure the safety of exposed flanks; to handle his air force
so as to hold the enemy air force in check and to delay the
pursuit; and to arrange for offensive ripostes in favourable
conditions so as to impose caution on the enemy's advance.
V07793 (72) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

