pg_0024.pdf:
V07793 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Sec. 5.]
11
2. Since in peace it is impossible to maintain on a war
basis all the requirements of a field force, plans to deal
with a situation must always include arrangements for
the utilization and expansion of civil resources, especially
transportation facilities, at home and in the theatre of
operations, with speed and efficiency. Thus, for example,
the information that a certain type of transport-it may
be carriers, camels or other pack animals, river craft, or
some special type of vehicle is required for a certain theatre
of war is incomplete without knowledge of where such
transport can be obtained, with what delay and in what
quantities. Plans for a given theatre must therefore be
based on as detailed a knowledge as possible of its topography
and of the local resources in animals, vehicles and supplies
of all kinds; proposals for exploiting them to the best
advantage should also have been prepared.
3. Plans of operations may be drawn up in peace to meet
a possible or probable situation; they must then be as
flexible as possible, since no crisis occurs exactly as antici-
pated. Or they may be drawn up on the occurrence of an
emergency or on the outbreak of war, to meet an actual
situation ;
they can then
be formulated with greater
exactitude.
The plan must in either event include a clear
statement of the aim of the force; the arrangements for
mobilization, for the strategical concentration, and for the
establishment of a base and lines of communication; an
estimate of the time required for these arrangements; all
available information regarding the enemy and the theatre;
and a forecast of the opening moves. The execution of the
plan of campaign will then be the responsibility of the
commander-in-chief appointed: the difficulty of his task and
the likelihood of success will depend largely on the preliminary
arrangements made and on the selection and preparation of
a base or bases and lines of communication. (Sec. 8.)
4. Strategical concentration is the process by which an
army is assembled in the theatre of operations by sea, by
rail, by waterway, by road, by air or by some combination
of these means.
For a British force a sea voyage is almost
always involved (Sec. 6). It is important that strategical
concentration should be completed with the minimum of
interruption by the enemy. It will usually be impossible
to secure complete immunity from air attack. Its effects
must be mitigated by the arrangements made with the air
V07793 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

