pg_0038.pdf:
V07793 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Sec. 12.]
25
hesitation and delay are fatal. The better the arrange-
ments that have been made
to secure information, the
easier it is to make a right choice; but plans will always
have to be made on probabilities- sometimes even on
guesses-not on certainties. No commander ever yet made
a plan of battle that could not have been improved with
better information and more time; but to
postpone a
decision because the information is incomplete is a frequent
cause of the loss of vital time, the passing of the initiative
to the enemy and consequent failure.
It may be that the
details of a battle plan cannot be determined until after
considerable fighting by the advanced troops, but the sooner
that the general outline is made the better. The simpler
the plan, the more likely it is to succeed: complicated plans
are dangerous.
2. The first choice lies between engaging in battle or
manœuvring for a greater advantage before forcing or
accepting it; the second choice, if battle is decided on, is
between attacking or taking up a position to await attack.
If the enemy is found occupying a prepared position of his
own choosing, it will usually be prudent to manœuvre him
out of it, if circumstances permit: or, if the enemy is found
in unexpected strength or so advantageously placed that the
chances of battle are in his favour, it may be advisable to
avoid a general action by withdrawal.
If decision by battle is chosen, or if the circumstances
are such that battle cannot be avoided, a commander must
determine whether to strike the first blow or to await attack.
The strategical object or situation may dictate oftensive
or defensive tactics: thus a force that is endeavouring to
relieve a besieged army will usually have to attack any
force between itself and the besieged place, if it is to fulfil
its mission; while the force covering the siege can often
achieve its object by acting defensively. This is not in-
variably so: the relieving force may decide to wait for
reinforcements and the covering force to attack before the
reinforcements arrive. Similarly, two separated forces
while a force that is endeavouring to hold them apart and to
defeat them in detail will usually act defensively against
one force and offensively against the other. Again, a com-
mander whose force has reached such a strategical position,
e.g. astride the enemy's communications, that his opponent
is forced to attack in order to retrieve his fortunes may decide
V07793 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

