pg_0033.pdf:
V07793 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
20
[Chap. III. Sec. 10.
tenance; on the other hand, it may expose the force to
defeat in detail and has somewhat less power of manœuvre
than a formation in depth.
cross-country movement. It can, however, more safely be
spread out, both on a wide front on a number of roads and
in depth along any particular road, since it can close in or
close up with much greater rapidity than a marching force.
In calculating moves by mechanized columns, it is the
"road time" (i.e. the number of hours taken by a unit or
formation to cover the required distance) that should be
taken into account; the "road space" taken up has not
same importance as with marching columns.
For
details of movements by M.T. or bus columns, see Field
Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 27.
7. The order of march within the various columns will
be determined in accordance with the tactical situation
and with considerations for the comfort of the troops. Units
will march in the order in which they are likely to come
into action; but mechanized units forming part of a non-
mechanized formation should move either by bounds in
rear of the formation or on a separate road. As regards
protection on the line of march, see Field Service Regulations,
Vol. II, 1935, Chapter V.
The position of corps and army
It should, for instance,
will be required; the bridging park, if not likely to be
needed for some time, may be one or more days' march in
rear.
Armoured troops, if not used in advance of the main
columns, may move at some distance in rear, since their
mobility enables them to reach the front rapidly when
required. The direction of their movement will depend
largely on the topography of the country, i.e. the suitability
of various areas for their operations.
8. Movement by night lessens the probability of detection
and attack by the enemy air force, but impairs the physical
condition of the troops if carried out for prolonged periods,
since they cannot obtain the same amount of rest by day
as by night, especially mounted troops, whose horses require
attention during the day. If a prolonged period of night
movement is undertaken, special arrangements must be
made to enable the troops to obtain the maximum of rest
V07793 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

