pg_0068.pdf:
V07793 (67) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 26)
55
the delivery of the decisive stroke; also the battle is fought
on ground of his own choosing not the enemy's.
In practice, however, to achieve success in this type of
battle demands the very highest qualities of judgment
and resolution. The chief difficulty is that the enemy
can, untortunately, seldom be trusted to play the role
assigned to him exactly as forecasted. He attacks at an
unexpected place, at an unexpected time or in unexpected
strength; unless a commander has chosen his ground and
planned his battle with great skill and holds to his original
purpose of a counter-offensive with unfaltering resolution, he
may find himself induced or forced to fight the battle on the
enemy's plan rather than on his own.
Three qualities are
needed for success: skill to create the opportunity for the
counter-stroke, which should come as a surprise; judgment
to time its execution; and resolution to remain unshaken in
purpose by the enemy's action.
2. The opportunity may be created by a pretence of
weakness-assisted perhaps by the spread of false infor-
mation; by the concealment of the force intended for the
counter-offensive, or of part of it; by offering a bait in the
shape of an apparent gap in the defensive arrangements or
of a strategical prize left unguarded. An advantage may
be taken of a headstrong enemy; or adroit manœuvre may
have given such strategical advantage that the opponent
is compelled to attack.
There should in short be a trap,
skilfully set, baited and concealed. Use may be made of
a natural feature, for example, of a river or line of hills, the
bait being perhaps an unguarded bridge or undefended pass.
3. However skilfully the opportunity may have been
stroke, there
made, there still remains the greater difficulty of timing the
stroke. The time of the counter-offensive may be to a
certain extent pre-determined, e.g. it may be designed to
be made when the enemy has reached a certain line or
topographical feature; or it may be dependent on the arrival
from a distance of a separate force that is to carry out the
counter-offensive; more often the time will have to be
left to be settled in accordance with the progress of the fight
—that is, in accordance with the action of the enemy. In
any event the selection of the moment will need the most
careful arrangements for obtaining up-to-date information
on which to base a correct judgment. The headquarters
of the commander on whom the decision rests must be well
V07793 (67) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

