pg_0054.pdf:
V07793 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 19.J
41
the execution of movements calculated to produce a wrong
impression, misleading activity by the artillery and by
wireless sets are other expedients that may be used. Such
methods are, in principle, very old: the application of
modern means, such as action in the air, wireless telegraphy
and mechanical movement, provides much scope for novelty
which is often the essence of successiul surprise
In position warfare, the difficulties of obtaining surprise
are increased (Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935,
Sec. 83, 4): the attacker has, however, two great advantages
—accurate and detailed knowledge of the enemy's dispositions
and time to devise elaborate means of deception. It should
be remembered that it is just as important to conceal adminis-
trative preparations, e.g. the siting of medical and supply
establishments, as the movements and preparations of the
front line troops.
4. When the place and front of attack have been deter-
mined, the troops for the first assault detailed, and the size
and position of the reserves determined, the distribution of
the artillery and the making of a tre-plan can be undertaken
in detail.
Divisions on the front of the main attack will
almost always require additional support from the artillery
of reserve divisions and the corps and army artillery. The
extent to which the corps commander should control the
artillery plan of the battle, when a corps or larger force is
engaged, is often a difficult question to decide: on the one
hand, central control-to the fullest extent that the means
of intercommunication and the time factor permit gives
the corps commander his best chance of being able to influence
the course of the battle, to apply his artillery fire-power to
the best general advantage and to time correctly the entry
into action of his reserves; on the other hand, too rigid a
control cramps the initiative of his divisional commanders,
who are closer to the fighting and can better judge of their
requirements at any given moment. The extent of control
will vary with the personality of the commanders concerned.
In a trench-to-trench attack in position warfare, the corps
commander will normally make and control the artillery
plan of the whole corps in great detail: in an encounter
battle, he will seldom find it possible or desirable to centralize
the command of the field artillery, and he may, when time
is very urgent, distribute the corps artillery between his
divisions and leave them to make their own plans entirely.
Generally speaking, the corps will, whenever possible, be
V07793 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

