pg_0051.pdf:
V07793 (50) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
38
[Chap. V. Sec. 18.
develops out of the first contact between the reconnoitring
and protective troops; it includes the engagement and
overthrow of the enemy's protective troops (in an encounter
battle) or the capture of his outpost position (if he is already
standing on the defensive); the deployment of the force;
and the making and issuing of a plan for the main thrust.
3. If the direction and scope of the main attack can be
determined beforehand, the distribution and role of the
majority of the troops can be decided at once.
- Otherwise
a part only of the force will be allotted tasks in the pre-
paratory action, while the remainder is kept in hand for the
main attack. The size and position of this body will need
most careful consideration with regard to the communica-
tions available and the facilities for concealment from the
With small forces, it may be possible to place it in a
weaknesses have been discovered. But with large forces,
flank or in the centre-must be determined early and it
must be placed accordingly. The deployment of the force
and the position of the body kept in hand for the main
blow must be concealed as far as possible, and it may often
be advisable to move the bulk of the troops under cover of
darkness.
4. In the preparatory period, the aim should be to drive
in the hostile covering troops before the enemy's main body
has time either to develop an offensive movement or to
strengthen its defences.
Decisions must be made quickly;
and the procedure outlined in Field Service Regulations,
Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 56, for shortening the period of prepara-
tion in an attack by a unit should be applied also in principle
to the methods of higher formations. The good commander
will always by practised economy make a little time go a
long way. Commanders must be well forward so as to get
early information. Plans should be simple and quickly
made.
The employment of tanks in the preparatory period
will often save time and give quicker results; but the
advantages of their use at this stage must always be balanced
against the possibility of thereby reducing their ability to
give full support to the main attack later on.
5. Reconnaissance, both from the ground and from the
air, and the rapid transmission of its results, is of the utmost
importance at this stage. Ground reconnaissance will be
V07793 (50) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

