pg_0028.pdf:
V07793 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Sec. 8.J
15
Aircraft Defence (Army Units), Vol. II. Since attacks from
the air may be made from the earliest moment and are
most dangerous during the initial concentration and establish-
ment of the base, air defence troops should, if possible, precede
the remainder of the force. The defence against air attack
of a base port sited immediately on the coast presents
difficulties owing to the lack of depth on the seaward side.
The protection of the base against raids by mobile forces
may also be necessary (see Field Service Regulations,
Vol. II, 1935, Chapter V).
3. The operations, and indeed the existence, of an army
in the field are dependent on free communication with the
base or bases from which come its munitions, reinforcements
and stores. Generally speaking, the most favourable con-
dition for a force is when it directly covers its principal line
of communications, i.e. when that line runs back behind
the centre of the army at right angles to the front on which
the army is operating, since it is then most difficult for the
enemy to attack or threaten the communications without
exposing his own.
Where, however, the principal com-
munications run obliquely from the front or lie behind one
flank of the army, the situation is likely to be comparatively
disadvantageous, since the enemy may be enabled to attack
the communications without a corresponding risk to his own.
The possession of an alternative base and line of supply,
or the ability to change the line of supply, confers on a force
a great advantage in freedom of manœuvre, and may afford
an opportunity to surprise the enemy by an unexpected
change in the line of operation. The sea power of the
British Empire has often been of great value in this respect
The possibility of changing the base and line
of supply is, however, affected by the size of armies and
their requirements in material; a small lightly equipped
force has obviously a greater opportunity to make use of
this advantage. Careful previous planning is necessary to
enable a rapid change to be made.
V07793 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

