pg_0016.pdf:
V07793 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 1.J
3
the highest judgment is required in making the most advan-
tageous distribution of those resources: the mobility given
to the army by sea power is liable to lead to dispersal of force
and effort, unless the bearing of any and all expeditions on
the aim of the war is very carefully calculated. In a
major war the British Empire may often be a member of
an alliance: this may lead on occasions to the subordination
of military, and even of national, interests to the interests
of the allies as a whole.
But the peculiar character of
British military power and its dependence on the sea should
always be kept in mind and exploited to the full, in an
alliance as when acting alone.
4. Whatever may be the form of warfare in which the
army is employed, the closest possible co-operation between
the army and the air force, between ground and air action,
is always essential. The army may be required to seize
and to hold bases from which the air force will operate-to
attack enemy forces or communications while the air force
will be required to co-operate in all the undertakings of
the army.
5. The introduction of new weapons and the increasing
mechanization of armies, besides influencing strategica
and tactical combinations in the field, necessitate the most
carefully considered allocation of the national resources
for the purpose of prosecuting the war. The demands for
warlike stores of all kinds will in any major war only be
met by the mobilization of industry in accordance with
plans prepared in peace.
A wise direction of industry and
correct distribution of man-power will be as important as
generalship in the field. It is essential that the army should
keep in touch with the organization of industry and with
mechanical developments in civil life, in order to judge
how far they can be used or adapted for military purposes,
and what effect they will have on operations in the field (see
Sec. 4, 2).
To The o125, to which mot, but tot al, to he pria pai
powers of the world have subscribed. Should war break out,
the British Government will endeavour, in conjunction with
its allies, to obtain from the enemy government or govern-
ments an engagement that poison gas shall not be used as
a weapon of war, if any of the governments concerned have
not ratified the Geneva Gas Protocol.
V07793 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

