pg_0072.pdf:
V07793 (71) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 28.]
59
drawal, both in order to exercise effective control of the
operations and to give confidence to the troops.
General
headquarters should also be kept well up. All headquarters
should, however, rid themselves of as much of their transport
and administrative portion as possible, which should be sent
back early to positions in rear.
3. Withdrawal should usually be made on as broad a
front as possible. This facilitates supply arrangements,
reduces the size of columns and the consequence of delays
and blocks and lessens the danger of an outfanking move-
ment by the pursuit; it also offers the enemy's air force a
more scattered target. The co-ordination of the withdrawal
of a number of columns requires, however, very careful
control, timing and arrangements for liaison, especially if
natural obstacles tend to separate columns.
The chief
dangers in a withdrawal will lie in interception or flank
attack by hostile mobile forces and attack by the enemy's
air force, especially at the passage of defiles. These dangers
must be lessened by good reconnaissance, by demolitions
(Sec. 29), by the use of a mobile reserve and by careful
arrangements for air defence.
4. The tactics of a force withdrawing in the face of an
active pursuit may be to occupy a defensive position during
the hours of daylight, to check the enemy on it and then to
retire under cover of darkness to a fresh position; in fact to
pursue similar tactics to those of a rear guard, only on a
much larger scale. The difficulties and dangers are similar
to those of a rear guard, as are the necessary measures and
means of precaution, especially good co-ordination and timing
(see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 48). As
in a rear guard action, before one position is left, parties
should be sent back to reconnoitre the next position in rear.
But, whereas with a rear guard it may be only a matter of
a few officers going back two or three miles, with a large
force the numbers involved may be considerable; it may
be necessary to send them back a distance of 10 or 12 miles;
and they may be separated from their units or formations
for 24 hours or more. In such circumstances the selection,
organization, transportation and feeding of these parties
will require much thought and good staff arrangements.
5 Good am nitrative are all meat etreat withe
control of traffic, the supply of the troops and the solution
V07793 (71) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

