pg_0071.pdf:
V07793 (70) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
58
[Chap. VII. Secs. 27 and 28.
Such preparation, particularly if a battle is in progress, is
apt to be hampered by the requirements of secrecy and
by the desire not to upset the morale of the troops by any
suggestion that retreat is contemplated. It is a com-
mander's duty always to have in mind the possibility of
retreat and to work out the necessary arrangements, but
these must be kept as secret as possible.
Any scheme of
large scale demolitions to protect the retreat and to hinder
the enemy's advance, requires considerable time to plan
and prepare if it is to be effective (Sec. 29).
3. It is especially necessary to maintain a high standard
of discipline in a retreat, when the moral depression of
supposed failure and the hardships of continued marching
tend to lower it. Discipline deteriorates fast in a retreat
if any relaxation is allowed.
28. The conduct of a withdrawal
1. The process of disengagement of an army from battle,
in preparation for retreat, is similar to that of the with-
drawal of a rearguard (see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II,
1935, Sec. 48). The roads in rear chosen for the withdrawal
should be cleared as early as possible of all transport not
essential to the fighting troops; positions should be recon-
noitred and selected in rear, to be held by the reserves still
available or the troops that can most easily be drawn into
reserve; the troops actually engaged should then be with-
drawn, under cover of darkness if necessary (see Field Service
Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 80), and reorganized behind
these positions; if the retreat is to be continued, rear guards
should be formed from the freshest troops available. Should
there be a defile close behind the battle front-it is a maxim
never to fight with a defile in rear if it can be avoided-it
will be important to get the army clear of it as soon as
mobile troops may be used with the rear guards for direct
cover of the withdrawal or may be given the task of pro-
tecting the flanks.
2. Headquarters of all formations should be close up to
the battle during the process of disengagement and with-
V07793 (70) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

