pg_0030.pdf:
V07793 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 9 and 10.]
17
likely to be obtained appears sufficiently important to justify
the effort necessary.
10. The opening moves
(See also Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935,
Chapter 111)
1. In the movement of units or formations from the port
of disembarkation to the concentration area-by rail, by
road, by water or by a combination of these the strategical
situation, e.g. the need of haste; the tactical situation, e.g
the dangers of attack by the enemy's aircraft and mobile
force; and administrative considerations, e.g. the comfort
of the troops and the utilization to the best advantage of
the accommodation and means of transportation available,
must all be given due weight. From the administrative
point of view, it is desirable that the movement, if by road,
should be made on a broad front so as to use all available
billeting and other resources; that separate roads should,
where possible, be given to formations of varying mobility
so that each can move at the pace best suited to it; and that
marches should be comparatively short until men and
animals are hardened. The danger of air attack or the
requirements of secrecy may, however, make it necessary
for moves to be made at night (see paragraph 8, below, and
Field Service Regulations, Vol. I1, 1935, Chapter VIII);
and the requirements of the strategical or tactical situation
may demand some sacrifice of administrative advantages.
2. Once the concentration is completed, readiness for
manœuvre and action will, unless the enemy is still at a
considerable distance, be the guiding factor in the order
and direction of the march and the disposition of the troops
at rest. The aim of the army may be to seek out and defeat
the enemy forces; to cover a certain area or point of
strategical importance; to relieve a beleaguered garrison ;
or to gain any other objective of strategical importance.
Since concentration will usually have taken place at a
certain distance from the probable scene of operations
(Sec. 5), the first movement is likely to be a forward one,
and, in view of the value of time in war, should be made as
soon as possible after the force is ready. It may sometimes
be necessary to move forward a portion of the force for some
purpose to delay the enemy and gain time, for example
before the concentration of the remainder is complete.
V07793 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

