pg_0052.pdf:
V07793 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 18 and 19.]
39
directed especially to discover the extent of the enemy's
front and the position of his flanks, and will usually be one
of the principal tasks of the mobile troops. Intensive air
action will be required to gain information of the enemy,
especially of the location of his reserves, and to hamper the
enemy's air reconnaissance.
19. The main attack
1. During the fighting in the preparatory period the main
attack will be planned and staged. A commander will
seldom, if ever, have sufficient means of support at his
disposal to enable him to attack in strength along the whole
enemy front. He must select a part or parts for the main
attack and must devise means to hold the enemy on the
remainder of the front (paragraph 7, below). In selecting
the front for the main attack, he has to consider which
portion offers the maximum results, the best chance of
surprising the enemy and the best opportunities of fruitful
exploitation; also which section of the ground best suits
the characteristics of his force in combination or of that
arm in particular on which he is principally relying the
power of his armoured troops, the skill of his infantry, the
weight of his artillery or the mobility of his mounted troops.
The aids he has to guide him in his selection are his deductions
from the fighting in the preparatory phase; a close study
of the ground from the map, from aeroplane photographs,
from personal reconnaissance on the ground and in the air ;
and his military experience and judgment.
The degree of
training of his troops may influence his decision; the less
trained they are (as in the later stages of a national war),
the simpler must be the plan and the easier the ground to
which he commits them.
2. When the plan of attack has been decided in outline,
the commander of the force will usually assemble his sub-
ordinate commanders, staff officers and heads of services as
necessary, explain the intended operation, lay down a pro-
gramme of preparatory measures and discuss any points
raised. In position warfare, when the period of preparation
trenched a sitions entr serval we s, such ce perences
of the preliminary work and to settle the details of the
operations. In such prolonged preparation secrecy will be
• V07793 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

