pg_0023.pdf:
V07793 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
10
[Chap. II. Sec. 5.
CHAPTER II
THE PREPARATION OF A CAMPAIGN
5. General considerations
1. The basis of all military preparations and plans must
be good information. The General Staff at the War Office
is responsible for collecting and keeping up to date informa-
tion regarding the military forces of all foreign powers; the
numbers, characteristics and armament of the inhabitants
of any undeveloped country where British forces may become
engaged; and the resources, transportation facilities and
topographical features of all possible theatres of operations.
Detailed topographical information of a theatre is of im-
portance, since on it will hinge the composition and organi-
zation of a field force; for instance,
the proportion of
armoured fighting vehicles will depend on the suitability
of a theatre for their operations; and the type of transport
required in undeveloped countries can only be determined
by a knowledge of local conditions. This applies with
special force to the type of expedition into undeveloped
countries that is characteristic of the commitments of the
British Empire. In view of modern developments in
vehicles and equipment, full intelligence of the water lines
(river or canal) in the theatre of operations will be essential,
as the provision of special or additional bridging material
may be involved, or the re-distribution of available material
(see Sec. 11, 5). Since it is not possible always to have
up-to-date information available for every purpose, the first
step in any threat of emergency will be to check the infor-
mation available and to supplement it, where necessary, by
special reconnaissance. The provision of accurate maps on
a suitable scale is more important than ever before owing
to the use that can often be made of them to enable artillery
to fire without observation (see Training Regulations, 1934,
Sec. 12, and Manual of Military Intelligence in the Field,
1930, Chapter XVII).
V07793 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

