pg_0022.pdf:
V07793 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 4.]
9
broadest possible outlook and knowledge, of social as well
as of military questions. War is now more than ever a
social problem:
a major war affects the whole of the
national life and every class of citizen, and there is a corre-
sponding civil influence on the conduct of military operations.
A higher commander will have to give due weight to political
requirements, even though these should have a hampering
effect on purely military considerations. It is also necessary
for him to have an understanding of the psychology and
habits of the ordinary unmilitary citizen, who may com-
pose the bulk of the forces under his command and will have
had only a short military training.
2. In military matters also his outlook must be a broad
one. It is certain that any future war will bring many
surprises, many novelties,
many fresh methods. New
weapons, or the improvement of old ones, and other develop-
ments in equipment may necessitate fa-reaching changes
i dariat with the unpected and thinks only in terms
of past experience will be at a loss. He must consider in
all operations air action as well as ground action. The
closest possible co-operation between the army and the air
force will be essential in every kind of operation; the more
closely a military commander has studied the powers and
limitations of the air, the better he will be qualified to wage
war in any theatre.
3. In dealing with his subordinates, a commander will
allot them definite tasks, clearly explaining his intentions,
and will then allow them liberty of action in arranging the
methods by which they will carry out these tasks. Undue
centralization and interference with subordinates is harmful,
since they are apt either to chafe at excessive control or to
become afraid of taking responsibility. Besides clear and
definite orders, personal touch is an essential factor in con-.
veying a commander's intentions to his subordinates and in
inspiring them with confidence and determination. No com-
mander, from the highest downward, must ever forget that
human nature is the ultimate factor on which all his plans,
movements and operations depend.
V07793 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

