pg_0056.pdf:
V07793 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 19.]
43
liminary to the assault to be concealed from the enemy's
ground observation during daylight, they may be detected
from the air, thus allowing the enemy to take counter-
measures before the attack can develop. Minor attacks,
which do not involve much preliminary movement, or large-
scale attacks against an enemy in greatly inferior numbers
or caught at a signal disadvantage in position, may be made
in daylight: the half-light of dusk is often of value for
attacks with a limited objective: but for large scale assaults
that require much preliminary movement the choice will
often lie between night attacks and attacks begun at dawn.
Night attacks give better opportunity of surprise and may
enable a strong position to be taken more easily than other-
wise. But certain conditions are necessary for success:
the troops must be sufficiently trained; there must be time
for the necessary reconnaissance and preparation; and the
attack must have a limited objective only; exploitation
must wait for daylight (see Field Service
Regulations,
Vol. II, 1935, Chapter VII). If a dawn attack is decided
on, surprise in the matter of time will probably be sacrificed;
therefore surprise in the matter of place and of metho
must be the more diligently sought.
7. The engagement of the enemy on the remainder of the
front, other than that selected for the main attack, will have
the
aim of deceiving him as to the real point of attack
and of diverting as many of his troops as possible from the
main attack. Whether the troops engaged can best fulfl
their role by attacking or by threatening to attack will
depend on circumstances. A well-conceived, well-timed
attack with a limited objective may have an excellent
effect in diverting the enemy's attention and strength from
the main attack; on the other hand, a weak assault, insuffi-
ciently supported, that fails easily and is obviously only
intended as a feint, is worse than useless. Preparations
conveying a threat of attack in strength and fire designed
to indicate such intention may sometimes be as effective
or more effective than an actual assault. If an attack is
so cet cane, mania a limit objection weta little
artillery support.
In position warfare, subsidiary attacks on a small front
with insufficient support will seldom have much effect on
the enemy's plans and are likely to incur unduly heavy
casualties. Preparations for attack on a wide front-such
V07793 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

