pg_0018.pdf:
V07793 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 2 and 3.]
5
Imperial Defence. This appreciation as finally approved by
the Government becomes the official expression of the policy
for the conduct of operations.
3. A state of war is declared by Royal Proclamation. In
the event of an overt act of war being committed by a foreign
power against any part of His Majesty's dominions previous
to a declaration of war, it is the duty of the senior commander
of the nearest armed forces to take such action for the
defence of his command and of the national interests as the
situation may require, and to report the action taken without
delay to superior authority.
4. On the declaration of war, the responsibility for carrying
out the tasks of the navy, the army and the air force in their
respective spheres of action rests with the commanders-in-
chief in the theatre or theatres of operations, who are
appointed with the approval of the King by His Majesty's
Government.
The commander-in-chief of the military forces in a theatre
of war receives through the Chief of the Imperial General
Staff acting under the authority of the Secretary of State
for War a copy of the Chiefs of Staff appreciation, as approved
by the Government, any other necessary instructions as to
the role of his force, a forecast of the time required to
concentrate it, a definition of the limits of his command
and all available information relative to his task. He is
then responsible for the execution of the plan of campaign,
subject to such orders from the Government as may be
conveyed to him from time to time.
3. Some principles of war
1. Grand strategy is the art of applying the whole of the
national power in the most effective way towards attaining
the national aim. It thus includes the use of diplomacy,
economic pressure, the conclusion of suitable arrangements
with allies, the mobilization of national industry and the
distribution of the man-power available, as well as the
employment of the three fighting Services in combination.
2. Certain ideas as to strategical planning and conduct
can be deduced from the experience of the past: they are
often defined and expressed in the form of " principles."
V07793 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

