pg_0050.pdf:
V07793 (49) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 17 and 18.]
37
front and to maintain the momentum of the assault to a
sufficient depth to enable the whole of the enemy's defensive
system to be overrun: penetration exposes the assaulting
troops to counter-attack on the flank as the advance pro-
gresses; the narrower the front on which the penetration
is made, the more dangerous such counter-attack will be.
Natural features should be used to protect as far as possible
the flanks of the penetration.
4. Conditions as regards envelopment and penetration
may change in the course of a battle. Thus a force that has
successfully turned the flank of the enemy's prepared position
may, in its exploitation of this advantage, have to make a
frontal attack against enemy reserves sent to oppose it, or
may have to meet a counter-attack against its own flank.
Or a force that has penetrated a part of its enemy's position
may be enabled to attack in flank the hostile troops on either
side of the gap that it has made. In fact the attack and
defence of flanks, on a large or a small scale, will be a pro-
minent factor in all fighting.
The aim must always be to
attack the enemy where he least expects it and is least
prepared, whether on the flank or in front, provided that
success in that quarter will bring adequate results. All
attacks, even in the course of a successful enveloping move-
ment, must to some extent be frontal: but, if the enemy
has been surprised, his resistance will be unorganized and
unprepared.
18. The preparatory period
1. No fixed rules for battle can be laid down, but generally
an offensive battle will have the following phases:
the
preparatory stage; the main attack on the enemy's position,
carefully organized and prepared; the period of exploitation
by the reserves after initial success or of reconstruction
after failure; and pursuit, when the enemy has been driven
from the battlefield. Though these phases are treated
eparated that a cums, they to seldom discence:
cut and distinct in actual practice, and will often tend to
merge into each other, without any marked interval.
2. The aims of the preparatory period are to fix and
immobilize the enemy so far as possible before delivering
the main blow, and to gather the information on which to
base the detailed plan for that blow: the period usually
V07793 (49) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

