pg_0040.pdf:
V07793 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 12 and 13.]
27
likely, in the present state of military development, to be
available in the opening stages of a war, will exercise a great
and possibly a decisive influence on manœuvre and on the
battle plan.
Their mobility and striking power make them
a valuable instrument of manœuvre; they may be used
to compel the enemy, by attack or threat of attack, to
disperse much of his strength in protective detachments;
or they may drive in his reconnoitring and protective troops
and prevent his obtaining information; or may force the
enemy infantry formations behind some anti-tank obstacle.
If, however, they are despatched to too great a distance or
used up to too great an extent, they may be prevented from
playing an important part in the battle, for which they will
always be required.
13. First contact and deployment for battle
1. Though the general plan should have been determined
before contact, partly by the strategical mission of the force,
partly by the information received during the concentration
and advance, the detailed tactical plan will only be formed
after actual contact and fighting has disclosed more or less
accurately the strength of the enemy, the extent of his
front, the position of his flanks and his apparent intentions.
However good the information available before contact may
seem, a commander must be prepared to revise his ideas in
the light of the information disclosed by actual fighting,
though he must not allow himself to be influenced unduly
or too easily diverted from his original purpose by finding
the situation not exactly in accordance with his anticipations.
2. Success in the first engagements between the recon-
noitring and protective troops on either side is important,
since it will enable further information to be obtained and is
likely to upset the plans of the opposing commander and to
disturb his judgment: vigorous action should therefore be
the usual role of the advanced troops at this stage. Com-
manders of columns should be well forward so as to obtain
early information, to act quickly and to influence the action
of their leading troops in accordance with the intentions
of the commander of the force.
3. Generally speaking, there are two methods of fighting
an offensive battle in open warfare. One consists in deploy-
ing the whole force on a broad front from the first and
advancing vigorously, with the object of overlapping one or
V07793 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

