pg_0017.pdf:
V07793 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
4
[Chap. I. Secs. 1 and 2.
Although the force of public opinion all over the world
against the use of gas in war makes it improbable that any
state will resort to its use without weighing carefully the
possible effect in neutral countries against the military advan-
tages that it hopes to obtain, there will always be the possi-
bility either that the enemy has not subscribed to the Gas
Protocol or that he may violate it. Every commander must
therefore at all times be responsible for the defence of his
command against the possible use of gas by the enemy.
The principles of defence against gas from the military
point of view are given in Field Service Regulations, Vol. I1,
1935, Sec. 40.
If the enemy should use gas, no portion of the homeland,
base of operations or theatre of war within the radius of
hostile aircraft can be regarded as immune from gas attacks.
Such attacks may begin at the moment of the declaration
of war: they may be directed to interfere with the mobiliza-
tion arrangements and the movement of a field force to its
concentration area.
7. Civilians and personnel not normally brought into
contact with the enemy, as well as military units, may be
called on to face a hostile gas attack; and preparations in
peace must include gas precautions for the civil population.
2. The control of the armed forces in war
1. There must be unity in the direction and control of
the armed forces.
This is exercised by the Government
of the day which, with the assistance of the heads of the
three fighting Services, decides on the policy for the conduct
of the war and provides and maintains the necessary
personnel and material.
2. The representative heads of the Services in Great
Britain are the First Sea Lord (Chief of the Naval Staff), the
Chief of the Imperial General Staff, and the Chief of the Air
Staff. Close touch is kept between them in order to secure
co-ordination between the three Services and joint action
in all matters relating to more than one Service. When
strategical or political considerations indicate the necessity,
the Government calls for a combined military appreciation
by the Chiefs of Staff Sub-Committee of the Committee of
V07793 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

