pg_0036.pdf:
V07793 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Sec. 11.]
23
detachments are made; but there are other occasions—
offensive or defensive that will require, or may seem to
require, detachments large or small.
Since every detach-
ment weakens the main body that is directed at the principal
objective, the aim should be that detachments should be as
few and as small as possible. On the other hand, a skilfully
planned and well-handled detachment may enable results
to be achieved that could never have been obtained by keep-
ing the whole force united; a detachment that occasions the
employment of a larger detachment by the enemy may
obviously contribute greatly to the success of an operation.
Thus in the discernment that decides when to make and when
to withhold a detachment; in the judgment that chooses
its task and determines its strength, so that it has the power
to accomplish its object and no more; and in the ability to
select a suitable commander and to instruct him appro-
priately lies a great part of the art of strategy. Not every
competent subordinate commander is a good commander of
a detachment, who must be a man of broad outlook, since
he has to consider the interests of the main body and the
aims of the operation as a whole; must be ready to accept
responsibility and act on general instructions rather than on
definite orders; and must be completely loyal, since he
may have to sacrifice the best interests of his detachment
in furtherance of the aims of the main body.
Recent inventions have to some extent modified some of
the dangers and difficulties of detachments. Improvements
in communication, in particular the use of wireless and of
enable closer touch to be kept between the
detached force and the main body; while means of
mechanical movement may be used to give a detachment
such mobility that it can accomplish its purpose and still
rejoin the main body in time for the decisive battle. The
enemy, however, is likely to enjoy similar advantages, so
that to outwit him and to join battle under favourable con-
ditions will require the same qualities of judgment and war-
craft, only geared up to a higher speed.
5. The influence on operations of natural obstacles, such
as rivers and wooded areas, will always require a commander's
earnest consideration. Modern developments in fighting
machines, in transport and in equipment are likely greatly
to increase the use and effect of water lines as obstacles.
The forcing of a water line held by the enemy is a delicate
operation, and a turning movement, using the water line as
V07793 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

