pg_0027.pdf:
V07793 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
14
[Chap. II. Secs. 7 and 8.
the possession of a port, accessible in all weathers, where
stores and reinforcements can be landed and casualties
evacuated. Unless therefore the operation is merely a raid,
its first purpose is likely to be to secure a seaport as a base
for further action. Since all ports and harbours are likely
to be strongly defended, the initial landing will usually be
on the open beach in as favourable a position as possible
for an advance on the required port.
3. An expedition of this type is faced with many hazards:
the mining of the approaches to the enemy's coast; attack
by enemy warships, including submarines; strong defences
and obstacles or contamination by gas at the most suitable
points for landing; attacks by enemy aircraft before and
during disembarkation; the uncertainty of weather con-
ditions. Local command of the sea and superiority in the
air at the time and place of landing are essentials of success,
and surprise is a necessary element. The landing force is
usually organized in two parts: a covering force and a
main body. The role of the covering force, which is com-
posed of armoured fighting vehicles, when available, infantry
and artillery, is to gain the first footing and to cover the
landing of the main body. Where conditions are favourable
for their use and craft are available to transport them to the
shore, tanks may form the first flight of the covering force.
The landing may be supported by the fire of warships and
by air reconnaissance and bombardment.
8. The overseas base and lines of communication
1. For a field force the overseas base will usually be
established in the vicinity of a port or ports in allied,
friendly or hostile territory. The organization of such a
base and of the line of communications from it is dealt with
in the Manual of Movement (War), 1933, Chapters II, VIII, X.
If the line of communications is very long, it may sometimes
become necessary to establish the base nearer to the scene
of operations.
2. The security of its base and of its lines of supply is
essential to an army; one of the principal devices of strategy
lies in attacking or threatening the enemy's communications
while safeguarding one's own. The protection of the base
will be principally a matter of protection against air attack,
the details of which will be found in the Manual of Anti-
V07793 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

