pg_0031.pdf:
V07793 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
18
[Chap. III. Sec. 10.
The direction and order of the initial movement are of
vital importance, since errors in the original dispositions
of a large force are very hard to correct.
This applies
equally to mechanized forces, with which the speed of
operations allows little margin for change of plan. A com-
mander who has decided, in pursuit of his aim, to move
his force in any required direction, has to take decisions on
some or all of the following :—
i. What instructions to give to his air force contingent.
ii. How to use his mobile troops: for reconnaissance;
to cover the movements of the main body; to
hamper the enemy's movements; to draw enemy
forces in a required direction; or for any other
special mission.
iii. In what general formation to move the main body:
on a wide front; in depth; or in echelon, from a
flank or from the centre.
iv. Whether to move by day or under cover of darkness.
v. To what extent the comfort of the troops can be
studied, or must be sacrificed to strategical and
tactical requirements.
vi. What detachments from the main force are necessary
for the security of the base or bases and line of
supply or for any other purposes.
Some of the considerations that may guide a commander
in his decisions on these questions are given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
3. The air force contingent, in addition to strategical
reconnaissance, may be employed to gain air superiority,
to impose delay on the enemy concentration and forward
regarding
employment of the air force contingent will be found in
the Manual of Emulationt of Air fores See And in
the Field, 1932, Chapter III.
4. The mobile forces at the disposal of a commander,
whether of armoured or unarmoured troops, may be used
in a variety of ways. If the information of the enemy's
dispositions is uncertain and scanty, it may be necessary
to use the bulk of the mobile forces to break through the
enemy's protective screen and to gain intelligence of his
V07793 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

