pg_0074.pdf:
V07793 (73) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 29.]
61
29. Demolitions and devastations
(See also Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 49)
1. Demolitions in the field may be classed as tactical
or strategical. The aim of tactical demolitions is usually
to give relief in a pursuit, to gain time or to safeguard a flank
from attack, by creating an obstacle in little depth. The
aim of strategical demolitions is to prevent or hamper
enemy movements over a wide area for a considerable time;
they are designed to cripple the enemy's maintenance system
by the destruction of his road and rail communications. The
effective use of either tactical or strategical demolitions will
require careful preliminary reconnaissance, a prepared plan for
allocating the personnel and explosives available, the pro-
vision of any additional transport required, and sufficient
time.
2. The commander who hesitates to put into execution
a thorough plan of demolitions because of his intention to
turn round and advance over the same ground at a later
date should bear in mind that he has no guarantee that the
enemy will display the same forbearance when he in his
turn retires.
3. Tactical demolitions include both minor obstructions
(such as the hurried destruction of culverts and small road
bridges, the blocking of roads by craters, felling trees or other
means) which are intended to gain temporary and local relief
from pressure and are often of special value against armoured
fighting vehicles; and also co-ordinated schemes designed to
impose a serious delay on all arms over a wide front. The
commonest and most effective form of such demolitions is
the destruction of all bridges over a waterline either between
two main bodies to check direct pursuit or on a flank to safe-
guard that flank from attack.
Since resources in time,
labour and explosives will generally be limited, the prepara-
tion of such demolitions must be carefully planned, so as to
ensure the completion with the minimum of delay of a
primary belt sufficient to form an effective obstacle covering
the vital front or flank; and all resources must be con-
centrated in the first instance on the completion of this
essential minimum. The primary belt will later, as circum-
stances permit, be extended laterally and in depth by sub-
sidiary demolitions.
The protection of demolition parties will require careful
3—1351)
V07793 (73) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

