pg_0037.pdf:
V07793 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
24
[Chap. II. Secs. 11 and 12.
a screen, is usually advisable, if possible. If a water line
held by the enemy has to be forced, success will depend on
factors similar to those necessary in any other attack, i.e.
a wise selection of the points of attack, careful preparation,
arrangements to secure surprise, and swift action (see also
Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Chapter VI). In
defending a water line, a commander may usually adopt
one of two courses. He may hold the whole line in strength
and endeavour to prevent the enemy from crossing the
water at all; or he may keep the main part of his force at
a little distance from the river or canal, with the intention
of counter-attacking the enemy when a part of his troops
have crossed, and his army is divided by the obstacle.
6. A normal scale of transport, baggage and equipment,
as well as a normal scale of rations, is laid down for all parts
of an army in the field according to the general conditions
of the campaign. But a commander must always be pre-
pared to modify these scales for a particular operation
in which a special effort is required. By reducing his im-
pedimenta and placing his troops for a time on hard rations,
he can often obtain such advantages in mobility and swift-
ness of movement as will go far towards ensuring the success
of an operation.
The one commodity that cannot be reduced
is the amount of fuel required to move a mechanical vehicle
a given distance: whether the normal scales of ammunition
can safely be reduced must depend on the circumstances.
of the operation.
12. The plan of battle
1. Battle is usually the decisive act in land warfare.
It
may occasionally happen that successful manœuvre enables
the objective to be attained without serious fighting: on
the other hand, a favourable strategical situation, secured
by greater readiness or by superior adroitness in manœuvre,
may be lost by failure in battle; or a dangerous crisis may
be averted by tactical success.
Therefore, the plan for
battle the choice between giving or accepting combat at
once or manœuvring for a more favourable opportunity ;
the decision to take the offensive or to stand on the defen-
sive; the selection of the ground to fight on; the deployment
of the force for action—is likely to spell the success or failure
of the whole operation. Quickness in arriving at a decision
and firmness in executing it are essential requirements;
V07793 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

