pg_0046.pdf:
V07793 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Sec. 16.]
33
especially if aircraft are being used for intercommunication
(see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 8, 4).
3. In order to allow headquarters to move sufficiently
far forward during active operations, it may be necessary
for the commander of a formation to form a rear headquarters
consisting of the staff officers or representatives of services
who are not immediately required at headquarters for the
control of operations. The work of headquarters will then
be limited to the conduct of operations and to administrative
matters having a direct bearing on them. All correspon-
dence dealing with matters of routine, or with administra-
tive subjects not having an immediate bearing on the
operations, will be sent to the rear headquarters.
This
splitting of headquarters leads to a certain loss of efficiency
and should only be done for good reason and for as short a
time as possible.
4. During marches, the headquarters of cavalry and
infantry brigades will move with their troops or by short
bounds, so as to keep in touch with their units and the
situation: the headquarters of a division may make two or
three bounds during a day's march, a rear headquarters
being established so as to lessen the size of the moving
headquarters.
A corps headquarters, which depends largely on air reports
for its information, and
has to deal continuously with many
vital problems of administration, in addition to the control
of operations, should seldom be moved more than once each
twenty-four hours. Thus the problem of keeping near a
suitable landing ground will be simplified and the necessity
of establishing a rear headquarters may be avoided. Touch
with subordinate commanders must be maintained by wire-
less, by personal visits and by liaison officers.
5. When it is intended to move a headquarters, sufficient
warning should be given to permit of adequate reconnais-
sance of the new site and to enable signal communications
to be established there before the move takes place. Superior
and subordinate headquarters and flank formations should
be notified in advance of the new location and of the time
at which the headquarters will open there.
6. In order to enable the signal service to operate satis-
factorily, it will frequently be advisable for a higher formation
to specify in operation orders routes to be followed by the
headquarters of subordinate commanders.
V07793 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

