pg_0055.pdf:
V07793 (54) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
42
[Chap. V. Sec. 19.
responsible for the counter-battery programme and for the
timing and firing of any barrage that covers the front of
more than one division, and will also control generally the
use of smoke on the corps front. The divisions will usually
be responsible for bombardment tasks on their own front,
but the corps will be responsible for any necessary co-ordina-
tion of divisional fire plans. In the later and looser stages
of the battle, when barrages and timed programmes on any
brigades sometimes to battalions.
Other considerations on
the use of artillery in the attack will be found in Field Service
Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Secs. 63 and 86.
5. The army tank battalions
available will normally be
employed in support of the main attack; the manner of
their employment and the method of their allotment to for-
mations will form an important consideration in the plan
of attack. The scale on which they are allotted and the
time at which they are employed (i.e. in the original assault
or in the subsequent looser fighting) will depend on the
suitability or otherwise of the ground for tank action on the
various portions of the front; the existence or not of wire
obstacles to be broken; and the means that it is intended
to employ to maintain the momentum of the attack (Sec. 20).
The co-operation of tanks and infantry is dealt with in
Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 60.
6. The fixing of the hour at which assaults begin is often
a matter of some difficulty. The arguments in favour of
beginning a large scale attack by early daylight are many.
It allows of the final preparations, especially the forward
move of the troops appointed for the assault, to be made
under cover of darkness; it enables advantage to be taken
of the half-light of early morning, when the assaulting
troops can see sufficiently well to keep direction, while the
defenders are still unable to make the best use of their
weapons; and it gives a full day's light for the completion
of the programme of the attack. For these reasons an
attack at dawn in any large-scale set-piece operation tends
to become so stereotyped a procedure that the benefits of
surprise are lost. To select a more suitable time is, however,
not always easy. Even if the natural features of the ground,
or the use of smoke screens, enable the movements pre-
V07793 (54) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

