pg_0064.pdf:
V07793 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 24 and 25.]
51
by giving up ground that is difficult or dangerous to hold.
The political objections to giving up any considerable area of
territory will have to be taken into acconnt.
25. The organization and conduct of the defence
1. The length of time for which defence is necessary,
which may be until expected reinforcements can arrive or
until a decision is reached in some other part of the theatre
of operations, will naturally affect the choice of the position,
the extent of the front held, the depth to which it is organized
and the size and composition of the general reserve. In
any position that has to be held for longer than a few hours,
the security of the flanks will become a primary considera-
tion, more especially as the increasing mechanization of
armies makes a wide turning movement against the flanks
and rear more probable. The best protection against the
envelopment of the flanks, if no suitable natural obstacle
exists, is good reconnaissance arrangements and a mobile
reserve, including armoured units, if available.
2. Except in a very temporary defence, the construction
of entrenchments and the making of obstacles should be
undertaken as early as possible, since they enable men and
weapons to be economized for the extension or deepening
of the defensive position or the strengthening of reserves.
Superior commanders should lay down the general policy of
defensive works and obstacles as soon as possible when a
position has to be taken up.
3. When the attacker disposes of armoured fighting
vehicles in any numbers, special arrangements will be neces-
ay to deal with them (see Field Service Resulatio to t and
flanks, may be exposed to a wide turning movement by
enemy armoured forces and may need special measures of
protection.
4. Outposts are always required to cover the occupation
of a defensive position and to give warning of the enemy's
approach (see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec.
69, 9). But the extent to which a commander should engage
his outpost force, in order to conceal his main position, to
break up the enemy's attack and to gain time, is often a
difficult problem to solve. On the one hand, a skilfully
handled outpost force may cause the enemy much delay,
V07793 (63) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

