pg_0057.pdf:
V07793 (56) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
44
Chap. V. Sec. 19.
as the construction of additional trenches, gun emplace-
ments, etc. ; increased artillery activity; intensive patrolling
at night-will usually be more effective in deceiving the
enemy, if skilfully carried out.
8. It is often comparatively easy to gain an initial success
against a part of
the enemy's forward position, but to
develop that success so as to complete the defeat of the
enemy presents much greater difficulties. Indeed, the chief
problem of the attacker usually is how to maintain a forward
impetus when the prepared and timed stage which may
vary in depth from 1,000 to 2,500 yards, according to the
time and ammunition available, and will not therefore
usually reach the enemy's main gun positions or engage his
principal reserves-is over. The chief difficulties in the way
of further progress are as follows: the situation both of the
enemy and of our own troops will be unknown or obscure;
success has probably not been uniform along the whole front
that the forward movement of reserves is delayed; artillery
support for a further advance is lacking or is much weaker
owing to the disadvantages of extreme range, difficulty of
observation and the necessity to husband ammunition.
There is thus apt to be a pause, by which the momentum of
the attack may be lost before the enemy's gun positions
have been overrun or his main reserves defeated. The
enemy will, in fact, usually be able to stem the breach with
his reserves before the attacker with his can enlarge it;
unless the latter has made special arrangements to reduce to
the minimum this pause after the completion of the timed
programme and has prepared effective measures to maintain
the momentum of the attack. Such measures will include
good means of intercommunication, so that superior com-
manders have an up-to-date knowledge of the situation;
mobility of the reserves (which will be largely dependent on
efficient traffic control in the rear area, so that they can
reach the required point in good time; a good system of
command, with all headquarters well forward; and arrange-
ments to delay the movement of the enemy reserves and to
disorganize his system of command by air attack or long-
range artillery fire. The more successful a commander has
been in surprising his enemy, the less organized a defence
will be have to meet, and the more time will he have at his
V07793 (56) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

