pg_0025.pdf:
V07793 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
12
[Chap. II. Sec. 6.
force to gain air superiority over the concentration area and
to assist in covering the sea passage where necessary; by the
selection of an area giving good facilities for concealment and
protection; by a judicious dispersion of the forces to be
assembled, both in time and in space; and by the early
despatch of air defence units. The area for concentration
on the proposed line of operation so as to save time. The
disposition of the troops in the concentration area must be
made with regard to subsequent operations, or time will be
lost in re-adjustment. On a land frontier, the peace dis-
positions will usually be arranged to provide a covering
force for the strategical concentration. Rapidity and
smoothness of concentration-including the establishment
of a base, or bases, and the organization of lines of supply-
are important factors towards securing an initial advantage,
which will have a great influence on the course of a campaign.
A strategical concentration of the scattered resources of
the British Empire, with its distant commitments, is usually
a slow process and is dependent on an adequate command
of the sea and air being maintained. A small force or the
garrison of a threatened possession may have to act as a
covering force against superior enemy bodies until an expedi-
tion for its reinforcement can be organized.
6. Overseas expeditions
(See also Manual of Movement (War), 1933, Chapter IX)
1. An overseas expedition will be the normal role of a
Movement (War), 1933, Secs. 8 and 14), the despatch of units,
after mobilization, to ports of embarkation, their embarka-
tion and the voyage to the theatre of operations.
The
responsibility for all arrangements for the voyage lies with
the navy and the Board of Trade: the safety of the trans-
ports from attack while at sea is the responsibility of the
navy and air force in their respective spheres.
The loading
of ships at the port of embarkation and their order of despatch
must be very carefully planned with regard to the probable
requirements at the point of disembarkation, more especially
so it a landing on enemy territory is to be undertaken (Sec. 7).
V07793 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

