pg_0034.pdf:
V07793 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 10 and 11.]
21
during the daytime. The movement of mechanical vehicles
by night is slow. (See Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935,
Sec. 79.) The surprise aimed at by night movements may be
lost unless careful arrangements are made to keep the whole
force concealed during the hours of daylight.
9. If the enemy is using gas, he may attempt to inflict
casualties and impose delay by gas spraying and gas bomb-
ing by aircraft during the movement into the concentration
areas and in the early stages of a forward move from the
concentration areas.
Protection against spray attack must
therefore receive consideration in the disposition of troops
in the concentration area and in the forward march. The
mobile troops operating in advance may find areas, such as
defiles, contaminated with persistent gas. (See Field Service
Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 40.)
11. Manœuvre and stratagem
1. Stratagems are the means by which an enemy is deceived
and misled; manœuvre is movement that aims at inducing
or forcing him into an unfavourable position.
Practically
all stratagems and manœuvres in war are variations on a
few simple themes, such as the spreading of false informa-
tion; attack or threat against the line of communications ;
a disposition of forces that threatens two or more of the
enemy's vulnerable points and leaves him in doubt which
is the real objective; the use of detachments to induce
dispersion or prevent concentration of the hostile forces;
or- probably the oldest of all stratagems a retreat to draw
them on to ground where they can be attacked with advan-
tage. An aptitude for stratagem is a very valuable gift in
a commander; but over-elaboration of manœuvre is
dangerous; movements in war should be as simple as
possible, since the possibility of error is great, even in simple
movements.
2. A commander in war receives so much misleading
information in any case, without any deliberate misguidance
from his enemy, that it may seem superfluous to add to it.
Skilfully conveyed false information has, however, often
great influence on the mind of the opponent and the course
of operations. It can be spread through spies, the press,
wireless messages, prisoners or documents purposely allowed
to fall into the enemy's hands and other agencies. It must
V07793 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

