pg_0065.pdf:
V07793 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
52
[Chap. VI. Sec. 25.
inflict considerable casualties on him at small cost to itself,
deceive him as to the location of the main position and lead
him to commit himself against it in the manner most favour-
able to the defence; on the other hand, there is the danger
The distance of the outpost force from the main position,
its strength, its command and the time and method of its
withdrawal will all require careful consideration in accord-
ance with the higher commander's plan for fighting the
defensive battle.
The distance at which the outpost force is placed will
depend mainly on the lie of the ground, e.g. the existence of
a tactical feature or obstacle suitable for delaying action
and with convenient lines for withdrawal. If such a feature
is outside supporting distance of the main position and it is
decided to engage the enemy on it, the outpost force will
consist of a complete unit or formation under its own com-
mander, with such additional support (mounted troops,
artillery or tank units) as the higher commander judges
necessary. The commander of the outpost force will receive
direct from the commander of the whole force instructions
as to the role that he is to play, i.e. the position that he is
to take up, the amount of resistance that he is to offer, the
direction in which he is to withdraw, which may be calcu-
lated so as to draw the enemy towards a desired quarter,
and his action after withdrawal is complete.
The outpost
force is in fact for the time being a detachment with a special
mission under the higher commander. In other conditions,
outposts may be required merely to give warning of the
enemy's approach and to cover the occupation of and work
on the main position. In such circumstances the outposts will
usually be within supporting distance of the main position,
and it will then be more convenient if each section of the
defence finds the outposts on its own front, on the system
laid down in Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec.
52, 2.
The higher commander must co-ordinate the position
of such outposts by laying down a general line or feature to
be held or by indicating the point of junction between
adjoining sectors. He must also co-ordinate the time and
method of withdrawal of the outposts, laying down clearly
by whose authority the order of withdrawal is to be given,
e.g. by his own order of on the responsibility of sector com-
V07793 (64) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

