Closure status: Ope
doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WU 171/436
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
ARA. I.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation o
eation of the particular command or appointment by :
i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(ti) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Oficer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(iv) Detailed account of operations
important propographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
nu the numba
Or Other rant.
m addition the case of it on tanks fol hers and of are, transport, be
or tolords asta is the names and rants of
ale of anime
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
out, or me one to a feet dod up, nch in the ods a given i me ht at the time they
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(1) A tipe offer or find retion (A., W3008 and A.P. W.3009 and of each gperation of
the tine odder or instruction issued during the period covered by the cure votine of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
and pa provide data dion i Set ase future inprovemen historia rainin opirations,
vernie provide data mistratos.
hich to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
r other person menti he in de dear, that the offere do tails do the dier a the commande
in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
ParA. 3.—Omitted.
IteRang dity co far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Imp arent order, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(i Rate cation Moment during the past trenty four hour and present dispositions.
St Benoit d'
(Se P.SA." Voll diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(1) Vinless otherwise c
s are attached.
Monin ana year..
September 1944
he SPECIAL NOTE The ting entered board to the time the mommaten or o
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY:
Army Form G. 21
Unit. 6. Airbome Division Provost Coy.
(Delete heading not required).
commandine Uncer ...
captain sit. er
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
7.
Lt Neaves and 5 N.C.O'g proceeded to transit Camp at Arromanches
It Neaves and 5 N.C.0's embarked Lox U.K.
Capt. collatt Northem It lault and Coy procooded to trensat Camp at Aromances.
Kens can
Khuis Cape
it Neavas and 5 N.C.0's errived back in Camp.
Coy retuned to Dazzacka and/Vontele Party.
All dalicioncias and kit checked. Div I., ecurity duty started and. Div H.,. ra-signed
Нелями
Coy inspection of all delicioncy lists..
Неши сам.
oy Bulk loave started. 0C. out all nigit ling onuiries regardin; mulachos blenes Cam
morican sollier at Stonehenge cross roads. 2 N.C.0'a and 1 Pio 12 Para Ba
meur car
11.
13...
YEAR
53RD (W) DIVISION ORDNA
26/Records
26/W.D.
26/W.D./A.
AR Duan
