pg_0039.pdf:
forms are obtainable: Army Form C2118A for
units and detachments; Army Form C2118B for
forma
adquarters.
When printed forms are not available, proformas will be used; the correct headings are
shown on page 4 of this cover.
The forms are designed to elicit essential information which is readily available in the normal course of
events, but which is frequently omitted from war diaries. A reply to each question is required daily.
Headquarters
of higher formations, however, which regularly publish orders of battle, location statements, AFV and other returns,
and intelligence summaries and include them among the appendices, need not fill up the columns " Changes in
Command," " Strengths" and " Intelligence Notes,'
provided that full and regular information is given in the
appropriate appendices.
The same form may be used for several consecutive days, a clear division being shown; but a fresh one
should be taken into use at the beginning of each month.
Appendices "B" and "C." The signal log and messages kept by units or formation headquarters will be
placed in these appendices.
Appendices "E" and "H." Origínators of documents are responsible for preserving copies for assignment
to war diaries.
Nevertheless it may be convenient to include in the war diary copies of important orders
instructions received if these are no longer required for reference
If duplicates of these are not available for
inclusion, a note of the fact should be made on the covers-of originals and duplicates.
It is emphasised that,
whether copies of orders and instructions are included in the war
diary or not, a note of the receipt of such
orders, giving sufficient details to enable them to be identified, should be made in the narrative.
Appendix "I."
Any statistical or other returns, i.e., location statements, strength states (e.g., AF W 3008
and W 3009), distribution of transport, ammunition returns, etc., should be included.
after the pinin op i che not on a day a dc pha ding on, with sechi i or ay, ake pace
a supplice Only war.
will never fall into this category.
Docum into thim ally handled by mind er formation, eye when graded " inp Secret
personal" messages may be included in
Appendix "Z."
Appendix "Z" will be prepared and disposed of as shown in paras. 12-14 below.
DISPOSAL OF WAR DIARIES.
11. War diaries will be disposed of as follows: —
a) ARMY GROUP, ARMY AND CORPS HEADQUARTERS
i) British-To GHQ 2nd Echelon, 21 Army Group
ii) Canadian-To Canadian Section, GHQ 2nd Echelon, 21 Army Group
Note: If the duplicate copies of diaries of these formations are required at an intermediate address for
record purposes, separate instructions will be issued.
(b) HEADQUARTERS OF OTHER FORMATIONS AND UNITS
(1) British-To GHQ 2nd Echelon, 21 Army Group
ii Canadian-To Canadian Section, GHQ 2nd Echelon, 21 Army Group.
will be forwarded to 2nd Echelon as soon as possible after the-
Units and formations of the Canadian Army will forward a duplicate copy of the war diary at the same
time as the original and forward the triplicate a month later.
The duplicate, and in the case of Canadian units, and formations, triplicate, copies of the war diary wi
e carefully checked before despatch of the original to ensure that they are identical in every respec
Canadian units and formations will continue to maintain war diaries in accordance with instructions con-
tained in Canadian Routine Orders.
AF C2119A may be used where Canadian forms are unobtainable.
TOP SECRET SUPPLEMENTARY WAR DIARIES.
12.
The documents referred to in the note on Appendix "Z," together with a list of them made out
IF C 2118 will be placed in a separate war diary cover
on
All details
of unit and formation, date, etc., will be
lled in and the cover will be clearly marked in red: APPENDIX "Z"_" OFFICER ONLY
If several distinct subjects fall into this category, it may be found convenient to sub-divide the papers by
subjects, lettering them in similar fashion to appendices of normal war diaries. In such cases the standard grouping
of appendices should be adhered to as far as possible.
13. Supplementary war diaries will be forwarded through the normal channels for correspondence in the TOP
category to HQ 21 Army Group, from where they will eventually be forwarded to the War Office (C7).
They will be placed in two envelopes, the inner envelope being wax-sealed and plainly marked:
TOP SECRET
APPENDIX "Z" TO
If possible an indication should be given on the inner envelope of the date on which the contents can be
downgraded to SECRET.
The duplicates of TOP SECRET supplementary diaries may be despatched as soon as receipt of the
originals has been acknowledged.
14. Where supplementary diaries of the type referred to above are compiled by Canadian formations or units
they will be forwarded by the most direct and secure means available to Chief of Staff, Canadian Military
Headquarters, London.

