pg_0045.pdf:
(г18• 4), 01 мощаси
is mounted on the yoke of the machine at the commutator end.
The cables are secured by means of grub screws.
Lubrication
As the bearings are packed with grease before leaving the Works,
very little attention is needed. A few drops of oil, however, may
be added through the lubricators, say, every 1000 miles.
The
reader is cautioned that far more trouble has been caused by
excessive oiling than by too little.
After the vehicle has run about 10,000 miles the dynamo should
be dismantled for cleaning and adjustment, and the bearings should
be repacked with grease.
This is preferably carried out at the
nearest Lucas Service Depot.
Adjustment of Dynamo Output
These dynamos are dispatched from the Works with the control
brush set to give an approximate output of either 7 or 11 amperes.
Generally speaking, the low output machines are fitted to chassis
with the standard five-lamp set, while the high output machines
are fitted when there is an extra lamp load such as internal lighting
in omnibuses.
To enable lighting sets to give satisfactory service the maximum
output of the dynamo should approximately balance the lamp load.
In certain circumstances it may, therefore, be advisable to alter
the dynamo output.
The following test will indicate if any adjustment is necessary :
When the vehicle is running at 18-20 miles per hour in top gear with
the head
and sidelamps switched on, note the position of the
ammeter needle.
(I) With vehicles fitted with a five-lamp set only, the ammeter
needle should be at zero.
(2) With vehicles fitted with a five-lamp set and internal lamps, the
ammeter should give a reading on the charge side of the scale
equal to the internal lighting load. This is explained by the
fact that the internal lights are connected directly to the
battery, and consequently the current taken by these lamps
is not indicated on the ammeter.
This load may be calculated by assuming that the internal lights
are fitted with six-watt bulbs, and will, therefore, take half an
ampere each. For instance, suppose there are seven internal lights,
then the ammeter reading on the charge side should be about three
and a half amperes.
Unless in the first case the reading is greater than two amperes
on either side the scale, or in the second case unless the reading
differs by more than two amperes from the calculated value, it is

