pg_0044.pdf:
the commutator end bracket.
Brushes
It is very important to make sure that the three brushes work
freely in their holders.
This can easily be ascertained by gently
pulling each flexible lead, when the brush should move without
the slightest suggestion of sluggishness. It should also return
freely directly the lead is let go.
When testing the brush in this
way, release it gently; violent contact with the commutator may
fracture it.
The brushes should "bed" over the whole surface ;
that is, the face in contact with the commutator should appear
uniformly polished and clean.
Dirty brushes may be cleaned with
a cloth moistened with petrol. If any of the brushes become so
badly worn that it is necessary to replace them, this can easily
be done as follows: Release the eyelet "J" (Fig. t) on the brush
flexible by unscrewing the two screws-or, in some models, by
removing two nuts--and hold back the spring lever
the brush may be withdrawn from its holder.
"B."
when
When ordering brush replacements, state whether they are main
or control brushes, and for what type machine they are required.
The brush springs should be inspected occasionally to see that they
have sufficient tension to keep the brushes firmly pressed against
the commutator when the machine is running.
It is particularly
necessary to keep this in mind when the brushes have been in use
for a long time and are very much worn down.
Owners are cautioned that it is unwise to insert brushes of a
grade other than that supplied with the machine, or to change
the tension springs.
The grade and tension provided has been
arrived at only after many years' experience, and it will be found
to give the best results and the longest life.
Commutator
The surface of the commutator should be kept clean and free
from oil or brush dust, etc.; neglect of this precaution will result in
the commutator becoming blackened, causing sparking to occur at
the brushes, and the life of the machine will be shortened in conse-
The best way to clean the commutator is to insert a fine
duster, held by means of a suitably shaped piece of wond, againse
the commutator surface, slowly rotating the armature at the same
time. If the commutator has been neglected for long periods it
may need cleaning with fine glass paper, but this is more difficult
to do and should not be necessary if it has received regular attention.
The grooves between the commutator segments should be
examined occasionally, and any deposits of copper or carbon dust
may be cleaned out by means of a thin saw blade or similar article.

