pg_0013.pdf:
at, will the result that the engine will stop. If the strangler
be closed when the
engine is warm,
and attempts are made to
start, too rich a mixture even to enable the engine to start will
be drawn into the cylinders.
Brakes
The hand and foot brakes take effect on both driving axles,
that is, all four rear wheels, and braking is assisted by the Dewandre
Vacuum Servo fitted.
This
device is operated by the engine
suction and amplifies the pedal pressure actually exerted by the
driver.
When descending a very long hill it is advisable to use
the foot and the hand brake alternately to check the
speed, this
practice preventing the fabric on the shoes from heating un hott
When descending a very steep hill which requires both
the brakes to check the speed of the truck, we strongly recommend
the practice of changing into second, or even first, gear, using the
engine as an auxiliary brake.
The ignition switch should not be
turned off during this procedure, otherwise the plug points may
become foul with unconsumed oil and petrol.
Starting Up
Before endeavouring to start the truck the following points
should be checked over.
The hand brake lever (in the centre of
the driver's cab) should be securely on, that is, it should be pulled
back as far as it will go.
The gear lever should be in neutral, and
should be free to move sideways easily.
The petrol tap should
be turned on (a quarter turn anti-clockwise) and the magneto
switch should be moved to the
"on"
position. The ignition
control lever (left-hand steering column) should be set half-way
between its two limits of travel.
The right-hand lever on the
steering column
(slow-running
adjustment) should be pushed
forward about 1 in. or il in. from its fully shut position.
The
throttle is shut when the lever is right back.
Then, closing the strangler, press the starter knob, releasing
both immediately the engine starts.
The speed of the engine can
be
controlled by the right-hand lever on the steering column.
Pushing it forward speeds up the engine, and vice versa.
New Engines
When the truck is given its first run it will be noticed that the
full power of the engine is not available for about 150 to 200 miles.
The reason for this is that the engine is fairly stiff on account of
all the working parts being a fairly close fit.
As the truck is
further used, however, and the bearings are gradually run in,
there will be a progressive improvement in the engine and truck
generally for the first 1000 miles if proper care is exercised.
If
he driver will content himself with speeds up to 20 miles per
nour on top gear, and 12 miles per hour on second gear for the

