pg_0082.pdf:
SECTION XII
General Service
NY owner of a Morris-Commercial Truck who is in doubt o
difficulty over
behaviour of his
asked to write to
the Works.
At the same time,
it is most advisable whenever possible to consult our Dealer in the
owner's locality, since the very best verbal description is a pool
substitute for a personal examination.
is the main reasor
why we are so anxious that customers should always purchase their
trucks through our authorised Dealers in the district in which they
These Dealers handle our trucks in large numbers,
quently at our
Works,
and take an individual interest in every
truck of which
send their
mechanics to the Works for a special course of training,
whereby
they learn the best, quickest and easiest methods of carrying out
any repair or adjustment which may be required.
What is, perhaps,
important, while at the Works
they have the opportunity of noting the symptoms of the various
complaints that the commercial vehicle is heir to, and are thus able
rapidly to diagnose the trouble and prescribe the remedy.
time is usually spent in searching for the cause of a knock or al
squeak than in remedying it when found, and instances are fre-
quently brought to our notice where a great deal of overhauling
work has been carried out entirely unnecessarily, with resultant
heavy bills, and without the desired result being attained.
This is not written to disparage the work done by the average
garage, but it is self-evident that men who see and attend daily
to trucks of one particular type have a great advantage, so far as this
type is concerned, over others-perhaps equally skilled-who deal
with it occasionally only.
If our local Dealers are unsuccessful in remedying a trouble, the
Works should be at once advised.
All questions relative to Morris-
Commercial Trucks put on the road are dealt with by the one
department only, and are tabulated under the various portions of
the truck affected.
If any trouble occurs with a truck we can.
therefore, tell instantly
whether a similar case has happened
previously, the origin of the trouble and the treatment that is
necessary to overcome it.
If there is no similar case recorded,
steps are at once taken to carry out a thorough investigation, with
a view not only to curing the particular case, but to prevent, if
possible, the recurrence of other cases.
79

