pg_0033.pdf:
SECTION IV
The Carburetter
• HE Smith carburetter, which has performed so well on numer-
Tous well-known makes of cars for some years, is now fitted as
standard to all Morris-Commercial Vehicles.
The principle on
which this carburetter works is so well known that we shall only
refer to it briefly; it is simply a carburetter with the suction on the
main jet controlled by
the movement of the throttle.
This
patented feature permits the design of a carburetter which will
give just
the correct amount of mixture according to the engine
demand, i.e. at full throttle position a heavy suction is put on the
jet, which gives the extreme limit of power. and on the normal-
running position-say 20 miles per hour— the suction on the jet is so
arranged that
the minimum
consumption is obtained.
Apart
from this special feature the carburetter is known as the straight-
through or fixed-choke type; it is of the very simplest possible
construction, and, therefore, should appeal to those truck owners
who have no experience of motoring
whatever.
In spite of its
simplicity it will be found to give extremely satisfactory results,
providing smoothness of running throughout the range, excellent
consumption coupled with easy starting, good acceleration, and
wonderful tick-over at low speeds.
There is nothing to get out
of order, and we would strongly advise all owners not to interfere
with the carburetter in any way; the only thing necessary is to
make certain that the carburetter is kept clean.
A filter is fitted
at the bottom of the float-chamber marked "A" in Fig. 1; this
should entirely be removed, say, every 1000 miles, and the gauze
cleaned and replaced.
We would strongly recommend that this
is cleaned out after the first few hundred miles, as there is always
the po immedia all articles of dust ato the inten honk
Should,
however, any foreign matter such as water or dirt fet it will
the passage marked "??" into the jet carrier plug
possibly stop up the jet "K," and if this occurs the plug "J"
should be removed entirely, when it will be found that the jet
fitted will come away with it. Remove the jet as shown in Fig. 3,
after seeing that the plug, float-chamber, and, in particular, the
interior of the jet plug are perfectly clean, reassemble, taking
care to see that the two washers "W" and "V" are in their
correct places.
30

