pg_0023.pdf:
of the pedal (carrying
the
fulcrum "N" with it) will immediately reopen the valve and so
produce the corresponding pull of the piston until the point "N"
again becomes stationary.
brain becomes station or relaxed, to ever the open le on the
is carried back by the pull of the piston to the extent of the clear-
"H2," this time exerting
on the rod "J," and
opening the atmospheric valve
" and releasing the suction in
It will thus be seen that the action of the brake is at all points
progressive, and under complete control of the driver,
but the
physical effort required is four or five times less than is necessary
without the servo.
Should the device, by any chance, fail to function, the ordinary
braking gear remains intact, and
can be used
exactly as if the
servo apparatus were not fitted.
No adjustments of any sort are required to the servo itself.
The apparatus is properly adjusted when it leaves the manufacturers,
and need never be touched when once fitted.
Adjustments to the ordinary brakes are made in the manner
indicated on page 21.
Lubrication of the servo valves, cylinder and piston is effected
by drawing the air for releasing the brakes through the release
valve "B,"
connected to some part of the crankcase of the engine,
which contains an amount of oil vapour sufficient for the purpose.
Brakes
The hand and foot brakes take effect on both driving axles, that
is, on all four rear wheels, and braking is assisted by the Dewandre
Vacuum Servo fitted. This device operates by the engine suction
and amplifies the pedal pressure actually exerted by the driver.
When descending a very long hill it is advisable to use the foot and
hand brake alternately to check the speed; this practice prevents
the fabric on the shoes from heating up and burning.
When descend
ing a very steep hill which apparently requires both the brakes to
check the speed of the truck we strongly recommend the practice
of changing into second or even first gear, which causes the engine
automatically to act as a brake.
Brake Adjustments
HAND BRAKE. Adjustment of the hand brake may be effected
at the front end under the floor boards by means of a turnbuckle.
Adjustment on the front rear axle rods can be carried out by means
of a tommy bar inserted through the } in. brake tubing. The rearmost
axle brake rods are adjusted by turnbuckles.

