pg_0041.pdf:
101
we vetecuon anu
nencuy
of Ignition Faults
If a failure of the ignition is suspected, unless the cause is at
once apparent, the reader is strongly recommended to proceed in
accordance with the following routine, which should quickly enable
him to locate the trouble.
If mistiring occurs in only one cylinder, either the plug lead or
the plug itself may be at fault. An examination of the high-ten-
sion cables may reveal the fault. Rubber is apt to perish or crack
with age, and it will not last for ever. If a spare plug is at hand,
it may be substituted for the suspected one, or if it is merely the
gap that is too large it may be adjusted. (See page 35.)
Missing on full throttle is sometimes due to the plug gaps being
too wide. Bad plug insulation is sometimes caused through sooting,
and may occasionally be remedied by washing the plug out with
petrol.
It is sometimes recommended to remove the plug, and,
resting the body on the cylinder head, to observe whether a spark
occurs at the points when the engine is turned by hand. It should
be noted, however, that this is only a rough test, since it is possible
that a spark may not take place when the plug is under compression.
If it is suspected that the ignition has failed completely in all
cylinders, this may be checked by removing from the plug ter-
minals one or more of the high-tension cables and observing whether
a spark takes place on turning the engine round with the terminal
lead held about & in. from some metal part of the engine.
If no
spark takes place, examine first the earth wire leading from the
magneto to the cut-off switch; it may have been accidentally
earthed. This may be checked by temporarily removing the
contact breaker end cover, enabling the magneto to function
correctly again.
If the fault is not yet apparent, before replacing the contact
breaker cover, turn the engine slowly by hand and examine the
notion of the on act bree spins, but sible the the leventis
open as it is rotated. If this appears to be so, remove the contact
breaker, and, applying pressure with the finger on the fibre heel
," observe whether the points readily open and close. If they
are at all sluggish, push aside the locating spring "H" and, prising
the rocker-arm off its bearing, examine the steel pin on which it
works. Clean this, if necessary, with fine emery cloth, wiping
away all grit and moistening the pin with oil before replacing the
lever. We need hardly warn the reader that no trace of oil should
be left anywhere near the contact points after this has been done.

