Closure status: Oper
doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WO 171/436
14622851
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
ES.R. Vol. 1. Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the parucular command or appomunent by .
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
und area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(i) Unit commanders.
li) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(f) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
vl) Fleads of services and their representatives, Controller of salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
bout ill bey lured, hof dant whether no, the dider sled he diest by a unit
the War Omice, Loren, S. W..
RA. 4.—A war cary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of onertio
I to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipmen
organisation and administration
Ar. Cil e ened up noty, each entry ration a t the of of deplet to nep it, on,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
OTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande
other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
Para. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
() and otton ter, instructions, reports, mesages or despatches received and isued,
Dally locations
any otis in cement rust pat treaty four hour and present dispositions
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations,
peration popographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions or troopsing
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
VOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vil) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
he we diary or instruction issued during the period covered by the
current volume of
(i) Copies orders, or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
SPECIAL NOTE.-
the unit concerned.
The the time entered should be the time the infor
le event recorded should also be given in the text,
STEM
Month and Year...
August 1944
orifinal.
WAR DIARY
Army Form
6 Airborne Division Provost
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Oficer Capt. K.G. Well
References to Appendices
Ranville
0100
0200-
0600
1500
Routine PatroLs
in Div Area, Ouistrehan, Lion and Lue sur Her.
Citations
for Honours
Ками см
калисан
Routine Patrols in Div Area, Coastal
CoY
IT hit by shellfire. Items of G 1098 equipment lost through shramel,
blast and fire.
Routine Patrols in Div Area, Coastal Towns, and Swinning beach
Coy Pay Parade. Normal Patrols in Area.
Комині:
Fir wheeled road manned and lighted for Am. Dumping Progrenne.
1 Set and $ sub seotion of 1st Corps Bovost Coy amrived and cane under our commando laus cu
Коми суu..
Ash Track signed, Patrols and T.P.'g in Div Area.
Div School and Rest Camp at Ouistrehen signed. Patrols and Traffic duties
in Div Area
FIR track re-signed as necessar. Patrols and Traffic duties in Div Area
G. M:a. 20
titan in.
FANTTRNTEN
53RD (W) DIVISION OR
26/Records
26/W.D.
26/W.D./A.
AR Duan
