pg_0058.pdf:
V10323 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
55
the frontage to be adopted. To ensure a rapid advance and
early information of the enemy's main dispositions, a broad
front is desirable. The greater the number of routes used, the
smaller will be the road space required and the speedier will
be the move.
On the other hand the broader the frontage the more
difficult may be control, and the more stretched will be the
engineer resources for the repair and maintenance of routes.
Bridging considerations will often dictate the decision.
251. At least two forward routes are desirable, and up to
four are often preferable. The tank brigade must move on a
route capable of taking its loads, and one which involves as
few obstacles as possible in order to minimize the bridging
problem.
Grouping
252. There are two main alternatives for the mixed division:
to advance strong in front, or weak in front. When tanks are
allotted to leading brigades from the beginning of the approach
march, the speed of embussed infantry will be restricted.
On the other hand if tanks and artillery are not allotted
initially, too much time may be wasted in regrouping during
the approach, the initiative and tactical advantage thereby
being lost.
In either case it is essential that when opposition stiffens,
leading brigades should have ample artillery support, and they
will often require the assistance of tanks.
253. In the initial stages of the approach, when opposition
is expected to be light and it is decided to advance weak in
front, relying on time being available for regrouping, the
divisional reconnaissance regiment will lead the division
followed by column advanced guards found from the leading
brigade or brigades. The tank brigade will move in rear or to
a flank on its own axis.
254. When increased opposition is expected, the mixed divi-
sion must advance strong in front, in order to maintain its
momentum. Then it will be normal for each leading brigade
to be allotted one tank squadron and to be supported by one
field regiment.
255. The main problem confronting the divisional com-
mander will be to decide how far he can move disposed for
speed before regrouping is necessary owing to increased
opposition. The decision will depend on his appreciation of
when and where he will begin to encounter serious opposition.
V10323 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

