pg_0007.pdf:
V10323 (6) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
4
11. A major offensive requires weeks or even months to
prepare.
If the enemy intelligence service is able to gain informa-
tion of preparations, strategical surprise at least will be lost.
12. A good cover plan is essential; it must be arranged by
the highest authorities, since all services whether military or
civilian are implicated.
13. The most careful arrangements are required to ensure
secrecy at bases and amongst formations concerned in the
offensive. The problem will be to balance the need for
co-operative action against the risk of disclosure of plans.
Base areas are particularly fruitful ground for the employ-
ment of enemy agents, and the whole security plan will fail
unless good individual security discipline, both of civilians and
of all ranks of the military services, is ruthlessly enforced.
The minimum number of persons will be informed of the
plan at any stage of preparation, unusual wireless activity
will be avoided, and the greatest possible secrecy observed
in the conduct of conferences and issue of orders. Further,
administrative preparations that must be put in hand early
are very liable to prejudice surprise.
14. Both strategical and tactical surprise will be aided by
good deceptive measures based on a well co-ordinated plan.
15. The saving of all possible time and speed of thought
and action are essential if surprise is to be achieved, anc
the initiative seized before the enemy can take it.
During operations time will be saved by well-practised
battle procedure by headquarters, and by careful preliminary
training in simple battle drills by units. All ranks must
continually think ahead and prepare themselves for every
likely eventuality. Plans. must be simple and flexible so
that they can be understood and executed in the minimum
time, and all ranks must have sufficient knowledge of their
commander's intention to enable them to further his plan
when orders cannot reach them.
16. The effect of surprise will be fleeting. The attacker
must, therefore, be ready to exploit rapidly, and to the full,
the advantage while it lasts, and must have adequate resources
at hand for the purpose.
Mobility
17. One of the greatest aids to the achievement and
exploitation of success is a high degree of mobility, not only
in the approach and pursuit but also in the attack itself
V10323 (6) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

