pg_0060.pdf:
V10323 (59) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
57
commander; and they will be probing the main enemy
defended area to discover his flanks and his softest
spots.
In the case of the mixed division when advancing two up, it
one battalion tree tat has ins brained, that be italy
committed; otherwise the subsequent concentration by the
divisional commander of the infantry component for the main
assault will present difficulty.
Artillery will be in action supporting the leading brigades,
who may have some tanks under command.
Requirements in the preparation for attack are recon-
naissance, concentration, and a simple, flexible plan.
Reconnaissance
261. The information most urgently required is that con-
cerning obstacles and ground.
This will be acquired from air reconnaissance, including
vertical photographs, from offensive patrols, technical recon-
naissance parties, and observation posts. Until the com-
mander has sufficient detailed information, he cannot correctly
organize his assault or frame a fire-plan to neutralize adequately
the weapons of the defence; nor can his administrative staff
make the necessary arrangements.
Concentration
262. Since tanks, if already used, can disengage with com-
parative ease, there should be little difficulty in concentrating
the tank brigade in its chosen assembly area.
263. Artillery deployment is quickly completed, provided
reat cove ad pos in actre railable wither between the tw
The outline plan
264. A careful appreciation of ground and of known enemy
defences is necessary before deciding the methods to be
adopted for the capture of intermediate and final objectives.
A frontal attack will generally meet with maximum resistance ;
whereas attacks from the flank, or even from the rear, may
prove the most economical, and in the end the quickest,
method of securing the final objective.
Thus the selection of intermediate objectives is of very
great importance. If, by the capture of these objectives,
the vital areas can be outflanked, to be dealt with later by
reserves, major frontal attacks will be reduced in number,
and the final objective will be gained with the greatest speed
and with minimum loss.
V10323 (59) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

