pg_0049.pdf:
V10323 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
46
203. Corps will normally control medium reconnaissance,
which is carried out by the armoured car regiment.
armoured car regiment, being wheeled and largely bound to
roads or tracks, cannot fight for detailed information and can
provide only the general picture of the enemy's intentions and
movements.
204. Close reconnaissance is provided in front and on the
flanks by the armoured reconnaissance regiment.
This
unit is able to fight for detailed information in order to
complete the intelligence picture for the divisional com-
mander. The unit will pass back all topographical informa-
tion, particularly that affecting forward routes; the com-
mander will be provided with an engineer reconnaissance
party to assist in this task.
33. ROUTES
205. Both to reduce the length of the armoured division and
to increase the chances of finding unobstructed lines of advance,
movement should be carried out on a wide frontage using all
available routes.
When movement is confined to roads, the limited recon-
naissance resources will make it impracticable to use more
than four routes, and these should not cover a frontage of
more than from ten to twelve miles.
Any wider frontage will
lead to undue dispersion, making it difficult to concentrate
rapidly for battle. A minimum of two forward routes is
essential.
206. Enclosed country will increase the delay to be expected
from natural obstacles and demolitions. A very careful
choice of routes is necessary to economize in the limited
resources of bridging equipment, and in the transport available
for it.
34. ADVANCED GUARD
207. The armoured reconnaissance regiment
may be
employed to form the nucleus of the advanced guard or the
advanced guard mounted troops. But it must be remembered
that sufficient sub-units must be available to carry out
battle reconnaissance for the armoured brigade. It may be
necessary to reinforce the reconnaissance unit by as much as
one infantry battalion and one regiment of horse or field
artillery; engineers will normally be included.
208. In some circumstances the advanced guard covering
the advance of the division may be commanded by the com-
V10323 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

