pg_0052.pdf:
V10323 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
43
Method
218. In principle the method of attack by an armoured
division differs in no way from that employed by other types
of division.
The average tempo will, however, be faster, and
there are likely to be fewer intermediate objectives, which will
themselves be farther apart. Nevertheless, since tanks do
not normally fire on the move, armoured fire fights may
produce periods of considerable length during which there
will be no movement.
The armoured brigade leading
219. Each objective will be seized by the armoured brigade,
close support being afforded by the motor battalion, by self-
propelled anti-tank artillery, and by engineers. These troops
will, as soon as the objective is gained, form a new advanced
pivot.
Units of the infantry brigade, with anti-tank artillery and
engineers, will then move forward immediately. They may
be required to afford close support to the armoured brigade
in its attack on the next objective; otherwise they will relieve
the troops forming the newly won advanced pivot and will
complete its consolidation, thus releasing those troops for the
further close support of the attack.
220. Until the enemy's defence is beginning to collapse, the
support of the whole divisional artillery will be necessary for
the assault on each successive objective. When resistance
weakens to such an extent that the field artillery has difficulty
in providing continuous support, the maximum use must be
made of direct air support.
221. The troops affording close support must always employ
their transport boldly, with the object of getting men and
guns forward as quickly as is consistent with the avoidance
of unduly heavy casualties. Only thus can the momentum
of advance be maintained, and rapid and deep penetration
achieved.
The infantry brigade leading
222. Even against hastily prepared defences it will often
be necessary to secure a bridgehead over an obstacle before
the armoured brigade can be used. For this purpose the
infantry brigade will have to be employed to create a gap
through which to launch the armoured brigade. The attack
by the infantry brigade must be supported by the whole
resources of the division; it will necessarily be slower than
that by the armoured brigade, and the methods adopted
will be those of a normal infantry attack.
V10323 (51) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

