pg_0045.pdf:
V10323 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
42
PART II-THE ARMOURED DIVISION
CHAPTER 6
EMPLOYMENT CONSIDERATIONS AND RULES
25. GENERAL
186. The armoured division is a hard hitting formation
designed primarily for speed, movement over long distances,
and offensive action.
The armoured division is equipped with tanks of compara-
tively light armour and contains a large proportion of un-
armoured vehicles. Hence the division should not be employed
to break the crust of the enemy defence but rather should be
used to exploit success.
The threat of armour is very great. Any action by the
attacker's armour will inevitably influence the employment of
the armour of the defender. At the same time the defender's
armour must be neutralized, so that the main assault will
have the best chance of success.
Speed
187. Speed is the most important quality of the armoured
division. It is by quick decisions of commanders, and by
rapid movement of all components of the division, that
surprise is gained and maximum effect produced.
188. Wireless deception by armoured formations can be
particularly effective.
The object must always be to lull the
enemy into thinking that the armour is not doing anything
unexpected; it will best be achieved by allowing normal
wireless traffic to continue. Complete wireless silence will
immediately make the enemy suspicious and alert; its effect
on our own troops in the approach will be simply to slow down
movement because of the absence of the normal means of
command.
Information
189. To ensure speed in action, reliable and continuous
information is essential. This is obtained by reports from
air reconnaissance, from armoured car regiments operating
ahead of the division, and from the divisional reconnaissance
unit.
Ground
190. Ground is the main factor affecting all operations of
the armoured division. Water obstacles are also a most
important factor.
V10323 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

