pg_0056.pdf:
V10323 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
53
239. The infantry division.--This division will normally be
used in the attack on strongly defended areas, over ground
where the use of tanks is impracticable, or to seize deep
bridgeheads in order to create opportunities for the use of
armour.
In the approach or pursuit it is slow in movement unless
provided with troop-carrying transport and, if the ground
is suitable for the employment of other types of division, will
normally be used for relieving these divisions in successive
vital areas.
240. General.—Infantry are extremely vulnerable and
difficult to control when embussed ; once debussed they can
operate over almost any type of country. The mixed division
is more susceptible to ground than the infantry division.
The commander of the mixed division requires ground suitable
for the effective employment of the tank brigade; the
commander of the infantry division will always select the
ground which provides maximum defilade for his infantry.
41. THE HANDLING OF DIVISIONS
241. The tactical formation.—Divisions are designed to
operate as complete fighting formations. They will not be
split up into brigade groups except for a specific operation
when decentralization of supporting arms cannot be avoided.
242. Concentration.-In attack the whole resources of a
division will be concentrated in order to provide the maximum
support for the assaulting troops, who will attack on a narrow
front.
243. Administration.-Administration will remain central-
ized under the divisional commander. It will be the exception
for RASC companies to be placed under brigade control;
repair and recovery, and medical arrangements, will be
centralized to the maximum extent throughout the offensive.
CHAPTER 10
THE APPROACH
General
244. The plan of advance must ensure that the division can
be regrouped in minimum time as opposition stiffens; and
that advanced guards are sufficiently strong in supporting
arms at any moment, not only to decide minor encounter
battles without great delay to the remainder of the division,
V10323 (55) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

