pg_0008.pdf:
V10323 (7) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
5
Mobility is largely dependent on an efficient system of com-
mand and control, and on sound administrative arrangements.
Concentration
18. A characteristic of good generalship is to concentrate
overwhelming force and fire power at the decisive point and
at the right time, in order to ensure that the task is well
within the capacity of the troops.
The commander charged with
an offensive operation,
whether during the approach, attack, or pursuit phases, is
faced with the problem of concentrating the best balanced
force for the operation in hand from dispersed dispositions
in the shortest time, and in the greatest secrecy possible.
Forethought, sound initial dispositions and grouping based
on ground and likely enemy opposition, thorough adminis-
trative planning, and good information are all necessary
requirements for adequate concentration for battle.
19. During the approach formations should move on
broad fronts, and seize vital areas of ground in succession
on a co-ordinated plan. In this phase the main problems
are the correct grouping and disposition of formations.
In attack, the rapid concentration of fire power of both
ground weapons and air forces to support the assaulting
troops is the main problem.
For successful pursuit the most mobile, hard-hitting forma-
tions available must be used in conjunction with adequate
air forces.
Co-operation
20. In the past, the necessity for inter-service co-operation
has been emphasized. It is now, however, apparent that
the three fighting services must be considered-and must
act-as one, each being complementary and necessary to
the other two for the successful prosecution of any offensive.
The Royal Navy will be responsible for the safe arrival of
an expedition at its base and may often be able to afford
direct support to the army by the engagement of land targets.
The RAF will always play a major part in any land offensive
by providing maximum support for the army, including the
conveyance of airborne forces and the transport of supplies.
The army, by the very nature of its offensive, may afford
valuable assistance to the other services by
seizing further
naval and air bases and by driving the enemy's naval and air
forces farther away.
21. The highest degree of co-operation between all arms and
between arms and services within the army is a first essential
V10323 (7) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

