pg_0026.pdf:
V10323 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
23
Night or day attack
99. The main advantages of night attack are :—
(a) The enemy's defensive fire plan is rigid, and direct
fire impossible unless searchlights are employed.
(b) The employment of the defender's reserves is restricted,
because information will be lacking.
(c) The attacker will generally be able to establish himself
and reorganize before major counter-attack can be
staged.
The degree of moonlight is an important factor.
100. The main disadvantage of night attack is that lack of
visibility restricts manœuvre by tanks, though this factor
will not apply when the enemy is stronger in armour. Infantry
will suffer from the difficulties of movement and control
inherent in darkness, unless these difficulties have been
overcome by thorough training.
101. The advantages of attacking by night to secure bridge-
heads over obstacles, and to gain other initial objectives, are
so great that major attacks by night, or in conditions of poor
visibility, will be the rule rather than the exception. A
major attack will generally be so timed that the main tank
assault is launched at first light after bridgeheads have been
secured and gaps made over or through tank obstacles.
102. Invariable attack by night must be avoided, and
surprise achieved by carrying out major attacks sometimes
by night and at other times by day under cover of smoke or
fog.
Objectives
103. The objectives selected for attack should be those,
whose capture will most easily and quickly disorganize the
defence and permit major penetration or envelopment.
104. It may be necessary to capture intermediate objectives
before the final objective can be gained, e.g., areas of ground
giving observation previously denied to the attacker, or
bridgeheads over obstacles. Such intermediate objectives
must be regarded merely as stepping stones for reaching the
final objective, and their capture and retention must be well
within the capacity of the formation to whom the task is
allotted.
Fire plan
105. The attack will only succeed with certainty if the
assaulting troops are given the maximum covering fire at all
stages, including direct air support.
V10323 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

