pg_0019.pdf:
V10323 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
16
be given whether movement by night at high density or by
day at low density is likely to afford the better protection.
66. Centralized control of anti-aircraft resources is essential.
The requirements of the various formations will differ
according to the number of defiles, and the degree of dispersion
• possible, along their main axes, and a careful anti-aircraft
appreciation is required to ensure a correct allotment of guns.
Light anti-aircraft protection will be required during
movement at defiles and for the protection of the columns;
also to protect harbour areas and debussing points. Since
leap-frogging of units will usually be impossible, the portion
allotted for defiles must be placed well forward in the order of
march to be dropped in succession at the vulnerable points;
the portion allotted for column protection must be split up
throughout the column.
67. Whether on the move or at rest, all troops will engage
hostile low flying aircraft unless specifically ordered not to do
so because of the need for concealment.
Movement by day or night
68. The higher commander must decide whether major
movement will be carried out during daylight or in darkness.
The most important factors to be considered are :-
(a) Maximum speed of advance must be maintained.
(b) The greater the degree of air superiority the more can
movement be carried out by day without detection
or delay by enemy air forces.
(c) The more concealment afforded, or dispersion possible,
the more is day movement possible.
(d) When defiles have to be negotiated by mechanical
transport, their passage is more quickly effected by
large columns at night at high density than by day
at low density.
(e) When within striking distance of enemy armoured
formations it will often be advisable to restrict
movement of unarmoured formations to the hours
of darkness.
(f) Movement by night, unless carried out over a period
with no day movement, causes considerable addi-
tional strain and fatigue.
(g) Vehicles can be maintained efficiently only in daylight.
69. During the initial stages strategical moves may be
carried out mostly by day. When within striking distance
V10323 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

