pg_0029.pdf:
V10323 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
23
mostly by line, but during the battle reliance must largely be
placed on wireless.
116. The positioning of headquarters will depend largely on
communication facilities.
Control cannot be exercised unless
the rapid transmission of information is assured, and this will
generally necessitate army/air headquarters being well for-
ward. Staff and signal resources will not permit the splitting
of formation headquarters into more than two portions. The
higher headquarters will usually require to be split into a
main and a rear headquarters; occasionally special circum-
stances may require a higher commander to be located closer
to the battle area than his main headquarters, in which event
a small tactical headquarters should be formed, but even so
all reports will be sent to the main headquarters, and orders
will emanate from it.
117. During attack it may be necessary to stop or repeat
pre-arranged tasks in the covering fire plans, but this can
only be done if the artillery commander is able to communi-
cate rapidly with his units throughout the battle.
16. THE ARMS IN ATTACK
Armoured cars
118. The main role of armoured cars is medium reconnais-
sance, in the course of which they may be required to drive
in lightly armed enemy forces, but they should never become
involved in a serious fight. Normally they will be used for
observation of flanks to give timely warning of any possible
enemy interference. If opportunity offers they may be used
for harassing the enemy in his rear areas.
As many armoured cars as possible should be resting in
reserve ready to assume their normal role after the attack
has succeeded.
Infantry
119. Infantry formations and units are now so organized
and equipped as to permit them to undertake a major part
in the attack and to hold ground seized either as a secure
pivot for armoured action or as a firm base from which further
infantry operations can be conducted.
Lattalion support companies and brigade support groups
enable means of support to be always available, though this
factor in no way lessens the need for the closest co-operation
between infantry and those other arms whose support is an
essential for attack against a modern enemy.
Infantry tactics require a high standard of training and
physique, while sound battle drill and thorough knowledge of
V10323 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

