pg_0050.pdf:
V10323 (49) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
47
mander of the reconnaissance unit and controlled by division.
At other times it will be more convenient for a separate
advanced guard to be provided for each forward route.
35. ORDER OF MARCH OF MAIN BODY
209. During the tactical approach there are three possible
methods of moving the main body :—
(a) With the armoured brigade leading.
(b) With the infantry brigade leading.
(c) With both brigades moving on parallel axes.
210. In open country, where routes do not form defiles, the
armoured brigade should lead the advance behind the recon-
naissance unit. This arrangement will ensure a rapid advance,
because the brigade can manœuvre off roads and overcome
light opposition as it is met; it is also available in the fore-
front of the division should any threat from enemy armoured
forces develop.
When the country is close, or when manœuvre off roads is
difficult for tanks, the infantry brigade will lead.
When enemy armoured forces are known to be on one flank
only, it may be advisable to move both brigades on parallel
axes, the armoured brigade being on the threatened flank.
211. During the approach it may be necessary to pass one
brigade through the other. A carefully worked out procedure
and well organized traffic control are necessary to ensure this
operation being carried out in minimum time.
36. CONDUCT AND CONTROL
212. The conduct of the tactical approach of the armoured
division is based on the following rules :—
(a) The two brigades must never be out of quick supporting
distance of each other.
(b) The infantry brigade is extremely vulnerable when in
movement, and both brigades must have battle
procedure perfected whereby a temporary defensive
position is taken up with minimum delay in the
event of sudden attack by superior enemy armour.
(c) All commanders must be well forward. It will be an
advantage if the commanders of the advanced guard,
of both brigades, and of the division can move on the
same centre line, thus facilitating inter-communication.
(d) Strict wireless control is essential.
V10323 (49) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

