pg_0061.pdf:
V10323 (60) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
58
The detailed plan
265. If the defence is well organized and considerable time
is required for gaining the necessary information, collecting
and dumping ammunition, and equipping the assault groups,
the divisional commander may himself work out the details
of every operation with his subordinates.
266. When time is short, however, the commander may
only decide the objectives and timings of each operation,
allot tasks and resources to his brigadiers, and leave them to
work out the detailed plan with the commanders of the
supporting arms. It will, however, always be desirable to
use the divisional artillery under centralized control; its
flexibility makes this possible.
The fire plan
267. The main object of attacking on narrow fronts is to
concentrate all fire power on to the smallest areas possible and
thus to produce maximum effect.
Although the CRA, if not the CCRA of the corps, will control
all artillery, it will in the later stages sometimes be necessary
to decentralize some guns to the leading brigades to support
consolidation of captured localities and exploitation.
268. Direct support aircraft will be used as an additional
artillery weapon and to engage targets well in rear of the
defended area. They will be particularly useful for the
in sage
demoralization of enemy forward troops, and for the engage-
ment of enemy headquarters and of forces assembling for
counter-attack.
47. CONDUCT OF THE ATTACK
269. The strength of the defence will determine the number
of stepping stones which must be secured in succession in
order to gain the final objective.
There will be important strongly held localities requiring
separate operations for their capture. There will be less
important features which will be secured by the fanning out
of the main assaulting troops after initial penetration through
the obstacles, or after capture of main localities. The capture
of the less important features may require only the support
of local reserves at the immediate disposal of the assaulting
formations or units, but the divisional fire plan will be designed
to cover this outward movement.
270. Hence the divisional attack may consist of a number
of strong attacks on narrow fronts on main localities, and
subsidiary attacks on intervening defences. After the initial
V10323 (60) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

