pg_0020.pdf:
V10323 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
17
of enemy land forces, and particularly when concentrating
for attack, it will usually be necessary for major movement
to be completed before first light.
The encounter battles
70. During the approach, opposition will gradually stiffen
and minor engagements will be fought to drive in enemy
delaying detachments. These encounter battles will initially
be fought by advanced guards of formations.
71. Each prong of the force will be preceded by an advanced
guard capable of overcoming expected opposition with mini-
mum delay to the main body, and formation commanders
must have so controlled their approach that they can easily
and quickly support their advanced guards should this prove
necessary.
Control
72. It is vital that formations and units are not allowed
to drift into battle, or become involved piecemeal in either
an encounter fight or a major battle. To this end, com-
manders must ensure that they maintain continuous control.
Control of movement
73. Commanders will control the initial moves by the issue
of timings at which formations will cross a start line.
Thereafter control of movement is exercised by the allot-
ment of bounds, report lines, objectives, and centre lines (or
axes).
74. The flank points of bounds and report lines will often
be sufficient to indicate automatically the general area for
reconnaissance, and the frontage to be covered, by a forma-
tion. This procedure will frequently make it unnecessary to
define boundaries, thus reducing the length of orders.
10. SPECIAL FORCES
75. It may be necessary to allot special independent tasks
to formations as part of the general plan. The seizure of an
airfield or vital centre of communications, the capture of a
bridgehead over a major obstacle ahead of the main forces,
or any such task which cannot be carried out by airborne
troops alone, may necessitate the employment by a higher
commander of a special mobile detachment of all arms.
76. Such detachments should consist of complete forma-
tions or units, with their normal staffs and signals. Forces
comprising a mixed collection of units and sub-units thrown
2--18502
V10323 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

