pg_0044.pdf:
V10323 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
41
182. Full advantage cannot be taken of opportunities for
furthering success unless the actions of all parts of a force
acting on the offensive are properly integrated. Thus control
must be exercised by the highest commander possible at every
stage of the offensive.
24. THE HIGHER COMMANDER
183. The commander who is controlling the offensive has
one ultimate object-to force the opposing commander to
cease resistance.
To hasten this end, he will strive to paralyse
the enemy commander's system of control and communica-
tong carly, on the matin for himself he opportunity ay
piecemeal.
184. Before his offensive starts he must be quite clear in
his own mind how he intends to night the battle; an i his plan
must be explained clearly to all commanders in his force.
Having decided his course of action, he must pursue his
object relentlessly. Many outside influences may suggest
alternative courses, and events may tend to shake his con-
fidence in his own plan and in his ability to see it through.
But he must have complete confidence in his own plan and
in his own ability. He must impose his will on the enemy.
In order to be able to do so, he must always maintain a force
ready for further offensive use in accordance with the needs
of the situation at the time, and this will involve frequent
re-grouping.
185. Every decision must be made with the original object
in mind. The commander who starts with the initiative
must never lose it. If the enemy starts with the initiative,
it must be wrested from him at the earliest opportunity.
Indecision and hesitation are fatal. Firm determination
on the part of the commander to impress his will on his
opponent, coupled with the knowledge by every officer and
man of the influence of his own actions on the whole battle,
will enable the full fighting power of the army to be developed
in such a way that ultimate victory will be assured.
V10323 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

