pg_0018.pdf:
V10323 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
15
battle and the necessary concentration at the chosen
point are speeded up.
(c) If lateral communications are poor, wide frontages will
make control more difficult.
(d) The strength and armament of the enemy and his
most likely initial moves will decide whether or not
large gaps can be left between formations.
61. The approach of an army to battle should be carried
out by the thrusting forward of formations, each directed on
to a selected objective. There may be a screen of recon-
naissance troops under army or corps control moving in front of
formation advanced guards; there may also be flank guards
operating under higher control. But the picture is that of a
number of prongs pushed forward fast and far, the length
of the prongs differing according to enemy opposition or the
obstacles met, and the general action being controlled by
higher headquarters.
Protection against ground attack
62. Reconnaissance units are primarily the means of gaining
information and, when acting in that role,
must not be
considered as forming a protective screen in addition, though
they will automatically provide some degree of protection.
The duties of protection during approach are carried out by
formation advanced guards and flank guards.
63. Advanced guards will be composed of all arms. Their
detailed composition will depend on the type of country and
the probable opposition, but they must be strong enough to
prevent delay to the advance of main bodies.
64. Flank guards may be necessary to seize in succession
areas of tactical or strategical importance which flank the
main axis of advance. Their organization and strength must
depend on the nature of country and tasks allotted; armoured
divisions, or armoured brigades or units reinforced as neces-
sary, may be suitable for this role.
Protection against air attack
65. Protection from air attack, other than by the provision
of fighter cover, is obtained by dispersion and concealment,
by speed of movement by day or by confining movement to
the night, by efficient traffic control, and by the correct
positioning of anti-aircraft weapons.
The relative value of dispersion and concealment should
always be considered. Concealment is of little value if the
cover affording it is an obvious target. Consideration must
V10323 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

