pg_0053.pdf:
V10323 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
50
Combined attack
223. It may sometimes be advisable to stage a combined
attack by both brigades when the armoured brigade is to
carry out an enveloping movement. On such occasions the
most careful co-ordination and timing are required to ensure
that the tanks make full use of their mobility.
The risk of unduly weakening the pivot will seldom justify
the employment of the whole of the infantry brigade in attack
in such circumstances.
Artillery
224. Whether the armoured or infantry brigade leads, or
their action is combined, a fire plan must always be pre-
arranged to ensure effective artillery support at every phase.
FOOs will keep in the closest possible touch with the assault-
ing troops, and the fire plan must be sufficiently flexible to
enable them to call for strong support as required.
225. Field artillery.-When the armoured brigade is lead-
ing the attack, or after it has
• been passed through
the gap created by the infantry
brigade, artillery will
be required both to support the armoured brigade and to
support the successive pivots.
Support and movement will
then be required simultaneously, and of the two regiments
of the division one can give support whilst the other moves.
Support for the armoured brigade must be designed to
blind the anti-tank guns of the defence, and this will often
best be achieved by the use of smoke.
226. Anti-tank.—Anti-tank guns will be an essential defence
weapon of the pivot. Infantry guns will be reinforced by
artillery guns which must be brought forward as early as
possible.
Anti-tank guns may be required to reinforce the armoured
brigade, particularly to cover the flanks of attack; self-
propelled guns are most suitable for this purpose.
227. Anti-aircraft.—It is almost certain that the successive
pivots, particularly that formed on the final objective, will be
the target for heavy air attack. Their defence by infantry and
artillery anti-aircraft weapons must be quickly organized, and
a proportion of each will move forward with the leading
elements of the infantry brigade. Artillery positions are often
the selected targets for dive bombers and must be adequately
protected.
Engineers
228. Minefields.—Owing to the speed of attack by the
armoured brigade, and often also because of the distance to
V10323 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

