pg_0010.pdf:
V10323 (9) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
7
25. The higher commander must ensure that the plan is
within the capacity of the administrative services. Adminis-
trative considerations will often govern the actual time of start
of an offensive, and the speed with which it can be pursued.
Preparation
26. Administrative.-The main concern of the administra-
tive staffs will be the collection of the necessary stores and
equipment to replace wastage during preliminary operations,
to maintain forward bases, and to retain sufficient reserves of
all kinds for the main battle and for pursuit. Petrol,
ammunition, and transport will generally be the largest items
of expenditure, and it is essential that rigid economy in their
use should be enforced during initial operations.
Bridging
equipment and water supply may also be vital problems.
The maximum use must be made of the resources of the
country, and arrangements made for the collection and
disposal of salvaged and captured equipment.
Administrative planning must keep in step with operational
planning. Specialized equipment will often be required
which must be manufactured at home bases, or produced
from local resources in the theatre of war. The last-minute
discovery of the lack of a certain necessary store is almost
inevitable if the administrative staff is not kept fully informed
of the higher commander's plan.
A sound plan for the maintenance and repair of equipment
is necessary•
27. Operational.—The main responsibility of the operational
staffs, apart from working out the commander's plan in detail,
is to ensure that the formations taking part are in all respects
suitably trained and equipped for the tasks allotted.
IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT COMPLETE FORMATIONS, INCLUDING
STAFF AND SERVICES, ARE GIVEN ADEQUATE TIME TO TRAIN AS
A TEAM FOR THE TASK IN HAND. If new equipment is to be
used by any arm, sufficient time must be allowed for the
individual teams to practise the use of, and to gain confidence
in, this equipment.
28. Morale.—Morale is all-important.
It is the responsibility of all commanders and of all branches
of the staff to ensure that the troops are keyed up to a high
level of operational fighting fitness. The troops must be
imbued with the offensive spirit and with the will to win at
any cost. They must be launched into battle confident in
themselves and in their commanders and at the highest pitch
of physical fitness.
V10323 (9) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

