pg_0057.pdf:
V10323 (56) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
54
but also, where possible, to occupy ground of tactical impor-
tance and thereby facilitate the launching of a divisional attack,
The plan must further ensure that the action of all arms and
subordinate formations is so co-ordinated that the division
is not committed to a main battle piecemeal.
245. In addition to the factors discussed in Part I, the
plan will be influenced by :—
(a) What troops are operating ahead of the division, and
on the flanks.
(b) The number of roads or tracks available, and the
strength of bridges on the routes.
(c) Whether troop-carrying transport is available for
infantry, and whether transporters are used to move
tanks.
246. Troop-carrying companies, each capable of carrying one
infantry brigade, and transporter companies, each of which
can lift one tank battalion, are army troops. There may be
sufficient companies to make mixed divisions completely
mobile, but in the infantry division a combination of movement
by transport and marching will generally be necessary. It
is probable that sufficient transporter companies will be avail-
able to lift all the tanks but, since considerable time is required
to unload tanks from transporters, any units employed well
forward in the advance must generally move on their tracks.
43. RECONNAISSANCE
247. Air reconnaissance will normally be under corps or
army control, and the division will keep corps fully informed
of its requirements for medium reconnaissance.
248. Ground reconnaissance will be carried out by the
divisional reconnaissance regiment, which should normally
operate under the control of the divisional commander. The
placing of sub-units of the reconnaissance unit under the
on set
command of leading brigades will only be justified if the front
is very wide or if lateral communications are bad.
249. The reports sent back by the commander of the
reconnaissance
unit
must include engineer information
required for the opening and development of forward routes.
Engineer and artillery reconnaissance parties will move with
this unit.
44. METHOD OF ADVANCE
Frontage
250. The number and nature of routes available and the
scale of enemy opposition expected will generally determine
V10323 (56) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

