pg_0016.pdf:
V10323 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
13
should be used to simulate occupied camps and gun areas
which have in fact been vacated. Dummies should be used
to make the enemy believe concentration is taking place at
a point where it is not; and to draw fire away from occupied
gun pits or small arms emplacements.
The aircraft camera, used repeatedly at irregular intervals,
has to be deceived. Dummies must, therefore, be realistic and
complete. When large installations or camps are erected,
normal tracks must be maintained, fires lit, and movement
organized and maintained.
51. Concealment.—Camouflage will be fully exploited for
the concealment of troops, weapons, and installations. When
it is impossible to conceal them, the object will be to mislead
the enemy as to their real nature.
Unless individual and unit camouflage is effective, the value
of other deceptive measures will be greatly reduced.
CHAPTER 2
THE APPROACH
8. GENERAL
52. The higher commander's object is to seize and hold the
initiative from the outset by the speed of movement of his
formations and by the occupation of such areas as will assist
in the successful staging of the decisive battle. The main
requirement for successful strategical or tactical approach to
battle is speed, which is gained even more by the careful
selection of initial tasks and the suitable grouping of formations
and allotment of axes of advance than by the actual capacity
of troops and vehicles for rapid movement.
53. The plan must be flexible, and formation commanders
must be allowed considerable initiative in the methods adopted
for carrying out their tasks. On the other hand the higher
commander must maintain adequate control during the various
phases in order to regroup his formations as the situation
demands. To this end commanders of armies and corps must
be well forward, and the movement of main army/air head-
quarters must be so arranged as to ensure the most rapid and
certain communication to both army and air force formations.
The army commander may have to accept a location which,
for control of land forces alone, is not ideal.
54. Centralized administrative control is most desirable
to economize in traffic control arrangements, to free forward
V10323 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

