pg_0027.pdf:
V10323 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
24
106. When defences are strong, it may be necessary to carry
out preliminary action by fire in order to demoralize the
defence and to cause casualties to the defender's personnel
and equipment. The fire plan may, therefore, begin with a
period of preparation.
Prolonged preparatory fire from ground weapons and aircraft
may well compromise surprise, is expensive in ammunition
and bombs, and enables the defenders to occupy alternative
positions before the assault develops, with the result that
some weapons may remain unneutralized by subsequent
covering fire.
107. The object of covering fire is to neutralize the weapons
of the defence. The danger from small arms weapons, anti-tank
weapons, and artillery will vary according to the method of
attack adopted, the ground, and the phase of attack. Covering
fire must, therefore, be most carefully planned and applied
with intensity on those weapons which, at any given period,
are most likely to hold up or disorganize the attack.
It is vital that the weapons of the defence that are located
outside the selected narrow front of attack and can engage
the assaulting troops, should be adequately neutralized.
This can be achieved by making full use of defilade, by
extending the covering fire beyond the frontage of attack, by
the use of smoke, and by night attack.
108. Covering fire will never achieve more than temporary
neutralization
of the defender's weapons.
The leading
echelons of the assaulting troops will, therefore, follow as
closely as possible behind the covering fire provided and
should be accompanied by FOOs. Succeeding echelons
must be adequately provided with close support weapons
in the form of tanks, anti-tank guns, mortars, and small
arms, for the neutralization or destruction of enemy detach-
ments who have survived the covering fire. Unless these are
dealt with, the leading echelons may become isolated and the
attack may break down.
Airborne troops
109. The action of airborne troops must be closely co-
ordinated with the operations of other attacking formations,
both to ensure that the latter derive the maximum advantage
from the activities of the former and to reduce to the minimum
the period during which the former will have to operate un-
supported.
Administration
110. The major administrative problems connected with
attack should have been solved to a great extent during the
V10323 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

