pg_0013.pdf:
V10323 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
10
by a high degree of air superiority. The gaining and retention
of air superiority, and control of the air at least over areas
where major action is taking place, is therefore the over-
riding task of air forces allotted to the army in an offensive.
40. The army will require air reconnaissance, direct and
indirect air support, and air cover. Reconnaissance and
indirect support are required almost continuously; direct
support and air cover will be necessary at intervals, and in
varying intensity.
The main principle of employment of either direct support
in close proximity to our own troops or indirect support at
a distance from our troops is that concentrated and repeated
attack on a limited number of targets will achieve the best
results.
Air cover may be required to enable our concentrations to
take place unobserved, to protect formations when refuelling
or on other occasions when dispersion is difficult, and to cover
major outflanking movements.
Reconnaissance
41. Air, particularly photographic, and ground recon-
naissances are complementary means of obtaining information,
and adequate means must be provided for rapid exchange of
information between army reconnaissance elements and the
RAF units detailed for reconnaissance tasks.
Advanced formations can receive information through
tactical reconnaissance broadcasts. Aircraft used for bomber
and fighter tasks can often supplement the information gained
by reconnaissance aircraft, and their pilots should be briefed
accordingly.
42. Strategical, tactical, and artillery reconnaissance will be
required in varying priority as the battle develops.
During the approach phase it will be important to discover
the enemy's main advanced bases, his concentration areas,
and his general direction of movement. When contact is
imminent, details of the movements of his armoured columns
are particularly important. During preparation and in attack
both tactical and artillery reconnaissance will be needed to
locate enemy reserves, to study the nature, layout, and
development of his obstacles and field defences, to assist
counter-battery work, and to confirm the location of our own
troops.
Direct support
43. In attack aircraft may be used for :—
(a) Action against headquarters and communications
with the object of paralysing command and pre-
venting reinforcement and supply.
V10323 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

