pg_0014.pdf:
V10323 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
11
(b) Action against reserves to break up counter-attack.
(c) Bombing or low-flying attack to disorganize and
demoralize the defenders.
(d) Provision of smoke cover.
Direct air support must on all occasions be concentrated on
one task at a time.
44. In pursuit the concentrated effort of the air forces must
be utilized to cause the maximum loss to the enemy, and so
to delay him that he is unable to break contact with the
pursuing land forces.
Indirect support
45. Before and during the attack aircraft may be used for :
(a) Isolating the battlefield by destroying enemy supply
columns of all types, by delaying the forward move-
ment of his general reserves, and by disrupting the
road communications used by either of these.
(b) Destroying enemy base installations, and the rail and
dock facilities leading into and from them.
(c) Destroying shipping used by the enemy to convey
troops or stores into the theatre of operations.
The destruction of enemy airfields and landing grounds
behind the battle area is not included as indirect support,
since it is an integral part of the RAF plan to attain air
superiority.
Operational landing grounds
46. The full power of the air forces will not be developed
unless the forward moves of landing grounds keep pace with
the advance of the army.
To ensure the rapid operation of aircraft from forward
landing grounds the following arrangements are necessary :—
(a) Forward reconnaissance.-The information sent back
units regarding suitable areas for new airfields or
advanced landing grounds and the condition of those
existing.
(b) Protection.—Anti-aircraft units and units of the RAF
regiment, or specially allotted army units, must be
organized to take over the local protection of air-
fields as soon as they are secured by forward troops.
(c) Construction.-Army units must be available to re-
condition captured airfields, or to construct new
ones, as rapidly as possible.
V10323 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

