pg_0021.pdf:
V10323 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
18
together without adequate machinery for command and
control, will rarely be justifiable or successful; they will
never derive full fighting value from the troops of which they
are composed.
77. The commander of such a force should be provided
with adequate means of, or reports from, air reconnaissance.
11. AIRBORNE TROOPS
78. The employment of airborne troops will often prove
of great value during the approach. They can be used
either unsupported for short periods, or in conjunction with
the special forces mentioned above.
They may be employed to seize important ground, vital
centres of communication, enemy landing grounds, or defiles
in the line of advance.
Their use in operations involving an opposed landing is
dealt with in another pamphlet.
12. ADMINISTRATION
Transport
79. The provision of adequate transport is one of the
main problems facing the administrative staff both during
the planning and the conduct of the approach.
Infantry brigades of mixed and infantry divisions, if
required to move over long distances at speed, must be pro-
vided with troop-carrying transport. If railways or water-
ways are not available, much transport will be required to
maintain essential supplies of petrol, ammunition, bridging
material, and possibly water. A formation given a special
task may have to be made self-contained for several days,
requiring much transport additional to normal establishment.
80. When available, air transport may be valuable for
supplementing land transport, for facilitating the early
establishment of forward airfields, and for ferrying troops or
vital stores. The latter use, however, involves the troops
arriving without their transport and heavy equipment. Every
opportunity should be taken of evacuating casualties by
returning aircraft.
81. The strategical plan of campaign is largely influenced
by the availability of the type of transport most suitable,
and the successful conduct of the approach depends to a high
degree on the economical use and centralized control of
transport.
V10323 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

