pg_0047.pdf:
V10323 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
44
action of the remainder of the division. This brigade will
not be used piecemeal by regimental groups in attack; every
available weapon in the division and maximum direct support
from aircraft, whether controlled by army, corps, or the
division, must be employed for its support.
195. Although the tactical approach may be made on a
broad front, the armoured brigade will always attack on a
narrow frontage, except where opposition is particularly light,
or where exceptional opportunities for manœuvre exist.
196. The motor battalion of the armoured brigade will
always be used in close co-operation with the armoured
regiments, and it should not be previously employed on any
task which will reduce its capacity to carry out this co-opera-
tion.
28. THE INFANTRY BRIGADE
197. The roles of the infantry brigade may be :—
(a) To clear and to cover the advance of the armoured
brigade in enclosed or difficult country.
(b) To form a pivot, or a series of pivots, on which the
operations of the armoured brigade will be based.
(c) To mop up and hold areas of ground captured by the
armoured brigade.
(d) To continue offensive operations after armoured
action.
(e) To attack hastily prepared areas protected by
obstacles.
(f) To carry out harassing operations against enemy
harbours and communications, especially at night.
(g) To screen a flank.
198. The infantry brigade is extremely vulnerable when
moving in lorries, but its speed on roads is greater than that
of the armoured brigade.
The infantry of this brigade must
be specially trained in rapid movement on their feet.
29. ADMINISTRATION
199. Administrative control must be highly centralized, but
there may be occasions when part or the whole of the brigade
echelons must move with, and under the command of, brigades
to ensure adequate and timely supply. Such occasions will
often occur during the approach phase or during pursuit.
V10323 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

