pg_0035.pdf:
V10323 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
32
parous enny of to cies tad draco ocalities, which are
counter-attacks are being launched.
139. Light anti-aircraft artillery may be used in an anti-
tank role, but, being extremely vulnerable and difficult to
conceal, it should assume this secondary role only when tank
attack is imminent.
140. The fire of the guns may be useful for indicating
inter-unit boundaries, etc., at night.
Engineers
141. ENGINEERS WILL FORM PART OF THE ASSAULT GROUPS
FOR TFE INITIAL PENETRATION OF OBSTACLES AND FOR THE
SUBSEQUENT MOPPING-UP OF STRONG POINTS. Other tasks may
inclur'e the improvement of forward routes and water supply,
the location and destruction, or removal, of mines and booby-
traps, and the destruction of enemy tanks and equipment.
To assist in consolidaticn of captured Iccalities they may be
I quired to construct road blocks and other obstacles against
ccunter-attack by tanks.
142. Centralized control of engineer units is necessary to
ensure co-erdination and economy of force; the supply of
engineer assistance will rarely meet the demand.
17. GAS
143. Except against strongly organized defences, it will be
unusual to employ gas in attack other than as a neutralizing
agent on the flanks and well in rear of the area to be attacked.
Ground contamination by blister gas and the use of other
tod we inster of s
persistent gases will generally be confined to flank localities
8 1
that are not to be attacked, but the effect of non-persistent
gases, used just before zero, will be considerable.
144. Very great care must be exercised in the employment
of gas owing to the vagaries of wind and weather. It is far
better to relv on other methods of neutralization than to risk
delays and casualties to the assaulting troops by the incorrect
use of this weapon.
18. CONDUCT OF ATTACK
145. Whether attack is carried out against hastily prepared
defences or against well organized defended areas, it will be
based on a simple and flexible plan which must be executed
with the utmost determination. Formations of units, having
V10323 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

