pg_0030.pdf:
V10323 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
27
the characteristics and capabilities of the weapons, with which
infantry is equipped, are essential needs for operations whether
carried out by day or by night.
120. Except against hastily prepared defences, it will
usually be the task of infantry to capture and hold bridge-
heads beyond obstacles so as to permit the clearing of lanes
for the forward movement of other assaulting or supporting
arms. This will often involve initially capturing the enemy
forward posts sited to cover the outer obstacles. Infantry
will always have to carry out, whether or not in co-operation
with tanks, the clearing of enemy posts and localities within
the area attacked, and frequently they will have to furnish
the parties necessary for the clearing of the gaps through
minefields or obstacles.
121. The following rules govern the employment of infantry
in the attack :
(a) Infantry must be launched in the attack fresh and
lightly equipped. Only those weapons and loads
that are essential for the attack and immediate
consolidation should be carried by dismounted men.
(b) The fullest use must be made of ground to conceal
movement and to enable infantry weapons to give
the maximum covering fire.
(c) Attacking infantry must make the fullest use of
covering and supporting fire so as to gain ground
and seize objectives directly such fire lifts.
(d) Separate units or sub-units must be detailed for the
mopping up of enemy who may have been overrun
but not destroyed by leading waves.
(e) The sub-units of the brigade support group should be
employed in the way that will ensure the fullest
support for the most vital stage of the brigade
attack. Battalion anti-tank guns are, however, for
the anti-tank defence of the battalion concerned
and, though the battalion may be given tasks that
involve their use, they should not be withdrawn for
employment outside the battalion area. The need
for anti-tank guns to support forward infantry
during the initial stages of consolidation requires
that the guns be moved forward at the earliest
opportunity.
(f) When attacking in co-operation with tanks, the
closest co-operation is needed, so that each can by
fire destroy or neutralize opposition that is affecting
the action of the other.
V10323 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

