pg_0009.pdf:
V10323 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
6
for successful offensive operations. The maintenance and
supply services are now fully fighting troops; they must be
trained to fight and to co-operate with the other arms, and so
must know the tactics these employ. Similarly, the fighting
arms must know the organization
of the administrative
services and the conditions under which they work, and must
appreciate their problems.
3. PLANNING AND PREPARATION
Outline plan
22. With the foregoing principles in view the higher com-
mander, in close consultation with the commander of the
supporting air forces and with the commander of any naval
forces co-operating, must decide his outline plan early, in
order to allow as much time as possible for necessary
preparation,
23. In making his appreciation the following are amongst
the main factors requiring consideration :—
(a) The relative strengths and armament of the opposing
forces, and the enemy's probable reactions
b An assessment of time and space
(c) Ground that is vital to his plan.
(d) Ground most suited for the operation of armoured
forces.
(e) The best areas for operational landing grounds, and
the initial tasks of the air forces.
(f) The protection for his main and proposed forward
bases.
(g) The effect of the administrative resources on the scope
of operations.
Only after reaching conclusions on these and many other
factors can the higher commander consider and formulate his
plan, and put in hand the preparations for its execution.
24. The outline plan must ensure the fulfilment of the
following conditions :—
(a) The offensive will start with the correct grouping of
formations according to the task allotted and the
ground.
-(b) The maximum support is assured from, and to, the air
forces available, including the transport of airborne
troops.
(c) Control throughout the offensive is centralized at as
high a level as possible.
(d) The maintenance of an adequate reserve.
V10323 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

