pg_0062.pdf:
V10323 (61) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
59
assault has penetrated the main obstacle, subsequent objec-
tives should be captured by envelopment rather than by
direct frontal assault.
48. THE ATTACK WITH TANKS
Organization for attack
271. The number of echelons of tanks desirable, and the
relative positions of infantry and tanks, will depend on the
strength of the defences, on the ground, and on the nature of
obstacles.
Information obtained by reconnaissance will determine
whether tanks or infantry will lead the attack. In either
event close co-operation between both arms is vital and maxi-
mum fire support for the leading troops must be provided.
It is desirable, if the situation allows, to conserve the energy
of infantry by carrying them forward
as far as the start line
on tanks.
272. For every main successive operation, suitably organized
assault groups may have to lead the attack to secure gaps
through tank obstacles.
These groups will consist of infantry
and engineers, and may include anti-tank guns and possibly
tanks to deal with immediate counter-attack.
273. The attack with tanks leading, as also the main
attack through gaps in an obstacle secured by a preliminary
operation, will usually be organized in three echelons and will
be carried out as follows :—
(a) The assaulting echelon, consisting of tanks possibly
closely followed by infantry, will move at best tank
speed on to the objective. Since tanks can control
an area only for a limited period, they must be
relieved quickly by infantry.
(b) The supporting echelon, therefore, will consist of
infantry to secure the objective and of tanks to
provide close support to the infantry during the
move to the objective. This echelon will not com-
pletely mop up the area, its duty being to reinforce
the first echelon as soon as possible.
(c) The reserve of tanks and infantry will follow the second
echelon. It will be divided into mopping-up parties
and the reserve.
274. Command.—Whatever the proportion of tanks to
infantry, an infantry commander will command the attack,
because it is the infantry who will remain in occupation of
the objective when captured.
V10323 (61) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

