pg_0045.pdf:
2440
25.
NOT TO DE FAKEN ON SHORE-
- 6 -
VOTE - Tasks 137, 159, 140 and I44 will have to be comordinated
with 3 Canadian Infantry Division through Royal Artillery
channels.
(b)
207. A th Bty.
On arrival firal objective Self-propclled troop will. be disposed in
reserve battalion area - see Trace 3 - and wili support EAST RIDING
YEOMANRY in its counter attack roles
Remaining Troops together with infanty anti-tank guns will be
lisposed to proteot whole Brigade localityo
Cond 101 Anti-Tank
attery will coordinate the siting of all infantry and Royal Artillery
anti-tank guns and minefielas within the brigade locality.
Platoon 253 Field Company.
(a) Tasks.
Clearance of Brigade forward routes.
(b) Marking of minefield areas.
Standard red and white gap sims will be usod,
Cleared carriage wags of roads will be rarked by pairs of gap signs
Cleared verges will be narled by notice boards at 400 yds and gap signs
moved out fron carriage-way.
Verges will be cleared to 10 foat width only.
RIGHT verges will be cleared in priority to LEFTo
(o) The following assault bridging equipment is being landed by Royal
Engineers 3 British Infantry Division:-
8 Class 5 Folding Bridge Equipment rafts
24 Mark III Assault Boats.
Half this equipment will be available for 9 British Infantry
Brigade on call to 3 British Infantry Division,
(a) Platoon 253 Field Corpany will also be prepared to assist in:-
(i) assault demolitions
(ii) rafting.
(e) One 22 set with Platoon HQ will be notted to Brigade 'A' Wave. In
addition, units will give every facility to Royal Engineers to pass
information on battalion nets.
Assembly and Movement.
(a) Vehicle parties landing on NAN Sector are being assembled, and as the
tactical situation permits,
are being moved along the lateral TAIIEVIITE
0082 - LA DELIVERANDE 0281
to a 3 British Infantry Division Iraffic Post
for onward moves to units.
(b) A11 vehicle parties will be briefed with their probable routes and
destinations as laid down in 3 British Infantry Division Administrative
Plan.
(o) Cormanders will irpress on their subordinates the vital importance,
particularly during the initial stages, of kooping the forward! routes
the advance is temporarily held up by enemy action
ust be dispersed into fields so as not to block the flow from fine
beaches.
Hanks should proceed across country so as not to block routes.
- 6 -

