pg_0041.pdf:
NOT TO ED TAKIN ON SHORE.
- 2 -
3.
50
Additional. TroopEr
See Appendix 'A' attanheas
Royal. Navy•
A mixed force of bastleships,
cruisers and destroyers is
bombarding enony coastal.
basteries,
beach and inland defences on 3 British
Infantry Division front and fianks on D dajo
Royal Air Force.
(a) Heavy night bombers are bombirg selected coastal batteries night D-I, daye
(b) Heavy, medium and fighter bombers on inland batteries and defences D day.
(a) Medium day bombers on CAEN H + 5 hours and hoavy day bombers at H 7 houre.
(a) Neutralisation of eneny counter-attack forces as ordered,
(e) Tactical reconnaissanse infornation on requeste
Go
Aavancod TroopS a Squadron INTS OF COURT REGIMENT wilL be engaged on cortain
demolition tasks on 3 British Infantry Division fronts
On conclusion these
tasks, C Squadron will withdraw displaying following recognition signols;
Yellow celanese band round turret ard if necessary releasing
yellow smoke and with
For further information see para 32,
uns pointing to the rear.
INTENTION.
3.
9 British Infantry Brigade Group
will land after 185 Infantry Brigade
on QUEEN WHITE and RED - sec Landing Tables/Urit Sheets already issueds
Brigade Assembly Area - see Irace 2 attachudo
Staff Captain and unit reconnaissance parties as shown in Unit sheets
will land with 185 Infantry Brigade and prepare unit assembly areas,
Six Provost 5 Section 3 British Infantry Division Provost Corpany under
Staff Captain will signpost all routes within the Brigade Assembly Area.
Unit seconds-in-cormand and one officer will slear the beaches of unit
vehicles and feed forward groups of vehicles and personnel as collected to the
One officer representative will return to the beaches and act
similarly for vehicles arriving on second and third tides.
9.
Capture of Brigade Concentration Area - see Iraoe 2.
(a) 2 LINCOLNS with in support EAST RIDING YEOMANRY
Self-propelled Troop 101 Anti-Tank Battery,
Platoon (less two Sections) 253 Field Company,
under Cormand One Seation 9 Field Ambulance,
will destroy eneny defences in CRESSERONS 0480 and PLUMETOT 0479 prior to
advance of remainder of the Brigade Group.
10.
(b) Route - via LION SUR MER.
(a) Timings - no nove forward,
except by reconnaissance patrols, until
ordered by Ide HQ. Div Cond may cut this out according
to the situation.
Advance to Concentration Area
On capture of Brigade Concentration Area by 2 LINCOLNS Group, remaindor
of Brigade will advance;-
- 2 -

