The reason for the second section of the Northern L. of C., known as
the water link, was that there was no all-weather road from Kalewa to Shwebo.
and an alternative route was therefore very important.
The capture of
Myingyan on 23rd March, 1945, was in consequence a very valuable gain.
The place was on the existing all-weather road system of central Burma, and
on the railway, of which, though it had been much damaged, stretches could
be used. It was well placed at Meiktila, the road/rail axis to Rangoon, and
the Irrawaddy axis to Prome
and beyond.
It was therefore chosen as
advanced base for supplying the forces in Central Burma by ground route.
Immense efforts were made to develop Kalewa as the I.W.T. base for the
water link, and in the construction of vessels from material available locally;
but there was nevertheless something of a bottleneck, since its target capacity
was only 700 tons a day as compared with the 1,200 tons delivered by road
at Kalewa.
on this section, numerous expedients were improvised from transporting
both pack and bulk petroleum products from Kalewa to Myingyan before
distribution from Rangoon began.
Owing to the shortage of prefabricated
oil barges for carrying bulk petrol, 800-gallon fabric tanks, 620-gallon steel
portable tanks (the first consignment of which had just reached Calcutta),
and the tanks off unserviceable road tank wagons were put on Higgins barges
and locally-built barges, and floated down river.
This was a joint transporta-
ion and S.T. venture; although it was a " Heath Robinson" arrangement, it
delivered substantial quantities of bulk spirit to Myingyan, where the bulk
was filled into returnable containers more easily accumulated there.
Another
improvisation was the P.O.L. rafts, no more than a batch of some hundred-
odd barrels held together with pieces of bamboo, and floated downstream
with four Burmans as a crew.
Beyond Myingyan, distribution to Meiktila was effected in bulk by means
of rail tank wagons improvised from old road tank lorry tanks mounted on
burnt-out chassis of railway rolling stock, towed by jeeps fitted with flanged
wheels to enable them to run on the rails.
These efforts resulted in 300 tons of valuable oil a day going to an area
which was cut off from supply by other routes, and whose airlift had to be
devoted mainly to the carriage of food and other essentials.
With a single road of limited capacity, there comes a time when, if its
length is extended sufficiently and no matter how much is put in at the rear
end, practically nothing comes out at the forward end.
On the Northern
L. of C. this stage had nearly been reached.
Hence the necessity for air
transport on a large scale.
A.A.T.O. Reorganized
The Army Air Transport Organization, as originally organized, did not
Com in an entirely satisfactory way, and in February, 1945, a Commander,
Combined Army Air Transportation Organization, was appointed.
He was
responsible to A.L.F.S.E.A. for the co-ordination and executive control of
the entire Army aspect of air transport, including the command and control
Of R.A.M.Os., the co-ordination of demands from formations for the trans-
pom by air of personnel, supplies, and equips from formatiocation of these
demands to the appropriate R.A.M.Os.
He kept A.L.F.S.E.A. informed of
decisions as to priorities.
the air transport and supply situation and was the agent ALFSE A fo
92
With the support of War Office, A.L.F.S.E.A. tried to obtain agreement to
Air Despatch becoming a S.T. commitment and to Cs.R.A.S.C, replacing the
R.A.M.O. staff establishment which was under a commander,
Decisions as to priorities would remain the responsibility of A.L.F.S.E.A
In all the circumstances as previously set out, and particularly because the
Air Force was the carrying agent, G.H.Q., India held that the responsibility
for air despatch must remain that of the Staff.
The S.T. representative at C.A.A.T.O. was an A.D.S.T.; War Office con-
sidered that this should be upgraded to D.D.S.T. in view of the responsibility
involved in this theatre, but this would have upset the balance of the staff of
the organization, in existing conditions.
All S. and T. air supply units were under the operational control of the
but there was a departmental link from S.T.,
A.L.F.S.E.A. through S.T., C.A.A.T.O., to S.T., R.A.M.O.
Predominance of Air Supply
The whole question of supply and transport organization and methods
and the employment of supply and transport units during the third and
fourth phases of Operation "Capital" must be considered against the back-
ground of supply by air.
This was the predominant method employed, as
may be judged by the fact that, in April, of Fourteenth Army's daily require-
ments of 2,090 tons, an average of 1,845 tons was delivered by air, the balance
coming by road and water.
This, more than anything else, showed the total
madequacy of the Northern L. of C.
Because sufficient transport aircraft
could not be provided to meet the constantly increasing demands of Four-
teenth Army, the wasteful land route had to be developed to the utmost, in
spite of the disproportion between the effort expended and the results it was
The highly flexible system of maintenance provided by air supply was
able to do far more than ease the maintenance burden of the land L. of C.;
to a very great extent, it took the latter's place in maintenance. Frequently
the direct air supply link was between R.A.M.Os. and Divisions.
System Governing Supply by Air
The procedure governing supply by air in Fourteenth Army was as
follows: —
(a) A total maximum daily lift (for air-landed and air-dropped main-
tenance separately) was allotted to Fourteenth Army by C.A.A.T.O.;
this was reviewed weekly.
(b) Within this ceiling, Army sub-allotted air space to Corps, and when
necessary to individual divisions and independent brigades.
(c) Formations then demanded on C.A.A.T.O./R.A.M.Os. within their
(d) The corresponding tonnages were then landed or dropped.
93
(37477)
917e7/17
WO 277/21
27
