Pioneer Labour in R.A.S.C. M.T. Depots
In the early part of 1941, it became necessary for various reasons to
employ a number of Pioneer personnel in R.A.S.C. M.T. Depots.
at Slough, they were required to relieve trained R.A.S.C. drivers needed for
At Ashchurch, civilian labour was unobtainable locally, and
shortage of R.A.S.C. personnel made it difficult to operate the depot.
Feltham, they were required to compensate for the loss of civilian labour due
to the latter seeking more remunerative employment locally.
Transfer of R.A.S.C. M.T. Depots to R.A.O.C./R.E.M.E.
In consequence of the Army Council decision on the reorganization of the
Army's M.T. vehicle provision, storage, and maintenance and repair, in
June, 1942, all the R.A.S.C. M.T. Depots in the U.K. were handed over: - -
M.T. Stores Depots
- to R.A.O.C.
Vehicle Reception Depots
Heavy Repair Shops
to R.E.M.E.
One exception was that the portion of the Heavy Repair Shop at High
Wycombe, which had been used for training of R.A.S.C. apprentice trades-
men, was retained by R.A.S.C. for continuation of such artificer training.
It was redesignated as a Training Battalion (Artificers) R.A.S.C.
The technical R.A.S.C. petrol equipment and stores which had been held
in No. 2 M.T. Depot was transferred to No. 9 Petrol Depot, R.A.S.C.
V.R.Ds. for R.A.S.C. Specialist Vehicles
An agreement was reached in June, 1943, between the Directorate of
Warlike Stores and that of Vehicles, that vehicles
operated only in R.A.S.C. units, should be released to such units on direct
requisition to the Directorate of Warlike Stores, without the prior sanction
of the Vehicles Directorate being necessary.
S.T.3 then suggested an extension of this simplified procedure, by an
arrangement for all such vehicles to be held in one or more selected Vehicle
The vehicles which it was proposed should be held in
this way were bulk petrol lorries, water tank lorries, 10-ton and 6-ton lorries,
40-ton tank transporter tractors and trailers, 20-ton tank transporters, Alliga-
tors, DUKWs, ambulances, and bridging vehicles. All these required servicing
and items of equipment not common to the average "B"
with all arms. Control would be simplified, the carrying out of modifications
facilitated, and the provision of special servicing equipment reduced, it
Since, with stocks at their existing critical state, the total holdings of
such vehicles would not fully employ a V.R.D., and that other types of
"B" vehicles would therefore have to be held in it, it was suggested that
"domestic" vehicles, included in the War Establishments of R.A.S.C.
specialist transport companies,
might also be held there, thus making it a
relatively simple matter for all issues for such R.A.S.C, units to be made
the principal types suggested.
The proposal was accepted, and given effect in December, 1943, for
Provision of Vehicles and Spare Parts
As described in earlier chapters, the requirements of the Army in respect
of vehicles on the outbreak of war were mainly satisfied by requisitioning
civilian vehicles, though cars and motor-cycles came direct from the manu-
Subsequent provision was by means of contracts placed with
manufacturers, who made vehicles to W.D. specification.
From early in the war, dependence was placed on the U.S.A. and Canada
for the supply of a large part of the Army's requirements of M.T. vehicles
and spare parts, and by February, 1941, the number of M.T. vehicles ordered
by the Ministry of Supply from those sources, to meet R.A.S.C. Field Force
requirements exceeded 25,000 3-ton lorries, besides 1,400 technical vehicles.
The difficulties experienced in connection with the provision of vehicles and
spare parts from North America are described below.
Proposed switch from vehicle to aircraft production
The Ministry of Supply, on 9th August, 1940, asked whether the War
Office would undertake the impressment or requisitioning of 80,000 load-
carrying vehicles from civilian sources in order to release factories, then
engaged on W.D. vehicle contracts, for the production of Air Ministry re-
The question was examined in conjunction with the Ministry
It appeared that, owing to the high priority assigned
to the Ministry of Aircraft Production in certain stamping and forging pro-
cesses, vehicle output was being disturbed, and this would tend to increase.
i Ce testin, hi to tag is this sure if vehicles has proposed arou
small margin consisting of private cars and tradesmen's vans.
was also worried because they could not get either new vehicles or the
release of raw materials for the repair and maintenance of vehicles already
The Ministry of Supply consequently accepted the fact that Army require-
ments of vehicles could not be met from requisitioned civilian sources, as
Second-hand Civilian Cars
About the end of 1940 the possibility was considered in War Office of
the Army using second-hand high-powered cars, in preference to buying new
cars from North American
Prime Minister himself, and consequently the War Office view that such
a procedure would not be altogether satisfactory was not accepted by the
Ministry of Supply.
On reconsideration, it was agreed to accept 425 cars
for home service use, and, in order to help further over temporary difficulties
with the dollar, to wait until the end of February, 1941, for the final order of
S00 utility cars from North America.
By the middle of 1942. War Office had rather changed its tune, and was
addressing the M.O.W.T. on a proposal to acquire 2,000 civilian-type cars.
Of 11 + 35 hn for the use of static units. etc.. at home, in place of the
W.D. 4-seater cars.
The intention of the Ministry was to buy cars
irom trivate ownere wha had laid them un in consequence of netrol rationing
Eventually, a owners whO.D. cars were replaced in this way.
+117
WO 277/21
