the average vehicle, working in transport pools, was employed for 28 days
of each month, leaving inadequate time for routine maintenance, and virtually
none for the training or recreation of the drivers concerned.
units had not, in fact, been able to avail themselves of the M.T. holidays
afforded by the transportless days.
There was besides already a shortage of drivers in R.A.S.C.
the United Kingdom.
Those of them in the field force which had not yet
been mobilized were 15 per cent. deficient, which made it extremely hara
for them to maintain the requisite standards of training, efficiency, and trans-
port capacity. C.(M)T. companies had not been issued with their full estab-
lishment of vehicles, but only with such numbers as could be operated and
maintained by the personnel at their disposal, i.e., about 95 per cent.
was not practicable to withdraw drivers from units merely to prevent vehicles
The monthly figures of petrol consumption in the Army in the United
Kingdom showed certain reactions to the various measures which have been
described, and these were summarized by the D.S.T. in January, 1943, in
The arbitrary 10 per cent. cut in petrol consumption, ordered in May,
1941, was immediately reflected in the index figure for June and July.
There was slightly more than ten per cent. reduction during June, suggesting
that the first " transportless"
introduced immediately after the ten
per cent. cut, also had a fractional effect.
In January, 1942, the second
' transportless" day was introduced, but no significant change in the general
trend of the index figure was noticeable.
1942, commands had been instructed to develop schemes
for petrol rationing; here again there was no sharp downward trend in the
graph curve, but there was a fairly steady decline in consumption.
A very noticeable decrease in consumption, however, took
September/ October, 1942, which was considered to have resulted from the
reorganization of home transport services and the pooling of transport
resources ordered in the autumn of 1942.
The D.S.T. inferred that the "no transport" day had not contributed
materially to any reduction in fuel consumption, and that the economy in
both fuel and rubber which was being sought was best achieved by the
rigid application of the fuel restrictions, and by the improved administration
Revised Edition of Rules
A revised edition of the pamphlet, " Rules for the Control and use of
, was issued in January, 1943.
It incorporated all the main points described above, but is particularly
noticeable for the even stronger line taken in connection with the use os.
sects of their own first line transport (Or, in the case of R.A.S.C. units,
second or third line transport) vehicles.
It swas now laid down that R.A.S.C. resources were to be supplemented
by use being made of all load-carrying sehicles on charge of units alle
formations; that, in field formations and AVA divisions, no first line vehicle
was to turn out for services Of a regular recurring nature such as drawing
rations, or of an occasional nature such as drawing ordnance stores o
184
conveyance of baggage and of duty personnel without
(the staff captain at brigade H.Q.,
B.R.A.S.C.O., etc); and that, in sub-areas and static establishments, any
unit, no matter how much first, second or third line transport it might possess,
should, as a matter of routine, requisition on the officer i/c transport for
vehicles to perform duties of the same nature as referred to above, and only
with his authorization turn out its own vehicles for the service.
Prior concurrence for regularly recurring services might be of a standing
nature, subject to periodic review.
British and American Speed Limits
In view of the disparity in speed limits between British Army and R.A.F.
vehicles and those of the United States Army, the whole question of speed
in March, 1943.
In four
categories of
divergencies of speeds in these Services were :
W.D.
Motor cars
R.A.F. U.S. Army
Motor cycles
3-ton load-carriers
Wheeled tractors
The question was discussed between the War Office and Air Ministry,
and the conclusions reached were that there would be many disadvantages
in reducing the speed limits for W.D. and R.A.F. cars and motor-cycles
from 40 to 35 m.p.h., in order to conform with U.S. limits, and no appreciable
saving in petrol and rubber would accrue.
In the ordinary way, the dis-
advantages would preclude any reduction; but if, as a matter of expediency,
a reduction was essential, a speed limit of 35 m.p.h. could be enforced without
adversely affecting training or economy in petrol or rubber.
It was con-
sidered that the British Forces secured economy principally by rigid regula-
tion of the use of transport, and by training personnel to avoid the usual
causes of tyre wear, rather than by imposing a speed limit so low as to make
driving a constant strain.
There appeared to be no effective reason for reducing the speed limit
of the heavy vehicles. Little rubber economy would result, petrol consump-
tion would probably increase, and mechanical wear would no doubt also be
greater. It was thought preferable to try and get the U.S. Forces to raise
their limits for heavy vehicles, in order to conform to the W.D.
practice.
The R.A.F. undertook to re-examine their speed limit classifications with
a view to simplification, and to fall into line with whatever speed limits the
Army decided to adopt.
The War Office decided not to alter the existing
speed limits for War Department vehicles.
Recreational Transport
The use of W.D. M.T. vehicles for the conveyance of Army personnel
for recreational purposes was a vexed
question, involving a protracted
process of adjustment between two policies, that of the welfare and morale
of the troops on the one hand, and that of economy of transport for reasons
of saving of money, petrol, and rubber, on the other.
The former was
generally on the winning side.
17717
WO 277/21
27
