million special packs of 23 different types comprising 177 component items.
52 firms were engaged in packing alone, and there were some 1,300 contracts
in all.
The final increase in C.P.O. (F.S.) establishment
was the addition of
12 officers for factory inspections.
This requirement had arisen as a result
of the immense programme for the production of Compo packs, 24-hour
and emergency rations, and the special packages of other foodstuffs for Far
Eastern warfare.
Experience had shown that it was vital to have some officers
spending their whole time at each of the bigger firms involved, and others
spending part time at smaller firms.
It was essential to keep watch on the
receipt from manufacturers of the many items required for a particular pack,
and to watch the packing lines.
This saw the peak of C.P.O's. tasks and also of his organization's strength,
and there was no material change until the run-down began.
Supply Reserve Depots
The Supply Reserve Depot is the foundation of the whole R.A.S.C. supply
system.
In peace, it holds the reserve against war; in war, it holds the basic
stocks from which local depots at home and overseas are built up and
replenished.
In 1938, the only Supply Reserve Depot was at Deptford, in South
East London.
It handled a limited range of items such as were not easily
obtainable from the trade in quantity at short notice or were more economi-
cally bought in bulk than by local contract.
Turnover was effected by using
these stocks to maintain R.A.S.C. Supply
Depots at home and overseas.
Lubricants
were included in the supplies handled.
The Depot had a
capacity of 11,000 tons.
bad from the point of view of air attack.
As described in Chapter IV, the decision was taken in 1938 to provide
a reserve of foodstuffs against the new Field Service Ration Scale, which
included a number of new tinned items.
This required increased holdings
in the S.R.D. and, taken in conjunction with the need for greater security,
led to the establishment of a second depot, designed to hold 30,000 tons, at
Barry, in South
Wales.
Construction was not
complete at the time of
the Munich crisis, but part of the Deptford stocks were hastily transferred
to it as a precautionary measure.
This process of transfer was accelerated
on the outbreak of war, and by December,
1939, Barry held 65,000 tons.
The S.R.Ds. had already been warned to be ready to take in and
despatch supplies, and they were prepared to carry on when mobilization
was ordered
S.T.6 arranged with the Director of Army
Contracts for
the completion of the 30 days' supply for the B.E.F., and of 60 days' of
certain items, and these stocks began to come in.
At the same time
outflow to France began and from the point of view of the S.R.DS.
the
operation of maintaining the B.E.F. proceeded according to plan,
though
unfortunately it was not so satisfactory in the other links of the chain.
The original War Establishment of each
supervisors.
15 other ranks, and 664 civilians, of whom 363
depot comprised 26 officers,
were labourers and labour
As experience was gained, it was found that identical War Establishments
met at first by giving each a special establishment: but, in July 1942 approval
did not fit the differing conditions of individual depots.
This difficulty was
was given to a basic establishment, with variable additions to cover personnel
whose number and quality were dependent upon local conditions at each
The basic element comprised 24 officers and 160 other ranks, the variable
additions ranged from 13 to 43. Labour was to come from Pioneer Corps
or from civilian sources.
There was a provision that civilians were to be
employed where available, and that A.T.S. might be employed where civilians
This establishment was designed for a depot holding
A third S.R.D. was established at Taunton, and began to take in supplies
By July, 1942, two subsidiary types of S.R.D. had come into being, the
S.R.D., working under the central control of the parent S.R.D.,
and the Stores Group S.R.D., a store to hold dispersed stocks which were
subject to infrequent movement.
In 1943, however, as the result of ex-
perience gained in mounting the North African campaign, a reorganization
took place under which A.S.R.Ds. and S.G.S.R.Ds.
had proved satisfactory.
Instead of these, and the basic establishment for
S.R.Ds. with variable additions, two new establishments for S.R.Ds. were now
introduced, Type " A " and Type "В".
"A" S.R.D. was designed to hold 35,000 tons.
establishment was 23 officers,
six civilians, with variable additions for each of the six large S.R.Ds. now to
Provision of labour was from Pioneer or civilian sources.
Type "B" S.R.D. was to hold 8,000 tons, and had a strength of six officers,
16 other ranks, and 30 A.T.S. other ranks, with variable additions where
The lay-out of both was similar, consisting of a headquarter wing,
a provision wing, a stores and transport wing, and four supply (commodity-
These establishments proved sound in principle and
satisfactory in practice, and remained substantially unaltered until the end
It is of interest to note that the greatest differences between depots lay
in the number of tractors and trailers required for interior working.
located numer of trad sorrage company's premises, needed none; but another
15 mechanical horses, 11 tractors,
trailers; and the average
was about four mechanical horses, ten tractors,
Locations before and after Reorganization
Old Organization
1 S.R.D.,
Thornliebank
23 S.G.S.R.D., Edinburgh
24 S.G.S.R.D., Glasgow
4 S.R.D., Swindon
5 S.R.D.,
Lancaster
18 S.R.D., Steventon
19 S.R. D
Osterley, London,
W.
A.S.R.D., Harlesden
22 S.G.S.R.D.,
Hendon
20 S.R.D., Purfleet..
26 A.S.R.D., Tilbury
27 S.G.S.R.D., Victoria Docks, London
1 S. R.D., Type "A".
4 S.R.D., Type " A
5 S.R.D., Type
18 S.R.D., Type
19 S.R.D., Type "A".
20 S.R.D., Type "A".
28 S.R.D., Type "B".
28 A.S.R.D., Leeds.
225
WO 277/21
27
