Increases in Establishment
It was found necessary in August, 1941, to increase the establishment
of the Inspectorate by 14 officers and 53 civilians, in order to cope with
the great expansion of R.A.S.C. units at home.
In addition, there was the
extra work which devolved on the Inspectorate by
the increasing intake
of vehicles from North America, and the technical action resulting therefrom.
Formation of R.E.M.E.
Consequent on the formation in 1942 of R.E.M.E., and the transfer of
responsibilities to D.M.E. and D.W.S., the establishment of C.I.M.T. was
revised, and surplus R.A.S.C. officers were transferred to the R.E.M.E.
The method of publication and distribution to R.A.S.C. units of technical
and modification circulars and other memoranda, until then issued by
C.I.M.T., had to be reconsidered. It was decided that no further C.I.M.T.
technical and modification circulars should be issued, but that C.I.M.T.
would publish periodical memoranda.
These were informative documents
on regimental matters of R.A.S.C. domestic administration for the purpose of
guiding units in applying instructions contained in D.M.E. technical publica-
tions, and of promulgating special instructions considered desirable by D.S.T.
Inspection of Transport Offices
As described elsewhere in this chapter, a reorganization of R.A.S.C.
Transport Offices was carried out, and it was considered necessary to provide
for their periodical inspection.
Three officers were consequently added to
the staff of the C.I.M.T. to carry out this work.
The designation of the Inspectorate was in consequence changed to that
of " Inspectorate of Transport Services, R.A.S.C.", (C.I.T.S.), as being a
more accurate description.
M.T. Inspectorates in Overseas Theatres
M.T. Inspectorates were also set up in all the overseas theatres in which
there was a considerable number of transport units of the R.A.S.C. or its
associated corps. That in Middle East was established in October, 1940.
There were also inspectorates in West and
East Africa, and they were
included in the Order of Battle of the British forces which took part in
the campaigns in North Africa and Italy.
A M.T. Inspectorate, R.A.S.C., was formed in 21 Army Group, before
Operation "Overlord"
It was responsible for inspection
duties in respect of R.A.S.C. vehicles of the field force in the United King-
This brought about a proportionate decrease of the responsibilities
of the C.I.T.S., and a due proportion of inspection staff was transferred
to 21 Army Group to form the new establishment.
Vehicle and Workshop Records
Vehicle accounting is necessary for a number
of reasons:
to show
whether a vehicle is being used in accordance with the rules in force for
he emplomant of W tranennet and with dua varard ta enammy. to afford
148
information as to the mechanical efficiency of the vehicle, as reflected in
inspection reports, and indicated by its consumption of petrol and oil
compared with the mileage run; to provide a record of the work done to
maintain the vehicle in running order, and of changes of engine oil, exchange
of tyres, etc.; a record of the driver responsible at any time; and a record
of the tools, etc., belonging to the vehicle.
The data regarding mileage and consumption of petrol and lubricants
provide material for the completion of statistics from which comparisons of
the results of units'
drawn, and on which estimates may be based.
endeavours to achieve efficiency and economy may be
Below is a brief account of the various documents kept in R.A.S.C.
transport units as vehicle records to meet the foregoing requirements.
Transport Work Ticket
The basis of the system of vehicle records was the transport work
ticket (A.F.
G 3518), which formed at once an authority for the journey
and a record of the route followed, the mileage and duration of each trip,
and the quantities of P.O.L. received.
Before the war, a fresh work ticket
was prepared for every day on which the vehicle ran, and it showed full
details of the day's work, e.g., the trips run between depot and rail.
Daily Work Book
The data recorded in the work ticket were transferred to the Daily Work
Book (A.B. 246) of the unit, which was thus a digest of the work done by all
the vehicles of the company on any given day.
It presented the officer com-
manding with a picture of the employment of his unit, and he was able
to scrutinize vehicle performance in terms of miles run per gallon, to check
excessive mileage for particular journeys, and to take appropriate action
to ascertain the cause of, and to rectify, unsatisfactory results, whether due
to the inefficiency of the driver or the machine, or possibly to some
misdemeanour.
Vehicle Log Book
The figures of mileage run, of P.O.L. drawn, and of days on which the
vehicle was running or not, or was in workshops, were transferred weekly
to the Vehicle Log Book (A.B. 412), and totalled monthly.
In its pre-war
form, the log-book included, besides this information,
repairs carried out and of modifications effected, of the tools belonging to
the vehicle, and of changes of drivers.
The record that maintenance had been
carried out was a later addition which is referred to below.
Vehicle Log Sheet Summary
The monthly total of data regarding mileage, days working, not running,
or in workshops, and the consumption of P.O.L.,
was transferred to a
monthly vehicle log sheet summary.
In this the vehicles were grouped by
types, and it was therefore possible to compare the results of the vehicles
WO 277/21
2
