APPENDIX VID
(See Vol. I, page 364)
MAINTENANCE FACTOR SYSTEM
The Maintenance Factor System was designed to show mathematically
the standard of driver maintenance in a unit.
It formed the basis of the
assessment by the M.T. Inspectorate of the mechanical condition of the unit
vehicles,
and the efficiency of application of maintenance and inspection
routine.
When inspecting vehicles, the M.T. Inspection Branch vehicle examiners
recorded their findings on Army Form G 932, which was very similar to the
form in Army Book 406, that used for platoon and workshop inspections in
M.T. companies.
There were spaces in each for the various parts of the
vehicle, e.g., engine, brakes, electrical equipment, etc.
In A.F. G 932, there were 20 headings.
For the purposes of the system,
each of these carried five points, making a total of 100 points for each vehicle.
When the I.M.T. discovered a fault attributable to lack of driver maintenance
or to lack of supervision of driver maintenance, he marked the appropriate
space to indicate this, and the five points for that section were deducted.
There was no sliding scale, as it was considered that the inspector's individual
opinion of the gravity of the fault must not govern the amounts deducted:
on the other hand, if there were several faults in a section, only
five points
were lost.
The remainder after deductions gave the maintenance factor for
the vehicle.
When all the vehicles had been assessed, a master card was prepared.
This consisted of columns for the 20 sections of A.F. G 932, and a line for
each vehicle inspected.
Against each vehicle, an "X" was marked in each
column where a fault had been found, and at the end the vehicle main-
tenance factor was entered.
At the bottom of the card, the number of
faults in each section was totalled, and the average maintenance factor of
the unit was arrived at, i.e., the percentage of vehicles inspected that had
faults under each of the 20 sections of A.F. G 932.
This master card, showing
the make-up of individual maintenance factors, revealed very clearly the
common weaknesses in a unit, and the direction in which remedial action
should be taken.
The maintenance factor of a vehicle reflected only the degree of driver
maintenance on that vehicle, and mechanical and other faults beyond the
actual scope of the driver had no bearing on the result.
In judging the
standard of driver maintenance, it had to be borne in mind that every de-
duction of five points from 100 indicated that the maintenance of that pari-
cular item had not been properly carried out.
The total deductions indicated
the degree of omission of driver maintenance on the entire vehicle.
A vehicle
maintenance factor of 80 per cent. did not show a satisfactory state of affairs
as would be the case in a school examination.
On the contrary, it showed
on all vehicles inspected an average of four items of maintenance not properly
Any maintenance factor of less than 100 per cent. indicated
that the standard of maintenance was capable of improvement.
398
APPENDIX VIE
(See Vol. I, page 353)
THE " RED BALL" SYSTEM
The essence of the "Red Ball" system operated by the American Army
on its road L. of C. was that maintenance traffic had a cleared route, which
was policed to ensure that only privileged traffic was permitted to use the
route, and subjected to centralized movement control when the traffic offered
was likely to exceed the capacity of the roads used.
This permitted an increase in the average speed maintained by convoys,
which allowed quicker turnround and therefore greater load-carrying value
from a given number of lorries over a given period.
The system was normally associated with the system of transport opera-
tion known as " Continuous Running", i.e., that by which a vehicle is kept
running the maximum number of hours during the day without reference to
vehicle maintenance, and drivers are provided on a scale which enables this
maximum number of hours to be attained.
The contrast to this is the normal R.A.S.C. system, under which a vehicle
is allotted to a driver and is always driven by that driver; the number of
hours in the day which the lorry can operate is limited by the endurance of
the driver, who is also primarily responsible for the maintenance of the
vehicle.
Provided that a high enough average speed can be maintained, it follows
that the more hours a day a lorry travels, the more ton-miles a day will be
attained by a given number of lorries in a given period.
Continuous running
could be shown to give an increase in lift of as much as 30 per cent. over
the R.A.S.C. system.
The use of continuous running system has, however, a number of pre-
requisites, e.g.,
A minimum number of two drivers for each vehicle.
The organization of the transport of the Army to meet the system.
Suitable tasks on which
to employ the transport, the expensive
organization of which would be wasted when employed on miscellaneous
details for which the higher ratio of drivers to vehicles is not required.
Alternative routes and bridges,
on to which
all other
traffic is
ruthlessly diverted.
Suitable tasks presuppose a long haul of a regular lift between
fixed
terminals.
In 21 Army Group, out of a total lift available to G.H.Q. of
34,000 tons in general transport companies, 7,800 tons, or 23 per cent. was
employed on the lift from Bayeux to Brussels, which was the task most
nearly satisfying the pre-requisites; nine per cent. and 12 per cent. in varying
proportions, were employed on the runs from Dieppe to Brussels, and from
the Seine roadheads to Brussels, which would have been partly suitable, but
less so, because of the daily varying proportions between the two runs.
Only on 45 per cent. of the transport in 21 Army Group at most, there-
fore, would it have been anything but wasteful to apply the continuous running
system, involving a complete reorganization of the transport system of the
British Army.
DD 2
37477)
92947
WO 277/21
27
