4. Airborne Divisional R.A.S.C.
(a) Consideration of the reorganization of airborne divisional R.A.S.C.
was based on the assumption that there would be three parachute brigades in
an Airborne Division.
(b) The following proposals were accepted in principle :—
(i) An Airborne Divisional R.A.S.C.
should conform with brigade
organization.
(ii) The total R.A.S.C. resources should consist of :—
H.Q., R.A.S.C.
Three M.T. Company H.Q.
Nine Transport Platoons.
Three Parachute Platoons.
Three Composite Platoons.
Three Workshop Platoons.
Six relief driver increments.
(iii) The basic organization of each company should be :—
H.Q. M.T. Company.
Three Transport Platoons (one to have alternative vehicles—3-ton
and Half-track (or jeep)).
One Parachute Platoon.
One Composite Platoon.
Two R.D.Is.
One Workshop Platoon.
Each company should, however, be capable of interchanging its platoons
with platoons of the other companies in accordance with the operational
situation.
(c) The following were the arguments in support of this organization :-
(i) Provision of a Parachute Brigade Company for each brigade would
allow the formation to operate in brigade groups without altering
the basic organization of the R.A.S.C.
(ii) Each company would be equally trained and ready to undertake an
airborne role.
In the existing organization, only one company was
so designed and trained.
(iii) When the division operated as such in an airborne role, the three
Parachute Platoons would normally be assembled in one company,
in order that only one company should control the dropping zone
initially.
(iv) Compared with the existing organization, that proposed provided
sufficient transport to enable the formation to fight in a ground
role without additional assistance.
5. Amphibious Units.
(a) One organization, common to units manning tracked amphibians and
to those manning wheeled amphibians, was not practicable.
(b) The existing organization of Amphibious Companies R.A.S.C.,
H.Q., M.T. company; four Transport Platoons; three R.D.Is. ; one Am-
phibious Platoon ; and one Workshop Platoon, Serial 3 ; was satisfactory for
units manning wheeled amphibians.
342
(c) A special organization was recommended for R.A.S.C. units manning
tracked amphibians, to be designated
"An Amphibious Assault Regiment,
R.A.S.C.", and to be sub-divided into squadrons and troops.
Each squadron
would have its own workshop troop.
This unit would be capable of three alternative roles :—
(i) Conveyance of troops and stores in an amphibious assault on a
defended-beach, etc., using tracked amphibians.
(ii) Maintenance across a beach or inland water obstacle, using tracked
amphibians.
(ili) Operation of normal load carriers when amphibians were not required,
while also maintaining the tracked amphibians till wanted.
6. Tank Transporter Companies
(a) The existing organization of a Tank Transporter Company, i.e., :—
H.Q., M.T. Company.
Three Transport Platoons, each of 30 transporters.
Three R.D.Is.
One General Duty Platoon.
One Workshop Platoon (serial 5) ;
was considered unsatisfactory, on the following grounds :—
(i It was unwieldy in operation.
(ii) It placed an undue strain on its driver resources, which resulted in
a lack of maintenance efficiency.
(iii) It provided insufficient workshop personnel to meet the units' repair
requirements adequately.
(b) The following organization was considered preferable :-
H.Q., M.T. Company.
Four Transport Platoons, each of 17. transporters, of which two should
be held as spares.
Two R.D.Is.
One Workshop Platoon (serial 5).
While this might appear to be extravagant in manpower, practical experi-
ence had proved that it was essential for each transporter to be manned by
two drivers.
In a normal G.T. company, where each task vehicle was manned
by one driver, the allowance of drivers, including spare drivers, was about 1 • 7
for each vehicle.
The organization proposed for
Tank Transporter Com-
panies would allow about 3•3 drivers for every transporter.
(c) There continued to be an R.E. requirement for an R.A.S.C.-manned
low-loader type of carrier, to carry out the duties then performed by R.A.S.C.
companies operating the obsolescent light tank transporters.
7. Artillery Companies
The organization of a standard Artillery Platoon for an Artillery Regiment
was agreed as follows :—
One Transport Platoon, operating 3-ton lorries.
"A" Section of a Composite Platoon.
One R.D.I.
A Workshop Element, under a staff-serjeant, with tradesmen to scale ;
no breakdown vehicle, but one trailer for carrying stores.
343
WO 277/21
27
