Allocation of Production
In January, 1941, in order that the production of new vehicles in the
United Kingdom might be allocated proportionately between the Service
and Civil Ministries, it was decided that the Ministry of Supply should take
over the productive capacity of the country for spare parts and for new
vehicles for all Government Departments, and that the allocation of vehicle
output would be 90 per cent. to Service Departments, including Civil Defence,
and 10 per cent. to civilian transport services.
Replacement of Impressed Vehicles
The question of replacing by W.D. types of vehicle the considerable
number of civilian vehicles which had been impressed into W.D.
since the outbreak of war was considered by the War Office and the Ministry
of Supply in 1941.
The impressed vehicles' age and mechanical condition
now made their upkeep and operation uneconomical.
Replacement had to be gradual, consistent
Ministry of Supply channels and with the more urgent requirements of
By the end of the year, over 3,000 of these vehicles had been got rid of,
leaving only a small number not replaced as they were of types similar to
vehicles being provided off contracts and the difficulty of providing spare
parts did not therefore arise.
Co-ordination in War Office
It was considered necessary that an officer should be appointed to
be responsible for co-ordinating in the War Office the business connected
with the supply of M.T. vehicles and spare parts of all types required for
all British and Allied Services.
The greater part of this work was at that time being done by S.T.3,
in co-operation with other branches and departments, and this took up
time which that branch could not afford.
A separate branch, known as Q(M.T.) branch, was therefore set up,
in 1942, directly under the D.Q.M.G., with the task of co-ordinating the
work of the provision branches, and acting as a link with the General Staff
Branch concerned. S.T.3 provided an officer to start the Branch.
Spare Parts for North American Vehicles
It was observed early in 1941 that the
scale of
spare parts supplied
with the vehicles by the manufacturers in Canada and the U.S.A. was not
suficiently comprehensive for Army needs, and that additional spares had
consequently to be ordered by the Ministry of Supply.
It was accordingly
arranged that the Ministry should appoint a permanent representative in
North America to act as a liaison officer, and to superintend the purchase of
Office needs.
all spare parts there on a schedule to be determined more in line with War
S.T.3 emphasised the following points as essential for this officer to watch,.
in order to obviate the many difficulties which had been experienced.
M.T.
spares, together with spare engines and other assemblies, must be shipped
with the vehicles, and not separately.
show the contents accurately.
Packing cases must be marked to
Initial consignments must represent 12 months'
estimated supply, after which demands would be made by Central Provision
Printed spare parts lists must be sent at the same time as the vehicles,
and must be available in the first instance in time for units to receive them
Delay in Supply
By September, 1941, a serious delay was occurring in the provision of
spare parts for vehicles from North America, but in a more marked degree
in the case of maintenance and supplementary demands on account of vehicles
already in service in Middle East.
This was attributable mainly to delay
in implementing Lend/Lease procedure, and in securing U.S.
The British Army Staff had recently been established in Washington, the
S.T. element of which was at first mainly concerned with transport matters;
in the present connection, therefore, see also Chapter XIII.
In order to alleviate the difficulty, B.A.S., Washington, proposed the
setting up in Canada of a British M.T. stores depot to hold spare parts
and stores for vehicles of North American origin.
The War Office reaction
to this was that the only safe policy would be to buy three years' estimated
For the total of 90,000 vehicles involved, the cost
of the additional two years' spare parts, over and above the one year already
sanctioned, would be over £7 million.
Treasury approval was received for
the depot, and preparatory action was taken.
The question of the quantities of spare parts to be ordered with new
vehicles obtained under Lend/Lease arrangements had then to be examined.
The Minister of Supply had directed that reductions must be considered in
orders on the U.S.A. for spare parts.
The least that War Office could agree
to was placed at two years' stock, to be provided with the vehicles (of which
one year was to go to the vehicles' destination, and one year to the M.T.S.D
in Canada), and an extra six months' spares to be provided for all parts
which had been subject to modifications, and would not therefore continue
in normal production.
The Ministry of Supply was therefore asked to
order spares accordingly, with an additional one year's stock of spares for
all vehicles already shipped, or to be shipped, from North America.
B.A.S., Washington, was asked to arrange that M.T. stores should
consigned direct to the same destination as vehicles at the agreed percentage
factors at the rate of six month's consumption with the vehicles, six further
months within four months of despatch of the vehicles, followed by six months'
stock every half-year.
Army Rubber Allotment Reduced
The situation of W.D. tyre requirements for home services was
seriously affected by March, 1942, when a cut of 17 per cent. was made in
the allocation of rubber for this purpose.
A total cut of 51 per cent. was
threatened, which would have meant the War Department being deficient
of 320,000 tyres during 1942.
The military repercussions were accordingly
represented to the Ministry of Supply.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
