Method of Procurement under Lend-Lease
The Lend-Lease procuring agency in U.S.A. for military vehicles in
1941 was the Motor Transport Division of the Quarter-Master Corps of
the U.S. War Department, which had set up a Defence Aid Section for the
purpose.
But, before the Motor Transport Division could take any procure-
ment action, all vehicles had to be included in tabled requirements, subject
to the approval of the International Supply Committee.
Revision of Procedure for Distribution, etc.
The B.A.S. were in a most unfortunate position in connection with con-
trolling distribution, owing to the procedure in existence for maintaining and
shipping vehicles, which was as follows: —
(a) Submission by B.P.C. to the U.S. W.D. of a Lend-Lease requisition.
(b) Letting of a special contract by the Motor Transport Division to
vehicle manufacturers.
(c) Issue of case-marking instructions by S.T. to the Motor Transport
(d) Notification to B.P.C. of availability of vehicles ex plant.
(e) Issue by B.P.C. (Lend-Lease Stores Clearance Section) of shipping
instructions to M.O.W.T.
In November, 1941, therefore, the Lend-Lease Stores Clearance Section
was transferred to the B.A.S., and that part of it dealing with the shipment
of vehicles was absorbed in S.T.
The immediate result of this change was
that S.T. not only controlled all distribution and shipment of vehicles and
spares, but also acted as the Movements Section for all M.T. stores and
related equipment procured by the Motor Transport Supply Directorate of
the B.P.C.
Revised Procedure under Lend-Lease
the procedure for obtaining
material under Lend-
Lease was radically changed, owing primarily to the fact that the U.S.
were now at war, and it was undesirable for special contracts to be made
solely for requirements for any Lend-Lease beneficiary country.
Under the new arrangements, all requirements of all Lend-Lease countries
and the U.S. W.D. were tabled for the year, and vehicles were made available
by monthly assignments either from U.S. stocks, or from contracts made by
the U.S. W.D. to cover the joint requirements.
Scale of Maintenance Spares
From the beginning of British purchases in North America, there had
been no standard scale in existence for the provision of maintenance spares,
with the result that either spares were shipped according to the manufacturer's
ideas of maintenance needs or, in some cases a costings were shipped at all.
When Lend-Lease vehicles began to be provided, the Quarter-Master Corps
furnished scales to what was known as the Defence Aid Scale, which covered,
on an average, 400-500 items for every Defe vehicles a quite inadequate
290
The U.S. W.D. appeared to be indifferent to the question of maintenance,
probably because they were not then at war and had never seriously con-
sidered the vast problem which the maintenance of vehicles in war presents.
On manoeuvres, the U.S. Army had been serviced almost entirely by the
vehicle manufacturers themselves, who sent vehicles full of spare parts to
the scene of operations, and if necessary flew parts from the factory.
normal times, the comparatively small holdings of M.T. vehicles were ser-
viced from local suppliers.
The Army
minded.
was not therefore maintenance
The Ministry of Supply had foreseen the problem which was bound
to arise,
and had sent to North America a representative specifically to
deal with maintenance spares, and in the first instance to persuade manu-
facturers to produce a reasonable maintenance scale.
His terms of reference
also included the duties of arranging for the procurement of any additional
spares required over and above those supplied with the vehicles, and investi-
gating the Canadian production situation, with the ultimate object of fixing
a scale which could be used as a basis for issue in both Canada and the U.S.
(See also Chapter XII, Section 2.)
A general scale of spares for "B" vehicles was not produced and
approved by London until the summer of 1941.
It was called the British
Percentage Factor Scale, and was adopted at once by the D.M.S., Canada,
as a basis for initial spares procurement and issue.
The Quarter-Master Corps could not be persuaded to procure spares
to this British scale, and so supplementary spares réquisitions had to be
submitted to them in order to provide additional spares for vehicles supplied
under Lend-Lease, and for vehicles obtained under British contracts which
had been been supplied with an inadequate scale of spares or none at all.
By August, 1941, the Ministry of Supply representative had made a few
of these supplementary
requisitions,
but
the proportion
of vehicles so
covered was infinitesimal compared with the numbers supplied or to come.
S.T., therefore, with the full knowledge and concurrence of the B.P.C., the
Ministry of Supply and the War Office, assumed the responsibility for
initiating procurement of the additional spares required, and in December,
1941, proceeded to build up the necessary lists for procurement in respect
of all vehicles supplied since the first order placed by the Ministry of Supply.
In the meantime, the British Percentage Factor Scale had been revised,
and agreement reached that spare parts would be provided from North
America automatically, sufficient to cover two years' maintenance.
This was
accepted by D.M.S., Canada, and action was taken to place the necessary
orders; but for U.S. vehicles the new policy meant that not only had "fill-
in" requisitions to be submitted, but also further requisitions in respect of
all vehicles supplied to date to cover one additional year's maintenance
spares.
No extra military stafl could be obtained to cope with this enormous
task, and reliance had to be placed on indifferent civilian assistance.
By March, 1942, the U.S. W.D. had at last realized the necessity for
adequate provision of spares, and revised their Defence Aid Scale to make
it appate provision of spares to the revised British Percentage Factor Scale.
They also agreed that it was essential that the vehicles should be maintained
beyond 12 months, and undertook to place orders with all future vehicle
contracts for the supply of two years' maintenance spares.
291
wO 277/
27
