In order to remedy the shortage of rations, a special road transport column
from Rangoon was improvised, which carried to the corps supplies
from those intended for the follow-up troops which would have come by sea
if the landing had been opposed.
Maintenance, Phase Il
At the beginning of June, the port of Rangoon began to get into its stride.
The troops in the Rangoon area had been placed on half rations to help the
general situation, and a trickle of supplies began to move northwards.
This
grew until a full scale of rations was achieved on 25th May.
Thereafter all
resources were devoted to building up maintenance at the full ration scale.
the inclusion of fresh supplies, canteen stores, monsoon stores (tents and
tarpaulins), amenity stores, and clothing.
These were made available by free
dropping at Pegu,
and a limited airlift to Mingaladon and Toungoo.
Gradually the L. of C. from Rangoon became able to maintain the whole
corps, though three days' lift to Toungoo had to be sacrificed to allow rein-
forcements to be brought in to 19 Division.
By the end of the phase, the
use of the railway instead of the road from Rangoon was about to begin.
Maintenance, Phase III
When the Japanese break-out occurred, road and rail communications
between Pegu and Toungoo were closed, except for operational moves and
operationally essential convoys.
Troops north of the break were based on
F.M.A., Toungoo, and those south of it on F.M.A., Pegu.
The former were
maintained throughout by way of the L. of C. from Manipur Road through
Kalewa and Myingyan, plus all possible airlift (50 tons a day) landed at
Toungoo.
The airlift was devoted to ammunition, as certain types were not
available from Central Burma or Pegu.
F.M.A., Pegu, was maintained by
road from Rangoon, either in corps or formation transport, throughout the
battle. An armed convoy was held always ready to supply any units along
the Pegu-Toungoo road.
Before the break-out, the ammunition reserves of all formations and units
had been considerably increased, and this " cushion", together with adequate
holdings in F.M.As., enabled all ammunition demands to be met over the
limited period of the battle.
This was fortunate, as Rangoon Base Ammuni-
tion Depot was exhausted of several sorts, and the tonnages of ammunition
delivered into Toungoo were insufficient to replace expenditure, which
amounted to 600 tons a day from 20th to 23rd July.
SECTION 6.—THE FAR EAST
The Australians in New Guinea
The operations envisaged in the report of the Lethbridge Mission were
expected to take place in Burma, Indo-China, Malaya and Indonesia.
Mission therefore pursued its enquiries with the Australian forces in New
Guinea. as well as with A.T.F ES F. A.. as nresentina conditions similar to those
which would be encountered in those areas.
104
Nowgon
Gauhati
assess:
BUI
SCALE 1: 2,922,000 OR
MLS 2,5
International Bound Mesarieng
Inter-State Bounde
Inter-Provincial B
Railwavs (Double Tr
Railways (Single Tre
Roads, under consi
or motorable in F
Pook tracks. Only=
Footpaths.
Airfeld....
Landing
Roads (M.T.).
Geographical Section, Ging
MAP NO 7
eang Nagor Lämpang
M. Sawarngalo
• M Kambhengbhej
M Nagörn Sawarn
WO 277/21
27
