The skeleton organization for the R.A.S.C.
of each division in
the
home defence plan was to comprise a C.R.A.S.C.,
one officer
represent the supply, petrol, and ammunition companies, respectively; and
a framework of the divisional R.A.S.C. companies in order to control and
put into use without delay the acquired vehicles.
The proposal was made that the vehicles of the M.T.
vehicle depots
should be at the disposal of the C.-in-C., Home Forces; but S.T.3 represented
that the number and type of vehicles in these depots fluctuated from time to
time, and it would be dangerous to plan on their availability.
The use of vehicles of transport units in Mobilization Centres, R.A.S.C.,
and other R.A.S.C. units mobilized for overseas, for troop-carrying duties
in case of an emergency only was, however, agreed, unrestricted use being
permitted if active operations developed.
In any case, the sub-unit organi-
zation of companies so employed was to be kept intact.
The eleven divisions and the Armoured Division which returned from
France brought no R.A.S.C. vehicles with
therefore,
equipped with a nucleus of M.T. sufficient to give them a skeleton organiza-
tion for the carriage of supplies, petrol and ammunition.
Some were com-
pletely re-equipped.
equipped with R.A.S.C. vehicles in whole of in part.
and
29th June, 1940, roughly 8,500 vehicles and 3,000 motor-cycles were issued
in this connection.
been issued by 10th August.
On 17th May, 1940, at noon, S.T.3 was called upon to provide motor-
car transport to convey rifle parties, drawn from searchlight detachments,
to the scene of any parachute descent.
The total number of vehicles required
was about 2,000.
of Transport, the Metropolitan Police, taxi-cab owners, and the Cab-drivers'
Union; and, by 8 p.m. that day, the acquisition of a number of taxicabs
was in hand, the whole requirement being satisfied in 48 hours.
Motor Coach Companies
On 18th June, it was decided to acquire over
1,900 motor coaches,
to be formed into Motor Coach Companies, R.A.S.C., for the conveyance
of troops of divisions.
This meant the creation of a procedure to acquire vehicles under Ministry
of Defence Regulations, which had not hitherto been used by the War Depart-
ment, and required detailed collaboration with the Ministry of Transport
and the Treasury Solicitor.
Meantime, 60 technically qualified R.A.S.C.
officers, including those of the Inspectorate of Supplementary
Transport,
began the initial selection and earmarking of the vehicles to be acquired.
The War Establishment of a Motor Coach Company was drawn up. and
redundant R.A.S.C. units, formerly in the B.E.F., were reorganized to form
the 32 companies necessary.
Coaches were absorbed into organized com-
panies at an average rate of about 240 vehicles, i.e., four companies, a day.
The coaches, being of 32-seater capacity, were organized in sections of 20,
each section sufficient to carry one battalion.
were raised, making a total of 2,580 coaches in all.
Later, 11 additional companies
coaches for maintenance and replacement was also formed.
A reserve of 400
122
civilian capacity,
breakdowns
Home Forces,
efficiency.
military service.
These strictures
comparatively old coaches.
tinuous use on operational rôles.
formations concerned.
were in the required 32-seater
had 3,000 already.
their equipment and machinery.
facilities were not available.
In August,
and similarity of performance.
considerable mileage in their
Owing to low
with constant
clearance, they
units,
commands and G.H.Q.,
and did
The
urgency
of the
proposed to requisition
Of these, considerably less than half
were inspected by officers of the
WO 277/
27
