720-tons lift of the normal eight 3-ton platoons of a divisional R.A.S.C. in
other theatres, and the 540-ton lift of the Indian Divisional R.I.A.S.C.; and.
on the other hand with the 130 tons a day, inclusive of all commodities,
which was the air lift allowance for a division maintained by air supply.
In practice, however, as a result of the shortage of jeeps, 15-cwt. 4x4
trucks were issued instead of jeeps: while 30-cwt. 6 x 6 lorries were largely
substituted for 3-ton 4 x 4 lorries.
Few divisions, apart from 17, 19 and 36,
had any jeep companies; 4 Corps had four such units as Corps troops at one
time. Fighting units were given priority of issue of jeeps and 15-cwt. 4x4
The carriers materialized, but their performance did not make them
popular with divisions, which preferred jeeps and 15-cwt. trucks.
In the case of the 2 Divisional R.A.S.C., the heavy company was allowed
four relief driver increments, and the light company two. In practice in this
division, the two companies were not organized as one heavy and one light,
but in the following manner, which was found to work well: -
First Company: two platoons of 3-ton lorries, and two platoons of
Second Company: two platoons of 3-ton lorries, one platoon of jeeps
(or substitutes), and one platoon of carriers.
This arrangement made for flexibility, and obviated constant borrowing
of transport between the two companies to suit the terrain over which they
were operating.
The first company was the supplies and petrol company,
Each com-
pany had its workshop platoon; and as the scale allowed made no provision
for the maintenance of the affiliated vehicles of divisional H.Q. and the field
ambulances, an additional workshop platoon was retained by the divisional
R.A.S.C. to cover this commitment.
The Composite Platoons in this division were each split into an ammuni-
tion and a supplies and petrol section, and the four sections of each type were
attached to the appropriate transport companies.
units, and were intended to be used as a pool.
In other divisions there was no general allotment of companies to com-
modity duties and the available transport was used as a pool, depending on
the role of the division, the number of brigades on air lift, and the length
and condition of the road lift.
Availability in companies was not more than
663 per cent., due to lack of spares, major assemblies, and replacement
vehicles.
Concentration of 33 Corps
The plan was for 11 East African Division to establish a bridgehead over
to cross at Mawlaik.
the Chindwin at Kalewa, for 2 Division to pass through it, and for 20 Division
The two latter formations, together with 254 Tank
Brigade, had first to be concentrated in the Yazagyo area.
2 Division had
to move in its own transport.
to be carried there in Corps and L. of C. transport. but 20 Division was able
78
For the maintenance of the concentration, an air-landing strip was opened
No F.A.M.O. was yet available, so the Burma Supply Com-
pany was given labour and transport and the task of organizing the strip,
which it did with considerable success, and the first Dakotas landed on 16th
The same company aiso operated a supply point, a petrol point,
and an ammunition
Then a detachment from a beach group was
allotted as a F.A.M.O., maintaining the Corps from the strip, with the excep-
tion of 11 Division which persisted in depending on supply drop supplemented
by ammunition and petrol drawn by road from corps F.M.A.
33 Corps claimed, not without justification, that never before had a
corps been committed over 170 miles of the worst roads in the world with
such inadequate resources.
The air tonnage allotted was insufficient to main-
tain the troops and at the same time enable reserves to be built up against
the crossing of the Chindwin.
Maintenance by air through Yazagyo was
unsatisfactory, as 33 Corps never knew what tonnage would be landed.
was at this time some confusion in the rearward areas, where the rate of
advance had taken higher formations by surprise, and it increased as depots
were transferred from Fourteenth Army to the newly-formed L. of C. com-
mand, or to A.L.F.S.E.A. control.
Thé air lift was supplemented by Corps
transport bringing petrol, ammunition, and canteen stores from Moreh and
even Imphal, while 2 Division and the Tank Brigade drew their own petrol
This arrangement could not be kept up, and Army allotted
Corps 100 tons a day of L. of C. transport from 9th December, but this could
Then 50 Dakotas were withdrawn to help the situation in China, and the
corps airlift was cut by fifty tons; and finally Yazagyo strip was put out of
action by rain. There was insufficient petrol to turn round the lorries
employed on the concentration of the corps, as in spite of orders to the con-
trary large numbers of Army and L. of C. vehicles arrived in corps area
without enough petrol for their return journey. In this connection, compare
Chapter VI, " Third line transport ".
In such circumstances, it said much for the services that there was no real
breakdown. Even so, the troops were on half rations and had no cigarettes.
The fiction persisted that all abortive air lifts were made up, but in fact this
was never the case. The comment was made that if no tea was landed one
day, and there was no reserve to make up the deficiency, all the tea in the
world landed several days later would not convince the troops that adminis-
tration was sound. Matters improved when the Supreme Allied Commander
arranged for the aircraft lift to be restored to its former volume; and the re-
organization of the whole air supply system was initiated, as described later.
Operation "Capital", Phase Il
Meanwhile, Fourteenth Army was beginning to cross the Chindwin as the
first stage in Phase Il of the operations.
4 Corps had come up on the left
of 33 Corps, and had put 19 Division across at Sittaung. 11 Division had
established the bridgehead opposite Kalew.
The R.A.S.C. DUKW company played a very considerable part in the
operations in the Chindwin valley.
The road from Kalewa to Shwegyin was
impassable at this timwin valley ferry srovice was improvised using R.E.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
