S.T.3 and Veterinary Branch agreed that it would be preferable for the
but S.T.3 considered that, unless there
could be a concentration of one platoon (25 wagons) in any one district,
any smaller number should be regarded as first line transport of the unit, etc.,
A.T.S. could not be used owing to their
other duties, and, where necessary,
Civilian type wagons had to be bought in some cases, as the W.D. vehicles
Where platoons were formed, they became part of a command (mixed)
transport, company, the establishment
being one officer, 51 other ranks,
4 A.T.S., up to 60 animals, and up to 30 vehicles.
The initial allotment was of 572 vehicles, and as many pairs of animals,
distributed throughout home commands.
By May, 1943,
become 400 vehicles and 600 animals, while in October, 1944, it was 220
These figures reflect the fact that the one-horse
vehicle is a useful form of horse transport for use in barracks, etc., for such
work as carting coal, and collection and delivery of packages.
vehicle was not found to be altogether suitable for employment, and purchase
of civilian types was approved, where this would be more economical, up
to the limit of the allotments of wagons to each command.
Policy regarding use of Animal Transport
While War Department animal transport was being thus expanded, the
policy of hiring animal transport to the maximum extent possible for services
hitherto performed by W.D. or hired M.T. was followed by the D.S.T.
the same time, he submitted to the Q.M.G. that, in view of the
deficiencies in manpower, and of the fact that the only suitable animals and
vehicles must come from civilian resources, the most practical method of
exploiting animal transport was to use the existing civil resources of organized
animal transport, i.e., to hire complete turn-outs of man, animal and vehicle.
This would have the advantage of giving the War Department the use of
horse-drawn vehicles without any load being imposed on military man-
power, or on the administrative services which would have to be created to
manage what would be an entirely new service;
organization of W.D. transport were to increase very considerably.
therefore suggested that no further action should be considered necessary
to provide W.D. sources of animal transport turn-outs.
Q.M.G. agreed, directing at the same time that every animal the Army
possessed should earn its keep if at all possible, and that every possible
use was to be made of animal transport.
Two years later, in September, 1944, Q.M.G. stated that, as the tonnag
per man which could be carried in animal transport was very low, it would
be difficult, at that stage of the war, particularly now that the Army was
being reduced in numbers, to establish a strong case for incurring expendi-
MET. on animals, vehicles or harness, especially as adequate supplies of
M.T. vehicles were available.
We consequence of this decision, the animal transport situation was re-
viewed. and i was found that the numbers of vehicles and animais nad
fallen by about 40 per cent. It had been assumed that some commands were
unable to take up their full allotment because suitable civilian vehicles were
not available for purchase nor were personnel available to work the transport.
It was, however, ascertained that, in general, the existing W.D. animal trans-
port was being employed to its full capacity.
Hiring charges for animal transport in the third quarter of 1942 totalled
only £1,700, but in the next it had risen to £14,000, and throughout 1943
and 1944 averaged €20,000 a quarter.
Thereafter, it declined to £8,000
Abolition of Animal Transport Platoons
It was decided to abolish the animal transport platoons in commands at
Although useful employment had been found for
this transport for certain R.A.S.C. services involving comparatively short
its operation had become generally uneconomical as
Apart from the requirement of trained personnel for its opera-
tion and maintenance, involving manpower which could be more
allocated elsewhere, special arrangements were necessary for the
of forage, stables, and veterinary services, involving administrative problems
which were considered to outweigh the few advantages which might remain to
justify the continued existence of animal transport in this form.
R.A.S.C. Transport Offices-Pre-War
Before the outbreak of war in 1939, R.A.S.C. transport offices in the
United Kingdom were responsible for the administrative arrangements in
connection with all transport services of the Army except the conveyance
of personnel by rail.
Thus, they received requisitions for transport for all
services which units were unable to carry out with their own transport, and
they detailed the transport suitable for performing the services.
port might be either W.D. transport, whether R.A.S.C. or other arms, or
hired. In this connection, it is to be noted that all load-carrying transport,
including cars, of all military units, was, under King's Regulations, placed
at the disposal of the R.A.S.C. officer i/c transport, when not required for
training purposes by the unit and was then available for employment on
general transport duties.
The transport office carried out all hirings of road transport for the
conveyance of both personnel and stores, whether under contract or of a
casual nature; it administered the contracts, checked the correctness of the
bills, and passed them to the Command Paymaster for settlement.
The officer i/c transport was also responsible for the arrangements in
connection with the conveyance of military goods and baggage by rail.
included the arrangements, direct in large stations, and through the railway or
a transport agency and/or the local unit in smaller stations, for the collection
and delivery
of stores and baggage,
and for their despatch by rail; the
arrangements for the provision of rolling stock when necessary; the registra-
tion of the documents relating to carriage, and their proper disposal; the
obtaining of acknowledgement of receipt by the consignee; action with the
railway companies in connection with loss or damage in transit; the checking
of railway bills, which required an intimate knowledge of the complicated
167
21987/77
WO 277/21
27
