In so far as a considerable amount of really unnecessary running, which
would otherwise have taken place, was prevented by the scheme, there was
of course a consequential economy of petrol, which did, in fact, attain large
At the same time, it is evident that any necessary journey
which was not allowed to take place on the rest-day would have to be
made on another day.
The natural consequence would be to cause an
increased demand for transport on working days.
While the rule could be reasonably applied to units other than R.A.S.C.
which possessed first line transport as part of their organization for war,
and not for general transport purposes, it could not as a rule be applied to
R.A.S.C. transport, or at any rate to Command (Mixed) Transport Companies.
Ration orries, ambulances, cars for the conveyance of staff and administrative
officers, and a number of other vehicles, had to carry on as usual, or much
other work would have been brought to a standstill.
Again, an increased
demand would have been caused on working days.
Another aspect of the weekly rest-day
was that it confused the issue
The 16-task maintenance system, applicable
to all "B" and R.A.S.C. vehicles, provided for all necessary maintenance
being carried out in instalments of half an hour's duration each day, thus
completing the whole schedule once in every fortnight.
the most practicable system for application to field service conditions, where
days off for maintenance could not be guaranteed, and might well be few
To make the rest day a recognized occasion for maintenance would tend
to induce the practice of leaving the daily task undone, and of concentrating
the whole week's tasks on the rest day.
Thus, a wrong
habit would be
inculcated into those responsible for vehicle maintenance, which would have
to be unlearnt when they went on active service.
Maintenance Day-Another Form
It is convenient to mention here, for purposes of comparison, another
form of weekly maintenance day, under which a proportion of the vehicles
of a unit were, in static conditions, taken off the road each day during the
week. This was carried (in India) to the extent of painting on each vehicle
its allotted day of the week; and units actually went into the forward area
with their vehicles still so marked, where conditions made the observance
of such an arrangement quite impossible, thus necessitating the introduction
of a different system at a difficult moment.
The efiect of such a system on a transport company was to reduce the
daily availability below its proper level.
vehicles and three spare.
A transport platoon had 30 task
The latter were intended to provide for replace-
the lit the task vehicles necessarily off the road for inspection and repair,
the lift of the platoon thus remaining unimpaired.
the description of the R.A.S.C. system in Appendix VIB.)
(In this connection, see
If, however, one
that ven of the 33 vehicles was taken off the road every day, this meant
that four to five vehicles a dav were off. excluding those under repair, thus
in Chapter VII, the description of such a system adopted in the campaign
reducing the lift by at least one or two vehicles a platoon.
Compare also,
Conservation of Rubber
The necessity for conservation of rubber was an important aspect of
economy of transport, and it became of outstanding importance towards the
end of 1941, when the worsening situation in the Far East began to con-
stitute a threat to rubber supplies, for which we depended very largely on
the production in Malaya.
Measures were considered at the War Office with a view to effecting
economy and conservation of rubber, and the Rubber Committee, on which
S.T.3 was represented, made a number of recommendations, as follows: -
(a) The institution of a second vehicle rest-day a week.
The reduction of full-scale formation exercises by 25 per cent.
(c) The abolition, as far as possible, of the delivery of stores by road.
(d) The reduction of the number of vehicles on the establishment of
units and installations, etc.
The use of handcarts in camps and barracks, in place of M.T.
(f) The conservation of tyres in units in all circumstances.
The question of remoulding or otherwise recovering worn tyres was also
considered. There were at that time no definite data as to the relative merits
of the two methods, remoulding and recapping, the latter involving renewal
of the tread only; but the former was considered to be the more thorough
of the two, and it was decided to use remoulded tyres in overseas theatres,
The procedure adopted in the R.A.S.C. for reconditioning worn tyres
was for units to remove them when they had reached the limit of wear
which had been laid down for that purpose, and return them to M.T.S.Ds.
Any tyres there found obviously unfit for remoulding were passed to
salvage, while those considered fit for remoulding were sent to agreed tyre
manufacturers, who remoulded them under Ministry of Supply running con-
tracts and then returned them to M.T.S.Ds. for re-issue.
of the R.A.S.C. tyres sent to these manufacturers were recovered.
Further Restrictions on Transport
Partly as the result of the recommendations of the Rubber Committee,
the advantages of the rest-day
scheme was considered to outweigh its
disadvantages, and in January, 1942, it was extended.
In view of the effect
of the Far Eastern situation on the supply of rubber, it was imperative to
obtain the maximum life from the tyres of W.D. M.T. vehicles.
this, the following instructions were promulgated (A.C.I. 129 of 1942): -
(a) Tyres were to removed in time to enable them to be remoulded
and re-treaded, rather than to be run until quite worn out.
(b) The vehicle rest day, or maintenance day as it had come to be
called, was increased to two days a week, neither to be a Sunday,
(c) A ban was placed on the use of one-third of all transport in the
United Kingdom on the other five days of the week, except where
this would seriously interfere with the training of drivers.
(d) The maximum restrictions were placed
on the delivery or collec-
tion by road or ordnance and other stores.
179
7717
WO 277/21
27
