As a result of this reorganization, the R.I.A.S.C. transport companies
lost their workshops, which had been organized on the same lines as those
of the R.A.S.C.
This induced a tendency in the R.I.A.S.C. to feel that
vehicle maintenance was now the other man's job.
It was unfortunate that
the declaration of war in 1939 came before the I.A.O.C. workshop organiza-
tion had had a chance of becoming an efficient and fully equipped service.
Much reorganization was still in progress, and there was an urgent demand
for expansion on mobilization.
The compromise later effected in respect of company workshops is dealt
with later in this chapter.
In spite of the experiences of the first world war in Mesopotamia, the
Imperial aspect of organization for war had been neglected in
years
between the wars, and, for political and financial reasons, the Indian Army
was primarily organized to deal with internal security and with problems
arising on the North West Frontier.
Partly for these reasons, a number
of animal transport units, mule and camel, had been retained; and later the
mule companies proved to be of immense service in France, Italy, Middle
East, and Burma.
The organization of Base and L. of C. supply units
of the R.I.A.S.C. in particular was designed for frontier warfare.
These
units were organized as Headquarters of Supply Companies, and Supply
Sections; and the principle of employment of the company was for the
Headquarters, with some sections, to operate the Base, or Advanced Base,
Supply Depot maintaining the force, and for other sections to operate as
Detail Issue Depots up the line. This system was not in itself objectionable;
and it was well suited to minor operations.
But it did not lend itself to
large scale operations of the character of a world war, especially overseas
operations in conjunction with other forces.
The chief difficulty lay in
the method of control.
Under the Indian system, the O.C. of the Supply Company was made
responsible for the supervision of all depots manned by sections of his
company, and for their technical efficiency.
This may, perhaps, have beer
a satisfactory arrangement where the area covered was limited. as it would
be in the ordinary small war on the North West Frontier;
but it proved
quite impracticable, when, as in Assam, the depots were hundreds of miles
from the company headquarters, with indifferent communications with the
latter, and no lateral communications between the different lines.
The result
was that if the O.C. company paid a brief visit to each of his sections once
a month, he might be away from his headquarters for at least half the month.
This principle applied even where the depot was located in a sub-area,
with a local D.A.D.S.T.
Under the British system, the latter
would have
been regarded as responsible for the local supply services, including
the
technical supervision of the supply depot; but, under the Indian, he was
regarded as purely a technical adviser, and it was improper for him to
intefere even if the depot failed in its task; then he could only report the
matter to the O.C. company, perhaps 300 miles away.
This difficulty was later overcome by the appointment of Cs.R.I.A.S.C.,
L. of C., who exercised executive functions and command in relation to
the supply and transport units in their jurisdiction.
Staff and Services
There was a considerable degree of centralization in administrative matters
in India, and the S.T. staff was not so free to deal with technical matters as
branch of "Q" Staff dealing solely with P.O.L., although there was at
the same time a branch in the S.T. directorate for the same purpose.
Commands was controlled by
Staff, who did not invariably
consult their S.T. advisers, e.g., on such matters as estimates of the amount
of transport required for the various commitments in the command.
B.R.I.A.S.C. of a Command, equivalent to a D.D.S.T., was not allowed to
issue instructions to the S.T.
technical matters as the stocking of supply depots, but this was required to
be done through staff channels.
In fact, the general principle was that all action originated with the
could be acted upon unless it had reached the service through staff channels.
the British
It is a fair criticism to say that this state of affairs resulted in the
stifing of initiative in the services, a duplication of personnel, and loss of
efficiency.
Control of Transport
In India, the peace-time use of military transport units was very largely
confined to the employment of animal transport, except for the few M.T.
units which were employed on regular maintenance duties on the North West
frontier.
This was
chiefly due to reasons of economy, and throughout
India the main transport requirements of the Services were met by local
hired transport contracts,
operated in a few cases by specially appointed
station transport officers, but for the most part controlled by the O. i/c
supplies as a subsidiary function.
There was therefore no central control
of local transport services by G.H.Q., India, analogous to the system in
force in the United Kingdom, where the War Office enunciated policy and
co-ordinated operation, local administration being effected by a network of
transport offices, as described in Chapter XII, Section 2.
Under the Indian
arrangements,
Headquarters of Commands and Armies were empowered to
make contracts to suit local conditions, of which they were the better judges,
and no attempt to introduce central control was made until the beginning of
1945.
The
inadequacy of local transport to
meet demands then
made it
imperative to introduce a greater measure of control,
and to effect co-
ordination of every available transport resource.
Regulations to promote
and achieve this were promulgated in an Indian Army Order, which defined
unequivocally the correct relations
between the Staff and
the S.
and T.
Directorate in regard to the control of transport; and, while the principles
on which these relations rested were of general application, and not limited
to the particular circumstances of India,
it is believed that this was the
first authoritative expression of such definition.
WO 277/21.
27
