The problem of the meat supply for Indian troops was not so easy to
solve, and was never really satisfactory.
The best that could be done was
a supply of dehydrated goat meat prepared in India.
This scheme met severe
initial difficulties, and supply never approached demand.
Some dehydrated
minced mutton was imported from Australia, which was acceptable to some
categories of Indian troops.
The medical authorities decided that long service in Arakan and Assam
without fresh meat had brought about a condition of malnutrition in 7 Indian
Division.
A special scale of convalescent rations was therefore sanctioned.
and the supply of meat on hoof was stepped up.
It was later found that the
parrot cry of malnutrition had been overdone, and the word fell into
disrepute.
The Indian 8-men Pack and the "K" Ration
In spite of all these difficulties, it was the firm policy throughout the
campaign to issue the field service ration in preference to pack rations, for
First, there were the normal considerations of the nutritional
value of the ration, and the effect on morale of living for protracted periods
on preserved foods. In any case, it was difficult to obtain large quantities of
pack rations of United Kingdom or American manufacture, even if these had
been, at this period, suitable for the conditions in S.E.A.C. India failed to
invent a really satisfactory pack ration with her available resources, and there
were also production difficulties (see also Chapter X).
whole, it is unlikely that special pack rations formed more than 10 per cent.
of the total consumption of rations, and probably the proportion did not
exceed 5 per cent.
The most extensively used pack ration of the whole campaign was the
8-men composite ration, produced in India.. It was of three types, for
British, Indian, and West African troops respectively; all three were packed
in "flimsy" tins of the 4-gallon pattern used for petrol, but with a soldered
side opening.
There were six varieties of the British troops type, the con-
tents being similar to the full F.S. ration, with tinned or dried substitutes for
the fresh items.
On the whole, it was a success, the principal fault being the
outer container, which was very liable to break up with rough handling.
For the second expedition of his long range penetration brigades into
Burma, General Wingate selected the American
"K" ration. originally a
parachute troops' ration (see Appendix IX).
Several million were ordered,
but the numbers used by Special Force fell far short of provision, and there
was a large surplus to dispose of, effected by issue to troops on the L. of C.,
with the addition of certain items, including bread, to make the ration more
acceptable.
War Office Planning of Special Packs
The recommendations of the Lethbridge Mission regarding the provision
of special ration packs for use in the Far East had been anticipated by the
War Office, which had foreseen that this was, from the supply point of view,
the first and most important problem to be solved.
mittee was therefore convened to study the question. including in its com
A War Office Com-
position rentesentatives of all the various interacte annarad namely ST. 6
and Medical Branch,
War Office; the Chief War Department Analyst; the
Dietetic Adviser to the Ministry of Food; and the Directors of Canning,
Packing and Dehydration in that Ministry.
It was assumed, as a basis for discussion, that new types of rations would
have to be devised, on the lines that the requirements were for: —
(a) A ration for individual feeding, which might have to sustain a soldier
for periods up to six days.
(b) A ration on the basis of the Compo ration, which could be used for
Limiting factors were that rations on such a basis would have to be cased
in a pack of size, weight, and strength, suitable for manhandling for consider-
able distances, handling over beaches from amphibians, and dropping from
aircraft.
They must contain Tommy
cookers, matches,
water sterilizing
outfits, and insect repellents. Packs of these rations would have to be designed
so as to minimize loss by damage or deterioration caused by damp, heat,
or insects; and the calorific content of the rations must be adequate, subject
to the availability of the foodstuffs recommended for inclusion.
The Committee, however, had little time to produce definite results before
the anticipated demand for a special ration pack materialized.
noted, the Indian 24-hour ration was not a success; and in October, 1943.
India made an urgent request for 367,000 24-hour rations to be delivered in
December, with a further 239,000 monthly till September, 1944. The existing
British 24-hour ration was designed solely for operations in Europe, and it
was not certain that it would stand up to tropical climatic conditions.
some form of this type of ration was wanted at once, so S.T. 6 set to work,
and in two days' time produced a prototype ration which was accepted.
Known as the jungle ration, Mark I (see Appendix IX), its components were
as far as possible those of the European ration, except that the meat block
was replaced by a tin of preserved meat, and the tea-sugar-and-milk blocks
tea tablets with the milk and sugar separate.
inclusion of a 2-oz. tin of jam.
As the report of the Lethbridge Mission had
not yet been received, and it was not known what its recommendations might
be in this respect, and as it was certain that this improvised ration could be
improved, only 12 million of this type were produced.
The Jungle Ration, Mark II
A further million iungle rations were called for in February, 1944, and
this requirement was satisfied with a new type of pack.
Initial reports of the
Mark I ration had been favourable, but greater variety was wanted in the
meat component.
The Mark II Jungle Ration was accordingly devised.
this the one tin of meat was substituted by two, a "breakfast item" and a
"main meal item " thus being provided, and there were four varieties of each.
On the representations of 11 Army Group, the sugar content of the original
Mark Il ration was increased from four to eight tablets, at the expense of one
bar of chocolate.
The reason was partly the poor keeping quality of the
chocolate, and partly to increase the sugar ration.
71
WO 277/21
27
