The pamphlet was intended to provide a comprehensive instruction on
the ration scales.
It was also a convenient medium for
publishing the
various comments, notes, explanations, and warnings, which it was desirable
to keep before both units and R.A.S.C. supply personnel.
It will be observed that, while the items of the scale were provided from
three main sources, R.A.S.C., N.A.A.F.I., and Ministry of Food, the R.A.S.C.
were nevertheless made responsible for the correctness of every item issued so
far as quality and quantity were concerned.
suggestions went direct to the R.A.S.C. officer concerned.
All indents, complaints and
As already stated
he could only bring complaints to the notice of the N.A.A.F.I. manager
and report them to higher authority if necessary.
The principal modification was that where the messing of soldiers and
A.T.S. was necessarily combined, the scale to be drawn for A.T.S would
be that applicable to soldiers.
The definition of a combined mess was one
where meals were prepared and cooked in the same cook-house on a
common bill of fare.
The object of this was to ensure that the men received
their full entitlement, and that the A.T.S. received a diet suitable to the type
of work which they were doing; e.g., in a mixed A.A. battery, or in a
Command (Mixed) Transport Company.
Other Scales
Two other principal ration scales used in the United Kingdom require
to be noted.
The first of these,
" British/American Ration Scale",
was devised in January, 1942, for issues to the U.S. Forces in N.I.D. when
fed from British Service sources.
There were very few amendments to
this scale throughout the ensuing years, and it is given at Appendix IX,
amended to mid-1945.
Altogether some eight million of these rations were
issued in about 34 years.
The other scale was that for prisoners of war.
"The policy for feeding
these was to keep as near the normal home scale as possible, and dated
from 1939.
In August, 1940, variations were made to suit their national
tastes, meat being reduced from 8 oz. to 6 oz., bread increased from 12 oz.
to 16 oz., and potatoes from 13 oz. to 16 oz.
In January, 1941, the cash
eleme oz. an reduced from 21d. to 1d., and variations were introduced in
their beverages.
They received a weekly free issue of cigarettes.
In April, 1941, the reductions in the ration of meat, sugar and tea for
troops in the U.K. led to the decision that P.W. should receive the same
scale as that issued to British troops, except that coffee could be issued in
lieu of tea and cocoa.
In September, 1941, for Italians only, there were
further reductions in meat and flour, and increases in bread, potatoes,
vegetables, and coffee.
At the end of that year, since British soldiers not fed in mess were
to receive the civilian ration (but double the meat), P.W. rations were
reduced, except for those employed on working parties.
There were only
minor variations thereafter until the end working parteen the Cabinet made
the decision, backed by considerable public feeling,
should be substantially reduced.
that P.W. ration scales
the new scales are shown in Appendix IX.
This was given
effect in May, 1945, and
While maintaining an adequate
nutritional value, these scales were below civilian scales of nationally rationed
items, and the supplements for working P.W.
items.
were entirely of unrationed
244
Supply Accounts
A simplified system of accounting was introduced in C.S.Ds. at the begin-
ning of 1942, in consequence of the investigations of the Supply and Petrol
A description of the forms used is contained in Appen-
The next development was the centralization of C.S.D. accounting. This
implied all the accounting in a group of C.S.Ds. being centralized in one
depot, the others doing no accounting beyond recording issues and receipts.
Trials proved an almost unqualified success, though no great saving in man-
power seemed likely.
It was clear that the system gave better control by
concentrating the clerical staft in a small number of offices, made the careful
selection of suitable clerical personnel easier, and enabled the introduction
of a high percentage of A.T.S. clerks.
It was therefore adopted in February,
Until September, 1941, the system of accounting for the containers, in
which R.A.S.C. supplies were received in depots and issued to units, con-
tinued to be in accordance with peace regulations.
The accounts involved
a disproportionately large amount of clerical work in depots compared with
the results in terms of containers returned by units.
It was therefore agreed
that container accounting in general should be in abeyance, and all empty
containers handed in to salvage depots, except containers supplied upon
terms providing for deposits or hiring charges.
This change of policy pro-
duced the benefits expected, and continued throughout the war.
To reduce the clerical work involved in accounting for supplies in
formations, and at the same time preserve the necessary accounting control,
a modified system was introduced.
The practice was for formation R.A.S.C.
to draw supplies from C.S.Ds. in bulk, generally by brigade or equivalent
groups, and then to break bulk as in the field, and distribute to units in
The C.S.D. vouchered off the supplies on A.F. G 1033 to formation
R.A.S.C., who brought them on charge in a provision and supply account,
and recorded issues in the same.
The new system dispensed with the P. and S. Account, and with A.F.
G 1033 (Receipt and Issue Voucher).
The documentation was an adaptation
of that used in the field.
Ration and Subsistence Return
It is convenient to mention here the method by which ration strength
figures were obtained in War Office.
Until the latter part of 1939, there
was only a quarterly departmental return, but then the frequency of changes
made a monthly statement necessary.
This showed, for the last day of
each messing period: —
(a) Total numbers rationed in kind.
(b) Total numbers drawing ration allowance.
(c) Total numbers billetted with subsistence.
Army and R.A.F. strengths were shown separately.
Later, women's Service
and other special categories were shown separately.
In November, 1942, the date of the return was altered to the Saturday
The object of this was to
nearest the last day of the calendar month.
245
WO 277/21
27
