leakage for nearly a year, until all the 250,000 gallons were stored in 50-gallon
At first the stocks had to be held in houses, etc., until proper over-
head cover could be arranged.
Supplies worth half a million Hong Kong dollars were bought, and stored
in evacuated married quarters.
Authority was also given for further supply stores, two forage barns,
eight petrol dumps, six dumps for fuel, wood, etc., stabling for 3,000 goats,
atta mills for the Indian troops, and the building of an emergency supply
depot and bakery in the country on the south side of the island.
stores, dumps and quarters used as stores were scattered over the east, west,
and south sides of the island, away from the vulnerable north.
In regard to transport an emergency workshop was to be constructed on
the south side of the island; houses scattered round this location were to be
hired for the storage of spare parts, and to form the headquarters of the M.T.
and localities were to be earmarked and allotted to the
R.A.S.C. as vehicle parks.
Until February, 1941, the garrison held a reserve of ninety days' stock of
the items of the basic ration.
The question of reserve holdings
was then
reviewed, and it was decided that a reserve of 130 days stock of all items in
the field service ration scale should be held, with a working margin of 136
days.
Special Ration Scale
A special ration scale, with everything in tins, was drawn up and approved.
A large initial order for supplies was submitted to the United Kingdom, but
at the same time samples of all tinned commodities were called for from
Australia, while certain items, such as tinned butter, were obtained from
India.
Australia assisted, making margarine, chocolate, etc., to China Com-
mand's specification, with the result that about the
middle of 1941, Hong
Kong received its last consignment of supplies from the United Kingdom, and
became entirely self-supporting.
Implementation of plans
By that time, nearly all the stores and buildings had been erected, stocks
of food, petrol, etc., were dispersed in small consignments all over the island,
the atta mills were working, and the goats were in their stables with adequate
When the brief hostilities broke out, the R.A.S.C. installations on the north
side were the first to be destroyed by shell fire, and within a few days the
original area was a shambles.
Owing to the plans which had been carried
out, however, everything had been evacuated within 24 hours,
and no loss
was sustained during this phase. It was claimed that i? the defence had been
from the new installations.
more protracted the R.A.S.C. could have maintained the troops satisfactorily
have been out of action in a few days.
If they had not moved, however, they would
30
SECTION 2.-MALAYA
R.A.S.C. Organization
Before the war, the R.A.S.C. organization in Malaya consisted of a head-
quarters, one M.T. company, a Supply Depot, Bakery, and Cold Storage, and
the usual Supply, Transport, and Barrack administrative offices.
The Officer
i/c Transport also supervised the detachment of the War Department Fleet.
The total strength of the R.A.S.C. was under one hundred of all ranks, in-
cluding the clerks in the headquarter offices.
This number was quite inade-
quate to maintain even the small force of 4,500 then in Malaya.
There was no increase in these numbers during the first two years of the
Then, as the menace in the Far East began to grow, the strength of the
garrison was built up.
As reinforcing formations arrived, they brought their
own second line Army Service Corps units.
Third line units and base depots
were formed locally, partly from reinforcements from the United Kingdom
and India, and partly by local recruitment.
When the battle for Malaya developed, the D.D.S.T., Malayan Command,
controlled an Imperial Army Service Corps, including R.A.S.C., A.A.S.C.,
and R.I.A.S.C.; it comprised five divisional Army Service Corps (the fortress
counting as one), three R.A.S.C. districts, a Base Supply Depot, a Base Petrol
Depot, a Heavy Repair Shop, a Vehicle Reception Depot, a M.T. Stores
Depot, Field Bakeries, Cold Storage Plants, and six Reserve M.T. Companies.
This organization totalled 12,000 all ranks, and maintained a force of 125,000,
including R.A.F.
Until the middle of 1940, the British troops in Malaya were fed in the
peace-time manner, drawing certain items from
the R.A.S.C. and
buying the remainder from N.A.A.F.I. R.A.S.C. commodities were obtained
in the first place in three ways: by local contracts, by contracts placed in
Australia, and by demands on War Office for preserved meat, biscuit, frozen
meat, tinned butter, tinned milk, flour, and certain forage items.
meat and biscuit were shipped from the United Kingdom; demands for flour,
butter, and forage, were met from producer countries under War Office con-
tract arrangements; and those for frozen meat and tinned milk were handled
by the Ministry of Food, who arranged shipment from producer countries.
Field service ration scales for both British and native troops were intro-
duced in the Far Eastern theatres in mid-1940.
The ration strength of Malaya in 1939 was 4,500; but by the time of the
battle for Malaya, it had reached 125,000.
A summary of feeding strengths
from July, 1940, to January, 1942, is at Appendix VIIIA.
The scale of reserves of supplies until February 1941, was ninety days'
stock of the items of the basic ration.
It was then reviewed, and fixed at a
G.S. reserve of 180 days of all items of the F.S. ration scale, with a Q.M.G.
reserve, or working margin, of 124 days.
The Q.M.G. reserve was increased
in July to 180 days.
The administrative arrangements in connection with the despatch of re-
inforcements to Malaya were reviewed at the War Office on 16th January,
1942, and the following is a resumé of the supply situation as then visualized.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
