The M.O.W.T. was requested to approach the Motor Traders' Association
with a view to high priority being given to the repair of W.D.
vehicles in
this way.
It had been permissible, since May, 1940, for repairs to W.D. vehicles to
be carried out in civilian garages on demand in cases of urgent necessity.
The object of the procedure
was to ensure that, in particular, drivers of
vehicles which became immobile while carrying out urgent duties should
be in a position to have the requisite repairs effected without being obliged
to comply with the normal W.D. procedure,
provided that by this means
vehicles could return to operation sooner than if replaced.
Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport
The Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport, R.A.S.C., was established in
the United Kingdom, and also in the B.E.F., in February,
first formed, it was placed under the control of the
This officer's designation was later changed to
that of Chief Inspector of Mechanical Transport, abbreviated to C.I.M.T.,
and from the latter title the whole organization borrowed the name by which
it was generally known.
Such an organization had existed in the war of 1914-1918, and
but it had been abolished some years before 1939, and its functions were
incorporated in the Chief Inspectorate of Armaments.
The Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport was organized in the form of
a headquarters, and a number of inspection teams.
primarily a report centre where the reports from the teams were collated and
The teams consisted of specially selected officers
and N.C.Os. who visited units as a rule on a planned programme, the normal
interval between visits to a unit being six months.
Functions of C.I.M.T.
While the C.I.M.T. organization was charged with the responsibility
for the technical inspection of all R.A.S.C. mechanical transport units in
respect of the mechanical efficiency and maintenance of vehicles, the opera-
tion of M.T. workshops, and M.T. storekeeping, its function was not entirely
that of bringing to light deficiencies in these directions, but also of acting
as a channel of information for the D.S.T.
Through the Inspectorate, D.S.T.
obtained information from which he could, on the one hand, gauge the
efficiency of the service for which he was responsible, and on the other hand
provide the means for maintaining that efficiency.
To this end, the Inspectorate, besides carrying out the physical inspection
of vehicles in order to ascertain their condition, also collected, collated and
disseminated information about defects in vehicles, and their prevention
and cure; and deduced, from the information collected, the quantities of
vehicles, spare parts and stores which would be required, and where and
The Inspectorate dealt with defect reports sent in by units, i.e., reports
of recurring defeets in particular types of vehicle, indicating weakness of
design or construction.
It also carried out special investigations, as required,
146
on the situation of specific items, such as stocks of tyres held by units,
incidence of accidents, and the training and up grading of artificers within
1n1ts.
It was responsible for the issue of technical
R.A.S.C.
vehicles.
circulars affecting
Points Inspected
The visits of an inspection team to a field unit usually covered the
following points: —
(a) Detailed inspection of a percentage of the vehicles held.
(b) General inspection of the whole of the vehicles and technical equip-
ment.
(c) Examination of the programme, methods, and standards of vehicle
inspection and maintenance, by the unit personnel.
(d) Review of stocks of spare parts held.
(e) Dissemination of information relating to any peculiarities in the
design, operation, or repair, of the unit vehicles.
(f) Instruction on the spot, where necessary, in correct methods of
vehicle examination and maintenance.
(g) Collection of useful data relating to difficulties and the ways in which
they had been met, and the passing on of other units' ideas.
(h) Collection of data regarding vehicle life, performance and main-
tenance under varying conditions, and details of fuel and oil con-
(i) Decision whether to repair or replace a vehicle, when it might be
a question of reserves of vehicles and spares available, concerning
which a unit commander would have no direct knowledge.
(i) General and direct liaison on all technical questions of vehicle
operation and maintenance between the Directorate, the user units,
and the M.T. installations, i.e., the H.R.S., M.T.S.D., and V.R.D.
(k) Information on availability of urgently required spares in other units.
Reports of inspectors were sent to C.I.M.T., who forwarded them direct
to S.T.3. For a considerable time after the institution of the inspectorate,
the first information that the D.D.S.T. of the command concerned had of the
contents of the report was when he received it from the D.S.T. with a com-
ment and directions to take action to rectify matters which had been adversely
As this was only received after a lapse of perhaps two
months, action was delayed accordingly, and things might meantime have
In consequence, it was eventually arranged for
an inspector, on completion of his inspection, to inform the D.D.S.T. of
the command of the nature of his report, and of those matters which required
In this way, it was made possible for the D.D.S.T. to
take immediate action to put things right, and this greatly enhanced the
value of the reports and went far to remove the unfortunate impression
sometimes held of the Inspectorate that it was a sort of " Gestapo "
on commands and units.
This idea was a misconception of the functions
of the Inspectorate, which were more advisory than critical, though the
reports did, of course, serve to bring to notice cases of inefficiency or mal-
practice which might not otherwise have been easily discovered.
7/77
WO 277/21
27
