Stocks of the principal commodities were about six months, and there
were varying quantities en route.
The programme for reinforcements pro-
vided for the
despatch of 18 British Division,
17 Indian
Division,
one
armoured brigade, and their ancillaries, and some troops diverted from other
theatres, totalling 38,500 British and 13,500 Indian troops in all, to be added
to an existing strength estimated at 43,000 Europeans and 45,000 Indians.
fact only two brigade groups of 17 Indian Division arrived, the remainder of
the formation, and the Armoured Brigade, going to Burma.
As far as the build-up of reserves was concerned, it was intended that
India should provide 180 days' supplies for the two divisions,
although this
was a doubtful matter as regards 18 Division, since India's demands on
Australia for European foods had not been met.
60 days' supplies were with
the Armoured Brigade from Middle East and with the diverted troops, and
68 days' of all items for 35,000 had been loaded in the United Kingdom.
Forward and outstanding deliveries were expedited.
But there was still a
deficiency of 3a million rations to be made good, to provide full reserves for
the reinforcements.
The position in the Dutch East Indies was also stated.
apart from Dutch troops,
was taken as two Australian divisions, plus
ancillaries, Corps troops, Base and L. of C. installations, totalling 80,000. The
British stocks there were nil. No decisions had been made as to the scale of
G.S. reserves, method of demanding future requirements, or sources of supply.
It was presumed that demands would be made on War Office, and the main
source of supply would be Australia.
The only arrangements to establish a
reserve were that Middle East were shipping 60 days with all reinforcements.
The static supply organization in Malaya had not been augmented corres-
pondingly with the growth of the feeding strength. Although an increase had
been approved, the personnel had not left the United Kingdom.
The Australian Imperial Force and 9 and 11 Indian
Divisions had
brought some supply units, and it was planned to send others with the re-
inforcements from the Middle East.
But in the event the fall of Singapore
came so quickly, and there was so little information, that it is not known
exactly what reinforcements arrived or what happened to some of the supply
units sent.
There was of course plenty of food to last out the brief campaign, and the
supply arrangements worked satisfactorily.
P.O.L.
Before the war with Japan began, it had been decided that a total of 180
days reserve of petroleum products should be held by the Army on Singapore
Island and the Malay Peninsula. This scheme was abandoned owing to the
lack of suitable storage accommodation and the improbability of its early
depots throughout Malaya,
The campaign opened with six million gallons of M.T. spirit in Army
with the proper
quota
of lubricants.
represented 120 days for 12,500 vehicles at 4 gallons a vehicle a day.
Huge
stocks were held by the civilian oil companies on neighbouring islands.
32
All demands for P.O.L. in pack or bulk were placed on the Asiatic
Petroleum Company, which had a plant for manufacturing and filling 4-gallon
non-returnable
tins on an island.
known and estimated requirements.
This was quite capable of meeting all
All the petroleum products came from
Indonesia, except hypoid oils from America.
For distribution purposes, the fullest possible use was made of commer-
cial bulk distributing facilities throughout Malaya, including some 1,500 kerb-
side pumps, besides those in permanent military stations.
The P.O.L. duties were carried out entirely by twelve R.I.A.S.C. P.O.L.
sections, several of which were combined to form base depots, etc.
Little is known of the extent to which stocks of P.O.L. in the Malaya
peninsula were denied to the enemy.
In Singapore itself, petrol stocks were
very low towards the end, as the result of denial schemes and losses by enemy
The stocks in the large island installations were only partially des-
troyed, owing to the shortage of skilled personnel and the immense quantities
Barrack Services
The barrack services in Malaya before the war were administered by an
Officer i/c Barracks at Singapore, and by the officers i/c R.A.S.C. duties at
Changi and Penang.
When the garrison was reinforced, there was some reorganization of
barrack services. They depended entirely on Asiatic civilian labour, under
The normal procedure was carried on as far as possible,
though constant moves of units made accurate accounting impossible.
It
became the practice for units moving up into the area of anticipated opera-
tions, to take with them extra accommodation stores, in order to make them-
selves more comfortable.
Solid fuel was obtained through state fuel officers.
light and disinfectants in permanent barracks was still carried out by the
but otherwise these items were handed over to the
R.A.S.C. supply branch to deal with.
As more hutted camps were built on the mainland, units demanded direct
on R.A.O.C. for the accommodation stores detailed in the hutment schedules
for the Command.
These represented the minimum considered necessary for
the climatic conditions, and proved adequate.
When barrack stores were opened in the new areas, officers i/c barracks
arranged the transfer of these accommodation stores from unit ledger charge
to barrack inventory charge, on "long rolls".
These terms are explained in
This work was slow, but was proceeding satisfactorily, when
the Japanese invaded Malaya.
As the enemy advanced, barrack stores were successively abandoned, but
considerable quantities of the contents of some of these stores were back-
loaded to Base Ordnance Depots.
The barrack stores at Singapore functioned
until they received direct hits from bombs or shells.
The Asiatic staff worked
loyally and efficiently throughout, and incurred some casualties.
33
102907
FIt
WO 277/21
27
