reserve was additional to the I5 days' working margin in Supply Depots
required to meet current demands.
In May, 1940, margarine and meat loaf
were added to the reserves, to provide a more complete ration.
When invasion threatened in June, 1940, additional emergency
were provided in the Main Supply Depots, whose formation was described
in Section 1 of this chapter.
They were stocked with two days' preserved
meat and biscuit for 500,000 men, a varying number of days of other staple
commodities and tinned equivalents, two days' hospital supplies, disinfectants,
and miscellaneous items, and three days' flour for 500,000 men in case bakery
contractors' supplies failed.
Larger reserves were laid down for Northern
Ireland District, Orkney Islands, Dover Defences, Humber Defences, and
isolated A.A. detachments.
Reserves of frozen meat were provided by the Ministry of Food, who
placed stocks in about a hundred inland depots, instead of, as normally,
keeping the bulk of them in a few large depots on the coast.
reserves were agreed at 14 days' stock of staple non-perishable messing
commodities in local stores and 14 days in main warehouses.
In June, 1940, the strengths on which reserves were based were raised
from 1,150,000 to 2,000,000 to cover the returned B.E.F., and reserves of
tinned meat, biscuits, tinned margarine and meat loaf were increased.
When the " Invasion Scale
of rations was brought out in May, 1941,
was taken to bring
command reserves into line at an
average of seven days at that scale, calculated on arbitrary strengths for each
command totalling rather over two and a half million.
These arrangements
continued in force until September, 1941, when the figures were adjusted
upwards to agree with actual strengths, plus about 15 per cent. to provide a
small additional reserve and to cover inter-command moves.
stood at just over two and three-quarter million.
The end of 1941 saw the beginning of the build-up of stocks of 14-men
Compo pack rations and A.F.V. rations against the eventual needs of the field
forces which would ultimately be sent overseas.
For the progress of this
build-up, see Appendix VIIIB.
In April, 1942, there began a lengthy examination of the basis on which
the level of reserves in the United Kingdom should be founded, and eventually,
in June, 1943, a new policy was laid down.
(a) The total authorized reserve was now to be 30 days, of which seven
would be held under command control, and 23 under War
control in S.R.Ds. or M.S.Ds.
(b) The strength upon which reserves were to be based was fixed at
3,065,000, allocated between commands
more or less in relation
(c) The scale at which reserves were to be held was the Field Service
(U.K.) scale then current in respect of the following items:
preserved meat, tea, sugar, condensed milk, jam, tinned sausage, or
(d) The allocation of reserves for formations and units was delegated
to commands, but limited to those mations ast defence rôles or liable
to isolation by enemy action of weather, and restricted to two days
unless in exceptional circumstances.
to be held in unbroken paumstanCes. Rest KeA S.C. or unit head-
(e) Reserve holdings in the Orkneys and Shetlands were reduced from
(t) Reserves for Northern Ireland District were reduced from 50 to
(g) All stocks of emergency rations were withdrawn to War Office control.
Besides the above reserves held in R.A.S.C. depots, or by units, N.A.A.F.I.
held, in its depots and warehouses, seven days' stock of rice, oatmeal, fresh
bacon, dried peas /beans and dried fruits.
Seven days' supply of boneless frozen meat was specifically set aside
War Department in nominated Ministry of Food stores.
reserve of bread-making ingredients was held in W.D.
The Air Ministry agreed that the restricted scale should also apply to
These would normally hold two days' reserve,
might, in certain cases, be increased to four days on the authority of the
Reserves held by formations
accompanied them when this was
considered operationally essential by the authority ordering the
was not normally necessary to transfer the reserves held by individual units.
Formations and units ordered overseas
rations held to the nearest C.S.D. before leaving for the port of embarkation.
The reserves of self-heating soups,
packs, Compo (14-men) ration packs, and A.F.V. ration packs, held in War
Office controlled depots in the United Kingdom,
for overseas operations, but would be made available, should the necessity
arise, for use for operations at home.
It was not considered necessary for
any part of these reserves to be held under command control.
No specific stocks of Tommy cookers, water sterilizing outfits, hospital
supplies, disinfectants and miscellaneous items were held in commands for
operational use, but stocks maintained in War Office controlled depots would
be issued to C.S.Ds. if and when necessary.
The authorized reserves for the United Kingdom were revised in October,
1944, in consequence of the changed conditions.
was now impracticable without ample warning, but raids were still possible
and administrative arrangements must be adequate to deal with them.
and installations provided for normal administrative purposes would generally
suffice for operational requirements.
The holding of command and unit
reserves of supplies, specially for operational reasons, was no longer neces-
sary as a rule, except for the ten-men packs held by Home Guard units.
The level of reserves was fixed at 15 days for all troops in the United
Kingdom, at the F.S. (U.K.) scale.
The broad allocation of these reserves
was seven days under command control and eight days under War Office
were to be calculated on a total net ration strength, on
completion of the move of 21 Army Group overseas, of one and three-quarter
R.A.F. units might now hold seven days' reserve on the authority
Reserve Holdings Terminology
It is convenient to explain here the various terms applied to reserve
holdings in overseas theatres and at home during the war,
the various names used for the same thing at diferent periods of the war.
221
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
