outboard motors on country craft, light craft with a shallow draft,
swamp craft, and amphibians; the latter to operate small trawlers,
landing craft (L.C.M. and L.C.V.), and amphibians.
(c) Both types of unit should be organized into
(i) a maintenance wing, with floating workshops, and boat-keeping
personnel for the care of craft not being operated; and
(i) operative companies, divided into crew platoons, which must be
self-contained administratively and able to live ashore or afloat.
Recommendation regarding Air Transport
The success or failure of any operation in the war against Japan might
depend to a great extent on the air transport units.
The functions of the
R.A.S.C. air transport units must be taught to all R.A.S.C. units, so that,
when attached to such units as the Air Maintenance Company, they could
operate with a full understanding of their task.
Recommendations regarding Supplies
Supply personnel would be faced with a difficult task, as conditions of
heat, damp and insect life enormously hastened the deterioration of all stores.
It was therefore most necessary that all ranks should have a thorough know-
ledge of the causes of this, and be expert in such matters as dunnage, stacking.
The Mission was particularly insistent on the necessity for the provision
of rations of the highest quality, as a vital factor in waging war against the
Good food was of major importance in maintaining the physical
and mental resistance of the troops to heat, damp, sickness and insects.
was not sufficient that rations should be adequate; they must be excellent
almost to luxuriousness, nutritive, attractive and varied.
fresh meat was recommended as most important.
British rations, as devised
for use in the Middle East and in Europe, were not suitable for the use of
British troops operating in the Far East.
Conditions of climate and trans-
port made requirements quite different, both as regards the container and its
contents
Suggestions were made regarding the contents and specifications of a
composite ration pack for issue in the theatre.
The British 24-hour ration
pack was not considered suitable for use in the Pacific theatre as an emer-
gency ration, and a ration on the lines of the Australian " A. 3" ration (sel
Appendix IX) was recommended.
The requirement was also stated for a
. 6-men composite pack with the following characteristics: —
(a) Weight not more than 35 lb.
(b) Completely watertight and weatherproof, even after lying in tropical
mud for weeks.
(c) Sufficiently strong to withstand heavy handling on the T. of C. and.
(d) Constructed so that it might be carried on the back. and with round
when wrapped, suitable for air dropping.
edges for the comfort of the carrier.
Standard of Feeding in S.E.A.C.
Especially when considered in comparison with the recommendations of
the Lethbridge Mission in regard to ration scales, the standard of feeding of
the British troops in S.E.A.C. was unsatisfactory at that time for the follow-
Although the ration scale was theoretically adequate, the rations actually
Fresh meat was often unobtainable for long
periods; the circumstances affecting this commodity are described below.
Soya link (sausage with a high content of soya bean
meal) was issued as a substitute for a number of commodities in short supply
Fresh vegetables of the English type were available only in
the four months of the cold season; while, for fresh fruit, oranges only were
issued from December to April, pineapples and little else in July and August,
and plantains the rest of the year.
Eight months' issue of pumpkins and
Indian-type vegetables, combined with preserved meat and soya link for
breakfast, dinner and tea, made catering a problem for the most experienced
But the catering service in India was still in its infancy,
and technical supervision and advice were therefore lacking.
In the cookhouses, first-class equipment was non-existent. British units
which had arrived with their war equipment cooking apparatus could not get
Other units had camp kettles and unreliable kerosine cookers.
Hard fuel was generally green wood.
Cookery training was carried out at Schools of Cookery in India, and
4 Corps established its own in Imphal. Special attention was paid in instruc-
tion to improvised building, and to recipes in which preserved meat, soya
link and pumpkin predominated, as a first measure towards improving the
standard of messing.
Supply of Fresh Meat
During 1943 and 1944, successive efforts were made in India to maintain
a supply of fresh meat for British and Indian troops on the Burma front by
despatches from as far west as Benares of trainloads of cattle, sheep, and
But time, distance, and unavoidable transhipment of animals at the
change of gauge, and long marches which were sometimes necessary, all
militated against the successful delivery of suitable quantities in good condi-
tion, and the project had to be abandoned.
For British troops, arrangements were made for the supply of frozen
meat, principally Australian mutton, to be delivered to Calcutta, where a
large cold store was taken over by a Field Butchery and Cold Storage Depot,
widespread system of transportable cold storage plants was
planned for erection at key centres in Bengal and Assam, with a refrigerated
rail transport link; but this scheme was never put fully into operation, though
some plants were erected.
The distribution system was by no means com-
plete when, by the middle of 1944,
the need for giving British troops in
Fourteenth Army a good supply of fresh meat became acute.
fore arranged for about 20 to 30 tons of frozen meat daily to be flown on a
milk-round system to airfields in Bengal and Assam.
This was carried out
on a programme controlled by S.T., Fourteenth Army, and enabled all British
troops in the Army area to be issued with fresh meat at least three times a
week, a very welcome state of affairs.
1981/17
WO 277/21
27
