steadily deteriorated, owing to bad unit maintenance and bad driving by
This was enhanced by the strain,
and many
partially trained drivers.
vehicles were found to be unserviceable.
A large proportion of these were
hired, and it caused a great deal of trouble when they were returned to their
owners as no longer required, but in fact immobile or irreparable.
An enquiry was instituted, and the
Quarter-Master-General
expressed
the opinion that the loss of control by A.A. Command due to the withdrawal
of the S.T. staff on the outbreak of war had had an adverse effect on the
operation of A.A., R.A.S.C. divisional companies, and this led to the changes
referred to in Chapter II, Section 1.
In addition, in November, 1940, there was a reorganization of A.A.
Command, resulting in the formation of five additional divisions, making
12 in all.
The proposals of S.T.3 to meet this new commitment were to
form headquarters, divisional R.A.S.C., for the new divisions at once; to
form new sections of existing A.A. R.A.S.C. companies for the expanded
requirements as and when equipment became available; and, from December,
to raise the cadres of two new R.A.S.C. companies each
month, to be
available for posting into A.D.G.B. as the increased number of sections
justified new companies being formed. This policy was duly implemented.
The whole S. and T. organization in A.A. Command was considered by
a committee, which examined the problem in all its aspects early in 1941.
Its findings included the following main points.
there should be a D.D.S.T. at the head.
It considered that the A.A. transport companies were working under
very difficult and potentially dangerous conditions in respect of ensuring
efficient service to the A.A. units during periods of intensive air attacks.
This was said to be primarily because the development of these companies
had not kept pace with the creation of new A.A. units.
of the companies, while it was adequate as regards the scale of vehicles, did
not allow a sufficient reserve to enable the companies to maintain continuously
more units than the scale provided for.
overloaded except during quiet periods, and were only able to carry on by
using their ammunition lorries to supplement the supply lorries and by the
loan in some cases of vehicles from Army commands.
provision, as in the field force, of vehicles for the conveyance of engineer
and ordnance stores.
This method of pooling was considered to be potenti-
ally very dangerous in view of the possibility of heavier and more prolonged
air attacks, more particularly if these were concentrated, as there would then
both, breaking down.
be a considerable risk of either the ammunition rated, as upply service, or
The commite recommended that every effort should be made to bring
the transport companies up to the scale required to enable them to give
adequate service to existing A.A: units. and to expand them on a slidine
scale in accordance with the programme of provision of new A.A.
The following were stated to be needed to make up the 26 A.A.
Companies required to maintain the existing A.Á. units:
Divisional
Headquarters, five workshop sections, four transport sections,
Company
and four
ambulance sections. This was. of course. hefore the renroanization on the
118
new standard "brick" system, with platoons instead of sections.
recommended that the R.A.S.C. should be allowed to have new sections
in operation as soon as the number of new A.A. units exceeded the capacity
of existing sections, and new companies as soon as the number of new A.A.
units exceeded the capacity of two sections.
If this were done,
panies would always have some reserve in hand for emergency, instead of
being constantly overloaded, as was then the case.
The proposed scale of increases was not acceptable to War Office, as,
owing to the manpower shortage in the R.A.S.C.
generally, it could never
R.A.S.C. resources in A.A. Command.
Any immediate requirements should be met from available
The problems of manpower could be solved by the employment of
women, and one A.T.S., M.T. company was accordingly formed in each
divisional R.A.S.C. to provide drivers for all R.A.S.C. cars, ambulances
and vans which could be driven by A.T.S. under operational conditions
within the division.
These companies were under the technical supervision
of D.D.S.T., A.A. Command, through Cs.R.A.S.C., A.A. divisions, and, from
the A.T.S. point of view, were controlled by a group headquarters.
question of A.T.S. driving 3-ton lorries is dealt with in the section of this
chapter dealing with the employment of A.T.S. on transport services generally.
Transport Re-Organization, 1942-1943
The R.A.S.C. and A.T.S. transport companies in A.A. Command were
reorganized on the standard "brick" system in April, 1942, and this was
followed, in April, 1943, by the amalgamation of the two types of company
into A.A. (Mixed) Transport Companies, R.A.S.C., on similar lines to the
Command (Mixed) Transport Companies described elsewhere.
The with-
drawal of R.A.S.C. drivers rendered surplus by the reorganization took place
progressively as and when suitable A.T.S. drivers became available and were
In connection with the general manpower situation, the question of
incorporating the second line transport of A.A. Command in the R.A.S.C.
organization of home commands was examined, and War Office proposed
merging the second line links of certain static A.A. units in this way.
A.A.
Command put forward a counter-proposal that it should undertake the
responsibility for the provision of its own third line transport commitments
from its own existing resources, including the lift from I.À.Ds. to E.A.Ms.,
and this arrangement was accepted and took effect from February, 1943.
Operational Commitments, 1944
Early in 1944, there were renewed air attacks on London, and the
ammunition expenditure was found to be far heavier than had been antici-
pated as the expenditure was ally increased rate of fire made possible by
new equipment.
This increased lift of ammunition proved such an un-
expected burden that it became necessary
to create a special transport
reserve.
Three companies were withdrawn from quiet areas, reconstituted
as command reserve companies, and stationed near London.
They were
119
WO 27
27
