20 Indian Division withdrew from Tamu,
and, in pursuance of the
policy of denying supplies to the enemy, brought in with it nearly 1,000 head
In Imphal plain, 4 Corps awaited the Japanese in a series of defended
localities, organized like the administrative bases.
Administrative units took
i scre of the defence, a winse dieut iron corps H.O: " The
R.I.A.S.C. Supply Branch has had a more difficult job than most.
had to construct and man defences, and still carry on their normal work; they
have had to carry on under fire; they have held portions of the perimeter
M.T. and A.T. units fought as infantry; four A.T. com-
panies were overrun, but, though out-numbered, accounted for 200 Japanese.
4 Corps were supplied by air for more than two months, this constituting
the largest and most vital air supply operation of the campaign, at any rate
up to that time.
Maintenance of 4 Corps by Air
The first essential for air supply on this unprecedented scale was, of
course.
availability of sufficient transport aircraft,
and although
S.A.C.S.E.A. did all he could to ensure this, it was only by a narrow margin
that the formations on the plain were kept supplied, as aircraft borrowed
from the lift to China and from the Mediterranean had to be released.
The basis of the plan was that, to maintain the Army and Air Force units
on the Imphal plain up to full scale, some 540 tons a day would have to be
flown in.
on which the road was likely to be reopened; the weather; the state of the
ground supplies in Imphal; the flying-out of non-essential personnel; and the
advisability of putting the troops on a reduced scale of rations.
be possible to supply ammunition at a higher scale than normal; and it was
appreciated that, if the Imphal airfields were lost, and supply dropping had
to take the place of supply landing, the target figure would have to be
drastically reduced, since there was a great shortage of air supply packing
personnel, and of dropping equipment.
The weather proved capricious, and bad weather prevented flying for
hours and even days at a time, which had the effect of concentrating opera-
tions into the fair periods.
This resulted in a corresponding increase in the
symptoms of strain and congestion, and exerted unexpected pressure on
the base airfields and the installations at Imphal.
When the road was cut, there were more than 20 days' supplies in Imphal.
Local purchase and the Army's vegetable gardens helped to eke out the
30,000 unessential administrative personnel, in addition to casualties,
were flown out on returning supply aircraft. On 9th April, 4 Corps was put
on a reduced scale of rations, at 65 per cent. of nor Ali some increase and
variation became possible in June; and when the road from Kohima was te
opened on 22nd June, the corps still had suficien rood to last for a consider.
able time: and the full F.S. scale was restored on ith Tuly The main problem
had not been that of transporting sufficient supplies to keep the troops alive,
but rather of maintaining an even flow of stores required for battle.
64
Kohima and After
Kohima was invested on 5th April, and relieved after 16 days of continuous
fighting, in which the R.I.A.S.C. personnel took a full share.
was maintained by air.
The garrison
The relief was carried out largely by 2 Division under 33 Corps, which
had assumed control of the operations in the area.
The R.A.S.C. of the
division was organized on the normal group basis in four two-platoon com-
panies.
It was soon found that in these operations, with a single-road L. of C.,
the group organization was not the most economical method of working.
Then an urgent need arose for reinforcements for the infantry, and for
additional troops to guard defended localities on the L. of C., and A. 1
category R.A.S.C. personnel had to be made available for these purposes to
the equivalent extent of four transport platoons.
organized in two companies on a commodity basis, one being responsible for
supplies and petrol, and the other for ammunition and general transport
duties.
The smaller amount of transport would evidently not be able also
to carry out troop-carrying duties, or to operate a double echelon supply
system, and Corps therefore undertook to provide transport for troop-carry-
ing, and to deliver supplies to bulk-breaking point.
As long as the semi-static conditions continued, the new organization was
able to meet its commitments.
Advanced composite dumps were established
as near as 1,000 yards behind the forward troops.
This policy proved
extremely satisfactory, as it was found that emergency requirements of units
were thus immediately available, whereas in most cases their "B" echelon
transport with their first line ammunition was several miles behind.
The
forward troops were maintained by pack transport, and lorries got through
with supplies at irregular intervals without much enemy interference.
As our troops advanced, the transport situation became more acute, and
some R.A.S.C. personnel had to be
withdrawn from those employed as
infantry, for employment on troop-carrying; but the relief was soon nullified
by heavy calls on the R.A.S.C. for reinforcements for the infantry, and the
resulting shortage of transport was made up with two G.P.T. companies.
may be observed that the L. of C. transport organization had worked until
the road was cut, when it withdrew north and south of the roadblock, with all
its belongings, and the loss of only one lorry.
In the last days of this stage of the campaign movement was very rapid,
and transport was stretched to its maximum.
Replenishment of ammunition
meant a turnround of 100 miles, which
often took 24 hours on account of
landslides blocking the road.
The dump system for ammunition supply was
no longer suitable, and a mobile ammunition point was formed, consisting
of 12 lorries, carrying S.A.A., mortar and tank natures,
but not artillery
ammunition, owing to shortage of vehicles.
Dumps were therefore formed of
artillery ammunition, supplies and P.O.L.
The shortage of transport was
accentuated by the necessity for forming a mobile mechanized column, and
by the retention by units of vehicles sent to them for specific tasks, the number
so diverted amounting at one time to over forty lorries.
Part of this trouble
was due to units not having enough first line transport for their needs, and
partly to rapid movement which made it impossible to off-load.
The demand
for petrol was abnormal, as guns and all materials had to be ferried forward,
+7/14
WO 277/21
27
