An establishment was then introduced calculated on a " Sliding Scale",
according to the number of troops to be served.
The basis of the establish-
ment was that of a D.I.D. less its P.O.L.
section, but there were some
anomalies.
The normal capacity of a D.I.D. was a ration strength of
8.000, whilst C.S.Ds. might have to deal with strengths of 30,000 or more,
and the issue of the home ration entailed more detailed work than was done
by a D.I.D. in the field.
To meet these difficulties, all C.S.Ds. with a ration
strength of 7,500 or over were given, besides the domestic staff of a D.I.D.
(i.e.,
batmen, cooks, and drivers), increases on a sliding scale as shown
in Appendix IIG.
This establishment is important as recognizing for the
first time that no fixed establishment could be satisfactory for so variable
a commitment as a Command Supply Depot.
The system proved troublesome from the War Office point of view, since
it was difficult to control the numbers of personnel employed and increases
were effected without reference to War Office.
There were in existence War Establishments in normal form, one for
each command, which purported to show in detail all the personnel required
for C.S.Ds.
As a result of the sliding scale superimposed on these fixed
establishments, it was possible for commands to increase their entitlement
to personnel over and above the fixed establishment so long as any variations
came within the sliding scale.
As a general rule, commands only referred to
War Office for W.E.C. approval where an amendment to the fixed establish-
ment was required.
This upset any attempt to arrange postings in their
proper priority, and it became necessary to issue instructions laying down that
all variations from the basic establishment were to be reported to War Office
with appropriate details; that surpluses arising from reductions in load must
be reported; and that commands must refer to War Office before they opened
a new C.S.D.
Experience of the system showed that a scale providing for a maximum
ration strength of only 20,000 was inadequate, and it was therefore extended
to include depots with ration strengths of 22,500, 25,000, 30,000 and 35,000.
D.I.Ds. used to support C.S.Ds.
It was, however, one thing to make War Establishments, and another
to find the requisite personnel.
In the autumn of 1941, it became increasingly
apparent that the F.F.C. allotment of some 5,900 personnel for C.S.Ds. was
not sufficient to cope with the ever-increasing ration strength in the United
Kingdom.
D.S.T. therefore asked for an increase of 1,667 men.
There were at that
time 163 C.S.Ds. with a working strength of 5,770, based on the ration
strength of 24 million obtaining in January, 1941.
It was calculated that this
would rise to 2, million, and this factor, coupled with General Staft insistence
on dispersion of depots and with the economic drive in respect of transport
and petrol, justified the increase.
The General Staff did not accept the figures for impending ration strengths
put forward by the D.S.T.; and,
in point of fact,
were right.
The
actual numbers rationed in kind did not reach 22 million till August, 1942.
or 2 million till May, 1944. Eventually reach 27 milas reached of forming
a number of D.I.Ds. against that part of the C. which related to
field force, and was admittedly under-provided with supply
units; and it
230
was accepted that units of a field force type might properly be used in support
organization until such time as they left the country with the
In this way, they would receive valuable practical training and
29 D.I.Ds. were formed on a new establishment for
D.I.D., type "B", and employed in pursuance of this policy.
An essential condition was that they should retain their identity,
that they would be available when required for duty overseas.
not, therefore, to be broken down below complete sections of 12 all ranks.
Commands were warned against staffing C.S.Ds. wholly with D.I.D. personnel,
and that the object should be to man larger depots with one or more D.I.D.
sections attached to a substantial nucleus of C.S.D. staff proper.
The D.I.D. personnel were to be set off, rank by rank and trade by
trade, against the C.S.D. War Establishments.
were allotted between commands on an arbitrary basis, but the ability to
transfer them from one command to another gave a measure of flexibility
to meet inter-command changes in ration strength.
The arrangement worked
At the same time, the first of a series of " Guide Scales" was issued for
calculating the establishments of C.S.Ds. (see Appendix IIG).
These estab-
lishments proved satisfactory on the whole, only a few amendments being
necessitated by new developments.
The most important was that 50 per
cent. of the supply storemen might be replaced by A.T.S., and that A.T.S.
should have a proportion of ranks, up to and including Serjeant, in the
trades of clerk and storeman.
New additions were those of engine fitters
(Internal Combustion and Pumps) in connection with the provision of fuel
for smoke-screen purposes.
While provision was made for the employment
of civilians, where available, in lieu of soldiers or A.T.S., a minimum by
trades and categories was specified in each command establishment below
which military other ranks were not to be allowed to fall.
The object of
this was to maintain an adequate pool of military personnel in C.S.Ds.
to feed field force units in case of an emergency.
A more important modification in
the organization of C.S.Ds. came
early in 1944, when a system of central accounting was introduced.
By the
end of 1943, the effects of the preparations for mounting "Overlord" were
beginning to be felt seriously by C.S.Ds.,
because the supporting D.I.Ds.
were being steadily
withdrawn for mobilization,
training,
and exercises,
in conjunction with 21 Army Group.
Reorganization of C.S.Ds.
became
unavoidable, but there were a number of problems to be overcome, the chief
of which was that the manpower situation would not permit of an addition
of military to the home manpower ceiling.
A new
" Guide Scale" was
introduced (see Appendix IIG), which had the general effect of reducing
the manpower for any given load.
The provision of clerks was dealt with
Separately, and related not to the ration strength served by the depot, but,
with greater reason, to the number of units with which it had to deal.
This guide scale was applied, on paper, to each depot in relation to ration
Strength and number of units, and the result totalled for each command.
A deduction of ten per cent. of the military
"bodies" in each command total
was made, and this was termed the " War Office Pool", to be used by War
231
WO 277/24
27
