4. The erection of tankage, laying of pipelines, installation of plant, and
other works of a general engineering nature connected with the storage and
distribution of petrol, will be the responsibility of D.F.W., under the direction
of the Engineer-in-Chief.
Where such work forms part of the plan for operations overseas, the C-in-C.
will be responsible that adequate demands for R.E. units are included for this
purpose, and that they are practised in the equipment and method of installation.
5. Design, in co-operation with the D.S.T., of installations for the storage
and issue of P.O.L., calculation for provision purposes of all stores required
for those installations, provision, storage and arrangements for shipment, will
be the responsibility of D.F.W., under the direction of E.-in-C.
6. Whenever technical oil questions regarding the storage, issue, and
distribution of P.O.L. arise, the E.-in-C. will seek the advice of D.S.T., and
D.S.T. may appoint his technical experts to advise on any work being carried
out by the R.E. from a technical oil aspect.
7. The responsibility for maintenance beyond the capacity of the R.A.S.C.
operating personnel and tools will be a R.E. responsibility.
8. The staffing of pump stations and operation of pumps on main pipe
routes, and arrangements for provision of signal communications throughout
the length of main pipe routes, will be an R.E. responsibility.
The staffing and operation of pumps within the boundaries of an installation,
e.g., transfer, loading, and other intra-depot pumps, will be an R.A.S.C.
responsibility.
9. The responsibility for action in connection with the necessary fire fighting
precautions will devolve on the service operating any installation.
10. Any cases where doubt exists as to the responsibility will be negotiated
between E.-in-C. and D.S.T. in the spirit of the instructions given above.
514
APPENDIX X D
(See Vol. I, page 303)
PLY OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS TO AN EXPEDITIONARY
FORCE IN NORTH WEST EUROPE
Paper issued by " O" Branch, War Office, July, 1943)
1. Introduction
The object of this paper is to give all those concerned with planning for an
frequirements for the provision of petroleum products, together with the
rationary Force operating in N.W. Europe an outline of the task involved,
Us Ministries, Services, and Staffs responsible.
Eir planning purposes, the pre-war oil ports and inland storages of Holland,
im, and N.W. France must be regarded as non-existent.
2. General Responsibility of Staff and Services
Task
Responsibility
"Q" Staff, with the advice of
Policy and plans
the appropriate S.T. Branch.
Provision of P.O.L. and technical equip-
D.S.T.
ment, other than that specified in 2 (d)
Detailed planning, research, design (other
D.S.T.
than that specified in 2 (e) below),
formulation of requirements, opera-
tion of installations, storage, issue and
accounting.
Giction of tankage, laying of land pipe-
Engineer-in-Chief in
United
lines, installation of plant,
general
Kingdom.
Chief Engineer
engineering work connected with stor-
of Force, Overseas.
age and distribution.
Enablishments of R.E. units concerned,
E.-in-C.
training in
use
of equipment and
methods of installation.
Design of installations,
calculation
for
E.-in-C., in co-operation with
provision of stores, their provision,
D.S.T.
siorage, and arrangements for ship-
Technical oil matters affecting storage
D.S.T. to advise E.-in-C., and
and issue.
allocate
technical staff to
assist R.E.
Maintenance
of installations
beyond
capacity of R.A.S.C. operating per-
R.E.
sonnel and tools.
) Staffing of main route pump stations,
R.E.
operating of pumps, and manning pipe
(i) Provision of signal communication
Royal Signals.
along pipe routes.
515
WO 277/
