238
= NEPTUNE
phrase for a twenty-four-hour delay, and all the elements of his Western
Task Force would adjust accordingly.29
For the most part, Kirk's confidence proved well founded. The signal
("One Mike Post") went out over the radio at 5:15 a.m., and hundreds of
ships from the Irish Sea to the Thames Estuary adjusted as necessary. The
battleships and cruisers from Scotland and Ireland reversed course. As
Admiral Dey put it, "We merely countermarched up the Irish Sea during
the day, got some sleep, and countermarched again that evening." The
"corncobs," proceeding under tow at a leisurely three to four knots, adjusted
similarly.30
The problem, of course, was Moon's Force U. Moon had been up all
night ensuring that the various elements of his eclectic command success-
fully got to sea in accordance with the detailed timetable. So far he had
managed it, though during the transit eastward, near-gale-force winds and
high waves had scattered elements of his command over a wide swath of the
western Channel. Now with the postponement, Moon not only had to con-
solidate his literally far-flung command, he also had to redirect the ships
into nearby ports. They could not remain at sea like the cruisers and destroy-
ers, for they were already in mid-Channel where daylight (sunrise was at
5:58 that morning) would soon expose them to German reconnaissance
aircraft if any bothered to overfly the Channel. Moreover, the smaller ves-
sels, including the LCTs, LCIs, and Mike boats, did not have the fuel ca-
pacity to stay at sea for another twenty-four hours and still have enough left
to carry out the operation. They had to find a safe harbor for the night, one
with substantial refueling capability. Most of Moon's ships headed into
Weymouth and Portland, though one of the convoy groups, designated as
U-2A, was beyond the reach of the short-range TBS (talk- between-ships)
radio and unwilling to break radio silence, Moon sent the destroyer Forrest
(DD-461) speeding at better than thirty knots to find it and turn it around.?"
Unsurprisingly, the recall dampened morale. Though most of the sailors
and soldiers had correctly guessed that this was the actual invasion, the ship
captains had waited until their vessels had cleared the harbor before mak-
ing a formal announcement. On many ships that announcement had pro-
voked cheers; on others, thoughtful solemnity. Then, only hours later, came
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 239
the "One Mike Post" radio message, and the captains came back on the
speaker system to announce, essentially, never mind. For some it was relief;
for many it was disappointment. For almost everyone it was frustrating.
Having steeled themselves to make the supreme effort of their lives, their
adrenaline crashed and left behind a curious lethargy. "When we de-
patted...wve were ready to go, and in a high state of excitement," one sailor
remembered later. The recall announcement "was a real letdown, and it
exhausted the crew."32
Notall of Moon's command was at sea when the postponement order
came through. Those forces designated for the follow-up assaults, including
most of the personnel-carrying LCIs, were still loading in the several West
Country ports. Captain James Arnold was supervising the embarkation of
soldiers at Dartmouth when a courier handed him a flimsy with the new
orders. Arnold secured the work details, but he was too keyed up to sleep,
she got a cup of coffee from the galley and went out on the starboard wing
o one of the ships. There he "gazed at the silent, eerie waters of the Dart
River, watching the incoming tide slack the mooring lines." Like ghostly
shadows in the dark, sailors took in the lines to keep the ship secure, care-
fully stepping over and around the sleeping bodies of hundreds of soldiers
lying on the deck.33
Meanwhile, the recalled elements of Moon's command were discovering
that the harbors at Weymouth and Portland were already crowded with the
ships of Halls Force O. They worked their way cautiously into the harbors
seeking an open stretch of water where they could drop anchor, and in
doing so many inevitably became separated from the other vessels in their
unit. Those lowest on fuel made their way to the fueling docks to top off
their tanks. Moon and his various flotilla commanders tried to keep track of
all the vessels in their charge, but in the chaos of the moment, with each
ship captain looking out for his particular command, that became all but
impossible. "We were never again in the proper order in the convoy," Edwin
Gale remembered. An additional burden was that all the ships were oper-
ating under strict radio silence. The short-range TBS radio could be used,
but only for emergencies, and most communication took place by flag
hoist, by blinker light, or even by shouting and gesticulating from ship to
