XiV
= Prologue
from America to England and then, after months of training, across the
Channel to occupied France. The Allied invasion of the Normandy beaches
on June 6, 1944, bore the designation Operation Overlord, but everything
that came before it, including the surge across the Channel and the landing
itself, was part of Operation Neptune, and D-Day could not have taken
place without it.
Neptune, the Roman god of the sea, is traditionally depicted as a bare-
chested, muscular, white-bearded deity, often wielding a trident and driv-
ing a chariot pulled by seahorses. At the Quadrant Conference at Quebec
in May 1943, where the Combined Chiefs of Staff of Britain and the
United States confirmed the long-delayed decision to invade German-
occupied France one year hence, it seemed an appropriate designation to
apply to the massive amphibious operation that had just been approved.
"Massive" is not an overstatement. Operation Neptune was the largest
seaborne assault in human history, involving over six thousand vessels
and more than a million men. This book is a study of how the British and
Americans managed to overcome divergent strategic views, Russian im-
patience, German U-boats, insufficient shipping, training disasters, and a
thousand other obstacles to bring the Allied armies to Normandy and
keep them there.
Many of those at the Quebec conference who solemnly affirmed the de-
cision to invade the European continent in the spring of 1944 wondered at
the time if it represented anything more than wishful thinking, for the ship-
ping needed to conduct such an invasion simply did not exist. The Ameri-
cans, confident that their unrivaled industrial capability could meet any
challenge, were far more sanguine than the British, who could barely con-
ceive of an armada of six thousand ships. After all, ships were needed to
maintain the lifeline of supplies from the United States to both Britain and
Russia; more ships were needed to transport a million or more American
soldiers across the ocean, and then to supply them with mail and cigarettes;
still more were needed to ferry the jeeps, trucks, tanks, bombs, bullets, fuel,
and all the other tools of war from the United States to England. And to
guard these vessels from the predations of enemy U-boats, escort ships —
destroyers, corvettes, and auxiliary aircraft carriers— were needed as well.
Prologue = xv
For the invasion itself, still more ships of a quite specialized type were
needed to transport the invaders and their equipment across the Channel
to the landing beaches, and then to evacuate the wounded and the prison-
ers back to Britain. And all of this had to be accomplished while still more
ships-thousands of them—carried out a naval war against Japan halfway
around the world. These ubiquitous demands put severe pressure on the
decision makers. During World War II, a dearth of shipping was the key lo-
gistical constraint in Allied decision-making, and because of it, the most
important Anglo-American strategic decisions of the war were less a prod-
uct of what they wanted to do than of what they could do.
All the great milestone events of military history have a strategic ele-
ment, a logistical element, and an operational element. Strategic pla
ning for Neptune began even before the United States entered the war,
with the formation and development of the Anglo-American partner-
ship. From the moment the British Expeditionary Force evacuated the
beaches of Dunkirk in late May and early June 1940, British planners —
and soon enough American planners-began to consider how, when,
and where the Western Allies could reenter the European continent in
force. The urgency of such planning varied dramatically between 1941
and 1944, and almost as dramatically between the ostensible partners,
with the British far less eager than the impetuous Americans, or after
June 1941 the hard-pressed Russians, to sanction a swift return to the
Continent. These issues became topics of sometimes sharp exchanges
between the English-speaking allies. There were also disagreements,
misunderstandings, and rivalries between and among the various serv-
ices within each country, including disputes about the relative impor-
tance of an expanded Pacific War or an all-out commitment to strategic
bombing. In the end, a consensus, if not quite unity, was achieved, and
Europe was liberated, though it was, as Wellington said of Waterloo,
a near-run thing.
A necessary second step involved the development of the wherewithal
needed to secure the common goal. That included the men, of course, and
between 1942 and 1944, millions of Americans were torn from their Iowa
farms and Brooklyn tenements and transformed into soldiers and sailors.
