10 = NEPTUNE
of his life. Even as chief of naval operations, Stark signed his memos—
including those to the president-simply as "Betty"*
Both Marshall and Stark advised Roosevelt that if the Germans got con-
trol of the French navy, it would tip the balance of naval power in the Atlan-
tic. In such a case, they suggested, the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, which
Roosevelt had sent there to deter Japanese aggression in Asia, should be
transferred to the Atlantic. Roosevelt agreed in principle, but he chose to
wait until the status of the French navy was clarified. Some clarification
came eleven days later when the Royal Navy took the matter in hand and
executed a preemptive strike against the French fleet at Mers-el-Kebir in
Algiers, sinking a French battleship and heavily damaging six other ships,
killing more than twelve hundred Frenchmen in the process. Consequently,
though Roosevelt did send a battleship division as well as its two newest
battleships to the Atlantic in June 1941, nine American battleships remained
in the Pacific, including eight at Pearl Harbor, where they still were five
months later, on December 7,10
The German triumph in France led some American planners to conclude
that Europe, including Britain, was lost, and that the most practical thing the
United States could do now was reduce or even end its material support of
the British and hoard its arms for self-defense. Characteristically, Roosevelt
listened and nodded to those who offered such advice, but he attached so
many conditions as to make it effectively impossible. He viewed the sur-
vival of Britain as an essential component of American security. Instead of
cutting back on American support, he decided to send a "special observer"
to England to provide an independent source of war news. The initiative for
that came from the British ambassador, Philip Kerr, known by his title, Lord
Lothian. Lothian recalled to Roosevelt's mind the critical role that Rear
Admiral William S. Sims had played in the opening months of American
participation in World War I, when he had collaborated with the British to
• One irony of this tale is that John Stark's wife was actually named Molly and what he
is supposed to have said at the Battle of Bennington is "We'll beat them before night or
Molly Stark's a widow." If the upperclassman had known his historical mythology a
little better, the future chief of naval operations might have gone through life as
"Molly" Stark.
Germany First = 11
produce a coordinated Atlantic strategy. Of course, Sims had gone to Lon-
don only after an American declaration of war. Still, Roosevelt thought it
was a good idea, and he nominated Rear Admiral Robert L. Ghormley for
the post. Though technically Ghormley's mission was merely to discuss the
standardization of arms, his presence in wartime London strengthened the
link between the English-speaking countries, which may have been exactly
what Lothian had in mind all along.!
That summer, Britain braced for a German invasion, though instead, in
the first week of September, Germany began a sustained aerial bombing
campaign of British ports and cities— the Blitz. As if impressed by that, on
September 27, 1940, Japan formally joined the Tripartite Pact with Germany
and Italy. Now a future American war against all three of the Axis powers
seemed not only possible but likely—perhaps even inevitable. Instead of
refocusing American attention on the Pacific, however, Japan's decision
contributed to the growing emphasis on the Atlantic. In June, Marshall sug-
gested that these circumstances "forced" the United States into "reframing
our naval policy" to a "purely defensive" posture in the Pacific and making
the "main effort on the Atlantic side." It was uncertain, however, that the
Navy could be convinced of that, and it was at this moment that Stark played
a vital role. 12
On November 12, at the height of the German Blitz against London and
two months after Japan joined the Tripartite Pact, Stark took it upon him-
self to send Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox a lengthy memorandum in
which he embraced the emerging reorientation in American strategic
thinking. In case of war, Stark wrote, "the reduction of Japanese offensive
power" could be achieved "chiefly through economic blockade," while the
United States devoted the bulk of its efforts to "a land offensive against the
[European] Axis powers." That would require "a major naval and military
effort in the Atlantic, during which time "we would ...be able to do little
more in the Pacific than remain on a strict defensive." He acknowledged
that such a policy would allow Japan to consolidate its early conquests.
Nevertheless, Stark believed the greater danger was that Germany would
complete its mastery of Europe, including the conquest of Britain. If that
happened, any future campaign to defeat Hitler would become significantly
