144
= NEPTUNE
anywhere near the numbers you want.... And as for time, I don't see
how it could possibly be done in less than at least a week longer than
you seem prepared to give us.... We'll have a crack at it, only don't
expect much of a show.34
All too often, Americans found this tongue-in-cheek stereotype uncom-
fortably accurate. Bred to the notion that swift action and undeviating
focus on the objective was the way to get things done, Americans found
the British agonizingly indirect. When American Navy Captain James E.
Arnold received orders as the naval officer in charge (NOIC) for one of
the landing operations, he sought out his British counterpart to discuss
how they could cooperate. He showed up at British headquarters and
introduced himself: "I'm Captain Arnold, U.S. Navy, and I'm looking for
NOIC, British forces. I wanted to discuss -" At that point he was inter-
rupted: "Aye, sit down and have a spot of tea." Such exchanges were not
necessarily typical, but they were common enough to suggest that the cul-
tural and professional gulf between the two nations affected planning and
training for Neptune-Overlord. 35
The origin of this Anglo-American gulf was not merely cultural- it was
also experience-based. The vastly diferent roles that each country had
played during the First World War colored all the exchanges between Brits
and Yanks in the Second. In August 1943, Secretary of War Stimson wrote
to Roosevelt, "The shadows of Passchendaele and Dunkerque still hang too
heavily over the imagination of these [Britishl leaders. Though they have
rendered lip service to the [cross- Channel) operation, their hearts are not
in it. That much was evident. As late as November 25, 1943, barely five
months before the date set for the invasion of Europe, the British chief of
staff argued, "We must not... regard OVERLORD on a fixed date as the pivot
of our whole strategy on which all else turns." The British, Stimson said,
believed in "pinprick warfare" and were convinced that "Germany can be
beaten by a series of attritions in northern Italy, in the eastern Mediterra-
nean, in Greece, in the Balkans, in Rumania and other satellite countries
and that the only fighting which needs to be done will be done by
Russia. "36
Brits and Yanks = 145
He was not entirely wrong. And yet, in spite of the dissimilar experiences
that informed their divergent approaches to war, and in spite of the cultural
gulf between the gum-chewing, wisecracking Yanks and the temperamen-
taly restrained, tea-drinking Brits, by the end of 1943 they were bound to-
gether by mutual need, and poised on the brink of history. It now seemed
likely that the manpower resources for the invasion could be assembled in
time to meet the agreed-upon deadline of May 1, 1944. To be sure, most of
those men were inexperienced, many were insufficiently trained, and oth-
ers were still en route, but they were well armed, well fed, and certainly
eager enough. Two questions, however, remained unanswered: Could
the Allies assemble the sealift capability needed to get them across the
Channel and onto the Normandy beaches? And who would command the
operation?
