74
NEPTUNE
Another constraint was Eisenhower's lack of control over political issues.
One of those was whether to use British or American troops in the inva-
sion. That question grew out of the complicated and uncertain political
status of North Africa. The putatively independent Vichy French govern-
ment retained colonial oversight over Morocco and Algeria, so, officially at
least, an American invasion of North Africa would constitute an unpro-
voked attack on a neutral country, one with which the United States main-
tained nominally friendly relations. On the other hand, most Frenchmen
continued to consider Germany their real enemy, and the Allied hope was
that many of them would welcome the Americans as liberators.
That was not likely to be the case if British troops were involved. Though
England and France had been allied against Germany in both world wars,
that partnership had suffered a blow in May 1940 during the German blitz-
krieg, when British forces had retreated to the Channel coast at Dunkirk to
save themselves, leaving the French to face the Germans alone. To be sure,
by then the military situation had utterly collapsed and the only other Brit-
ish options were destruction or surrender. Nevertheless, the French felt
betrayed by what they considered their abandonment. Far worse, however,
was the Royal Navy attack six weeks later on the French fleet at Mers-el-
Kebir, near Oran in Algeria. The British had justified that attack as neces-
sary to keep French naval assets out of German hands, but justified or not,
it had been a deliberate and unprovoked assault in which more than twelve
hundred Frenchmen had been killed. To the French, it was little different,
and arguably even more infamous, than what the Japanese had done to the
Americans at Pearl Harbor. Roosevelt feared that French anger would
translate into fierce resistance to any invasion that included British troops,
and he therefore wanted the North African assault to be an all-American
show. Naturally enough, Churchill and the British did not want to be left
out of this first Anglo-American counteroffensive of the war.*
A second issue was where the troops would land. French North Africa
stretched for a thousand miles from the Atlantic Ocean to the Tunisian
desert. The British wanted to secure a foothold as far inside the Mediter-
ranean as possible. That way, they could move quickly into Tunisia and
trap the German Afrika Korps between the invasion force and the British
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 75
Eighth Army in Egypt. American planners, dubious about sending forces
through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the cul-de-sac of the Mediterra-
nean, wanted the landings to take place outside the Mediterranean, on the
Atlantic coast of French Morocco. Roosevelt himself personally insisted
that "one of our landings must be on the Atlantic." The British found such
concerns incomprehensible. They had been passing through the Strait of
Gibraltar with impunity for more than two hundred years, and to them it
was as friendly and familiar as the English Channel. In the end, these issues
were resolved by compromise. The Allies would make three landings: an
all-American effort on the Atlantic coast near Casablanca, and two Anglo-
American landings on the Mediterranean coast at Oran and Algiers. These
negotiations, however, played havoc with the timetable. Eisenhower did
not get the green light until the first week of September, and only then
could he begin to assemble the various pieces—the troops, the ships, and
thesuplies - that would make up the invasion groups.
In the meantime, on August 19, the British launched a raid against the
French Channel coast at Dieppe, about halfway between the Pas de Calais
and Normandy. As he had made clear at Arcadia, Churchill's long-term
strategic vision included periodic assaults against the periphery of Nazi-
occupied Europe to test German defenses, give hope to the resistance, and
perhaps draw the Luftwaffe into a battle of attrition. He had made Mount-
bate the commander of combined operations precisely to oversee such
rid, and the British had already carried out successful forays against Le
Hare and St. Nazaire. The attack on Dieppe, however, was a disaster from
the start. German defenses proved more than adequate, inflicting an appall-
ing 60 percent asualty rate on the five thousand Canadians and one thou-
and British commandos who took part. Even the air battle went the way of
the Germans: the Luftwaffe lost only 46 planes, while the Allies lost 106. If
the operation had any silver lining at all it was in providing important les-
tons about amphibious operations, including the difficulty of getting heavy
cals sore from landing ships. Of the fifty-eight big 40-ton "Churchill"
haks embarked for the raid, fewer than half got to the beach at all, and
fewer than half of those got as far as the seawall. Thoush the British sought
to put the hest face on it and kent the extent of the disaster a secret. the
