174 = NEPTUNE
British planes covered British beaches. Eisenhower rejected that out of
hand, insisting, as he had from the start, on an integrated effort. In the end,
Eisenhower won all these disputes, relying heavily on Tedder and Leigh-
Mallory to do so.+
Of course, at root Neptune-Overlord was an amphibious operation, and
the designation of an overall naval commander was critical. The officer
assigned the job of Allied Naval Commander, Expeditionary Force, which
yielded the rather cumbersome acronym ANCXF, was Admiral Sir Ber-
tram Home Ramsay-"Bertie" to his friends. Ramsay, who turned sixty-
one on January 20, was the oldest of the SHAEF commanders and physically
unprepossessing: of average stature with a plain round face and thinning,
though surprisingly dark, hair. The son and brother of British Army gen-
erals, he had joined the Royal Navy in 1898 at the age of fifteen, undergoing
initial training aboard HMS Britannia, an old three-deck ship-of-the-line,
not unlike those of the Napoleonic era, that served as Britain's Naval Acad-
emy until 1905.
Like Eisenhower, Ramsay had spent much of his career as a staff officer,
working for very senior officers. He had been flag lieutenant to the com-
manding officers of both the Atlantic and Mediterranean fleets, and flag
commander to Admiral Sir John Jellicoe during a round-the-world cruise
on the battlecruiser HIMS New Zealand. He had a strong work ethic and
high personal standards that he tended to apply to others as well as to him-
self, writing in his diary, My faults are that I can't sit still and see things
done in an antiquated and un-progressive way. This "shortness of manner,
as one put it, occasionally got him into trouble. Indeed, it very nearly ended
his career in the 1930s when, as a rear admiral, he resigned as chief of staff
to Admiral Sir Roger Backhouse after only four months on the job because
he felt that Backhouse was insisting on doing all the staff work himself.
Their parting was amicable and Backhouse bore him no ill will, but his
voluntary abdication of such a high-profile position cast a shadow on his
career, and for the next four years he was without an assignment, a status
made official in October 1938 when his name was moved to the retired list.
Ramsay rather enjoyed the hiatus, marrying an heiress half his age and set-
tling down to the comfortable life of a gentleman landowner.'
SHAEF and ANCXF = 175
Curiously, it was Backhouse, when he became First Sea Lord, who res-
cued Ramsay from Coventry by appointing him flag officer in charge at
Dover during the Munich crisis in the fall of 1938. Ramsay still held that
position two years later when the Germans smashed through Allied
defenses in the lowlands and the British Expeditionary Force retreated to
the beaches near Dunkirk. As the man on the spot, it was Ramsay who cho-
regraphed the evacuation of more than 338,000 men from the Dunkirk
beaches, including nearly 140,000 French, Polish, and Belgian soldiers. It
was all but a miracle, and it proved the making of him. In 1942, Ramsay was
promoted to full admiral and appointed Commander, Expeditionary
Forces with responsibility for the "general direction of all naval forces en-
gaged in large-scale landing operations." In that capacity he played key roles
in both the Torch and Husky operations in the Mediterranean.®
Ramsay received his appointment to command the naval forces for Nep-
tune in October 1943, a full six weeks before Eisenhower got the job as
supreme commander, and he was already ensconced at Norfolk House
when Eisenhower arrived there in January 1944. He got along well with
Eisenhower, whom he considered "a sensible chap," and with his British
colleagues as well. He was one of very few who could call Montgomery
"Monty" and get away with it, and he thought Tedder both "intelligent and
sympathetic."
In fact, all of the British service commanders for Neptune-Overlord got
along well, making up "a most cheerful party, in Montgomery's words.
Ramsay actually lived with Montgomery, since both men took rooms at St.
Paul's School, which had been turned over to the armed forces for the dura-
ton. That allowed them to swap ideas and build a sense of interservice
teamwork. Of course Montgomery always considered himself the captain
of the team. Ramsav occasionally took it unon himself to remind Monty
that he was not, in fact, the boss. On January 12 when Montgomery sched-
wed a meeting at St. Paul's prior to Eisenhower's arrival, the conference
100m was set up with a U-shaped table and place cards put out to denote
the various participants. The placards for Ramsay and Leigh-Mallory read
"Naval C-in-C, and "Air C-in-C" while others read "U.S. Army, "U.S. Air
Roc," and so on. But the place card for Montgomery at the head of the
