= NEPTUNE
then had operated as autonomous entities. The meetings of both the Joint
Chiefs and the Combined Chiefs soon came to dominate the work calen-
dars of the principals. King estimated that despite his dual role during the
war as both chief of naval operations and commander in chief of the U.S.
Fleet, he spent two-thirds of all his time on either JCS or CCS matters.?
The CCS was not, however, a decision-making body. Everything it did
was subject to oversight and reversal by the heads of governments. Chur-
chill, who, in addition to his role as prime minister also held the portfolio of
Minister of Defence, continued to direct British strategy from his basement
war room in Whitehall. To him, both the British Chiefs of Staff in London
and the Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington were merely advisory
bodies, and his larger-than life personality dominated British strategic de-
cision making throughout the war. For his part, Roosevelt was much less o
a bully to his service chiefs, but his instinctive preference for a loose and
informal (some said chaotic) administrative style unbound by clear wire
diagrams or strict protocol allowed him to give the Joint and Combined
Chiefs the freedom to make plans and to recommend policies - as long as
everyone understood that in the end the final decisions were always his.
Even then, he was as likely as not to change his mind.
Marshall began his campaign to obtain a commitment to an early cross-
Channel offensive at the very first meeting of the CCS. As he saw it, if the
strategic blueprint was "Germany first" then it was best to get on with it. He
was distressed by the dispersion of scarce Allied resources to secondary
theaters around the world, and he urged a focus on the vital center: Nazi
Germany. Eisenhower agreed with that, writing, "We've got to go to Europe
and fight - and we've got to quit wasting resources all over the world — and
still more— wasting time." To Marshall and Eisenhower, it was self-evident
that the Allies could not continue to send their resources all over the globe
in penny-packet reactions to various Axis threats.†
Alas, in the first months of the war, some dispersal of assets was to a cer-
tain extent unavoidable, for the peril was global. The chilling effectiveness
of the German U-boat offensive in the Atlantic was visible from the Ameri-
can coastline in the reflected light of burning oil tankers; in Africa, British
forces in Libya struggled to hold on to Egypt. Both India and Burma were
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" =
5 1
under threat from Japanese armies, and Chiang Kai-shek was calling for
help in China. A Japanese force was closing in on the British citadel of Sin-
gapore, and MacArthur's forces had been driven back into the Bataan
peninsula in the Philippines. Further south, the continent of Australia, in-
cluding its precarious communications link to Hawaii, was endangered,
and of course the principal theater of the war—more important than all
the others combined-was in Russia, where nine million men slew one
another by the tens of thousands along a twelve-hundred-mile front. A
Russian collapse would be catastrophic and make any subsequent invasion
of Europe all but impossible. Shoring up each of these threatened and pre-
carious theaters with finite resources was like trying to plug eleven leaks in
a dam using only five fingers. For several weeks, therefore, the Allies strug-
gled to send whatever reinforcements they could scrape together to as
many threatened fronts as the severely limited shipping would allow.
It was amid these perils that Marshall began his quixotic effort to halt, or
at least to limit, the dispersion of Allied assets and focus on the decisive
theater. He asked Eisenhower to put together a formal plan for a rapid
buildup of Allied forces in Britain, to be followed by a cross-Channel inva-
sion of occupied France on or about April 1, 1943. Eisenhower began his
report by noting that an attack in northern France was "the shortest route
to the heart of Germany, and that it was only in northern France that the
Allies could establish clear air superiority over the invasion beaches from
aiffelds in Britain. And, of course, the establishment of an Allied front in
northern France would provide "the maximum possible support to Russia."
His proposal sounded a note of urgency in asserting that the decision to act
"must be made now," for any such assault necessarily required "a long period
of intensive preparation. The Marshall-Eisenhower plan was consistent
with the one Churchill had presented at Arcadia, which also called for an
invasion of France in 1943. Nevertheless, before offering the proposal to
the Combined Chiefs, the politically sensitive Marshall first sought presi-
dential approval 6
Marshall met with the president in his Oval Study on March 25. Others
present included King and Knox for the Navy, Arnold for the Army Air
Forces, and both Secretary Stimson and the ubiquitous Harry Hopkins.
