82
= NEPTUNE
American warship contingent included the brand-new battleship USS
Massachusetts (BB-59) plus the much older New York (BB-34) and Texas
(BB-35) as well as seven cruisers and no fewer than thirty-eight destroyers.
More destroyers would have been preferable, but in the late summer of
1942, destroyers were in demand everywhere: the Battle of the Atlantic
against German U-boats was at full tide, and that very week in the Pacific,
U.S. Navy destroyers engaged in a series of fierce surface engagements in
the Solomon Islands. In this, as in all things, the Allies would make do with
what there was. The British warships committed to Torch, dubbed
"Force H" and "Force X" included the Duke of York (the battleship that had
carried Churchill to the Arcadia conference), the Nelson, two battlecruisers
(ships with armament similar to a battleship but more lightly armored),
three cruisers, and seventeen destroyers, one of them Dutch. To assemble
this force, the Royal Navy had to draw from the Home Fleet, reduce the
Atlantic escorts, and temporarily suspend the convoys to Russia.!s
Eisenhower's job was to bring all the elements together — the troop-
ships, the transports, the aircraft carriers, the landing craft, and the war-
ships, both British and American, plus the tanks, trucks, and jeeps, and the
thousands of tons of supplies, plus more than a hundred thousand men—
in a complex maritime quadrille. Keeping track of all the various pieces of
this giant puzzle was all but overwhelming. Eisenhower bemoaned the fact
that "there is no way in many instances of knowing exactly what we have
here. Many supplies are still unclassified and are not yet unloaded at depots.
Time for unloading, sorting, cataloging, and for subsequent boxing, crat-
ing, marking, and loading simply does not exist. Nevertheless, the unfor-
giving timetable dictated that the operation begin before the winter storms
arrived, and so work continued around the clock. 16
In early November, Eisenhower boarded a B-17 "Flying Fortress" and
flew from England to Gibraltar where he set up headquarters in a small,
dank chamber carved out of the rock itself.* He had set all the pieces in
motion; now it was a matter of what he described as an "interminable, almost
• The pilot of Eisenhower's plane was Major Paul Tibbets, who three years later, as Colo-
nel Tibbets, would fly the B-29 Enola Gay to Hiroshima carrying an atomic bomb.
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 83
endurable wait" to see whether they fit together. The wait was especially
nerve-racking because the ships en route to the invasion beaches all oper-
ated under radio silence. He may have been in command, but he had no
idea what was happening, and he felt utterly helpless. "We cannot find out
anything!" he scrawled in his diary in frustration.17
ONOCTOBER 23, 1942, A LONG COLUMN of ships that included twenty-eight
transports packed with 33,843 American soldiers began filing slowly out of
Hampton Roads, Virginia, and into Chesapeake Bay to begin a four-
thousand-mile journey to the coast of Africa. That same day in Egypt,
forces of the British Eighth Army attacked the German Afrika Corps at El
Alamein. The British pounded the outnumbered Germans for ten days,
eventually winning a signal victory-indeed, the first major British victory
ofthe war against a German army. It was a promising omen.
While the British assailed the Germans at El Alamein, the American
conly steamed eastward across the Atlantic. Destroyers scouted ahead,
with watch standers scouring the sea for the telltale "feather" of an enemy
periscope. Navy patrol planes circled overhead; two silver blimps drifted
aly nearby. On board the task force flagship, the heavy cruiser USS
Augusta (CA-31), were both Major General George Patton, who com-
manded the embarked troops, and Rear Admiral H. Kent Hewitt, who
conmanded the armada itself, officially designated Task Force 34. The con-
tas between the two men was jarring. Patton was impeccably attired, with
are badge and button in place; Hewit's uniform often looked like he had
dipit. aton was a former Olympic athlete who presented himself with
castive a most challenging military bearing; Hewitt had a perceptible
cade chi and an easy relaxed manner. Patton was flamboyant, profane,
and quick triggered; Hewitt was understated, low-key, and deliberate.
Dopte his appearance, Hewitt was bright and competent and every bit a
polsional. Patton wasn't so sure. When, prior to sailing, Hewitt sug.
posed that there were still a number of problems they had to work out,
can the a tantrum and accused Hewitt of being defeatist. Concerned
by Patonisation, Hewit went to King, who talked to Marshall, and Patton
octal. imbed down enough to allow a working relationship, though
