118
= NEPTUNE
legacy of pre-Victorian England, that constituted the middle echelon of the
British government. (One Royal Navy veteran quipped that British officials
moved "at the rate of frozen molasses traveling across sand paper.") The
combination of the ambitious goal, the proximate deadline, tepid coopera-
tion from the military bureaucracy, and skepticism from the top all fed frus-
tration and even anger within the COSSAC group.33
It was Mountbatten who stepped in to apply the balm. In June, he invited
the entire COSSAC team to his summer home, Largs, on the west coast of
Scotland. When Morgan and the other officers arrived there on June 28,
their general mood was somber, even defeatist. Morgan feared that some
members of his team had decided the mission was hopeless. The retreat to
the Scottish highlands, however, proved a tonic. Morgan himself felt the
change that first evening when he walked the grounds of the estate with the
tall, handsome, and buoyantly confident Mountbatten. The new mood was
aided by a felicitous coincidence later that night when the conferees
watched from Mountbatten's rooftop as a convoy of ships departed the
Firth of Clyde carrying soldiers to the invasion of Sicily, now twelve days
away. On the spur of the moment, a small signal lamp was set up on the roof
and a message of "Godspeed" blinked out to the embarked soldiers.
Whether it was the change in venue, Mountbatten's irresistible confidence,
the fine June weather, or the vision of soldiers off to do their duty, a new
sense of optimism infused the COSSAC planners. Within days, deadlocks
were overcome and a plan finalized for a May landing on the Normandy
beaches.34
Morgan's orders required him to provide a detailed operational plan
to the CCS by the first of August. Two weeks before that deadline, he pre-
sented a preliminary report to the British chiefs of staff. In it, Morgan
asserted, first, that he believed the operation was feasible. To be sure, ship-
ping would be a difficulty, and the number of landing craft would have to be
increased dramatically, but these difficulties were surmountable. Second, he
announced COSSAC's conclusion that the landings should take place on a
three-division front on the Normandy beaches near Bayeux. A larger initial
landing force would be desirable, but the limited number of landing craft
was the controlling factor. In an effort to extend the optimism of the Largs
Casablanca to COSSAC = 119
retreat to the chiefs of staff, Morgan reminded them that it was essential for
the government to embrace the plan fully, and to take "all possible steps" to
supportit. That meant that "action must start now and every possible effort
made by all means in our power... to speed up our own preparations." There
was, he told them, "not one moment to spare." 35
According to Morgan, the reaction of the British chiefs of staff was "not
demonstrably enthusiastic." Even allowing for traditional British reserve,
their response was disappointing, and some members of the COSSAC
team were angered that their hard work was so casually received. When
Morgan asked if he could forward the plan to the American chiefs of staff,
permission was denied. The British were about to leave for another confer-
ence in Quebec (code name Quadrant) and they wanted to keep the cards
in their hands. This created a serious professional dilemma for Morgan. He
was British officer, but COSSAC was an Allied organ, set up to be "neither
Bitish nor American, but equally answerable to both.. governments." He
knew the Combined Chiefs would have to approve the plan before any-
thing could be done, yet he was denied permission to share the plan with
the Americans 36
Morgan resolved his dilemma by ensuring that an advance team of COS-
SAC members, some of them Americans and all of them familiar with the
plan, sailed for the United States a few days ahead of the British delegation.
Once there, they briefed not only their American counterparts but Roo-
sevelt himself, both in Washington and again at Hyde Park. By then
Churchill was also en route, this time on the Queen Mary. Lounging in his
bunk with cigar in hand, he listened impassively as staff officers read aloud
the details of the COSSAC plan to invade the beaches of Normandy eight
months hence.37
At the Quebec conference, the British did not attempt to overturn the
decision that had been made at Trident; instead they emphasized the impor-
tance of keeping the Germans distracted by conducting a vigorous and
aggressive campaign in Italy. The Americans remained deeply suspicious
that this was simply another manifestation of British obstructionism. That
suspicion fed Marshall's opposition, which in turn provoked Brooke's impa-
tience. "It is quite impossible to argue with him [Marshall]," Brooke wrote in
