148 = NEPTUNE
a particularly long gestation period that begins with the accumulation of
raw materials and leads through steel mills, fabrication shops, machine
shops, and assembly plants before eventually arriving in the building ways.
It is a complex puzzle involving tens of thousands of interconnected parts.
As a result, decisions made about construction priorities in 1943 decisively
affected what was operationally possible in 1944. The American industrial
colossus was impressive, but it was not infinite. If Neptune-Overlord was to
become a reality-if those hundreds of thousands of soldiers crowding
into southern England were to be lifted across the Channel and deposited
onto the beaches of Normandy—the Allies had to produce the thou-
sands of landing craft needed to carry them there.
Back in 1942, Roosevelt had created the War Production Board (WPB).
In theory, at least, part of its job was to establish priority categories for all
sorts of products, not just ships but also machine tools, cranes, valves, forg-
ings, engine parts, and the hundreds of other industrial tools of war. The
WPB set up a system in which the highest priority items received a rating of
A-1. Inevitably, however, one or another command or interest group came
forward to explain why a particular product needed to be elevated above
the others, and soon there was an AA-I category, and not long after that an
AAA-1 category. By mid-1943 such ratings had become all but meaningless
because so many items had been assigned the highest priority. At that point,
the WPB created a new standard: an urgency rating. After confirmation of
the decision for Neptune-Overlord in August 1943, only one American
shipbuilding program carried an urgency rating: landing craft. The decision
came late in the game, however, and the friction of war proved particularly
powerful in slowing the production of desperately needed landing craft. In
the end, the Allies simply ran out of time.'
THE TERM "LANDING CRAFT" encompasses forty-six different types of
vessels," ranging from oceangoing transport and cargo ships that displaced
* In general, any vessel over two hundred tons was called a "ship" and those under two
hundred tons were called "craft, though this was not universally true. Both the LCI
(landing craft, infantry and LCT (landing craft, tank) displaced more than two hun-
dred tons but were nevertheless labeled as craft.
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" =
149
ten thousand tons or more down to the thirty-six-foot Higgins boats that
caried the soldiers to the beach. The alphabet soup of acronyms for all
these vessels can be confusing, even to experts, and for that reason, it is
useful to lump them into three broad categories:
1. The most numerous, indeed nearly ubiquitous, type of landing craft
was the small, flat-bottomed personnel carriers developed by Andrew
Jackson Higgins at his shipyard in Louisiana (see Chapter 4). Popularly
known as Higgins boats, they were initially designated as Landing Craft,
Personnel (LCP) by the Navy. These displaced only six tons each and were
carried aboard larger ships, suspended on davits that could lower them into
the sea alongside the mother ship. Soldiers would then climb down chain
or rope nets into the holds, which had no seats or benches, making some
fellike they were inside a railroad boxcar with no roof. Each boat had a Navy
crew of three whose job was to ferry their human cargo several miles to the
beach. By the time of the Trident conference in May 1943, the United States
had produced nearly four thousand of these craft. (See Table 2, page 161.)
Many had gone to the Pacific, others had been employed in the Torch land-
ing in North Africa, and still others were sent to the Mediterranean for the
invasions of Sicily and Italy.
B; May 1943, however, the LCP was no longer being manufactured, for it
had been replaced by a slightly larger and more resilient variant that dis-
placed eight tons and carried both soldiers and vehicles, including jeeps
and light trucks, though not tanks. These were also produced by the Hig-
gins Company and still called Higgins boats, though the Navy's designation
for them was Landing Craft, Vehicle and Personnel (LCVP). Like the ear-
let LCP, they were carried aboard larger ships, and suspended on davits.
They were an improvement over their slightly smaller predecessors in sev-
eral ways. First, the draft forward was only twelve inches, which allowed
them to land on beaches that had a very gradual slope (as at Normandy).
They were also faster (12 mph) and had a longer range (one hundred miles)
than the L.CP, and they carried two . 30 caliber machine guns aft. The first of
them was built in Novemher 194), slightly too late for Torch, but over the
next eighteen months American shipyards turned out an astonishing twelve
