YUL
344 = NEPTUNE
Deyo ordered counterbattery fire, but it seemed to have little immediate
effect, for the Nevada was straddled six times in the five minutes between
12:40 and 12:45. An ensign on board insisted later that the Nevada was
straddled by enemy salvos a total of twenty-seven times that afternoon. A
sailor whose battle station was in an AA mount on the superstructure
recalled seeing the shells arcing in toward the ship through the clear blue
sky. He watched as one shell passed "between the Nevada's masts" and
landed only a few yards off the side, "sending up a huge geyser of water and
scattering shell fragments against the ship's hull." The Nevada's captain,
Powell Rhea, maneuvered radically in an effort to throw off the German
gunners, calling down to the engine room for emergency speed that allowed
the old battlewagon to work herself up to twenty-one knots, a turn of speed
she had not shown since before Pearl Harbor. 16
MEANWHILE, BRYANT WITH THE SHIPS of Group Two, including the battle-
ships Texas and Arkansas, approached Cherbourg from the east. Bryants
assignment was to neutralize the big guns at Battery Hamburg behind Cap
Lévi, then join Deyo off the city. Bryant knew that Battery Hamburg had
been positioned to cover the seaward approach to Cherbourg Harbor, and
as a result, its guns could track only to a point about thirty-five degrees east
of due north. (See Map, page 341.) His plan, therefore, was to open fire while
his ships were still east of that arc and slowly hammer the battery to pieces.
That plan was undone at the last minute by the order not to open fire until
fired upon or until contacted by a fire control party ashore. As it happened,
however, the Arkansas established early radio contact with spotters ashore
who had the Hamburg Battery under direct observation. That allowed
the Arkansas to close to eighteen thousand yards (ten miles) and open a
"Jow deliberate fre" on the Hamburg Battery at 12:08. Explosions from
her 12 inch guns erupted all around the target, but there was no response
from the enemy Some in the American hotleshins wondered whether the
German gun positions had been abandoned.17
The Germans were merely biding their time. Bryant's ships crept west-
ward until they were inside Hamburg's are of fire, and then at 12:29 the
Germans opened up. The guns in Battery Hamburg significantly outranged
"A Field of Ruins" = 345
those on the Arkansas and Texas, and as at Querqueville, their marksman-
ship was "extremely accurate" The destroyer Barton (DD-722) was hit on
thesecond salvo at 12:30 when a 9.4-inch shell ricocheted off the water and
cashed into her hull, smashing through several bulkheads and coming to
rist inside the ship. But it did not explode. Then, only seconds later, an-
other salvo landed just in front of USS Laffey (DD-724). Again, one of the
shells ricocheted off the water and smashed into the hull of the American
destroyer, and it, too, failed to explode. Ordinarily an 11-inch shell, or even
194-inch shell, could break a destroyer in half, sinking her almost at once,
and to some the fact that neither of these shells exploded was nothing less
than providential. Bryant later speculated that the shells may have been
manufactured at the famous Skoda Arms Works in Pilson, Czechoslovakia,
where anti-Nazi patriots risked their lives to sabotage them. If so, the Amer-
icans off Cherbourg were much in their debt.l8
Despite their flawed shells, German marksmanship was unnervingly ac-
curate. They fired in three-gun salvos, and they proved very adept at adjust-
ing fire. A salvo aimed at the destroyer O'Brien at 12:51 landed six hundred
yards long; only seconds later, a second salvo was three hundred yards
long; a third straddled her; and at 12:53 she was hit—and this shell did
explode. Thirteen men were killed outright, and nineteen more were
wounded. That shell also knocked out the O'Brien's radar, leaving her blind
in heavy smoke amid several radically maneuvering vessels. To avoid a col-
lision, the O'Brien's skipper, Commander W. W. Outerbridge, temporarily
retired northward. When he returned to the fight later, he shifted his ord-
nance to air-burst shells in the hope of forcing the German gunners to keep
their heads down.!9
Just as the gunners at Querqueville focused on the Nevada, those in Bat-
tery Hamburg concentrated much of their attention on the Texas. The
Texas was bracketed on the third salvo, and as Bryant put it, "They had us
pretty well pinpointed." The salvos came in at unrelenting intervals every
twenty to thirty seconds while the Texas maneuvered radically. Bryant
thought the incoming shells had a kind of "seductive sound — a soft swish,
almost a caress" while they were en route. Then they hit the water with "the
most ungodly smack you ever heard —sharper than that of your own guns
