214
= NEPTUNE
of the exercise. Only minutes later, bright green tracer rounds from the
E-boats lit up the darkness. Even then, most of the men on board the 507
and the other ships in the convoy assumed this was another, quite realistic
part of the drill.39
All doubt evaporated at 2:07 a.m. when the first torpedo exploded. It
struck the 507 amidships in the auxiliary engine room, knocking out both
the ship's electricity and its communications and starting several fires. The
dozens of vehicles on the tank deck had all been topped off with gasoline,
and as the fires reached them, they burst into flame one by one. The 507
also began taking on water. Because of their large open tank deck, ISTs had
no transverse bulkheads or watertight compartments that could be used to
limit the flooding. The only thing that could be done was to close off as
many hatches as possible in the hope of controlling the inundation of water.
Meanwhile, the fires produced "a dull roar," as one sailor recalled, "punctu-
ated by the crackling and sputtering of small arms ammunition" cooking
off. Lieutenant (i.g.) Gene Eckstam, the ship's doctor, looked into the tank
deck to see a huge, roaring blast furnace... Trucks were burning; gasoline
was burning; and small-arms ammunition was exploding." He could hear
the screams of men being consumed by the flames, but he knew there was
nothing he could do for them; smoke inhalation would soon overcome any
who were still alive. "So I closed the hatches into the tank deck and dogged
them tightly shut."40
Crowded as the ship was, with nearly five hundred soldiers on board as
well as more than a hundred crewmen, the men got in one another's way
as they reacted to the crisis. They found that the metal pins holding the life
rafts to the bulkheads had rusted in place and couldn't be pried loose.
Crewmen tried to lower the Higgins boats alongside, but the LST was list-
ing so badly the hydraulic gear jammed. A soldier used his rifle to shoot
the cable holding one of them, and it finally dropped into the water. Men
panicked and began jumping over the side. Sooppea into teund the 507
was filled with struggling men, some who could swim and many who
could not. 41
Eleven minutes after the S07 was struck, a torpedo hit LST-531, and less
than a minute laterit was hit again. The resul was "a gigantic orange ball' of
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 215
Rame, and the 531 began to sink almost at once. Sailors and soldiers simply
laped over the side into the chill water, trusting to their life vests. The water
mas so cold it drove the breath from their bodies. Moreover, the life vests
that had been issued to the soldiers proved worse than useless. Unlike the
kapok vests that were standard in the Navy, the soldiers had been issued
something that resembled a bicycle inner tube that wrapped around their
chests. Most wore them at their waist so they didn't interfere with their
packs. As a result, when men triggered the CO, cartridges and inflated
them, the vests tipped them over onto their heads. Those who could clung
to one of the small two-man rafts, which soon became overcrowded. One
rat had more than twenty men clinging to it and to each other in concen-
tric circles. As the frigid cold overcame them and they lost consciousness,
they let go and drifted away into the dark. 42
Then LST-289 was hit. The skipper, Lieutenant Henry A. Mettler, saw
the torpedo coming and ordered, "Right full rudder." The maneuver may
have saved the ship, because the torpedo struck the ship's stern rather than
is broadside. It blew off the after section of the 289, containing the crew's
quarters and the galley, while the rest of the ship remained afloat; this time,
the fact that LSTs were shaped like a bathtub proved an advantage. By now
both the 507 and 531 were gone. The 507 had broken in half, with the bow
and stern sections rising up to form what one sailor described as "a fiery
jackknife" before it went under. The 531, hit by two torpedoes, had gone
down in only six minutes. Gunners on the remaining LSTs fired at the swift,
dark shadows in the night as red (American) and green (German) tracer
bullets illed the air. German tracers had a delayed illumination, so it was
difficut to determine their point of origin, and in the confusion and poor
visibility, many of the American shells struck other LSTs.,43
Commander Geddes, in the Azalea, heard the explosions from his posi-
tion a mile ahead of the convoy and circled back at flank speed. He was re-
luctant to fire a star shell that would illuminate the scene, for he knew that
it would also expose the LSTs. He did not even know from which direction
the atacks had come or whether the attacker was a U-boat or an E-boat. For
his part, Commander Skahill in LST-S15 ordered the remaining ships of the
convoy to head toward shore. This was the correct and well-established
