YUL
324 = NEPTUNE
delivered to Omaha Beach increased slightly, from 8,500 tons to 8,700
tons, but at the same time, the landing of personnel actually dropped from
an average of 17,843 per day (June 13 to 16) to only 11,686 per day (June
17 to 19). (See Table 3, page 328.) Either way, the flood of men, vehicles,
and supplies into Normandy was remarkable. In the two weeks after D-Day,
the Allies landed a total of 618,855 men, 93,986 vehicles, and 245,133 tons
of supplies over the five Normandy beaches, even though most of the
unloading at Sword Beach had to be halted due to continuing German artil-
lery fire. Only a small percentage of the total came in via the Mulberries,
and given that, it was not yet evident that the great effort put into the Mul-
berry project was yielding a significant return. To validate the wisdom of
the project, the next several days would be crucial. 33
THE STORM THAT ARRIVED on June 19 caught almost everyone by sur-
prise. Indeed, after the inclement weather on June S that had forced the
initial postponement of the invasion, the weather in the Channel had been
relatively benign, and all predictions were that it would remain that way. On
June 18, the official weather report for the next day was: "Cloudy to partly
cloudy. Visibility fair, 4-6 miles. Wind NE, velocity gentle - 8-13 knots.
Even as that forecast was distributed to the fleet, however, the wind was gust-
ing in excess of twenty knots. On June 19, a southward-moving cold front
from Ireland collided with a depression moving north from the Mediterra-
nean to produce a summer gale of historic ferocity. The barometer dropped
to 99.92 inches, and the wind increased to thirty knots. By ten oclock that
night, waves were crashing over the top of the Phoenix units, and the British
gun crews in the anti-aircraft batteries atop each of the units had to be evacu-
ated. When the Mike boats arrived to do that, the British soldiers were "hang-
ing onto the gun for dear life. Even inside the breakwater, the seas were so
rough that the Mike boats rose and fell as much as fifteen feet, soaring up to
the top of the Phoenix units at the crest of a wave, then suddenly swooping
down again. In one Mike boat, the men took off their kapok life jackets and
threw them into the open deck space to create a cushion for the soldiers to
land on, and then encouraged the men on the Phoenix to jump. Of the five
men in one gun crew who did so, two were severely injured.34
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 325
Meanwhile, the floating metal roadways from the Lobnitz piers to the
bech began to heave wildly, undulating, as one put it, "like writhing
pythons. The Seabees worked furiously to secure them, holding on with
ce hand to avoid being swept into the sea while they sought to double up
belines on both the Lobnitz pier and the floating roadway with eight-inch
Lauses The whales off Arromanche were less vulnerable, partly because
they were more protected by the coastal geography, but also because of the
Bish decision to anchor both ends of every section.?5
Allied shipping also suffered from the wrath of the storm, and the smaller
rasels were particularly at risk. The bigger ships put out heavy anchors to
both port and starboard, but the LCTs, Higgins boats, and Mike boats car-
tied only a single anchor, and they were not equipped with spring lines that
could ease the strain. As these smaller vessels were buffeted by seven-foot
seas and thirty-knot winds, their anchor lines stretched "taut as bowstrinos."
and inevitably some of those lines snapped and sent the vessels can
helesly before the wind. Many were driven ashore and broache
ways on the sand, where they were pounded by the heavy surf. One
daimed they were "piled six deep against the shore." On some vess
skippers deliberately ran their boats up onto the beach, concluding
was better to go aground than to go under. 36
The storm lasted all night, and the next day even the big ships bega
drag their anchors as a powerful north-by-northeast wind pushed t
shoreward. Many got up steam and headed out to gain sea room off w
was now a lee shore. Even so, that afternoon a salvage barge and five Briti
ICTs whose anchor lines gave way crashed violently into the whale o
Omaha Beach. Their steel hulls punctured the pontoons that kept th
roadway afloat, and several sections of the whale were wrecked; other se
tions simply disappeared.
On the morning of June 20, there were glimpses of blue skies through th
gray clouds, and many hoped that the worst had passed. Instead, the stor
worked its way up to a full-blown gale— the worst June storm in the Engli
Channel in forty years. Those LCTs that had gotten under way to avoid be
blown ashore now began to run low on fuel, and they sought a safe pla/
tie up. With so many vessels seeking shelter, such places were hard to
