= NEPTUNE
those ships were augmented by hundreds of new recruits, most of them
right out of boot camp. And the only seagoing experience of the men on the
newest LSTs arriving from America was their journey across the Atlantic.
They were, as one officer put it, "green as corn."!
As for the smaller L.CTS, as Betty Stark had pointed out to King, they had
only one commissioned officer each, most of them young ensigns with just
a few months' service. Indeed, they did not even have the experience of
having crossed the Atlantic under way, since their ships had been carried as
deck cargo on the larger LSTs. Given that, it seemed desirable to Stark to
add a second officer to each vessel. It was not clear how adding one more
brand-new and inexperienced ensign to each LCT would significantly im-
prove its efficiency, but it seemed a good idea at the time. To fill that per-
ceived need, the officer training program back in the States was cut short.
College graduates who had been enrolled in the Navy's V-7 officer training
program for only a few weeks suddenly got orders to pack their sea bags and
report to New York for embarkation.?
Arriving in Glasgow, they took trains south to one or another Channe!
port. Ninety-two of them were dispatched to Dartmouth, where they
encountered the rather awesome spectacle of nearly a hundred LCTs lined
up hull to hull across the Dart River. The ninety-two new arrivals became
instant executive officers, virtually all of them serving under a captain who
was in many cases only a few months their senior. It was rumored among
the new execs that one of the LCT skippers, an ensign named Clifford Un-
derwood, was actually thirty years old and married!?
The British, too, worried about having enough junior officers to com-
mand the hundreds of smaller amphibious ships. To address that need, they
opened a special naval cadet school at Lochaiort in Scotland where the of-
ficer candidates focused almost entirely on amphibious issues. They did not
even get training in deep-sea navigation. Some veteran Royal Navy officers
muttered that the graduates should not have commissions at all if they
could not handle a ship on the high seas, though in the end most acknowl-
edged that it was, as one put it, "a matter of necessity rather than choice.
British and American ICTs were grouped into flotillas of a dozen
vessels each, and the flotilla commanders were young, too, most of them
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 197
lieutenants in their mid- to late twenties. Their first task was to ensure
that the LCTs were operationally ready. In addition to such cosmetic
things as providing a fresh coat of paint, they had to ensure that engines
and the guns actually worked. Once the vessels were certified as func-
tonal, the flotilla commanders began taking them out into the Channel,
where the new skippers (and their even newer execs) learned how to
respond to flag and light signals so they could maintain their positions in
a formation and turn simultaneously from a column ahead into a line
abreast. They maneuvered first in groups of eight to twelve, then twenty
to thirty, and finally more than a hundred. They learned how to land their
cat on a beach and successfully retract. And they conducted endless
man-overboard drills, fire drills, and first-aid drills.'
Beginning early in 1944, British and American landing craft began to
conduct small-scale rehearsals of amphibious landings with their army
counterparts. In Channel ports from Fowey in Cornwall to Salcombe in
Deron and Poole in Dorset, American LCT skippers worked closely with
the elements of the Ist and 29th U.S. Infantry divisions that made up part
of Major General Leonard Gerow's V Corps and the 4th division that
was part of J. Lawton Collins's VII Corps. Farther east, up the England
Channel, Royal Navy LCTs conducted exercises from the Solent to the
Thames estuary with units of Dempsey's British Second Army, which in-
cluded the Canadian Third Division.
For the Americans, the center of much of this activity was the Amphib-
ious Training School at Slapton Sands, only a few miles west of Dartmouth.
In at least one respect, Slapton Sands was a misnomer, for there was no
sand there at all. Like the American target beaches across the Channel (now
renamed Omaha and Utah), the beach at Slapton was composed of shingle:
billins of small wave-polished black and gray pebbles. The site had other
physical characteristics that were similar to Omaha Beach and especially
Viah Beach. Not only did the rolling countryside of South Devon resemble
the bocage country of Normandy, but behind the beach at Slapton Sands
was a brackish marshy inlet called Slapton Ley. Since there was a similar
body of marshland behind Utah Beach, the landings at Slapton would allow
the would-be invaders to rehearse bridging this obstacle.
