YUL
314 = NEPTUNE
on the bridge, and he was furious about the lack of fire discipline. Accord-
ing to one witness, "angry words were spoken to the captain.""!3
Another threat was the E-boats out of Le Havre and Cherbourg. For the
most part, these were easily fended off, though one of them did manage to
put a torpedo into the USS Nelson (DD-623) on June 12, and two LSTs
(314 and 376) were torpedoed and sunk, presumably by E-boats. Due to
these threats from air and sea, the men on the Allied ships offshore remained
at general quarters around the clock throughout the first week. Stewards
carried coffee, soup, and sandwiches to the men at their stations, and only
one man at a time was allowed to visit the head. When there was a lull, half
the men were allowed to sleep on the deck near their stations, but no one
was to go below.14
THINGS BECAN TO IMPROVE on D-Day plus four - that is, June 10. Ramsay
concluded that Omaha Beach was now sufficiently secure that the LSTs
could begin to go ashore without having to discharge their cargoes onto the
LCTs or rhinos. Because Moon had authorized LSTs to run up onto the
beach on the afternoon of June 7, the tonnage delivered to Utah Beach ex-
ceeded the totals for Omaha Beach on both June 8 and 9. Now, with the
ISTs going ashore on Omaha Beach as well, the totals there quickly
mounted. Offloading was relatively swift for those LS Ts loaded solely with
vehicles because they could discharge their tanks and trucks and retract
again before the retreating tide stranded them. Those LSTs carrying cargo,
however, took much longer to unload, and in most cases that meant re-
maining on the beach, thoroughly aground, throughout a full tide cyce—a
process known as "drying out." If the big flat-bottomed LSTs came ashore
near the high- water mark, the retreating tide left them sitting so high up on
the beach that crewmembers could walk all the way around the ship without
getting their feet wet Even the smaller TOTe occasionally had to "fry out'
on the beach, and more than a few LCT crews actually sought a "dry load"
so that after they landed, they could remain on the beach and get eight to
ten hours of rest before going back to work. Is
For the LST crewmembers, the biggest inconvenience during these drying-
out periods was that because the ship's generator required a constant
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 315
circulation of water, there was no electricity on board. Rather than just sit
itout sailors often went ashore to assist in the unloading of their own or
chervessels, or even to do a little sightseeing or souvenir collecting. In at
last one case, some crewmen tried to organize a baseball game, though
they had to callit off when the ball rolled under the ship. Of course, Omaha
Bech was still a dangerous place. On one occasion when an artillery shell
whited overhead, some sailors from LST-75 who had been sent ashore to
he unload a nearby LCT took shelter against the cliff. They were standing
there when the beach master came over to ask them what they were sup-
poed to be doing. They explained about unloading the LCT, and the
bach master told them: "Well then, get the hell over there and unload it,
orpick up one of these rifles and get up the hill and start shooting them
damn Germans. Given that choice, they decided the stevedore work was
preferable!
The beach masters were the choreographers of the Allied supply effort,
and it was difficult work. They and the Navy signalmen who worked with
them stayed on the beach for weeks, living in foxholes with canvas roofs or
inside wrecked ships, and surviving on cold K rations while directing traffic
both offshore and on the beach. A few skippers resented their authority,
especially when, after maneuvering for hours, they finally found a likely
landing spot only to be ordered away from it by a beach master. One LCT
skipper later described his initial reaction to receiving such an order: "Hey,
this is my ship and you aren't going to tell me what to do." He kept that view
to himself, however, and did as he was told. There was additional friction
when American skippers sought to land on a British beach. While most
Americans found British speech patterns amusing, at least one ground his
teeth with annoyance when a British beach master told him: "Skipper, don't
come in there...Over here, old chap."17
On the other hand, there could be advantages to landing on a British
beach. When Ensign Don Irwin landed LCT-614 on Gold Beach, the beach
master invited him and his exec over to his "headquarters" while the vessel
was being unloaded. Those headquarters turned out to be a wrecked British
ICT. It was a place for the beach master to rest when he could, and to sleep
whenever possible. It was also stocked with, among other things, British
