248 = NEPTUNE
midwestern American accent: "Soldiers, Sailors, and Airmen of the Allied
Expeditionary Forces! You are about to embark upon the Great Crusade,
toward which we have striven for many months." Ike acknowledged that
"your task will not be an easy one," though he also assured them that they
would have "overwhelming superiority in weapons and munitions," and
that he had "full confidence in your courage, devotion to duty, and skill in
battle." He ended with: "Good Luck! And let us all beseech the blessing of
Almighty God upon this great and noble undertaking." On Moon's flagship,
that inspired hundreds of men on the open decks to begin singing "The
Battle Hymn of the Republic. The sound of it filtered down into the lower
decks, where men lay on their cots or sat cross-legged on the deck. A junior
officer on Moon's staff recalled the lump in his throat as he sang: "As He
died to make men holy, let us die to make men free"s
THE RENDEZVOUS SITE for all five of the invasion forces was a few miles
south of the Isle of Wight. Offcially it was designated as Area Zebra, though
virtually everyone called it "Piccadilly Circus" after the notoriously con-
gested roundabout in the middle of London. It was an appropriate sobri-
quet. The thousands of ships of nearly every size and shape made up a city
on the sea. The congestion was so great that it was difficult for some of the
vessels to find their assigned flotillas, and inevitably there was some inter-
mingling of ships from various commands. Lieutenant Dean Rockwell,
who commanded the sixteen LCIs carrying the sixty-four duplex drive
tanks for Omaha Beach, counted noses- or rather masts —and came up
one short, Ensign E. S. White's LCT-713 was missing. Like the proverbial
good shepherd, Rockwell went off in search of it, and he found it maneu-
vering among the LCIs of Moon's Force U. Rockwell came alongside the
713 and called out to White: had he noticed that while his vessel had a large
white O painted on its conning tower, every other vessel in this area was
marked with a U? White looked around and with dawning comprehension,
though no apparent sense of irony, responded, "Oh."
By midnight on June S, the Piccadilly Circus rendezvous in mid-
Channel was far more congested than the original ever had been. The
assembled armada included between four thousand and six thousand
D- Day: The Invasion =
249
rases depending on whether one counted the minesweepers, patrol craft,
tig, in ferries, and other auxiliaries. Among them were 284 warships, a
cumber that includes five battleships, two monitors, twenty-three cruisers,
and more than a hundred destroyers and destroyer escorts, plus 142 smaller
gunships. Adding armed patrol craft and PT boats to the list boosts the
number of warships to nearly seven hundred. In addition to that, there were
JIlLSTs, two hundred LCIs, eight hundred LCTs, nearly five hundred Mike
boats (LCMs), and more than fifteen hundred of the small landing craft:
Higgins boats and LCAs. Of all the memories that soldiers and sailors carried
ith them in the years afterward, the most pervasive was the one of "thou-
sends and thousands of ships of all classes stretched from horizon to horizon." o
Because the galley fires had to be put out at midnight, many of these
ships served the last hot meal the men would have for some time. After that,
althe ships went to general quarters and set Condition Zebra, which re-
quired dogging down the watertight hatches. Paint cans and other inflam-
mable materials were thrown over the side; firefighting and damage-repair
equipment was broken out. On the destroyers, men pulled the plugs from
the muzzles of the S-inch guns and stacked shells in the ammunition hoists
from the magazines. On some ships, the captain gave a short speech over
the -MC. Then the invasion groups began to sort themselves out and move
ship by ship into the marked channels.
There were two swept channels to each beach—a fast channel for ships
moving at twelve knots, mostly the big transports and destroyers, and a
sow channel for those traveling at five knots, which included all the landing
crat. Small sub chasers acted as guide ships for long lines of LCTs, all of
them blacked out save for a single small blue light on the fantail to serve as
a beacon for the ship behind it. To men on the guide ships out in front, the
luminated dan buoys red on the right, green on the left- seemed "like
highway leading us to our own section of beach." On Sub Chaser 1282,
George Hackett looked astern to see hundreds of L.CTs, one after another,
in a line that stretched as far as he could see. One officer thought it looked
like "a gigantic, twisting dragon." 1
Most of the skippers focused on the blue light of the vessel in front of
