272 = NEPTUNE
validated that decision by approving the reorientation of the Utah Beach
invasion plan to accommodate the reality on the ground. It required adjust-
ing both the timetable of subsequent waves as well as the logistical support
plan, but it got the soldiers off the beach sooner and unquestionably saved
many lives. Indeed, the accidental reorientation of the Allied assault on
Utah Beach was fortuitous in several ways. The German defenses were
somewhat weaker where the men actually landed than where they were
supposed to have landed, and the access to routes inland was easier, too. For
this and for his other activities that day, Roosevelt was subsequently (and
posthumously) awarded the Medal of Honor.S
The offshore current was less assertive at Omaha Beach, but there were
other, far more serious problems there. The most salient was geography.
Omaha was the only landing beach that was overlooked by high bluffs
that ranged from 100 to 150 feet in height. On those bluffs the Germans
had erected thirty antitank and field guns as well as an astonishing eighty-
five machine gun positions, four times as many as on any of the other
invasion beaches. And almost all of their positions were so cleverly cam-
ouflaged that it was all but impossible to see them. Worse, the crescent
shape of the beach allowed the Germans to fire not only down from the
bluffs but also from both flanks. Though the preliminary bombing and
gunfire had forced the defenders to keep their heads down, none of
the German gun emplacements had suffered a direct hit. As a result, when
the first wave of Allied infantry rushed out onto the beach, the men were
struck almost at once by an intense crossfire of artillery, mortars, and ma-
chine guns. And finally, unknown to the Allies, the Germans had recently
reinforced that sector of beach with the 352nd Division, which had been
sent there for training. Thus as a result of geography, weaponry, and
manpower, Omaha was a much tougher objective than any of the other
targeted beaches.
Among the first to land on Omaha Beach that morning were the men of
the Gap Assault Teams (GATs), composed of a Navy Combat Demolition
Unit and an Army Combat Engineer group. Technically, all of the men in an
NCDU team were volunteers, though many had volunteered in the
time-honored military way: when not enough men raised their hands for
D-Day: The Beaches = 273
this hazardous duty in one particular shipload of new arrivals in England,
anensign simply declared that all the men whose names began with the let-
ters A through C had just volunteered. On the other hand, none of them
objected or tried to escape the duty?
On Omaha Beach there were sixteen of these teams, each charged with
dearing a path, fifty yards wide, through the beach obstructions. Those
obstructions took several forms. One type, which the Allies called hedge-
hogs, consisted of steel sculptures created by welding three steel beams to-
gether into free-standing tetrahedrons five or six feet across. They resembled
enormous steel jacks, almost as if the children of giants had been inter-
rupted in a game and walked off leaving their toys scattered on the beach.
Paced between high and low tide, they could tear the bottom out of small
craft at high tide. Another common type was made up of wooden poles
resembling telegraph or telephone poles, most of which had plate-like
Teller mines affixed to them, so if the pole was jarred, the mine would ex-
plode. Even if a vessel successfully navigated between two of the poles,
many were connected by wires that would trigger the nearest mine. The
Alied decision to land two hours after low tide was to provide an opportu-
nity, however brief, for the NCDU teams to clear at least some of these
obtacles. The initial expectation was that by landing immediately after the
fury of the pre-invasion bombardment, they would face little if any resist-
ance, though that proved not to be the case.®
Each member of an NCDU team carried a double-sided canvas bag,
much like those used by newspaper boys back home, though instead of
newspapers, they were filled with sixty pounds of C-2 explosives divided
upinto two-pound blocks. Struggling ashore through the surf with such a
burden was difficult enough, and it became much more so when machine
gun and mortar fire erupted from the high ground behind the beach and on
both flanks. Since few of the landing craft could maneuver all the way to the
suf line, the men in the GAT teams had to disembark well off the beach
and vade ashore. Worse, while the water might be only a foot or two deep
inst off the bow where the vessel grounded, deep runnels scattered unpre-
dictably along the beachfront meant that many of the men took only a few
Steps shoreward before they floundered into water that was over their
