YUL
306 = NEPTUNE
though it also bled the color out of the landscape, turning everything into
shades of black and white. The detritus on Omaha Beach offered mute
testimony to an apparent catastrophe. Despite the ongoing work of the
combat engineers, the beachfront remained littered with scores of wrecked
landing craft, tanks, trucks, and jeeps. Though a dozen lanes had been
cleared through the obstructions, many of those obstacles remained in
place— obscene black sculptures scarring the silvered sheen of the beach.
Yet thanks to the sheer will of the officers and men who had fought the
battle, and in part at least to the close-in fire support of a handful of destroy-
ers, by nightfall on June 6 the Allies had landed 132,450 American, British,
and Canadian soldiers on French soil.* To the east, British Tommies ad-
vanced gingerly from Sword Beach toward Caen; to the west, American Gls
moved inland from Utah Beach toward the village of Sainte-Mère-Eglise;
and on Omaha, the men were at last off the beach and in possession of the
high ground, including the villages of Vierville, St. Laurent, and Colleville.
In the end, it was less the detailed invasion plan, labored over for so many
months, that provided the margin of success than it was the desperate
ferocity of the men themselves. If the plan had failed, the men had tri-
umphed; if they had not quite established a foothold, they had at least
secured a toehold. The question now was whether they could maintain the
buildup of men, vehicles, and supplies needed to keep that toehold and to
expand it.
* Among the American Britich and Canadian forces was a battalion of Inter-Allied
Commandos that included Match Balrian Marwarian. Polich and of entrea French
troops. There were even a few expatriate Germans.
CHAPTER 14
"THE SHORELINE WAS JUST
A SHAMBLES"
HE OFFICIAL OBJECTIVE of Operation Neptune was "to secure a
lodgment on the Continent from which further offensive operations
can be developed." By midnight on June 6, it might have been argued that
this objective had been achieved. But as Frederick Morgan had noted back
in 1943 when he was still COSSAC: "The surprise assault….. would no
doubt win the first round. The far more important question, the one that
would ultimately decide the campaign, was whether the Allies could bring
in reinforcements and equipment over the assault beaches faster than the
Germans could direct their mobile divisions there— as Morgan put it in a
rough paraphrase of Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest, "who
could get the mostest men there fustest."
In that race, the D-Day landings were only the first lap.
The Allied
soldiers who had seized the beaches had to be fed and supplied with am-
munition. Then thousands more men-tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands — had to be brought ashore in a never-ending stream to support
and expand the beachhead, and those men, too, had to be fed and supplied.
