198
= NEPTUNE
Beginning in the midwinter chill of January 1944, the practice landings
at Slapton Sands and elsewhere continued through February and March
and into April as the days gradually lengthened and the Channel waters be-
came slightly less frigid. Most of the smaller exercises did not involve the
big LSTs, and the smaller LCTs did much of the work. A crew member on
LCT-276 recalled the exercises fondly: "We sailed into Devon and Con-
wall County seaside cities and towns where [the soldiers] were stationed.
Both of the counties were renowned for their beauty, fine hotels, and quaint
pubs. In between the practices, there was enough time to be able to enjoy
them." Ninety miles to the north on the Bristol Channel, the official "Boat
Operational Schedule" for the Appledore Training Center showed similar
activity, and still more exercises took place even farther north in the Firth of
Clyde in Scotland, though uncertain weather and chilly seas often wreaked
havoc with the schedule. In all of these exercises, the soldiers and sailors
learned the protocols of each other's service, and soon enough the practice
sessions became routine, or as routine as inherently dangerous amphibious
landings could be. "We loaded and unloaded various troops and equipment
time after time, one sailor recalled. "We were never sure if each practice
might be the real thing.""
The Allied planners who organized these training sessions gradually
raised the stakes. The exercises became larger and more realistic until they
began to approximate the feel of a live-fire assault. The planners sowed
mines in the waters leading to the beach so that the minesweepers could
sweep them up, and they designated targets onshore as enemy bunkers or
gun emplacements so that the destroyers could practice taking them out
with naval gunfire. One gunner recalled being assigned the window on the
upper left side of a specific house as his target. In many of the exercises, the
first troops ashore belonged to the Special Engineer Brigades, whose job it
would be to disarm or destroy the mines. The infantry came next, splashing
ashore through the frigid Channel surf and charging inland to set up a de-
fensive perimeter. L.CTs and the smaller Mike boats brought ashore the
trucks, tanks, and jeeps needed to exploit the landing, With live ammuni-
tion passing over their heads from the destroyers offshore, and mines ex-
ploding both offshore and on the beach, it looked and felt a lot like real war.
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 199
Dangerous as it was, Allied officers were convinced that occasional casual-
tis were the price of readiness, and that it would save lives in the end.®
AUTHOUGH THE LSTS had been specifically designed to run up onto the
sand and discharge their cargoes directly onto the beach, that was not ad-
visable or even possible during the initial assault phase, when enemy artil-
lery dominated the landing site. German guns ashore might smash up so
many of the scarce LSTs that it would become impossible for the Allies to
sustain the flow of essential reinforcements and equipment. Only after the
big guns were captured or suppressed would it be safe to bring the LSTs
ashore. Until then, smaller vessels such as the LCTs would have to shuttle
the men and equipment from the LSTs to the beach.
That was no simple matter. Since the LSTs remained stationary, the
young skippers of the LCTs had to maneuver into position. The anchored
IST would have its bow doors open and its ramp partially deployed, hover-
ing ten or a dozen feet above the sea, and the LCT skipper had to maneuver
underneath that heavy ramp while his own vessel was heaving and rolling
with the Channel swells. Once the LCT was positioned perpendicularly
across the bow of the LST, the ramp was lowered until it rested on the
thwart of the smaller vessel. With the ramp in place and secured, vehicles
could then be driven under their own power from the tank deck of the LST
across what was now a narrow metal bridge into the exposed deck of the
ICT. The weight of each truck or tank not only caused the LCT to settle
lower in the water, it also acted to push it away from the LST and put a tre-
mendous strain on the lines holding the ships together.?
Sometimes LCTs took on loads further offshore from the even larger
Attack Transports (APA), and this, too, was no picnic. The big transports
had three mooring zones alongside where an LCT could tie up, and as the
LCT approached, a coordinator on the transport assigned it a specific zone.
To maneuver into place, the LCT skipper used a speaking tube to give helm
orders to the quartermaster in the chart house one level below him while
simultaneously giving orders to the engine room. Mooring at the bow or
the stern of an APA was difficult enough, but mooring amidships was a
nightmare, especially if there were already other ICTs moored ahead and
