YUL
352 = NEPTUNE
Neptune possible. The planners sought to account for every eventuality,
though in the end the factor that produced the Allied victory was human
judgment applied at a crisis moment, often instinctively and selflessly. That
certainly included Ike's courageous decision to go ahead with the operation
despite the storm that was raging around Southwick House on June S. It in-
cluded the grim determination of the young Navy and Coast Guard officers
and coxswains who pushed their landing craft onto the target beaches through
the hedgehogs and the teller mines. It included the close-in gunfire support
provided by the destroyers off Omaha Beach, which all but put their bows on
the bottom to suppress the German guns ashore. It included the soldiers
themselves, trapped on that deadly beach, who scaled the bluffs hand over
hand and seized the high ground. It included the British commandos who
held Pegasus Bridge, as well as the Rangers who seized Pointe du Hoc. Andit
included thousands of others, officers and men, who had to make life-and-
death decisions in the midst of furious combat on all the beaches. Back in
their hometowns, the newspapers and radio reports announced the names
of the Allied commanders in large boldface type. Most of those engaged in
Neptune, however, did their jobs anonymously: the ensigns and lieutenants,
coxswains, enginemen, boatswain's mates, line handlers, demolition spe-
cialists, gunners, Seabees, and medics-indeed, all the varied ratings of a
vast and complex maritime organization, American, British, and Canadian,
both Navy and Coast Guard. They made Neptune a success.
EPILOGUE
ON 10NA i day the se of the My
to abate, and while Collins's three divis:
their final assault on Cherbourg, Russian forces on
ated Operation Bagration, a massive ground of
hundred-mile front that involved 2.3 million men
divisions. Initially, that offensive was to have take
with the Normandy landings, but Stalin waited unti
because June 22 was the third anniversary of the G
sia. Here at last was a double envelopment of the c
scale. Nazi Germany now confronted a two-front wal
can, British, Canadian, and French soldiers attacking
than two million Russians attacking in the east.
Hitler refused to accept reality. Just as he had order
die in the last ditch at Cherbourg, so now he ordered all
and fight where they were, insisting that there should be no
course, simply condemned most of them to die. And die the
