36
= NEPTUNE
When it was Roosevelt's turn, he seconded Churchill's emphasis on an
accelerated bombing campaign, and he agreed that American ground forces
could go to Iceland and Ireland. But he downplayed the idea of an Allied
intervention in North Africa in favor of securing and maintaining global
lines of communication. Churchill was disappointed; the president had
seemed so much warmer about a North African campaign the night before.
Apparently someone had gotten to him.?2
Someone had -probably several someones. The American service
chiefs were far less enthusiastic about a campaign into North Africa than
their president was. One problem was shipping: there simply wasn't enough
of it. Mounting an invasion of North Africa from the American East Coast
meant crossing and recrossing the Atlantic Ocean - a distance of thirty-
eight hundred miles —at a time when the U-boats were still winning the
Battle of the Atlantic. And there were so many other demands on scarce
shipping, including MacArthur's beleaguered forces in the Philippines, that
it was hard to see how the necessary ships could be found. Moreover,
in North Africa, so much depended on the French. Were the Anglo-
Americans invited in, that was one thing, but to wrest control from a
defending army was quite another. Thus cautioned, Roosevelt soft-pedaled
his support of a North African campaign in his opening remarks. He would
wait to see what the admirals and generals came up with.
After these formal introductions, Churchill and Roosevelt left, and the
service chiefs got down to business.* On the American side, that group in-
cluded both Marshall and Stark, plus King and Henry H. "Hap" Arnold,
head of the Army Air Corps, which had been rechristened the U.S. Army
Air Forces in June. Despite his nickname, Arnold was a ferocious defender
of his service and, like Portal, a champion of strategic bombing. The British
• Churchill headed first to Canada, where he made a memorable address to the
Canadian parliament, mocking Hitler's claim that he would wring England's neck like
a chicken. In his growling baritone, Churchill remarked: "Some chicken... some
neck. Then on January 6 he flew to Florida, where he stayed for several days in the
winter home of the American Lend-Lease administrator (and later secretary of state)
Edward Stettinius. There he enjoyed a genuine vacation, one of only a very few during
the war.
Arcadia w
37
delegation consisted of Dill, Pound, and Portal. Each country also had a
civilian production expert on hand: Hopkins for Roosevelt, and Beaver-
brook for Churchill. There was a small kerfuffle when, at their first meeting
in the new Federal Reserve Building on Constitution Avenue, it was discov-
ered that the room assigned to them was too small. Soon enough, however,
they found a suitable space and began work in earnest. 23
The British were undoubtedly pleased when Stark began the meeting by
asserting that the British Isles "must be protected at all cost," and by reaf-
firming America's commitment to the Germany-first strategy. Thus one of
the principal goals that had brought the British across the Atlantic was
achieved in the first minutes. Beyond that, however, the British officers
were rather taken aback to discover that the Americans had no particular
proposals to offer, or even a very clear notion of what to do next. Dill wrote
his successor, Alan Brooke, back in London, that "the country has not—
repeat not— the slightest conception of what the war means, and their
armed forces are more unready for war than it is possible to imagine." For
their part, the Americans were suspicious of the political motives behind
the British proposals, fearing that they concealed some hidden agenda con-
nected to their own imperial interests. That suspicion was reinforced when
Marshall learned that Roosevelt had agreed to divert U.S. ships headed for
the Philippines to beleaguered Singapore. Marshall went to see Secretary
Stimson about it, and together they confronted Roosevelt, who in his off-
hand way dismissed the story as "nonsense."?4
The conversation continued on Christmas Day, the timing suggesting a
lot about the sense of urgency. As one member of the American delegation
wrote to a friend, "We just grind away all day long.... Christmas meant no
more to us here than religion does to a dog." Christmas was Dill's sixty-first
bithday, though an effort to surprise him with a singing telegram fell flat
when the security guards refused to let the Western Union man in the door.
Before revisiting Churchill's North Africa scheme, the chiefs reviewed the
dire situation in the Far East where the Japanese rampage was still at full
Rood. Marshall brought up the fact that the Japanese had an advantage
because they had unity of command, whereas the Allies had to work
through four governments and at least eight service chiefs. To overcome
