166
= NEPTUNE
these on the date required. We have cut out entirely the building of Destroyer
Escorts, and are concentrating those yards on landing craft production. 33
Was it too late? To be sure, LS Is were at last making their way across the
Atlantic, albeit slowly, and many of them also carried a fully loaded ICT
strapped to the deck as cargo. To the men on board, this was a decidedly
mixed blessing. It allowed the executive officer on the LST to integrate the
crew of the LCT into the watch bill for the crossing, which meant that
watch standers did not have to serve "watch-and-watch"— four hours on
and four hours off, around the clock. On the other hand, the added weight
topside made the LS Is even more liable to heavy rolling than usual. It was
hard to say whether the extra help on watch compensated for the rough
ride. As one put it, "You have never ridden a ship until you have ridden an
IST in the North Atlantic in the month of February. Another sailor
described the experience with particular vividness: "One minute the ship
was carried to the crest of a wave, at which time one could look down into
the valley of water below, and the next minute the ship would sink down to
the bottom of the trough and then one would look at a wall of water, tow-
ering almost vertically above the ship on all sides." It was difficult-even
dangerous-just to sit on the toilet since the swift rise and fall of the hull
often sent the occupant crashing into the overhead and then plunging down
back onto the toilet seat 34
Despite Knox's attempt to reassure Stark, it was soon evident that the
Allies would be short several dozen LSTs on the projected date for D-Day,
and that many of the LSTs that did arrive would be in no condition for a
major effort for weeks if not months afterward. That meant either going
ahead with inadequate shipping or postponing the invasion. Churchill
may not have been entirely disappointed by the prospect of a delay, for
he had already suggested a postponement until June; nonetheless, he
found it absurd, as he wrote to Marshall, that "the destinies of two great
empires.. seemed to be tied up in some god-dammed things called ISTs. "35
ONE ISSUE THAT WAS FINALLY RESOLVED that winter was the appoint-
ment of a commanding general. At Quebec in August, Morgan had
been granted a third star and endowed with de facto command of the
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" =
167
cross-Channel attack "pending the appointment of the Supreme Com-
mander." As D-Day neared, Morgan's temporary status became increasingly
awkward, and the need to make a permanent appointment more urgent.
When he had conceded to Roosevelt the authority to make that appoint-
ment, Churchill had assumed that Roosevelt would name George C.
Marshall to the post, and at the time, that was exactly what the president
planned to do. FDR believed that Marshall had more than paid his dues
with the JCS and CCS and that he deserved an opportunity to become, as
the president put it, "the Pershing of the Second World War" by command-
ing the great invasion. Even Morgan urged Roosevelt to name Marshall to
command, and to do it soon, telling him during an October visit to America
thateen though the invasion was still six months away, some matters had
to be put in motion immediately in order to ensure readiness on D-Day.
Roosevelt listened but did not commit himself 36
Nevertheless, the assumption on both sides of the Atlantic was that Mar-
hall vuld soon be named to command the cross-Channel invasion and
that Eisenhower would return from the Mediterranean to assume the job of
chief of staff so that a British officer could take command in the Mediter-
ranean. Marshall even began to put his household effects into storage in
preparation for an imminent move to Europe. Secretary of War Stimson did
no more than reflect the general consensus when he wrote to Roosevelt
that making Marshall the supreme commander was obvious. Making an
calogy with the Civil War, Stimson noted that while "Mr. Lincoln had to
fumble through a process of trial and error with dreadful losses until he was
ableto discover the right choice," no such casting about was needed on this
acasion. eneral Marshall already has a towering eminence of reputation
asa tried soldier and as a broad-minded and skillful administrator.""7
But that was exactly the problem. Marshall was such a "skilful adminis-
ador that it was not clear that Eisenhower or anyone else could replace
lim. Who would run the war while Marshall was running the invasion? The
Gat hat Eisenhower had been Marshall's acolyte and would now become
is tortical superior as chief of staff added another layer of awkward-
ness. Though Roosevelt had all but promised Marshall the command (as
Couchil had done to Brooke before snatching it back), as September
