= NEPTUNE
to forestall a British collapse, first by agreeing in September 1940 to give the
hard-pressed Royal Navy fifty older American destroyers in exchange for
long-term leases on British naval bases in the Caribbean and Newfound-
land, and then, three months after that, by proposing and supporting pas-
sage of the Lend-Lease program. Those congressmen, newspaper editors,
and clergymen who made up the vociferous and politically powerful isola-
tionist movement in America were horrified by such policies, and they
were absolutely apoplectic about the president's naval war against German
U-boats. They charged that Roosevelt was deliberately trying to provoke a
war with Germany for the sake of Britain, or if not open war, an excuse to
expand the convoy program. They were not entirely wrong. Secretary of the
Interior Harold Ickes confided to his diary in April, "We are longing for an
incident that would give us a justification for setting up a system of convoy-
ing ships to England." Others, including Treasury Secretary Henry Mor-
genthau, thought the president was too diffident, and complained to his
diary that instead of leading public opinion, the president was waiting for
public opinion to catch up with him so that he could follow it. Had he been
able to read their diary entries, Roosevelt might have thought that he had
calibrated his policy about right.
Now war had come, though it was a war against Japan, not Germany.
To be sure, Japan was formally associated with Germany in the so-called
Tripartite Pact, which also included Italy, but that agreement obligated
the participants to support one another only when one of them was the
victim of an attack, not when it inaugurated a war of choice, as Japan had
done. Hitler was delighted that his American tormenters had been griev-
ously wounded by the Japanese strike, but he was under no obligation to
join the conflict it inaugurated. On the other hand, he might do it any-
way. Thanks to the American code breakers, Roosevelt knew of a secret
message from the German Foreign Office promising Japan that if she
"became engaged in a war against the United States, Germany would of
course join in the war immediately. Such promises from Hitler's govern-
ment had meant little in the past, of course, though it was at least pos-
sible that this time he would fulfill his pledge and declare war on the
United States.'
Germany First = 7
Roosevelt might have preempted him and asked Congress for a declara-
tion of war against both Japan and Germany, and several of those who
showed up in the White House that night for the emergency cabinet meet-
ing suggested that he should do exactly that. Uncertain that Congress or the
country would support him if he did so, Roosevelt preferred to wait and see
what action Hitler would take. That afternoon, when Winston Churchill
called from his country estate at Chequers to confirm the news reports and
offer his condolences for the American losses at Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt
assured him, "We are all in the same boat now." But that was not yet strictly
true?
IT WOULD BE EXTRAORDINARILY AWKWARD for the United States, and
particularly for Roosevelt's policy, if Hitler did not declare war, for during
the preceding two years, the United States had dramatically reoriented its
war planning from a focus on Japan and the Pacific to the possibility, even
the likelihood, of a two-front war against both Germany and Japan. The key
component in the new plan-indeed, its vital element-was that in such a
war, it would be necessary to defeat Germany first. This assessment marked
a virtual revolution in American strategic planning; until then, U.S. Navy
planners had focused their attention almost exclusively on what was called
War Plan Orange.
Plan Orange was one of a series of so-called color plans whose origins
reached back to the beginning of the century. They were contingency plans
for possible conflicts against a whole variety of potential foes, some of them
more likely than others. Besides Orange, which was the plan for war against
Japan, there were plans for Germany (Black), England (Red), and Mexico
(Green), plus many others. But it was Plan Orange that dominated the war-
gaming exercises at the U.S. Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island.
There, on the giant checkerboard floor of Pringle Hall, officer-students
maneuvered wooden models of battleships around to refight the World
War I Battle of Jutland, and to imagine a similar confrontation against the
Imperial Japanese Navy. Initially, at least, Plan Orange itself was relatively
simple, if not simplistic. It posited an effort by Japan to seize the Philip-
pines, which would trigger the mobilization of the American Pacific battle
