218 = NEPTUNE
three replacements to the Med in June. Once again, the Allies were forced
to shift naval assets around from theater to theater like a slide puzzle. 48
PUTTING A LID ON THE CATASTROPHE did not mean there were no reper-
cussions. Ernest King ordered eight more destroyers from the U.S. Navy to
join Ramsay's command, adding, "Experience against E boats desirable.
Kirk did not think that was sufficient. He wanted to use the battleship
Nevada and her big 14-inch guns to blast the E-boat pens in Cherbourg.
Ramsay was cool to the idea, partly because it might alert the Germans that
something was up, but also because it deviated from the carefully struc-
tured Neptune operational plan. To Kirk, this was simply another example
of British unwillingness to depart from the script. Kirk was annoyed that
his previous attempt to obtain operational control over the waters around
Cherbourg had been rejected, and angry that the cumbersome command
structure in Plymouth had resulted in the convoy having an inadequate
escort. In an official letter to Ramsay, he expressed himself rather strongly
on both issues. Ramsay took umbrage at Kirk's tone and thought Kirk had
"quite lost his sense of proportion." He concluded that Kirk "is not a big
enough man to hold the position he does." For his part, Kirk attributed
Ramsay's attitude to the British tendency to view all operations as a set
piece" in which "no initiative was possible.". The relationship got testy on.
May when Ramsay met with the command teams of both of his naval task
forces. After meeting with Vian and his force commanders in the morning,
Ramsay met with Kirk, Hall, and Moon in the afternoon. There, Kirk again
brought up the question of attacking the German E-boat sanctuary in
Cherbourg. Ramsay thought Kirk was being "Stupid," and admitted that"!
somewhat lost my patience with him." Ramsay's final verdict on Kirk was
that he was "a poor fish." They had come a long way from being "Alan" and
Still Kirk wouldn't let it go. Getting no satisfaction from Ramsay, he
ensured that his concerns found their way through back channels to Eisen-
hower's chief of staff, Beetle Smith. That irritated Ramsay even more andhe
briefly considered an oficial reprimand of Kirk for violating the chain of
command. At a meeting with both Eisenhower and Ramsay on May 8, Kink
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 219
gain argued the importance of "blasting the German E-boats out of their
ness" Eisenhower asked Ramsay what he thought about the idea, and Ram-
say xplained why he thought a naval attack on Cherbourg was unnecessary
and perhaps even harmful. Then, to Ramsay's horror, Ike turned back
to ask what he thought of Ramsay's argument. To Ramsay, that w
geous. In his view, it didn't matter what Kirk thought. Ramsay was
Cin C, and Kirk was his subordinate. He was appalled that Eisenho
as if their views had equal merit. Ramsay kept quiet at the time, bui
furious. "It was a bad meeting," he wrote in his diary, "& made me cro
On an official level, Stark ordered an "immediate investigation"
events in Lyme Bay, and the ensuing report cited several failures thai
be taken as lessons. The first was obvious: American-British commi
tions had failed. The existence of an independent command for the C
Plymouth, as distinct from the operational command, had made po
the kind of confusion that led to the absence of HMS Scimitar. Ar
failure was that almost everyone involved with Exercise Tiger has
ceived of it as another rehearsal and had behaved accordingly.
had been so many practice landings that the sailors and soldiers-
the officers- had trouble making the mental adjustment to actual comb,
Despite the tracer fire in the night and even the exploding torpedoes, man,
dung to the idea that this was a rehearsal right up to the moment they
found themselves in the water. I
Like Kirk, many of the Americans blamed the British, especially Leatham.
But in the U.S. Navy, responsibility for every event belongs, rightly or
wrongly, to the commanding officer. An old saw in the U.S. Navy was that
you could delegate authority, but you could not delegate responsibility.
Thouh Moon might properly have been held accountable for his question-
abl decision to postpone the practice landing on Slapton Sands on the
morning of April 27, he had had no hand at all in the circumstances that led
to the disaster in Lyme Bay in the early morning hours of April 28. Never-
theless, he was the man in overall command, and so it did not surprise him
when he received an order to report on board Kirk's flagship, the heavy
cruiser Augusta. Instead of Kirk, however, Moon found Kirk's chief of staff,
Rear Admiral Arthur Struble, waiting for him.
