152
= NEPTUNE
While both the LCI and the LCT could cross the English Channel on
their own, neither had been designed for a transatlantic voyage. Many of
the LCIs did it anyway, but most of the LCTs came to England as deck
cargo. In some cases they arrived in sections and were welded together in
British shipyards, though the general practice was for them to be carried
piggyback on the deck of a larger ship. When the paired ships arrived in
England, the host ship would transfer water in her ballast tanks to create a
deliberate list to one side, and the 286-ton LCT would slide sideways down
greased wooden beams to land alongside with a spectacular splash.?
3. The third type of amphibious vessel was both the largest and by far
the most important. It was also the ship that became the industrial and lo-
Sistical bottleneck for the Allies, not only for the Normandy invasion, but
worldwide. This was the Landing Ship, Tank (LST). Described by one
authority as a large, empty, self propelled box," it was an oceangoing ship
that displaced 1,62S tons when empty and could carry twenty Sherman
tanks, thirty heavy trucks, or twenty-one hundred tons of cargo in its cay-
ernous hold, plus as many as forty light trucks or jeeps lashed to its upper
deck. It also had bunk space for up to 350 soldiers. Because of its flat bot-
tom, which gave it a draft of only a foot and a half forward when empty and
four to seven feet when fully loaded, it could steam right up onto a beach
despite its great size and discharge its cargo through massive bow doors.
The British had pioneered this kind ofarge-capacity tank carrier with the
"Winstons" and "Winettes" used at Dippe, and because of that the Amer-
ican-built ISTs were sometimes referred to as the LST-2. Very quickly,
however, the American version eclipsed its British prototype and was soon
universally known simply as the LST.10
A case can be made that ISTs were the most important ships of the Second
World War, yet few loved or admired them. To begin with, they were very
poor sailors. With their blunt bow (to accommodate the big doors) and flat
bottom (to ensure shallow draft), they were, as one sailor put it, "shaped
like a bathtub," and they wallowed badly even in calm seas. In any kind of
mild chop they would smack down heavily on each successive wave with a
teeth ratling thump. As one veteran recalled: "Some ships go over the
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" = 153
waves; some of them go through the waves; some go under the waves; but
an IST just clubs them to death." In an active sea, the LSTs also tended to
Shimmy and vibrate," and the torque exerted on the lengthy hull as it
slipped precariously down a quartering wave was so powerful that observ-
ers on the bridge could see the hull actually twist. If the ship was loaded
with a full cargo of jeeps and light trucks on its weather deck, the vehicles
would rise and fall rhythmically as if driving in unison over a hilly country-
side. On rare occasions, the movement of the ship's hull became so violent
itcould rip open the welds that held the ship together, opening a seam, as
one sailor put it, like a run in a woman's stocking."
Given these sailing characteristics, seasickness was endemic, and the
ISts were uncomfortable in other ways, too. To conserve space for the
barn-like hold, the crew's quarters were squeezed into a small space aft
under the fantail and consisted of hinged bunks stacked three high. The
ships head was directly behind these bunks, and one veteran recalled that
the ISTs stank of diesel oil, backed-up toilets, and vomit." The LSTs did
noteven have names. Instead, like the smaller LCIs and LCTs, the ungainly
and unloved ISTs were distinguished only by their hull number, such
as IST-235 or LST-393.* It was almost as if the Navy bureaucracy was
ashamed of these ugly ducklings and sought to deny them the distinction of
a christening. Finally, the LSTs were slow, seldom able to exceed ten knots,
and remembers joked that "LST" actually stood for "Large Slow Target."
Po all that, they were absolutely essential to any large-scale amphibious
operation, and vital for success at Normandy. 12
Before the war was over, the United States would build more than a
thousand LSTs, but by May 1943, when the conferees at Trident approved
the plan for an invasion of Europe one year hence, only 241 of them had
been completed. Moreover, all but a handful of them were in the Pacific or
the Mediterranean. The COSSAC plan for the cross-Channel invasion
called for a concentration of 230 L.STs in southern England by early 1944 in
* Both of the sample LST hull numbers cited here are for ships that participated in the
Normandy invasion and which are preserved today as historic artifacts. LST-235, at
Biasil, Indiana, is the only L.ST in the world that is still operational; L.ST-393 is
not operational but is open to visitors as a museum in Muskegon, Michigan.
