= NEPTUNE
One version was an armored variant, designated LCT(A). These vessels
were to go ashore with the infantry, ground themselves on the beach, and
unload their Sherman tanks, including some equipped with bulldozer
blades so they could help clear the beach obstacles. Another group of LCTs
carried the experimental duplex drive tanks that would be launched from
offshore and swim into the beach under their own power. Since the DD
tanks were considerably slower than the Higgins boats, they would launch
early, around 3:00 a.m., to give them time to motor to the beach at a pains-
taking two or three knots.
The problem, of course, was the weather. The inflatable canvas shrouds
on the DD tanks had only about nine inches of freeboard when deployed,
and it seemed unlikely that they could survive very long in the four-foot
waves. The Neptune orders specified that "if state of sea is such as to pre-
vent their being launched... land them with the first wave." The responsi-
bility of judging the "state of sea" lay with the commanding officers of the
LCT flotillas. Thus the first life-and-death decisions off the Normandy
beaches on June 6 fell to a handful of ensigns and lieutenants20
Off Omaha Beach, that responsibility belonged to Navy Lieutenant
Dean Rockwell. A tall, dark, and robust individual with an oversized per-
sonality, Rockwell was a former athlete at Eastern Michigan University and
a sometime professional wrestler. He had been teaching high school in
Michigan and coaching the school's football team when he heard about
Pearl Harbor and immediately enlisted in the Navy. Now, on D-Day, he was
in charge of LCT Flotilla 12, consisting of sixteen vessels, each commanded
by an ensign, and each carrying four DD tanks, half of them from the 74l
Tank Battalion and half from the 743rd.21
In the predawn darkness, Rockwell led his sixteen LC Is in a long single file
past the looming shadows of the big transports, battleships, and cruisers off
Omaha Beach to take up their assigned positions six thousand yards a itle
over three miles) off the beach. At the designated line of departure, Rockwell!
deployed his flotilla into two groups of eight in a line abreast facing Omaha
Beach. It was just past 3:00 a.m., and the soldiers in the Higgins boats had not
yet begun their slow journey toward the beach. Nevertheless, according to
the plan, this was the moment for Rockwell's LCTs to open their bow doors,
D- Day: The Invasion = 255
drop their ramps, and send the amphibious DD tanks on their way. It was ev-
ident to Rockwell, however, that doing so in such a violent sea would be tan-
tamount to murder. He talked it over with Army Captain Ned Elder, the
senior Army officer on board, and between them they decided "it would be
insane" to launch the DD tanks into that volatile sea. Rockwell concluded
thatit was his duty to carry the tanks all the way to the beach 22
The problem was how to communicate that decision to the other vessels
in his flotilla. Rockwell doubted that flag signals were sufficient. Nor could
he use flashing lights, which would alert the enemy, and of course the Allies
were operating under radio silence. But with the eastern sky already begin-
ming to lighten in anticipation of dawn and the coast now visible to the
naked eye, Rockwell decided to break the rules. What the hell, he thought.
Bynow the Germans know what is about to happen. Rather than use the ship's
long-range radio, however, he employed the shorter-range radio in one of
the tanks, calling the other LCTs in his flotilla to order them not to launch 23
Notall the LCT skippers got the word. The eight vessels that were under
Rockwell's immediate supervision did, but the other eight, carrying the
thity-two tanks of Companies B and C of the 741st Tank Battalion under
Amy Captain James G. Thornton, did not. On those vessels, there was un-
cetanty and confusion as the young and mostly inexperienced Army and
Nary officers grappled with the distinction between duty and judgment.
According to protocol, until the men and equipment were ashore, opera-
tional authority and responsibility belonged to the senior naval officer on
board. But in this case those naval officers were ensigns in their early twen-
tis and quite naturally they felt some diffidence in making such a decision
on behalf of the tank men. The Army officers were young, too, and they
were eager to go—after all, they had spent months in rigorous training for
just this moment. On LCT-600, Ensign Henry Sullivan discussed the cir-
cumstances with Second Lieutenant PatrickJ. O'Shaughnessy. Even though
they agreed it was a little too rough to launch," O'Shaughnessy was cogni-
rant of the historic immensity of the moment. Driven by a powerful sense
of duty he told Sallivan that he wanted go anyway, and Sullivan deferred
to him At 5.35 am O'Shauckness drove the first DD tank off the
bow ramp.?4
