62
= NEPTUNE
Molotov remained suspicious, and the question was shelved. The Allies
would simply try to overcome the shipping problem.27
Meanwhile, it was necessary to draft a public statement about what
exactly the two men had agreed upon. The key sentence in the final docu-
ment was neither elegant nor definitive: "In the course of the conversa-
tions full understanding was reached with regard to the urgent tasks of
creating a Second Front in Europe in 1942. While the statement contained
the words "Second Front" and "1942" it was immediately evident that
acknowledging the urgency of a task was hardly the same thing as a pledge to
accomplish it. Apparently it was now the Americans' turn to say, "We'll see."
Molotov accepted it because he perceived that it was all he was likely to get.
Churchill accepted it because he thought it "might make the Germans ap-
prehensive," though not for a minute did he assume that it meant a Western
Front in France in 1942. To make sure Molotov understood that, he pre-
pared an aide-mémoire to give to the Russian foreign minister when he
passed through London en route back to Moscow. In it, Churchill was care-
ful to state that although the British and Americans were "making prepara-
tions for a landing on the Continent," they could "give no promise in the
matter." There it rested…. for now.?8
Despite the absence of a pledge, the meeting between Roosevelt and
Molotov was critical, for the American president found the specter of a
Soviet collapse so horrifying that he was reconfirmed in his view that an
offensive somewhere in the European theater in 1942 was essential. To
Churchill he reported that they "faced real trouble on the Russian front and
must make our plans to meet it." Even if a 1942 invasion of Europe failed to
gain a permanent toehold for the Allies, it might draw the Luftwaffe into an
air battle over the beaches that could erode German air assets and would at
least demonstrate good faith.?9
No sooner did Molotov leave Washington than another visitor
arrived. The new guest was Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, and there
could hardly have been a greater contrast with the departed Molotov.
A great-grandson of Queen Victoria, and second cousin to King George
himself, Mountbatten was tall, attractive, sophisticated, and gracious.
Churchill (who, like all of Mountbatten's friends, called him "Dickie") had
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 63
named him chief of combined operations with oversight over the produc-
tion of amphibious shipping. In that capacity, Mountbatten was simultane-
ously a lieutenant general in the British Army, a vice admiral in the Royal
Navy, and an air vice marshal in the Royal Air Force. Mountbatten was
eager to take on the Germans, but his careful study of landing craft availa-
bility had convinced him that a cross-Channel operation in 1942 was out of
the question. He told the British chiefs that it was dishonest to continue to
plan an operation they knew to be impossible. Aware of his views, Churchill
dispatched him to the United States to insert some realism into American
thinking 30
As Churchill no doubt expected, Mountbatten made a wonderful
impression on the Americans; both Marshall and King thought him first-
rate More significant, however, was the five-hour conversation he had with
Rosevelt in the White House. The president's fear of a Russian collapse
had benintensified by Molotov's visit, and he asked Mountbatten "whether
we could not get a footing on the Continent some time this year." Not only
did Mountbatten explain the landing craft problem, but he also reminded
Rosevelt that the Germans already had twenty-five mobile divisions in
France, so no landing that we could carry out could draw off any troops"
tom the Eastern Front. Roosevelt found that alarming and suggested that
pahaps a "sacrifice" landing would be necessary anyway in order to show
god faith to the Russians. When Mountbatten returned to England and
shared that notion with Churchill, the prime minister decided that he must
cross the Atlantic once again in order to squelch it. "I feel it is my duty to
come se you, he wrote Roosevelt on June 13, and soon afterward he was
in the a gain, lying west. 31
IT TOOK TWENTY-EIGHT HOUrS for Churchill's flying boat to cross
the atic, and then he boarded another, much smaller plane to fly up to
Hyde Park, on the Hudson, where Roosevelt was spending the weekend
Bode had accompanied Churchill, but he stayed in Washington to meet
with Marshall and the CCS. After a bumpy landing at the small Hyde Park
airstrip, Churchill found a smiling Roosevelt sitting behind the wheel of
is perily modified Ford that allowed him to drive without using foot
