244
= NEPTUNE
on tripods that bent out of the way when contacted by minesweeping gear,
then rocked back into place to detonate only when a ship passed overhead.
German "oyster" mines rested on the bottom and detonated when they
sensed a change in water pressure caused by a vessel that was at least 120 feet
long passing overhead. The only effective Allied countermeasure for this
type of mine was to tow a sled that mimicked the signature of a passing ship.
But since the sled was towed astern, the minesweeper itself remained vulner-
able, as was evident when the minesweeper USS Osprey was lost during the
sweeping operations on June 5. Another problem was that some of the mines
had "counters" which meant that they would ignore the first one or two ves-
sels that passed overhead and then detonate under the third. The Germans
also deployed anti-sweeping devices that could cut the sweeping gear and
temporarily put a minesweeper out of action until it could be repaired?
All but thirty-two of the more than three hundred minesweepers
assigned to the operation were Royal Navy vessels. Ramsay had appealedto
Ernest King to increase the American contribution, but without success.
Ramsays appeal did, however, result in the assignment of an American PT
boat squadron to protect the minesweepers from B-boat attacks, though
that decision had as much to do with the disastrous events during Exercise
Tiger as with Ramsay's request. As it happened, the PT boat squadron King
sent was under the command of Lieutenant Commander John Bulkeley,
who had been awarded the Medal of Honor two years before for his role in
the Philippine campaign, including extracting Douglas MacArthur from
Corregidor. Bulkeley's squadron arrived in England only two days before
the invasion, and Jimmy Hall told him to "get those minesweepers in and
get those lines swept, then get out by 5:15 in the morning.
The minesweepers left port on the afternoon of June 5 and began sweep-
ing at 8:00 p.m., while it was still daylight. They worked in flotillas of six,
steaming en echelon to cover the desired channel width, while smaller ves-
sels followed them to deploy red and green buoys on either side of the
cleared channel. Charged to clear ten channels to the invasion beaches -
two for each beach-—they steamed in toward the coast for four hours, then
turned around and swept back again on a parallel track.
Once they had
swept and marked the ten channels, they began sweeping the area off the
D-Day: The Invasion
245
landing beaches where the big transports would anchor. They did not com-
plete their work until only minutes before dawn on June 6, after more than
siten hours of nonstop labor. Not every mine was detected, and mines
remained "a constant source of worry," but the role of the minesweepers
was crucial. Captain Powell Rhea, who commanded the American battle-
ship Nevada, declared in his official report that the minesweepers "deserve
th lion's share of the credit for the successful accomplishment of the mis-
sion." In an unusual testimonial, he added: "They not only swept and
buoyed a remarkably clear and geographically accurate channel through
the German mine fields, but did so at night, unescorted, in severe cross cur-
rents, in mine-infested waters, and in the face of possible enemy attack.",
While the minesweepers did their work, the invasion forces sortied from
their several harbors. The LCTs carrying the men and equipment for the
first wave left within minutes of Eisenhower's preliminary "go" decision at
9,45 p.m. on June 4. The bigger troop transports, LSTs and LCIL)s, joined
the exodus the next morning. By midday on June 5, most of the vast Allied
amada was at sea, and once again for thousands of men, the butterflies of
uncertainty mixed with the adrenaline of anticipation.
British ships made up well over half of the invasion armada of more than
sit thousand vessels, and they offered a remarkable spectacle as they filed
out of Southampton and Portsmouth. English ships had put to sea from
those ancient ports for nine centuries, and the channels that led from them
to the open sea were household names. Those leaving Southampton passed
through the Solent, which separated the Isle of Wight from the mainland,
and into a broad open roadstead known as Spithead for the long spit of sand
that protected it from the Channel. This was the historic anchorage of the
Royal Navy and the scene of formal reviews of the fleet by monarchs since
Blizabeth I. Yet familiar as these roadsteads were to generations of British
seamen since Drake and Frobisher, Spithead had never seen an armada like
this one. To Vian, watching from his flagship, the cruiser Scylla, "the con-
stant stream of landing craft and ships" coming down the Solent and into
Spithead was "a heartening sight."
As Captain Stagg had promised, it was an
"uncomfortable" crossing.
Four-foot waves smacked into the blunt bows of the LCTs, and green water
