136
= NEPTUNE
erstwhile enemies. British soldiers resented the Americans' new, clean lib-
erty uniforms that included a necktie, which made them all look like offi-
cers. And they resented the medals they wore, including the European
Theater of Operations (ETO) medal, issued to every soldier who arrived.
As the British put it, the Americans got medals for "just showing up." Would
these men really be able to stand up to the Germans when the time came?
One British officer suggested, though only within his own circle, that per-
haps the best thing to do was to assign British officers to command Amen-
can soldiers, in much the same way they commanded colonial troops from
India or South Africa, so that they could put a little starch into them.?
One particularly sensitive point was the relationship between American
Gis and British women. Because Britain had been at war since 1939, with
British soldiers fighting on battlefields from Burma to Egypt (and now in
Sicily and Italy), the military-age male population of Britain was little in
evidence in 1943. British women were too fully occupied to sit around
waiting for them. Nearly half a million British women were in the armed
services themselves, and virtually all the rest worked, for there was no un-
employment in wartime Britain. Indeed, a wartime British law required
that any man who worked less than sixty hours a week and any woman who
worked less than fifty-five hours a week also had to serve at least one night
a week on fire watch. Of course, all this was new since the war began, and it
had bred a dramatic change in the social dynamic. Before the war, respect-
able women did not go out unescorted, especially in the evening, but due
to the dearth of possible escorts those rules no longer applied. Given the
new social fluidity, the arrival of a million free-spending, joke-cracking
Americans was all but explosive. Brenda Devereux, who was a teenager in
the Channel port city of Bournemouth, recalled that when the Americans
hit town, "they swaggered, they boasted, and they threw their money
about, unlike British men, who found such behavior vulgar and tawdry.
Brenda was "captivated. "How we loved it" she gushed. British men, espe-
cially British soldiers, blamed the erosion of the old standards on the GIs
who, in the famous phrase of the day, were "overpaid, oversexed, and over
here. But many Americans felt that equal responsibility belonged to British
women, who, liberated from the straitjacketed life of the prewar years, often
Brits and Yanks = 137
welcomed the advances of the GIs with enthusiasm. As one GI put it, "The
English girls were a lot friendlier than English men."?1
In an effort to control the burgeoning social revolution, the British
government created an agency to provide social outlets for the occupiers.
They authorized clubs and other centers for social interaction. However,
the fare was sparse, the music bland, and the mood sedate. Americans
much preferred the clubs set up and run by the American Red Cross,
where the beer was cold, the cigarettes were American-made, and the
radios were tuned to the jive sounds of the American Armed Forces Net-
work instead of the drear and pedantic BBC. The British resented the ob-
vious American preference for replicating a piece of the USA in Britain
rather than integrating into British culture. Anthony Eden, the British
foreign secretary, complained about it to John Dill. "We had hoped," he
wrote in August 1943, "that the presence of large numbers of American
troops... would have done much to develop mutual understanding." In-
stead, he reported, "American military authorities in England tend to dis-
courage fraternization as a waste of time." Similarly, the director of the
BBC, Godfrey Adams, betrayed his pique when he remarked that "the
American Army authorities are anxious to have everything over here of
their own- their own equipment, of course; their own food, their own
sportskit to play their own games, and so forth. In a word, pretty well all
they require from this country is a piece of land to camp on until the 'sec.
ond front' opens. 22
One slice of American culture that migrated across the Atlantic with the
soldiers was the tradition of racial separation and discrimination. As David
Reynolds writes in his excellent history of the American "occupation" of
Britain, the experience "proved something of a sociological laboratory for
black GIs" The U.S. Army of World War Il was still segregated, though
black soldiers made up 10 percent of the whole, serving mainly as drivers,
as cooks, and on laundry detail, the kind of work that is done mostly by
contract borers in the twentv-fret century When Maior General Tames E.
Chaney had been in command, he strongly recommended that no black
soldiers be sent to England at all. Roosevelt overruled him, declaring that
10 percent of the Army should be composed of black soldiers, and that this
