48
NEPTUNE
for that year into aircraft production and leave other programs pretty much
as they were. He went around the room to ensure that all were in agreement
with this idea, and his eye fell on the sandy-haired brigadier general at the
end of the sofa. "Don't you think so, George?" he asked.
Marshall was a stickler for form who bristled silently at being called
"George" even by the president of the United States. He had listened with
growing alarm to Roosevelt's lengthy disquisition, fearful that such a pro-
gram would leave U.S. ground forces mired in a state of continued unreadi-
ness. He had said nothing while the president spoke, but now he had been
asked his opinion, so he gave it. "I'm sorry, Mr. President, but I don't agree
with that at all"
Roosevelt was visibly startled, though he did not follow up on Marshall's
comment at the time. When the group adjourned and the men filed out the
door into the anteroom, several of them turned to Marshall to offer their
condolences for what they were certain was the end of a promising career.
Instead, five months later, Roosevelt appointed Marshall chief of staff of the
Army, with four-star rank.'
Marshal's particular combination of deference and candor, so evident in
his remark to Roosevelt, also worked well in dealing with his naval counter-
parts (Stark and King) and with the British - even, as was evident at Arca-
dia, with the redoubtable Churchill. Months later, the judgmental and not
entirely admiring British General Alan Brooke confided to his diary that
while he did not think Marshall much of a strategist, he acknowledged that
he was very good at "providing the necessary links between the political and
military worlds." In a global coalition war, that skill would prove invaluable and
make Marshall, as much as anyone in uniform, the architect of Allied victory?
During the first six months of 1942, however, Marshall found himself on
the losing side of a difficult and often frustrating campaign to convince first
his fellow service chiefs, then the Combined Chiefs, and finally Churchill
and Roosevelt that an early cross-Channel invasion of occupied France was
the best and surest way to victory. From January through July 1942, Mar-
shall employed reason, argument, and on one occasion blackmail to con-
vince the heads of the American and British governments to accept the
need for, and the wisdom of, his strategic vision. It was a campaign that
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight"
49
tested his diplomacy, his debating skills, and often his patience, and in the
end it was one that he would lose.
THE COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF created at the Arcadia conference
met more than two hundred times during the war, a number that does
not include the scores of private discussions and informal conversations
that took place on a near daily basis. The first meeting, held in the U.S.
Public Health Building on Constitution Avenue because no other site was
available, occurred on January 23, only nine days after Churchill returned
to England. Marshall, King, and Arnold attended regularly, with occasional
support from Eisenhower, whom Marshall had appointed in February to
head the Army's War Plans Division.* Dill was the principal British spokes-
man, and he was seconded by Admiral Sir Charles Little, who led the Brit-
ish Joint Staff in Washington until he returned to England later in the year
and was replaced by Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham. The Royal Air
Force was represented by Air Marshal D. C. S. Evill, whose name occa-
sioned some amused comment. Others circulated in and out. A more per-
manent change occurred in July when Admiral William D. Leahy returned
from his difficult and delicate assignment as the U.S. ambassador to Vichy
France and Roosevelt made him his chief of staff in which capacity he
joined the CCS as its titular head.
Early on, a kind of unofficial protocol emerged in which the Americans
convened separately in the morning or over lunch to ensure that they were
more or less in agreement before they met with their British counterparts
in the afternoon. There was no official authority for these meetings of the
American service chiefs, and no name for the group they formed, though
others soon began to refer to it as the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), a name
that has stuck. Later in the war. Roosevelt sanctioned both the organization
and the name with an executive ordet, but in the beginning it emerged out
of convenience and necessity, an important first step toward cooperation -
i not quite integration - among the American armed services, which up to
* The War Plans Division was renamed the Operations Division in March 1942, though
Eisenhower remained its director.
