YUL
ОмАна BEACH, 9:00 A.M., JUNE 6, 1944
English Channel
USS SATTERLEE
HICC THOMPCAN
Mater WAS FLLYSIN.
INVASION FLEET
Pointe du Hoc. - .
USS CARMICK
USS McCOOK
(maneuvering)
880 yards of beach
GREEN
USS FRANKFORD
(SANDERS)
USS DOYLE
USS BALDWIN
USS EMMONS
HISS ENDICOTI
(maneuvering)
Vierville-sur-Mer
St. Taurent-sur-Mer
Longueville
Le Grand
, Formigny
sur-Mer
/ Trévières
* Mandeville
Mosles
© 2013 leffrey L. Ward
D- Day: The Crisis = 293
moments when the Frankford had only a few inches of water under her keel,
and Kirk later asserted that "they had their bows against the bottom." Even if
that was not literally true, it suggested the willingness of the destroyer cap-
tain to put their ships at risk in an obvious emergency. These dozen or so
distroyers constituted only a tiny fraction of the more than five thousand
ships that participated in the invasion, but over the ensuing ninety minutes,
they turned the tide of battle on Omaha Beach. 3
Several destroyers played a key role in what was perhaps the most daunt-
in assignment of the entire invasion: the assault by 225 U.S. Army Rangers
under Lieutenant Colonel James A. Rudder on Pointe du Hoc. Atop this
promontory west of Omaha Beach, the Germans were believed to have
place several heavy guns that could reach both American beaches. To
eliminate this threat, the Rangers would have to land on a narrow rocky
beach at the base of the cliff, then scale the nearly vertical cliff with ropes
and laders. They boarded ten Royal Navy landing craft before dawn, but
lie almost every other vessel that morning, the boats were swept well to
the left of their intended landing site by the current, and the coxswains ini-
tilly aimed their boats not at Pointe du Hoc but Pointe de la Percée, slightly
west of Vierville. Recognizing their error at about six-thirty, just as the first
landings on Omaha and Utah Beach were taking place, the coxswains
sought guidance and direction from one of the tiny (fifty-six-foot) landing
control craft off Omaha Beach.
U.S. Navy Lieutenant William Steel commanded the control craft off
Charlie Beach that morning, and he was fully engaged in trying to establish
order amid the emerging chaos onshore when the group of landing craft
carying Rudder's men closed on his position. One of the boats eased up to
the starboard side of Steel's little vessel, and a Royal Navy officer stood up
with a megaphone in his hand. "I say," he called out, "can you tell me the
way to Pointe du Hoc?" Steel was astonished; the question was delivered
with the kind of casual diffidence a tourist might employ "standing on a
street in New York City saying, 'How do you get to Times Square?" Steel
recovered quickly and, consulting the chart, gave the officer a bearing to
Pointe du Hoc. The British officer took up the megaphone again: "Thank
you very much, he called out, and with a wave, off they went.
