220 = NEPTUNE
Though Moon was close to Hall (who was godfather to Moon's son), he
had an awkward relationship with Struble. For one thing, Struble had grad-
uated a year ahead of Moon at the academy and resented the fact that Moon
had a fleet command while he had a staff position. When Moon arrived in
Struble's cabin on the Augusta, Struble was standing with his back to the
hatchway, looking out a porthole, and he did not immediately turn around
to acknowledge Moon's arrival. Some moments passed in awkward silence.
When a British submarine passed within Struble's vision with a broom
lashed to its periscope to signal that it had made a clean sweep, he muttered,
"Well, I see somebody did his duty." Only then did he turn to face Moon
and, with cold expression, ask, "All right, Moon, what happened?" Moon
offered a full oral report of the events as he understood them, but the
atmosphere in the room remained chilly. Struble responded only that
Admiral King in Washington was not going to be pleased. Eventually Moon
made his escape and returned to his flagship, no doubt determined to work
even harder.52
NOT QUITE A WEEK LATER, On May 3, the Allies began a series of exercises,
called Fabius, that lasted for six days. Hall's Force O carried elements of
Gerow's V Corps from Portland and Weymouth to Slapton Sands, and the
British conducted full-scale landings of Dempsey's Second British Army
on the beaches east of Portsmouth. This time there was no interference
from the enemy indeed, few problems of any kind. Ramsay, watching the
British landings from Vian's flagship, the cruiser Scylla, was "very favorably
impressed. Despite lingering concerns over what he perceived as Kink's
"wilful stupidity" about the E-boat threat, Ramsay informed Eisenhower
that the Neptune force was ready.53
Perhaps it would have been more accurate to say that it was as ready as
could reasonably have been expected given the circumstances. The de-
stroyer squadron that King had dispatched after the debacle of Exercise
Tiger was still en route, and although May 1944 was the most prolific
month of the entire war for IST production, only a few of the new LSTs
made it from the shipyards on the Ohio River, down the Mississippi, and
across the Atlantic in time to join the Neptune force. Moreover, those that
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 221
did arrive had novice crews with no amphibious training whatsoever.
A handful of veterans were transferred into them from other landing craft
to provide some experienced leadership, but the rest were neophytes, "lit-
erally jumping from boot camp to combat," in the words of one. For the
new arrivals, the assault on the beaches of Normandy would be the first
beach landing of any kind they had ever made. Nevertheless, the operation
could be put off no longer. As one LCT skipper put it, "Our training was
about as good as could be done given the shortness of time available," add-
ing,"What we lacked in expertise, we made up for in enthusiasm." It
remained to be seen if that would be enough. s4
At the last full-scale briefing, held at St. Paul's School on May 15, all of the
principal commanders from Eisenhower on down delivered detailed oral
summaries of the forthcoming operation. It was a star-studded audience
filled with admirals, generals, and air vice marshals as well as the prime min-
ister and King George himself. On the stage was a giant three-dimensional
map of the target beaches, angled so the audience could see it, and as each of
the principal commanders spoke, he walked around the map pointing out
the key sites. In spite of himself, Churchill was impressed. When at last it was
his turn, he gave what Eisenhower called "one of his typical fighting
speeches," but then the prime minister added this: "Gentlemen, I am hard-
ening toward this enterprise. Eisenhower was taken aback. It was as if
Churchill was only then becoming reconciled to the operation that had
doninated Allied planning for a full year.
On May 28, Ramsay sent an order to all hands: "Carry out Operation
Neptune. In response, battleships and cruisers set out from ports in North-
em Ireland and Scotland, landing ships and landing craft moved along the
Channel coast to their assigned ports, and trucks filled to capacity with sol-
diers in full kit made their way in an endless stream along the narrow roads
of southern Eneland to ports of embarkation from Falmouth in Cornwal
to Newhaven in East Sussex.
D-Day was eight days away.
