112
— NEPTUNE
Churchill and emphasized the importance of "knocking Italy out of
the war," but the Americans were having none of it. It was a measure of
Marshall's growing impatience that he uncharacteristically snapped back
that rather than "knocking Italy out of the war," perhaps they should direct
their attention to "knocking Germany out of the war." He pointed out that
"operations invariably created a vacuum in which it was essential to pour
in more and more means. Torch was supposed to have required a total of
185,000 U.S. soldiers, but there were now more than 400,000 American
GIs in North Africa. Meanwhile, of the 279,000 American soldiers who
had been shipped to England, fewer than 20,000 ground troops remained
there because "all available U.S. resources had been sent to North Africa."
Both Torch and Husky had been approved "in order to do something this
year while preparing for cross-Channel operations," yet no meaningful
preparations had been made. Given that, Marshall announced that the
program sketched out by the British was "not acceptable to the United
States."?6
The British argued that the realities of the shipping problem made any
transfer of assets from North Africa to England virtually impossible. Indeed,
the dearth of shipping continued to dominate any discussion of Allied
plans. Fears that the Germans might cut the transatlantic supply lines had
eased, thanks to stronger convoy escorts, accelerated shipbuilding in the
States, and the tremendous advantage gained by having broken the code
that the Germans used to vector U-boats toward Allied convoys. Neverthe-
less, there were continuous new demands on shipping in the Pacific, and in
the Mediterranean, too, including the need to transport a million prisoners
of war from North Africa at the rate of thirty thousand a month. Shipping
was so scarce that the Allies felt compelled to decline a plea from seventy
thousand Bulgarian Jews who sought rescue from the Axis, a decision that
in hindsight would come to look especially callous. Eisenhower reported
that he was "thirty ships short of what he needed" even to conduct Opera-
tion Husky. Where would the ships come from to reorient operations from
the Mediterranean to England? The American answer was that they would
simply build more. In fact, the Americans were now building new cargo
ships —most of them Liberty ships— faster than the Germans could sink
ALLIED SHIPPING LOSSES VS.
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SHIPS, 1942-1944
1943
1944
1942
CONSTRUCTION
< NET GAIN OR LOSS
1
in rrand
