#13O
— NEPTUNE
proportion should be reflected in all command theaters.* After Eisenhower
replaced Chaney in England, he sought to reduce racial tensions by issuing
an order that "the spreading of derogatory statements concerning the char-
acter of any group of United States troops, either white or colored, must be
considered as conduct prejudicial to good order and military discipline.
Nevertheless, black American soldiers in England were billeted separately,
ate separately, and were generally restricted to their own area unless they
were making a delivery or assigned to a work project. White Americans,
both officers and enlisted, accepted this as perfectly normal?3
The British, however, had no legacy of domestic slavery and no tradition
of race separation; at the time, there were fewer than eight thousand black
residents in all of England. Consequently, while Americans of any color
were novel and therefore innately interesting, black Americans were espe-
cially intriguing. Moreover, while white Americans often displayed a brash
confidence, blacks were polite, deferential, even courtly. In many venues,
the black soldiers were more popular with the British than the white sol-
diers were. "Everybody here adores the negro troops" a woman in Wit-
Shire wrote, "but nobody likes the white Americans. They swagger about as
if they were the only people fighting the war, they all get so drunk.., while
the negroes are very polite." A story that was popular at the time, and which
was stil being told in Devon a half century later, involved the reaction of
one local when asked what he thought of the American soldiers. "They're
right fine blokes," he said, "but I don't much care for the white buggers they
brought with'em."?4
For many Americans, especially from the South, the very idea that white
women of any nationality would "walk out" with black men was not only
disorienting but intolerable. Often the very presence of black soldiers in a
pub led to fights, as white American soldiers sought to defend the cultural
traditions they had been born to. On rare occasions the fights were serious
• The U.S. Navy also had a lengthy tradition of racial segregation and a policy of restrict-
ing black recruits to service positions, in particular as "mess boys"— essentially ser-
vants for officers. In 1942, Roosevelt had insisted that the Navy begin to open more
specialties to blacks, including those of gunner, signalman, yeoman, and quarter-
master
Brits and Yanks = 139
enough that men were killed. The British were horrified by this and some-
times came to the aid of black soldiers who were under attack from a crowd
ofangry white Americans. In the end, however, the British were compelled
to adjust. Their perceived need for American military partnership proved
the trump card, and the British accepted, without embracing, the racial
code imposed on them by the Americans. Pubs were designated as either
black or white, or in some cases blacks and whites were allowed access only
on alternate days?5
THE PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY of the American troops in England was training-
especially training for amphibious assault. Except for those veterans o
the North African campaign who were transferred back to Britain in
November 1943, most of the GIs were raw recruits in their teens and early
twenties, and their officers hoped to complete their combat traini
England. Morgan ordered that "advanced amphibious training... be
ated without delay. In such training, not only did Brits and Yanks hav
leam to work together, but so did Army and Navy units, which was no su.
thing, Moreover, it was essential "to familiarize troops and naval units with
conditions peculiar to [the] English Channel. The goal was to conduct
combined training exercises "under conditions similar to those which pre-
vail in the Channel."26
To effect this training, the Americans made a number of requests to the
British Government for large tracts of land for military exercises. In additi
to the forty thousand acres used to house the Americans, and well over twi
that amount devoted to American air bases in East Anglia, the United State
in September 1943 requested an additional 191,000 acres in southern Eng-
land for armored training. The British minister of agriculture protested that
this would devastate the country's food and dairy production at a time when
Britain could barely feed its people, much less its voracious guests. Neverthe-
les, though the size of the tract was reduced to 141,000 acres (220 square
miles) the British agreed to this, too, assigning much of the Salisbury Plain
and the Channel coast west of the Dart River to the American Army?7
Generous as that was, it seemed severely restricted by American
standards. For comparative purposes, when George Patton set up a desert
