100 = NEPTUNE
all but inevitable since the limitations of Allied shipping made any other option
impossible. Portal then took up the cause by asserting that continued pressure
in the Mediterranean, along with unrelenting strategic bombing, would bring
Germany to her knees.
These arguments were neither new nor surprising to the Americans, for
they were not significantly different from what Churchill had proposed a
year earlier at the Arcadia conference. Marshall and the Americans remained
skeptical, convinced that "an operation from the United Kingdom" was es-
sential to ultimate victory. If the arguments had not changed, the circum-
stances had. The Torch landings and the subsequent North African ground
campaign had revealed serious shortcomings in both American training
and available assets. It was perhaps to be expected that the judgmental
George Patton would find fault with the combat readiness of U.S. soldiers,
many of them only a few months out of civilian life, but even Marshall was
shocked when, during an evening walk outside Casablanca, he encountered
a unit of newly arrived American soldiers and found the men so sloppily
dressed and undisciplined that they were, in his view, "not usable for any
battle against the Germans. The British certainly agreed. Field Marshal
Harold Alexander wrote to Brooke that the Americans "simply do not know
their job as soldiers. That was not true of every American, of course, but it
was clear that more training and more experience would improve the odds
of future battlefield confrontations.
As for the sealift problem, the Torch landings had used up almost exactly
half of the Allies' available landing craft, and at Casablanca, Eisenhower te-
ported that a subsequent move to Sicily would entail the loss of 50 to 75 per-
cent of what was left. Landing craft, apparently, were like Kleenex: good for
one use and then discarded. This was especially true for the small Higgins
boats. The problem of underprepared American soldiers could be overcome
with training and experience, but if the Allies expended most or all of their re-
maining landing craft in another Mediterranean operation, there would be few
or none left for a cross-Channel invasion. Marshall was cold-bloodedly real-
istic in observing that "we could replace troops" lost in any Mediterranean
campaign, but that "a heavy loss in shipping... might completely destroy any
opportunity for successful operations against the enemy in the near future."
Casablanca to COSSAC = 101
In reply to these concerns, Brooke adopted the demeanor of a long-
suffering schoolmaster forced to deal with a class of particularly slow-witted
pupils. All matters have to be carefully explained and reexplained [to the
Americans] before they can be absorbed," he wrote in his diary that night.
"They can't be pushed and hurried, and must be made gradually to assimilate
ourproposed policy." Brooke got support from Mountbatten, the director of
combined operations, who suggested that instead of attempting to redeploy
landing craft from the Mediterranean back to England, which would be a
lengthy and tedious process, new landing craft should be brought over from
America on the same transports that carried the U.S. troops. That way, the
arriving Gls would have landing vessels available for amphibious training,
and the landing craft already in the Mediterranean could remain there and be
putto good use in local follow-on operations.
Like Marshall, Brooke sought relief from the negotiations by taking
walks, though in his case, they doubled as birding expeditions. (Brooke re-
corded excitedly in his diary that he spotted "sanderlings, ring plover, grey
plover, and turnstones!') During the sessions, he sought to reassure Mar-
shall that the buildup of American forces in England could continue even as
operations unfolded in the Mediterranean. He envisioned the movement
oftvere thousand American GIs a month to Britain throughout the spring
and summer, so by August there would be nine to twelve divisions in
southern England for a thrust across the Channel if a "crack" in the German
defenses provided an opportunity. And Brooke assured Marshall that "we
should definitely count on reentering the Continent in 1944 on a large
sale? Of course, they had said much the same thing a year earlier about a
1943 invasion.®
This dispute was not merely about available resources or even strategy.
dits heart it was the product of a fundamentally different understanding
of the very purpose of a cross-Channel invasion. From the beginning, the
British had envisioned any such assault as the final coup de grâce to be
applied to an enemy utterly worn out by prolonged struggle and constant
bombing; to them, no invasion should be attempted until Germany was
misby fatering and on the brink of collapse. The American view was quite
different. To them, the invasion was not to ratify a victory already won; it
