180 = NEPTUNE
called for more than twelve hundred warships, four thousand landing craft,
and fifteen hundred other vessels—nearly seven thousand vessels in all if
one included the small Higgins boats and British LCAs. Eisenhower
acknowledged that it might be difficult to obtain all those resources quickly,
and expressed his willingness to postpone the attack for a month if neces-
sary. "Rather... than risk failure with reduced forces on the earlier date, he
wrote, "I would accept postponement of a month if I were assured of
obtaining the strength required." Eisenhower concluded his lengthy cable
by asking for "an immediate decision."12
He didn't get one. The arrival of his memo in Washington triggered
another lengthy debate within the CCS, one that pitted not only Overlord
against Anvil, but also Europe against the Pacific. That very month, U.S.
naval forces seized targets in the Marshall Islands at Kwajalein, Majuro, and
Eniwetok, operations that also required large numbers of landing craft.
King was suspicious that the CCS were looking toward the Pacificas a kind
of resource pool for Overlord, and he reminded the CCS that the original
Neptune plan had called for the British to provide the naval support for the
invasion of Europe. Rather than a prompt yes or no, therefore, Eisenhower
received a rather curious reply that came not from the Combined Chiefs
but from the American Joint Chiefs. It was neither an approval nor a rejec-
tion, but a list of questions that implied skepticism about Eisenhower's cal-
culations. In particular, the ICS wanted to know "the basis you used in
arriving at the additional resources required. How many landing craft did
he have? What was their capacity? What was the iustification for more war-
ships? In effect, the JCS wanted Eisenhower to do the math and to show his
work. The Supreme Allied Commander might have taken offense at the
challenging tone of that reply—-Montgomery and Ramsay certainly did.
True to his character, however, Eisenhower patiently responded to all of the
questions, though he reiterated that he needed an answer soon, for it was
impossible to make any meaningful plans until he knew whether he was to
have the needed sealift. "All plans and training considerations hang on the
answer," he wrote 13
In Eisenhower's detailed item-bu-item response he listed the number of
ships he had, along with their function and their capacity, and allowed the
SHAEF and ANCXF = 181
numbers to speak for themselves. Taking the number of serviceable LSTs
already in England (173) and adding twenty-five more per month (the pro-
duction numbers given him by the JCS) would give him 248 LSTs on
D-Day. Because several of them had to be used as command ships and
fighter-director ships, he would be left with almost exactly the 230 that
Morgan had calculated would be necessary for a three-division assault, but
dearly considerably short of what was needed for a five-division assault.
"We have gone into this matter carefully," Eisenhower wrote, "and as far as
we know every serviceable landing craft that is worth having is allocated to
OVBRLORD." And it wasn't enough. 14
In receipt of Eisenhower's detailed cable, the JCS agreed to postpone
D-Day from May 1 to May 31 in order to build up Allied sealift. They also
agreed to preserve the Anvil landings. To make that possible, however, Ike
would have to make do with forty-eight fewer LSTs and fifty-one fewer
LI(L)s than he had requested. Some of the shortfall could be made up by
adding more transports and American attack cargo ships (AKAs), but it
reduced the margin of safety to near zero. Eisenhower was betting on Ameri-
can productivity, writing Marshall that "one extra month of landing craft pro-
duction, including LSTs, should help a lot." Ramsay thought otherwise. In his
opinion, the decision to continue with Anvil was "outrageous." Even with an
extra month to build more ships, he was convinced that the necessary sealift
fo: Neptune "cannot be obtained without some of [the] Anvil lift"Is
All of Eisenhower's hopes for Anvil were predicated on a swift and suc-
cessful conclusion to the campaign in Italy so that ships from the Mediter-
ranean could be used for both Neptune and Anvil. But as January turned to
February, the Allied forces around Anzio remained virtually imprisoned in
their precarious beachhead, sustained there by the very landing ships that
Eisenhower wanted and needed. On February S the British Chiefs of Staff
insisted that the stalemate in Italy made Anvil "neither possible nor desir-
able" and urged that any landing craft in the Mediterranean not needed to
sustain the Anzio beachhead should be moved at once to England for Over-
lord. Less than a year before, the British had pushed hard for expanded
Mediterranean operations and the Americans had insisted on the primacy
ofa cross-Channel aad. Now it was the other way around 6
