216 = NEPTUNE
protocol when a convoy came under attack. But the order did not sit well
with the captain of Skahill's flagship, Lieutenant John Doyle. 44
Doyle was much younger than Skahill and was what was called a "mus-
tang"—that is, a prior enlisted sailor. Thickset, bluff, hearty, and short-
necked, he was a bulldog to Skahill's aging greyhound. Doyle objected
vociferously to Skahill's decision to turn shoreward while two, and perhaps
three, of his ships were sinking. Doyle wanted to go back and pick up the
survivors. Skahill knew not only that this was a violation of standing orders
but also that trying to pick up survivors more often than not resulted in yet
another ship being sunk. Doyle didn't care. In an act of near mutiny, he got
on the 1-MC loudspeaker and explained the situation to the men on board,
Their shipmates and fellow soldiers were dying out there, he announced.
Who wanted to go back to get them? A rousing cheer went up, and Skahill
capitulated. The 515 returned to the scene.45
It was too late. With the sun coming up, the E-boats had retreated, butit
had been more than two hours since the first men had gone into the frigid
water. Even most of those who could swim or who had found something to
cling to had lost functionality in their limbs. The Saladin arrived to help,
and men on Doyle's S1S and on the Saladin began retrieving those who
were left alive. Most of the bodies in the water, however, were not moving.
After rescuing the few survivors, the 515 and the Saladin began retrieving
the lifeless forms from the water with the intent, no doubt, of giving them a
proper burial. Then orders arrived from shore to leave them where they
were. There were complaints about that, too, but this time the orders held,
and the ships left the scene. Hours later, crewmen on LCT-271 passing
through the area en route to Portland Harbor noted that the sea around
them was filled with hundreds of small floating obiects. "As we got closer"
a sailor recalled, "we noted that they were American GI's. Crewmen used a
boat hook to pull one of the bodies alongside. It was a UJS. Army soldier, "in
a sort of sitting position with all his clothes on... His eyes were wide open
and staring"." He looked, a sailor recalled, like he had known he was going to
die. After reporting the discovery, they, too, got orders to leave the bodies
where they were, and L.CT-271 continued on to Portland, though it had to
zigzag "to keep from running over the bodies."46
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 217
The final death toll from Exercise Tiger was 198 sailors and 441 soldiers
ile, which was more, as it happened, than died during the actual landings
on Utah Beach five weeks later.*? But no one was to know about the
slaughter that had occurred in Lyme Bay. The news, after all, would be a
crushing blow to morale and cast a pall over the other major rehearsal
scheduled to take place only five days later. Indeed, if news of the disaster
became public, it might even undermine support for the D-Day landings
themselves. Certainly the Germans would take increased confidence from
knowing how badly the Allies had been hurt. So the decision was made at
the very top — very likely by Eisenhower himself—that the incident would
remain a secret. When Skahill, Doyle, and LST-515 arrived in Portland late
on the afternoon of April 28, they saw that every U.S. Navy ship in the
harbor flew its flag at half staff. Naturally, they assumed that this was in
honor of the hundreds of men who had died in the Channel that morning.
liwas not. By coincidence, Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox had died that
same day, and the flags had been lowered in his honor. In an effort to keep
news of the debacle in Lyme Bay from spreading, the survivors were placed
in hospitals. Officially they were under observation, but to some it felt like
incarceration, and the entire incident remained largely unknown until well
after the war was over.
Terrible as the death toll was, Eisenhower and Ramsay were almost as
concerned about the loss of those three LSTs.* The Allied operational
margin of safety in terms of LSTs was so narrow that the loss of three of
them threatened the viability of Neptune itself. Stark wired King that three
replacement ISTs must be sent from America at once. King advised Stark
that the only way replacements could get there in time was to bring them
from the Mediterranean, but Admiral Cunningham, who commanded in
the Med, said he had no LSTs to spare. King promised that he would send
*Eisenhower also worried about the security of the D.-Day plans because he knew that
at least one of the officers reported as missing after Exercise Tiger had been thor-
oughly briefed about Neptune-Overlord. If that oficer had been pulled from the
water by one of the E-boats and interrogated, it could jeopardize the entire operation.
In the end, however, the Allies recovered the bodies of all those who had access to the
invasion plans.
