YUL
274 = NEPTUNE
heads. Robert Miller of the 149th Combat Engineers would "never forget
the feeling of panic" as he stepped off into a runnel and went straight to the
bottom, dragged down by the weight of his pack. He shucked off the pack,
pushed hard against the sandy bottom, and struggled up to the surface,
gasping for air. Half swimming and half flailing, he managed to make it to
the beach. "I was near exhaustion by this time," he remembered, "and felt as
though my body weighed at least three hundred pounds." NCDU team
member Orval Wakefield made it ashore still in possession of his pack, but
when he got there he noted with alarm that his legs were so weak he could
hardly stand. He wondered briefly if that meant he was a coward, until he
realized that his canvas sack had filled with seawater. He used his knife to
cut holes in the bottom of each bag so the water could drain out, and found
that he could stand up after all.?
Because so many, like Miller, lost their explosives and detonators in their
desperate scramble ashore, some waded back out to the boats to retrieve
the rubber rafts filled with the team's reserve explosives. Alas, the rafts, too,
had filled with water and were too heavy to move. So the men grabbed as
many satchels as they could carry and breasted their way back through the
water to the beach. All the while, machine gun bullets churned up the sea
around them, making little zip zip sounds as they hit the water. On shore,
the bullets kicked up the sand when they didn't find a more yielding target.
Many men fell the casualty rate among the NCDU teams on Omaha
Beach that morning was 70 percent. The survivors took cover behind the
beach obstacles and, lying prone, began to affix prima cord and C-2 explo-
sives to the poles. Using enemy mines as cover while deploying highly
volatile prima cord was extraordinarily hazardous, but there were few activ-
ities on Omaha Beach that morning that were not.
Several of the NCDU teams managed to place charges on the obsta
cles, called out "Fire in the hole!" and exploded them one by one. One
team, assigned to the Dog White sector of Omaha Beach near Les Mou-
lins, managed to clear a fifty-yard-wide gap in a mere twenty minutes.
Elsewhere, however, the teams were slowed by ferocious enemy fire.
One team was wiped out entirely when the LCT taking them ashore was
hit by an artillery shell. Another was obliterated when a shell hit their
D- Day: The Beaches = 275
raft loaded with explosives. Elsewhere, the men had to cut their work
short when the infantry began coming ashore—one recalled that "the
infantry was right on top of us." Amid the heavy fire from the bluffs, the
ariving soldiers instinctively took cover behind obstacles that had al-
ready been wired for demolition, and the men of the NCDU teams had
to chase them away in order to trigger the charges. Soon they had to stop
altogether, for any more explosions would endanger the arriving GIs.
In the end, the sixteen GAT teams on Omaha Beach managed to create
only five gaps through the obstacles. Consequently, when the second
and third waves got to the beach, they found most of the mined impedi-
ments still in place.!°
The men in the first several waves had been told that the bombing and
naval gunfire would knock out the enemy defensive positions, and many
aso expected that the beach would be pockmarked with ready-made bomb
craters that they could use as foxholes, but of course neither of those expec-
tations was validated. Some of the German machine guns fired at the aston-
ishing rate of twenty rounds per second, and that created a virtual wall of
fre that could not be avoided. Those who made it through the surf to the
beach staggered forward to find imperfect cover behind a slight rise in
the sand some two hundred yards inland from the surf line. Along part of
the beach there was a low concrete seawall that offered additional protec-
tion, but elsewhere there was only this slight rise in the shingle— the prod-
uct of several centuries' worth of high tides. The men could advance no
further due to the ubiquitous fire across the beach, nor could they go back,
since any landing craft that had not been wrecked on the beach or hit by
German gunfire had already retracted.
Indeed, the destruction of so many landing craft was nearly as disastrous
to the Allied invasion plan as the casualties to the soldiers. As one example,
the USS Thurston (AP-77) lowered a total of twenty-five Higgins boats that
morning. One sank when it collided with a submerged tank just off the
beach; two others broached during the landing; five were smashed up by
hard landings or enemy fire and had to be abandoned; the rest succeeded in
landing their soldiers and retracting, but of those, nine were so badly dam-
aged they had to be hoisted back on board the Thurston for repairs. As a
