30 = NEPTUNE
The Duke of York was also a big ship, and Churchill took along a substan-
tial coterie, including several men who would play key roles in the design
and execution of Anglo-American war plans right up to the invasion of
Normandy two and a half years later. Arguably the most important of them
was Field Marshal Sir John Dill, who represented the British Army. Dill's
presence was a bit awkward since Churchill had only recently replaced him
as Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS) with General Alan Brooke.
Churchill had concluded that despite an exemplary war record, Dill was
simply too hidebound and conventional to continue as head of the British
Army. One reason for the move may have been Dill's objection to giving the
Mediterranean a higher priority in British strategic planning than the Far
East. Then, too, Dill often declined to take seriously many of Churchill's
more off-the-wall suggestions about gimmick weapons and eccentric strat-
egies. The prime minister initially planned to put Dill on the shelf as gov-
ernor of India. After Pearl Harbor, however, he decided to take Dill with
him on the trip to Washington, leaving Brooke behind in London to mind
the shop. Churchill thought that if things worked out, Dill might remain in
Washington to represent British interests there. It proved to be an inspired
notion, for Dill had a calm and diplomatic presence that helped smooth
over the occasional and inevitable bumps in the alliance partnership. He
proved invaluable not only at the forthcoming conference but throughout
the war until his death in 1944.
Another member of the British delegation was Admiral of the Fleet Sir
Dudley Pound, who represented the Royal Navy. Sixty-four years old and
in poor health, Pound was visibly past his physical prime. He had an unset-
tling tendency to nod off at meetings, then abruptly sit up and make a well-
argued point before slumping back into his chair and closing his eyes. Air
Marshal Sir Charles Portal represented the Royal Air Force. Sixteen years
younger than Pound, he was more active and outspoken in meetings. Por-
tal's Oxford degree gave him a certain intellectual cachet, and Marshall
thought him "the best of the lot," though it was sometimes hard to tell
whether Portal's principal constituency was Great Britain or the Royal Air
Force. Another key member of the British team was Lord Beaverbrook, the
wealthy Canadian-born newspaperman whom Churchill had put in charge
Arcadia
31
of the Ministry of Supply. A self-made man who had become the owner of
both the Daily Express and the Evening Standard, the elfin-looking Beaver-
brook was a dynamo of energy and organization who had dramatically
increased British war production. His most important credential, however,
was his personal friendship with the prime minister, and he played a similar
role for Churchill that Hopkins did for Roosevelt. 10*
Churchill and his senior staff used the eight-day crossing to produce a
number of position papers on various aspects of war management. Churchill
wrote three of them himself, one each on the Atlantic, the Pacific, and stra-
tegic options for 1943. They were broad philosophical essays rather than
specific plans (Hopkins, who was also on board, had warned him against
arriving with detailed plans already in hand, for fear of triggering American
suspicions). Since the Americans were still scrambling in the aftermath of
Pearl Harbor, they had not prepared any position papers at all, and as a
result the British memos became the basis for subsequent discussion.
Churchill's goals for the conference were threefold: to reconfirm American
commitment to the Germany-first strategy, to ensure the continuation of
Lend-Lease goods, and to obtain approval for an early Allied campaign into
North Africa 11
He need not have worried about the first two objectives. By now, the
Americans were as committed to a Germany-first strategy as the British
were. Nor was there any problem with the continuation of Lend-Lease,
which, as Hopkins had predicted, soon increased rather than diminished.
What was to prove the central issue, not only of the upcoming discussions
in Washington but of Anglo-American conferences throughout the war,
was how the defeat of Germany could best be secured. Churchill would
soon discover that the American commitment to the Germany-first pro-
gram made them eager to get on with it. For his part, Churchill did not
oppose an eventual invasion of German-occupied Europe; indeed, he
* Beaverbrook resigned as minister of supplyin February, shortly after returning to Eng-
land from the Arcadia conference. Ostensibly it was because of his poor health, but
Beaverbrok also objected to hu Ostensibly it was because e Admot to control
shipbul ding priorities, and he feuded open vision Clement Attee, Churchill's deputy
prime minister.
