212 = NEPTUNE
As the various elements of Force U gathered off Slapton Sands early on
the morning of April 27, Moon learned that at least one LCT flotilla was
behind schedule. Careful as always, he decided to postpone the landing by
an hour to ensure that all the pieces of the invasion force were in place. But
Moon made that call at 6:25 for a landing that was scheduled to begin at
6:30. In a complex exercise with army, naval, and air elements, that invited
confusion. Some of the Higgins boats began heading for the beach in ac-
cordance with the original schedule when the British heavy cruiser Hawkins
opened fire on the beach. Shells fell among the landing craft and caused a
number of friendly-fire casualties. It was quickly straightened out and the
forces eventually got ashore, but it was not an especially good showing.
And it was about to get much worse. 36
The second-wave assault force for Exercise Tiger, scheduled to land the
next day, consisted of eight fully loaded LSTs collectively dubbed convoy
T.4. The commodore of the convoy was U.S. Navy Commander Bernard
Skahill, from New York City, a prim, neat man with a thin neck that pro-
truded stalk-like from his crisp uniform collar. At forty-six, Skahill was a
Naval Academy grad from the class of 1921, and to the young officers and
men of the amphibious force, he seemed positively ancient. The Royal
Navy escort for the convoy consisted of one small Flower-class corvette,
the Azalea, which at just over two hundred feet in length was even smaller
than an American destroyer escort, plus the larger but much older destroyer
Scimitar. The Azalea would lead, and the Scimitar would screen the con-
voy s right flank, which was the likely avenue of approach for any German
naval force seeking to interfere with the exercise.
In the jostling of ships inside Plymouth Harbor just prior to departure,
the Scimitar was struck by an American landing craft in a collision that
gouged a two-foot hole in her starboard side some twenty feet back from
the bow. Such collisions were not altogether unusual in a crowded harbor,
and the damage was not significant, but the C in C Plymouth, Rear Admiral
Sir Ralph Leatham, nevertheless ordered the Scimitar into the yards for re-
pair. Neither Leatham nor the captain of the Scimitar, however, notified
Commander Skahil, who, after all, was not in the Royal Navy chain of com-
mand. Skahill saw the Scimitar going in the wrong direction as it headed for
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger =
213
the repair yard, but he assumed it was part of the complicated maneuvering
necessary to get all the ships out of port and into formation. As a result,
convoy T.4 went to sea that evening with only a single escort, the tiny
Azalea, and no flank guard. After joining up off Berry Head, the eight LSTs
headed out into the Channel. The idea was for them to spend as much time
atsen as it would take to cross the Channel to Normandy, thus emulating
the experience of an actual assault. 37
Several hours after Skahill and the LSTs left Plymouth, at about 10
p.m, nine small German warships sortied from Cherbourg. Called E-b
by the Allies, the German designation for these craft was Schnellboote (S-t
or "fast boat"— a particularly apt designation. With their 7,500-horsepo
Daimler-Benz engines, they could make up to forty knots. Built of wood c
light metal alloy frame with a thin sheath of mahogany, they were abou
hundred feet long (about twenty feet longer than an American PT boat) a
amed with 40 mm guns, though their principal weapon was the four torp
does they carried amidships that had a range of seven to eight thousan
yards about four miles. The E-boats operated almost exclusivel
and were painted either gray or in a mottled camouflage patteri
made them very hard to see. Their sortie from Cherbourg on the n
April 27 was noted by British radar technicians ashore, but in the dua
munication system, no word of it got to Skahill or to the captain
Azalea, Commander George C. Geddes, RNVR, until after midnigh
news did, however, concern Admiral Leatham, who realized belai
that convoy T-4 was at sea with only a single escort. At 1:37 a.m. he
patched the destroyer HIMS Saladin, a sister ship of the damaged Scim
as a relief escort. 38
Like the German E-boats, the LSTs of convoy T-4 were running bla
out. They were approaching Lyme Bay at a few minutes past 1:00 i
morning on April 28 when crewmen and the embarked soldiers on
s07 heard what one described as "a scraping and dragging noise" under t.
ship. In hindsight it is evident that this was a German torpedo passing jusi
under the shallow-draft LST: Lieutenant J. S. Swarts, skipper of the 507,
sounded general quarters, though most of the sailors who dutifully headed
for their combat stations assumed, quite naturally, that this was simply part
