TUL
284
= NEPTUNE
Roosevelt had originally planned to fly to London to be alongside
Churchill during the invasion, but to his and Churchill's great disappoint-
ment, his declining health made that impossible. ("How I wish you were
here," the prime minister cabled the president.) Instead, Roosevelt wentto
Charlottesville, Virginia, to be with his daughter Anna and her husband.
He went to bed on June S aware that the invasion was likely to be under
way before he awoke. George Marshall called from Washington at 3:00
a.m. (It was 8:00 a.m. in Normandy, and Vyn's LCI(L)-91 was burning on
Omaha Beach.) Marshall told the president that the landings had taken
place on schedule. Roosevelt authorized a public announcement a half
hour later, and those who heard it also heard Eisenhower's recorded mes-
sage to the invading force from the night before: "Soldiers, sailors and air-
men of the Allied Expeditionary Force! You are about to embark upon the
great crusade ..." As the sun rose and the news spread, church bells began
to ring, and factories sounded their whistles. Even as the celebrations
began, however, the outcome of the fighting on Omaha Beach remained in
doubt.29
OFF THE AMERICAN BEACHES, the American generals who commanded
the men who were pinned down on Omaha Beach were nearly wild with
frustration. Omar Bradley, commander of the American First Army, stared
shoreward at the smoke-enshrouded coastline from Kirk's flagship, the
heavy cruiser Augusta. Off Utah Beach, Joe Collins, the VII Corps com-
mander, and Raymond O. "Tubby" Barton, the 4th Division commander,
watched from Moon's flagship, the transport Bayfield, while off Omaha
Beach, Leonard I. Gerow, who commanded V Corps, and Clarence R.
Huebner, who commanded the Ist Division, were on board USS Ancon, the
converted ocean liner that Jimmy Hall used as his command ship. All these
generals agonized about the circumstances ashore, and they chafed at their
enforced absence from the battlefield. The command protocol for the
American invasion beaches was that Kirk and the Navy retained full opera-
tional authority and control until the generals landed on the beach to
assume command. That made the generals little more than high-ranking
but largely impotent passengers, at least until they got their boots onto
D-Day: The Beaches =
285
FRench soil. It was maddening. They had spent most of their adult lives
trining for a moment such as this, and they had spent months honing their
commands to a hard edge. Yet even as their men were dying, here they were
a dozen miles offshore, unable to do much of anything to affect the course
dfevents.30
The Augusta was a grand old lady of a warship. Laid down as a so-called
Treaty cruiser in 1930, she had been designed to squeeze in just under the
192 Naval Arms Limitation Treaty's definition of a battleship. She served
from 1933 to 1940 as the flagship of the U.S. Asiatic Fleet, and then, trans-
fered to the Atlantic in 1941, she had carried Franklin Roosevelt to New-
foundland to meet Churchill in the first of the Anglo-American strategy
conferences. Now she was the flagship of the Western Task Force and the
hub of much of the frenetic activity off the American beaches on D-Day.
Kirk and Bradley got on well. They had served together during the land-
ungs in Sicily, and they trusted and genuinely liked each other —from the
beginning they had called each other "Alan" and "Brad." Now, at 8:00 a.m.
on June 6, 1944, they were both deeply concerned. The forces on Utah
Beach seemed to be doing all right, even if they had landed too far to
the south. Though resistance there continued, "jeeps and tanks with their
human cargoes seemed to be spilling out on [to] the sands without trou-
ble," as one witness recalled. It was Omaha that was the problem. Kirk con-
fessed to being "worried, very much worried, about Omaha, and Bradley
wrote later of his "grave personal anxiety and frustration." The few reports
that arrived on board Augusta from the beach suggested nothing less than a
mounting disaster. Those who had landed were pinned down on the beach
and not moving, and the clogged shoreline meant that the ensuing waves of
landing craft had no place to go. Vessels offshore were jockeying about in
obvious and increasing disorder. "I gained the impression," Bradley wrote,
*that our forces had suffered an irreversible catastrophe, that there was little
hope we could force the beach.31
Both Kirk and Bradley knew the old military adage "Never reinforce
failure," and Bradley in particular wondered if instead of sending more sol-
diers to be slaughtered on Omaha, he and Kirk should direct ensuing waves
to one of the other beaches where there was measurable progress. Of course,
