YUL
364
= Acknowledgments
their ship should not be sold for scrap. They raised the money to buy it, flew to Athens,
and sailed it back across the Atlantic, an adventure worthy of a major motion picture.
The ship is moored today in the Ohio River at Evansville, where it was built. I am also
grateful to Dr. Meredith Moon, daughter of Rear Admiral Don P. Moon, and to her
cousin, also named Don Moon, both of whom were generous with their time and their
materials, and helped me understand the circumstances and character of their admiral
ancestor. I offer thanks as well to Navy Captain William Garrett (Ret.), who took a par-
ticular interest in this project from the start, and Rev. John R. Kenny, who served off the
Normandy beaches in 1944.
Finally, I am deeply indebted to those who helped me look at the events in different
ways or who offered both substantive and editorial help. The idea for this book came
from my editor at Oxford University Press, Tim Bent, who provided just the right
amount of direction, encouragement, and license to allow me to engage fully with the
topic. It has been wonderful to work again with the team of professionals at Oxford, in-
cluding Keely Latcham, Joellyn Ausanka, and Sue Warga. I am thankful to Evan Davies,
my former colleague at Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth, England, with
whom I first toured the Normandy beaches. I am particularly indebted to two friends
who read the entire manuscript, made me rethink some aspects of the story, corrected
more than a few errors, and offered enthusiastic encouragement. These two worthies are
Richard B. Frank, whose knowledge of the Second World War is unmatched, and Paul
Stillwell, whom I have known for more than thirty years and to whom every historian of
naval history owes an enormous debt for his leadership of the Oral History Program at
the U.S. Naval Institute, as well as for his many books and articles. If some gaffes have
nonetheless survived the careful scrutiny of these two scholars, it is not because they did
not make every effort to save me from myself. I am grateful, too, to Jeffrey Ward, who
rendered the maps and charts in this book with exceptional care and accuracy, and toler-
ated my repeated pleas for just one more addition or correction.
Finally, as always, my greatest debt is to my wife, Marylou, who remains my most
exacting and sympathetic editor as well as my indispensable partner in all things. This
book is dedicated to Jeff Symonds and Susan Witt, both of them exceptional teachers
and exceptional parents to our two grandchildren, William and Beatrice, and to my big
sister Carol who claims to have read all my books, including "The Professor General,
which I wrote at age eight.
= ABBREVIATIONS USED IN NOTES
ANCXF
BAOR
Allied Naval Commander, Expeditionary Force (Ramsay)
World War Il Battle Action and Operational Reports (Mss 416),
Nimitz Library, Special Collections, U.S. Naval Academy
Brooke Diary
Alanbrooke, Field Marshall Lord [General Alan Brooke].
War Diaries, 1939-1945. Alex Danchev and Daniel Todman,
editors. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 2001.
CCS
Combined Chiefs of Staff
ComUSNavEu or Commander, U.S. Naval Forces, Europe (Stark)
COMNAVEU
COS
DDE
FDR
FDRL
FRUS
GCM
JCS
NA
NHHC
NMPW
NWWIIM-EC
PGCM
PDDE
Ramsay Diary
Chiefs of Staff (British)
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York
U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, various dates by
volume and series.
George C. Marshall
Joint Chiefs of Staff (American)
National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II),
College Park, Maryland
Naval History and Heritage Command, Washington Navy Yard,
Washington, DC
The National Museum of the Pacific War, Fredericksburg, Texas
The National World War II Museum, New Orleans, Louisiana
(Eisenhower Center)
The Papers of George Catlett Marshall. Larry I. Bland, editor.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.
The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower. Alfred D. Chandler, editor.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1970.
The Year of D-Day: The 1944 Diary of Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay.
Robert W. Love Jr. and John Major, editors. Hull, England:
University of Hull Press, 1994.
