184
= NEPTUNE
simply not possible to conduct Neptune-Overlord without drawing upon
"the landing craft hitherto hypothecated for a possible ANVIL." To drive the
point home in a particularly vivid way, he told Marshall that without the
vessels from the Mediterranean, there would be enough sealift at Nor-
mandy for only "the first three tides." After that, "we will have no repeat no
LSTs reaching the beaches after the morning of D plus 1 until the morning
of D plus 4." Though smaller landing craft would be available, the Allied
landing force would be effectively stranded on the Normandy beaches for
three days without any LSTs available for either major reinforcement or, if
necessary, evacuation.
The addition of the twenty-six LSTs and forty
LCIL)s from the Mediterranean would give Eisenhower and Ramsay
"some margin of safety as well as flexibility in the assault. 1
In the end, the solution for Anvil was the same as for Overlord: it was
postponed. Overlord had already been delayed for a month in order to
allow time to build more landing craft. Now Anvil was delayed until mid-
summer so that all or most of the Mediterranean sealift capability could be
used for Overlord, then redeployed back to the Mediterranean afterward
for a future Anvil. Of course that meant there would be no simultaneous
double pincer, but there seemed to be no other solution.
Brooke was relieved ("At last!" he wrote in his diary), though he was
hardly forgiving. He remained angry at the Americans, and particularly at
Marshall, for trying to manipulate the crisis. From his point of view, the
American offer of twenty-six new LS Ts for the Mediterranean had been an
effort "to blackmail us into agreeing with them." After Anvil was postponed,
the Americans withdrew the offer and sent the LSTs, as originally planned,
to the Pacific. "History will never forgive them" Brooke wrote, "for bar-
gaining equipment against strategy? Brooke's bitterness may have been
exacerbated by his continuing row with Churchill, for his assessment of
Marshall was hugely unfair. Marshall's support for Anvil had been genuine,
and it was with real regret that he abandoned it, accepting at last the fact
that sometimes logistics do trump strategy. Ramsay's reaction to the news
that Anvil was put off was restrained but heartfelt: "Thank Goodness."22
The issue was settled at last, but it was now April 19, 1944, three
months and two days after Eisenhower had arrived in London to assume
SHAEF and ANCXF = 185
the responsibilities of Supreme Commander. Even with the four weeks he
had gained by the postponement of the Normandy landings, D-Day was
only six weeks away.
OF COURSE THE ALLIES had not been completely idle during those three
months. More than four hundred thousand additional American GIs had
disembarked at English ports since January-two hundred thousand of
them in April alone. More ships, too, had arrived, some of them LSTs with
ICTs riding piggyback on their hulls, and all of them stuffed with supplies
ofevery kind, from beans to bullets. With them came more than twenty-
to thousand U.S. Navy officers and men, most of whom were billeted
ashore, eight thousand of them at Plymouth, three thousand at Falmouth,
and two thousand at Dartmouth. Training, and especially joint training,
was accelerated. While Eisenhower worried over grand strategy and the
viability of Anvil, his trio of commanders —Montgomery, Leigh-Mallory,
and Ramsay - supervised programs designed to prepare their forces for the
great invasion, though their dissimilar styles made for dramatically differ-
ent approaches.
As the commander of an Army group, Montgomery supervised two
amies: the American First Army under command of the homely but well-
lied General Omar Bradley, and the British Second Army (which included
the Canadian Third Division) under the tall and gaunt General Miles
Dempsey. The various elements of their commands were spread out in
more than a hundred camps all over England, and Montgomery spent most
of his time traveling about the country visiting them, sometimes two or
three a day. He did so using a special train (which he called the "Rapier")
on which the abstemious Montgomery allowed no drinking or smoking.*
At each stop, the local commander held a parade so that the troops could
pass in review. Montgomery was convinced it was essential for him to see
the troots. and even more important for them to sae him. He once tol
* Mongomer's intolerance of smoking led to some awkward moments when he and
Eisenhower worked together. At one early meeting, Ike lit up a Camel, and Monty
looked up and asked accusingly: "Who's smoking!" Eisenhower stubbed out the ciga-
rett, and for the sake of Allied harmony he never did it again, but he quietly resented it.
