88
= NEPTUNE
in this first effort would badly damage Allied morale and confidence and
send the planners back to the drawing board. Russia would feel abandoned,
and the peoples of the occupied nations would lose whatever hope they
had. It would delay indefinitely any invasion of Europe. Finally, the landings
would test, really for the first time, the ability of the Allies to conduct a
large-scale multinational amphibious operation against a defended shore.
As Hewitt put it, "The TORCH Operation served as a severe material test."
Much, then, was riding on what happened in the early morning hours of
November 8, 1942.24
THE ALLIED LANDINGS OCCURRED on a front that was seven hundred
miles wide-from the Moroccan city of Safi, a hundred miles south of
Casablanca, to Algiers, on Africas northern coast. At each site, the Allies
landed on several different beaches with code names such as Red One
and Blue Two. Because of the importance of securing undamaged port fa-
cilities before they could be sabotaged, the Allies also tried the unusual
gambit of sending specially selected warships filled with British and Ameri-
can commandos charging directly into the harbors of several of the port cities.
At Oran, that assignment went to two British corvettes, Hartland and
Walney, both of them former U.S. Coast Guard cutters. The planners hoped
to achieve surprise, but when the ships entered the harbor, crewmen on
board could hear sirens wailing ashore. Then the shore lights went out, the
searchlights came on, and the batteries opened fire. The two corvettes
pressed on and even managed to land a small shore party in some canoes.
Soon enough, however, both ships were burning wrecks. Of the 393 com-
mandos onboard, 189 were killed outright and another 157 wounded-a
casualty rate of 88 percent.25
The results were not quite as horrific at Algiers, though only one of the
two destroyers assigned to the mission managed to make it into the harbor.
The initial idea here had been to wait until three hours after the landings to
send in the two destroyers, in the hope that by then some kind of accom-
modation might have been worked out with the French. But the landings
were late, and the British destroyers Broke and Malcolm encountered the
same kind of heavy battery fire as the corvettes had at Oran. The Malcolm
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 89
was hit several times and set afire, so it had to withdraw. The Broke got
through on her third try, and even landed her embarked American com-
mandos under Lieutenant Colonel Edwin T. Swenson. Swenson led his
men inland, secured the facilities, and set up a defensive perimeter, while
the Broke remained alongside the pier to provide support. Soon, however,
the Broke came under such heavy and accurate fire from the shore batteries
that her captain sounded the recall. By then, the shore party was also under
heavyfire, and Swenson decided his men could not make it back to the ship.
He opted to stay. The crippled Broke was towed out to sea and later sank.
Swenson and his command held off a force of French colonial infantry from
Senegal backed by Renault tanks for several hours before surrendering
at 12:30.26
Bitish and American forces coming ashore elsewhere met with widely
divergent reactions. At Algiers, Allied commandos encountered furious
resistance as they sought to secure French coastal guns, but at a landing
beach twelve miles to the west, the Americans were greeted with cries of
"Vieles américains!" In the suburbs of Algiers, there was house-to-house
fighting before French and American officers negotiated a cease-fire. A
final armistice was delayed by French concern that if they openly wel-
comed the Americans and the incursion proved to be only a raid, the Ger-
mans would return afterward and exact fearful revenge. Once it was clear
that the lis had come to stay, it became possible to work out a series of
case ires that led eventually to an armistice that included the release of
Senson and his men. 7
It was different in Morocco, where American readiness to conduct an
amphibious landing faced a much sterner test. This was especially true at
Feda (now Mohammedia), five miles north of Casablanca, the site of the
aigest American assault. The British had wanted to bypass Morocco alto-
get it Marshall and King, fearful of being cut off at Gibraltar, saw the
control of Morocco as essential and convinced Roosevelt to insist upon
khalings there. Now the Americans would pay the price for that insistence.
About from the start, the landings in Morocco, and especially at Fedala,
kraled ust how much work the Allies still needed to do before they could
eren consider a cross-Channel invasion.
