240 = NEPTUNE
ship. At one point two LCT flotillas, one from Force U and one from Force
O, became intermingled. Seeking to restore order, the commander of one
flotilla found himself reduced to yelling and waving, recalling later that "we
could not do anything but curse and swear at one another until the whole
thing got sorted out."34
Though they had reached safe harbor, the crews and the embarked sol-
ders remained confined to their ships, and by now the men were no longer
"freshly bathed, shaved, and wearing warm underclothing," as the opera-
tional order had specified. As one sailor put it, "we were exhausted, salt-
water soaked, and hungry long before we got back to England and tied up
at Weymouth." Besides the physical exhaustion and the anticlimax of
the recall, there was now another period of apprehensive waiting. The
thoughts of many turned to home, family, and their own mortality. Some
Prayed. Richard G. "Jack" Laine recalled making a private vow that if
he lived through the invasion, he would strive to be a better Christian. He
assumed others were making similar pledges, for he could see men in var-
ious corners with their beads bent and their lips moving silently. Others
played cards, read, passed along rumors, and waited in lines to use the
limited number of heads on board. Nearly all wondered "what the dawn
would bring"3s
Once it was full dark, their reveries were broken by a routine Luftwaffe
raid. The planes dropped mainly mines, and with the harbors as crowded as
they were, they could hardly miss. Though no ships were sunk, several were
damaged. When a mine exploded near LCT-271, it threw everyone out of
their bunks and severed the anchor cable. Unable to operate without an an-
chor, the 271 made a quick trip to the repair yard for a new one so that it
would not miss the sortie. 36
THAT NIGHT AT 9:00, Eisenhower met yet again with his command team.
His decision to postpone the landing from June 5 to June 6 had been diff-
cult, but it was not evident that the operation could be launched even on
June 6. Unless the weather moderated, it might have to be postponed again,
perhaps even until the next moon and tide cycle, which was not until June
19-21. If that happened, the ships would all have to return to their original
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 241
pots, the men disembark, and the loading process be restarted.* Aware of
that, the men who gathered at Southwick House that night were solemn. As
Stag had foretold, a storm was raging outside, the sound of it clearly evi-
dent in the room as rain beat against the windows and wind whistled
around the corners. This time, however, Stagg had a glimmer of good news.
Itapeared likely, he reported, that the storm would moderate on June 6.
That provoked cheers from the assembled officers, though Tedder, Ike's
deputy, leaned in to ask for specifics. He wanted to know exactly what the
weather would be like over the landing beaches on June 6. Stagg was quiet
fora long breathless moment before he replied, "To answer that question
would make me a guesser, not a meteorologist." The weather was likely to
improve, he said, but there remained a huge element of uncertainty—and
therefore of risk. 37
Once again, Eisenhower surveyed opinion in the room. Ramsay was
willing to go, though he made it clear that because of the lead time neces-
sary to get his armada back to sea, he had to know Eisenhower's decision
soon, within the next half hour. Both Tedder and Leigh-Mallory were cau-
tious, but Monty, as always, was game. "I would say—Go!" he declared
pugnaciously. Ike agreed. "I don't see how we could do anything else," he
said. As he had the night before, however, Eisenhower declared that they
would meet again at four-fifteen in the morning to hear Stagg's latest report,
at which time he would make the final and irrevocable decision one way or
another. The decision could be recalled if Stagg came in with bad news, but
for now, Ramsay should tell his force commanders that it was a go. When
Ramsay called them, Vian and Kirk "showed great concern," for the storm
was then at its peak. Nevertheless, they both passed the orders to their task
group commanders, and the five invasion fleets — two of them now inter-
mingled in Weymouth and Portland - again prepared to sortie. Some left
immediately.?8
* With hindsight, it is evident that a postponement until June 19 would have been cata-
strophic. Though Eisenhower could not have known it, June 19 was the date a massive
summer storm came churning up the English Channel. (See Chapter 14.) That would
have made any invasion during the June 19-21 window impossible and might have
scuttled the invasion entirely.
