YUL
356 = NEPTUNE
itself, he had worked fifteen-hour days, seven days a week. Reluctant to dele-
gate even the smallest detail to his subordinates, he sought to manage every-
thing personally. Commander Frank Lowe, the medical officer on the Bayfield,
had told him repeatedly that he needed to get more rest and exercise, warning
him that, "no individual can work those long hours over an indefinite period
and stand up under the work." Lowe insisted that Moon meet with the Eighth
Fleet medical officer, Captain Frederick Greaves.®
To Greaves, Moon acknowledged that he was working hard, but, he
insisted, "it was necessary for him to work too many hours a day." Greaves
later testified that during their interview, Moon was clear and focused and
betrayed no evidence of mental confusion or uncertainty. Nevertheless,
every man has a breaking point, and by August 5, 1944, Rear Admiral Don
Pardee Moon had reached his.
At 7:00 a.m., Moon sat down at the desk in his cabin on the Bayfield.
"The mind is gone" he wrote in a clear steady hand. "With the mind stalled
& crazy... things once easy are not in sight. The fact that he was still in his
underwear and that he wrote in uncharacteristically jumbled syntax evi-
denced that he was struggling with a severe mental crisis he could not con-
trol. "Command is wrong under such a condition.... Overwork thru the
years-—T have given the Navy everything I had - too much-it has broken
me. "My country" he wrote, "what am I doing to you. My wife & dear chil-
dren...I am sick, so sick." He signed with his initials, then, meticulous as
always, he wrapped his .45 caliber sidearm in a towel to minimize the mess,
put the gun to his head, and pulled the trigger."
The war went on without him. Ten days later, Operation Dragoon took
place as scheduled when three divisions of Lucian Truscott's VI Corps went
ashore on the French Riviera against what turned out to be light opposition.
Ten days after that, on August 25, the Allies entered Paris, led by the French
2nd Armored Division, which was accorded pride of place in the liberation
of the city. A week later, elements of the American Third Army crossed the
Meuse, and on September 3, the British Second Army liberated Brussels.
For a moment. it seemed the war might end soon-perhaps before
winter. But the moment passed. There would be many more battles before
the end, including the sanguinary Battle of the Bulge in December, when
Epilogue =
357
Hiersought to turn the war around with a desperate ground offensive into
the Ardennes Forest. When the Germans began that counteroffensive,
Ramsay decided to fly from his headquarters northwest of Paris to Mont-
gomer' headquarters in Brussels to talk face-to-face about the defense of
Antwerp. In soggy weather, his small two-engine plane took off success-
fly then suddenly plummeted to the ground and exploded. Along with
his chief of staff and his flag lieutenant, Ramsay died instantly.
The surprise assault in the Ardennes allowed the Germans to seize a
broad salient in the front line- the famous "bulge" —but their offensive
salled after only a week, and the British and Americans counterattacked.
By Christmas the German gambit had failed, and it was clear to all, or at
least to everyone except Hitler, that the end of the war was only a matter of
time. By spring, the Anglo-Americans were just 2S0 miles west of Berlin,
and the Russians were in the outskirts of the city. Though many more men
would die while Hitler clung to power for a few more days, the Allied tri-
umph in Europe was now inevitable. The war in the Pacific continued until
August, terminated at last by the deus ex machina of the atomic bombs.
Franklin Roosevelt did not live to see it. In spite of the good news from
the various fighting fronts, the president was worn down from his exer-
tions. On January 20, 1945, he took the oath of office for a fourth term, and
in February he left for yet another conference, this one at Yalta in the Rus-
sian Crimea. There he sought to play the role of mediator between Churchill
and Stalin, a delicate and trying balancing act that left him even more
exhausted. His skin, unnaturally gray, sagged on his once robust frame, and
though he still occasionally flashed his famous smile for the cameras, it wa
too often the rictus of a game but obviously very ill man.
At the end of March, Roosevelt traveled south to Warm Springs, Georgia,
where he often went for the sake of his crippled legs to swim in what he was
convinced were the healing waters of the local spring. He had agreed to have
his portrait painted while he was there, and he was posing for it early on the
afternoon of April 12, when he told the artist, "I have a terrific pain in the back
of my head. Then he slumped in his chair. He never regained consciousness,
and within hours he was pronounced dead of a cerebral hemorrhage. Having
