90
= NEPTUNE
The American transports dropped anchor off Fedala in the early morn-
ing hours of November 8. Within minutes they began hoisting out the Hig-
gins boats, and soon the soldiers were climbing down into them on nets
made of chains. It was dark, the ships were blacked out, and the sea was
rough. The chains were slippery, and men reached out gingerly in the dark
for the footholds. More than a few ended up in the water, and some were
injured when the Higgins boats bobbing alongside collided with the hull of
the transports. Even after the landing craft successfully cast off from their
mother ships, many had to go around from ship to ship to find the particu-
lar units they had been designated to transport. As a result, the first wave
was an hour and fifteen minutes late in heading for the beaches?8
Once the landing craft were finally on their way, the coxswains often
took them to the wrong beaches, in part because it was still full dark, and in
part because they did not have adequate maps. The only coastal reconnais-
sance the Allies had conducted was to peer at the target beaches through
submarine periscopes, and the vague maps that resulted failed to give the
coxswains a clear understanding of the terrain features. The results would
have been comic had they not been so disastrous. For example, two landing
boats from the transport William P. Biddle got so disoriented they not only
missed their assigned beach but motored into Casablanca harbor, five miles
away, and stopped a passing French patrol boat to ask directions. The
French opened fire, sinking both of the landing craft and taking the survi-
vors prisoner.?9
On the beaches themselves, the landings were unopposed, but the surf
was heavier than anticipated, and the big waves lifted up the plywood Hig-
gins boats and slammed them down on the sand with a mighty thump,
often doing damage to the hull as well as to the embarked soldiers. The
boats all crowded together along the beach, and the big waves threw them
into one another. Several broached, their sterns cast up onto the sand so
that they lay parallel to the beach instead of perpendicular to it. Unable to
back off, the inexperienced crews simply abandoned them. Afterward,
Hewitt reported that Higgins boats were "definitely unsuited for landing
through a surf higher than seven feet." The soldiers, too, had trouble with
the high surf. When they scrambled out of the boats, many were knocked
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 91
off their feet by the waves. Overloaded as they were with heavy gear, some
were unable to regain their footing and drowned in water that was only
three or four feet deep. 30
There were other problems. The electric ramp-operating mechanisms on
some of the boats failed, and the ramps had to be cranked down manually.
This took more time and played havoc with the schedule. Worse, once the
ramps were deployed, the backwash from the receding waves ran into the
well of the boats and flooded some of them, making it difficult or impos-
sible to get off the beach again. As a result, many of the scarce Higgins boats
were so wrecked after the first landing they became inoperable. On one
beach, only seven of twenty-five Higgins boats were able to extricate them-
selves and return to the transports for a second load, and of those seven,
five more were wrecked during the next trip. On another beach, twenty-one
of thirty-two boats were smashed up in the initial assault. The historian
Samuel Eliot Morison estimates that "altogether between 137 and 160 out
of 347 landing boats in the Center Attack Group, 40 to 46 percent of the
total, were expended" on the beaches that morning. The steel LCMs carry-
ing the Sherman tanks fared better in the heavy surf, but they encountered
a different problem: many of the tanks rolled off the LCMs and immedi-
ately sank up to the middle of their treads in the soft sand and couldn't get
off the beach. 31
All in all, the American ship-to-shore movement at Fedala was anything
but a model of efficiency. It was evident to all that had this landing been
directed at a prepared enemy determined to resist, it would have been a dis-
ate. Even as it was, it came near enough to failure. Hewitt noted that the
Landings suffered from insufficient training, improper debarkation priori-
ties, and inadequate means." Major General Lucian Truscott went further,
declaring, "The combination of inexperienced landing craft crews, poor
ranigation, and desperate hurry resulting from the lateness of the hour,
Gally turned the debarkation into a hit-or-miss affair that would have
celle dister against a well armed enemy intent upon resistance. 32
The Americans did eventually get most of their men and equipment
ashore. By dusk of the first day, the surviving Higgins boats had delivered a
total of 7,750 men to the beaches. More followed the next day, and more
