YUL
270
= NEPTUNE
now they expended most of what was left. Between 8:50 and 10:15 that
morning, USS Emmons (DD-457) fired 767 rounds, McCook 975, and Car-
mick 1,127. Kirk became sufficiently nervous about this that he issued an
order that "destroyers must husband [their] ammunition, reminding them
that "our resources are limited." When the gunners on the Herndon (DD.
638) ran out of high-explosive ammunition, they began firing star shells
that were primarily used for illumination. On USS Butler (DD-636), Petty
Officer Felix Podolak remembered that the firing was so hot "we had to
hook up one-and-a-half-inch fire hoses to hydrants to spray water on our
gun mount," and even then, "the barrels were running red hot. 3
The German gunners fired back, mostly with their mobile 88 min field
guns, but the swift destroyers were difficult targets, even in the shallow and
crowded waters off Omaha Beach. The Germans had already claimed one
destroyer that morning when USS Corry (DD-463) hit a mine and vit-
ally broke in half, going down in less than thirty minutes. The Germans
were less successful in targeting the destroyers with gunfire. The skippers
used their engines "in spurts" ordering them alternately "ahead and astern,
to throw off the enemy gunners." There were some close calls. A German
battery behind Fox Red Beach straddled the Emmons, and USS Baldwin
(DD-624) was hit twice in rapid succession, the first shell striking her
whaleboat on the starboard side and the second blowing an eight-by-
twelve-inch hole in her main deck. But the Emmons escaped injury, and
Baldwin responded with accurate counterbattery fire, silencing its tor-
mentor after several salvos. No other destroyer was hit during this crucial
and decisive ninety-minute period. 14
Shortly before noon, the accuracy of the destroyer gunfire improved
when the ships finally established contact with some of the fire control par-
ties ashore. At 11:24, Army spotters directed the fire of the Frankford into a
concentration of German troops behind the beach and therefore beyond
the sightline of the destroyers. After two salvos, the spotters called a cease-
fire because the soldiers had scattered. Occasionally it worked exactly as it
was supposed to, as it did, for example, two days later, on June 8, when the
Ellyson got target coordinates from a shore fire control party for a German
artillery position. After one salvo, the spotters reported, "Up four hundred
D- Day: The Crisis = 299
yards after the next, "Up fifty yards"; and after the third, "Mission success-
' Of course, shore spotting had limits, too. An exchange recorded later
dat same day suggested why. Receiving a request for fire support, the gun-
ner oficer on the USS Laffey (DD-724) asked for coordinates. The answer
come back: "We're lying on our stomachs in a ditch under enemy fire. Can-
softnish spots. The Laffey opened fire nonetheless, and after several sal-
ros, the shore spotter radioed back: "Whoever was shooting at us has
stopped, so you must have done alright." Is
Given the dearth of working radios ashore and the complications of inter-
serice communication, it is not surprising that there were errors. Late tha
¿temon, several of the American destroyers received reports that the G
mans were using the church steeples in both Colleville-sur-Mer and Viervi
su: Meras observation posts. USS Emmons took on the task of taking down t
steple in Colleville, and after a few salvoes, it did, smashing it, as one sail,
ralled, just like you'd hit it with a big ax." A few miles to the west, off Viervill
USS Harding took the church there under fire. From offshore the results looke
pectacular. The Harding's first salvo clipped off the cross at the peak, the secon
hit he steple about ten feet from the top, and the third hit ten feet below that,
From seaward it looked like the Harding was slicing off the steeple ten feet at a
time, and Admiral Bryant, watching from the bridge of the Texas, thought it was
i beautiful sight. The reality on the ground was much different, Not only did
the shelling cause a lot of collateral damage, but, far worse, American troops had
already captured the town, and the Harding's shells killed and wounded a
number of Americans, Army Captain Joseph Dawson of the l6th Infantry
thought it was "totally disgraceful"6
Despite such errors, the cumulative effect of the close-in naval gunfire support
was decisive. For the first time since they had landed, the men lying facedow
behind the low rise of sand and shingle at the high tide mark were able to lifth
heads and look around them for a way off the beach. As early as 10:36, look
on the Frankford noted that some Allied troops were beginning to advance, mol
ing forward from that low hillock of sand toward the base of the cliffs. And an
hour later, at 11:37, some of the German defenders began coming out of their
positions with their hands up. While much of this was the result of incredible
bravery and determination by the soldiers themselves, the destroyers played a
