YUL
310 = NEPTUNE
that of a Higgins boat. Most of the rhinos and their Seabee crews had come
across the Channel under tow, and when they arrived off the invasion
beaches, they first had to cast loose and motor around to the bow of the
LST to load up. Some found that difficult to do—the violent sea state had
so strained the towing shackles that many of them had bent. On one rhino
ferry, the Seabees labored for more than an hour, "cursing, sweating, and
scrambling," trying to unshackle the disfigured couplings. All that time, the
skipper of the LST stood at the stern of his ship, megaphone in hand, yell-
ing at them to get on with it.
After the rhinos liberated themselves, they then had to maneuver around
to the bow of the LSTs, and that, too, proved difficult. The rhino barges
were particularly unwieldy, and the heavy sea state made the approach haz-
ardous as well as difficult. Some of the steel cables used to connect the two
vessels snapped "like kite cord," as one sailor put it. In at least one case, a
Seabee jumped into the chill water to retrieve the loose end of a parted
chain. Once the rhino was finally in place, the LST lowered its ramp, and
the tanks and fully loaded trucks drove out of the ship's tank deck onto the
rhino's fat arnaced curface As they did so, the rhino settled deeper and
deeper in the water until sometimes there was only a few inches of free-
board. Water "began to wash over the stern," as one Seabee recalled, and
soon everyone on the rhino was "wet from the knees down.""
Once divorced from the LSTs, the rhinos then made their painstaking
way the ten or eleven miles to the beach. Occasionally a tug might be
assigned to assist them, but the cumbersome rhinos were so ungainly that
the tugs were overmatched. As one Seabee put it, "It was like the tail trying
to wag the dog." After the rhinos got to within a mile or two of the beach,
the beach masters often ordered them to wait their turn before going
ashore. When they finally got the go-ahead signal, they had to contend with
the eastward-flowing current, which kept trying to push them to the left. As
one Seabee put it, "We kept sliding down the beach with the current." Allin
all. it was a difelt and sometimes precarious process that contriluted to
the disappointing totals of tonnage delivered ashore.®
One of the biggest Allied logistical concerns during those first several
days was ammunition. As the historian Rusell Weisley has noted, a salient
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 311
cateristic of the "American way of war" is the application of over-
whelming firepower. The British viewed this with a mixture of amuse-
rent and disapproval. To them, the American profligacy with ordnance
cal underscored their indifferent military skills. Here was one more as-
pet of the cultural differences between the Anglo-American partners.
Haring been forced all their lives to make do with limited resources, the
Bitish shook their collective heads at the American tendency to "use a
sighammer to crack nuts," as one British officer put it. To the Americans,
be apication of overwhelming firepower was simply the most effective
and fint way to defeat the enemy while minimizing their own casual-
lis: That view, however, also meant that the American front-line troops
lad to be supplied with prodigious quantities of bullets and artillery
tell. To do this, the initial plan was for ammunition ships to provide
«oat stowage offshore while the small amphibious DUKWs ferried am-
munition to the beach. They seemed especially appropriate for such a
mision because after motoring ashore with their supply of ordnance,
they could then simply keep going and drive inland to wherever the am-
munition was needed.'
From the beginning, however, Bradley had worried that a U-boat tor-
pedo or Luftwaffe bomb might blow an ammunition ship to kingdom come
and thereby interrupt the delivery of ordnance to his men. A few weeks
before the invasion, therefore, he had approached Kirk with the idea of
acquiring several car ferries and fling them up with what were called "units
of fire prepackaged containers of bullets, machine gun belts, bazooka
rockets, and artillery shells. The car ferries could be towed across the Chan-
nel, Bradley explained, and deposited onto the beach at high tide, where
they would serve as permanent ammunition depots. They would still be
subject to a lucky shot by long-range German artillery, but at least they
could not be sunk. As a result of that conversation, in the days after the ini-
tial landings several LCIs towed eight ammunition barges across the Chan-
nel and landed them on the invasion beaches just past midnight on June 8.
In at least one case a beach master strenuously objected to the placement of
the barges, but once they were well and firmly aground it was too late to
reposition them. 10
