294 = NEPTUNE
Despite this evident sangfroid, the delay did affect the Rangers' mission.
Instead of landing at 6:30 and on both sides of the promontory as planned,
they landed at 7:10 and only on the eastern side. On the other hand, that
was precisely where several 14-inch shells from the USS Texas had col-
lapsed a section of the cliff onto the narrow beach, creating a spoil of rocks
forty feet high. The Rangers clambered up the pile of fallen rock, triggered
their rocket-fired grappling hooks, and began to ascend the cliff face. The
Germans sprayed them with machine gun fire and dropped grenades over
the cliff, but the men kept climbing. The first of them to reach the top
dropped ropes for the others, then turned to take on the German defend-
ers. Of the 225 men who began the climb, 108 made it to the top. With so
few of them, and arriving piecemeal as they did, it was touch and go!
A crucial factor in their eventual success was gunfire support from the
destroyers. Hard pressed by German light artillery, the Rangers used a
blinker light to send target coordinates to the destroyers offshore. Satterlee
responded first, joined by Thompson at 8:30 and by Ellyson (DDD-454) an
hour later. Unable to see the target, the destroyers had to rely on indirect
fire, stopping after each salvo to receive a report from the Rangers about the
fall of shot. At 9:52 the Rangers called for the destroyers to cease fire, andat
11:30 lookouts in the destroyers saw an American flag flying over the posi-
tion. Having scaled the cliffs, driven off the defenders, and seized the high
ground, however, the Rangers soon discovered that the reported big guns
on Pointe du Hoc had been removed, replaced by wooden dummies. They
moved inland and set up a defensive perimeter, which they held for the rest
of the day and into the night.
The other destroyers of Sander's squadron, operating off maha Beach
itself, had great initial difficulty identifying appropriate targets. The poor
visibility along the beachfront and the excellent German camouflage made
it all but impossible to figure out where the German guns were. Some of
those guns retracted into underground bombproofs; others were so well
hidden that, as one sailor put it, "you couldn't see it if you was ten feet from
them. In theory, the ships were supposed to coordinate with shore-based
fire control parties that would identify the targets and report the fall of the
shot, as the Rangers did on Pointe du Hoc. But there was such chaos on the
D- Day: The Crisis
= 295
bach that morning, and such a dearth of working radios, that not until the
femon did the destroyers establish regular radio communication with
spotter ashore. In the meantime, the destroyer skippers were compelled to
sek targets of opportunity." There was one immediate benefit of their ar-
iral however: many of the German gunners, fearful of disclosing their lo-
cation, briefly held their fire, while others shifted their fire to target the
distroyers. In both cases that created a blessed, if temporary, respite for the
soldiers on the beach?
Near the center of Omaha Beach, just off the beachfront village of Les
Moulins, Commander Robert Beer, the tall, lanky captain of the Carmick,
scanned the bluffs looking for telltale "puffs of smoke or flashes from enemy
gun emplacements." Because the Germans were using smokeless powder,
he saw none, and Beer became impatient, finding the process "slow and un-
relable?. As he studied the beach through his binoculars, however, he noted
a few Allied tanks trying vainly to fight their way up the draw, or gully, in the
diffs near Vierville-sur-Mer. It was evident to him that they were being held
uby heavy gunfire from above, though he could not identify the source of
that fre. Several of the Allied tanks were shooting at a particular spot on the
buf, and, carefully noting the fall of their shot, Beer directed his ship's
guns to target those same positions. The Carmick fired a series of rapid-fire
sars from her S-inch guns into the suspicious area. After a few minutes,
Beer noted that the tank gunners had shifted their fire to another site, and
Beer directed his gunnery officer to follow suit. "It became evident," Beer
reported afterward, " that the Army was using tank fire in [the] hope that
fire support vessels would see the target and take it under fire." In a kind of
deadly pas de deux, the tank men used their shells to point out enemy gun
positions, and the destroyer men aimed accordingly.®
Near the
Carmick, Lieutenant Commander Ralph Ramey,
in USS
McCook, opened fire on two strongly fortified German guns set into the
cif face. Many of Ramey's friends thought he was the spitting image of the
comedian Will Rogers, and Ramey often sprinkled his conversation with
country aphorisms, but he was all business now. Ramey and the McCook
maintained an unremitting fire at the German battery for more than fifteen
minutes, and eventually that concentrated bombardment undermined the
