14
= NEPTUNE
All of the officers attending the conference wore civilian clothes. Not only
was this in line with peacetime protocol in Washington, but it also helped dis-
guise the fact that American and British officers were involved in war planning.
Though technically it was a meeting between equals, the British were clearly the
suitors. Everyone in the room knew how close Britain was to starvation and de-
feat in that cruel winter of 1940-41. The British desperately needed American
materiel support, certainly far more than the Americans needed to chain them-
selves to a besieged and battered ally, one that many feared would not last out
the year. On the other hand, the British representatives came to the meetings
with clear and concrete objectives, whereas the Americans were there simply to
mull over possible ways to implement newly revised contingency war plans.
Through two months of "conversations, the fourteen delegates came
to appreciate that their views were largely congruent. The first impor-
tant accomplishment was a mutual pledge to "collaborate continually in
the formation and execution of strategical policies and plans." That alone
constituted a significant success for the British, for it ensured an ongoing
partnership and tied the United States more closely to Britain's fate. In
addition, the British were ecstatic to learn that the Americans were will-
ing to make the Atlantic and Europe the primary battlefield. "Since Ger-
many is the predominant member of the Axis Powers, their report read,
"the Atlantic and European area is considered to be the decisive theater."
This was no more than Marshall and Stark had already concluded, but the
news was a welcome revelation to the British. Notable as well was the fact
that the final report, when it was completed in March, was sprinkled with
phrases such as "When the United States enters the war..." and "When the
United States becomes involved...." as if such a thing were a foregone con-
clusion. It gave the British hope —hope that soon became expectation.17
With all of the delegates committed to the defeat of Nazi Germany as the
prime objective, the next question was how to achieve that goal. The report
laid out a comprehensive strategy that listed seven "offensive policies" that
would be applied to Germany. It was much too generalized to be called a
"plan," but it did illustrate an overall strategic vision. Those seven policies
included a blockade of the continent, the bombing of Germany from the
air, the conduct of raids on the periphery of Hitler's empire, and support for
Germany First = 15
the occupied nations. Only near the end did the report mention a military
buildup "for an eventual offensive against Germany" itself. 18
It is immediately evident that this program outlined a passive and peripheral
strategy-the kind of indirect approach that the British had used against Napo-
leon's empire a century and a half earlier. Of course, anything more ambitious
than that would have required military assets far beyond anything the British
possessed in early 1941, and the Americans, who were not yet in the war, were
in no position to push for anything more direct. Nevertheless, two aspects of
this strategic blueprint deserve special scrutiny. One was the third goal on the
list, which was "The early elimination of Italy as an active partner in the Axis."
That seemed to contradict the guiding principle that Germany was the "preem-
inent" foe. If a conflict with Japan could be deferred until later, why didn't that
same assumption apply to Italy? Very likely the reason was that in early 1941,
the delegates perceived Italy as a weaker opponent whose defeat was within
the theoretical reach of their limited assets, while the defeat of Germany was
not. Nevertheless, the identification of Italy as a preliminary step on the road t
Germany was thus implanted early in Allied strategic thinking and planning.!9
The other noteworthy element in this list of "offensive policies" was the
objective of capturing "positions from which to launch the eventual effer
sive" against Germany. This implied that the Allies did not already
such positions—that, in other words, the "eventual" offensive again
many would be launched not from the British Isles but from some othe
yet unidentified and currently uncaptured position. When connected with
the goal of the "early" defeat of Italy, these two obiectives foreshador
subsequent Allied campaign into North Africa and the Mediterrane:
not dear whether the wording of either of these strategic goals signa.
deliberate attempt by the British to avoid a commitment to a direct assaul
on Germany from bases in England or whether they simply represented
early and unfocused thinking constrained by limited resources. What is
clear is that despite Roosevelt's insertion of the made-up word "navally"
into the initial guidelines, the British were already thinking of attacking
what Churchill would later label Europe's "soft underbelly" 20
There was some evidence that the delegates were paying attention to the
inevitable command problems that were likely to arise when four services
