YUL
30 4.
= NEPTUNE
Allies would be driven into the sea. Higgins boats and LCTs carrying men,
vehicles, and equipment shuttled back and forth in a nearly continuous
stream between the transports and LSTs offshore and the beach. Though
the initial Neptune plan had assigned specific roles for these landing craft,
most of them simply went up to whatever vessel was nearby, took on what-
ever cargo was available, and headed for whatever piece of beach was open.
When one Higgins boat driver reported to an officer on an LCI to ask for
orders, the officer said simply, "Just continue shuttling material ashore"?
With the division commanders now on the beach, control of the ensuing
operations transferred formally from the Navy to the Army. That did not
mean the Navy had finished its work. As soon as the tide receded, the sur-
viving members of the NCDU teams got busy again attacking the beach
obstacles to clear more paths for subsequent waves of men and equipment.
The loss of so much of their equipment compelled Hall to send an urgent
request to Commander Service Forces back in England for "additional
exnlosives and demolition equinment... by the quickest available means."
The quickest means proved to be Bulkeley's PT boats. Speeding at forty
knots, they completed the round trip across the Channel by nine the next
morning. As the NCDU teams cleared the mines, the bulldozers of the
Combat Engineer Brigades began shoving aside the wrecked Higgins boats,
the disabled jeeps, and even the Allied dead. Seaman Second Class Jackson
Hoffler, who at age fourteen was almost certainly the youngest warrior on
Omaha Beach that day, was sure he would "never forget seeing vehides
driving over bodies."27
Though Omaha Beach was now in Allied hands, it was evident to nearly
everyone that the assault had not gone according to plan. As the historian
Adrian Lewis bluntly put it, "The plan for the assault at Omaha Beach
failed." The list of disappointments was long. The preliminary air attack and
naval bombardment had failed to knock out the German strongpoints; too
few of the DD tanks had made it to the shore; the NCDU teams had insuf-
ficient time to clear the obstacles; most of the troops had come ashore in
the wrong places; too many of the landing craft had been wrecked or dis-
abled; and the advance inland, when it finally happened, had been largely a
product of initiative and determination by brave and desperate men rather
D- Day: The Crisis = 305
than the neat and structured offensive detailed in the operational plan.
And, of course, the losses had been heavy. The most commonly cite
mumber of Allied killed, wounded, and missing for June 6, 1944, is arou
ten thousand, with 60 percent of them American. Nearly half of those
altes were incurred by the airborne troops behind the beaches, bu
three thousand of them resulted from the fighting on Omaha Beach,
was greater than the losses on all four of the other invasion beaches
bined. In spite of that, the Allies were ashore, and by nightfall it was ev.
that they would stay there. No small part of the credit for that belonge
the sea forces: the ships and men of the Royal Navy, the U.S. Navy, and
US. Coast Guard. Gerow himself finally got ashore between seven
eight that evening, and his first message to Bradley, still on board
Augusta, was: "Thank God for the United States Navy'28
The news from the other beaches was better. Utah Beach was w
hand, with the men of Collins's VII Corps already moving inland f
eventual link-up with the airborne troops. West of Omaha Beach
Bitish and alongside them the Canadians - were established asi
and already attracting the attention of several furious German counte,
tacks. Off Sword Beach, the Germans mounted their only naval counter.
tack of the day when German torpedo boats out of Le Havre stumbled
into the invasion force. Awestruck by the spectacle, and no doubt assum-
ing that it would be all but impossible to miss in such a target-rich environ-
ment, the E-boats had fired off their torpedoes in the general direction of
the Allied fleet and then fled. One torpedo passed between the Warspit and
Ramilles, and another headed directly toward Ramsay's headquarters ship,
Largs. The officer of the deck on the Largs ordered full astern, and the tor-
pedo passed across its bow, missing by only a matter of feet. The Norwe-
gian destroyer Svenner was less fortunate. A torpedo struck her boiler
room, and the ensuing explosion lifted her out of the water, breaking her in
half. Like the Corry, she sank within minutes. That, however, proved to be
the only Allied loss of the day to enemy surface action?"
THE SUN FINALLY SET AT 10:06. Even then, a bright, full moon cast a
silver glow over the beaches, offering good visibility through thinning clouds,
