178
—NEPTUNE
an additional three-division paratroop drop—a "vertical envelopment" in
military terminology-behind the beaches, two on the Cotentin Penin-
sula, behind the westernmost beach, and another near Caen, at the easter
end of the Bay of the Seine. That brought the initial assault on D-Day to a
total of ten Allied divisions. The problem, of course, was sealift. All of Mor-
gan's calculations for the naval requirements had been based on a three-
division assault, and the number of landing ships, landing craft, escort
vessels, and gunfire support ships detailed in the COSSAC plan were
wholly inadequate for a five-division assault.
There was, however, a relatively easy solution at hand. The overall Neptune-
Overlord plan confirmed at Quebec had included a diversionary Allied
landing in southern France. At Tehran, this diversion received enthusiastic
support from Stalin, who believed it would force the Germans to face
threats from two directions at once and allow the Normandy "hammer" to
slam down on the southern "anvil." As a result, the initial diversion was ex-
panded into a two-division assault and code-named Anvil. The Americans
had proposed the diversion in the first place as a way to rein in Churchill's
ambitions for other, more tangential Mediterranean adventures, but then
Stalin's support made it an integral part of the strategic plan. The difficulty
was that while Anvil confronted the Germans with a potential two-front
campaign in France, it also compelled the Allies to conduct two simulta-
neous landings, and that meant more landing craft and more support ships,
including the essential LSTs. Once the SHAFF team determined on the
necessity of a five-division initial assault in Normandy, it was evident that
one way to resolve the problem of insufficient landing craft for Neptune
was to cancel Anvil and transfer the necessary naval assets from the Medi-
terranean to England, All of Eisenhower's British service commanders, in-
cluding his own chief of staff, Beetle Smith, found this a compelling, even
obvious, solution 10
Eisenhower was loath to do it. In part, his opposition was a product of
his own analysis. He believed that Anvil would greatly aid Overlord by fore-
ing the Germans to disperse their military assets, and he was aware of how
valuable it would be to have several seaports in southern France to funne
supplies into the country once the ground campaign took off. He was also
SHAEF and ANCXF = 179
sensitive to the political implications. Stalin had made it clear that he con-
sidered Overlord and Anvil to be a single inseparable operation. The can-
cellation of either might well have negative repercussions for the alliance. In
addition to that, however, Eisenhower defended Anvil because he knew
that Marshall supported it, and he was reluctant to oppose his mentor.
Consequently, in his first report as SHAEF to the Combined Chiefs, rather
than advocate the cancellation of Anvil, Eisenhower instead queried them
about getting additional sealift in order to do both operations.
Ramsay was disappointed. He viewed Eisenhower's desire to conduct
both Neptune and Anvil as an unwillingness to come to grips with reality.
Though Ramsay had previously written his wife that Eisenhower was "a
sensible chap," he now confided to his diary that, "Ike is waffling and seek-
ing to have his cake and eat it [too]." In Ramsay's view, there was simply no
alternative to canceling Anvil and moving the needed sealift vessels from
the Mediterranean to England. Instead of risking both operations by divid-
ing up the limited shipping for two assaults, it was far better to ensure suc-
ces for one of them, and that one, obviously, was Neptune. To Ramsay, the
solution was self-evident and unavoidable: "Anvil must be cancelled." 1
This newest Anglo-American disagreement reflected the difference
between British and American views of the relationship between logistics
and strategy. To the British it was simply self-evident that operational
planing had to adjust to the realities of logistical limits. Their view was that
ithere weren't enough ships for two landings, one landing had to go. The
Americans, accustomed to greater matériel abundance, took the view that if
there weren't enough ships for two landings, the obvious solution was to
get more ships.
To do exactly that, Eisenhower sent a lengthy telegram to the Combined
Chiefs in Washington detailing the sealift requirements for a five-division
sault on Normandy. Specifically, he wanted 271 more landing craft, in-
cluding forty-seven more of the scarce T STs Nor was that all, for in order
to escort those landing ships and landing craft safely across the Channel,
and to support the landings, Ike also wanted thirty-six more destroyers, five
aditional cruisers, and one or two battleships. Adding up all of the naval
assets needed for the expanded cross-Channel operation, the new plan
