YUL
326
= NEPTUNE
The big ships were already virtually surrounded by smaller vessels tied up
alongside, and there was no more room. Often when an LCT or a Mike boat
sought to tie up, it was warned off, first with shouts, then with threats, and in
a few cases with gunfire. When one British LCT requested permission to tie
up to a large American ship that was already surrounded by scores of small
Higgins boats all tied together, the American officer of the deck, Ensign
Clifford Sinnett, shouted back that there was no room. The British LCT skip-
per was desperate, however, and after a moment of silence, he announced:
"We're coming in to tie up." This time Sinnett responded more emphatically,
announcing "in no uncertain terms that he was not going to come in and tie
up," and using some sailor's language for emphasis. The British officer replied:
"I don't know who you are, sir, but you are no gentleman."37
By now, "the whole Baie de la Seine was a mass of dirty yellow-gray water
streaked and flecked with white foam and cresting seas." The cables secur-
ing the Lobnitz piers to the bottom began to snap, and though the legs, or
spuds, remained intact and in place, the whole structure swayed dramati-
cally with the huge swells, some of them a hundred feet long. Fearing that
the strain would be too much, the crew released the clutch holding the
platform in place so that it could ride up and down with the swells. That
eased the strain on the platform, but it multiplied the discomfort level
for the men on the pier heads, who had to hold on with both hands as
the platform rose and fell dramatically and unpredictably. Worse yet, the
two-hundred-foot-long bombardons a thousand yards out to sea broke
loose from their anchors and hurtled down on the artificial harbor like so
many battering rams. They smashed into the Mulberry with such velocity
that some of the Phoenix units actually broke in half. Before it was over,
twenty of the thirty-one Phoenix units off Omaha Beach were wrecked. By
now, a total of seventeen ships had collided with the floating metal roadway,
turning it into "a tangled heaving mass"38
The winds finally began to abate on the evening of June 22, and on the
morning of the twenty-third it was possible to assess the damage. Kirk was
appalled. "Landing craft were piled up on the beach." he recalled later, and "the
shoreline was just a shambles. Kirk's chief of staff, Arthur Struble, estimated
that there were between twenty-two hundred and twenty-four hundred vessels
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles"
wrecked on the beach, though many of them had grounde
and would later be salvaged. The actual total of destroyed vo
thre hundred, which was bad enough. That morning the
ICTs and one rhino ferry in operating condition off Omah
The damage to the artificial harbors was harder to ass
of the corncobs had been shifted out of place, the goos
mostly intact. The barrier of Phoenix units, the l
berry harbors, had suffered serious damage, an
the whale roadways were all but destroyed. S
on the Mulberry program from the beginn.
repaired. But Commodore William A. Sullivan
of salvage, decided otherwise. He recommend
Mulberry off Omaha Beach should be shut don
ments of it should be towed over to effect repair
manche, which had fared much better. Eisenhower
would be repaired and even reinforced, but the c
and whale roadways off Omaha Beach were aband
At the time, no one knew what impact this wo
whether without the artificial harbors it would eve
the buildup of men and equipment needed to su
were a few rays of hope. Bradley's idea of beaching a
proved a godsend, for they had been largely unaffected
worried nonetheless, and on June 22, as the storm abat
land more ammunition barges on the beach. Though at o.
pile of ammunition ashore got down to only three days' sup
of both men and supplies to the beach never stopped enti
totals dropped from 8,700 tons before the storm to only 676
21, when the storm was at its height. But then the numbers rose
tons the next day and to 4,595 on June 23. On the twenty-fourth, they
ally topped 10,000 tons for the first time-more than when the Mulbe.
was in full operation. On that one day, 22,630 men, 3,513 vehicles, and
10,974 tons of supplies landed on Omaha Beach, all of it over the beach,
and mostly by the LSTs. Moreover, the LSTs were able to sustain these
levels over the next several weeks. That confirmed what should have been
