250
= NEPTUNE
navigating system since the high waves often obscured the blue lights. At
one point, the executive officer of an LCT turned to the skipper to ask if the
green buoys were supposed to be on the right side or the left side! To their
horror they saw that their entire line of LCTs was outside the lane.
In another case, a line of landing craft passed directly across the bow of
some transport ships, and last-second "radical course changes were neces-
sary to avoid them." Inevitably, some ships broke down: more than a few
had engine trouble, others leaked and began taking on water, still others
had fuel problems. LCT-852 reported that its ramp "fell off", offering no
further explanation. All of these ships had to return to port. 12
For most of the men, however, the three-hour crossing was routine. "The
hours crept slowly by, one recalled, and men passed the time in different
ways. On LST-315, a large poker game began soon after midnight and lasted
throughout the crossing. Chaplains on some of the larger ships hosted brief
religious services. On one British destroyer, men stood "bare headed and
drenched with spray….., holding on to anything they could find which
would steady them against the violent movements of the ship," as the chap-
lain recited the traditional Royal Navy prayer, written by Lord Nelson on
the eve of the Battle of Trafalgar in 180S: "May the Great God whom I wor-
ship grant to my Country and to the benefit of Europe in general a great and
glorious victory. Amen. On other ships, men kept to themselves, thinking
of family, sweethearts, and friends. To many the silence seemed "terrible,"
and at least one man thought, "The ripple of the bow wave sounded like
Niagara Falls in the tense silence."13
So far there had been no reaction from the enemy, or any indication that
the Germans even knew what was about to descend on them. At about 1:00
a.m., most of those on board the ships of Force O and Force U who were
topside could hear, even ifthey could not see, hundreds of airplanes passing
overhead. They were C-47 transport planes towing sliders filled with men
of the 82nd and 101st Airborne divisions who would land behind the
American beaches that night. Other planes carried the paratroopers of the
British 6th Airborne Division toward their drop zone behind Sword Beach
near Caen. As the Allied ships approached the French coast, the navigators
were astonished to see that the 236-foot gray stone lighthouse on Cape
D- Day: The Invasion =
251
Barleur was still operating, its powerful beam of light blinking as usual,
almost as if the Germans disdained the whole idea of a sea assault. The big
troop transports dropped anchor at their designated positions eighteen
thousand yards (just over ten miles) off the coast at about 2:30 a.m., well
ahead of the slower and more numerous LCTs and LCIs, and they had
barely dropped anchor when they began to lower their Higgins boats along-
side Kirk, Hall, and Moon all agreed that, packed as they were with Ameri-
can soldiers, the transports were far too valuable and vulnerable to risk
taking them within range of the German shore batteries, and for the sol-
diers that meant a long and dizzying ride to the assault beaches in the tiny
Higgins boats. At 3:00 a.m., the 1-MC loudspeakers on the transports
squawked to life: "Now hear this. Stand by all troops." 4
Ashore on the high ground behind what the Allies called Omaha Beach,
near Colleville-sur-Mer, German Lance Corporal Hein Severloh was antic-
ipating his breakfast of bread, cheese, and butter when he paused to look
out over the sea. With the morning haze lifting, several dark objects slowly
came into focus, hundreds of them —thousands! "Holy smoke!" he said
aloud. "Here they are."'s
DUE TO THE TIDE DIFFERENTIAL and the curious geography of the Nor-
mandy coastline, the Americans would land sixty to eighty minutes ahead
of the British and Canadians. There had been a lot of discussion about this.
The Normandy beach gradients were very gradual— on much of the shore-
line there is only about a foot of vertical rise in fifty feet of horizontal beach.
Combined with tides of eighteen to twenty-four feet, that meant that the
with of the beach changed dramatically from high tide to low tide. The
generals had argued for making the attack at high tide, when the killing
zone of the beach was relatively narrow, but the admirals wanted to attack
atlow tide so that the beach obstructions, most of them wired with mines,
would be exposed. That would allow the landing craft to avoid them en
route to the beach and would give the Navy Combat Demolition Units an
opportunity to neutralize at least some of them before the second and third
waves came ashore. In the end, the compromise decision was to attack two
hours after low tide, which on June 6 was 6:30 a.m. That would give the
