190 = NEPTUNE
Unlike Vian, Kirk settled into the management of his diverse and far-
flung naval command with ease and authority-perhaps with a bit too
much authority, in Ramsay's opinion. As disappointed as Ramsay was with
Vian's hesitancy to grasp the reins of command, he soon became alarmed at
Kirk's tendency to overstep his bounds. Mostly this was a product of the
very different leadership protocols in the Royal Navy and the United States
Navy. As Kirk put it, "Our system of command was to tell the fellow what
you wanted him to do and why you wanted him to do it," and then to leave
it up to the on-scene commander to "decide for himself how he's going to do
it." Ramsay, however, did not want his subordinates running off willy-nilly
to do their own thing, especially during the decisive campaign of the war.
Kirk noted disapprovingly that "all the planning was done in Norfolk House
by Admiral Ramsay and his staff in the minutest detail." Written orders
arrived from London in thick packets, and if any change needed to be made,
it all had to be referred back up the chain of command to be reconsidered.
If the change was approved, another thick folder of orders was sure to
follow:* Kirk and his staff instinctively rebelled at these circumstances, and
occasionally they complained about it. When they did, Ramsay was un-
moved. Kirk noted that whenever his staff suggested that "we could do it
better this way or that way, the result was a "tough little comment" from
headquarters putting them in their place. 31
Despite this tension, Ramsay sought to pay lip service, at least, to the
idea of a fully integrated naval command. From the very start, one of Bisen-
hower's guiding principles had been the complete integration of Anglo-
American forces. It was in deference to that command guidance that
Ramsay wrote to Kirk early in their relationship: "The operations we are
planning together call for a degree of cooperation between our Navies
which had hitherto never even been contemplated. The idea, Ramsay
* When Ramsay issued the official Neptune operational order on April 10, it was eleven
hundred pages long and nearly four inches thick. All orders connected with Neptune
and Overlord were stamped "BIGOT" in large red letters, which was the equivalent of
"Top Secret. It derived from the fact that back in 1942, the secret orders for the Torch
invasion had been stamped "To Gibraltar" or simply"To Gib'" BIGOT was "To Gib"
spelled backward. Those privy to top secret information were said to be "bigoted."
SHAEF and ANCXF = 191
wrote, was to create the kind of partnership in which it would possible to
conclude that "there existed not two Navies but one nation." In that spirit,
each of Ramsay's task force commanders was in charge of all the ships, of
whatever nationality (including French, Dutch, and Norwegian), within
their respective area.32
All this left Admiral Harold Stark somewhat out in the cold. The former
US, chief of naval operations knew that he had been packed off to England
in the first place to make room for Ernie King to assume a dual role as both
CNO and COMINCH, and also because the incubus of Pearl Harbor still
hung about him like an aura. Then, too, Roosevelt may have decided that
Stark was simply not tough enough to be wartime CNO. Officially, at
least, Stark was Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Europe, and re-
cently he had been endowed with another title: Commander, Twelfth Fleet.
Those titles meant little, however, since Ramsay and his task force com-
manders absorbed literally every ship and landing craft they could get their
hands on. As a result, the Twelfth Fleet existed mainly as an abstraction, and
tibecame Stark's main job to ensure that Ramsay had the tools and the man-
power he needed to be successful. In that mission, Stark got invaluable sup-
pot from Navy Captain (later Rear Admiral) Howard A. Flanigan, a 1910
Naval Academy graduate and World War I veteran who had been recalled to
active service after the United States entered the war. He proved an imagina-
tie and resourceful administrator, who demonstrated an uncanny ability to
Guil (f perhaps illicitly) even the most exotic matériel requests. 33
QUITE APART FROM THESE COMPLICATIONS OF COMMAND, the issue
that continued to dominate Allied planning was whether there would be
enough ships available to execute the crossing at all. The problem of insuf-
Scient sealift had been partially resolved with the decisions to postpone
the Normandy landing until June it was now officially scheduled for
June S- and to postpone Anvil until the late summer. It also helped that
April and May were the most robust months yet for LST construction:
American shipyards turned out fifty of them in April, and an astonishing
tighty-two in May. Still unresolved, however, was the shortage of war-
shios to escort the landing vessels across the Channel and provide gunfire
