YUL
350
= NEPTUNE
already presided over a ceremony at city hall in which a homemade
French flag made of parachute cloth was raised over the Hôtel de Ville 31
Even before that ceremony, a Coast Guard advance team under Lieu-
tenant Commander Quentin Walsh had begun to investigate the condition
of the harbor facilities. Walsh and his team had accompanied the 79th Divi-
sion during its overland campaign, and as they worked their way through the
ruined city to the dock area, they encountered occasional pockets of contin-
uing resistance. Dodging snipers and taking prisoners, they made their way
to the harbor, where they found that the Germans, with their usual effi-
ciency, had wrecked virtually everything. What they had not smashed, they
had booby-trapped with mines and explosives. They had used an entire
freight train filled with explosives to demolish the railroad pier, and the inner
harbor was choked with dozens of scuttled ships and sown with 133 mines.
The Germans had even blown up the E-boat pens that had been the object
of Kirk's keen interest since April. The steel-reinforced concrete overheads
of those pens turned out to be eight feet thick, and as Walsh and his men
arrived, the E-boats inside them were still burning. Walsh reported to Kirk
that the harbor was useless.32
Nevertheless, American, Canadian, and British salvage teams got to work
almost immediately to clear the wreckage, sweep the mines, and repair the
facilities. It was slow going. For more than two weeks, into mid-July, no
Allied ships could use the harbor piers at all, and it was August before deep-
draft supply ships could come into Cherbourg to unload at the rebuilt piers.
Of course that meant that the Allies remained dependent on the beaches in
Normandy. Thankfully, the steady delivery of supplies there continued to
exceed expectations. On July 29, the day that the last pockets of resistance
in Cherbourg were cleaned out, the Allies landed more than 23,000 tons of
supplies on Omaha and Utah Beaches, and they sustained that level of efi-
ciency through the next several weeks while Cherbourg Harbor was being
repaired. On August 1, Allied ships landed 16,000 tons on Omaha Beach
alone, an amount exactly double the pre-invasion daily goal,33
ON TUNE 30, RAMSAY DECLARED that Oneration Neptune was officially
over. For more than two and a half years, ever since the ABC conversations
"A Field of Ruins" = 351
i Mashington back in March 1941, nine months before Pearl Harbor, the
Aglo-Americans had wrestled with the concept of invading Europe. Their
strategic negotiating had been marked by often contentious and sometimes
angry disputes about when and where to land. If the conversations at times
grew sharp and many of the principals cursed one another privately in their
diaries and letters, they never let their disagreements scuttle the alliance.
George Marshall, Dwight Eisenhower, and the Americans had been proven
coret in identifying northern Europe- and in particular France- as the
stategic center of gravity, and Churchill, Alan Brooke, and the British had
been correct in asserting that a premature invasion would have been cata-
stophic. From Bolero and Roundup to Neptune and Overlord, the plans
underwent numerous revisions. Neptune was confirmed in May 1912 at
Quebec, and it then took thirteen more months to plan, assemble, al
cute the biggest maritime expedition in history. In those thirteer
the Allies defeated the U-boat menace in the Atlantic and sect
mand of the air over France; they brought more than a million
Gis to Britain and conducted numberless training exerci
beaches; they built the thousands of ships-the destroyer
landing ships, and especially the LSTs— needed to condi
and they brought them all together in British ports. It was
chronicle of perseverance and productivity, and on June 6,
estarmada in the history of the planet assembled off the Norm
Yet despite all that has been rightly said about the importa
manpower and superior material assets, it was not merely the of
numbers that made Neptune possible. Nor was it the creative b
bious gimmick weapons: the DD tanks, the rocket-firing LCTs,
Mulberry harbors, all of which proved disappointing at some let
instead, the commitment and the dedication of the men themsel
the stalwart and unflagging determination of Winston Churchi
pragmatic flexibility and cheerful congeniality of Franklin Roosev
the dispassionate clear-eyed professionalism of George Marshal
flamboyant self-assurance of Bernard Montgomery, from the polit
sitivity and quiet competence of Dwight Eisenhower to the patri
highly professional Bertram Ramsay, it was the people involved
