YUL
282 = NEPTUNE
Behind the tanks and the infantry came the British obstacle-clearing
teams. As on Omaha Beach, they worked feverishly to clear as many mines
and obstructions as possible before the high tide covered them up. British
commandos also came ashore, most notably the First Special Service Bri-
gade, commanded by Brigadier General Simon Fraser, known by his Scot-
tish title as Lord Lovat. As the commandos splashed ashore, Lovat's piper,
Bill Millin, played "Blue Bonnets" on the bagpipes. Lovat then led his com-
mandos in a dash across country to relieve the British paratroopers who
were holding Pegasus Bridge over the Caen Canal. Other units conducted
house-to-house fighting in Ouistreham, the first urban fighting of the inva-
sion. One element of that assault was a French unit led by Captain Philippe
Keffer. Assigned to secure a German strongpoint outside the city, the
French commandos encountered fierce German resistance until Keffer
rounded up a few of the DD tanks; with their support, he routed the Ger-
mans out of their position and entered the city?5
The Germans defending the beaches recognized their pril, even if the high
command in Berlin and Paris did not. The 84th Corps commander, General
Erich Marcks, who was celebrating his fifty-third birthday that day, begged
permission to use his tanks in a counterattack. Headquarters, however,
remained convinced that this was a mere diversion and denied his request,
which prompted the normally restrained Marcks to growl that the decision
was "a disgrace." Not until the British and Canadians were well established
ashore and moving inland did Marcks get permission to release his tanks. He
organized forty of them into a strike force and ordered the commander to
drive a wedge between the British on Sword Beach and the Canadians on
Juno. He told the officer in charge, "If you don't succeed in throwing the Brit-
ish back into the sea, we shall have lost the war' Though this belated attack had
some initial success, the British blunted it with effective antitank fire and then
hurled it back. Nevertheless, the ferocity of the German counterattack helped
convince the Allied commanders that rather than dash inland at once to seize
the city of Caen, they should instead consolidate the front and dig in?6
BACK ACROSS THE ENGLISH CHANNEL the invasion's commanders waited
anxiously for battle reports. Eisenhower had gone to bed late on June S,
D- Day: The Beaches = 283
though he had slept little. He was particularly concerned about the fate of
the paratroopers of the airborne divisions. Leigh-Mallory had predicted
disaster if the drops went ahead as scheduled, and Eisenhower had over-
niedhim. Now the SHAEF commander awaited reports from the returning
transport planes about the fate of those paratroopers. Leigh-Mallory
himself called headquarters at 6:40 a.m., just as the first American sol-
diers were pushing up onto Omaha Beach in their Higgins boats. Ike's
navalaide, Harry Butcher, took the call, and he ran to Eisenhower's trailer
with the report. Butcher found the Allied Supreme Commander sitting
up in bed with a western novel in his hands and a filled ashtray next to
him. Butcher relayed Leigh-Mallory's information: twenty of the 850
American transport planes had been lost, and only eight of the 400 Brit-
ish planes. There had been no enemy fighter opposition, and little flak.
The drops had been a success. Then Ramsay called. He reported a sortie
bya few German E-boats from Le Havre and that the landings were pro-
ceding. Beyond that he had little news. Ike had no choice but to wait
helplessy for further reports of the battle he had set in motion. He drafted
a quick note to Marshall in Washington: "I have as yet no information
concerning the actual landings," he wrote, adding, "preliminary reports
are satisfactory.*27
Churchill, too, was eager for news. He had remained in the vicinity of
the Channel ports, "making a pest of himself" according to Brooke, until
June S when Eisenhower had postponed the invasion for a day. He had
then returned to London to await events. Never as sanguine about the
outcome of the invasion as the Americans, he bade his wife Clementine
goodnight that evening with the comment: "Do you realize that by the
time you wake up in the morning, twenty thousand young men may
have been killed?" As she retired, Churchill went down to his Map Room
to read the reports as they arrived, moving the little pins on the maps as
necessary. At noon he left to address the House of Commons. He
announced the liberation of Rome, which had coincidentally taken place
two days before, but as to the Normandy landings, he was unable to tell
them anything beyond the fact that the battle was "proceeding according
to plan."28
