266 = NEPTUNE
More than sixty destroyers added thousands more rounds of 4-inch and
S-inch ammunition to the bombardment. Initially, the newer and larger
American Gleaves-class destroyers were assigned to the bombardment mis-
sion, while the lighter British destroyers and American destroyer escorts
carried out screening duties to fend off German E-boats. The main reason
for this was that the Gleaves-class destroyers had radar fire control that
allowed them to target German gun emplacements by map coordinates
even through heavy smoke. As one destroyerman put it, "The Brits had to
be able to see their targets, while the Americans could deliver blind fire"43
Then, in the midst of the naval bombardment, more than two thousand
Allied bombers converged on the five beaches. Their impact was signifi-
cantly weakened, however, by the weather conditions. Though the storm
that had delayed the invasion was moderating, the cloud layer above the
beach remained thick enough that the pilots and bombardiers were unable
to see their targets. Consequently, they had to bomb by radar from above
the clouds. With so many planes operating in so small a space, each group
was assigned a very specific flight path. The pilots of the 450 high-flying
B-24 Liberator bombers assigned to Omaha Beach had the most difficult
mission, for their flight path was almost due south, directly over the invad-
ing fleet, and they would strike Omaha Beach perpendicularly, Unable to
see theirtargets, and desperate to avoid dropping their bombs on the Allied
landing craft already heading for the beach, the pilots waited an extra five to
twenty seconds before releasing their ordnance. The B-24s dropped more
than thirteen thousand bombs, but due to the conditions and their deter-
mination to avoid friendly casualties, all of them fell uselessly into the
French countryside behind Omaha Beach. While the spectacular pyrotech-
nics boosted the morale of the men in the approaching landing craft, who
cheered the explosions ashore, the historian Joseph Balkoski has noted that
"not a single bomb fell anywhere near Omaha Beach."44
Bombing on the other beaches was more successful. The B-26 Maraud-
ers assigned to Utah Beach flew lower than the B-24s, so pilot visibility was
better. Even more important, however. their flight bath took them along the
length of Utah Beach, so bombs that fell either long or short still had a good
chance ofhitting a target. The 276 Marauders dropped nearly five thousand
D-Day: The Invasion = 267
bombs, most of them weighing 250 pounds each, though a few carried
giant 2,000-pound "blockbuster" bombs, which, even if they did not hit a
specific target, left both attackers and defenders momentarily stunned.
Utah Beach was completely obscured by the resulting smoke, dust, and de-
bris In addition, Allied destroyers just off the beach generated more smoke
toscreen the approaching Higgins boats from German artillery ashore. The
consequence was that neither the gunners on the Allied warships nor the
coxswains driving the Higgins boats could see much of anything through
the thick pall of smoke. 4s
Once the Allied planes departed, the naval gunfire resumed, though the
smoke and dust were now so thick that gunners were reduced to firing
blindly Allied destroyers close to shore sought to pick out targets of oppor-
tunity, but there were so many ships off the coast they literally got in one
another's way. Lieutenant Commander G. J. Marshall, on the destroyer
USS Doyle (DD-494), spent much of his time "avoiding collision" amidst
the wind and currents of the crowded seafront, though his ship still man-
aged to fire 364 rounds of S-inch ammunition 46
The third element of the Allied effort to soften the beaches relied on a
noveland somewhat experimental weapon: rocket-firing LCTs. Designated
¿ICT (R)s, these vessels carried two layers of rocket launchers that en-
it fil these resets. The launching racks were loaded with 1,080
tre-ot-long rockets. Since the rockets weighed sixty pounds each, an
ICT(R) could hurl nearly 65,000 pounds of ordnance toward the enemy
inabout ninety seconds, and there were thirty-six of them dedicated to the
bombardment mission, eight of them off Omaha Beach. The problem was
date rockets could be aimed only by pointing the vessel itself in the
guneral direction of the target, and the range could be adjusted only by
changing the angle of the racks. Once the commanding officer made the
best estimate he could of the target and distance, the crew headed below
and the CO retreated into an armored bolt-hole. When he triggered the
sunch, the rockets fired off automatically in a programmed sequence
ibout any further human involvement. There was no disputing the visual
apat ofit. A crewman recalled that "the ship seemed to explode" as hun-
dred of rockets whooshed off the racks in a virtual stream of fire, leaving
