110 = NEPTUNE
basis for ensuing discussion. This time, however, the Americans were ready
for them. For one thing, Marshall had managed to secure an agreement
from Roosevelt that their principal objective during Trident would be "to
pin down the British to a cross-Channel invasion of Europe at the earliest
practicable date." In addition, Wedemeyer, still smarting from his defeata
Casablanca, had prepared a set of detailed plans of his own. And finally, the
relationship between the western Allies had undergone a subtle but signifi-
cant sea change in the four months since Casablanca. During the Arcadia
conference in January 1942, and even during the Casablanca meeting a year
later, Britain had significantly more men under arms and engaged with the
enemy than the United States, despite a population less than one-third that
of its bigger and richer ally. When Commonwealth units were included, the
United States was very much the junior partner in terms of active combat
troops. Not until the middle of 1944 did the number of U.S. soldiers in
uniform begin to rival that of its British ally. Nevertheless, by May 1943, the
balance was beginning to shift, and American productivity-always the
Allies trump card was surging dramatically. In his opening remarks at
Trident, Roosevelt made a point of noting that the industrial output of the
United States surpassed that of Germany and Japan combined. He hardly
needed to add that many of the products of that industrial cornucopia were
being sent to England under Lend-Lease23
Churchill knew he would need all of his eloquence to convince the
Americans to continue the peripheral strategy he preferred. He opened by
noting how much things had changed in a year. The last time he had been
hosted in the White House, news had arrived of the fall of Tobruk; now all
of Africa was in Allied hands. Sicily would fall soon, and the next step,
clearly, was the invasion of Italy to take her out of the war altogether.
If Churchill expected that Roosevelt would applaud such a goal, he was
surely disappointed when the American president disputed Churchill's
assertion that the fall of Italy would provide succor to the Russians. Indeed,
Roosevelt suggested that an Allied occupation of Italy might have the op-
posite effect, releasing German troops from the Italian boot for service on
the Eastern Front. Moreover, the president revealed an agenda of his own.
"ROUNDUP and SLEDGEHAMMER have been talked about for two years" he
Casablanca to COSSAC = 111
said, but as yet none of these operations had been accepted as a concrete
plan to be carried out at a certain time." While he conceded that there was
"no possibility" of a cross-Channel operation that year, he declared that such
an operation "should be decided upon definitely as an operation for the
spring of 1944. In a direct challenge to Churchill's strategic vision, Roo-
sevelt asserted that "the most effective way of forcing Germany to fight was
bycarrying out a cross-Channel operation."24
If Churchill was taken aback, he did not show it. After all, Roosevelt had
acknowledged that an invasion of Europe was not possible that year, and
dearly something else would have to be done in the meantime with the
twenty Allied divisions already in the Mediterranean. Whatever that some-
hing turned out to be, it would very likely create a momentum of its own,
and after that, well... they would see. Though it seemed "imperative" to
Churchill to use our great armies to attack Italy, he was willing to let the
Combined Chiefs "thrash it out." While they did, he joined Roosevelt and
Harry Hopkins for an automobile trip to "Shangri-La," the presidential
aner retreat in the Catoctin Hills of Maryland (now Camp David).
Passing through the Maryland town of Frederick en route, Churchill, who
was aserious student of the American Civil War, remarked that it was in
Friderick where the elderly Barbara Frietchie had defiantly flown the
cational flag above her door when Lee's column of soldiers had marched
through in 1862. That inspired Hopkins to recite the famous couplet from
in Greenleaf Whittier's poem about her: "Shoot if you must this old gray
tad, but pare your country's flag she said. There was a brief pause, and
then t the amazement of all, Churchill recited all thirty stanzas of the
pen from memory, an astonishing display of recall— though he later ac-
moledged that he might have missed a line or two.?5
Meanwhile, back in Washington the CCS took up the familiar issues.
Tite vere no surprises left, for the arguments were by now entirely pre-
dial. The Americans, with Roosevelt's chief of staff, Admiral William
D. Leahy, in the chair, insisted upon a massive concentration of force in
tigad for an atack across the Channel. the British, led by Alan Brooke,
countered that no such attack was possible until at least the spring of 1944
and that something else must be done in the meantime. Brooke echoed
