158
= NEPTUNE
build LSTs to be warehoused in Britain for an unlikely contingency. German
bombers might blow them out of the water before they could be of use to
anyone. He proposed that any LSTs that were already under construction
should be completed, but they should then "be allocated to that theater
where they were most needed," by which he meant the Pacific. Meanwhile,
the contracts for all LSTs not yet laid down should be cancelled to allow for
the construction of more destroyers and escort carriers for convoy protec-
tion. The CCS agreed, and on September 16, 1942, the War Production
Board cancelled the contracts for one hundred of the new LSTs, as well as
forty-eight LCIL)s. Whereas in the spring of 1942, eighteen American
shipyards had been engaged in the construction of LSTs, by September
1943, only eight were so employed. Though landing craft in general
remained in the AA-1 category, their place in the priority list slid to twelfth,
behind minesweepers. By the end of 1942, the United States had produced
a total of only twenty-three LSTs.21
The decision made sense at the time. The prospects for Roundup were
doubtful at best, and the Allies were desperately short of escorts. The Brit-
ish First Sea Lord reported that the Royal Navy was two hundred escort
vessels short of simply being able to maintain current operations, and Frank
Knox told Roosevelt that the U.S. Navy was 981 escorts short of a full com-
plement. The new emphasis on building escorts in 1942 did much to ease
this shortage and helped turn the tide in the Battle of the Atlantic in 1943.
Indeed, the "crossover point" at which Allied ship construction began to
exceed losses to U-boats occurred in November 1942, during the North
African campaign. (See Chart, page 113.)
Still, the decision to restrict LST construction in the late summer of
1942 did affect the Allies ability to meet the requirements set down by
COSSAC for the invasion of France in 1944. The Allies tried to rejuvenate
the LST program after the Trident conference in May 1943, and to effect
that, four of the shipyards that had been retooled for destroyers were
ordered to shift back again to accommodate LSTs. But it was much easier to
order it than to do it. Retooling a shipyard was not simply a matter of throw-
ing a switch. Parts already fabricated for one kind of vessel had to be set
aside and the whole program restarted from the beginning of the logistical
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" = 159
lipline. As a result, some yards did not get fully back on line producing
LST until March 1944.22
Another factor that affected the LST shortage, one that was far more per-
pering, was the evident lack of any particular urgency on the part of the
principal decision makers-even after the Trident and Quebec confer-
ences Instead of responding to the May 1 deadline for D-Day with enthu-
cism and alacrity, the U.S. military bureaucracy exhibited a curious kind of
maaise, at least insofar as LST construction was concerned. The Joint
Chiefs did formally recommend a 25 percent increase in landing craft pro-
duction. That instruction, however, did not specify that LSTs were a par-
ticular priority. As a result, though the production of the small Higgins
boats (LCVPs) jumped from 567 in June to over 1,000 in July, there was no
imilar acceleration in LST construction-indeed, during those same
months, IST production actually fell from twenty-seven to twenty-four
permonth. When Morgan expressed concern that the shortfall in landing
cat could upset the Allied timetable, Donald Nelson, head of the War Pro-
duction Board, assured him that all was well. "Don't you believe a word of
i, Nelson told Morgan. "By early 1944 we shall have so much of the darned
stul that we shall be hard put to find a use for it all." The reality was much
diferent. New orders for LSTs were not placed until December 9, less than
fire months from the date scheduled for D-Day. Only then could the var-
ious subcontractors begin to retool their shops to manufacture the more
than hity thousand different components that made up an LST.23
A third factor that affected productivity was the competition for raw
materials. If shipbuilding was a major bottleneck in Allied strategic plan-
ting stel plate was a major bottleneck in shipbuilding. Between 1940 and
1943, American steel mills increased production from four million tons a
year to thirteen million tons, an increase of over 300 percent. In that same
Period, however, shipyard consumption of steel plate increased from half a
million tons to seven and a half million tons, an increase of 1,500 percent.
Inded, by 1943, shipbuilding consumed more than half of all the steel plate
coled in the United States, and the principal consumer of that steel plate
was the United States Maritime Commission, which produced the other
US, ship with a legitimate claim to being called the most important
