YUL
288 = NEPTUNE
here that I can't do down there," he told Mason. If General Huebner
wanted to talk to him, Hall said, Mason should "go down and bring
General Huebner up here." When Huebner arrived, Hall asserted again
that the situation, precarious as it was, was not dire, and he expressed his
belief that, in time, the weight of Allied men and matériel would shift the
balance of power on the invasion beaches. Hall insisted later that "there
was never a time that I had any apprehension that we would not succeed."
Meanwhile, he told Huebner in no uncertain terms: "I'm in command,
and I'm not worried."36
Hall may not have been worried, but fifty miles to the east on the head-
quarters command ship HMS Largs, Ramsay was. The Largs was a former
French vessel that had been docked in Gibraltar when France fell back in
1940. Taken into the Royal Navy, she had been renamed in honor of Mount-
batten's Scottish estate. Redesigned with advanced communications equip-
ment to serve as a command ship, she had so many antennae and radio
wires strung about her that at least one member of the crew thought she
looked "like a Monday morning wash line." It was thanks to all that elec-
tronic equipment that Ramsay could monitor all five beaches at once, and
on June 6 it was the news from Omaha Beach that alarmed him. Leaving
Rear Admiral Talbot to supervise the landings on Sword Beach, Ramsay
quit the Largs and boarded a British destroyer that carried him over to the
American sector, where he summoned Kirk on board. 37
Kirk found Ramsay visibly agitated, and, much as Hall had done with
Gerow and Huebner, he offered assurances. "We'll straighten it out," Kirk
told Ramsay, "don't worry?. In fact, Kirk was much less confident than his
words suggested, but he was loath to confess such a thing to a British admiral
with whom he had recently exchanged heated words. So he assumed a con-
fident air and assured Ramsay that it was all going to work out. Ramsay was
not entirely reassured. He blamed the mess on the "really bad" state of
American communications the product of all those smashed radios. Still,
having made his point by coming over to see Kirk, there was little more that
he could do. Because they were on a Royal Navy ship, where such things
were permitted, the two men indulged in a quick glass of whiskey, then each
returned to his post.38
D-Day: The Beaches = 289
There was no disguising the seriousness of the moment. Despite Hall's
repeated assertions of confidence, the situation ashore was genuinely pre-
carous. Omar Bradley confessed later that he was contemplating "evacuat-
ing the beachhead and directing the follow up troops to Utah Beach or the
Bitish beaches. Horrified by the prospect of failure, he asked Kirk if there
wasn't something more the Navy could do to break the bloody stalemate on
Omaha Beach. 39
In fact, there was.
