1141
= NEPTUNE
them (see chart). The anticipated availability of all that new shipping,
nearly all of it built in the United States, gave the Americans significantlev-
erage in the strategic debate.27
Three days of wrangling changed few minds, and once again the confer-
ence ended with what was officially a compromise. Unlike previous com-
promises, however, in which the Allies had approved one or another
peripheral attack and made a cross-Channel movement conditional upon
circumstances, this time it was the other way around. The final agreement
authorized a cross-Channel invasion of France with a firm target date of
May 1, 1944, and it made the invasion of Italy, or any other Mediterranean
operation, dependent on circumstances, leaving the decision to the judg-
ment of the theater commander, Dwight Eisenhower. The agreement also
acknowledged the importance of defeating "the U-boat menace" and
granted King permission to conduct a campaign of "unremitting pressure
against Japan," a foot in the door that triggered what would become the
Central Pacific Drive.28
It was significant that the "Draft of Agreed Decisions" included specific
details. The cross-Channel force would consist of twenty-nine divisions.
This was a much smaller force than Morgan had proposed, and smaller than
either the forty divisions Churchill had suggested eighteen months earlier or
the forty-eight divisions Marshall had envisioned for Roundup. Moreover,
due to the limited sealift capability, Morgan was instructed to plan for an
initial assault force of only three divisions. These early estimates would be
subsequently revisited and modified. Nevertheless, it was the first time the
Allies had agreed to commit a precise number of troops to an invasion on a
specific date. Most important of all from the American viewpoint, the agree-
ment specified that forces would be transferred from the Mediterranean
back to England to form the core of this invasion force. If all of the pieces
could be assembled - the men, the ships, the supplies, and especially the
landing craft — the Allies would begin the great invasion on May 1, 194429
Churchill was not ready to throw in the towel. He had come to Washing-
ton to secure an agreement for the invasion of Italy, and because that deci-
sion had been delegated to Eisenhower, he now resolved to go to Algiers
and sell the idea to Ike. He invited Roosevelt to come along. The president
Casablanca to COSSAC = 115
demurred and suggested that Marshall should go instead. Three days later,
Churchill and Marshall flew to Gibraltar, and then on to Algiers, where the
British prime minister turned the full force of his personality on Eisen-
hower. Ike later acknowledged that "Churchill was at his eloquent best"
during this visit. He was certainly persistent. Ike complained privately to
his friend and naval aide, Harry Butcher, that it was physically exhausting to
listen to Churchill relentlessly press his case over and over. Eisenhower was
no averse to the idea of an Italian campaign. His concern was that it would
inhibit future options. As Marshall had written him in a private letter, "an all
out invasion of Italy inevitably presents very serious consequences in the
way of shipping... which would put a stop to serious offensive operations
elsewhere." Ike wrote back: "My views agree completely with yours." Even
¡fan Allied invasion of Italy was fully successful, the need to keep the Italian
nation fed and supplied with coal so that her people did not starve or freeze
over the winter would further absorb scarce Allied shipping and thereby
restrict European operations. In any case, Eisenhower reminded Churchill
that theirability to do anything in the Mediterranean after Husky depended
on how quickly and how efficiently Sicily could be taken. "If Sicily proved
to be relatively easy," he told the prime minister, a subsequent move into
Italy might be possible, but if the battle for Sicily proved long and difficult,
ay such invasion was unlikely. Churchill remained his confident and ebul-
lient self, elling Eisenhower that he "looked forward to having Christmas
dinner with Ike in Rome."30
In the end, Churchill got his way, mainly because the campaign in Sicily
was remarkably successful. The initial landings on July 10 went so smoothly
that Mountbatten, watching from offshore, thought "the whole show looked
like a rehearsal." Only twelve days later, Patton's Seventh Army captured
Palermo, on the Sicilian north coast, and two days after that, the Italian gov-
emment effectively removed Mussolini from power with a vote of no con-
fidence. Il Duces replacement, Prime Minister Pietro Badoglio, sent out
peace feelers to the Allies, and on September 3, the same day an armistice
was tatifed, British forces crossed the narrow Strait of Messina into Italy.
A week later Kent Hewit's naval tock force delivered Mort Clark's
mostly American Fifth Army to the beaches near Salerno, south of Naples,
