22
= NEPTUNE
from the outside, bombing it continually from the air, and constantly
appealing to the citizens of the occupied countries to rise up, Churchill im-
plied that Hitler's empire could be so weakened that it would collapse of its
own dead weight. The document paid lip service to "landing forces on the
continent," but only after Germany was on its last legs. Churchill hoped,
even expected, that blockade, bombing, and subversion would "destroy the
foundation upon which the [German] war machine rests-the economy
which feeds it, the morale which sustains it, the supplies which nourish
it... and the hopes of victory which inspire it. Churchill sent copies of this
document to Marshall, Stark, and Major General Henry H. "Hap" Arnold,
chief of the U.S. Army Air Corps.2
At the meeting of the senior officers the next day, the Americans exhib-
ited a palpable coolness to Churchill's vision. To his suggestion that heavy
bombers be given the highest production priority, Stark objected that this
seemed inappropriate given that shipping was in such peril. Both Stark and
Marshall found it odd that there was little mention of aid to the Soviet
Union. Did the British not expect the Russians to hold out? The Americans
worried, too, that Churchill's proposals contained only a vague reference to
a possible land campaign on the continent, and then only when Germany
was tottering and near defeat. It may have been Marshall who wrote this
sentence in the American response: "Wars cannot be finally won without
the use of land armies."33
Despite these apparent fissures in the Anglo-American war planning, the
real significance of the meeting at Argentia was the personal connection
made between the heads of government, and the only real news to emerge
from it was the announcement of the Atlantic Charter. After the moving
church service on Sunday, August 10, Roosevelt had suggested to Churchill,
"We could draw up a joint declaration laying down certain broad principles
which should guide our policies along the same road." That night, Churchill
dictated the first draft of such a declaration, citing eight principles that
would guide a postwar settlement, including "the right of all peoples to
choose the form of government under which they will ive" While offering
few specifics, it outlined a vision for a peaceful and prosperous post-war
world, 34
Germany First = 23
The conference at Argentia marked a new milestone in the emerging
Anglo-American partnership. From the first appointment of uniformed
observers to England in 1937 to the secret staff talks in January through
March 1941 and now the convivial exchanges on board Augusta and Prince
of Wales, the United States had become as committed as a neutral nation
could be to a strategic blueprint—however vague —for the defeat of Ger-
many. It would begin with securing the Atlantic supply line, then ramp up
into a massive bombing campaign while the Anglo-American partners
assembled the men and matériel necessary for an eventual attack on Ger-
many itself. When and where that invasion would take place were issues
that were unaddressed.
Then on December 7, 1941, Japan attacked the United States.
WITHIN MINUTES of Frank Knox's phone call on that historic day, White
House operators were summoning cabinet members for an emergency
meeting. Stark called the president to confirm the attack, adding that the
reports so far indicated that it had been a severe one, with substantial
American losses in both ships and men. Roosevelt dictated a news release
for the public. At three o'clock he met with the men of what would soon
come to be known as his war cabinet: Marshall, Betty Stark, and the two
service secretaries, Stimson and Knox, plus in this case Secretary of State
Cordell Hull. As a rule, Roosevelt tended to work around Hull, who was
never a member of the White House inner circle. His presence now was
mostly a product of the fact that only moments before, Hull had met the
Japanese negotiators in his office to receive their formal reply to the latest
American peace proposal. Before they arrived, Roosevelt had called him
with the news of Pearl Harbor. The president told Hull to receive the Japa-
nese reply without comment, then coolly "bow them out." Hull, however,
had been unable to remain mute. After reading the Japanese note with the
two Japanese delegates standing in front of his desk, Hull looked up and
said, "Thave never seen a document that was more crowded with infamous
falsehoods and distortions infamous falsehoods and distortions on a
scale so huge that I never imagined until today that any Government on this
planet was capable of uttering them."3
