34
= NEPTUNE
In addition to Dill, Pound, and Portal, Churchill had also brought along
a full suite of junior officers and servants, for Churchill was notoriously
high-maintenance, and on some days there seemed to be more British
officers with their red tabs (indicating a staff position) striding purpose-
fully down the White House corridors than there were Americans. One of
the young officers in the White House later recalled catching glimpses of
Churchill "always with a sheaf of dispatches in hand, shuttling back and
forth between his bedroom, Harry Hopkins's tiny office, and the president's
study. In addition to his bedroom, Churchill also took over the Madison
Room next to the Oval Study, where his staff installed what the prime minister
called his traveling "map room" featuring giant theater maps with colored
pins showing the curent location of Allied and enemy forces around the world.
Roosevelt greatly admired it, and after the conference was over, he ordered that
a map room of his own be set up in the basement of the White House."7
As far as the American public was concerned, the highlights of the visit were
the joint lighting of the White House tree on Christmas Eve by Roosevelt and
Churchill, their attendance at the Foundry Methodist Church on Christmas
morning, and Churchil's formal address to a joint session of Congress on the
day after Christmas. All three events were triumphs for Anglo-American unity.
Churchill won over the members of Congress immediately with his opening
quip: "I cannot help reflecting that if my father had been American and my
mother British, instead of the other way round, I might have got here on my
own. Showman that he was, he brought the congressmen roaring to their feet
when, in reference to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, he growled, "What
kind of a people do they think we are? Is it possible that they do not realize we
shall never cease to persevere against them until they have been taught a lesson
which they and the world will never forget?"!8
The real work of the conference, however, took place out of the public
eye, when the British and American heads of the military services met to
contrive a joint strategy.
THE CONFERENCE WAS CODE-NAMED ARCADIA, a word that conjures a
bucolic retreat where peace and serenity are broken only by the gentle song
of birds or the lilting notes of a shepherd's flute. The crusty and humorless
Arcadia m
35
Ernest J. King, whom Roosevelt had appointed U.S. Navy commander in
chief (COMINCH) only six days before, opined that the name was "singu-
larly infelicitous."19
Churchill wasted no time in pressing his agenda. At dinner on the very
day he arrived, he broached the subject of an Anglo-American joint inter-
vention into French North Africa. Roosevelt was not averse to the idea.
Political animal that he was, he understood instinctively that if American
troops did not become engaged somewhere in the European theater fairly
soon, there would be tremendous pressure for them to be employed in the
Pacific. Then they would have to be supported and supplied, and soon the
Pacific would become the dominant theater, thereby wrecking the agreed-
upon grand strategy. Since assaulting occupied Europe itself was beyond
the Allie' capability in 1942, perhaps North Africa offered an interim solu-
tion. Moreover, Roosevelt had had his eye on Africa even before Pearl
Harbor. An avid student of world geography from his youth (inspired in
part by his world-class stamp collection), he had already picked out Dakar,
a French colony on the westernmost tip of Africa, as a potential problem for
both the Atlantic trade routes and for South American security. He saw that
an Allied occupation of French Africa would prevent the Germans from
developing Dakar into an important base. Churchill was convinced that
"the President was thinking very much along the same lines as I was about
action in French Northwest Africa."20
Churchill renewed his campaign the next day at the first official session
of the Arcadia conference. He delivered a broad overview of the war,
emphasizing the importance of the bombing campaign against Germany,
the favorable prospects for an early victory in Libya, the conundrum of
Vichy France (especially the disposition of the rest of the French fleet), and
how the United States might contribute. He suggested that American sol-
diers might be sent to Iceland and Ireland to relieve British soldiers there,
who would then become available for combat missions, It irked Marshall
that Churchill assumed that American Gis were not ready yet for actual
combat, though he also knew that he was probably right. Finally, Churchill
brought up the idea of an Allied incursion into French North Africa,
whether the French invited them in or not.?1
