156
= NEPTUNE
problematic, and even humorous. While the large open deck of an IST
provided lots of room for calisthenics, the constant rolling of the ship made
it something of an adventure. As the sailors lined up and began doing jump-
ing jacks, the rolling ship moved beneath them so that after each jump, they
landed a few inches away from where they had started. As the ship slowly
rolled to starboard, the files of jumping men "moved slowly across the deck
to the port rail, and then, as the ship righted itself, they bounded slowly
back to starboard. Watching this from the bridge, one officer wondered if
"in a prolonged roll, the crew would dance right over the side." 6
Combat training consisted of learning how to shoot the 3-inch gun on the
stern and the 20 mm anti-aircraft guns, or later the 40 mm Bofors gun. Often
there was only one day to practice firing those guns, aiming at a target sleeve
towed at the end of a long tether by a Navy airplane whose pilot was almost
certainly very nervous. Beaching exercises were especially nerve-racking, It
was frightening to steam directly toward the shore. It was so counterintui-
tive that during the first attempt, men on board instinctively grabbed on to
whatever they could, anticipating a jarring collision, if not worse. Then, too,
if the LST grounded on the beach at anything other than a fairly precise
90-degree angle, it was likely to slew off to one side, an effect called broach-
ing, which meant it would end up sideways on the beach and probably re-
quire a tow to get off again.17
Once an LST successfully pushed itself up onto a beach, its massive bow
doors opened like a cupboard, a twenty-three-foot bow ramp was lowered,
and the tanks, trucks, and jeeps inside its hold drove off onto the sand
under their own power. Huge fans ventilated the cargo hold so that the ex-
haust from all those gasoline engines firing up at once did not asphyxiate
the crew. After the hold was emptied, the vehicles on the upper deck
could be unloaded. In early models of the LST, an elevator on the fore-
deck lowered them one by one down to the cargo hold. That proved
time-consuming, however, and beginning with LST-491, laid down in July
1943, a ramp replaced the elevator so that the vehicles on the weather deck
could simply drive down the ramp and out the bow doors.!8
After unloading, the LSTs needed to retract from the beach. To do that,
each was equipped with a special anchor at the stern that was attached to a
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" =
157
steel cable wound around a massive winch. As the LST steamed in toward
the beach, crew members dropped the anchor well offshore and paid out
the cable as necessary. It was important to pick the right moment to execute
that maneuver, for if the crew dropped the anchor too soon, the cable would
run right off the spool and disappear into the sea. After disgorging its cargo,
a gasoline-powered motor engaged the winch, the anchor dug into the bot-
tom, and the LST hauled itself off the beach stern first, assisted by its own
engines. The sequence of orders was: "Up ramp. Close bow doors. Haul
around on the stern anchor. All engines back one third."19
It was helpful if the LSTs landed on a rising tide at or near the high-tide
mark. If they attempted to discharge their cargo at low tide, the last vehicles
to drive off might be swamped by the rising tide; if they unloaded during a
falling tide, by the time the last vehicle debarked, the ship could find itself
thoroughly aground, high and dry like a beached whale, a circumstance
known as drying out." When that happened, there was no choice but to
wat for the next high tide to retract.
THE PIRST ISTS WERE PART of a large construction program authorized
eaty in 1942 for Operation Roundup. In March of that year, Secretary of
War Stimson urged Roosevelt to "lean with all your strength on the ruthless
rearrangement of shipping allotments" to ensure a sufficiency of landing
crat for the invasion, and the next month Roosevelt declared that landing
crat should have priority over "any other program." The Navy dutifully in-
formed its contractors that "landing craft would take precedence over all
other programs in the A-I category," then still the highest priority rating. In
May 1942, contracts were let to build three hundred new ISTs, and on
July 1, they were officially elevated to the top of the priority list 20
The moment did not last. The July 22 decision to invade North Africa
made Roundup unlikely for 1943, and both Leahy and King argued that
landing craft construction should be scaled back in favor of building escorts
for the convoys. The British protested mildly, suggesting that the new LSTs
could be sent to England anyway in case "an opportunity for operations on
the Continent in 1943 might arise." King thought that was a terrible idea,
and said so in his usual emphatic way. He argued that it made no sense to"
