YUL
338 = NEPTUNE
The commander of the German defenders, General Karl von Schlieben,
requested permission from headquarters to withdraw his forces into the
prepared defenses about the city. That was obviously the correct military
move, but Hitler insisted that there must be no retreat, and von Schlieben
dutifully ordered his men to fight "to the last man and the last bullet." That
did little to slow the American advance, and despite the storm that battered
the ships and the artificial harbors off the beaches, the three American divi-
sions made rapid progress. By June 21, as the storm abated, the Americans
were poised to begin a general assault on the city. That afternoon, Collins
broadcast a formal request for surrender in several languages, essentially
warning von Schlieben that if he did not capitulate by nine o'clock the next
morning, his forces would be annihilated. Collins did not expect an answer,
and he did not get one.
Shortly after 9:00 a.m. on June 22, the Allies initiated a massive aerial
assault on the city's defenses. Four squadrons of RAF Typhoons and
six squadrons of RAF Mustangs bombed and strafed the German
defenses. They were followed by twelve groups of fighter-bombers from
the American IX Tactical Air Command. Once again the results of the
air assault were disappointing. As on Omaha Beach, the German fortifi-
cations proved stubbornly resistant to aerial bombing. Moreover, the
fluidity of the front lines outside Cherbourg and the proximity of friend
to foe meant that Allied troops occasionally found themselves the target
of Allied bombs. Men in both the 9th and 4th Divisions complained an-
grily that they had been strafed by friendly aircraft. Collins himself very
nearly became a casualty when Tuphoons strafed a position not a hun-
dred yards from him. But if the bombing did little physical damage, it did
depress the morale of the defenders. A large portion of the soldiers in
von Schlieben's command were non-Germans who had been forced
into service from one or another of the subjugated countries of eastern
Europe, including the Soviet Union. They knew that they were cut off
from support, and few of them embraced von Schlieben's call to fight
to the death. As von Schlieben himself noted, "We are asking rather a
lot if we expect Russians to fight in France for Germany against the
Americans."6
"A Field of Ruins" = 339
Sil, the defenses of Cherbourg remained formidable. The city and its
barborsatin akind of bowl surrounded by a series of ridges that commanded
the lines of approach. On the western side of the city was the old Citadel,
and on the east was Forte des Flamands. In the center was the powerful
Fore du Roule, built on a high bluff overlooking the city. Between these
tongpoints, the Germans were dug deep into the ground. The
cans
would have to target each defensive position individually, with
maintaining a steady covering fire while engineers crept around
with satchel charges. It could be done, but it would take time as
and time was now of the essence. Von Schlieben had receivec
begin destruction of the harbor facilities as early as June 10, even
campaign for Cherbourg began. Hitler told him that it was his du
fend (Cherbourg to the last bunker and leave to the enemy not a he
a field of ruins." Von Schlieben's objective, therefore, was not so i
defend the city as to delay its fall long enough for his engineers to thot
destroy the harbor facilities. Every day that the Germans remained i
trol gave them another day to continue their ruthless sabotage?
To speed the fall of the city and minimize damage to the harbor, B
asked Ramsay if the Navy could use its long-range guns to target the
strongpoints. The biggest guns that Collins had were 155 mm (6-ind
lery pieces, and he did not have enough of them. But the Navy ha
guns on the heavy cruisers, and 12- and 14-inch guns on the battles
haps the Navy could hit the German positions from seaward.
Though Ramsay was less than enthusiastic about pitting s
coastal fortifications, he asked Kirk to work up a plan. Two m
in the wake of Exercise Tiger off Slapton Sands, Kirk had u
use the American battleships to destroy the German E-bo
bourg. On that occasion, Ramsay had turned him down, a.
had provoked some bitter words and lingering resentment.
this as a chance to show what those big battleships might hav
still could do — to hardened German defenses.®
FOR THE NAVAL ASSAULT on Cherbourg, Kirk formed Task
under Rear Admiral Morton Deyo, the fifty-seven-year-old care
