256 = NEPTUNE
As the second tank prepared to follow, a near miss from a German artil-
lery shell caused LCT-600 to rock violently. The tanks jostled against one
another, and the motion tore a hole in the canvas shroud of the second tank
in line. That may have been providential, for with its shroud compromised,
it could not be launched at all, nor could the two tanks behind it. Like
Rockwell, Sullivan concluded that he had to take the other three tanks all
the way to the beach. As for O'Shaughnessy's tank, it swam about a hun-
dred yards under its own power, then disappeared from sight. Worse was to
come. Without the fortunate accident of a torn shroud, all seven of the
other LCTs in the group launched their DD tanks as prescribed in the op
order. Captain Thornton went first. Then, one after another, twenty-seven
more DD tanks rolled off the ramps and into the tossing sea. As on the 600,
one of the tanks on board LCT-537 had a tear in its canvas shroud, but the
tank driver, Staff Sergeant John R. Sertell, insisted that the tank's bilge
pump could manage the leak. Ensign Robert J. McKee declined to overrule
him, and all four tanks went into the water. Sertell's tank sank almost imme-
diately. The other three struggled forward through the severe chop for a few
hundred yards before they, too, went down. In the end, of the twenty-nine
tanks launched off Omaha Beach that morning, only two made it to dry
land. It was horrifying to watch. "They just went down to the bottom like
rocks, a crewman on one of the LCTs recalled. "Some men were able to
jump out in time, but not all' The rest, trapped inside a thirty-four-ton
tank, went to the bottom with it. The LCTs and other nearby vessels has-
tened to pull bodies from the water, both living and dead. Joe Esclavon was
one of those so engaged, and as he worked, he recognized the bodies of
some of those he had trained with at Slapton Sands. He was deeply affected
by the sight of them stacked "like cordwood" on the deck. Recalling it forty
Years later he paused in the midet of his descrintion and muttered: "They
were real nice people on those tanks."?s
The survival rates of the DD tanks varied from beach to beach. Off Utah
Beach, U.S. Navy Lieutenant (i.g.) John B. Richer, commanding one of the
tiny natel arf whose inh it as to mart the lan ding nones carthat the sea
conditions made launching the DD tanks from six thousand yards impos
sible. On his own, he moved his patrol craft to within two thousand yards
D- Day: The Invasion = 257
of the beach to establish a new departure line. There the LCTs were not
only closer to shore but also in the lee of the protruding headland of Cape
Barfleur: One of them, LCT-597, was hit by a German artillery shell and
sank with all four tanks still on board, but twenty-seven of the remaining
twenty-eight DD tanks made it safely to shore.26
Some fifty miles to the east, off Sword Beach, the British LCT skippers
dosed to fifteen hundred yards, less than a mile, before launching their swim-
ming tanks. Consequently, of the forty DD tanks there, thirty-four of them
launched successfully, and thirty-one made it ashore, where, according to Vian,
they did "sterling work." At Gold Beach, the LCTs brought their tanks to within
a half mile of the shore before launching, though eight were lost anyway. At the
Canadian Juno Beach, many of the DD tanks could not be launched at all, but
ofthose that were, twenty-one of twenty-nine made it ashore. Though the tanks
that survived the journey did good work, the disaster off Omaha Beach meant
that the soldiers there had relatively little tank support.27
Almost as disastrous was the fate of the DUKWs. The Allies had more
than twenty-five hundred of these little wheeled amphibians, which were
entrusted with carrying some of the Army's artillery pieces to the beach.
They, too, were launched from well offshore, and though they had per-
formed flawlessly during the exercises at Slapton Sands, some of them now
sufe a fate similar to the DD tanks, shipping water until they lost buoy-
ancy. Though their crews were rescued, twenty-six field pieces were lost.
One crewmember, hauled up onto a rhino ferry after his DUKW sank be-
neath him, was thoroughly disgusted. After practicing for most of three
years "to be in the spearhead of the invasion," he said, "when the time
comes, the God Damn boat sinks from under us." 8
WHILE THE HIGGINS BOATS chugged shoreward and the LCTs sought with
decidedly mixed results to launch the DD tanks, the Allies unleashed a
catefully coordinated air and sea bombardment of the target beaches. This
consisted of three phases: a massive air assault by thousands of heavy and
medium bombers from England, a naval barrage by the battleships and
cruisers, and a last-minute rocket attack by specially equipped LCTS. The
idea was that the application of so much ordnance in so short a time frame
