8 = NEPTUNE
fleet in Hawaian waters followed by a campaign across the Central Pacific
that would culminate in a Jutland-like showdown with the Japanese some-
where in the Philippine Sea. While the plan grew in sophistication as it
underwent periodic review and adjustment, the central elements of it
remained at the heart of U.S. Navy planning, and it informed both budget
requests and the annual fleet exercises held each spring to test the fleet's
readiness.®
American planners began to reassess their assumptions as early as 1937.
It was not because Japan seemed any less ambitious or dangerous; that
very year, in fact, the Japanese invaded China to begin what they labeled
"the China incident, but which was in fact a full-scale war of conquest.
Rather, it was because the complexity of the international environment
suggested the wisdom of broadening America's security outlook. To do
that, Roosevelt sent Navy Captain Royal E. Ingersoll, head of the Navy's
War Plans Division, to London to conduct private exploratory talks with
the British about how the two nations might coordinate their forces in the
Pacific and elsewhere in the event of war. It was the first foot in the door of
a transatlantic relationship that would develop dramatically over the next
four years. Two years later, in 1939, the key assumptions of Plan Orange
were openly challenged when a U.S. Army-Navy Joint Planning Commit-
tee noted that a successful defense of the Caribbean and the Panama Canal
against Germany would require "offensive measures in the Atlantic, and
as a result, the U.S. Navy should adopt "a defensive attitude in the Eastern
Pacific. That fall, the U.S. Army-Navy Joint Board scripted a whole new
array of plans that retained the color coding for potential foes but grouped
them in such a way as to envision possible wars against two or more
"colors" at the same time. Inevitably, perhaps, these were dubbed "rain-
bow" plans. Despite these straws in the wind, most U.S. Navy leaders
resisted a reorientation of defense policy away from the Pacific. To the
admirals, Japan remained the primary and most probable enemy, and the
ghost of Plan Orange continued to influence both eir thinking and their
training.'
That began to change after Hitler invaded Poland in September 1939, and
especially after German forces sliced through Belgium and the Netherlands
Germany First = 9
in the spring of 1940, drove the British from the beaches at Dunkirk, and
compelled the French to sue for peace. On June 22, 1940, the very day that
French generals signed an armistice that acknowledged their defeat, Roo-
sevelt met with the Army chief of staff, George C. Marshall, and the chief of
naval operations, Harold R. Stark, to discuss how the French collapse might
affect American security interests.
Both Marshall and Stark were destined to play key roles in the war to
come. Marshall was a specialist in planning and training who had served
on the staff of John "Black Jack" Pershing during the First World War and
had helped orchestrate the Meuse-Argonne offensive. Promoted to the
rank of brigadier general in 1936, he pinned on the four stars of a full
general when Roosevelt chose him for chief of staff, a post he assumed,
significantly, on September 1, 1939, the very day Germany invaded
Poland. For all his administrative gifts and keen intelligence, Marshall's
greatest asset was his temperament. Quiet, dignified, and patient, he
seldom raised his voice and never lost his temper. He was a superb judge
of other men and kept a small notebook in which he listed the names of
those officers who, in some future crisis, should be tapped for command
responsibility.
Harold Raynsford Stark had taken up his duties as the eighth chief of
naval operations a month earlier, on August 1, 1939. A 1903 graduate of the
Naval Academy, he bore an unusual nickname. As a plebe (freshman) at the
academy in 1899, he had been asked by an upperclassman if he was related
to the American Revolutionary War general John Stark. The young plebe,
no doubt standing at exaggerated attention, as befitted his status, confessed
that he had never heard of General John Stark. At that, the upperclassman,
with more forcefulness than accuracy, informed the young plebe that at the
Revolutionary War's Battle of Bennington in Vermont, John Stark had pro-
claimed, "We will win today or Betty Stark will be a widow!" It was a piece of
American patriotic lore that the upperclassman thought every plebe should
know, especially one named Stark. So he instructed the hapless plebe that
from that moment on he was to shout out that phrase whenever he encoun-
tered a senior midshipman. It was not long before Stark became universally
Known as "Betty" at the academy, and Betty Stark he remained for the rest
