CHAPTER 6
BRITS AND YANKS
active campaign in the Mediterranean, the United States could still
maintain a buildup of troops in England at the rate of twelve thousand men
per month. At that rate, he noted, there would be some 135,000 American
soldiers- about nine divisions - in England by August 1943, in position
for a swift cross-Channel assault in case of a German collapse. Of course,
Germany did not collapse that summer, nor did the Americans manage to
ship twelve thousand GIs a month to England. Instead, the number aver-
aged only a fraction of Brooke's proposed goal -in March, for example,
only twelve hundred GIs arrived. As a result, by mid-May, when the Trident
conferees agreed to invade France a year hence, while there were more than
a hundred thousand U.S. support personnel on or near the airfields in East
Anglia, there were fewer than twenty thousand American combat troops in
England-barely one division. Clearly, if the Allies were serious about a
cross-Channel invasion in less than twelve months, the movement of
American troops to England would have to increase dramatically.
Brits and Yanks =
123
And it did. Once Neptune-Overlord was approved at Trident and rati-
fied at Quebec, the transatlantic trickle of American soldiers turned into a
Hood. In June, nearly fifty thousand GIs arrived at British ports, all but
overwhelming the ability of the British to accommodate them. Another
fity thousand arrived in July, and nearly that many in August. Eighty thou-
sand arrived in September. In October, the numbers topped a hundred
thousand, and for each of the next seven months, an average of nearly
150,000 Americans arrived in Britain. (See Table 1, page 124.)
For nearly four hundred years, the movement of humanity between
Europe and America had been overwhelmingly westward as immigrants
took passage for the New World. Now that tide was reversed, and in partic-
ularly dramatic fashion, for the American "invasion" of Britain took place
not over centuries or even decades but in a single calendar year. Not only
did this phenomenon test the sealift capability of the Allies, but it greatly
affected the soldiers themselves, most of whom had never been outside
their home states, much less out of the country, and of course it dramati-
cally affected the citizens of the United Kingdom who became their hosts.
As one Briton recalled, "The American invasion rated second only to the
bombs as the outstanding feature of wartime life."
Most of those who took part in this mass migration were young men in
their late teens and early twenties. They had volunteered, or been con-
scripted, and sent to training camps where, in a dizzying sequence, they were
barhered inoculated and issued uniforms. They learned how to salute (and
whom to salute, how to march, and how to shoot. Then, after a brief leave
home, some, though not all, received more instruction at an advanced train-
ing center. Before a year had passed, they hoisted their olive-drab duffel bags,
stenciled with their names and units, and boarded trains and buses that took
them to one or another port of embarkation, New York being by far the larg-
est. There they were mustered on a pier and marched up a gangplank onto a
shin. Onlv a few had ever been on a shin before or even seen one. They did
not know where they were bound, and made guesses about their destination
based on the type of clothing they had been issued. Though they were filled
with the confidence (and the arrogance) of youth, few had ever fired a shot
in anger, and for the most part they were utterly ignorant of what lay ahead.
