270 = NEPTUNE
included the Navy and Coast Guard coxswains who took their fragile Hig-
gins boats through the coastal obstacles. It included as well the lieutenants
and ensigns who drove their LCTs and LCIs onto the crowded beaches even
after it became evident that the elegant plan was going spectacularly awry. It
included the Army captains and lieutenants who led their small tank and in-
fantry units into the slaughterhouse ashore, and it included the sergeants
and other noncommissioned officers who assumed responsibility on the
beach after their officers fell in the first burst of relentless gunfire. Finally—
indeed, most of all— it included the enlisted sailors and soldiers, who though
terrified to the core, executed their assignments as best they could for as long
as they could. In the end, it was the training and instinct of those soldiers and
sailors, more than the carefully prepared script, that produced the Allied vic-
tory on the Normandy beaches.
THE FIRST ALLIED LANDING CRAFT arrived on the American beaches
within minutes of the moment indicated on the timetable. The Navy and
Coast Guard coxswains jammed their Higgins boats up onto the beach, or
as close to it as the uneven sub-aqueous terrain and still-visible mined ob-
stacles would allow. The coxswains had been guided to the departure points
by patrol craft, but for the final run in to the smoke-enshrouded beach, they
simply aimed their craft shoreward and opened the throttles, going "hell
bent for election as fast as we could go," as one put it. More than a few of the
boats, running flat out and pushed on by the rising tide, were virtuallylited
up by the surf and slammed down violently onto the sand. One sailor re-
membered that the wooden boats "would just bounce up and down, up and
down, until finally they were hard aground." Some of them "split wide open"
and the men had to swim or crawl away. Those not wrecked on the beach
became targets of the German artillery which immediately opened fire?
Most of the Hisgins boats had to thread their way through the obstacles,
sometimes with only a few feet to spare on either side. Due to the shallow
gradient of the heach. man rounded while they were still well off the surf
line. A few of the coxswains backed out and tried to find another section of
beach where they could get closer. Others toggled their engines forward
and back, trying to force their way over the sandbars. Sooner or later,
Roeret and Churchill get acquainted prior to a joint religious service on board HMS
Pinceo Wales on August 10, 1941. Behind them are many of the men who would
pay central roles in the development of Anglo-American strategy during the war. At
hi, ary Hopkins chats with Averell Harriman; in the center, Ernest King talks with
George Marshall; Sir John Dill is behind Churchill's left shoulder; and at right Harold
"Betty" Stark stands with Dudley Pound. (FDR Library)
