78
= NEPTUNE
By far the most daunting obstacle for the invaders was the dearth of land-
ing craft. Getting armed men, each of them carrying fifty or sixty pounds of
weapons and equipment, from the troopships to the beaches, along with
their supplies and especially their vehicles, was the most difficult aspect of
any amphibious operation. The U.S. Marines had pioneered amphibious
tactics during the 1930s and had conducted a number of practice landings
during the annual fleet exercises at Culebra in Puerto Rico. But due to the
parsimonious budgets of those years, they improvised "landing craft" from
ships' boats. That would not suffice for the kind of large-scale amphibious
assaults needed to effect Torch. For that, the Allies needed specially designed
vessels that were small enough to be carried aboard the troopships during
the ocean crossing, yet large enough to carry a score or more soldiers and
their equipment several miles to the beach. They needed to be of sufficiently
shallow draft to get close to the beach — or even onto the beach — but also
commodious enough to carry the jeeps, trucks, and tanks needed to sustain
a landing force in a battle ashore. Though the Navy Department had experi-
mented with early designs for a "tank lighter" in the 1930s, the vessel that
proved most useful in this role was something called the Higgins boat.!lo
IN THE 1930S, A TEAM OF DESIGNERS working for boatbuilding entrepre-
neur Andrew Jackson Higgins had developed what was initially called a
"Eureka boat" for trappers and oil explorers in the shallow swamps of the
Louisiana delta. The U.S. Marines became interested in the Eureka boat for
military purposes, and in the fall of 1940 Higgins obtained a contract with
the Navy to build 335 of them. The boats that made up this first generation
of landing craft were flat-bottomed plywood vessels thirty-six feet long with
a spoon-shaped bow that allowed them to push up onto a shallow beach.
They were initially powered by a gasoline engine, though diesel engines even-
tually proved more practical. Higgins was a charismatic and tenacious busi-
nessman who was occasionally frustrated in his prewar dealings with the
Navy bureaucracy. Furious when the Navy reneged on a handshake deal
for 131 tank carriers in favor of an inferior in-house design, Higgins pub-
licly characterized the Naval Academy as a place where officers learned
"fancy dancing, football, fencing, boxing— things like that," but, he insisted,
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 79
"there are no officers... who know a goddam thing about small boat design."
Nayleaders, in turn, considered him "an arrogant know it all."! 1
Pearl Harbor swept away most of the bureaucratic impediments, but
it did not change the Navy's low priority for landing-craft production. In
January 1942 the construction of carriers, destroyers, and even battleships
seemed more urgent than building landing craft, which were initially listed
eighth in the Navy's shipbuilding precedence. Two months later they were
lowered to tenth. Nevertheless, by the summer of 1942, the Navy had
authorized construction of nearly two thousand of them. Many of those
wer still in the construction pipeline as the deadline for Torch approached,
and most would eventually be sent to the Pacific. Consequently, there were
only a few hundred landing craft available for the landings in North Africa.
What made the Higgins boats so valuable was their peculiar design. Be-
cause of their flat bottom, spoonbill bow, and shallow draft (only twenty-six
inches forward), they could run right up onto the beach. In newer versions,
the bow was squared off and hinged at the bottom so that it could be
dropped onto the sand to allow the men to rush out onto the beach dry-
thod. Each boat could carry thirty-six soldiers plus a Navy crew of three,
and the addition of the bow ramp meant that they could also carry jeeps
sad trucks, though at thirty-six feet long and just over ten feet wide, they
could carry only one truck or two jeeps at a time. To improve on that, Hig-
gins designed and built a fifty-foot model that was made of steel and
equipped with a stronger ramp so that it could carry a thirty-four-ton
Sherman tank. Characteristically, the Navy endowed each of these vessels
it a slightly different acronym: the initial Higgins boat was a Landing
Cat Personnel (LCP), and the ramped version was an LCP (R), later
resignated as a Landing Craft, Vehicle and Personnel (LCVP). The big-
8, te Higns boats for carrying tanks ashore were designated as Land-
big Cat Mechanized (LCM), often called a "Mike boat." 2
Higgins even assumed responsibility for training the coxswains who
would operate these ungainly craft. Upon completing the course, they re-
cinda crificate from the "Higgins Eureka Motor Boat Operators School
iNe leans, U.S.A." At the school, they learned the distinctive charac-
kitio se unique craft. For example, the natural instinct of a boat
