164
= NEPTUNE
the beach, suffering horrible casualties in the process. As a result, the
Marines requested a dramatic increase in the number of tracked amphib-
ious vessels (LVTs or "amphtracks") that could crawl over such reefs. The
November schedule had initially called for 2,05S of these, but as a result of
the lessons learned at Tarawa, the December schedule included more than
4,000 of them, virtually doubling the requirement. It was one more obliga-
tion crowded onto an already congested construction schedule?9
Finally, assembling a sufficient number of LSTs for Neptune-Overlord
was not simply a matter of production; it was also a question of distribu-
tion. Besides those sent to the Pacific, there were 104 LSTs till in the Medi-
terranean in late 1943. Since Allied soldiers were already ashore on the
Italian boot, the need for landing craft in that theater had diminished signif
icantly, and Morgan's plan called for fifty-six of those LSTs to return to Eng-
land in January 1944 to prepare for the cross-Channel operation. As the
campaign in Italy dragged on, however, Churchill conceived of an end run
around the German defensive line in Italy by conducting an amphibious
landing at Anzio. Though Eisenhower was less enthusiastic about this
maneuver than most of his subordinates, he agreed that it was desirable in
order to avoid "a series of slow and costly frontal attacks." Of course, to con-
duct that operation meant keeping a number of landing craft, and especially
the essential LSTS, in the Mediterranean. "T do not wish to interfere with
the preparations for OVERLORD, Eisenhower wrote to the Combined
Chiefs, "but I have felt it my duty to lay before you my requirements".30
Churchill argued that the departure of the LSTs for England could be
delayed several months without any serious consequences because the
ships and crews in question were already veterans of multible onerations
and would not need additional training after they arrived in the United
Kingdom. Of course, that argument overlooked the fact that while the
ships crews might be experienced, the troops they would carry were not,
so it would be helpful, arguably even essential, to have the IS Is in England
for training several months before they set out across the Channel. Never-
theless, on October 29, orders went out to suspend "all shipments of
landing craft to U.K. from Mediterranean area." In the end, the fifty-six
ISTs participated in the landings at Anzio (dubbed Operation Shingle) on
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" = 165
January 22, 1944. (See map, page 116.) It was another fist hurled into the
Mediterranean tar baby, for the troops at Anzio became trapped in a coastal
cul de-sac and the campaign bogged down again. Churchill acknowledged
his disappointment in a particularly vivid sentence: "I had hoped that we
were hurling a wild cat on to the shore, but all we got was a stranded whale."
Stranded or not, the forces in the Anzio bridgehead had to be supplied, and
much of their supplies had to be carried on LSTs, a fact that kept those
ships, like the men they supplied, imprisoned in the Mediterranean. 31
Scrambling to close the gap between the shrinking availability and the
increasing need, the Combined Chiefs took steps to ensure that none of the
LSTs were being "wasted" conducting ancillary missions. Because they had
acommodious hold and the ability to discharge cargo anywhere without a
pier, jetty, or heavy-lift cranes, theater commanders found LSTs useful for
all sorts of logistic work. A few of them, especially in the Pacific, even used
them as "float storage" for ammunition and supplies. Aware of this, King
ordered all commanders to "rigidly restrict use of landing craft to first am-
phibious assault operations, adding an unusual note: "This is mandatory."
Similarly, Churchill wrote to Brooke to ask about LSTs being "absorbed in
purely supply work to the prevention of their amphibious duties." The
prime minister was annoyed that "such valuable forces [were] being so
completely wasted."32
Meanwhile, back in the United States, despite an "urgency" priority and
twenty-four-hour-a-day work schedules, the production of new LSTs
remained modest, even disappointing. Roosevelt authorized the new
director of war mobilization, James (Jimmy) Byrnes, to make landing craft
the single highest construction priority, over Army trucks, Navy ships, and
even Russian assistance. By the end of 1943, the United States had built a
total of 398 LSTs, but over half of them were in the Pacific and more than
a hundred were still in the Mediterranean. That left fewer than a hundred
foran operation that Morgan estimated would require 230. By the spring of
194, the situation was becoming serious. Secretary of the Navy Knox tried
to put the best face on it he could in a letter to Betty Stark in London. He
asserted that "we are right up to schedule - in fact, ahead of schedule - for
landing craft of all types except L.STs, and we might be short five or six of
