86 = NEPTUNE
for Algiers. The British and American soldiers on board these ships had a
somewhat shorter journey than those in Task Force 34, and some of the
Americans found the experience rather novel, even enjoyable. They were
especially pleased to be included in the British tradition of "splicing the
main brace" each day, when a ration of rum was served out to all hands.
They were less enchanted by the other British tradition of afternoon tea,
and they were positively repelled by the food, which consisted almost
exclusively of boiled mutton.?1
Altogether, the Allies committed more than six hundred ships to Opera-
tion Torch. Keeping this massive movement secret was a major concern,
not only to achieve surprise on the beach but to avoid German U-boats en
route. Consequently, the convoys from both Norfolk and Britain took de-
ceptive routes to give the impression that they might be bound elsewhere,
such as the Azores or South Africa. Even after the convoys from England
passed through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Mediterranean, they
continued eastward, as if headed for the besieged island of Malta, before
they abruptly turned south for the African coast. The mission was kept
secret from the French as well, and as a result, no one knew how the French
would react when the Allied troops came ashore. Would the British and
Americans be greeted as liberators or invaders? There had been some dis-
cussion about sharing plans with the French in the hope of working out an
arrangement in advance, though to do so risked compromising the whole
operation. In the end, the decision was made to keep everything secret
until the last moment.
The Allies did make one effort to obtain French cooperation. On the
night of October 23, the same day the American invasion convoy left Nor-
folk, Eisenhower's deputy commander, Mark Clark, arrived by prearrange-
ment off the African coast near Algiers as a passenger on a British submarine.
After some clandestine blinking of lights with a contact onshore, Clark
climbed gingerly into a canvas kayak called a folbot and paddled to the
beach with a handful of British commandos to meet a French major general
named Charles Mast, who had indicated his readiness to use his influence
to encourage French cooperation with an Allied invasion. It was a risky,
perhaps even foolhardy undertaking since Clark was privy not only to all
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 87
the plans for Torch but also to what was called the Ultra secret: that the
Allis had broken the German signal codes. Were Clark to be captured and
tortured, all that would be in jeopardy. Moreover, the mission was of ques-
tionable value since Clark was not authorized to tell Mast anything specific
about the pending invasion, including the date, which made it impossible
for Mastto arrange for any meaningful cooperation.
The episode meeting was dramatic enough. At one point, news that the
police were en route forced Clark and the others to hide in the cellar while
policemen searched the house where they were meeting. Later, Clark and
the commandos raced down to the beach, where Clark removed his trou-
sers in order to swim out to a swamped folbot. He came back ashore unsuc-
esful and spent the rest of the night trouserless, hiding among the trees.*
Lathe end, Clark made it safely back to the waiting sub, though his clandes-
tine mission resolved nothing, and when the Allied convoys approached
the target beaches on the night of November 7, no one knew how the
French would react. The Americans agreed beforehand that if they received
hostil fire, they were to report, "Batter up!" and the order to return fire
would be "Play ball!"22
In hindsight, it might have been worth risking the secrecy of the opera-
ton to bring the French more fully into Allied confidence, for instead of
bring greted as friends, the Americans met fierce resistance. Some of this
is because the French navy, frustrated by the fact that it had not had the
opportunity to fire a shot during the 1940 campaign against the Germans,
ves eg to defend not only French territory but honor. In addition, when
the elfreuted out of the predawn darkness on November 8, it was
cay natural for the French to respond in kind. At a few minutes past
600 a.m., Hewitt ordered, "Play ball!"23
Though there were no Germans in either Morocco or Algeria, the landings
it costed the first Anglo-American counterattack against Hitler's
cope liven that, it was absolutely essential that the Allies succeed. Failing
* This story soon made the rounds of those few who were aware of the mission. When
Cat Later met King George VI in Buckingham Palace, the king tweaked him by
sing: ic the one who took that kinglous trip. Didn't you, by the way, get
standed on the beach without your pants?"
