186 - NEPTUNE
George VI that his beret alone was worth three divisions because when
soldiers saw it across a battlefield, they would cry, "There's Monty!" and
become unbeatable. After almost every one of these formal parades, Mont-
gomery made an effort to interact personally with the soldiers. Often he
called for the men to "stand easy," then wandered among them, shaking
hands and making chitchat. At some of the larger events, he would signal
that they should break ranks and crowd up to the reviewing stand for an
informal talk. If there wasn't a reviewing stand, he might climb on top of a
jeep and wave the soldiers to gather round. His actions were based on a
conviction that "stout hearts" (his words) were at least as important as
technical training. Paraphrasing Napoleon, he asserted that, "It is' the man'
that counts, and not only the machine." What he meant was that winning
battles was due as much to individual courage as to technical or mechanical
superiority, but few who heard him were left in any doubt about who "the
man" was. Significantly, Montgomery spent much of February sitting for a
formal oil portrait.23
After visiting virtually every Army base on the island, Montgomery
began giving speeches at factories and work centers. He told his listeners
that "we were all one great army" and that "we must all ally to the task and
finish off the war. He was well received everywhere he went, which con-
tributed to his already healthy self-regard, but it was unclear to some
whether he was preparing for a military operation or running for public
office. In his postwar memoirs, he noted, "The people seemed to think I had
some magic prescription for victory and that I had been sent to lead them
to better things." Almost certainly he thought so, too. Both Churchill and
Eisenhower worried that Montgomery was not focusing on the pressing
need for realistic training, and Ramsay was particularly frustrated by his
lengthy absences. "His knowledge of the technique of the operation is very
small" Ramsay wrote in his diary. He worried that rather than make com-
mand decisions himself, Montgomery left almost everything to his staf.
"He does no work at all," Ramsay wrote in disgust.?4
For his part, Ramsay established his headquarters at Southwick House, a
few miles inland from Portsmouth. A large, impressive manor house with a
colonnaded front, it had been turned over to the Royal Navy as a School of
SHAEF and ANCXF = 187
Navigation to replace the one that had been bombed out in Portsmouth,
and as such, it bore the name HMS Dryad, though it certainly never went to
sea. Once an elegant private estate, the grounds were marred now by hun-
dreds of the ubiquitous Nissen huts. A giant map of the English Channel
was installed on one wall of the main house showing all the ports in
southern England where Allied troops were congregated, as well as the
target beaches in Normandy. Tiny wooden ship icons could be moved
about on the map to show the location, both current and intended, of Allied
vessels.
One of Ramsay's first decisions after moving into Southwick House was
to request the appointment of Admiral Sir Philip Vian as his deputy com-
mander. It was a natural selection for a number of reasons, including the
fact that Ramsay and Vian were close friends. Ramsay had spent the New
Year' holiday at Vian's house in Hampshire, where they had played golf
despite the weather and spent the evenings playing card games with Vian's
children.' In addition to their personal friendship, Vian was a natural
choice because, like Montgomery, he was something of a national hero in
Britain. Early in the war, he had pursued a German supply ship, the Alt-
mark, into then-neutral Norwegian waters in order to rescue three hundred
Bitish merchant seamen being held on board as prisoners, an act for which
he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order (DSO). Two years later in
the Mediteranean, Vian won a knighthood after a series of desperate
actions in defense of convoys fighting their way from Egypt to the besieged
island of Malta, south of Sicily.*
Vian had also commanded what was labeled "Force V" during the Husky
landings in Sicily and the Avalanche landings near Salerno, in which role he
had worked closely with Ramsay. After that, Churchill decided to name
him to succeed Louis Mountbatten as head of amphibious forces. When
Vian reported to the Admiralty in 1943, however, he learned that Ramsay
had requested him as his deputy for the cross-Channel invasion, and that
* Fans of naval literature who are familiar with C. S. Forester's classic novel The Ship may
be avare that it is based on the Second Battle of Sirte, fought on March 22, 1942, in
air forces.
which Vian fought of several attacks from a superior Italian surface force and German
