76
= NEPTUNE
Dieppe raid fell short of being a full-blown catastrophe only because of the
limited numbers involved. The lesson was not lost on Eisenhower, who
wrote his naval aide Harry Butcher on September 2 that in planning Torch,
"we are undertaking something of a quite desperate nature"
TO MANAGE OPERATION TORCH, Eisenhower moved his headquarters
from No. 20 Grosvenor Square in London's Mayfair district to the larger
Norfolk House on St. James's Square, a block off Pall Mall. Once the home
of the Dukes of Norfolk, the original building had been razed just before
the war to accommodate a rather charmless red brick office building.
There, Eisenhower and his team of staff officers kept long hours dealing
with the infinite number of details associated with mounting an invasion
of Africa, now only two months away. Haste bred anxiety in the barely
controlled chaos that characterized the daily schedule at Norfolk House.
Tke's deputy Mark Clark (who preferred to use his middle name, Wayne)
found that keeping track of all the various aspects of the global operation
was all but impossible. Goods and equipment that had been ordered and
shipped somehow disappeared. The U-boats were responsible for some of
that, of course, but much of it was administrative confusion. Whatever the
cause, the shortfalls had to be made up somehow, and staff officers scram-
bled to find replacements or substitutes. Their frustration led to frayed
tempers and sharp words. Through it all, whatever he might feel person-
ally, Eisenhower remained outwardly calm and confident. When Clark
came to him frantic about yet another seemingly insoluble crisis, Eisen-
hower's most characteristic comment was, "Now just keep your shirt on,
Wayne."
Eisenhower also had to keep Churchill happy. The prime minister liked
to be in the middle of things, and he insisted that both Eisenhower and
Clark attend weekly luncheons and occasional late-night meetings at 10
Downing Street. The P.M. also hosted the Americans for weekends at
Chequers. Churchill considered these meetings a great success. To Eisen-
hower they were one more time-consuming distraction from the work he
had to do. In spite of that, he was unfailingly courteous, always compli-
mented Churchill on the Irish stew that was often served, and managed to
The Mediterranean Tar Baby E 77
convince the prime minister that he was as delighted by these conferences
as his host.®
The biggest problem confronting the planners at Norfolk House was
the old one of shipping. There were not enough troopships for the inva-
sion force, not enough cargo ships to carry the supplies, not enough
escorts for protection, and, most of all, not enough landing craft to get
the men, their supplies, and their vehicles from the transports to the
beach. As Clark put it, "There was a continual crisis over shipping space
and frequent changes in plans had to be made to overcome what was al-
ways a shortage of vessels." The prewar emphasis on building combatants
had severely restricted the construction of auxiliaries, and losses in the
Batle of the Atlantic made the problem worse. In consequence, the inva-
sion armadas for all three beaches were improvised flotillas of whatever
the Allies could lay their hands on. Prewar cruise ships became troop-
ships, cargo vessels metamorphosed into attack transports, and even fer-
ryboats from the Glasgow-Belfast run were called into service. To use the
American idiom, the invasion fleets were jury-rigged, or as the British
would say, lash-ups.
Another problem was air cover. The landing beaches in Algeria could be
protected, at least in part, by planes operating from the recently enlarged
single airstrip at British Gibraltar, but the American landings in Morocco
would depend entirely on carrier-borne aircraft, and most of the full-sized
American aircraft carriers were in the Pacific. Indeed, only three days after
the American invasion flotilla left Norfolk for Africa on October 23, U.S.
cariers in the Pacific fought the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands, which cost
the Americans the USS Hornet (CV-8). The only carrier in the Atlantic was
the much smaller USS Ranger (CV-4). To supplement her, the Americans
ried on our small carriers that had been converted from oilers, each of
Chem capable of catrying thirty planes.* These ships did excellent service,
though their hasty conversion demonstrated again the ersatz character of
the invasion force.
* The were the Sangemon (CV-26), which gave her name to the class; the Suwanee
((VE-2); the Chenango (CVE-28); and the Santee (CVE-29).
