9 8
= NEPTUNE
equipment in North Africa, and that number would rise to eight hundred
thousand by May. It would be far simpler to use that force locally, to cross the
narrow waist of the Mediterranean to Sicily or Sardinia, than to move all of
it, or most of it, back to England for an assault on Brest. The second factor, as
always, was shipping. Losses in the Pacific during the fierce battles around
Guadalcanal, losses to the U-boats in the Atlantic, and of course losses dur-
ing Torch all affected both sealift and amphibious capability. Given that, the
British argued that it made much more sense to continue operations in the
Mediterranean than to try to move hundreds of thousands of men from
there to England. The Catch-22 of this option was that another operation in
the Mediterranean would deplete Allied shipping even more and delay a
cross-Channel move yet again —perhaps indefinitely?'
Roosevelt kept an open mind. He took Marshall's earnest advocacy of a
cross-Channel operation seriously, but he also wanted to talk to Churchill
again, and he was especially eager to hear Stalin's views. He proposed an-
other meting. Churchill was more than willing, "As soon as we have knocked
the Germans out of Tunisia," the prime minister wrote to Roosevelt two
weeks after the Torch landings, "we should proceed with a military confer-
ence." Roosevelt suggested that they meet somewhere in Africa, in part be-
cause an African venue might allow Stalin to attend, and in part because he
foresaw the political benefits that would accrue from being photographed
reviewing American troops on a recent battlefield. Roosevelt initially
thought "a secure place south of Algiers" might do, though in the end he ac-
cepted Marshall's suggestion to hold the meeting near Casablanca in French
Morocco. Soon thereafter, during movie night at the White House, it suited
the president's puckish sense of humor to screen the new Humphrey
Bogart-Ingrid Bergman film Casablanca. Since the forthcoming trip was
still a closely held secret, only he and a few others got the joke?
Roosevelt enjoyed the fact that the trip would be both historic and more
than a little adventurous. He would be the first American president to fly in
an airplane or to visit Africa while in office, and the first commander in chief
to leave the country in time of war. As always, the trip was kept utterly secret,
and the clandestine atmosphere only added to the president's boyish enthu-
siasm. (Hopkins thought he "acted like a sixteen-year-old.") The presidential
Casablanca to COSSAC = 99
party stole surreptitiously out of Washington late at night on January 9 and
headed south by train to Miami. There he and his entourage boarded a plane
for Trinidad, where Admiral William Leahy, Roosevelt's chief of staff, who
had been battling a stomach virus, declared himself too ill to continue. The
rest of the party flew south again to Belem, on the Brazilian coast. There were
some obligatory meetings with local leaders before the official party boarded
a lying boat for an eighteen-and-a-half-hour overnight crossing of the Atlan-
tic. The plane splashed down in the mouth of the Gambia River in western
Africa, and from there it was back onto another plane that flew the presiden-
tial party over the Atlas Mountains to an airstrip only two miles from the
hotel that had been secured for the conference.?
As it happened, Stalin did not attend. He declared that he would n
leave the Soviet Union so long as there were German soldiers on Russia.
soil. Perhaps, too, he felt that his refusal underscored the fact that whi
western allies traveled around attending conferences, he was actually
ing a war.
Party because of travel fatigue, and partly because of the prim
te's nocturnal habits, most of the business sessions involving
and Roosevelt took place in the late afternoon and evening. The
the Combined Chiefs to meet in the mornings to thrash out strate
natives before presenting their views to the heads of government in
ternoon. In effect, the generals and admirals proposed, and the por
leaders disposed. The schedule also allowed time for some family reuni
Churchill arranged to have his son, Randolph, released temporarily fro
his post with the British Eighth Army in Egypt; both Elliot Roosevelt
was with the U.S. Army, and Franklin junior, a lieutenant in the Navy,
present. Even Harry Hopkins's son Robert, whom he had not seen in ye
and who was now an Army Air Forces photographer, was there.
The Combined Chiefs got together for their first session on January 14. I
Bitish were well prepared as usual, and Brooke led off with an hour-long pre
entation that emphasized the great results to be expected by invading Sicily
Such a move, Brooke argued, would "compel the Germans to disperse their
forces," and thereby give greater assistance to the Russians than an invasion of
France would. Pound argued that continued Mediterranean operations were
