YUL
354 = NEPTUNE
tens of thousands. Officers who suggested any other tactical solution were
sacked. Field Marshal Karl von Rundstedt, commanding German armies in
the west, felt obligated to tell Hitler that the strategic situation in France
was hopeless. Hitler responded by replacing him with Gunther Hans von
Kluge.
Throughout the rest of June and into July, the principal fighting in Nor-
mandy continued to swirl around Caen, which allowed Montgomery to
assert, with justification, that his forces were bearing the brunt of the ene-
my's counterattacks. It also allowed the Royal Navy battleships and cruisers
to hammer away at German positions in and around the city, doing so with
such effectiveness that Major General Leo Geyr von Schweppenberg, com-
mander of Panzer Group West, appealed to Berlin for permission to with-
draw beyond the range of the Allied naval guns. Hitler denied the request
and fired von Schweppenberg.
All that time, the Allies continued to pour men, vehicles, and equipment
into France. With Cherbourg harbor still not fully operational, the LSTs
and smaller landing craft brought men and supplies over the Normandy
beaches as well as the Rritich Mulberry Dier off A rromanche. On July 4, the
millionth Allied soldier came ashore, and two days later George Patton,
who up to then had been cooling his heels in England as a decoy, landed at
a small airstrip behind Omaha Beach. Once off the plane, he told the sol-
diers who crowded around him that they were going to Berlin, where, he
insisted, "I am going to personally shoot that paper-hanging goddammed
son of a bitch."?
Three weeks later, on July 25, the Americans initiated Operation Cobra,
a plan to break out of their enclave in Brittany and Normandy. Early gains
were incremental and costly. Then on August 1, two armored divisions of
Collin's VII Corps opened a hole in the German lines, and Patton's newly
activated Third Army burst through into the French countryside. Hitler
ordered an immediate counterattack, and though his lieutenants attempted
to obey. their assaults were blunted and than hurled back With unchallenged
command of the air and dominant superiority on the ground, Allied columns
raced across France the way the Germans had done back in 1940. The Allies
very nearly trapped two full German armies in a double envelopment in
Epilogue =
355
what was known as the Falaise pocket south of Caen, and while the Ger-
mans managed to escape by the narrowest of margins, they nevertheless
fled eastward all the way to the Seine River.3
AS THE FIGHTING MOVED INLAND, away from the beaches, the Neptune
forces were dispersed. Ramsay himself continued to cooperate with Mont-
gomery Second Army in the campaign for the lowlands and especially the
capture of Antwerp in September, but both Vian and Kirk returned to Eng-
land for reassignment. Kirk's Western Naval Task Force was officially dis-
solved on July 10, and he became Commander, U.S. Naval Forces in France.
Vian, elevated to a Knight Commander of the Bath and the rank of vice
admiral, went to the Pacific, where he assumed command of a fleet of air-
craft carriers. In that capacity, he supervised the attack Churchill had long
advocated against Japanese-held Sumatra. Both Jimmy Hall and Morton
Deyo also got orders to the Pacific, where in the spring of 1945 they par-
ticipated in the American invasion of Okinawa, for which each of them
received the Navy's Distinguished Service Medal. Leigh-Mallory, too, was
assigned to the Pacific as the Air Commander-in-Chief for South East Asia,
though while en route there his plane crashed over the French Alps in poor
weather and everyone on board was killed.+
Don Moon got orders to the Mediterranean to command the invasion
force for the attack on southern France, initially code-named Anvil but now
renamed Dragoon, supposedly because Churchill claimed that he had been
dragooned into it. Arriving in Naples in July, Moon reported to Kent
Hewitt, the overall commander of Dragoon, who had been his math pro-
fessor at the Naval Academy and a kind of mentor. Moon was uneasy about
the short interval he had to absorb all the various elements of this new
operation. He urged Hewitt to postpone the landings. Hewitt turned him
down. The invasion had been postponed once before, Hewitt reminded
him, and too many factors, political as well as logistical, were involved.
Moon had been working fifteen-hour days, seven days a week for months
and now suffered from a physical tiredness that bordered on exhaustion.
Much of that was due to his work ethic. Throughout the planning period for
Neptune, then during the crisis of Exercise Tiger, and all through the invasion
