236 = NEPTUNE
By midnight on June 3, several of the tightly scheduled elements of the
complex invasion plan had been set in motion, but there was one aspect of
the plan that could not be scripted.
THE SHIPS OF MOON'S FORCE U were still emerging from their several
harbors at 9:30 p.m. on June 3, when Eisenhower and his principal dep.
uties met at Southwick House near Portsmouth to hear the latest weather
forecast from Group Captain James M. Stagg, the Royal Air Force officer
who was Ike's chief meteorologist. The day before, Stagg had reported that
the forecast for June S was "full of menace," and that the weather was likely
to turn worse before it got better. Ike had decided to wait a day before de-
ciding what, if anything, to do about it. Now, twenty-four hours later,
Stagg's updated forecast was even more dire. A low-pressure area was
moving in, and the weather stations in Northern Ireland were reporting
large waves and winds of thirty miles per hour. Eisenhower asked his trio
of commanders what they thought. Ramsay, who had spent the day vis.
iting the hards in Portsmouth, replied that he believed the initial assault
force would be able to get ashore but that the worsening weather would
make it difficult, perhaps even impossible, to provide follow-up support.
Leigh-Mallory was similarly cautious, suggesting that even if his planes
could fly, the pilots would not be able to see well enough to be sure of their
targets. Only Montgomery announced himself ready to go, a statement
that provoked a few sidelong glances from others in the room who won-
dered if this was just Monty being Monty. The decision, of course, was
Eisenhower's. To send the invasion force into the teeth of a bad storm
could prove disastrous, but a postponement might prove almost as bad
A delay risked losing the element of surprise and would utterly disrunt the
intricate invasion timetable, with potentially catastrophic results. There
seemed to be no good option. Eisenhower announced that the circum-
stances seemed to require a twenty-four-hour Dostonement but that he
would wait until four-fifteen the next morning to hear one more weather
report before making a final decision. In the meantime, the original
southeasterly course, battling the elements.27
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 237
By 4:15 a.m. on June 4, the winds had moderated, and when the SHAEF
command team gathered again at Southwick House, there was a surge of
cautious hope. As he entered, Captain Stagg felt an almost physical tension
in the room. Ike nodded to him meaningfully, and Stagg presented his
updated forecast. It was not good. Clouds and winds would continue to
increase all day, he reported, and bring the cloud ceiling down to a mere
three hundred feet. Ramsay spoke up to observe that it was clear and calm
outside at the moment, but Stagg assured him that the weather would
worsen over the next several hours. Eisenhower again queried his com-
manders. Ramsay feared that the low cloud ceiling "would prohibit use of
airborne troops" and most other air action, "including air spotting" for
naval gunfire support. Ramsay had agreed to a daylight attack in the first
place only because of assurances that air and gunfire support would be
"overwhelming." Given the conditions described by Captain Stagg, it
seemed unlikely now that there could be any significant air or naval sup-
port. Ramsay believed the invasion should be delayed. Eisenhower con-
curred. "If the air cannot operate" he said, "we must postpone." He looked
around the room and asked if everyone was in agreement. No one spoke;
even Montgomery remained silent. Eisenhower thereupon announced that
the landings would be postponed for twenty-four hours. In fact, the post-
ponement would be twenty-four and a halfhours, since the original H-Hour
was 6:00 a.m. on June 5 but had now been changed to 6:30 a.m. on June 6
to accommodate the tide?8
Ramsay at once notified his task force commanders by phone. Vian's
thre task groups, though fully loaded and ready to go, had not yet left port,
so for them, while the news was irksome, it was not dire. Kirk's two task
groups were more of a problem. Hall's Force O had been scheduled to de-
partat 7:00 a.m., now just over two hours away, which meant that his ships
had already begun their departure routines. And of course most of Moon's
Force U had been at sea since the night before. Nevertheless, when Ramsay
called Kirk to ask, "Can you hold up?" Kirk at once replied, "Yes we can."
Kirk's confidence derived from his knowledge that there was an annex to
the operational plan dedicated to precisely these circumstances. All that
was necessary, Kirk believed, was to broadcast the preestablished code
