224 = NEPTUNE
superiority and could absorb very heavy casualties and still succeed. That
last bit of information was probably less comforting than the briefer
intended.3
Some had more reason to worry than most. That certainly included the
men who would go in first to clear the mines and obstacles on the assault
beaches. In the U.S. Navy these men belonged to Naval Combat Demoli-
tion Units (NCDUs); in the Royal Navy they were part of the Landing
Craft Obstacle Clearing Units (LCOCUs). In either service, their jobs
were among the most perilous in the entire operation. Just behind them
would come the men of the Special Engineer Brigades, whose job it was to
construct passages through the cleared minefields using bulldozers, road
graders, and tractors landed from the LCTs. Then there were the beach
masters who acted as traffic cops, supervising the landing and off-loading
of the vessels bringing the infantry and the tanks ashore. At one of the
preinvasion briefings, a designated beach master in the audience asked
about how he was to get food and drinking water during his extended stay
ashore. "Not to worry" the briefer replied matter-of factly. "If any of you
beach officers are still alive after the invasion, we'll take care of you and
find a way to supply you."
The marshaling areas around the Channel ports were known as "sausage
camps" because their locations were indicated on the maps by sausage-
shaped symbols. To disguise the military buildup, the trucks, tanks, and
jeeps were parked, whenever possible, in wooded areas where they could
not be easily identified from the air. Forested areas from Cornwall to East
Sussex soon filled up with a wide variety of camouflaged vehicles and
equipment. Even the woods around the athletic fields at the British Naval
Academy at Dartmouth were crowded with parked vehicles. That caused a
bit of a flutter when some of the old guard protested that driving tanks over
the cricket pitch was just too much. Surely some things were sacred! As dip-
lomatically as possible, local commanders explained that painful sacrifices
were necessary to ensure victory.
Though the buildup was unceasing, those who arrived first in the mar-
shaling areas confronted the old story of "hurry up and wait" — and the
waiting was agonizing. Robert Miller, a member of the 149th Combat
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 225
Engineer Brigade, scheduled to go ashore in the first wave, recalled that
time "hung heavy" on him and the rest of his team. Like many others, he
wondered what his fate would be on the other side of the Channel. "We
made pacts with our best buddies," he recalled, "to contact each other's
family after the war," should they be killed, and to tell them how they had
died. Others repeatedly, even compulsively, cleaned their rifles and
checked and double-checked their equipment. Members of the demoli-
ton teams carefully measured out two-pound explosive charges and put
them into Navy socks, tying off the ends so they could be quickly affixed to
the obstructions ashore. Given that half a million men were now crowding
up to the embarkation sites, much of their time was spent standing in long
chow lines. The sailors were weary of waiting, too. Ensign Curtis Hansen
ofLST: 15 recalled, "We were tired of the training and of the boredom,
and wanted to get it over with no matter what the outcome personally
would be.
Even now, at nearly the last minute, there were some jitters within the
kigh command. Leigh-Mallory went to Eisenhower to urge the cancella-
tion of the air drop behind the beaches. Given the uncertain weather and
the difficult terrain, he was convinced that the casualty rates among the
paratroopers would be unacceptable. It was one more burden for Ike to
shoulder as he queried others at SHAEF about the impact such a cancella-
tion would have. In the end, he told Leigh-Mallory that the air drop would
take place as planned, and that he —Eisenhower —would accept the
responsibility.
AFTER THE LONG WAIT, the moment came suddenly. As George Good-
speed remembered it, "One morning we were told to pack our sea bags,
sack them in a building, and take with us what we actually needed." Army
patoon commanders were told to ensure that all the men were "freshly
bathed, shaved, and wearing warm underclothing." Some filled their pockets
with candy bars, uncertain when they would have another chance to eat a
regular meal. Divided into "boat teams" of 220 men each— roughly the ca-
pacity of an ICIL) — they were loaded into trucks that drove them to the
harbors, where they lined up on the quay. At 171 different sites all over
