= NEPTUNE
to Roosevelt, the most important thing was to do something quickly to
keep the Russians and the American public in the game. Here was the
conundrum: they could fight elsewhere in 1942, or they could fight in
Europe in 1943, but they could probably not do both. They must choose.!"
Roosevelt did not like to choose. Incorrigible optimist that he was, he
continued to talk and act as if it would be possible to do both. In any case,
the buildup phase (Bolero could begin at once no matter what contingen-
cies arose in the meantime. Whether that buildup fed Sledgehammer or
Roundup-or even Gymnast-would depend on a number of factors,
incuding British acquiescence. As Hopkins put it in a note to the president,
"This will have to be worked out very carefully between you and Marshall,
in the first instance, and you and Churchill, in the second."12
IN ENGLAND, CHURCHILL AND THE BRITISH prepared to receive their
guests with a mixture of anticipation and uncertainty. It had been evident
from the beginning that the Americans and the British had divergent views
on grand strategy, some of which had emerged at Arcadia. Several factors
contributed to this. The first was the British experience on the continent
during the First World War. While the United States had remained neutral
from 1914 to 1917, entering the war with significant numbers of troops
only in the last few months of the conflict, an entire generation of British
men and boys had died on the battlefelds of France and Flanders.* The
narrow escape of the British Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk in 1940
only reminded them that the continent was a dangerous place.
In addition, the British were very much aware of two other factors that
made a swift return to the continent altogether impractical. The first was
that for all their eager enthusiasm, the Americans simply did not have the
available manpower to execute the early invasion they championed. Though
mobilization in America was proceeding rapidly, it would be many months
before the United States could deliver more than a token assault force to
• It is instructive to compare British losses in World War I (886,939 deaths out of a
population of 45.4 million, or about 2 percent) to American losses in the Civil War
(about 700,000 deaths— on both sides — out of a population of 31.5 million, or about
2.2 percent).
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 55
Britain for a cross-Channel attack. Marshall's plan called for the United
States to ship some 800,000 men to England by the spring of 1943. Even if
this schedule could be met, however, there would be only 105,000 Ameri-
cans in Britain by the fall of 1942. So while a 1943 invasion might be fea-
sible, any operation before that would have to be conducted mostly, if not
exclusively, by British soldiers. Marshall acknowledged that he was "greatly
embarrassed by the fact that we could propose only 2½ divisions to partic-
ipate in a cross-Channel operation" in 1942. Rather than Sledgehammer, a
more appropriate name for the contingency plan the Americans were sug-
gesting might have been Croquet Mallet, for the Allies simply did not have
the wherewithal for a full-scale invasion of northern France in 1942.13
Then there was the unresolved shipping problem. The astonishing pro-
ductivity of American shipyards could possibly make an invasion armada a
reality by 1943, assuming, that is, that the Allies could win the Battle of the
Atlantic against German U-boats. But in 1942 there was not enough ship-
ping for a cross-Channel invasion even if the troops to conduct it could
somehow be found. Ferrying two infantry divisions and two tank regi-
ments across the English Channel (the absolute minimum even for a
serious raid) would require more sealift capability and landing craft than
would be available by the fall of 1942.14
In addition to these tangible shortages, there was another problem on a
more subjective level, and that was the British assumption-which they
were careful to keep hidden-that American forces in any number were
simply not ready for a confrontation with the Wehrmacht. Indeed, the
eagerness of the Americans for an early invasion of Europe would have
been amusing if it were not so alarming. Despite a lack of manpower,
shipping, and experience, the Americans were — from the British perspec-
tive, at least —ludicrously eager to pitch into the fray against the most
proficient armed force on the planet. The British found themselves in a situ-
ation akin to a parent trying to explain to his six-year-old why he cannot
drive the car: you don't know how, and your feet don't reach the pedals.
They couldn't say any of that, of course, for they desperately needed the
Americans their manpower, and especially their financial and industrial
strength - to fight the war at all. And so they listened earnestly and feigned
