202 = NEPTUNE
for each beach. Three of them were under Vian's supervision: Force S for
Sword Beach, Force J for Juno Beach, and Force G for Gold Beach. The
other two, under Kirk's command, were Force U for Utah Beach and Force
O for Omaha Beach. And each of them got a separate commander.
The men selected to command the two American task groups were very
different from each other. Jimmy Hall gave up his training command to take
over Force O, which would carry Leonard Gerow's V Corps to Omaha
Beach. Like most career officers, Hall was happy to trade an administrative
post for an active afloat command. His singular characteristic, both as a per-
sonality and as an officer, was a hearty self-confidence. On his Naval Acad-
emy yearbook page, Hall's classmates described him as "a big, blonde,
good-natured Virginian" with a "deep bass voice" who was "a friend to eve-
ryone." Like Eisenhower, he was older than most of his classmates because
prior to attending the Naval Academy, he had spent three years at William
and Mary College, where his father was an English professor famous in ac-
ademic circles for his translation of Beowulf. A standout athlete at William
and Mary, Hall had starred in football, basketball, and baseball. This was
before the NCAA had rules limiting the eligibility of athletes, and Hall
played all three of those sports for four more years at Navy, later recalling,
"My last year at the Academy, I played every second of the Army football
game, every second of every basketball game, and every inning of every
baseball game.* Upon his graduation in 1913, he was awarded the sword
presented to the academy's best all-around athlete. His size, his age, and his
athletic prowess all contributed to an ebullient self-confidence.'4
Though Hall spent most of his naval career as a battleship-destroyer
man, he had as much or more experience in amphibious operations as
anyone in the theater. He had been Hewitt's chief of staff during the Torch
landings and had organized the U.S. Amphibious Force for the invasions of
* When Hall suited up for the baseball game against Army in 1913, the left fielder on the
opposing team was Omar Bradley, (Army won the game 2-1. Because of that shared
history, the two-star admiral felt no qualms calling the three-star general "Brad" when
they met thirty years later to plan the rehearsals for D-Day. The 1914 Army baseball
team, on which Bradley also played, subsequently became famous for the fact that
every member of the starting nine became a general.
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 203
both Sicily and Italy. When he arrived in England, he impressed Ra
' fine type of seaman, bluff and obstinate, & a fine leader." That bl
nary occasionally got him into trouble, such as when he told Samn
that "it was ridiculous" for King and the JCS to refuse to sup
Channel force with the warships that were needed. He occas
to lecture Army generals as well. After assuming his new jo
commander and studying the numbers carefully, he went p
Montgomery's headquarters to explain to him that the shipping
well mean a reduction in the size of the initial cross-Channel lift
gothere, Montgomery was absent, off on yet another speaking tr
explained the situation to Monty's chief of staff, Brigadier Gener
"Freddy" Guingand. Guingand heard him out and then r
Montgomery would not accept a reduction of that nati
dearthat he wasn't there to get Montgomery's approval, ar
a matter of what Montgomery would "accept." It was a mai
possible. "General, apparently you misunderstand the
assigned," Hall told Guingand. "I'm down here to tell you h
doitif you had to accept. It is probably just as well that Moi
not there. IS
The other American naval command was Force U, for Utal
job might have gone to Wilkes, and in fact, Kirk wrote to Kin
recommend" Wilkes for the post because of his experience in
"general familiarity with the plan." King had other ideas. Wil
ashore as the administrator of landing craft, and the comma
went instead to Rear Admiral Don P. Moon, who had served as
ational plans officer and had been slotted to command a naval ta:
Anvil. Now that Anvil was postponed, King sent Moon to England
mand Force U. Ramsay expressed satisfaction with Moon when he a
in March, noting in his diary that Moon was "a fine type of U.S. officer.
cient & alert. He should do well' Moon, however, was very different fru
Hall bluff self-confidence was Hall's principal characteristic, Moon's wa.
a ferocious work ethic, the product of a fierce determination "to always do
one's best. Even as a midshipman, what Moon's classmates remembered
most about him was his "infinite capacity for hard work" Instead of the easy
