YUL
358
= NEPTUNE
restored American optimism during the Depression, sustained Britain in its
darkest days, and shepherded the anti-fascist alliance through four years of
war, his work was finally at an end. He was sixty-three years old.
George Marshall was promoted to the rank of General of the Army (five
stars) in December 1944 even as the Battle of the Bulge was raging in the
Ardennes, although he never exercised the field command that he coveted
and which many of his colleagues felt was his due. After the war, he resigned
as chief of staff, though because his new rank was a life tenure, he techni-
cally remained on active duty. In 1947, he accepted President Harry Tru-
man's invitation to serve as secretary of state, in which capacity he made
what was arguably his greatest contribution to history by sponsoring the
European Recovery Program, better known as the Marshall Plan. In recog-
nition of that, he was awarded the 1953 Nobel Peace Prize. Though Mar-
shall resigned as secretary of state in 1949, he was called back to service a
year later as secretary of defense upon the outbreak of the Korean War He
was disappointed and very likely hurt during the 1952 presidential cam-
paign when Eisenhower, his former protégé, publicly supported those who
criticized Marshalls tenure of leadership in both cabinet positions. True to
his character. however. Marchall never responded to those charges or spoke
an unkind word about Eisenhower or any of his other wartime associates.
He died in Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington on October 16, 1959,
at the age of seventy-eight.
Alan Brooke outlived Marshall by four years. After retirement, Brooke
became the First Viscount Alanbrooke and indulged his passion for bird
watching, becoming vice president of the Royal Society for the Protection
of Birds and president of the Zoological Society of London. He held several
ceremonial positions, including Lord Lieutenant of the County of London.
As Constable of England. he plaved a leu role in the ceremonies surround-
ing the 1953 coronation of Elizabeth Il, an event also attended by his former
counterpart, George Marshall. Four years later, in 1957, there was a flurry of
Dublic interest and cellation unon the Dublicion ofhis edit chunch still
quite candid, diaries that contained sharp criticisms of Churchill, Marshall,
Eisenhower, and others, Alanbrooke suffered a fatal heart attack in June
1963, a month short of his eightieth birthday.
Epilogue = 359
Winston Churchill outlived all of them. A month after Roosevelt's
death, he was the featured speaker at a huge outdoor rally in London to cel-
coate the German surrender, which was announced on May 8, 1945.
Churchill told the crowd, "This is your victory," and almost to a man they
shouted back: "No, it is yours." In many ways, that was true enough, for it
was Churchill more than anyone who had held the beleaguered nation
together in those dark days during 1940 and 1941. Ironically, however, the
very strengths that made him an unrivaled wartime leader—his uncon-
queable will his love of king and country, and his reverence for the old
Empire-did not resonate in the same way in the postwar era. By 1945,
Britons were tired of "blood, tears, toil, and sweat," and despite their grati-
tude for all that he had done for them, they voted his party out of office in
the fist postwar election later that year. Churchill felt the blow keenly and
resigned at once, but he was never one to withdraw quietly into the shad-
ows, and he remained an active and voluble member of Parliament. As ever,
he was also a prolific author, producing his magisterial six-volume history,
The Second World War, which won him the Nobel Prize for Literature in
1953, the same year that George Marshall won the Nobel Peace Prize.
Churchill returned to office in 1951, but poor health, including a severe
stroke, convinced him to resign again in 1955, at the age of eighty. Despite
lifelong habits of heavy drinking, heavy smoking, and absurdly late hours,
he lived to the age of ninety and died at his home in Hyde Park Gate, Lon-
don, in January 1965.
Dwight Eisenhower returned to the United States in November 1945
to succeed his mentor George Marshall as Army chief of staff. In 1948, he
declined offers from both political parties to run for president of the United
States and instead became president of Columbia University in New York
City. Two years later he became Supreme Allied Commander of NATO
forces, and in 1952 he accepted the Republican nomination for president.
Elected twice by wide margins, he presided over a period of relative sta-
bility both at home and abroad, and stepped down in 1961 a much-beloved
national figure. He retired to his farm near Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, where
he had spent much of World War I, and indulged his interest in golf. Having
suffered from heart disease for much of his later life, he succumbed to a
