28
= NEPTUNE
straighten things out. Hopkins told Beaverbrook not to worry, that this was
just a temporary misunderstanding. Hopkins was sure that once the United
States began to mobilize for the war, "we will undoubtedly greatly increase
our amounts." Still, the event reminded Churchill how precarious that
supply line was, and how crucial it was to ensure its continuation. These
considerations convinced him to make a personal visit to Washington as
soon as possible.*
Churchill met with his war cabinet to get formal approval, then wrote to
ask George VI for permission to leave the country in time of war. He made
the reason clear: "We have ...to be careful that our share of munitions and
other aid which we are receiving from the United States does not suffer
more than is, I fear, inevitable. With the king's approval in hand, Churchill
sent a telegram to Roosevelt that same day inviting himself to Washington
for a review of "the whole war plan in the light of reality and new facts."
Roosevelt was not initially enthusiastic. He may have wondered about
the wisdom of conducting a high-level meeting with his British counterpart
while America was still reeling from the initial Japanese onslaught. The U.S.
Navy was trying to put together a relief force for the besieged garrison of
tiny Wake Island in the mid-Pacific, and the Army was seeking reinforce-
ments for the men of General Douglas MacArthur's command in the
Philippines. Pearl Harbor had quieted the isolationists, but they would be-
come noisy again if they suspected that the British were coming over to
assume direction of the war. Whatever his real concerns, Roosevelt couched
his reservations in terms of anxiety for Churchill's safety in crossing the
still-dangerous Atlantic once again. Churchill waved off such consider-
ations and refused to be dissuaded.
The very next day, Hitler declared war on the United States. In one of his
long and rambling speeches to the Reichstag, he portrayed the entire war as
a German response to plots and threats from all quarters. Poland, Britain,
France, and Russia had all been poised to attack, he insisted, only to be
thwarted by bold defensive action by brave German soldiers. As for Ger-
many's relationship with the United States, he cast it in personal terms as a
confrontation between himself, a stalwart and hardworking champion
of the German Volk, and the privileged and effete Roosevelt. "Roosevelt
Arcadia = 29
comes from a rich family and belongs to the class whose path is smoothed
in the Democracies," he told the Reichstag deputies. "I am only the child of
asmall, poor family and had to fight my way by work and industry." The rich
and privileged Roosevelt had been a complete failure as president, Hitler
insisted, and "the only salvation for him lay in diverting public attention
from home to foreign policy." As a result, "he himself began from March
1939 onwards, to meddle in European affairs which were no concern at all
of the President of the U.S.A." Germany had been patient, Hitler asserted,
but she had borne it long enough. He did not ask for a declaration of war;
he simply announced that Germany was now at war with the United States.
The deputies cheered.
The United States was in the war at last-"up to the neck and in to the
death, as Churchill put it—and the contingency plans of more than two
years could be put into effect. Back in March, the tentative Anglo-American
partners had determined that Germany was the most proximate threat and
the most dangerous enemy. Would that decision still hold in the wake of
Japanese infamy? To find out, Churchill prepared to cross the ocean for the
second time in four months.
CHURCHILL LEFT ENGLAND on December 14, one week to the day after
Peat Harbor. He sailed on the battleship Duke of York, sister ship of the
Prince of Wales, which had carried him to the Argentia conference four
months earlier. Soon after that meeting off Newfoundland, Churchill had
dispatched the Prince of Wales, alone with the battlecruiser Renulse to tha
Far East to bolster the defense of Malaya and Singapore. Then on Decem-
ber 1, the very day he telegraphed Roosevelt to invite himself to Washing-
ton, he learned that both of those shins had met their doom at the hands of
a Japanese air attack. It was a severe blow. "In all the war" Churchill wrote
Later, I never received a more direct shock. As elated as he had been to
leam that Japan's assault had brought the United States into the war, he now
confronted the reality that the Japanese offensive had been astonishingly
successful! With the demise of the mighty Prince of Wales, Churchill appre-
diated that throughout the Indian and Pacific Oceans, "Japan was supreme,
and we were everywhere weak and naked.8
