CHAPTER 13
D- DAY: THE CRISIS
YUL
EVERAL OF THE AMERICAN DESTROYERs that had participated in
the early-morning bombardment had pulled off the invasion beaches
prior to H-Hour. They did so partly to make room for the landing craft
and partly to take up screening positions to seaward. Nevertheless, the de-
stroyer skippers could see for themselves that the situation on Omaha
Beach was deteriorating, and even without orders, some of them returned
to the beachfront to open fire on the high ground behind the beach. Now,
just past eight thirty, Hall recalled the rest of them, ordering them to "main-
tain as heavy a volume of fire on beach target [s) as possible. In support of
that, Admiral Bryant radioed a general message from the USS Texas: "Get
on them, men! Get on them! They are raising hell with the men on the
beach, and we can't have any more of that! We must stop it!"!
The destroyer captains responded with enthusiasm— indeed, almost too
much enthusiasm. Most of the ships were American Gleaves-class destroyers
that drew more than thirteen feet of water, and the gradual slope of Omaha
D-Day: The Crisis =
291
Beach made close-in fire support extremely hazardous.* It was self-evident
tatia destroyer grounded in the shallows, the German gunners could blast
itopes at their leisure. Nevertheless, they now came speeding shoreward
at twenty knots or more into water that was both shallow and outside the
Sept channels. One sailor on an LCT approaching the beach was shocked
lose a destroyer ahead of us with heavy smoke pouring from its stack." To
kim, the ship appeared to be out of control and headed directly for the beach.
My God, he thought, they're going to run aground and be disabled right in front
othe German artillery. At the last minute, the destroyer made a sudden hard
let, ured its starboard side parallel to the beach, and began "blazing away
with every gun it had, point blank at the defensive positions." The sailor was
thrilled to see "puffs of smoke and mounds of dirt" flying "everywhere on
the hillsid as the destroyer passed swiftly by.
More than a dozen Allied destroyers responded to the call that morning,
nine of then from Destroyer Squadron (DESRON) 18, under the command
oUS. Navy Captain Harry Sanders, who, like King's planning officer, Charles
Cooke, had earned the nickname "Savvy" for his academic brilliance at the
Naral Academy. Two of Sanders's destroyers, USS Satterlee (DD-626) and
USS Thompson (DD- 627), along with HIMS Talybont, supported the U.S.
Army Rangers assigned to assault the nearly vertical cliff at Pointe du Hoc,
west of Omaha Beach. Two more, Carmick (DD-493) and McCook (DD-
496) joined later by the USS Harding (DD-625), took up positions near the
center of Omaha Beach, off St. Laurent-sur-Mer, and five others, led by the
squadron flagship Frankford (DD-497) with Sanders on board, steamed for
the eastern end of the beach near Colleville-sur-Mer. Most of them took up
positions only eight hundred to a thousand yards off the beach, so close that,
as a witness reported, "Germans were hitting them with rifle bullets." Though
gradients varied across the beachfront, at that distance the water depth was
only about twelve to eighteen feet. Sanders later speculated that there were
* The American Gleaves class destroyers, which carried five S inch guns, were modified
during the war to carry one fewer 5-inch gun in order to accommodate additional anti-
aircraft batteries. These wartime versions were dubbed Bristol class destroyers. A total of
ninety-six vessels variously dubbed Gleaves or Bristol class were commissioned during
the war. To avoid confusion, all these vessels will be referred to here as Gleaves class.
