YUL
360
= NEPTUNE
massive heart attack in March 1969, dying at Walter Reed Army Hospital
on March 28, at the age of seventy-eight.
Bernard Montgomery proved nearly as resilient as Churchill. He had
insisted to all who would listen that after the Normandy landings he would
spearhead a drive into the heart of Germany and win the war before winter
set in. Instead his forces bogged down almost at once. The city of Caen,
which was supposed to have fallen on D-Day, held out for more than two
months. Monty's attempt to atone for this disappointment, a thrust into the
lowlands code-named Operation Market Garden, also went awry. Because
he was Monty, however, none of this dampened his hearty self-confidence,
and he was at his best in responding to the emergency of the Battle of the
Bulge. After the war, he succeeded Brooke (now Viscount Alanbrooke) as
chief of the Imperial General Staff, though he was out of his depth in deal-
ing with the political and strategic elements of the job, and it was not a suc-
cessful tour. He retired from the Army in 1958 at age seventy-one, was
made Viscount Montgomery of Alamein,
and wrote his memoirs. An
ardent Tory, he supported and defended apartheid in South Africa, and
campaigned against the decriminalization of homosexuality in Britain. As
abstemious in his personal habits as Churchill was self-indulgent, he never-
theless did not quite match Churchill's longevity, dying in 1976 at the age of
eighty-nine.
AS FOR THE REST, those thousands of largely anonymous junior oficers
and enlisted men who took part in Operation Neptune from its concep-
tion in the spring of 1943 to its culmination in the summer of 1944, nearly
all of them were changed by their experience. The British returned to a
nation where the scars of war lingered for many years. They would rebuild,
but shortages including food shortages continued for nearly a decade.
The Americans returned to a country with few visible scars. They were
reluctant to talk about the war, at least with their families. Many tried to
behave as if the war had not happened at all. They went back to school on
the Gl Bill, or they got jobs building houses, refrigerators, and automo-
biles. They got married, bought homes, had children, mowed the grass,
and built America.
Epilogue =
361
But they never forgot. Karl Bischoff had spent more than a year as the
"motor mac" a machinist's mate, on LCI(L)-489, including a landing on
Omaha Beach on D-Day. His main job had been to ensure that the engines
were working and in good repair. One night he woke up in pitch darkness
with the chilling awareness that he could not hear the engines. He threw off
the covers and raced to the door. Yanking it open, he was completely befud-
ded to see his father standing there holding a cup of coffee. It made no
sense: what was his father doing in the engine room? It took him several
seconds to process it. And then he knew. He was home.'
