58
= NEPTUNE
Europe. As he had explained it to Roosevelt, "The most important consid-
eration is the gathering of the largest force of ground troops possible in the
British Isles at the earliest possible date."!8
What Brooke heard, however, was an American general insisting that a
cross-Channel operation should be seriously considered for that fall, and to
him that was utterly ridiculous. Rather than respond the way Marshall had
to Roosevelt four years earlier ("I don't agree with that at all"), Brooke
instead implied a general acquiescence, if not quite full acceptance. Coached
by Churchill, Brooke feared that if the Americans were denied their
preferred strategy, they might abandon the Germany-first concept and turn
to the Pacific. So he agreed "in principle" but remained vague about specif-
ics. Curiously, and a bit ironically, this was precisely the managerial gambit
that Roosevelt often used when confronted with problems that he preferred
not to engage.l9
For most of a week, Marshall and Hopkins met with Brooke, Pound, and
Portal to discuss what Brooke called "Marshall's scheme for [the] invasion
of Europe. Their daytime meetings were generally followed by elaborate
late-night dinners, generally hosted by Churchill. Marshall often flagged
when social activities lasted well into the morning hours, but Brooke took
it all in stride. It was, after all, part of his job to keep up with the prime min-
ister. Indeed, Brooke expressed astonishment when Marshall told him that
it was not unusual for him not to see the president for months at a time.
Brooke responded ruefully that he was lucky if he could escape the prime
minister for six hours.20
During the week, Brooke softened a bit in his reaction to Marshall ("The
more I see of him the more I like him, he wrote), though he continued to
believe the American scheme was not only wrongheaded but foolish. Nev-
ertheless, on April 14 the British formally accepted the American plan,
which Brooke recorded in his diary as "offensive action in Europe in 1942
perhaps, and in 1943 for certain.". That was a fair summary of what Marshall
sought. But Brooke's private reaction, confided to his diary, was that "it was
not possible to take Marshall's 'castles in the air' too seriously. If Brooke
was less than fully forthcoming to Marshall, Marshall was similarly guilty.
His real plan, after all, was to use the prospect of a 1942 invasion to keep men
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 59
and supplies coming to England so that they would not be sent off to some
pripheral theater and thereby make a 1943 invasion impossible. Moreover,
despite British agreement, Marshall recognized the reluctant and condi-
tional nature of their acquiescence. To a colleague back in the States he
wrote, "Virtually everyone agrees with us in principle, but many if not most
hold reservations regarding this or that."?1
Officially, at least, it was agreement and consensus all the way. Churchill
wrote to Roosevelt on April 17, "We wholeheartedly agree with your con-
ception of concentration against the main enemy." His only qualification
was that because of recent triumphs by the Japanese in the Indian Ocean,
including the fall of Rangoon in Burma, "a proportion of our combined
resources must, for the moment, be set aside to halt the Japanese advance."
He noted that "the campaign of 1943 is straightforward, and we are starting
joint plans and preparations at once. Significantly, however, he added one
more note toward the end: "We may, however, feel compelled to act this
year' When Churchill wrote that, it was not Sledgehammer he had in mind.
The Americans had barely left for home when Churchill sat down with
Brooke and told him frankly that it was "impossible to establish a front" in
France with the small number of landing craft available in 1942. Brooke was
relieved to hear that the prime minister was so "amenable to reason," until
Churchill old him that what he had in mind for 1942 was an invasion of
Norway!22
Roosevelt replied to Churchill's April 17 cable as if everything were set-
Hed. I am delighted with the agreement which was reached between you
and your military advisors and Marshall and Hopkins, the president wrote.
"They have reported to me of the unanimity of opinion relative to the pro-
posal which they carried with them "23
THAT APPARENT UNANIMITY began to evaporate almost at once, and
the all for a division here, a squadron there, and convoy support some-
where else continued. Early in May, Eisenhower noted privately, "Bolero is
supposed to have the approval of the Pres and Prime Minister. But the
struggle to get everyone behind it, and to keep the highest authority
from wrecking it by makino additional commitments of air-ship-troops
