194
= NEPTUNE
There were other shortages besides shipping. On April 17, Stark sent King
a long cable arguing that "despite every effort to spread all available per-
sonnel in Ukay [U.K.] just as far as they will go," he was concerned about
"important deficits" that threatened the viability of the cross-Channel
movement. Among the deficiencies: there were not enough officers for the
LCTs, not enough medical personnel to treat the expected casualties, too
few intelligence officers and communications personnel, and not enough
tugs. Most of these problems were relatively minor and fixable, but they
could not be ignored.38
While Ramsay, Stark, and King sparred over available warships and short-
falls in other areas, the training never stopped, especially amphibious train-
ing. A hundred years before, the French military theorist Antoine-Heni
Jomini had declared that amphibious operations were "among the most difi-
cult in war," an adage that had become a mantra in the military academies and
war colleges of Western nations. Certainly the Allies had seen ample evidence
of Jominis cautionary dictum, from Dieppe to Torch to Tarawa. With so
much riding on the outcome of this particular amphibious operation, it was
essential that the soldiers of Montgomery's 21st Army Group and the sailors
of Ramsays naval command develop a clear and practiced protocol in the fev
weeks left before they crossed the Channel. Training - training that was as
realistic as it was possible to make it-was the next hurdle.
CHAPTER 9
DUCK, FOX, BEAVER, TIGER
URING 1943, most of the training received by those million and a
half soldiers spread out in a hundred or more camps all across
southern England had consisted primarily of lengthy route marches. Due
manly to the shortage of landing ships and landing craft, few of them had
ever participated in an amphibious landing or even been on board an am-
phibious ship. One Army officer at the American training base at Appledore
on Devon's north coast did the best he could with what he had. He had logs
lid out on the practice beach in the shape of a Higgins boat and ordered his
men to huddle together inside the rectangular outline. Then, on his signal,
they ran out the landward end to take positions farther up the beach. While
perhaps better than nothing at all, it was hardly an effective substitute for an
actual landing.
Equally important was the training needed by the Navy and Coast Guard
offers and men on the thousands of vessels that would carry these soldiers
to the beaches. Those LSTs transferred from the Mediterranean after Anvil
was postponed did have experienced crews, but on their arrival in England,
