F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(i) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
or su one cAr queti, tho dit wither no, a tar didy stould he left by a 3).
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
ina to
PARA, 2. A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administration.
lata upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOI. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affec
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troop
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks
in ton i cale of it on the 1. / hange in store, transport, be. not
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military of political.
NotE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction
he war diary.
issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
NoTr.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
repaning a diary :—
(*) Important osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
) at oction he cements tar anth pat renty four hour and present dispositions.
111) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA. 6.— All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
See F.S.R., Volume I).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
the EAT NOT The time entered should be the tin the lo it on oth
Instructions regardine W.. n:
Intelligen
ns regarding in Diaries, osa in li
not availabye, wid
Month and Year. May 19Wn
Origmal
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY:
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Fu.
Unit. I. 2o RASC. 6. Airborne Div. (Res
Commanding Uncer
Major..
Place
BULFORD.
Date
21
22
FIGSBURY BKS.
WINTERBOURNE
23
BULFORD...
25.
L.WAR DIARIES SECTIO.
1800
0900
1400|
Aduance parties of following units arrived
518 Coy. RASC:
(Div Composite)
81
(Div Composite)
36 Coy.
(DIV Composite
Accomodation in Bulford Fields and Figsbury. Barracks taken over.
HQ. RASG. 6 Airborne Div, Seaborne Parties for OVARIORD.
A11 main bodies of RASC Coys
mentioned above in location.
Strength of Units:
518 CoY RASC.
634 Coy RASC.
636 Coy RASC.
Brioling of Company Commanders as to their duties regarding Transport
arrangements for OVERLORD.
Reece of location and routes to be used in company with Officers Commandin
RASC Coys.
14 JUL 1944
G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Depart to Iransit Camp.
Issue of written instr
ion as per "Appendix A
0930
Briefing of all RASe Offioers of 518, 634 and 636 Coys PAst.
Careful recce of all routes, transit camps and lying up areas stressed.
Fron now until D-l continuous reece and liaison with Divuntus necessary.
1.800....
Troop Carving Transport reported to units preparatory to move to transit
0800
Canement to Transit Camps a8 COlOV
3ton
EATING FAR.
Wt.47724,998 2,000,000 3/18 W. H. & S. 51/6576
lents in your Bulk Or
u have requested
e of your doc
ts - Enquire a
documents are in use
sk for full details
