night of 28th/29th.
The
Retimo garrison was over
The re-
mainder of the force was evacuated as far as possible
8th/29th
May and 1st/2nd June, but about half of the total stren
Transport shortage made it diffcult to keep sectors up to authorized
reserves, and in daily maintenance.
Sector supply depots were fed by issues
reservese B.S.D, and Petrol Depot by sea in caiques, and or by road to the
Heraklion and Retimo sectors, and by road elsewhere.
In order to augment
the small amount of R.A.S.C. transport, such first line vehicles as the staff
agreed to release were used to form a pool transport company, with unit
drivers and R.A.S.C. officers and N.C.Os.
This comprised 24 load-carriers,
mostly of small capacity.
Some 3-ton lorries
were also received from
Egypt, and the strength of R.A.S.C. vehicles on the road was raised to 84.
Transport priorities
were decided by the General Staff, and operational
details necessarily took the bulk of the transport. By the use of relief drivers,
the vehicles were kept on the road both night and day.
Movement by day
resulted in heavy personnel and vehicle casualties,
and subsequently day-
light work in depots became almost impracticable.
The Campaign in Syria
The invasion of Syria was undertaken in order to remove the threat to
our communications in the Middle East caused by the presence there of
French forces
which supported the Vichy French Government.
The plan
of the operation provided for an advance in four sectors by columns based
on Palestine.
The four columns were composed as under:
Coastal Sector
and
Merjayoun
ector.
One
Australian Infantry
Brigade
each
Group, with an Infantry Brigade
Company, Australian A.S.C., and
two sections of a Reserve M.T.
Company.
Damascus Sector
One Indian Infantry Brigade Group,
with Infantry
Brigade Company,
R.I.A.S.C.;.
Free
French
Forces
Brigade
approximating
Group, with hired buses for troop-
carrying,
manned by
a Reserve
M.T. Company, R.A.S.C.
" Habforce ",
formed from the 1
Desert Sector
Cavalry
Division, and consisting
of one Cavalry Brigade (Mechani
zed) two Arab Mechanized Regi
Infantry
ments,
and a
British
besides
Divisional
Battalion,
Troops,
which
included
R.A.S.C. M.T. Companies.
according to
The operations began on 8th June, 1941, and proceeded on the whole
plan, until
the French Commander sued for peace on
July, 1941.
strative point of view.
The camnaion had some interesting features from the admini-
184
The system adopted for the maintenance of the force was the establish-
ment of F.S.Ds., stocked by road and / or rail from the B.S.D. at Haifa.
first of these, at Acre and Roshpina, held about 14 days' reserve rations,
and that at Deraa seven days.
the force advanced, further F.S.Ds.
were established, with forward ammunition depots adjacent.
Before the operation started, the petrol depot at Haifa established large
P.O.L. dumps at the same initial locations as the F.S.Ds., delivery being
made by the civilian oil company.
In the initial stages, units drew from
these dumps in their own second line; later, petrol refiling points
were
established in the coastal sector, being stocked by third line transport, and
stocks were also put into F.S.Ds. farther forward.
Habforce had to carry seven days' full maintenance, and for this purpose
a Reserve M.T. Company and the Cavalry Divisional Supply Column were
allotted.
These also carried 700 miles of petrol for each vehicle in the force,
for which 116 3-ton lorries were required, and seven days'
water, at one
gallon a man and one gallon a vehicle, for which 75 lorries were necessary.
The second line and troop-carrying transport proved adequate and there
was no record of any major hitch in the maintenance arrangements.
The initial stocking of F.S.Ds. was carried out by a Reserve M.T. Com-
pany and a Tank Brigade Company, R.A.S.C.
The latter company
was
also employed to ferry P.O.L. and ammunition to F.S.Ds. and F.A.Ds.,
as these were established farther forward.
The turn-round of third line
transport increased to 200 miles at the end of the campaign.
In the case
of Habforce, an additional company had to be allotted for third line duties
as its L. of C. extended.
At one time, ammunition was carried direct from
ship to second line, to save time.
No large M.T. maintenance programme was necessary, as heavy repair
facilities, and replacements of vehicles and spare parts, were available at
the advanced M.T. depot near Haifa.
Evolution of Field Maintenance Centres
By the end of the 1940-1941 campaign in the Western Desert, F.S.Ds.
were being manned by a complete D.I.D. each, with some R.A.O.C. men
on the ammunion dy as which were later to become Forward Ammun-
tion Depots.
With the development of fairly static conditions, the F.S.D.
began to grow into a considerable township, as the D.I.D., water point,
petrol po grow into a considerable, were joined by transit camps, prisoset
of war cages, E.F.I., etC.:; as a result the F.S.D. commander found himself
to all intents and purposes the commander of an area of desert, as much
as 15 square miles in extent, dotted with small units and stores.
He obviously
could not perform this task as well as his normal duties.
A suitable head-
quarters to commands this asea was therefore approved by
G.H.Q.,
with
he designation mand this arreld Maintenance Centre"
A spare M.T.
company headquarters was used to try out the new establishment, and much
ustul experience ters was use
formed in anticination of the requirements of the onerations which opened
The first F.M.C. headquarters proper were
on 18th November, 1941, from personnel provided by the formations con
cerned, on a divisional basis.
185
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
