Expeditionary Force Institute
N.A.A.F.I. had introduced a pack rather on the lines of the 14-man
Compo pack, which weighed 60 lb., and was designed to cater for troops
until the Expeditionary Force Institutes were established in the theatre.
These packs were intended for 30 men for 21 days.
cards, tooth paste, shaving
and toilet soap, and razor blades, and cost about €9. Units drew these in
the United Kingdom, and took them overseas.
A reserve, to cover units
who could not take their own packs overseas, or had lost them, was to be
sent, on a scale of five per cent. for 30 days' requirements, with maintenance
shipments between D+2 and D+8.
Another 15,000 packs were to be
sent for consumption between D + 30 and D+45, if E.F.I. facilities were
still not available.
The stocks for despatch in bulk were collected in
S.R.Ds. to facilitate shipping.
Ration Scales
All the ration scales for which the need could be foreseen had been
approved, and issued to 21 Army Group.
A complete list is in Appendix
IX, together with details of the more important ones.
Provision of Supply Units
Initially, the scale of provision of supply units was as follows:—
Base Provision Officers, one for four B.S.Ds.
B.S.Ds., Type "B", one for 25,000 in the Force ...
D.I.Ds., two and a quarter for each B.S.D., or one for every
59
7,500 of nearly 70 per cent. of the Force ...
Field Bakeries, Type "A"
Field Bakeries (Mobile) ...
to produce altogether 576,000 lb. of bread daily, i.e., about 650,000
rations.
Field Butcheries and C.S.Ds., one for every 25,000
There were only very slender assets to meet this commitment.
majority of the existing units of these types in the United Kingdom wer
an essential part of the static organization.
Even so, it was clear that
the scale adopted was inadequate,
and experience in
North Africa was
already proving that the Generate, and experiale figures were seriously
below actual ration strength.
Also, the size of the force on the Continent
was likely to require a number of such units for extoa duties such as coal
supply, roadheads, and maintenance areas.
calculated on the basis of three for every B.S.D.
A change was therefore made in the method of planning, DID: bing
More type "A" bakeries
wou included, as it was expected the uS of the totty bread production
(21,000 lb.) of the mobile bakeries.
needed in amounts in one place less than the indivisible output
as, on the one hand, they
could carry a higher load than
ratings, and, on the other, lack of cold storage would prevent 100 per cent.
The number of butcheries was halved,
their normal
frozen meat issues.
300
Formation of the necessary units went forward on these lines,
available source haying to be tapped.
and a scheme for " para-military
every
The man-power shortage was acute,
" units was proposed, of which the basis
was that a number of administrative units would be in cadre form oasis.
and would be made up to strength immediately before
civilian tradesmen withdrawn from civil life.
embarkation
by
Although the scheme was
worked out in detail, it was not implemented as far as supply unite was
concerned.
Finality was reached in February, 1944, when the total strength of
21 Army Group was, approximately, British Army, 695,000 ; Canadian Army,
107,000; R.A.F. and R.C.A.F., 47,000; total 849,000. For this the provision
of supply units was as follows: —
H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Supply Units (former B.P.O.) ...
B.S.Ds.
D.I.Ds.
83
Field Bakeries, Type "A"
Field Bakeries, Mobile
Field Butcheries and C.S.Ds.
Port Detachments
14
18
For the ration
strength,
there should have been 34
B.S.Ds.,
with
Cs.R.A.S.C. in proportion.
As there was an absolute ban on increasing the
overall British manpower, 21 Army Group accepted the lower figure, as
it was considered that the B.S.Ds. could carry an average load of 34,000
to be fed in bulk.
As a precaution, field butcheries were to be trained in
B.S.D. work.
The full planning had been for 102 D.I.Ds., i.e., three
each for 34
B.S.Ds., but the anticipated number had not returned from the Mediterranean
theatre with 30 Corps, and even then 21 Army Group had to accept only
80 of these units.
The bakery units had a capacity of 968,000 rations at 12-oz. daily, a
result achieved mainly by an increase in the output of the mobile bakery.
21 Army Group would accept no reduction in bakery units.
of the scale of provision of Field Butcheries and Port Detachments was
always at the mercy of eventual local conditions; but in fact the provision
supply units had received their collective training in
salations in the United Kingdom.
overseas by being attached to static supply
This method was not satisfactory, and
in any case could nited Kin won the large number of units now re wried,
field force units could be given intensive training under field conditions.
Technical Training Wings were therefore formed, in which
These opened in October,
June, 1944, when October, disa, ded.
1943, and had trained about half the units by
Some units were sent to A.F.H.Q. in
Africa to obtain practical experience, as well as helping the local
experienced units
D.I.Ds. for Beach Groun work went for training to the Combined Opera-
tions Training Centred had those for handlina told fuel were trained fo
that work by employment with civilian coal merchants.
(37452)
301
ET 7
20471
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
