War Office tank transporter pool was to be maintained at a minimum of 200
Eventually, another 21 Army Group
transport
company was
equipped with tank transporters, instead of one of the War Office companies.
and this company was not to be sent overseas without reference to War Office
and until it had been re-equipped.
Its vehicles would then be transferred to
a War Office company which was being trained.
Evacuation of Casualties
The evacuation of sick and wounded arriving at ports was to be efiected
partly by train, partly by the ambulance coaches and civilian ambulances of
the Emergency Medical Services of the Ministry of Health, and partly by
military ambulances.
The resources of commands affected were inadequate,
and additional ambulances were allotted to commands from late-phased units
of 21 Army Group, i.e., eleven Field Ambulances, and two Ambulance Car
Companies, plus a number of additional vehicles and 150 B.R.C.S. ambulances
from those due to join 21 Army Group later.
P.O.L. Arrangements, Mounting Phase
(a) Preparatory.—Jerricans forming part of vehicle equipment were to be
carried filled, and, in addition, all vehicles were to carry filled jerricans on the
scale: —under 3-ton, three; 3-ton and over, and "A" vehicles when practic-
able, five; for each vehicle.
If possible, full first and second line scales were
to be carried. (See note below.) Formations were to demand forthwith through
normal R.A.S.C. channels the quantities of various grades of P.O.L. required
to complete first and second line scales, and the additional number of filled
jerricans required to complete the additional holding.
In no circumstances
was P.O.L. from the filled containers so carried to be used, until after dis-
embarkation in the theatre of operations.
(b) Concentration Areas.-All vehicles were to leave the concentration
areas with their petrol tanks and containers filled to capacity.
All P.O.L.
requirements in these areas would be met from command resources.
(c) Marshalling Areas.-All vehicles, except motorcycles, were to leave
the marshalling areas with containers filled to capacity, and petrol tanks filled
so as to leave only a slight margin to avoid spillage during shipment.
so les would leave with their get to tavors at least one-quarter, but not more
than three-quarters, full.
supplied in jerricans and non-returnable containers.
All P.O.L. requirements in these areas would be
These
(d) Embarkation Areas. -P.O.L. would be issued to A.F.Vs. only.
would be topped up in the embarkation areas or in the vicinity of hards.
Sufficient margin was to be left when topping up to avoid the danger of
bursting tanks.
Fuel requirements would be drawn in returnable container
from R.A.S.C. dumps set up under command arrangements.
Petrol tanks of
A.F.Vs, which had been topped un were to be sealed with waterproofing
material brought by units.
(e) Emergency Arrangements.—If containers had to be replaced between
the times of concentration and embarkation, filled returnable containers were
demanded through area channels.
filled containers of the vehicles evacuated.
Replacement vehicles would take over the
326
( Shipping of Vehicles: Allovehicles would be shipped with petrol tanks
filed, a slight margin being allowed to avoid spillage.
PO.L. which were shipped in M.T. ships were not to be stowed in the same
Vehicles carrying
hold as those carrying ammunition or explosives.
with petrol were not to be allocated to L.S.Ts.
Road tank lorries filled
line scales about 50 miles.
Note. First line milles represented about 100 to 150 miles, and second
land with sufficient P.O.L. for 300 miles.
It was therefore considered that transport would
Command Responsibilities
Commands had two main responsibilities in connection with the arrange-
ments described above: first, the refuelling of vehicles passing from concen-
tration areas to embarkation areas and hards, via marshalling areas; and
second, the issue of filled spare jerricans to vehicles deficient of any part of
their quota.
The main problem in regard to the arrangements for refuelling was due
chiefly to restrictions on the movement of rail traffic generally in the United
Kingdom, and of road transport in the marshalling areas, the latter problem
being due to security requirements.
These restrictions arose out of the con-
ditions of the mounting plan, and they affected the supply of P.O.L. in two
ways.
The restriction of movement within the marshalling areas, under which
unit transport was immobilized, and the carrying out of all transport details
for units by specially detailed C.(M.)T. companies, precluded the adoption of
any scheme which involved refuelling from pumps.
Supply had therefore to
be effected by means of containers.
That being so, was a non-returnable or a returnable container system to
be used? At first it was thought that the returnable container would be
better, as it would avoid the necessity for moving large train loads of packed
P.O.L. from Avonmouth or South Wales, which would be contrary to the
restriction upon movement demanded by the conditions of the plan.
In the
end, it was decided to use non-returnable tins, chiefly because command
requirements of petrol touse dumped in marshalling areas were found to be
much smaller than estimated. The requirements were provided by a forward
dumping programme based on the formation demands.
The only exception
to this decision me based on the where stocks of jerricans were maintained
for topping up A.F. Vs., so ensuring that, in spite of their high petrol con-
sumption, they embarked with fuel tanks full.
At the request of the Admiralty, P.O.L. for minor landing craft was to be
supplied by the Army.
These vessels, which were to make the initial crossing
under their own power. These vessels, to carry fuel in returnable containers
to enable them to arrive of the hanches with cutient fuel for the perform
ance of their appointed duties.
required the provision of 60,000 jerricans of fuel and 1,150 5-gallon drums of
The commitment was considerable, as it
lubricants.
The naval authorities were responsible for notifving to the War
Office the cuantities reaniead and to commande the narticulars of railhead
distribution to landing craft.
and deliver inter for bose de laborate tary mit and for detailed
commands the quantities recuired by the naval authorities, for provision of
War Office was responsible
for notifying to
by comands.
filled containers, and for the consignment of these to railheads as indicated
Commands were responsible for notitying to War Ofice the
wes7e717
WO 277/21
27
N027 7752
