P.O.L. Planning
As regards the initial maintenance of the Force in P.O.I, the total planned
shipment to cover requirements up to M +32 (8th October), was 25,500 dead.
move to concentration areas. and 5.000 tons a further 15 days at " quiet"
weight tons, or 74 million gallons of petrol.
Of this 8,000 tons covered the
or half operational, rate.
ashe balance represented about 20 days' reserve
at operational rate.
Reserves were to be held in pack, in the 4-gallon non-
returnable tins, two in a wooden case.
There were dificulties with the Board of Trade owe the plans for ship.
ment, ase owing to the risk of fire, that department was averse to the use of
any ships out those of about 300 tons capacity, fove the shipment of packed
stocks.
s bus it shipment had to be speeded up, a very large number of ships
would be needed, and, with the limited berthing space available at overseas
ports, the whole programme would be retarded.
It was,
therefore, desirable to provide an alternative method of supply,
in case of dislocation in the supply of cased petrol at the outset.
The plan
adopted was, of locating part of the initial requirements at an overseas bulk
installation.
This was done with the co-operation of a civilian oil company
which provided, at a French port where it had its own installations, 5,000 tons
of bulk storage, 200,000 2-gallon cans, and filling facilities on a basis of
25,000 cans daily.
The fact that this was on W.D. behalf was, of course,
kept secret.
Transport Planning
The list of R.A.S.C. transport units, which formed part of the first con-
tingent, is given in Appendix VA.
The initial requirement of vehicles for
these, and other R.A.S.C. transport commitments in the B.E.F., including
reserve and war wastage, was 8,100, together with 2,800 motor-cycles and 350
trailers.
Details by types are shown in Appendix VIA together with the
scale of provision of reserve vehicles.
Provision of spare parts and M.T.
stores was made on the basis of two months' war requirements for unit'
initial holdings, and of six months' requirements for holding in the M.T.S.D.,
B.E.F.
Supply and Transport Staff
The Directorate of Supplies and Transport at G.H.Q., B.E.F., was originally
organized under a Director of Supplies and Transport (brigadier), in two
branches, under a Deputy Director of Supplies and a Deputy Director of
Transport respectively (colonels).
Practical experience of the working of the S.T. Directorate at G.H.Q, 35
it was at first organized, proved that, for the efficient performance of a task.
of such magnitude, it was essential to divide the directorate into two separat
directorates, supplies and transport.
This arrangement took effect on lst
December 1939, when the existing D.S.T., B.E.F., became Director of Trans
port, and another brigadier the Director of Supplies.
When the responsibility for the supply of P.O.L. was split off fron
Q.M.G. 6, War Ofice, and made that of a new branch of the S.T. Directorak.
a corresponding organization was set up in the directorate of the B.EF.
At each corps headquarters, there was an A.D.S.T. (colonel), and an
A.D.S.T. (lieut-colonel) was also attached to H.Q., R.A.F., A.A.S.F.
S.T organization in the L. of C. Area was under a D.D.S.T. (colonel), and
in each base and L. of C. sub-area there was an A.D.S.T. (lieut.-colonel,
later colonel).
The D.S.T. received his instructions on the day that war was declared,
and crossed to France the next day.
The plans for the maintenance of the B.E.F., as described in Chapter II,
began at once to be implemented.
It will now be seen how they worked out
SECTION 2.—THE FIRST EIGHT MONTHS
Supply Breakdown
On the outbreak of war, Q.M.G. 6 put the machinery for the despatch of
supplies to France into gear, and the flow began.
In the absence of infor-
mation to the contrary,
they could only assume that all was proceeding
according to plan, after the supplies left the Supply Reserve Depot.
For reasons of security, the General Staff had imposed a
complete ban on all information as to what was going on; and the first news
that the supply organization in France had, in fact, broken down, was received
by Q.M.G.6 a fortnight later in the form of an appeal from Advanced Air
Striking Force in France for rations.
These were flown over, an unplanned
instance of air supply; and A.D.S.T., Q.M.G.6, went to France to investigate.
He found that the conditions which might have made it possible for the
supply organization to function in France as planned,
There were no ready-made installations; every open site, every foot of
covered space, had to be reconnoitred, and competed for with other services.
The first troops landed ahead of supplies, petrol, and vehicles, before a single
major maintenance unit was operating, and while most of the necessary
administrative personnel were still in the United Kingdom.
came ashore hungry, without rations of any kind.
The first fighting troops and a handful of supply personnel landed at
Cherbourg on 10th September.
The first supply ship docked on the 12th
and the second on the 16th.
Cargoes were incorrectly loaded and rations
Labour was scarce; there were no facilities for handling
supplies in port transit areas; both B.S.Ds. were located inland, newly manned
by raw personnel, and unequal to the task of receiving supplies and simul-
taneously loading supplies.
No food was therefore coming forward from the bases, and the troops
were living on local resources.
The docks were severely congested, and the
Base Supply Depot system, as planned, was as yet inoperative.
Causes of Breakdown
There were several causes of this state of affairs.
again owing to over-emphasis on security, ships were not being sent over
loaded completely with supplies, as had been expected by Q.M.G. 6, but with
mixed cargoes of all sorts of stores, so as to minimize the effect of a ship
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
