An alterative method of obtaining maximum availability in the carly
days was that of employing civilians to drive the lorries by day, the RASC.
drivers doing the more difficult night-shift on docks clearance.
Extra workshop sections of Italian civilians were attached to the G.T.
companies concerned to assist in the intensive maintenance required to keep
the vehicles on the road in such gruelling working conditions.
Vehicle Maintenance
cam. nal cu
was considered to have proved conclusively, at any
rate to
the
R.A.S.C.
satisfaction
of the
R.A.S.C.,
the fundamental necessity of
comnanies
having their own integral workshops.
arrangement withstood the severest possible tests in Italy, and resulted,
in spite of innumerable difficulties, in the R.A.S.C. fleet of vehicles being
kept at the highest possible pitch of efficiency compatible with working con-
ditions.
During the most strenuous periods, the system of maintenance squads
was adopted temporarily by many units.
In such circumstances it had
the advantages of keeping maintenance time down to the minimum, ensuring
that minor defects were corrected before they became major ones, and of
allowing drivers a brief period of complete rest.
When civilian transport platoons were formed, they were at first afiliated
for maintenance to G.T. Or Artillery Companies, but this proved unsatis-
factory.
A number of static workshops were accordingly formed, with a
British cadre, supplemented by from 15 to 100 Italian civilians as required.
An Artillery Company supervised three of these workshops.
Finally, seven Station Transport Companies were formed to maintain the
36 civilian platoons then operating.
maintaining 55 platoons.
These later increased to nine companies,
pach compans comprised a H.O.., M.T. Company,
and a Serial 3 Workshop, which had a British care of three other ranks
and the balance Italians.
The sunoly of spare parts was the chief difficulty with which the P A S.C.
had to contend during the campaign in regard to vehicle maintenance
attempt was made to restrict the stock-holding of spare parts in R.A.S.C.
workshops by applying the terms of the
and thereby limiting their repair capacity.
practice of the R.A.S.C. for
Practicable havine regard to the one obtaining and without undu
interference with the inspection and repair of other vehicles.
that it had been issued without reference to So thus disreonding the claim
The restrictive instruction was overruled: but it is to be observed
to the Branch that, as the biggest usee of M.T., it should with
tenance of R.A.S.C. transport.
to both parties he consulted hatre changes were made affecting the main
was a
In consequence of a reorganization of Ordnance Depots,
could not be sorted for some time.
great accumulation of cases of M.T. spares in a Base Ordnance Depot which
This happenase the aul Do of 194,
284
when there was the prospect of a final offensive in the following spring and
consequent fast movement, and it was imperative that R.A.S.C. units should
be in a position to maintain their transport without having to depend on
the normal system of spares supply.
It was discovered that a large number
i packs of spares for R.A.S.C. vehicles were in the country, e.g., landing
and in all about 2,300 cases were retrieved.
sorted by the staff of the Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport, and issuec
in the form of composite packs prepared from lists of units' requirements.
In this way a number of units were equipped with a large
miscellaneous items which had been in short supply for a long time.
addition, arrangements were made for parties of R.A.S.C. workshop personne
10 examine stores at the M.T. Returned Stores Depot, and cake away any
This was also under the direction of the C.I.M.T.
hundreds of items were recovered and put to good use.
Large stocks of other items of M.T. stores which had been in short
supply were by then arriving in the country, and a M.T. Transit Depot
was opened to handle and sort cases.
An R.A.S.C. inspector of M.T. was
installed there as a liaison officer, and was able to expedite delivery to
As a result of these measures, which were of course carried
out with the co-operation of ordnance, the R.A.S.C. units in the force were
receiving nearly 99 per cent. of their demands for M.T. spares when the
campaign came to an end.
M.T. Inspection Branch
During the first part of the campaign, inspectors of M.T. were allotted
to formations.
It was found, however, that the vitally important work of
acting as M.T. advisers to D.Ds.S.T. tended to divert the inspectors from
their primary function of inspecting R.A.S.C. transport units.
The C.I.M.T.
therefore formed a Mobile Inspection Unit, consisting of three teams, to
tour the whole theatre and concentrate on carrying out inspections.
Mean-
while, the formation inspectors continued to inspect units as and when
their advisory and liaison duties permitted.
This system was found to work
satisfactorily.
Amphibians
Some mention has already been made of the employment of DUKWs
in various normal and already bi reles in this campaign.
At the beginning
of the campaign, and all through the invasion period, these vehicles were
operated by three nor all through panies on a variable scale of DUKWs to
companies accord normal Get avanies
had 3-ton load-carriers on their strength
Two of these companies also
Towards the end of 1943,
ret, it was decidiers concent strength DukWs in laly into two DUKW
companies, each of four transport platoons, three R.D.Is., and a Workshop
Serial 5. The overall number of DUKWs was reduced, but this was con-
sidered to be counterbalanced by the improvement in maintenance, admini
stration, and control, which resulted from the reorganization.
vehicles, also known as " Buffaloes" or " Fantails", was formed in February
A R.A.S.C. regiment,
equipped with L.V.Ts., or tracked amphibian
It was made up of. tO Army Transport Column. and two GT
(37452)
285
277
