For "" Overlord," in the planning of which C.O. H.Q, had been fully represented, the command of
the Brigades was transferred to the Force Commanders.
Both formations were landed in. Nomandy
on " D
" day and took their full share of the fighting to secure the bridgehead.
No. 1 Brigade,
on the left, pushed ahead to link up with the 6th Airborhe Division and then took up a defensive
position near Le Plein. Each Commando of No. 4 Brizade had its own individual task at the landing
but, when these were completed, they concentrated and moved over to assist No. 1 Brigade in the
Le Plein area.
The two Brigades continued to hold the left flank of the beach-head for forty days
without adequate rest or relief and can truly be said to have performed a most vital part in the
operation as a whole.
In October, 4 Brigade joined the Canadians in Holland for the attack on Walcheren, the capture
of which was to clear the mouth of the Scheldt and enable Allied shipping to reach Antwerp.
The
Canadians had already captured Breskens and were clearing South Beveland of the enemy and,
having completed this, they were to attack Walcheren across the causeway from Beveland while the
Commandos carried out two landings near Flushing and Westkapelle.
These landings were made, as
planned, on Ist November and both towns were captured in spite of severe opposition from the
enemy.
The success of the Commandos in this operation was very creditable in view of the strength
of the defences which had to be overcome by such a light force.
No. 1 Brigade, having fought for a time with the 7th Armoured Division, was employed in
the clearing of the Rhine-Mass triangle and then prepared for its part in the crossing of the Rhine.
The Commandos crossed the Rhine west of Wesel and, having infiltrated through the enemy defences
on the banks, entered Wesel itself from the north-west.
The next day, having cleared the town,
they turned back towards the river and linked up with the main bridgehead. The Brigade continued
to be employed with the Army during the advance into Germany and was used to force the crossings
of the Weser, Aller and Elbe Rivers, and, during these operations, they developed a technique of
infiltrating behind the enemy's lines and attacking their objective from an unexpected quarter
which seems to have been largely responsible for the remarkable successes they achieved.
Post-war Proposals for the Retention of Commandos
With the end of the war, the problem of the future of the Commandos immediately arose.
It had to be decided whether they were to be retained in peace time and, on the assumption that
they were, there were the far more difficult problems of organisation, size and composition.
C.O.H.Q.
was most anxious to retain both Commandos and also their inter-Service nature.
The proposals
were for a Commando Group of two Brigades made up of both Army and Royal Marine Com-
mandos. Brigadier Churchill, commanding No. 2 Brigade, went so far as to propose that the individual
Commandos themselves be made up of both Services.
London, was also suggested.
A Territorial Army Commando, based in
The Army's manpower difficulties, however, led to opposition to the C.O.H.Q. proposals and the
Chiefs of Staff eventually decided that all Army Commandos were to be disbanded.
Marine Commando Brigade was, however, to be retained.
One Royal
This decision left C.O.H.Q. and the Commando Group Headquarters, which was soon to be
disbanded, with the difficult problem of carrying out the reorganisation when various existing
Commandos were actively employed both in the Far East and in Germany.
The Army personnel
were returned to their own units or depots. The Royal Marine units in Germany were brought back
to England and contributed to the formation of the new peace-time Brigade. This Brigade was thus
left alone to carry on the tradition and the training for possible future amphibious Commando
operations. Their versatility and offensive spirit have been since proved both in Korea and Malaya.
112
CHAPTER 15
ROYAL MARINES IN COMBINED OPERATIONS
Introduction
At the outbreak of war in 1939 the functions of the Royal Marines were as follows :—
To provide detachments which, whilst fully capable of manning their share of the
gun armament of ships, are specially trained to provide a striking force drawn either from
the Royal Marine Divisions or the Fleet.
This force to be immediately available for use
under the direction of the Naval Commander-in-Chief for such amphibious operations as
raids on the enemy coast and bases, or the seizure and defence of temporary bases for use
by the Fleet.
These functions envisaged the Army waging a continental war with the Royal Navy holding
the seas and conducting,
necessary with its Royal Marine forces.
as a subsidiary to naval strategy, such amphibious operations as were
It was under these conditions that the Corps carried out its
initial amphibious operations of the war, notably in Norway, France and the Low Countries in
1940.
To this end, too, the original Royal Marine Brigade was formed, expanding later to the
Royal Marine Division.
When the Army was driven from Europe, a totally different state of affairs arose, in which
combined operations assumed a major role in grand strategy.
In particular, raids on certain parts
of the enemy coasts became the province of the Director of Combined Operations and not of the
Admiralty, to whom, strictly speaking, the Royal Marine formations belonged. The course of events
proved, moreover, that an
amphibious operation for the seizure of a naval base had assumed
proportions far beyond the strength of any force of which the Corps could dispose. At the same
time large Army formations were being trained in the technique of landing
operations;
such
pirations he became plat Alied gaid toatesy oather than the responsibility of tee Armal
In actual fact, Royal Marine formations found themselves operating under Army
rather than Naval Command. The old definition of the Corps' function was, in practice, obsolete.
The functions of the Royal Marines were therefore re-defined as follows :—
To provide :—
(1) Detachments for service in H.M. Ships which, whilst fully capable of manning their
share of the gun armament, are specially trained to undertake such landing operations
as the Naval Commander-in-Chief may find it necessary to order.
(2) Units to undertake, in co-operation with other Services, special amphibious operations.
(3) Units for the rapid establishment and temporary defence of Naval and Fleet Air
Arm Bases.
Although this definition was not laid down until 1943, it should be realised that it was made,
in fact, after the event.
From 1940 onwards, the Corps had swiftly developed and adapted itself
to meet the changed amphibious conditions of the times.
During the process, the work of C.O.H.Q.
became linked more and more with that of the Royal Marines.
It is the purpose of this chapter
to outline briefly the major amphibious commitments which were undertaken by the Corps.
These
may conveniently be grouped as follows:—
(1) Commando forces.
(2) Support.
(3) Minor Landing Craft.
(4)
Beach Maintenance.
Raiding.
(6) Miscellaneous.
The part
played by the Royal Marine Commandos has been included in Chapter 14, and
details of the Royal Marines in the support role, both afloat and ashore, are given in Chapter 16.
time, Thie Deto the Headquarter Establishments at Chatham, Portsmouth and Plymouth which were, at that
7
0₴
WO 277/21
27
