Commandos in the Middle East
As mentioned above, Commandos had been sent out to the Middle Fast early in 1941, where
they fought under the operational control of G.H.Q.
In April of that year, No. 7 Commando
carried out a raid on Bardia and later, together with the two locally raised Commandos, was used
in the defence of Crete, where all units suffered very severe casualties. No. 8 Commando was part
ot the garrison of Tobruk; No. 11, having forced the crossing of the Litani River in the Syrian
campaign,
carried out the famous, but abortive, raid on Field-Marshal Rommel's Headquarters,
for which Lieutenant-Colonel Keyes was awarded a posthumous V.C.
By the end of 1941, these
operations had so depleted the original three Commandos sent overseas that they had to be
disbanded, but many of their survivors carried on the combined operations traditions in the Long
Range Desert Group, the Special Raiding Section, the Special Air Service and Special Boat Section.
The Raids on St. Nazaire and Dieppe
In October, 1941, Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes was succeeded by Commodore Lord
Louis Mountbatten with the title of Adviser on Combined Operations (changed to Chief of Combined
Operations in March, 1942), and for a time the scale of operations, planned at C.O.H.Q. and carried
out by the Commandos, was increased still further.
In March, 1942, No. 2 Commando and specially trained demolition parties detailed from other
Commando Units, took part in the famous raid at St. Nazaire, which succeeded in destroying
harbour installations and in blocking the main dock by blowing up H.M.S. Campbeltown against the
outer dock gate.
In August of the same year came the raid on Dieppe, in which Nos. 3 and 4 Commandos
silenced the coast defence batteries overlooking the landing beaches, and a Royal Marine Commando,
No. 40, took part for the first time.
After Dieppe, small scale raiding on the north coast of Europe and in Norway continued
uninterruptedly, but there were no further large scale amphibious operations in this theatre until
the actual invasion of Europe in 1944. For the most part, these raids were pin-pricks against the
German defences, with reconnaissance as their main objective, but nevertheless they were sufficient
to cause the Germans to divert more troops and considerably increase their coast defences.
ine
degree of annoyance caused can be judged from the severe reprisals taken against captured
Commandos, culminating, at the end of 1942, in Hitler ordering that all those captured should be
shot.
Commandos in Major Operations
Combined Operations Command also provided Commando troops for special tasks in other
major operations about this time.
No. 5 Commando was used in the Madagascar landings; later
in 1942, Nos. 1 and 6 Commandos took part in the Anglo-American landings in North Africa.
After North Africa came the invasion of Sicily where No. 3 Army Commando, Nos. 40 and 41
R.M. Commandos and also the Special Raiding Section were in the initial landings.
They were later
joined by No. 2 Commando and all four took part in subsequent operations. No. 3, in a particularly
spectacular operation, captured a bridge over the Lentini River and, although the operation was
not a success due to the main advance being held up, the bridge, when finally captured intact, was
renamed Commando Bridge.
In September they all landed in Italy, where No. 2 Commando and No. 41 R.M. Commando
pass.
took part in the battle for Salerno, protecting the left flank of the bridgehead by holding La Molina
Reorganisation, Special Service Group Formed in November, 1943
In November, 1943, a major reorganisation of the Commando Forces took place, for which
there were two main reasons; one operational and one to simplify command.
From the operational
point of view, the conduct of war, as far as the Allies were concerned, was entering an offensive
stage and the requirement for raids on the enemy coast was giving place to larger scale and more
sustained operations, such as those in Italy mentioned above.
This made it necessary to modify the
training, organisation and reinforcement mcetored above mamas, and provide longer range
supporting weapons such as 3-in Mortars and some regimental transport which had hitherto been
On the Command side, the number of Commando units was now large and they were widely
At the time there were nine Army two Roval Marine and three checial burnose Com-
mandne in the SS Prionde of these the Raval Marine and twn of the Army Commandos were in
Italy. Apart from the 5.5. Brigade, there was the Royal Marine Div shen that had grown out of the
110
Royal Marine Brigade of 1940. It was now planned to break up this formation and turn the six
infantry units into Commandos under C.O.H.Q.
It was obvious that the Special Service Brigade H.Q., already overloaded, was inadequate to
control this very large force and considerable thought was given to the establishment of a larger
organisation to do this and to implement the new training and reinforcement requirements.
Marines was set up to replace the old S.S. Brigade.
result, in November, 1943, a Special Service Group, commanded by Major-General Sturges,
As a
Under it, eight Army and eight Royal Marine
Commandos were grouped into four Special Service Brigades, each having both Army and Royal
Marine Units.
In addition, there was also a Holding Commando, Commando Depot, Special Boat
Section and a Mountain and Snow Warfare School all under the S.S. Group Headquarters.
organisation remained virtually unchanged until the end of the war
This
the headquarters were later
changed to
except that the names of
organisation is illustrated at Appendix 30, Diagram C.
Commando Group and Commando Brigade.
The
Functions of the Holding Commando
The Holding Commando was formed to meet the training and reinforcement requirements
involved in the new sustained operations now being undertaken.
While the role of Commandos
had been raiding only, it had been possible to send them partially trained reinforcements who com-
pleted their training with the Commando while it was training itself for the next operation.
sustained operations, however, this was impracticable and the Holding Commando's function was to
receive the intake from the Commando Depot, complete their specialist training in heavy weapons,
demolitions, signals, etc., and draft them to individual Commandos as required.
Battle and other
casualties were also passed to the Holding Commando for drafting back to their original units.
The only alternative would have been considerable drafting from one Commando to another which
would have been bad for the esprit de corps. Commandos proceeding overseas took with them a
pool of 15 to 20
per cent. reinforcements to make up casualties occurring before
normal
reinforcements could arrive.
Disposition of the Four Special Service Brigades
Of the four Special Service Brigades, No. 2 was formed in Italy where four individual Commandos
were already operating.
This formation remained in the Mediterranean for the rest of the war
under the theatre commander.
They played a distinguished part in the fighting in Italy, Albania
Greece and in Yugoslavia where they co-operated with Marshal Tito's partisans.
of the C.C.O. until they were required for
The Co. tirades were focuid no gland, where Nos hod how ter, waned thier the cot to
No. 3, however, was sent immediately to
India.
No. 3 Special Service Brigade
No. 3 Brigade in S.E.A.C. spent much of its time in an ordinary infantry role and at one time,
filled a defensive position at Silchar.
They had rather a discouraging start which resulted in gloomy
reports being sent back to the S.S. Group and C.O.H.Q.
This was largely due to their having to
acclimatise themselves to a new theatre and its methods as well as to the tropical climate.
These
anticulties themselves me, however, and later they carried out a number of amphibious operations.
In March, 1944, two of the Commandos (Nos. 5 and 44) landed behind the Japanese
Teknaf, which resulted in a general advance in the area, and, towards the end of the year,
the
Brigade made a number of reconnaissance raids.
Early in 1945, three landings were planned, at
Akyab, Myebon and Kangaw, to hasten the Japanese withdrawal and disorganise it by cutting off
as many of his troops as possible.
These went well, particularly the last which involved most bitter
fighting.
At the end of the war No. 3 Brigade was sent to Hong Kong as part of the re-occupation
forces.
Nos. 1 and 4 Special Service Brigades
The reorganisation in the autumn of 1943 still left C.O.H.Q. with the responsibility for raiding
operations and the two remaining Special Service Brigades were available to it for this purpose
until they were required for " Overlord.
All the emphasis, however, was by now on the plans and
reparations for this invasion and the work of C.O.H.Q. in planning operations for the Commando
was closely co-ordinated with the requirements of C.O.S.S.A.C.
Numbers of small raids wer
carried out on the north-east coast of Europe and also in the Channel Islands with the object, not
only of reconnaissance, but also of supporting the cover plan.
These raids and beach reconnaissances
enabled the Allies to form a very clear picture of the Normandy beaches and their defences.
particular they furnished detailed information of the German beach obstacles and thus enabled
the Combined Operations Training Establishments to reconstruct them and devise methods for
removing or destroying them.
111
WO 277/21.
27
