Number of Groups Required
8. The number of Beach Organisation Groups required will depend on the scale of any operation;
in general, it can be taken that one Group for each assaulting Brigade will not be exceeded.
Training
9. In addition to units specifically allotted to the defence of the beaches there will be other units
who will require to be attached to and come under command of the Beach Groups during operations.
These units comprise the following :—
Detachment Field Park Company-for R.E. Stores Dump.
D.I.D. (Detail Issue Depot).
Medical Units.
Ordnance Beach Detachment.
During collective training it will be necessary for all attached units to be made available to join
the Beach Groups though at other times they will be able to continue with their own technical training
at their normal stations.
Summary of Proposals
10. The following proposals are therefore submitted for urgent consideration and approval :-
(a) Approval in principle be given immediately to the establishment of Beach Groups, the
preparation of a war establishment for the Group
Group Commanders and their staffs.
Headquarters and the appointment of
(3) Detailed consideration be given to the preparation of a suitable war establishment;
to be
undertaken by the War Office assisted as necessary by representatives of G.H.Q., Home
Forces and Combined Operations H.Q.
(c) One Beach Group to be formed immediately in each Command in the U.K.
(d) Formation of such further Beach Groups as may then be considered necessary as a result of
projected future operations.
Signed, LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN,
Chief of Combined Operations.
APPENDIX 25
DIRECTIVES TO A.W.C. AND A.W.S.C.
DIRECTIVE TO THE ASSAULT WARFARE COMMITTEE
The Assault Warfare Committee is to meet as often as may be necessary to study the recognised
problems of the Combined Assault and to make recommendations to the Executive as to any measures,
tactics,
weapons or equipment considered likely to help in solving them
There will be a standing
Assault Warfare Sub-Committee.
The same officer is to be Secretary both to the main committee and
to the Sub-Committee.
2. As its initial task the Committee is to compile and submit for the approval of the Executive a
list of problems considered to merit such study and thereafter to submit such lists with reports on
progress at monthly intervals.
In addition, the Committee
may submit
Executive as they arise if they consider the question is of sufficient urgency.
recommendations
3. In submitting recommendations to the Executive the Committee is, in appropriate cases, to attach
a draft of Staff requirements for submission to the Service Ministry, which will be responsible for
production.
4. The Committee is to initiate action with appropriate Section of C.O.H.Q. for the carrying out of
all such experiments and trials as they consider necessary for the proper performance of their duties
defined in paragraph 1.
5. Officers of C.O.H.Q. may,
consideration of the Committee.
through the Head of their Department, prepare papers for
the
These papers are to be submitted in the first instance to the Sub-
which may call upon the originator of the paper to explain or amplity these proposals.
If
them back for further study, reject them or submit them for final approval by the Executive.
€ Requests from Force Commandera or ontolo authorities for information or advice on combined
assault problems are to be passed, in the first instaide, to hor ties tot Warfat secretary who is to consule
drafting a reply.
the appropriate member of the Committee, or if necessary,
by the Executive.
If the matter is important or controversial the re meeting be submitted for approval
call a meeting
of the Committee before
246
DIRECTIVE TO PERMANENT ASSAULT WARFARE SUB-COMMITTEE
Committee in studying the recognised
The object of the Permanent Assault Warfare Sub-Committee is to assist the Assault Warfare
problems of the combined assault and in recommending anv
measures, tactics, we will tail into three main catered likely to help in solving them.
2. (a) Its work will fall into three main categories :-
(i) The detailed study of particular problems in accordance with the directions of the
main committee.
(ii) The initial study of papers forwarded to the Secretary for consideration by the main
Committee.
case
of papers
prepared by othcers
of C.O.H.Q.,
Committee may call upon the originator to explain or amplify his proposals.
(iji) The initiation of proposals relevant to the work of the main Committee.
the Sub-
(b) The results of its work will be submitted, through the Secretary in the form of draft reports,
papers and recommendations for consideration by the main Committee.
3. The Secretary of the main Committee will also act as Secretary of the Sub-Committee.
4. A room will be set aside for the use of the Sub-Committee when its members are not employed
on their duties.
6th December, 1942.
APPENDIX 26
DIRECTIVE TO THE CHIEF OF MILITARY STAFF DUTIES (WEAPONS) (C.M.S.D.(W.))
The C.M.S.D. (W.) is responsible to G.O.C.O. for studying the technique of combined assault warfare
with a view to making recommendations as to military measures, tactics, weapons or equipments likely
to prove of value.
2. He is to be the military member of the Assault Warfare Committee at C.O.H.Q. and is to have a
permanent representative on the Assault Warfare Sub-Committee.
3. He is to maintain close contact with the branches of the War Office under the D.C.I.G.S. (but
not the Director of Signals) and also with the Director of Mechanical Engineering, in order to ensure an
adequate exchange of information and views on the technique of assault warfare between the G.C.O.
and those branches of the War Office.
4. He is to maintain a similar contact with C.-in-C., Home Forces, and with C.O.S.S.A.C. for the
same purpose.
5. He is to act as the C.C.O.'s representative on the General Staff Weapons Policy Committee but
may be represented when papers not of immediate interest to the C.C.O. are under discussion.
6. He will have under him a Staff Duties Section and a Tactical Section.
7. In the absence of C.M.S.D. (W.), G.1, S.D. is to deputise for him.
11th July, 1943.
APPENDIX 27
DIRECTIVE TO THE AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE COMMITTEE
Terms of Reference
The Amphibious Warfare Committee is to study and keep under constant review all tactical
problems connected with the assault phase of an amphibious operation, including the associated air
support, and to make recommendation to the Executive for their solution.
2. In particular the Committee is to study tactics and technique, and the development required in
ships, craft, vehicles, aircraft, weapons, and equipment, for amphibious warfare and associated air support,
and is to deduce staff requirements.
3. Absolute priority is to be given to study of matters which will lead to results that will be of use
in the war against Japan.
Other matters are to be studied as adherence to this priority allows.
mattere
4. The Committee is NOT required to deal with purely administrative, maintenance, and training
However, since such matters cannot always be divorced from the subject which the Committee
15 charged to study they should receive due consideration when appropriate, subject to detailed work
The Chairman is empowered to rule that such matters
being referred to the functional group concerned.
shall be considered by the Committee.
Main Committee
5. The Committee will consist of :—
D.C.O. (Air)
D.D.C.O.(N.)
Permanent Chairman.
Full members.
D.D.C.O. (Mil.)
D.D.C.O.(Air)
D.X.O.R.
Advisory members.
Col. Trg.
VC AI
Secretary.
247
~02747
WO 277/21
27
30
