There were far too many staff and services officers, and not enough
administrative personnel.
duties re-allotted.
The two S.T. staffs were amalgamated, and the
As no air support could be provided, it was decided to evacuate, and this
process began on 29th April, and was completed on 2nd May.
SECTION 2.-ICELAND AND THE FAROES
Introductory
The situation resulting from the German victories on the Continent and
in Scandinavia made it imperative to secure the main shipping routes in the
North Atlantic, and to prevent the enemy from establishing himself in any
position from which those routes might be exposed to further danger.
It therefore became necessary to occupy the islands in the chain which
links the British Isles with America.
The U.S.A. secured Greenland, and the
British occupied the Faroes Islands and Iceland in May, 1940.
The Faroes lie about 250 miles from the Orkneys, and Iceland is 300
miles farther to the north-west.
No active operations occurred, and the British force in the Faroes began
to be progressively reduced in 1943.
After the entry of the U.S.A. into the
war, the Americans became mainly responsible for the occupation of Iceland.
Iceland
Iceland is a volcanic island of about 40,000 square miles, lying just outside
the Arctic
Circle.
At the period of the occupation, it depended almost
entirely on road and sea communications, and there were no railways.
roads were limited and not very good.
Sea transport was affected by the fact
that weather conditions in summer were liable to sudden change, and in
winter were very changeable with occasional violent gales.
The original force consisted of one Infantry Brigade, together with some
divisional troops of 49 Division, the total strength being about 3,500.
R.A.S.C. element consisted of one section of a Supply Personnel Company,
one sub-section of a Field Bakery, and one section of a Reserve M.T. Com-
pany, with 39 30-cwt. lorries.
There was also the usual R.A.S.C. complement
in the Field Ambulance, with six additional ambulances.
All other units had
their first line transport.
The initial shipment of supplies was 30 days' bulk supplies at Fiel
Service scale, plus three days' Compo ration as landing rations.
Ten tons of
potatoes and 25 tons of coal were also sent.
Petrol was not taken with the
first convoy, as it was correctly assumed that suficient supplies would be
available locally.
The force headquarters and the base were established at the capil od
the north, and Seydisfjordur in the east.
main port, Reykjavik, and the brigade was deployed there, and at Akurit
Increase in Strength
Towards the end of tund the rest oe 10 Division arrived bringing th
strength up to 16.000 including a Canadian contingent and R.N. and RAF
136
personnel. By Uctober, 194U, the strength was 19,000, and by the end of the
year it had reached 23,000.
This made it necessary to increase the supply
detachment,
and the three supply personnel sections then operating
were
reorganized as detail issue depots, a fourth D.I.D. being sent from the United
Kingdom.
This arrangement was unsatisfactory, and one D.I.D. was re-
organized as a base supply depot, Type "B".
The bakery grew to be a
field bakery, Type " A
with 16 ovens. In June, 1941,
another DID
arrived, with a field butchery, the butchery duties having
been previously
carried out by personnel from the base supply depot, D.I.Ds., and loca
sources
The remainder of the reserve M.T. company was sent to the island,
organized on a reduced establishment.
By November, 1941, the responsi-
bilities of the unit had increased to such an extent, that it was necessary to
revise the establishment to provide platoons for the receipt, custody, and issue,
of reserve vehicles, and a workshop platoon adequate for the repair and
maintenance of all R.A.S.C. vehicles in Iceland.
Communications
The maintenance of the force was complicated by the appalling com-
munications.
It was necessary to ensure that the outlying detachments were
adequately provided for in the event of their being cut off either by an enemy
landing or, as was more probable, by bad weather. Advanced supply depots
were accordingly established at the two outlying stations.
Maintenance of
the latter was effected by reshipment from Reykjavik, except for petrol and
coal, for which the vessels arriving from overseas made a "milk-round",
discharging as necessary at the ports.
For inter-communication purposes, a motor boat company was asked for
in July, 1940.
The type of craft to be sent was discussed between War Office
and the Admiralty.
The ordinary motor-boat was unsuitable, as such craft
could not get there under their own power, and could not readily be shipped
as cargo.
The most suitable type was the trawler or drifter,
suggested that the requirement should be met from available vessels of this
type already in Icelandic waters.
This did not prove to be the satisfactory solution, however, and in March,
1941, Iceland was asking for a motor boat company of 20 drifters and ten
light launches.
Provision of the drifters from United Kingdom sources was
difficult, and, as the Naval authorities in Iceland agreed that the provision of
boats and crews there was an Admiralty responsibility, the commitment was
met with Norwegian drifters. In September that year, the Navy was no longer
able to meet the commitment, and one section of a motor boat company was
accordingly sent to Iceland with ten 40-foot motor boats.
Instructions were
given that any additional craft required were to be requisitioned locally, with
the perhaps rather superfluous condition,
" provided they proved suitable
vessels for operations in waters round the Icelandic coast":
The unit was.
at any rate, equipped with local vessels very soon after arrival, and carried
out extensive water transport from the main port to the outlying garrisons.
It continued these duties without a break until the U.S. Forces took over in
December, 1942, and pesformed them in a very satisfactory manner, although
the craft were unfand performede coast as hazardous.
W9s997/77
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
