Reserves
In the middle of 1939, Gibraltar reported to War Office that the reserve
of one month's supplies then held, with a working margin of 30 days, would
be insufficient in war, and proposed that the scale should be two months'
reserve, plus 30 days' working
margin, for 3,000
men.
This was not
approved.
Six months later, however, the reserves were increased to 60
days, and, in August, 1940, to 180 days, plus two months' working margin.
These levels were considered essential, in view of the possibility of the
unloading of ships being hindered by enemy bombardment.
Another reason was the unusually large number of ships re-victualled
at Gibraltar, involving unexpected calls on the reserves.
To obviate this,
M.O.W.T. were asked to avoid re-victualling ships there as far as possible.
By October, 1940, the conclusion had been reached that sufficient stocks
ought to be held to cover 12 months' siege.
storage accommodation, particularly bomb and/or shell proof.
factor was that, owing to probable deterioration, due to damp, the items of
the siege ration could not be expected to last more than a year.
decided to try to hold 12 months' G.S. reserve of foodstuffs; but, of the
existing storage accommodation, some was overcrowded, and the peace-time
R.A.S.C. stores were in exposed positions.
Additional internal chambers in
the Rock were allocated, and safe storage was thus provided for 87 per
cent. of the siege reserves.
Reserves Reduced
Up to 1943, there were two reserve scales for Gibraltar, normal and siege.
The normal reserve included 60 days' G.S. reserve, and 13 days' working
margin, and the siege reserve was 300 days, with no margin.
of that year, as the prospect of a siege receded, the perishable commodities
of R.A.S.C. supply were reduced to six months' reserve, non-perishable items
remaining at 300 days.
In September, 1944, Gibraltar proposed that the holding should be
reduced to six months for 10,000, instead of for 18,000.
It was decided
to fix the holding at 45 days' G.S. reserve, and 45 days' maintenance stocks
based on actual ration strengths, then about 12,500.
The reasons for this
decision were that 45 days were the standard for G.S. reserves and main-
tenance stocks, and Gibraltar would thus be brought into line with other
Mediterranean theatres; that the scale would relieve turnover and storage
problems; and, finally, that no reason was known why 45 days' scale was
Gibraltar then accepted the reduced scale, plus 30 days' reserve at actual
feeding strength of certain commodities (bacon, tea, sugar, jam, flour, milk
powder and preserved meat).
This was considered necessary in view of
the situation of Gibraltar, and the possibility that any delay in delivery by
maintenance stocks for the Army and civil population would result
in drawing on reserves, which should never fall below 45 days.
reserve of certain essential commodities for the civilian population were also
420
In December, 1945, S.T.6 represented that military
reserves ought not
to continue to be held in Gibraltar at the disposal of the Colonial Office
guard against failure by that department
to provide
properly against
contingencies, such as the effect of a dock strike in the United Kingdom on
the despatch of civilian foodstuffs.
The maintenance of adequate reserves
for civilian populations was, in fact, a Colonial Office responsibility, and,
if the War Department was apparently willing to carry this
burden,
the
Colonial Office
would eventually claim its assistance as a right in
future emergency.
Controller of Supplies
The relations of the military and civilian supply services in Gibraltar
had, from the first, been interlocked.
Until the end of 1940, the Controller
of Supplies had been a civilian.
But during that year he had also become
a stock-holder, with a large proportion of stocks drawn from R.A.S.C. sources.
Accounting for these had
not been altogether satisfactory, and it was
thought that future developments might increase the amount of food for
civilians that was drawn from the Army, and that siege conditions would
result in the universal issue of rations on the military system.
considered by Gibraltar that an A.D.S.T. should be appointed to
control all food reserves, and that an R.A.S.C. officer should be civil con-
troller and supply officer. These officers were duly appointed.
Civil Food Stocks
The question of civil maintenance was reviewed in 1942.
Civil Food Controller could make
R.A.S.C. and obtain other items through War Office channels, the remaining
items being obtained through Colonial Office channels.
There had been a suggestion that War Office should undertake the
entire responsibility for feeding the civil population, but
The War Office, however, did not object to the existing system,
provided that the responsibility rested with the local Civil Food Controller,
and ultimately with the Colonial Office.
This policy did not invalidate
the arrangements, that, in siege conditions, all supplies in Gibraltar would
be available for issue to the whole siege population, i.e., the garrison plus
Siege Rations-Pack
Owing to the effect of damp on foodstuffs kept in store
and quick rusting of tins, a special pack was devised for the
siege ration. The supplies were packed in petrol tins proofed against rust.
The method was found to be wasteful of storage space, and, in view of
improved storage conditions, it was decided that extra protection against
rust was no longer necessary.
Supplies were not, therefore, packed in an
additional tin casing, but bulk supplies, not normally packed in tins, con-
tinued to be packed in the standard zinc-coated food tins.
Bread Production
Baking on the Rock was carried out in four separate bakeries, one
large and three small. These were operated by a detachment of a field bakery,
originally 57 strong, producing about 15,000 lb. of bread a day.
421
