When the retirement began, many R.A.S.C, units lost touch with thei
formations, owing to the cross-marching of divisions.
Hundreds of R.A.S.C.
vehicles had to off-load whatever they were carrying in order to clear dumps
and railhead depots.
On 21st May, the L. of C. was cut, and the B.E.F. north of the Somm
could receive nothine more from its bases and depots, all south of the river.
A new plan for its maintenance had to be put into operation at once, involving
a daily lift of ammunition, supplies, and petrol, of 2,000 tons. It was believed
that each corne hold on wheels, ammunition for two days, petrol for one,
supplice for four in 1 and 2 Corns and for two in 3 Corps; while en route t
each coros wur one day's supolies, two davs' petrol, and a little ammunition.
All trains in transit had been stopped, but some had been abandoned in
sidings, and R.A.S.C. units scoured the country for them, and recovered large
quantities of ammunition, P.O.L., and supplies.
This method, of collecting supplies, etc.,
wherever they could be found,
played a very large part in the maintenance of the B.E.F. for the remainder ol
its existence.
But it was not the only source of supply.
The War Office plan for a floating reserve was put into operation, and
despatches were made from the S.R.Ds. to ports in the United Kingdom or
an intensive schedule, in pack trains each carrying a given number of ratios
at Scale
"E", until 2nd June.
Thence they were shipped to Calis,
Boulogne, and Dunkirk.
But the two former were out of action as ports of
entry by 23rd, and all ships were then sent to Dunkirk.
Through this por,
almost incessanty bombed and a dangerous bottleneck, the British trops
were maintained as far as this was possible from the United Kingdom.
The
process was a difficult one, and the senior S.T. staff officer there reported or
26/27th May that, as the French were using the port, the British could not
use it as well, and he suggested landing supplies, ammunition and petrol as
the open beaches.
A thin trickle of these commodities was sent forward from Dunkink?
spite of appalling difficulties.
Roadheads were established, and even one a
two pack trains got through to Poperinghe.
Two echelons of gun ammun
tion had been dumped as part of the original plan for the occupation of tr
Lille sector, and this was quickly collected by the R.A.S.C. units which had
put it there. The petroleum situation gave no cause for immediate concen.
the petrol filling centre near Lille remained intact, with large stocks of MI
spirit in bulk tankage, and filling went on steadily, helped by a Corps Petal
Park.
The very considerable local resources of Lille and the surrounds
farms, all practcally abandoned by the inhabitants, were exploited to te
full, while the foraging process was carried on far and wide by R.A.S.C. uis
old railhead dumps and abandoned trains yielding a steady haul.
Maintenance was complicated by sudden changes of command, which ke
no time for claborate administrative adjustments.
Divisions were switched
from one corps to another without warning to the S.T. staffs.
At one period
DDST. I Corps, was responsible for maintaining four divisions and time
improvised forces.
The divisioes orcanitation of the R.A SC. did not prove flexible enou
for the conditions under which units had to operate.
Individual infant
124
brigades withdrew in different directions, or stood on widely separated fronts,
and divisional artillery was often widely dispersed.
R.A.S.C. sub-units had
often to operate independently of their parent units, with which touch was
easily lost.
Junior leaders had to act on their own initiative, and not wait for
orders.
Endurance and improvisation brought units through and enabled
them to maintain deliveries in the most adverse circumstances.
In addition,
the R.A.S.C. had often to take part in battle, thus emphasizing the necessity
for their being adequately trained to use their weapons.
By 20th or 2lst May, the third line R.A.S.C. had ceased to operate
normally, and were employed in troop-carrying, clearing railhead depots, and
numerous other tasks.
The old automatic replenishment of ammunition and
petrol refilling points stopped, and this had serious
consequences, as the
strain on the second line was greatly increased, units having to make very
long journeys to refill.
The strain on supply columns was as severe as on
other units, modified only by the fact that, as they were both second and
third line, they were better able to adapt themselves to the conditions; but
there were many departures from normal operation of the double echelon
system.
It was very difficult to locate formations and units for whom supplies
were intended, often because of the failure of units to send guides, and supplies
were often dumped in the hope that they would reach those for whom they
were meant.
At any rate, they reached someone.
In spite of formidable difficulties, R.A.S.C. transport units maintained
essential deliveries in all circumstances.
On 22nd and 23rd May, S.T.6 arranged for supply by air, and about 55
tons of rations were despatched and dropped in France.
It was impossible
to tell how much was collected by the B.E.F., or fell into enemy hands, or
was never found; but at least one lot of a number of sacks of preserved meat
and biscuit was found by a foraging party of a divisional supply column.
The
flights had to be discontinued owing to the casualties sustained by the aircraft
employed.
Dunkirk
The contraction of the area occupied by the B.E.F., and the progressive
shortening of its lines of communication, made it possible to dispense with a
number of administrative troops which were not required to continue the
battle. Many R.A.S.C. units were ordered to fall back; most of them received
orders to abandon their vehicles and march to the coast, and some were told
to destroy them, but the orders were not uniform.
There was a good deal of abandoned transport, both "B" and R.A.S.C.,
in and around Dunkirk, and the A.D.T., G.H.Q., who was the senior S.T.
representative there, collected them in an improvised V.R.D.
Drivers were
found for them among men waiting to be evacuated, and these vehicles, as
well as all other R.A.S.C. vehicles entering Dunkirk, were sent to the docks
to clear supplies and ammunition.
There they were loaded and sent on their
way forward.
14 10-ton lorries of a L. of C. (Railhead) Company were an
invaluable addition to the transport resources of the port.
Convoys of food and ammunition continued to run, with a certain amount
of loss.
The 10-tonner drivers did specially good work, but long before the
125
(37452)
wester 17
WO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
