they were most urgently needed. All repair work had to be performed in the
open, in most difficult conditions precluding the erection of any temporary
covered shelter.
months after the arrival of the M.T. section.
The Iris hut for the workshops was not completed till is
R.A.S.C.
The formation of a R.E.M.E. detachment from the L.A.D. relieved the
of responsibility
for some attached vehicles,
otherwise the
practice of dealing with all repairs within the scope of the R.A.S.C. work-
shop staff continued.
Water Transport
With the gradual expansion of the force, and the arrival of the force on
Vaagö, the R.A.S.C. responsibility for providing water transport between the
islands increased considerably.
In the earlier
days, local hiring of boats
was resorted to, but later a number of escaped Norwegian fishing vessels were
taken over, in some cases complete with their crews.
The position was then
regularized by
the vessels being chartered by the Ministry
of Sea Transport
Small Vessels Pool.
SECTION 3.—AID TO RUSSIA (NORTH)
In connection with "Aid to Russia" by
way of Archangel, a small
R.A.S.C. detachment was sent to that port, as part of a body called 126 Base
Unit; it consisted of a captain, as supply officer and quartermaster, an
The function of the detachment was to provide certain personnel in
Moscow with supplies to supplement their Russian rations and enable them
to maintain a reasonable standard of living, with P.O.L., clothing, necessaries,
and personal equipment.
These personnel included the British Military
the
British
Embassy
staffs, and journalists,
and the French
" Normandie squadron.
The detachment
also held rations for distribution to British personnel
working in and round Moscow, and to shipwrecked seamen.
The unit was withdrawn in October, 1943, when the Admiralty assumed
responsibility for the maintenance commitments of the supply detachments.
The War Office sent 320 tons of foodstuffs to Archangel, to provide a nine
months ration for the purpose.
Early in 1943, a R.A.F. force was sent to North Russia, for which ST
made the supply
arrangements, although no R.A.S.C. supply unit acco-
panied it.
strength of 900 for 270 days.
The quantity of supplies shipped with the force was based on 3
Eight days' Compo pack rations were loaded in
the first convoy so that the force could be maintained until cooking fating
had been arranged.
Flour was sent for breadmaking, which it was antips
could be arranged locally.
144
CHAPTER VI
MIDDLE EAST
Synopsis of Events
Middle East Command did not really exist as such before the war, although
a small planning staff was set up in August, 1939.
Until the outbreak of war,
British Troops in Egypt, with Cyprus and the Sudan, formed one Command,
and British Troops in Palestine and Transjordan another.
Middle East Command assumed operational control of these on the out-
break of war, and British Somaliland was included in January, 1940.
In the early months of the war, the British forces in Middle East were not
directly affected, although precautionary measures were taken against possible
Italian aggression from Libya.
This materialized in July, 1940, and by the
middle of September the Italians had reached Sidi Barrani 50 miles east of
the frontier.
Then they were held, and on 9th December, 1940, the British
counter-offensive began.
By the end of that month, 35,000 Italians had been
taken prisoner, and Benghazi was reached on 6th February, 1941.
But we
were obliged to evacuate it on 3rd April, and on 28th April, the Germans
captured Sollum on the Egypt-Cyrenaica frontier.
A garrison was left in
Tobruk, and successfully defended it. The situation in the Western Desert
stabilized until the autumn.
Meanwhile, the defeat of the Italians in East Africa, by the joint opera-
tions of Middle East and East Africa Commands in the Sudan, Eritrea, Soma-
liland, and Ethiopia, had eliminated one threat to the communications of the
British forces in the Western Desert; and another had been removed by the
occupation of Syria and Lebanon in June and July, 1941, of Iraq in April
that year, and of Persia in August.
The British forces in the two latter countries were known as Tenth Army,
and were under G.H.Q., India, until they were transferred to Middle East
Command at the beginning of 1942. Affairs in Persia and Iraq are dealt with
in Chapter IX.
The other British and Imperial forces in Middle East had
been reorganized in October, 1941, in two commands under the Commander-
in-Chief, Middle East, the Eighth Army in the Western Desert, and the Ninth
Army in Syria and Palestine.
Our successes against the Italians in 1941 had been balanced to some
extent by the defeat of our forces in Greece and Crete in April and May that
year.
On 18th November, 1941, we again took the offensive in Libya, and, after
varying fortunes, re-entered Benghazi on 24th December, only to be obliged
to fall back four weeks later to the Gazala line. In June, that line was broken.
Tobruk fell, and our retirement only ended at El Alamein over 200 miles
within the Egyptian frontier on 2nd July, 1942.
The next few months were spent in preparing for a counter-stroke against
the Germans under Rommel.
When everything was ready, the Eighth Army
attacked at El Alamein on 23rd October, 1942, and soon after began the
victorious advance mein ove 23 on without reverse until junction was effected
in Tunisia with the which went On i and the U.S. Forces, which had landed
17
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
