The medical authorities decided that rum was not required for assault
troops, but that issues might be made in the normal way after the assault
"Q" Maintenance Project
"O" Maintenance Project.
The policy for maintenance of the force was defined in the War Ofice
This stated that War Office was to be respon-
sible for controlling and operating the British main base in the until
Kingdom; for the supply of stores to embarkation point for despatch over.
seas, for British, Canadian, and Allied (other than U.S.) contingens, for
Civil Affairs Organization in the British Zones (in respect of items normaly
supplied by the Army), and for R.N. and R.A.F.; and for supply of certain
common-user items, e.g., fuels, to the U.S. Forces.
Supply Aspect of Project
The important features of the project, from the angle of S.T.6, were
as follows: —
(a) Reserves.—Reserves were to be 75 days' stocks, including 15 days'
G.S. reserve, all to be built up in the United Kingdom before the
operation.
By D+41, reserves and working margins totalling 14
days for the forces ashore were to be held in temporary depots in
rear maintenance areas.
Until a permanent base became available,
stocks from the
United Kingdom were to be transferred to the
continent as required by 21 Army Group.
(b) Movement of Stores—Phases.—Movement of stores overseas was
to be in four distinct phases.
The first phase was for D to D+1,
pre-loading for maintenance.
Vessels for this traffic were to be pre-
loaded a considerable time before D Day, and the loading was to
be composite, to insure the arrival of the right quantities of supplies
For the second phase, D+ to to D+ 30, arrangements
were to be made in advance for continuing the maintenance move-
after the pre-loading movement; but, as the
vessels employed would mostly be those used during the first phase,
pre-loading would be impossible.
would initiate a system of working on programmes prepared on
demands received from 21 Army Group, although, in the case of
particularly, the project made an exception so that pre-
arranged maintenance could continue longer if necessary.
were to be made every ten days.
The fourth phase would consist
in the changeover from coasters to store ships.
for its commencement.
i corn to stare a change to the normal
of an overseas theatre.
(c) Rationing Policy._The Project laid down that all troops would
be fed initially on Compo rations, which would be replaced by the
Field Service ration as soon as i which be accepted by 21 amy
Fresh items,
such as bread, potatoes, and frozen
Some local purchase
would be introduced as soon as possible.
might be made, provided an adequate amount of food was left for
the civilian population.
294
Adequacy of Home Organization
Detailed planning for the maintenance of 21 Army Group in supplies
began in September, 1943,
relative to the mounting of " Overlord".
with consideration of the problems
C.P.O.(F.S.) submitted an appreciation of the situation, on the following
(a) Operation " Overlord" would not take place before Ist April, 1944.
(b) Ration strength would be about 900,000, including R.A.F.
(c) D.S.T., War Office would be responsible for the provision of food-
stuffs for Civil Affairs for the first six months.
(d) Projected increases in S.R.D. accommodation would materialize.
(e) S.R.Ds. would hold all the 24-hour ration target, and the whole of
(t) Maintenance of the whole Mediterranean theatre would be effected
direct from America, with minor exceptions.
(s) Initial maintenance of "Overlord", up to D+41, would be by
(h) The General Staff reserve for " Overlord" would be 14 days, with
a 7 days' maintenance stock, and the reserve would be shipped by
D+41, by which time one-third of the force would be ashore.
The appreciation made it clear that the S.R.D. and M.S.D. organization
in the United Kingdom was capable of carrying the impending load.
factors and arguments adduced are contained in Appendix VIIIC.
The launching of the North Africa Campaign absorbed all reserves which
had been built up for the campaign in either that theatre or N.W. Europe.
The maintenance plan was arranged, first, to maintain the
forces, and, second, to build-up, by 31st December, 1943, the reserves for
the N.W. Europe operation.
This was successfully carried out.
Appendix VIIIB.) All the stocks required were complete on the ground, and
provision for continued maintenance was running smoothly.
World Shortage of Foodstuffs
The increasing world shortage of foodstuffs led the War Office in March,
1944, to ask Middle Fast ana A.F.H.Q. to adjust their demands andition.
sumption policy, do as accord with the general position of availabilities.
The items may y as to accore meatstuis, cereals, and dairy products.
The shipping position in the early part of 1944 was expected to reach
the lowest level of the war, not because of sinkings, but because of the
very large number of vessels to be converted for special purposes, thus
reducing the number of freighters available.
These factors had necessitated revicion of War Office requirements
for 1944 and a further complication toa thot ICA had long ceased to
accept demands under Lend/Lease without demur.
They were now being
subjected to rigid examination; ration scales, the numbers of troops in the
theatre by classes, and the authorized reserve holdings were all being
295
westerf
7
W0277
121
18
27
WO27736
