minimize delay and movement on mobilization.
The balance of unit require.
ments in these items, not immediately available on mobilization, was to be
sent to the overseas Base M.T. Stores Depot for onward transmission to units
in the field without demand.
The provision of spare parts was very
much
complicated by the expected influx of a very large number of vehicles of
different makes and types, requiring a wide range of spares.
Transport Personnel
The requirements of drivers and artificers on mobilization were to be
met very largely from the Supplementary Reserve, in which bus and lorry
drivers or mechanics in civil life enrolled in peace-time, receiving no military
training of any kind.
Other sources were Regular reservists, the Militia, and
As regards the latter, see Chapter XII, Section 2.
Hired Transport on Mobilization
In the event of mobilization or other emergency, there would be very
considerable requirements for local transport tasks, which would have to
be met from hired transport resources.
The services concerned were the
deployment of A.A. units, stores, and ammunition to war stations; the manning
of coast defences; the mobilization of the Field Force; military Passive Air
Defence services; embodiment and concentration of the Territorial Army,
other than A.A. and Coast Defence; vehicles for conversion into ambulances
for duty in the United Kingdom; and ordinary general transport services.
The policy to be followed in obtaining this transport was agreed between
the War Office and the Ministry of Transport in July, 1938. Co-ordination
of Services' requirements was made the responsibility of the Ministry of
Transport; but, in view of the magnitude of the task, it would take some
time to formulate the full plan of that Ministry, and interim arrangements
to meet military requirements were necessary.
These were covered by agree-
ments with selected contractors (in Northern Ireland with the Northern Ireland
Transport Board) and by ear-marking vehicles under Command arrange-
ments.
Care had to be taken that such vehicles were not also earmarked
to meet the needs of other services or authorities, and vice versa.
Water Transport
In the event of war, it was planned that as the training and administrative
commitments in connection with the War Department Fleet would be greatly
increased, it would be necessary to decentralize the control of the existing
craft to the Commands concerned; and that the existing organization of the
A.D.M.T. would be required to carry out expansion of the Fleet by building
vessels under contract.
The establishment of the A.D.M.T. was to be absorbed into the War Office
Directorate of Supplies and Transport. It was considered essential that the
valuable vessels composing the Fleet should be administered by suitably
qualified officers, and that the general administration and maintenance of the
craft should pass to these officers from the local R.A.S.C. officers in charge
of transport, hitherto responsible.
It was the intention that these water trans-
administration of the officer commanding, R.A.S.C., concerned.
pom officers should establish small water transport units, under the local
36
R.A.S.C. Clerks
The R.A.S.C. provided and trained soldier clerks, not only for its own
units and for supply, transport, and barrack services, but also for staff offices
at all levels from brigade headquarters upwards, and in static headquarters,
but excluding R.A., R.E., and technical corps, which provided their own.
The numbers required on mobilization were of course very much greater
than those actually serving in peace.
The difference was intended to be met
in several ways, including regular reservists, supplementary reservists,
A.T.S.,
the Militia, and civilians.
Territorial Army units had their own establishment
of clerks.
The Regular reservists were often employed in peace as civilian
clerks in military offices.
This meant that they, like the regular soldier clerks,
were liable to be withdrawn on mobilization to fill a vacancy in the Field
Force.
Thus, at the moment of greatest strain, a staff or administrative office
was liable to find itself deprived of experienced clerks.
In the event, the
calling-up of many of them was deferred for a time after mobilization, in order
to overcome this difficulty.
It was as a contribution to this situation that the clerical section of the
A.T.S. was formed in October, 1938. Its members were intended to relieve
R.A.S.C. clerks, and provide for expansion of clerical establishments,
on
mobilization.
There were many difficulties in the way of their being trained
for this purpose, chiefly inadequate financial provision; but a number of
women were thus available on mobilization, who did at least know something
of the organization of the Army, of its methods of correspondence, registration
and filing systems, and regulations, and a proportion were shorthand-typists
in civil life.
The supplementary reservist had no training as a military clerk, and his
value when he was called up for service was therefore reduced, even if he
were a clerk in civil life, as he was completely ignorant of the work in a
miltary office.
As regards the employment of civilian clerks, the War Establishments for
R.A.S.C. districts, drawn up before the war, for implementation on mobiliza-
tion, contain the following note:
"In the event of the full establishment of
military personnel not being available in the early stages of mobilization,
additional civilians will be employed to complete the establishment".
This
simply shelved the question, which was the requirement for trained clerks
immediately on mobilization, when the strain on the R.A.S.C. services was
bound to be enormously increased as the result of largely increased feeding
strengths, etc.
Os.C., R.A.S.C. were, before the war, directed to apply to the
local Labour Exchange, in order to obtain the names of men who might register
themselves as willing to be employed in military offices on mobilization, and
who meantime would come in, without pay, for a day or two's training.
The
result of this somewhat naïve expedient was, at any rate in one large commer-
cial city, completely unproductive of any suitable clerks, and there is no
reason to suppose that things were any different elsewhere.
It is clear that facilities must be afforded in peace-time for the maximum
possible practical experience to be given to A.T.S. and Supplementary Reserve
personnel in military offices, preferably those in which they would be employed
in wal.
Alternatively, the peace-time ceiling of regular clerks should be
37
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
