en route involved no R.A.S.C. responsibility.
The two routes established
eve retrom Dieppe to Toulon and Milan respectively, the last place being
maintained under A.F.H.Q. arrangements.
The F.S. ration scale was divided
so is to provide three separate meals in the transit camps, a haversack ration
being also laid down for consumption en route.
Preparations for the Last Round
The build-up of stocks in preparation for Operation " Veritable", to clear
the area between the Maas and the Rhine, began in the middle of January,
1945.
This operation was to be the first blow of what the Commander-in-
Chief, 21 Army Group, characterized as the
" last round", which was to
continue until the final count without any relaxation until the knock-out blow
had been delivered.
These were the principles on which the whole of the
administration in this phase was based.
From the moment that the crossing
of the Rhine began, the weight of the attack and the momentum of the pursuit
had to be maintained until final victory was won.
As in the previous advance
across France and Belgium, the exertion of continual pressure on the retreat-
ing enemy depended on the necessary supplies and stores being constantly
and instantly available to the fighting troops.
The first step towards shortening the L. of C. was the closing of the
R.M.A. from 20th February.
The build-up of stocks and the dumping of
ammunition was carried out as far as possible by rail, in view of the heavy
road movement programme already involved.
The railways in the Army area
were well developed, and a large number of railheads were available, freight
trains being off-loaded in some cases within three miles of the front line.
The
tonnage off-loaded at First Canadian Army railheads in February totalled
nearly 350,000 tons; 14,000 tons of ammunition were dumped at gun posi-
tions, and 22,700 tons placed in the F.M.Cs. of two corps.
At the beginning of this phase, H.Q., L. of C. had under command 82
equivalent 3-ton transport companies, while First Canadian Army and Second
Army had respectively nice and eisht companies from the GH.Q. pool.
The balance of the pool was about 20 equivalent 3-ton companies, but these
Were balane of the pool was about 20 ent, such as timber haulage, and R.E.
and airfield construction work.
The tyre shortage affected 10-ton carriers as well as the tank trans
porters, and four of the 10-ton companies had to be equipped with 3-ton
lorries in lieu from January to March,
2,400 tons.
with a resultant loss of lift of
The build-up began in earnest on 8th March, and proceeded at full speed
until 23rd March.
The target stocks for the
various commodities to be
dumped in the roadhead on which three corps of second Army were based,
before 24th March, which was D-day for the operation of crossing the Rhine,
were as follows: —
Ammunition
60,000 tons.
P.O.L
18,000
Supplies
5,000
R.E. stores
30,000
Ordnance and miscellaneous
5,400
Total
118,400
...
370
The very large ammunition build-up was assisted by corps drawing some
their ammunition direct from the ammunition railhead, and dumping it
at gun positions and formation dumps.
ammunition a day direct from the advance base
In addition, 30 Corps drew 600 tons
A large proportion of the tonnages had to be moved by road. Three
aditional G.T. companies were allotted to Second Army by 21 Army Group,
and on 23rd March the M.T. lift available to that Army, excluding all Corps
nort and bridge companies, but including troon-carrving vehicles, wa
10470 tons.
This included 22 equivalent 3-ton companies from the G.H.O.
pol, while First Canadian Army had ten.
The target was actually surpassed, some 130,000 tons having been moved
it te concentration area in addition to daily maintenance.
DUKW Companies
Two DUKW companies, which had been retained as such since the
begining of the campaign, were placed under command of First Canadian
Amy for use in operation " Veritable".
With the forthcoming assault across
the Rhine, and on account of the flooded countryside, it was essential to
inrease the number of DUKW companies.
Three G.T. companies, which
had originally been DUKW companies, were nominated for re-conversion, but
the number of these vehicles available in the theatre was so limited that by
te middle of February only two of these units had been fully equipped
Duing the period before the assault across the Rhine, DUKWs were not
caly used on second line maintenance but also for the evacuation of casualies
over the flooded areas between the Maas and the Rhine.
Air Freight
Pie packed supplies, representing five days' maintenance for a division,
ire held in the United Kingdom for the supply by air either of airborns
In January, it was
tops or, in an emergency, of isolated forward troops.
did that two days rese ve isolan infantry or armoured brigade grap
should he brought to Nivelles infeld from these stocks. so that unfavourable
lying conditions in the United Kingdom would not necessarily rule out the
posity of supply by air being carried out.
At the end of February, a
further two days' supply for an airborne brigade group was flown in.
the airborne operation
thoucht that air supply micht well he regnired for the troops taking part in
necessarv. as the ornund forced in anation " plunder " mickly made conta
"Varsity", but in actual fact it never
with the airborne troops, and the communications were not cut thereafter
Duting the later stages of the onerations the carriage of petrol and supplies
by air to the forward areas in the advance assumed greater importance, owing
lò the extension of the L. of C.
ificient aircraft for this purpose, as first priority for transport aircraft was
Difficulties were encountered in obtaining
allotted by SHAFF to thousaration of allied prisoners of war.
ansport was closely controlled by the Combined Air Transport Operation
Room (Cator) at S.H.A.E.F., to which all demands for air freight had to be
submitted. These were then fitted in with the arrangements for evacuation.
371
717
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
