tank landing ships, the first batch being known as " Winettes.'
As a result chee Prime Minister's directive, the D.N.C. put in hand the design of new type
These vessels and their successors
armoured tank had already changed many aspects of land warfare.
of various designs were to influence future amphibious warfare in a similar way to which the
However, in order to cover the long period required fot the designch had oduction of entirely
new shops, it as decided to convert certain light daught amkers which aid been specially built
to cross the bar of the Maracaibo River in South America.
Three " Maracaibos"
version by June, 1941, whereas, due to production difficulties, the first of the " Winettes
completed until early 1943.
a fault in their bow doors, were unseaworthy in bad weather; and there was an excessive water-gap
Neither of these tank carrying craft proved satisfactory in practice.
The " Maracaibos," with
for vehicles to cross when landing direct on to any but the steepest beaches.
The " Winettes
had too deep a draught and an unsatisfactory ramping system. Nevertheless they were important
as being the first ships ever used for landing tanks direct on to a beach and their early completion
enabled many problems to be studied.
The Landing Ship Tank, Mark II. (L.S.T. 2)
In October, 1941, when plans for the invasion of Europe began to receive serious attention, the
Joint Planning Staff reported that about 2,000 tank landing vessels would be required to carry the
Thus, with all shipbuilding capacity in the U.K. stretched to the full,
help was sought from the U.S.A.
However, at that time, the Americans had no Combined Operations
Organisation or experience and were reluctant to build for us any ships other than those
of conventional design. It was not until the President personally intervened in the matter and gave
instructions that the ships should be produced at the highest priority, that a start was made. Once
started, production of this new type vessel, suitable for an Atlantic crossing and embodying British
experience, was quick and the first L.S.T. (2) was completed in November, 1942. Altogether over
1,000 were built in two years, of which 115 were taken over by the British.
The L.S.T. (2) design proved very successful and only a few modifications were subsequently
However, after the ships had been in service, the need for their use on flat beaches
found necessaryt was then tound that, like the " Winettes" although not to the same extent, their
draught was too great for direct beaching on the flat shores of North-West Europe.
was solved in four ways :—
(1) By drying out as in Normandy, where the rise and fall of the tide was large.
(2) By using pontoons as in Sicily and Italy, and in the Pacific theatre.
(3) By the use of special pier heads as erected in the artificial harbours in Normandy.
(4) By the construction of suitable hards in captured ports.
The Landing Ship Tank, Mark I.
In October, 1943, plans for the overthrow of Japan made it necessary for a proportion of L.S.T.s
to be built in the U.K.
The Staff required a larger ship than the L.S.T. (2) with the same beaching
characteristics, but with greatly increased endurance and speed and with slightly larger bow doors.
However, material limitations prevented the staff requirement being fully met at that time.
This was due partly to the fact that the Admiralty could only make available steam reciprocating
engines originally earmarked for frigates but not now required due to the cancellation of part of
the frigate programme) ; and partly because the British and Canadian shipyards were only equipped
to produce craft with riveted plates which resulted in a heavier and higher craft than the American
diesel-driven all-welded ships.
The additional draught was a great disadvantage, as it involved the
However, there was no other
alternative and the design was approved, staff requirements being modified accordingly as follows:-
To land 500 tons of vehicles on a beach slope 1 in 50 with draught not exceeding 4 ft. 7 in.
To be capable of carrying L.C.T. on deck.
Ramp from upper deck to tank deck to carry 10 tons.
Provision for carrying N.L. pontoon equipment.
Six L.C.A. to be carried, two in davits, four under derricks.
The height between decks and the wilth of the bow door to he increased so as to facilitate the
carrying of amphibians.
172
Landing Ship Dock. (L.S.D.)
At a meeting held in the Admiralty on 19th September, 1941, to discuss the problem of pro-
ducing an L.S.T. with suitable beaching characteristics, Captain Hussey produced a picture of a
"Popper" barge transporter.
This transporter had been built for use on the Danube
designed to be flooded down and to " float on" Danube River barges, one on either side of the super-
structure; subsequently by pumping out, the " Popper" barge lifted the two Danube barges
Captain Hussey suggested that a number of similar ships should be built
it L. rations and from his dou a er ed the one ep the fo laving advant ca rie,
(1) Tanks could land in shallower water from L.C.T.s than from L.S.T.s.
(2) Dispersal of the tank unit on disembarkation.
(3) The smaller target presented by an L.C.T. compared with an L.S.T.
(4) Greater speed of disembarkation of tanks.
(5) The L.C.T.s could be made available for alternative duties during an operation.
The above presupposes that the L.S.D. can discharge her L.C.T.s in waters not subject to fire
from enemy shore defences.
At a meeting held on 30th September, 1941, it was agreed that there was a need for this type
of vessel to meet the following staff requirements :-
Endurance 5,000 miles at 14 knots.
To carry two L.C.T. (3) or (4).
Accommodation for the crews of twenty-four tanks and administrative staff, and for L.C.T.
crews and maintenance personnel.
Derricks and winches for hoisting out vehicles up to 10 tons in weight, carried on the upper
Armament, close range A.A. weapons only.
Not required to beach.
D.N.C. was at first opposed to the idea of these ships on the grounds of their extravagance,
but the design he prepared was subsequently accepted by the Americans without modification.
to for the in mint he was a pointy the in the of the fact the threshit ese he metered
ordered in America, the first three should proceed without modifications and the last four should be
1941, the U.S.
author a at in thiaton, ce oper that Would be america in Die 5. 0, i r
as construction had not yet been started.
Although doubtful as to the value of these
ships initially, the U.S. authorities eventually came to the conclusion that the L.S.D. were likely
to be of the utmost value; the order for seven was increased to fifteen and subsequently to twenty-
two, of which four only were assigned to the British.
These ships were entirely successful from their inception and were of the utmost value.
They ferried major and minor landing craft, amphibians and vehicles to all parts of the world.
To increase the carrying capacity for amphibians, the Americans devised a second deck that could be
erected by a dockyard in 48 hours and which doubled the carrying capacity for amphibians
and vehicles.
They were also used to a minor extent for docking landing craft for repairs but their use in
this connection was limited by the fact that, when flooded down, the maximum depth of water over
the deck was only 9 ft., whereas a damaged major landing craft probably drew more.
the water able to operate was restristed to easonably calm sea conditions oving to the surge of
The vessels assigned to the British were returned to the U.S.A. after the war.
The Landing Crait Tank. (L.C.T.)
In parallel with the development of large landing ships to carry armour over long ocean
passages, smaller tank landing vessels with a reduced radius of action
and less carrying capacity
were also a requirement.
In particular it was necessary to have shallow draught craft with good
beaching characteristics so that armour could be landed direct, even on to fairly flat beaches.
As early as June, 1940, the Prime Minister directed that the production of such craft was to be
WO 277/21
27
30
