After the departure of the two divisions for service overseas, the position
became stahilized, and it was possible to reorganize the establishments on a
This change was typified in the altered nomenclature of units
F S.Ds. and Composite Platoons became Command Supply Depots, General
Tronesort Companies henan Canad Transport Companies, and so on.
Transport, Initial Stages
There were no R.A.S.C. transport services in West Africa before the war,
and Theras nor until August, 1940, that R.A.S.C. M. T. personnel arrived there.
The intil reconnaissance of road conditions by the A.D.S.T. caused him
to recommend that vehicles sent out should have a high ground clearance and
be fitted with sand tyres.
The fitting of sand tyres, however, proved to be
unnecessary, and normal tyres as used in the United Kingdom were adequate.
G.H.Q., West Africa estimated its first and second line transport require-
ments, and demanded on War Office accordingly, but it was long before the
vehicles actually arrived. Until the end of 1940, and then with few exceptions
until June, 1941, all transport had to be hired or requisitioned. Up to June,
1941, the story of transport in West Africa was one of a struggle against over-
The main troubles were lack of equipment, lack of accom-
modation, lack of W.D. vehicles, and perhaps most important of all, lack of
Workshops were set up in clearings in the bush, with improvised benches,
vehicle pits dug in the ground, no tools except those borrowed from civilian
garages, and shelters of matting.
Maintenance of first line transport
In August, 1940, Ordnance were doubtful of their ability to carry out their
M.T, maintenance commitments in West Africa. The RA. S. was prepared
ti waintain all M.T, there, and this was accepted. This arrangement con-
tinued until October, 1942, and is one of the few instances, if not the only
case, were first line transport was maintained by the R.A.S.C. on such a
large scale. It added considerably to the task of the R.A.S.C. workshops.
In Sierra Leone, there had been ordnance workshops, and the respon-
sibliy for maintenance of all vehicles had been divided between them and
the WAA.S.C. workshops, on the basis of the former doing all the base unis,
and the latter all the forward units.
This arrangement proved completely
impracticable, and in October, 1941, G.H.Q. ruled that W.A.A.S.C, was to
take over the maintenance of all vehicles in the colony, including
hitherto maintained by W.A.O.C.
In October, 1942, the first line workshops were transferred to
the
R.E.M.P.. but the amount of renair wit which had accumulated made it
necessary for the R.A.S.C. workshops to help the R.E.M.E.
R.A.S.C. workshops had been previously.
ones, as
R.E.M.E. were just as handicapped by lack of personnel, stores, etc.. as the
be located at Port Harcourt, in Nigeria on the basic that the oreater part of
M.T. Base Installations
The decision was made originally that the up a MeeD should
the M.T. was expected to be in that colony, and that vehicles in the other
432
colonies which required overhaul should be evacuated by sea to Nigeria.
The fallacy of this reasoning was soon exposed.
Coastwise shipping was
limited to about one small ship a month, and there was thus no possibility of
evacuating vehicles on the scale that was later required.
Sections of the
and M.T.S.D. were eventually established in each colony, but the
H.R.S. could not do more than assist with second-line repairs, because of lack
When West Africa reported in March, 1941, that they were able to receive
M.T. stores and spare parts at Port Harcourt, six months' supply of these
items was sent out from the United Kingdom for the 600 vehicles and 200
motor-cycles which had been shipped. In October, 1941, a 12-months' pack,
to service all W.A.A.S.C. vehicles, was also despatched.
The work of the M.T.S.Ds. was also a long uphill fight. The sinking of
transports caused the loss of valuable spares and equipment; lorries arrived
without tool-kits, workshop and stores lorries without essential stores and
M.T.S.Ds. could not keep account of deficiencies, and, by the
time they had idented on the United Kingdom, it was impossible for unit
demands to be properly matched up.
The position was further aggravated
by the continual lack of spares, and this, together with bad maintenance
caused by a dearth of adequately trained personnel, was the main cause of
the deplorable number of vehicles off the road.
The workshops in each colony originally indented direct on the M.T.S.D.,
Port Harcourt, but, partly due to the lack of coastal shipping, that depot
could not supply spares quickly enough to other colonies. In October, 1941,
the G.O.C.-in-C.
ruled that all M.T. spares held by the R.A.O.C. would
come under W.A.A.S.C. control, and would be held in the local M.T.S.Ds.
This was the first big step forward, and the benefit of the local depots began
to be felt at once.
From that time, no major spares difficulties troubled the
Indents were no longer sent by individual units to Port
Harcourt, but to the local M.T.S.D., which in turn demanded direct on the
Owing to the almost complete lack of W.D. vehicles until well into 1941,
all transport had at first to be requisitioned. It consisted largely of second-
hand trucks which had been driven by Africans, and were therefore not in
good condition. When the flow of W.D. vehicles began, large numbers were
lost through the increased U-boat activity; and the same cause resulted in a
considerable shortening of the life of the vehicles which did arrive, owing to
the acute shortage of M.T. spares.
This shortage of spares was due almost
entirely to sinkings, although, in the earlier days, West Africa's requirements
were of a low priority in consequence of the urgent needs of other theatres
As an example of the effect of the shortage of vehicles, it may be mentioned
that, in late 1942 and 1943, when the Vichy crisis arose, there were only
sufficient vehicles to equip the three brigades in Nigeria with one General
Transport company each.
It would have required much ingenuity on the
part of commanders of Brigade Group Companies to arrange supply dumps
and petrol dumps to help the first line transport, which was then in bad
(37452)
