The conclusions reached in this carefully drafted paper confirmed the views so persistently and
strongly held by the C.C.O. and the planners at C.O.H.Q.
The Caen-Cotentin Sectors were those
in the Baie de la Seine.
From the naval point of view, the beaches mentioned were the only ones
prevaling wind tran pit Sott-West made my beaches to the eastward orad prestores and
another disadvantage was that the greatest rise and fall of the tide in the English Channel took
place on the eastern end.
Also the lift of heavy vehicles and tanks would have to be done from the
south coast ports in the first instance, and so the Caen-Cotentin Sectors actually presented the
shortest sea passage.
Operation " Skyscraper"
As a result of the study of the paper quoted above, we find in G.H.Q. Home Forces paperi
of 18th March, 1943, the following :—
" REVIEW OF CERTAIN FACTORS AFFECTING PREPARATIONS FOR A RETURN
TO THE CONTINENT
(1) The object of this paper is to obtain decisions on certain major points which must govern
not only planning for a return to the Continent against opposition,
particularly the organisation, equipment and training of the Army in the United
(2) The basis of the paper is an outline plan for operations on the Continent.
has not been approved by the Combined Commanders nor worked out in detail.
But it is generally agreed that the original
' Round-up' plan is not a feasible one
and some other basis is therefore necessary.
Whether the outline plan here discussed
is subsequently generally agreed to, or whether the final plan differs from it materially,
it is felt that at least it will make clear many problems.
OPERATION ' SKYSCRAPER'
Object
(3) Our ultimate object is at worst to establish a strong force within close bombing range
of the Ruhr, i.e. somewhere north-east of the Pas de Calais.
Hence:—
(a) The nearer to Antwerp we make our initial landing the better.
(6) If we land at a distance, we must consider not only the initial landing, but the
various steps until we get to the area mentioned above.
Area of Landing
4) The study ' Selection of Assault Areas for a Major Operation in North-West Europe
(C.C. (42) 108) has left a choice of one area only :-
-the Caen beaches, plus the east
beaches of the Cotentin peninsula."
The paper then went on to the War Office to be elaborated as to what was required from the
Army point of view.
The following minutes are on the War Office file in which this document was circulated :—
" D.D.M.O. (H).
I have discussed with C.I.G.S.
moment, but they will be useful to Lt.-General Morgan.
These plans need not be considered in detail at the
D.D.M.O. (H).
(Intd.),
D.M.O.
If you will return to me, I will pass to General Morgan.
5th April, 1943.
(Intd.).P.'
Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander
explain who he was.
This is the first mention of Lieutenant-General Sir Frederick Morgan, so it is necessary to
As has been stated previously, it was decided at the Casablanca Conference that a Chief of
Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander (C.O.S.S.A.C.) was to be appointed in charge of the planning
1 H.F./C.O./570/G (Plans), dated 18th March, 1943.
58
pending the decision on who was to be the Commander.
Lieutenant-General Morgan, who had up
now been commanding the First Corps, was nominated as the Chief of Staff and actually took
up his new post on 13th April, 1943.
It is of interest to see what he says in his book regarding his appointment:-
" Personal Background
The "A.N.F.A." Conference at Casablanca had meanwhile given to Western leaders
he opportunity to review in company the whole strategic situation
and it
was at this
Conference that it was deemed that the time was approaching, even that it had already
approached, for the delivery of the coup de grâce in the form of an invasion of Europe from
the North-West.
The full implications of this decision were too great even for our greatest
men to swallow at one gulp, so that their decision took the form of a determination in the
near future to appoint a Commander for this gigantic enterprise.
It was understandably
not possible, so far in advance, now to designate the individual who should hold this position,
but meanwhile the necessity was recognised to tidy up and to give point to all the many
and various projects of greater or less magnitude that had been considered in connection
with the frontal assault on Nazi Europe.
It was decided to appoint an individual in the
position of Chief of Staff to the unspecified Commander-to-be, the duty of this Chief of
Staff being, in so many words, to ' give cohesion and impetus' to preparations of all kinds.
The authorship of this phrase it is easy to guess.
It was to this post that I was nominated."
The Combined Operations Command
It is now necessary to take stock of what was happening in the Combined Operations Command
with regard to personnel, ships and craft.
A Joint Planning Staff? paper, dated 16th May, 1943, gives the following figures concerning the
total personnel available in the Combined Operations Command on 1st April, 1943.
Officers
Ratings
Total
Manning
Category
Landing craft crews, squadron and flotilla complement
3,059
25,151
28,210
and reserve personnel to scale.
36
1.096
1,132
Gun units for support craft, Royal Marines
Beach commandos, beach signal units and beach
127
1,001
1.128
support and reconnaissance signal units.
3,222
27,248
Total of Categories A and B
Combined operational ships crews-
Naval personnel
636
1,287
974
4,554
T.124X or Merchant Navy
Combined operational base administrative, mainten-
657
3,089
ance and training personnel.
2,177
W.R.N.S. ..
5,489
38,355
43,844
Total of all Categories
With regard to the ships and craft, the figures on 6th April, 1943,3 read as follows :-
Home
Abroad
Total
89
28
Landing ships
1.678
923
2,601
1,019
Landing craft
1,019
Landing barges
This unprecedented increase in any command, either in peace or war from a few hundred officers
and men to about 50,000 with some 90 ships and 3,600 craft prompted the C.C.O. to write the
following letter to the Prime Minister:-
" The Prime Minister
The continued expansion of the Combined Operations Command has made it necessary
for me to delegate, to an increasing extent, responsibility for executive action within the
command.
1 Overture to " Overlord" —Lieut.-General Sir Frederick Morgan.
Planner (C.O.J.P.).
ma CO re too per go a by then oi. 40 21 a dast to main oper Hens Joint
List"-a publication giving the operational states and whereabouts of these ships
did craft
(C52794)
e294
WO 277/21
27
3
