established at the C.T.C. Djidielli which had a good bombardment range in the neighbourhood
estis detachment thereafter became the responsibility of the Commander-in-Chief Mediterranean
but C.C.O. remained responsible for the provision of trained reinforcements and replacements.
Sicily, Operation "Husky"
Bombardmen it opte are was proaced in 5o5 Operation "Husky," and C.C.O. allotted one
The Sicilian operation offered the first opportunity of testing the command and control
organisation for naval gunfre support, to which so much time and thought had been applied by
Thirty-one F.O.O. parties were employed in the
asat in diver control by thie Samir BI. O. in he Divisiona HO Ships, Kopen, a in the
Marigor a peroti smal apparal up to saven tire the canen roch Admiral
The main lesson learned in Sicily was the essential need for F.O.O. parties to be provided
with their own transport as it was impossible for them to keep up with fast-moving infantry
battalions and, at the same time, engage targets and report the battle situation to the it.Q. Ship.
In spite of every effort by C.O.H.Q. it was not until shortly before Normandy that the establishment
ot a Bombardment Troop was amended to include vehicles for the F. O.0.5 parties. Sicily was shortly
followed by the invasion of Italy, where the F.O.O.s under Commander-in-Chief Mediterranean,
were deployed to meet the requirements of the Assault Force Commanders.
No new principles
were evolved, but strides were made towards combining Air O.P.s and F.O.O.s.
At Salerno, fifteen F.O.O. parties were deployed with 10th Corps, the Commandos and U.S.
Rangers, and between them over 270 targets were engaged. F.O.O.s were subsequently redeployed
for the Anzio landings.
Reorganisation and Expansion. Change of Title to Combined Operations Bombardment Unit (C.O.B.U.)
Meanwhile in U.K., more Bombardment Troops were raised to meet the commitment of
C.C.O. obtained, from the War Office on 1st January, 1944, approval to change the
Bombardment Unit Organisation ve a read utters wad up to six ter tru co corre ordia that
Bombardment Units each with three Troops.
a provisional reorganised establishment for the new type Units and Troops, each with their own
vehicles, was authorised on 28th March, 1944.
The title Combined Operations Bombardment Unit
(C.O.B.U.) came into force at the end of April.
At the same time as this reorganisation was taking place, the Admiralty had under consideration
the organisation, administration and status of the Beach Support Units of which the F.O.B.s' tele-
The question of the number required for future operations was also
equire a Boad that the tre, Bach Suint Unit, Wild he dropped as trement, val
naval element of the Bombardment Troop
eventually became a Naval
Troop. (N.S.B.T.). The N.S.B.T. consisted of one Petty Officer Telegraphist, two Leading Tele-
graphists and twenty Telegraphists, and was commanded by a Combined Operations Signals Officer.
Seven provisional N.S.B. T.s were, however, formed and the officers appointed in time for Normandy.
the naval organisation became parallel and directly connected with the army organisation and
A change in the nomenclature was finally brought about on 29th January, 1944, when the three
Service Ministries eventually agreed to C.C.O?'s recommendation, instigated in November, 1943, that
F. OO, controlling naval gunfire should be known as FO.B. (inward Observers Bombardment)
to avoid confusion with the F.O.O.s of the Army controlling land artillery.
While this expansion of Bombardment Units was proceeding, C.C.O. had been discussing with
the War Office the question of control of the three spit chich, shortly was increased to four on
request me Amy Group and proposals were submitted for a Headquarters Combined Operations
Bombardment Unit.
Commander Bombardment Units Appointed
The necessity for this Unit was agreed and it was subsequently sponsored by the R.A. Directorate.
The establishment was authorised on 5th May, and the appointment of Commander Bombardment
Units was filled by Colonel L. S. Seccombe, R.A. who set up his Headquarters at C.O.H.Q., with the
functions of :—
(1) Adviser to C.C.O. on the development and policy affecting the Bombardment Units
and their equipment.
(2) Chief Bombardment Officer (C.B.O.) on the Staff of A.N.C.X.F., responsible for the
provision of troops to implement their planning and to advise on planning.
3) Training of approximately 200 officers, 100 N.C.O.s and 275 naval ratings of the four
Combined Operations Bombardments Units.
Employment of Combined Operations Bombardment Units in Operation " Overlord"
The Combined Operations Bombardment Units were deployed for " Overlord" as follows :—
C.B.O. with Allied Naval Commander Expeditionary Force.
Chief B.L.O. with Naval Commander Eastern Task Force.
Chief B.L.O. with Naval Commander Western Task Force.
11 F.O.B.s with 50th Division.
10 F.O.B.s with 3rd Canadian Division.
8 F.O.B.s with 3rd British Division.
6 F.O.B.s with 6th Airborne Division.
Staff Officers Bombardment (S.O.B.) were attached to U.S. 5 and 7 Corps and British 1
and 30 Corps, as well as to H.Q.R.A. of each British Division.
Seventy-eight B.L.O.s
were embarked in supporting ships and craft.
In the assault, the initial shoots were observed and controlled by fighter aircraft according to
a prearranged plan; the pilots had been trained in
procedure by the Bombardment
Wing at the C.T.C. and had worked up with warships firing on the Kintyre range.
parties which landed with the Assault Brigades, met considerable opposition and several parties were
completely knocked out very early on "D" day, while the majority of those with the Airborne
Division were so widely scattered that they were unable to operate satisfactorily for at least
The close nature of the countryside made observation difficult unless an O.P. was established
in some obvious point of vantage such as a church tower or factory chimney.
targets were engaged effectively without observation as a result of intory atim ya wever, trols.
shoots were a novel feature of the first few days of the assault.
On each divisional front, the control of bombardment was exercised by the Combined Support
Control in the H.Q. Ship. F.O.B.s were re-allocated to ships to meet the changing requirements
of the military situation ashore.
Once H.Q.R.A. was established ashore together with its S.O.B. party, Naval Bombardment was
co-ordinated with the Divisional Artillery's day to day fire plans and included at night in harassing
By the time Ist Corps Headquarters was established ashore the majority of warships were
concentrated in support of the left of the Eastern Sector and the S.O.B., in conjunction with the
C.R.A.'s Staff, co-ordinated the support from the Bombarding Force.
A considerable amount of
counter-battery fire was undertaken by warships, details of targets being supplied through the
S.O.B. from the Corps counter-battery staff.
Air O.P.s observed for the supporting warships,
relaying through F.O.B.s situated on their landing strips.
Naval gunfire was used to the extreme limits of the heavier ships' maximum range in support
of the final attack on Caen and the subsequent advance eastward by the 6 Airborne Division.
By this time, the H.Q. Ships had been withdrawn and Bombardment Control Headquarters was set
up ashore at Coursuelles, the Headquarters of the Flag Officer British Assault Area. As the advance
was continued, a Mobile Bombardment Headquarters moved along the coast
co-ordinated the requirements for warships' fire with the Flag Officer Commanding the Bombarding
Naval support was required less and less as the artillery built up its strength ashore and, by
20th July, only "B" Troop of No. 3 C.O.B.U. was left in France.
This Troop moved to Ostend for
the Walcheren assault.
WO 277/21
27
30
