various organizations responsible.
would be implemented on the following lines: —
S.H.A.E.F. then directed that the plan
(a) Reserves of aviation fuel were to be built up to 23 days at sustained
rates by D+41 and maintained at this level up to D +90.
(b) Ports and beach areas, used for he noting of stores during the beath,
maintenance period, should not normally be used for the importa-
tion of bulk petrol.
(c) Bulk supply was to be introduced at the earliest possible moment.
(d) Separate pipelines should be used for 80 and 100 octane spirit respec-
tively, unless it was impracticable to lay separate lines; and one
line should be used for both qualities only when control could
be exercised by a qualified petrol commission.
(e) The introduction of piped petrol by means of submarine pipelines
should be considered, but should be regarded as bonus only, and
21 Army Group was to make 100 per cent. provision without it.
(f) S.H.A.E.F. would co-ordinate all demands involving movement of
the items to the Continent, excluding specialist items peculiar to
one Service.
(g) Packed maintenance was to be carried out in three phases: -
(i) Pre-loaded, covering D to D +7.
(ii) Pre-arranged, covering D to D + 30.
(iii) Maintenance by demand, from D +31.
Responsibility for Provision
The allocation of responsibility between Service Departments for pro-
vision of P.O.L. products was as follows: —
Type of Product.
(a) Fuels and
lubricants
of Naval
supply.
(b) All M.T. fuels, lubricants, fog-oil,
kerosene and
fuels,
flame
thrower
consigned to
U.S.-con-
Department responsible.
Admiralty.
European Theatre of Opera-
tions,
United States Army.
(E.T.O.U.S.A.)
trolled ports on the Continent.
(c) All M.T. fuels, lubricants fog-oil,
War Office.
and F.T.F., consigned to British-
controlled
tinent.
ports on the Con-
(d) All aviation fuels and aircraft engine
Air Ministry.
lubricants for both British and
U.S. controlled ports.
Responsibility of S.T. 2, War Office
The responsibility of S.T. 2, War Office, in relation to operation " Over
lord" was for the provision, supply, and distribution, of P.O.L. products,
and for the provision of units, equipment, and personnel.
the branch began in the spring of 1943, and the period until D. Day may be
The activities of
divided into two parts.
304
The earlier part, lasting until the spring of 1944, was occupied mainly in
reviewing all P.O.L. resources, balancing them against the estimated require-
ments of 21 Army Soroups ael evolving methods to make good de require.
wherever existing reso roes vame considered insuficient to meet the priencies
commitments.
Thus, for example, returnable and non-returnable container
production plans were overhauled and speeded up where necessary; intaine.
training was started for personnel of units in course of formation and destined
for 21 Army Group;
personnel and units were recalled from overseas to
insure against deficiencies, both of quality and quantity, in the order of batte:
research into design of technical equipment was followed by the placing of
contracts for production; in War Office controlled petrol depots, stocks were
built up to ensure that ample supplies would be available for all stages of the
operation.
For a more detailed account of these activities (see Chapter XII,
Section 5).
The later part of the period began about April, 1944, and lasted until
D Day, during which time the process was completed of transferring to 21
Army Group control the personnel, who had been trained and organized in
units, and the technical equipment which had been provided.
In the closing
weeks, S.T. 2 was concentrating chiefly on supervision of the arrangements in
Home Commands for mounting the operation.
Although these were tech-
nically the responsibility of Commands, they could not perform the task
unaided, and all possible assistance was afforded them in order to ensure
success.
These measures are described below.
Provision for Beach Requirements
It was anticipated that there would be a very heavy demand on the
beaches for oil for sumps and gear-boxes of follow-up vehicles which were
required to wade ashore.
To meet this, assault formations were issued with
drums of lubricants, which were carried on a unit basis, so that immediate oil
changes could be effected if necessary.
Lubricants were also issued to the
R.E.M.E. " drowned-vehicle
parks, which were to be established on the
beaches during the early stages to deal with vehicles recovered from sunk
craft, etc.
Special Fuels
S.T. 2, War Office were responsible for the distribution of Flame Thrower
Fuel, but production was carried out by Ministry of Supply in accordanes
with Petroleum Warfare Department specifications.
S.T. 2 arranged deliveries
from production centres to War Offse controlled petrol denots and thence
to 21 Army Group. See also Chapter XII, Section 5, regarding this fuel.
Two types of fo see also happaratus were in use, the Haslar, burning
fuel-oil, and the Esso, burning fog-oil.
Oil for use in this armira tos as provided for the following possible
requirements: -
(a) Protection of norte maad for mounting " Overlords in the event of
heavy enemy counter-attacks there.
(b) Screening of cross-channel supply convoys, by fog generators carrie
warships
and trawlers.
Arrangements
were made with
Admiralty for the fog-oil used to be replenished on the vessels'
return to port.
305
Wes7717
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
