The Far East
As mentioned carlier, the majority of the officers employed as F.O.B. and B.L.O.s in
Madagascar moved with 29 Independent Infantry Brigade to India Where a bombardment Section
was formed.
The decision to form a Unit coincided with the artival, in the autumn of 1948, of
Rear-Admiral L. E. H. Maund, to be Director of Combined Operations, India.
Initially the Unit consisted of a Headquarters and two Troops, Bath Troop being designed to
support an Assaul Division, and consisting of five F.O.B. parties, ten B.L.O.s and one Senior B.L.O.
The Unit was raised at the C.T.C. Madh Island and shortly afterwards, in November, 1943.
a revised establishment for No. 5 C.O.B.U. was approved by the Support Bombardment and
Reconnaissance Committee of the Directorate of
Combined Operations, India.
Lieutenant-Colonel in command and introduced, as a result of experience gained in Europe, a
second officer (Subaltern R.A.) into each F.O.B. party and a jeep with trailer for its transport.
Lieutenant-Colonel E. McEwen-Window, R.A., was appointed Commanding Officer and his duties
included Chief Bombardment Liaison Officer to the Commander-in-Chief Eastern Fleet.
The Commanding Officer was responsible to Commander-in-Chief Eastern Fleet for the
general efficiency and training of the Unit and also for liaison with the Navy.
to M.G.R.A. (India) on artillery matters and to D.C.O. (I.) on operational matters.
training of the F.O.B. parties and B.L.O.s took place at the C.T.C. and, as no combined operations
were mounted in 1944, the personnel of the Unit were sent to gain battle experience with the
XIVth Army in Assam.
were trained at the Combined Signals School, H.M.S. Braganza III.
training took place at the R.I.N. Gunnery School near Karachi and, a little later, F.O.B. parties
were trained as parachutists at Chaklala.
Early in 1944 with the expansion of the C.T.C., the Unit moved to Juhu where its Headquarters
remained until the end of the war.
A bombardment range was established on Manori Island
(north of Madh) where R.I.N. sloops and gunboats carried out practice firings.
In December, 1944, the Unit took part in its first operation in the Arakan and, from then on,
Nas con and ly deal, red with a rop a insue, Ched Ched and an oyab and subsequently at
Early in 1945, the requirements of bombardment personnel for the war against Japan were
reviewed in S.E.A.C. and it was envisaged that one Unit of three Troops would be required, together
The Commander Bombardment Units (C.B.U.) flew to India in April and
discussed the proposals for a new and increased C.O.B.U. War Establishment which was being
prepared by the War Office and C.C.O. The result of this visit was the formation of the Combined
Operations Bombardment Unit (Light). This Unit consisted of a H.Q. and three Troops with a
total of 79 officers and 146 O.R.s.
A new Unit, No. 6 C.O.B.U., was formed in U.K. on this
establishment at the end of June and moved out to India in August.
No. 5 C.O.B.U. were absorbed into the new Unit; Lieutenant-Colonel W. Hewitt,
TV. Hewitt, he per sono that
commanded No. 5 C.O.B.U. was flown out from the U.K. to the Staff of Force
then completing, in Bombay, their plans for the invasion of Malaya.
Revised Responsibilities of the Commander Bombardment Units
In March, 1945, C.C.O. drafted for the
approval of the three Service Ministries, a directive!
for the Commander Combined Operations Bombardment Units, which detailed the
Bombardment Units and gave C.B.U. the command of all units in the theatre in which he, with
his Headquarters was situated. He was made responsible for giving technical advice on policy and
training, initiating changes in organisation and equipment and advising Force Commanders on the
The channel of communications was also detailed.
mere approved by the Service Ministries and distributed to Supreme Commanders and Commanders-
Formation of a Naval Section Bombardment Unit (N.S.B.U.)
Meanwhile as a result of lessons learned in Normandy, C.C.O. had forwarded proposals, submitte.
oy H. Dunnald II, to the Admiralty on the reconstitution of the naval element of the C.O.B. U
it had been found durin"" Overlord" that when the Headquarters of a Bombardment Unit landed
and established itself at Corps Headquarters, it was frequently necessary to remove the Combined
Operations Communication Officer of the N.S.B.T. from Division to Corps Headquarters to assist
1 C.R. 118/45 dated 17th March, 1945.
in the control of the N.S.B. T.s and bombardment communications.
The final naval organisation
that was eventually agreed and promulgated' on 21st June, 1945, was a Naval Section Bombardment
Unit consisting of three communication officers and eighty-five ratings.
This N.S.B.U. was
designed to dovetail in with the C.O.B.U. and divide into a headquarters and three Sections.
This
organisation became effective in time for Operation "Zipper" and a N.S.B.U. was deployed with
6 C.O.B.U. in support of 34 Corps.
In the event, peace was declared just before the assault, but the F.O.B.s remained with the
infantry battalions and, for the first 24 hours of " Zipper,
that go the tit ce to in to 4e, to pray ago. an a rovide i at or a a with
play not only a vital part by calling for ships' fire, but also by providing an invaluable link between
the H.Q. Ship and formations ashore.
S778717
WO 277/21
27
3ф
1 A.F.O. 3284/45.
