down of the hard and fast system of the allotment of transport companies
for particularized rôles, and its replacement by the
pool system,
which
The development of the petrol
eventually became that generally employed.
container is also very largely bound up with the war in the Middle East; it
culminated in the adoption of the German "jerrican", which solved the
problem.
In Chapter VII is the account of the invasion of North Africa, the first
of its kind to be mounted on such a large scale, and therefore of value in
regard to the planning for others which followed.
Of these, the invasions of
Sicily and Italy are also described in this chapter, together with an account
of the supply and transport aspects of the long, slow struggle up the length of
the peninsula.
Chapter VIII describes first the very detailed planning for the invasion
of France in June, 1944, known as Operation " Overlord".
The planning
covered both the arrangements for the mounting of the expedition, i.e., its
orderly movement from the United Kingdom to the French shore, and those
for the subsequent maintenance of the force.
The chapter goes on to tell
the story of the operations which ended in the final defeat of the German
Army in May 1945.
On this front, conditions of climate and terrain were less
extraordinary, the normal organization functioned on the whole as intended,
and the whole operation, from the supply and transport point of view, pro-
ceeded very much according to plan.
The highest priority for the require-
ments of this force was given, and all available resources were placed at the
disposal of the Army Group.
A high-light of the campaign was the use of
the petrol pipeline under the ocean—" Pluto"-which carried spirit from the
United Kingdom as far as roadheads immediately in rear of the operational
formations.
Chapter IX is a miscellany covering Persia and Iraq, East and West
Africa, Malta and Gibraltar, and islands in the North and South Atlantic.
All these had their own characteristics and problems, and the account of the
way in which a diversity of tasks was tackled affords interesting illustrations of
the great variety of supply and transport duties.
Chapter X gives a brief account of the Supply and Transport organization
of India, which was quite independent of that of the British Army.
Since
then, India and Pakistan have become independent, and a detailed examination
of the R.I.A.S.C. system and organization would be academic; but, as that
Corps bore the brunt of the supply and transport services in the operations
in Burma, and played a considerable part in other theatres, and as India was
the base for South-East Asia Command, it was necessary to include a picture.
even though of a very sketchy character, of some aspects of Indian S. and T.
organization, to serve as a background to references to the subiect in other
chapters. Ceylon is also included in this chapter.
Chapter XI deals with the war in the Far East.
our defeats in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Burma.
First come the stories of
Then there is the period
of two years during which our forces facing the Japanese were on the defensive.
until India had developed her army, and resources were adequate for an
The reconquest of Burma is then describeds and the chapter finishes
with a brief account of the supply and transport methods of the Australians
in New Guinea, followed by some details of the preparations made for further
operations in the Far East, rendered abortive by the early end to the war
against Japan.
Until almost the very end of the campaign in Burma, this
theatre was at a low priority for its requirements as compared with those in
Europe; climate and terrain complicated the task; and improvisation was the
key-note of successful operation and administration.
Air supply on the
largest scale was a most important feature of the later stages of the campaign.
Chapter XII follows from the first part of Chapter II, with the account
of the supply and transport organization and activities of the United Kingdom.
These had two aspects: first, the affairs of the United Kingdom itself, that
is to say, its defence and the provision of services for the troops stationed
in it; and, second, the maintenance in varying degrees of practically every
theatre overseas.
These commitments combined to make the task of the
R.A.S.C. in the United Kingdom no mean one.
The organization to accomp-
lish it had to be built up from comparatively small beginnings, as the work
went on, and it reached large proportions.
It was subject to many complica-
tions, largely due to the paramount necessity for economy, and to being
obliged to fit in with the civil organization in respect of such matters as
food control, the use of transport, and coal supply. It also underwent severe
strains from manpower cuts, the withdrawal of personnel and transport for
service overseas, and dilution with A.T.S. and civilians.
The extent of the
maintenance task at home may be gauged from the ration strength,
which
passed the million mark in January, 1940, and rose to a peak of three million
in May, 1944.
The huge size of this commitment alone may be held to justify
the full account which has been given of the way in which the R.A.S.C
services were organized and carried out, apart from the fact that much of
the story is basic to that of the theatres overseas.
The chapter is divided
into seven parts, covering the following aspects of the services: home defence,
road transport, water transport, supplies, P.O.L., barrack services, and catering.
Chapter XIII contains an account of the work of the S. and T. branch of
the British Army Staff in Washington,
the organization which effected the
essential liaison with the United States of America, from which so many of our
requirements of food, transport, and equipment were obtained.
There are a number of appendices, which give detailed information too
voluminous for inclusion in the body of the book, such as the composition and
rôle of R.A.S.C. units; the organization of the
S. and T. Directorates in
certain Headquarters of theatres overseas; the numbers of the different types of
supply and transport units in operational theatres; details of policy decisions
in respect of the division of responsibility for particular services in which
both the S. and T. and other directorates were concerned, e.g., water transport,
and petroleum installations; and various papers on technical subjects.
The development of the ration scale is exemplified in a selection of those
in use during the war to meet a variety of conditions.
This war saw very
marked developments in the composition of the ration scale in respect both
of food values and of variety.
It had at last been realized that the fighting
efficiency of the soldier is most effectively maintained by providing a diet
that is sufficiently varied and palatable.
while at the same time serving
nutritional needs.
The ration of the B.E.F. in 1914 was, as will be seen
in Appendix IX, a very simple affair, and there was little improvement during
the First World War, though the need for tinned alternatives was beginning
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
