Organization in United Kingdom for Bulk Supply
Bulk shipments from the United Kingdom vision de from Hamble and
Fawley (Southampton
Water), under the supervision of a Petrol Reserve
Depot established there for the purpose.
Representatives of M.O.W.T. were
attached to each port to effect liaison with the Army and Navy representatives
there, and, in agreement with them, to allocate tankers in accordance with
local availability.
It was arranged that as soon as 21 Army Group were in a position to
accept bulk they would notify War Office.
Vessels were kept standing by,
ready loaded, awaiting the signal to proceed in response to requests from
21 Army Group.
Demand Procedure-Bulk Supply
In the early stages, procedure for demands was kept as simple as possible.
Requirements were signalled to S.T.2, War Office, who advised Movements
Branch the details of quantities involved, and also told the Petroleum Board
and the Petrol Reserve Depot the quantities by grades to be loaded.
consignment was despatched until an acceptance had been received from
21 Army Group indicating dates on which delivery could be taken, and ports
of discharge.
Later 21 Army Group forwarded demands covering 10-day periods, to
reach War Office seven days before the period began.
These showed the
estimated quantities which could be received each day, and from
estimates an allocation of tankers were made.
These demands were forwarded as under: —
H.Q., 21 Army Group
S.H.A.E.F.
New old St
Admiralty
Air Ministry
(Naval fuels) (Aviation fuels)
M.T. fuels
E.T.O.U.S.A.
Movements
(complete demand) Branch, W.O.
(complete demand)
M.O.W.T.
Petroleum Board
(who made provisional
(who made allocation
arrangements to
of tankers to meet
demands).
demands).
The information given in the provisional demand consisted of destination,
grade, quantity, day of discharge, and details of discharge facilities.
At first, 21 Army Group forwarded daily acceptance cables to state exactly
what they could receive, to reach War Oice 72 pause before discharge; later
these acceptances covered periods of five days.
gave the following information: —
The daily acceptance cables
Destination, estimated ullage (ie., available capacity in a tank) by
grades, confirmation and /or change of provisional demands,
of grades for discharge and destination, changes in discharge facilities
The five-day period cables only stated destination, confirmation and/or
334
change of demeanier fod changes in discharge facilities.
facilities on the far shore.
They were pre-
ferable to the earlier form, and were made possible by increased storage
If demands could not be met because
shortage of tankers, reference was made to S.H.A.E.F. to decide priorities.
• (Movements) at the port of loading signalled to the far shore, giving
details of cargoes, by grades, quantities and destination.
of arrival of tankers was notified through Naval channels.
The expected time
Technical Stores
The demands for replenishment of the Petroleum Technical Stores Depots
with 21 Army Group were sent to S.T.2, War Office, who passed themots
No. 9 Petrol Depot for action.
intervals, then one a month, and finally as required.
They were at first submitted at ten-day
Catering Service
The work begun by the Catering Branch in the United Kingdom on the
demonstration and instruction in the use of ration packs and in improvised
methods of cooking continued in the theatre of operations.
From the catering
point of view, the ration packs were a success, and definitely on the right lines.
The self-heating soup and cocoa in particular were greatly appreciated. But
there was still much to do in the way of advising cooks on the methods of
making the best of the Compo packs, and producing a varied diet.
It was proved that there is much for the catering adviser to do as soon
as operations begin, and that formation advisers should go in early and not
be left with rear parties.
The first A.C.C. officer landed in
Normandy on
D-day and others quickly followed, so that the Service was soon fully opera-
tive. It was soon evident that it was most important for a Divisional Catering
Adviser to be with the troops when the formation was in action, though this
had been a matter of doubt in the planning stages; in this way, he was able
to advise on the best means of getting hot food to the fighting man.
Feeding Front Line Troops
It was found to be more difficult to feed the infantry in the front line than
the armoured troops, as the latter could cook in their vehicles, while the
former were inadequately provided with cooks trucks.
Before the introduction of the Compo ration, only a limited variety of
meals, consisting of " sion of foods in containers, could be sent forward,
because solid foods "sloppy does tiners than were available and did
not remain hot so long.
unsealing them then nacked with boiling water in the insulator box, and so
With the Compo ration, the tins were heated without
taken forward.
distributed.
The food remained hot longer, and could be more easily
hit and and he more ence on t a saved
Again, with the Compo ration there was less loss if a load was
princible of using only the 14-men pool for unite in action was not accepted
however and frach rations ware issued whenaver it was onerationally practic.
able to do so.
Forward detachments of arms other than infantry were found to prefer
to prenare their own meals whether they had the Compo pack or the Field
Service ration scale.
To let them do this had a high morale value which
335
(37452)
westerf
17
WO 277/21
27
WO27776
