The next most favourable period for the raid would occur during August.
decided to re-mount the operation, the code name for which was changed from
tro was accordingly
" and to adopt, with certain modifications, the revised plan for one tide instead of two.
It was at this stage that Commandos were substituted for airborne troops.
It is of interest here to recall the terms of the directive under which C.C.O. launched this
C.C.O. was issued with a new directive by the Chiefs of Staff Committee on 27th July.
i diated that the outine plan for a raid was to be prepired by cal Stah, anter obtaining the
comments of the C.s-in-C. concerned and of the Assistant Chief of Naval Staff (Home), would submit
the plan with the comments to the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
If approved, Force Commanders
would be appointed and made responsible under C.C.O. for the detailed planning, the operation
ladies, to te operation At proving the d ta i phan dera the co ta on the ton to on.
manders, C.C.O. was to be responsible for the launching of the raid in
consultation with the
authorities mentioned above and subject to the approval of the Naval C.-in-C.
After the postponement of the operation, it was found that the Naval Force Commander origin-
ally appointed was no longer available and was therefore succeeded by Captain J. Hughes-Hallett.
Finally, after various delays due to weather or unfavourable tides, the raid was launched on
the night of 18th/19th August, 1942.
The Results of the Dieppe Raid
Operation " Jubilee" succeeded in testing the German defences at a point on the French
coast within the area in which fighter cover could be provided by the Royal Air Force.
succeeded in drawing the German Air Force into battle and causing the destruction of between
one-quarter and one-third of that force in the West.
The raid on Dieppe taught and re-emphasised
many lessons which contributed to the success of later amphibious operations,
particularly
" Overlord".
The cost was dear but the casualties at Dieppe have been justified many times over.
Lessons learned at Dieppe
Since so much was learned from this raid, the lessons as summarised in the official report
are here listed :-
(1) The need for overwhelming fire support, including close support, during the initial stages
of the attack.
(2) The necessity for the formation of permanent naval assault forces with a coherence
comparable to that of any other first line fighting formations.
Army formations
intended for amphibious assaults must without question be trained in close co-operation
with such naval assault forces.
(3) The necessity for planning a combined operation at a Combined Headquarters where the
Force Commanders and their staff can work and live together.
(4) The necessity to plan a raid so as to be independent of weather conditions in the greatest
possible degree.
A plan based on the assumption that weather conditions will be
uniform is very likely to fail; a plan, which can be carried out even when conditions
are indifferent or bad, is essential.
(5) The necessity for flexibility in the military plan and its execution.
assault must be on the widest possible front consistent with control and the amount
of naval and air support available.
To achieve this, the
(6) The allocation to the assault of the minimum forces required to achieve success and the
retention of the maximum force as a reserve to exploit success.
(7) The necessity for as accurate and comprehensive a system of control and communications
as it is possible to establish.
(8) The dissemination of knowledge to officers and other ranks, each of whom should know
the intention of his superior, the outline of the operatis, and the details of the task
of his own unit and those on the flanks.
(9) The value of special training, particularly in amphibious night operations.
must indude rehearsals and the testing of inter-communication arrangements.
Such training
L.C.I. (L)-Beached with ramp down.
(C52794)
Allied landings south of Rome.
Vehicles and tanks landing over pontoon causeway.
WO 277/21.
27
3Ф
