Acting on the advice of the C.C.O., the Admiralty had increased the intake of naval personnel
embarked for duty with the landing
craft,
so that in two years it would have increased by
500 per cent.
(This was later increased to 600 per cent. in one year.) This was then thought to be
the figure required for operations in the spring of 1943, when the re-entry into the Continent was
planned to take place.
Work on the facilities on the south coast was also proceeding with this target date in mind
and necessitated the constant requisitioning of property for the accommodation of the personnel.
The question of the pay, records and accounts of all Combined Operations personnel was also
causing anxiety so a central office for this most important part of the Administration was set up
under the C.C.O. in London in June, 1942.
In fact, during this period, the command was expanding at a rate never before dreamed in
the annals of the Services.
This rapid expansion introduced many difficulties which necessitated
very quick decisions.
Often new methods were essential and naturally these met with much criticism
from many quarters but, in the end, they stood the strain of war.
Craft Concentration in the South
cat git i tre in to no 9a2, the main problems ret one frate or the landing
The latter was treated as an operation and given the code name,
A most carefully prepared plan was made for this because it was necessary to tow the barges from
the Thames to as far west as Poole; this not only meant the provision of tugs but also of air and
surface escorts.
Towards the end of July the assembly of landing craft was nearly completed and the movement
of the barges was well under way.
Reversal of Strategy
In August, 1942, the decision was made to invade North Africa (" Torch").
As this was to
be mounted from the north and west coast ports, all available ships and craft had to be moved
north again in the shortest possible time.
In a C.O.H.Q. docket dated 18th August, 1942, the
following minute appears, signed by R.A.L.B.:—
"The Admiralty are making Operation ' Torch' a ' clear lower deck operation.'
I am sure that, to meet the craft and crew requirements, it will be necessary to use not
only the ships and craft asked for by C.-in-C. X.F. (Commander-in-Chief Naval Expeditionary
Force), but L.S.I.s (S.), at present in the South, as carriers.
It is therefore recommended
that until C.-in-C. X.F.'s requirements are met, no raiding operations necessitating the use
of crews, craft or ships be undertaken.
When casualties in ' Jubilee' are known and C.-in-C. X.F.'s requirements are stabilised,
approximate dates on which the L.S.Is. (S.) and L.S.Is. (H.) are available will be stated."
Manning of Crait for Operation "Torch"
The craft crews were a responsibility of the C.C.O. With regard to the personnel, the large
expansion approved by the Admiralty was just beginning to take shape but,
owing to the
had
disappointments in the delivery of craft, both the basic and advanced training of the crews
lagged behind.
experience and provide incentive, but at a cost.
The quota of craft for raids had been kept up to gain operational
departure of ships,
Shortage of accommodation, accentuated by the
craft and key personnel for Operation " Ironclad" (Madagascar), meant
restricting the intake of naval Combined Operations personnel for a time.
Thus, not only were
the craft crews not fully ready to man the craft required for the operation, but also more crews
the craft tres not fully ready to the craft required aos a dificulty in getting skilled ratings
for maintenance parties, a most important part of the flotilla organisation.
All these matters were at once put in hand but a severe setback occurred when, on 12th August,
orders were received to turn the main Combined Onerations base at Rosneath over to the America
Forces. It was on the use of this base that all programmes of training were founded.
actually turned over to the United States authorities on 25th August,
The base was
by which time British
itself.
Commandos and Beach Signal Parties to be trained; and, above all, personnel of the three Services
Comman isly trained for manning the communications of the two Headquarters Ships.
102
Fitting of Ships for Operation " Torch"
The ships to be used on the operation were, at the beginning of August, for the most part
carrying out their normal trading activities.
and additions to fit them for their assigned roles, S.O.A.S.C.
As they became available for the necessary alterations
who under the C.C.O. was the only
authority who knew what was required, had to arrange all the details and see that each ship was
capable of carrying out her duties.
As these ships were allocated to yards round the coast from
the Clyde to Southampton, the work undertaken by his staft is worthy of record.
The following table shows the ships and craft requirements when first made known in August
and the final form the expedition took when it sailed in October.
Notified
Ships
Sailed
H.Q. Ship
15
L.S.L. (L.)
L.S.G.
L.S.T.
15
37
M.T. Ships with craft
Totals
91
13
93
43
42
282
Craft
L.C.A.
L.C.S. (M.)
L.C.P.
L.C.M. (Mk. I)
L.C.M. (Mk. III)
Totals
140
12
120.
49
408
In appreciation of the work done, the following letter was sent to S.O.A.S.C. by Admiral
Ramsay on 10th November, 1942 :—
" I would like to pay tribute to the manner in which you and your staff successfully
handled the immense task of equipping and preparing for sea the large number of vessels
concerned in Operation ' Torch,' and to thank you and those with you for this great work.
It was a task for which your organisation was scarcely equipped, and the departmental
and physical difficulties in the way were very great; but thanks to your energy, initiative
and disregard for red tape, all obstacles were overcome, resulting in the sailing of the
expedition according to programme.
The part played by you and your organisation had mostly been behind the scenes
and is unlikely to receive the publicity which is its due, but its importance cannot be over-
estimated,
and the successful launching of the operation may
in no small measure be
attributed to you and your staff."
Maintenance of Landing Crait for Operation " Torch"
The Staff of C.O.H.Q. had carefully drawn up a schedule of all spare gear required for the
maintenance and repair of landing craft when used on operations.
The raiding forces were fully
equipped, and the requirements envisaged for Operation
" Sledgehammer
" had also been met.
Now, however, a much larger operation (" Torch") was being mounted and the demands for spares
increased as the planning progressed.
Further, the operation was taking place overseas and so the
resources in the U.K. would not be on hand for maintenance.
States.
Added to all this, no spares were coming forward for the craft being supplied from the United
To get these flotillas properly fitted out meant that the craft in the .K. must be sacrificed.
In this way craft were " cannibalised
and so put out of action, an expensive form of improvisation
which had the most severe repercussions on the training programme for the ensuing year.
But it
may be recorded that the schec
dule of craft and flotilla spares was correct when the expedition sailed.
As the result of previous exercises, it was found necessary to form Beach Recovery Units whose
role was to recover craft which had become casualties during the operations.
These had to be
be provided in time.
in provided on the operation and unfortunate ad, ate the play, the shes on le ranes could not
day, the swell on the beaches caused
many casualties among craft and, in consequence, a number of landing craft were lost whieh causet
have been recovered had the necessary lifting gear been available.
This was rectified in all future
operations.
103
WO 277/21
27
3ф
