exercise any useful function.
Army made strengthening
The addition of British formations to Fith
of the increment
essential,
and a D.D.S.T.
(Brigadier) was appointed with approximately 60 per cent. of the normal
Army S.T. staff.
Administrative Plan
The administrative chain
of responsibility
was planned as follows.
Bighth Army would be maintained in the early days by Fortbase, dealing
direct with A.F.H.Q.
Later,
Eighth Army would link up with 5 Corps at
Taranto, whose maintenance for 30 days would be arranged by A.F.H.Q.
for the airborne division and Army and corps troops, and by G.H.Q., Middle
East, for 8 Indian Division and attached troops.
After 30 days, Fortbase
was to assume responsibility for the maintenance of 5 Corps as well as
Eighth Army.
10 Corps would deal direct with A.F.H.Q. and G.H.Q.,
Middle East, for its initial maintenance; but,
when Naples fell, A.F.H.Q.
would become responsible.
In order to carry out the S.T. planning for the invasion of Italy, and
more
particularly to advise the Executive Planning Staff on S.T. matters,
a small planning staff, consisting of an A.D.S.T. and a D.A.D.S.T., was
added to the establishment of the S.T. Directorate of A.F.H.Q.
found, however, that detailed planning invariably had to be done by the
sections of the directorate, making the planning staff redundant, and the
experiment was dropped.
Apart from the recasting of tonnages to bring the maintenance plans
into line with the changing operational plans and Orders of Battle, a factor
which affected all planning staffs from corps H.Q. to G.H.Q., the principal
S.T. planning problems were: —
(a) To find sufficient R.A.S.C. units in North Africa and the Midde
East to fill the various Orders of Battle;
(b) to send R.A.S.C. units to Italy with serviceable vehicles.
The first of these was more difficult than might appear, for several reasons.
The Orders of Battle for each operation had to be kept separate; for
"Avalanche", Fifth
R.A.S.C.
Army required extra
Amy Troops; the resources of North Africa and the Middle East were
not unlimited, and they had both already contributed generously to th
Sicily Order of Battle; and the feeding strength in North Africa continue
to be very high.
Supply Units: Provision
Before the invasion of the Tralian mainland began on 3rd September.
1943 the situation in regard to the coale of provision of field force base and
L. of C. supply units for the theatre came to a head, and A.F.H.Q.
War Office to review it.
On the hecia normal unit capacities A F.H.Q
19 D.I.DS,
reckoned its deficiencies to be two
four Mobile Field Bakeries and four Field Butcheries.
on a feeding streneth of 450.000 includino 86.000 prisoners of war. most of
This was calculated
whom were to be retained in North Africa for labour.
to be set off the dilution of British units by prisoners of war, and, later,
Against this was
266
the formation of Italian Co-operator units, e.s., Field Bakeries and incre-
ments of B.S.Ds.
In consequence, A.F.H.Q. only asked for two B.S.Ds.,
five D.I.Ds.,
and two Port Detachments.
They also asked for the urgent
despatch of two Field Bakeries, type "A", as the number of field bakeries
available in the theatre in relation to the feeding strength was definitely in-
sufficient, and resulted in excessive issue of biscuit.
They could produce
only 276,000 ib. of bread a day, and, although no details were known of the
amount of bread available from civilian sources, there was obviously a very
substantial shortage.
The deficiency of supply units was fully appreciated at War Office, but
the permanent provision of units, even on the modest scale requested, was
out of the question, because of the necessity to build up the Order of Battle
for 21 Army Group.
A compromise was reached by sending to North
Africa certain supply units intended for 21 Army Group, with the proviso
that they should be sent back in time to carry out their allotted task.
arrangement also gave the units valuable practical training in operational
conditions.
As far as the bakeries were concerned, there were only two of type "A"
in the United Kingdom, which were allotted to 21 Army Group, and it was
not thought proper to reduce the latter's slender resources in this respect.
One mobile bakery was sent instead, and another was transferred from
Middle East.
Besides these,
one B.P.O. (Sups.), two B.S.Ds., and three
D.I.Ds., were despatched from 21 Army Group allotment.
In connection with the provision of additional R.A.S.C. units, it must
be borne in mind that the manpower ceiling of personnel allotted to the
R.A.S.C. for all purposes was barely sufficient to meet requirements, and
was always under review.
It was at all times essential to hold a reserve
of units in the United Kingdom, and only rigid economy by overseas Com-
mands could make this reserve one of reasonable size.
From the War
Office point of view, the revalue of the policy of dilution of British units
in overseas theatres could not be over-estimated.
Provision of Vehicles
The question of providing serviceable vehicles would not have arisen in
the normal way; ou providing see cranance were unable to supply replace-
ment vehicles in
any but small numbers.
The only alternative was to
strip the R.A.S.C. units remaining in North Africa of their best vehicles,
even though thos, units remaining ine required to work; and this parris.
which had previously been begun in preparing units for Sicily, was carried
lo a conclusion iously been begun in pi
The standard was low comporad with the idenl for vehicles faced with
in the circumstances.
a winter in the Italian mountaine but it woe the best that could be achievec
The R.A.S.C. Order of Rattle for Operation " Baytown" included the
S.T. Plan for Operation " Baytown"
second line transport of the two
divisions,
of 13 Corps, and a number of Army and G.H.Q. Troops units drawn from
the usual Corps Troops units
267
Mars micro 0.5 mm
WO 211/21.
27
WO27726
