6. The Chairman of the Amphibious Warfare Committee is empowered to co-opt any other officer
from within C.O.H.Q. who may be concerned with any particular problems under discussion.
also invite, as appropriate, officers of any of the three Services, who are not employed in C.O.H.Q.
He may
Sub-Committee
7. To assist the main Committee and to carry out the initial investigation of problems there will
be an Amphibious Warfare Sub-Committee consisting of :-
D.D.C.O.(Air)
Permanent Chairman.
N.A.W.
M.A. W.
-Full members.
A.A. W.
G.2 Trg. (A)
A. Q
G.1 Experiments
Advisory members.
+ S A. 2
Secretary'
D.D.C.O.(Air) will act as permanent Chairman of the Amphibious Warfare Sub-Committee as well as
being member of the main Committee.
8. The Chairman of the Amphibious Warfare Sub-Committee is empowered to co-opt any other
officer from within C.O.H.Q. who may be concerned with the particular problem under discussion, where
such officers are of his own or lower level.
levels from the three Services, who are not employed at C.O.H.Q.
repay at of prop hate, fic at of his on lowers
of senior levels he should arrange this through the Chairman of the main Committee.
Procedure
9. Problems for study will arise from two sources:
(a) those passed down by the Executive;
(b) those brought forward by members of C.O.H.Q. staff.
10. One of the main functions of C.C.O. is constantly to study amphibious warfare and associated
air support.
Hence it is incumbent on all his staff to bend a progressive mind to such warfare; this should
lead to problems being put forward as at 9 (b) above.
1. Authority for study of problems lies with the Executive
Problems brought forward under 9 (b)
bove are to be submitted to D.C.O.(Air) who, as Chairman of the Committee, may authorise studi
subject to subsequent confirmation by the Executive.
12. A list is to be put before the Executive each month showing problems being studied, and seeking
confirming authority for the study of those problems not as yet authorised by the Executive when
necessary
13. Unless otherwise directed by D.C.O.(Air) the Secretary is to arrange for problems to be taken
first by the Sub-Committee.
The results of their deliberations will then be taken by the main Committee.
The final results are to be submitted to the Chief of Staff for the consideration of the Executive.
14. The full members of the main Committee—i.e., the three Deputy Directors-have the duty to
keep the member of the Executive of their own Service informed of progress.
Experiments and Trials
15. The Committee is not to initiate action for carrying out experiments and trials involving major
expenditure or effort by outside authorities without the prior authority of the Executive.
16. D.X.O.R. is responsible for carrying out such experiments and trials as affect his branch in
connection with the requirements of the Committee, and for following matters up with the appropriate
Service Ministries as may be requisite.
Progress Reports
17. The Committee is to submit to the Executive a monthly statement showing briefly the progress
in each problem under study.
in 12 above.
This report is to be submitted at the same time as the list referred to
Cancellation of Previous Directive
Committee.
18. This acquaint cancels H.Q.A. 514-the previous directive issued to the Amphibious Warfare
16th April, 1945.
(C.R. 1197/44.)
APPENDIX 28
"H.Q. ACQUAINT No. 966"
Experiments, Trial and Development Projects-Method of Initiating
The taintiny instruntions with regard in the rotrent methnd of initiating exnerimante and trial
projects in C.O.H.Q. and development projects with the Service Ministries are promulgated.
248
Trials and Experiments xperiments 0.0,
2. All trials and experiments of prototypes will be arranged by the Director of Experimente for
Operational Ragate en the io.., except those in the case of communicatitos of terial, mints are
déalt with separately by the Chief Signal Officer.
3. D.X.O.R. will initiate trials or experiments in connection with :-
a) Prototype craft or equipment other than communications
Staff Requirement has already been approved by this Headquarters
material in respect of which a
(b) Requests for trials by Commanders-in-Chief or Directors of Combined Operations overseas.
a Staff Requirement exists.
4. D.X.O.R. is responsible for providing any technical advice required by the Amphibious Warfare
Committee in any preliminary examination of a project, considered necessary before determining whether
only work that can be carried out at C.O.X.E.
5. D.X.O.R. will also be responsible for modifications to existing craft and equipment involving
6. The approving authorities are :—
For 3 (a) and (b)
For 4 ..
The Executive Committee.
For 5 ..
D.C.O. (Air).
D.L.V.N.).
Development Projects of a Service Ministry
7. These come under two headings :-
(a) Those required to fulfil a firm Staff Requirement, and
(b) Those required to be developed in order that the progressive results can be examined, and, if
desirable, a firm Staff Requirement be stated.
8. In respect of 7 (a), the broad Staff Requirements, together with an indication of priority for
development, are stated by C.C.O. to the appropriate Ministry, which takes the necessary action for the
development.
This procedure is the same for all the Service Ministries.
9. In the case of 7 (b), the explanatory development of projects varies according to the Ministry
concerned.
10. Vis-à-vis the Admiralty, D.X.O.R. and the Admiralty Materials Branches discuss projects
which are then submitted by C.O.H.Q. for inclusion in the periodical Admiralty Staff Target List.
Projects on this list are developed as necessary to obtain progressive data, if required.
11. In the War Office, preliminary discussions are held between a member of the Military Amphibious
Warfare Staff, accompanied by a member of D.X.O.R. Staff, and the appropriate Directorate, in order
to obtain support and agreement to the development proceeding.
Inter alia, consideration is given
during these discussions as to whether :-
(i) The subject is already covered by a War Office policy statement, or
(i) An authority for the development must be obtained from the
Weapons Policy Committee.
War Office Organisation and
When support for the project has been obtained, the request is sent officially to the War Office for
the development to proceed.
12. In the Air Ministry, the procedure is similar to that required in conjunction with the War Office.
In this case, an Air Amphibious Warfare Staff Officer together with a member of D.X.O.R.'s Staff,
conducts the preliminary negotiations.
13. When the Ministry concerned approves a project, it places a demand on the appropriate Supply
Ministry for work to be taken in hand.
It is imperative that C.O.H.Q. does not attempt to short-circuit
procedure in paragraphs 8-12 by direct approach to the Supply Ministry with requests for development.
14. Contact between this Headquarters and the Supply Ministries is limited to technical advice, and
on no account should requests be made for developments to be taken in hand by the Supply Ministries
without the prior authorisation of a staff division or a branch of the Service Ministry concerned.
(This is not intended to cancel Headquarters Acquaint No. 967, paragraph 4, which authorised
A./Q. and D.X.O.R. branches to maintain direct liaison with Supply Ministries on items of special
egulpment.
This is the only exception).
Vhen advice is requested, it should be made clear that no production or preparation of a prototyp
s called for until the sanction of the appropriate staff division or branch has been obtainec
APPENDIX 29
AMPHIBIANS
1. The work of C.O.H.Q. with amphibians falls under two main heads :
(a) The functional trials of amphibians designed and produced in the U.S. 4.
From the reports on
these trials definite recommendations could be made to Service Ministries on the capabilities
and employment of the amphibians.
(b) The development and functional
trials of amphibians produced in the U.K.
Tinder this
heading may be included work done with other authorities in preparing the staff require-
ments for the British made amphibians,
and construction of the amphibian
a, do that the tation a i on the rope.
The report on the prototype trials was again of great importance in helping C.O.H.Q. and
Service Ministries to assess the capabilities and employment of the amphibians.
249
(C56794)
02747
117
WO 277/21
27
3
