This state of affairs continued in spite of strong representations
by the O.C., R.A.S.C., and all control of the transport situation was soon lost.
Vehicles were abandoned all over the island for want of petrol or oil, or for
some other mishap, and some 900 tons of stores accumulated on the quayside.
At this stage the Senior Naval Officer threatened to stop off-loading unless
transport was immediately reorganized, and as a result, O.C., R.A.S.C., was
given complete control of all transport on the island.
In all, 20,000 tons of stores, vehicles, etc., were discharged in a little over
three weeks, which was within the planned time limit.
Unloading facilities
were very limited.
All stores were placed temporarily in a transit area, two
miles from the quay.
The urgent necessity for getting ships discharged
before the weather broke meant that the transport had in fact to run 24
hours a day, and maintenance suffered accordingly.
After all stores had been moved to the transit area, they had to be trans-
ferred to the airfield at Lagens, where constructional work was proceeding.
There were only 15 3-ton lorries, as all tipper lorries had been handed over to
The work of transference had to be suspended when two supply
ships arrived in February and March, 1944, and their contents had to be
taken to the transit area.
Later, all supplies had to be moved to Lagens,
where Romney huts had been erected by the middle of March.
task was finished by the end of April and with it the need for the platoon
Surplus personnel went home, and vehicles in fair working condition
were handed over to the R.A.F.
A small transport detachment was main-
tained to carry out normal administrative transport requirements.
St. Helena
Before the war, there was no R.A.S.C. organization in St. Helena; but in
November, 1939, an establishment including a corporal (driver) and six
drivers, three clerks, and a butcher, was approved.
An officer was added in
October, 1942, as, owing to the world supply situation becoming increasingly
difficult, a very close liaison had to be maintained between civil and military
authorities in isolated garrisons. By November, 1943, the R.A.S.C. detach-
ment, including locally enlisted personnel, totalled 25.
Supply demands were at first sent by St. Helena to the Naval Victualling
Stores Officer. Simonstown in South Africa without detailed reference to
In fact, until arrangements were made for all demands to he reneated to
difficulties arose.
War Office, the latter only heard of the island's requirements when special
In September, 1943. St. Helena redorted having received
no frozen meat since February, and that at supplies were inade mate for a
The standing order with Simonstown was for three tons for each
ship. Cold storage capacitv availahle in St Lalana was for twn and a half
tons. Non-despatch was due to lack of refrigerated shinning space.
found impossible to arrange refrigerated shipping snace from the TInited
Kingdom, and a suggestion that St. along should eaten its own livestock
left in its original situation.
was also reported to be impracticable The matter, had consequently, to be
438
+714
0114
Discussions between War Office and Colonial Office in February, 1944, .
on the question of responsibility for feeding the garrison at St. Helena, resulted
in an agreement that this should remain with the War Office and not pass to
Coal was supplied from South Africa.
In 1940, the authorized reserve for supplies was raised to 60 days, plus
30 days' maintenance stock, and, later, to 90 days' reserve, with 60 days'
working margin.
The ration strength averaged 127 British and 258 native troops.
At first all vehicles were requisitioned, but later 15-cwt. and 30-cwt. W.D.
3-ton lorries would have been quite unsuitable.
roads were very bad, and low gear had to be used almost all the time.
accounted for poor petrol consumption and short life of tyres.
A 30-ton vessel was sent out in response to a request for a launch for
use by the Reporting Officer and for examination of ships.
It was formerly
a Thames boat and quite unsuitable for Atlantic use. The work was therefore
done by a ship's lifeboat which had brought survivors to the island, and was
Falkland Islands
These islands lie off the extreme south-east extremity of the continent of
South America, and are strategically important to us, as being the only British
possession in the southern hemisphere of the New World, and therefore
valuable as a port of call for the Royal Navy.
In peace-time, there is no
garrison, but after the outbreak of war the colony was given one of a strength
of four hundred.
In April, 1942, this was increased by a battalion of infantry, an anti-
aircraft battery, a coast defence battery, and ancillary troops.
In view of the
isolation of the islands, the force had to be self-contained, and considerable
quantities of stores were consequently taken.
The War Establishments were
designed to fit these circumstances, and to meet the abnormal local conditions.
The R.A.S.C. detachment with the force accordingly included a major in
command, an Officer i/c Supplies, an Officer i/c Transport,
i/c Barracks with 97 other ranks.
It was organized in a M.T. section of 40
vehicles, a supply and petrol section, and a barracks section.
section was completely self-contained, with sufficient bakers and butchers to
provide bread and fresh meat for the whole force.
The force took seven months' requirements of all commodities with it,
and another ship with an " automatic maintenance"
followed in October, 1942.
shipment of supplies
The policy at this time was to maintain a six months' reserve with a six
months' working margin.
Later a three months' buffer reserve was added, to
compensate for loss in shipping time, and in April, 1943, the G.S, reserve was
increased to nine months.
This made a total holding of 18
which decreased to one year before the arrival of a six-monthly supply ship.
In fact this policy was modified vent it ivas found that supplies could be
obtained in South America on a three-monthly basis.
in South America whenever possible, in order to save shipping space from
the United Kingdom.
