(4) The Controlling Officer and the Special Operations Executive should be associated with
you in both the planning and the preparation of the operation.
(5) You should assume that the full support of the Bomber, Fighter and Army Co-operation
Commands will be available for this operation and for any advance operations you may
deem desirable to assist your plan.
6) You may find, in the early stages of prising, that ce these in addiate or parations
should be undertaken.
You are authorised i
approval of your plans."
This directive shows in paras. 2 and 6 why the concentration of available landing craft in the
South already referred to was set in motion.
CHAPTER 4
FULL STATURE, MARCH, 1942 OCTOBER, 1943
WO 277/21
27
3ф
Change of Title.
Adviser on Combined Operations becomes Chief of Combined Operations (C.C.O.
On 18th March, 1942, the Chiefs of Staff had before them a memorandum by General Ismay,
the relevant paragraphs of which read as follows :—
" (3) The title of the appointment of ' Adviser on Combined Operations' has been altered
to ' Chief of Combined Operations.'
The appointment will in future carry with it
the rank of Vice-Admiral in the Navy, Lieutenant-General in the Army and Air
Marshal in the Royal Air Force.
(4) The Chief of Combined Operations will attend meetings of the Chiefs of Staff as a full
member whenever major issues are in question and also, as heretofore, when his
own Combined Operations, or any special matters in which he is concerned, are
under consideration."
From this time onwards, the Chief of Combined Operations (C.C.O.) attended all Chiefs of
Staff meetings when he was available and also those of the Vice-Chiefs of Staff.
Consequent on this decision, a confidential order was issued to all three Services. It is quoted
in full at Appendix 9 as it shows clearly what the Combined Operations Organisation had now
become.
Preliminaries for Invasion
After carefully reviewing the requirements for any form of Cross-Channel Operation on a large
scale, the C.C.O. foresaw that there would be a far greater requirement for craft than even the
most optimistic estimates could provide.
Further, the time available was short and no matter
what exertions could be made in construction, the shortage of craft would always be a governing
factor.
Administrative Problems
Other problems that emerged from a study of the effort required to return to the Continent
were the provision of accommodation for the personnel required for the reliefs of crews of landing
craft, the collection of spares, not only for the engines but also for the craft, and the setting up of
depots where these spares could be conveniently stored.
Above all was the overriding consideration of where to house the officers and men being trained
for the landing crait and the selection of suitable areas where they could be trained to the required
standard in the minimum time.
The possession of the base originally built by the Americans at Rosneath in the Gare Loch and
the enlargement of the facilities at Inveraray and Castle Toward were soon found to be insufficient
to compete with the intake and so where next to open up establishments was a constant source of
concern to the Administrative Staff.
apparent.
The improvisations and subterfuges that were forced on the Command will soon become
Assembly of Craft for " Sledgehammer"
Most of the craft available in the United Kingdom were, at this time (April, 1942), fully
employed in the Clyde area in the training of formations in amphibious warfare.
29
(C52974)
