CHAPTER 12
TRAINING AND TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS
The Institution of Training Establishments in the United Kingdom
After the evacuation of the Continent in May, 1940, our main concern became the defence
of the British Isles, but it was realised that the only means of offence for some time to come, except
by air action, would be amphibious raids. At the same time, the foundations for an eventual return
to the Continent, in force, would be laid.
The problem of training personnel for these operations had two main aspects: the training
of troops; and the training of ships' and craft crews.
The troops for these raids were provided initially by the Special Service Battalions and later
by Royal Marine and Army Commando units.
Ships and craft crews were at first civilians as was the case in the Boulogne raid (Operation
"Collar"), which was not successful. It was soon realised that naval personnel would have to be
trained specially for the operation and maintenance of landing craft. The first training establishment
was inaugurated in July, 1940, at Warsash as H.M.S. Tormentor, which was already being used
as a base for raiding operations.
At first this establishment was used for basic naval training.
Advanced training with the Special Service troops was given at Archaracle (H.M.S. Dortin).
At about the same time, similar training was started at H.M.S. Northney, a new base in Hayling
Island, and a few months later, other establishments were set up at Brightlingsea and Dartmouth.
These establishments, in addition to their training role, were organised as raiding bases, and Special
Service troops were located near them.
There was also the Inter-Services Training and Development Centre (I.S.T.D.C.) at Eastney
Barracks, Portsmouth whose primary function was the development of material, although the
attendant developments in doctrine and training were, at first, also its concern.
When the C.T.C.
was fully operating however, the I.S.T.D.C. dropped its training role and became the Combined
Operations Development Centre (C.O.D.C.) in August, 1941 under the D.C.O.
The First Combined Training Centre, Inveraray
In July, 1940, after wide reconnaissance,
Inveraray was selected to be the first Combined
Training Centre (C.T.C.) where the landing craft flotillas could complete their training, and where
it was intended to carry out Army training in amphibious warfare on a large scale.
On Ist September, 1940, Vice-Admiral T. J. Hallett assumed command of the C.T.C. as
Vice-Admiral Combined Training Centre (V.A.C.T.C.) and, on 15th October, the naval wing was
commissioned as H.M.S. Quebec.
At this time, the available ships and craft on which training largely depended, had to be divided
between the various establishments mentioned above and operational requirements, to implement
the policy of raiding the continental coastline.
However, after the two abortive raids during the
summer of 1940 and the failure at Dakar, the operational demands for the rest of the year were
much reduced and full concentration could be given to building up the training establishments in
personnel, both naval and military, and material.
Te was at the beginning of 1941 that the first great dificulty arose in the growth of these training
eetahlishmente and of the amphibions striking forces they trained. Most of the trouble was du
to the lack of a central authority responsible for the various faces of the Combined Operations
new
Firstly, there was the question of administering the training establishments,
opening
enable military and naval forces to train.
ones, obtaining personnel and staff and generally assembling all the necessary facilities to
divergence of oninion on hithe small strikine force nt enme 5000 trained trans child he used
of Staff raiding policy: to make the enemy disperse his forces uneconomically.
Secondly, there was the implementation of the Chiefs.
There was also
confusion of the enemy at the most vulnerable points.
The D.C.O. Admiral Sir Roger Keys, advocated using them offensively to the greatest possibl
He used all his influence to try to gain this
92
object, but he found these views in direct conflict with those of the Chiefs of Staff whose policy
as to use the available effort, firstly, to build up an amphibious striking force in the Mediterranean
and, secondly, as a nucleus on which to build the enormous organisation that would eventually be
needed for a return to the Continent.
The C.T.C. at Inveraray was gradually developed and in February, 1941, it was possible to
stage the first large scale exercise involving a Guards Brigade Group.
Combined Training in the Middle East
operations training centre in the Middle East.
As a result, Colonel MacLeod, who was Commandant
opened at Kabrit. Almost at once, after the first course had been completed, the C.T.C. was given
the task of training the 6th Division for an attack on Rhodes (Operation " Cordite "). This Division
was at first short of one Brigade and Nos. 7, 8 and 11 Commandos were sent out to Kabrit from the
U.K. in the three L.S.I. Glengyle, Glenroy and Glenearn.
Landing Craft, arrived in March, 1941, and training started in earnest.
These, together with some twenty Tank
Operation " Cordite" never took place, however, because Rommel, at the end of April, launched
his highly successful attack in the Western Desert and the 6th Division had to be sent hurriedly
into the desert to help stop the advance.
A section of the Special Boat Section was formed and trained at Kabrit during the spring of
1941, also a detachment of the Special Air Service Brigade.
The tasks of the former were at first
confined to landing in Folbots from submarines for beach reconnaissance and marking,
carrying out acts of sabotage. The latter operated by means of parachutes for much the same
In April and May, 1941, the ships and craft belonging to the C.T.C. Kabrit played an important
part in the evacuation of Greece and later Crete, many of them being damaged or lost.
About mid-summer the New Zealand Division was partially trained in combined operations
at the C.T.C. and between then and the end of the year, the training of various engineer units,
armoured units and one Brigade of the 4th Indian Division was undertaken.
concurrently run for British and Allied Officers.
October, 1942, was a period of intense activity at the C.T.C. as it had been decided to seize
Sicily with troops from the U.K. and the Middle East. The operation was, however, later cancelled,
this probably being a wise decision as the shortage of ships and craft would have made it a hazardous
In February, 1943, C.O.H.Q. sent out by air a number of officers to the Middle East for the
following purposes :—
(1) As a preliminary to doubling the strength of the existing C.T.C. so as to increase the
(2) To start a second C.T.C. and to form two dryshod training teams, each capable of carrying
out preliminary training in Syria, Iraq and Palestine, or inland in Egypt so that
brigades arrived partially trained at Kabrit and able to devote all their time to
wetshod training.
The balance of the staff available was used to train and assist in forming the Beach Groups
before they came to Kabrit.
Prior to the invasion of Sicily (" Husky"), large scale exercises took place under the general
direction of D.C.O. (M.E.) whilst dryshod teams were in Algeria, Damascus and Gaza.
Bricks were also formed and trained mainly in the light of experience gained in the Madagascar
Owing to the success and speed of operations in Sicily, it became necessary to organise local
training for the formations earmarked for the invasion of Italy. These were located near Tripoli
and Homs. A C.T.C. was therefore set up at Tripoli (staffed by personnel withdrawn from C.T.C
Tabrit) on an ad hoc mobile and functional basis, and dispersed along the coast at suitable points.
The system was a complete success and two Divisions and Corps troops were trained in their
designated operational role in under five weeks.
In the latter part of 1943, plans were prepared for operations in the Dodecanese which required
dryshod training areas at Suez and wetshod training at Kabrit.
In the spring of 1944, the training for immediate operations lapsed but the policy was accepted
that combined operations training should be a normal commitment for all formations in the Middle
East, a policy which kept the C.T.C. fully employed.
E * 3
(C52794)
WO 277/21
27
