FOREWORD
This book is intended primarily for students of history, for use at staff colleges and similar
establishments, and for the benefit of those interested in ministerial machinery for the direction
of war.
It is a record of the activities of Combined Operations Command, its origin and functions, its
ramifications in overseas theatres and, above all, its contribution towards winning the war.
a record of solid material achievement and of significant advances in amphibious technique.
It is
Combined Operations Headquarters was a novel element introduced into the British military
It was begun and developed largely through the genius of Sir Winston Churchill and
the outstanding ability and forcefulness of Admiral Mountbatten.
The work it did to make
amphibious operations possible and its value as a continuing contribution to our national defence
organisation are set out for all to read.
Even if we cannot anticipate the final verdict of history,
we must try to establish the facts on which judgment should be based so that the distinctive
contribution of Combined Operations will stand out with incontestable validity.
The main story is told in Chapters 1 to 10; the later chapters, which advisedly incorporate
some repetition, may be regarded as supplementary to these and describe the varied activities in
Inevitably, the story of Combined Operations is largely an account of the efforts of Admiral
Mountbatten and his team; his personal example and drive gave impetus to all and everything.
The measure of achievement by him personally and by Combined Operations Headquarters can
be gathered from the signal made to him which is recorded in Sir Winston Churchill's book
" Triumph and Tragedy'
"Today we visited the British and American armies on the soil of France.
through vast fleets of ships with landing craft of many types pouring more and more men
and vehicles ashore. We saw clearly the manoeuvre in process of rapid development.
We
have shared all secrets in common and helped each other all we could.
We wish to tell you
at this moment, in your arduous campaign, that we realise that much of this remarkable
technique and therefore the success of the venture has its origin in developments effected
by you and your Staff of Combined Operations.
Arnold, Brooke, Churchill, King, Marshall, Smuts."
Publication of a full and fair history should not be further delayed.
NO 277/21
27
3Ф
PART I
The History of Combined Operations
Headquarters
1940-1945
Amphibious Warfare Headquarters
1956
(C52794)
vi
