The jerrican was recognized as production anse to the container pra
blem, and it was decided that its production east be pressed forward o
that it could be used on a world-wide scale by the Allied Armies.
As plant of
entirely new design was necessary for this, production was inevitably de.
layed; and further time was lost by the production of a poor imitation, th
American "Quartermaster" container, known as the
" American". Thi
incorporated some, but not all, of the jerrican's advantages, and two of the
pre-dominantly useful features
were
omitted, i.e.,
the aperture designed
specially for pouring, and the closure which combined ease of opening with
a non-leak seal. (See the illustration in Appendix XJ.)
When, at the end of 1941, however, the American
was offered in
quantities from America, the offer was gladly accepted by Middle East, and
a million of them were ordered for immediate delivery, and a million jerr
cans for delivery by March, 1942.
In addiuon, plants were oraered for th
manufacture in Middle East of jerricans,
5-gallon drums, and 36-gallon
drums; while 20,000 barrels were ordered from South Africa, and 40,000
12-gallon drums from U.S.A.
A dump of between one and two million jerricans was captured at
Benghazi, but our hurried retreat prevented our removal of these, and our
net gain in the campaign was only 60,000 to 80,000. Units acquired huge
numbers wherever they could, and each vehicle carried six or eight. In
view of their value for distributive purposes, steps were taken for the
collection of these.
The appearance of the jerrican made it clear that the non-returnable
tin must disappear, and that the losses due to its continued use could no
longer be faced; but the process of ousting it from its established position
made slow progress.
During this battle the benefit was reaped of the Red Sea base scheme.
It was neceschry to draw on the reserves of packed petrol accumulated at
Romas necessary to draw A den to the extent of 10,000 tons, in ore to
make good the deficiency of container capacity in Middle East proper for
the maintenance of Eighth Army.
Petroleum Inspectorate
Four petrol inspectors
were appointed in November, 1941, one 10
Their duties
G.H.Q., and one each to Eighth Army, Egypt, and Palestine.
were to inspect, report, advise, and assist in every possible way, so tha
losses of petroleum products by leakage or any other cause might be fe
duced to a minimum.
They visited rail, sea, and road loading and unloading
Some of the
points, and also inspected units of all branches of the army.
main points observed were: —
(a) Improvement of the handling of cased and uncased petrol, eit.
into and out of ships, trains, and vehicles.
(b) Ensuring that enough suitable dunnage was used, and that trucks
and lorries
were tightly loaded.
(c) Seeing that effective arrangements were made in depots, etc., for
the inspection of containers and the salvaging of contents of leaker
assistance to units of all arms on the economic handling and consumption
They travelled
constantly throughout their areas, giving advice
190
of petroleum products.
They reported on losses and suggested ways of
counteracting them.
They had certain powers of write-off.
This establishment was considered to be justified during the operations
in Libya and Cyrenaica in 1941-1942, when the need was keenly
felt for
liaison
between
G.H.Q. and the headquarters of Army
and Corps
questions of P.O.L. usage, wastage, and recovery, and the salvage and use
of captured containers and material.
A report on the campaign suggested
that one of their primary duties was to detect and eliminate causes of waste
of P.O.L.
It was claimed that they should be at hand continuously during
the preparatory provisioning of a force for battle, since it was considered
that waste occurred and methods of prevention suggested themselves during
the shipment and dumping of large quantities of P.O.L.
Apart from direct
control, they did much to educate the forces towards an appreciation of the
appalling wastage which was taking place due to the lack of supervision
in the handling and transport of P.O.L.
In July, 1942, the inspectors were absorbed into a Petroleum Inspectorate,
under a Lieut.-Col. as Chief Inspector, and two
more were added.
months later, the Inspectorate was absorbed
into
the Inspectorate of M.T.
and P.O.L.,
R.A.S.C.
Maintenance in the Forward Area
With the capture of Agedabia, it had been intended to open a F.M.C.
in that area.
But the extension of the run of the convoys from Tobruk
to Agedabia would have involved an addition of two days to the turn-
round, with a consequent reduction of some 150 tons in the daily deliveries
by this route.
Until this 150 tons a day could be guaranteed as a minimum
receipt from Benghazi (and this could not be for some time, owing to the
difficulties at that port), the projected F.M.C. at Agedabia was postponed.
In addition, the site selected was found to be heavily mined, and in any
case could not be used until clearance could be effected.
Actually,
some
25,000 rounds of 25-pdr. ammunition were dumped, and these were lost in
the subsequent retreat.
They were however found again and used in the
final advance of Eighth Army.
The delay in opening the port of Benghazi was an additional drain on
the slender transport resources of 13 Corps, as an extra third line link
had to be inserted between the F.M.C. at Msus and the replenishment areas
of 1 Armoured Division, whose forward troops were in the El Agheila area
on the Tripolitanian frontier.
Twenty-one G.T. companies were eventually employed delivering a maxi-
mum of 750 tons a day at F.M.C.,
Msus; while six G.T.
comnanies were
allotted to 13 Corps for delivery from Msus to the troops in the forward area.
Delivery into F.M.Cs.
Eighth Army took over from 13 Corps the responsibility for the sumin
tenance of a Tadian Division and the troone at Benchari and alen assumed
direct control
excluding, F.M.C.
of the third line transport supply of 13 Corps up to, but
to the system
This latter arrangement
was contrary
hitherto in use wherehy Corns was resnonsible for ite own thied line convoys
Working between excluding forward base and including F.M.C.
Parture watween excluding forward kas as it was not possible to contro
191
(37452)
17
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
