O.M.G. 6 was about to assume responsibility for the procurement of all coal
required from the United Kingdom, when the B.E.F. withdrew.
Catering
sonica seet services was included in
the establishment of the B.E.F. when it first went to France.
The necessity
for catering advisers with formation headquarters, Army, corps and division,
was not yet recognized.
In November, 1939, a Catering Inspectorate was approved, to form part
of to L of C. and to consist of a major and four assistant caterin
advisers.
Later, a catering adviser was provided for each corps and division,
and supervising officers for Field Cookery Training Centres.
An inspection of the B.E.F., from the catering angle was carried out in
April, 1140, by the honorary catering adviser and the chief inspector of
catering, War Office.
They found that the standard of cooking was generally
good, in spite of many dificulties in finding suitable premises in which training
facilities could be provided. Cooks were not, as a rule, familiar with im-
provised methods of cooking.
Additional training centres were, therefore,
set up.
The necessity for this kind of training cannot be stressed too strongly.
D.S.T., B.E.F., reported in November that cooks had not been taught to
improvise an oven from cresol drums, or do a pot roast in camp kettles over
an open fire.
The comfort of the men would be greatly increased if the
School of Cookery taught cooks to make an oven out of three sheets of steel
plate, in the conditions in which they had to cook in France. The Aldershot
oven was useless, as amateurs used too much fuel.
The absence of much waste showed that cooks were becoming familiar
with the organization of the Field Service ration scale;
but units did not
appear to know that they could underdraw what they did not want, and
surplus stocks of certain commodities were found in most unit stores.
A beginning was made with the installation of messing by-product plants,
but their development in France was prevented by the general collapse.
The
idea was the fore-runner of the system for Great Britain eventually operated
under S.T. 4.
P.O.L.—Initial Situation
We turn now to consider the question of the supply of P.O.L.
The can
factories in the United Kingdom had been ordered to go into full production,
but, for reasons described in Chapter II, the required output could not be
achieved, and the allotted shipping could not be taken up.
In consequence,
by M+32 (8th October), only 2i,000 tons deadweight of petrol had been
shipped, or 4,000 tons short of the estimated consumption of the Force.
Fortunately, the arrangement for the reserve in France worked even bette
been produced.
than had been anticipated, and quantities greatly in excess of nomination bad
days.
Even with this help, the petrol situation was not very good in the ely
On 29th September, the stocks were only about two days.
With an
extended L. of und marches of over 100 miles a day. the drain on petrol
was considerably heavier than had been estimated in the Maintenance Proje
112
No working margin could be built up, let alone a reserve.
Still, the B.E.F.
was refuelled, even if on a day-to-day basis, and, although there was great
uncertainty as to what stocks really were, there was reason to believe that
the position was in fact better than it looked.
Units had demanded more than
they really required, as they feared that they would not get all they needed,
and formations were hoarding.
Owing to moves, stocks had become widely
distributed.
Petrol was going up to two railheads, and thence it was sent
to three dumps.
It could not be moved from these, but it was intended to
use it for units passing through.
The maintenance of the Base and L. of C. was being effected from bulk
as far as possible,
but the exploitation of bulk supplies was limited by a
shortage of returnable containers, as the turn round could not catch up with
the demand.
To alleviate this difficulty, War Office sent out 100,000 4-gallon
returnable containers, and formed and sent out a Base Petrol Filling Centre
to help fill them.
Eventually, about 1,300,000 of these containers were
shipped to the B.E.F., and fully justified themselves in the active operations
in 1940.
By 11th October, the situation was better, and there were about four
days' stock in containers, and 11 days' in bulk, exclusive of aviation spirit.
By the end of October, a reserve had begun to accumulate.
At the end of the
year, the packed stock position was quite satisfactory,
being held, or 44 days'
reserve at the then estimated
some 29,000 tons
" active" rate.
This was due to the continuance of non-operational conditions, and ship-
ments were then modified accordingly.
Development of Bulk Supply
Meantime, War Office had been working for the introduction of bulk
supply on a larger scale. The decision to use non-returnable tins had at least
provided a working method of supply to the B.E.F., but it was realized that
this means might not be sufficient to meet all requirements, since consumption
might increase to such proportions as to strain tin-plate supplies.
tally, it was found in practice that the flimsy 4-gallon non-returnable con-
tainer involved a difficult loading and shipping operation which led to high
For this, the nailed cases were largely responsible.
The nails worked loose, and subsequent handling, movement, and hurried
stacking, drove the nails back through the tins.
The leakage also constituted
a fire risk on board, which necessitated specially fitted ships.
consisted of squaring the sloping sides of the holds with timber, in steps, so
that cases could be packed in close, and kept from shifting.
In any case, it had been anticipated that, if the campaign developed as
expected in France, demand for petrol would exceed supply before the com-
pletion of the second contingent in February-March,
1940.
When
the
principles of petrol supply in the Field were decided, it was accepted that,
in the first phase of such a campaign as was visualized, supply must be in
packed form, as it was considered improbable that any bulk storage would
be available in the theatre of war.
Thereafter, two phases were visualized.
After three to six months, it was thought that some bulk storage would have
been acquired, and that supply could then be in bulk for the R.A.F. and for
base and L. of C. units, and in tins for the rest of the force.
113
WO 277/21
27
1027772
