Combined Operations Bases, North (R.A.C.O.B. (N) ) was established.
had been R.Á.L.B. up to that time, was given this new appointment and hoisted his flag in H.M.S.
Rear-Admiral Horan, who
Warren, the Combined Headquarters at Largs, on Ist May, 1943.
This appointment existed until
15th November, 1946.
The Directorate of Training and Staff Duties, Combined Operations established in the Admiralty
The only naval functions left to C.O.H.Q., from about August 1943, onwards were the develop-
ment of tactics and the initiation of staff requirements for special assault craft and equipment.
A Directorate of Training and Staff Duties, Combined Operations was set up in the Admiralty to
preserve liaison with C.O.H.Q. in these matters.
The Assault Warfare Committee
In July, 1943, as a result of the "Rattle" Conference and prior to his leaving for the "Quadrant"
Conference,
the C.C.O. had established within C.O.H.Q. the Assault Warfare Committee.
Their
terms of reference were as follows :—
phase of an amphibious operation.
(2) Study tactics, technique and the developments required in ships,
craft, vehicles,
aircraft, weapons and equipment for amphibious warfare and associated air support,
and to deduce staff requirements.
(3) Study requirements in the Far East.
This committee was very active and was in constant touch with the C.O.S.S.A.C. planners and
assisted them in every way.
C.C.O.'s Recommendations for the Future
C.O.H.Q.
reviewed the need for modifications in the organisation and responsibilities of the headquarters.
He pointed out that, although originally he had been charged with the planning and mounting
of raids and the build-up of an assault fleet;
raiding might now devolve upon the
Chief of
Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander (C.O.S.S.A.C.) so that it could be related to future
operations,
and that the Admiralty had now assumed full responsibility for the assault fleet.
There remained to the Chief of Combined Operations the following functions :—
(1) The study of tactical and technical problems of amphibious assaults and the formulation
of doctrine and staff requirements.
(2) Advice on all aspects of planning and training for amphibious assaults.
(3) Co-ordination of the general training policy for amphibious assaults for all three Services
and the control of Combined Training Centres in the U.K.
(4) Co-ordination of the development of communication material and inter-communication
technique in amphibious warfare.
being handed over to a Force Commander.
Admiral Mountbatten then went on to explain how, in the light of the reduced functions of
In his
opinion, there were in principle two possible systems which could be adopted :-
System A Control by One Man (Appendix 14)
The retention of an independent organisation under the control of one man, who would be
responsible for the functions outlined above to the Minister ol Defence thronen the Chiefs of Staff
Committee. He would have under him a reduced organisation based on the existing C.O.H.Q. and
sufficient for its reduced functions.
What her he would be a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee
or not must depend on the emphasis laid on the active study and development of comhined
operations and the role of the latter in future strategy.
1 C.O.S. (43) 554 (O), dated 20th September, 1943.
68
TAEDTLE:
System B-Control by Committee (Appendix 14)
The establishment of a Directorate of Combined Operations within each Service Ministry.
The study of technique and formulation of policy for combined operations would be the responsi-
bility of a Combined Operations Staff formed within the Chiefs of Staff organisation and working
under the directions of three Directors of Combined Operations,
Planning Staff.
Under this system,
in a similar manner to the Joint
the control of Combined Training Centres, the Combined
Operations Experimental Establishment and the Special Service Force with its inter-Service units,
would devolve upon one of the Service Ministries,
the Combined Operations Staff confining itself to
the formulation of policy for consideration by the Chiefs of Staff Committee and for the promulgation
of that policy when it had been approved.
Opinions Differ on the System to be Adopted
Admiral Mountbatten recommended System A as he considered that the advantages of having
one Head, who bears ultimate responsibility for all decisions taken within the scope of his functions,
outweighed the disadvantages of an establishment which had not the authority of a Service Ministry.
The disadvantages of this system would be largely offset by close liaison between each Senior
Service Adviser and his Ministry, it being incumbent upon each Service Adviser to represent to
the C.C.O. the views of the Service Ministry concerned.
amphibious aspect of combined operations only.
These proposals were intended to cover
Should any extension of these responsi-
bilities be contemplated, it would be necessary to re-examine the matter.
When these proposals had been studied by the Vice-Chiefs of Staff, the Vice-Chief of the Naval
Staff submitted a memorandum' dated 26th September, 1943, recommending that Course B
should be adopted.
Both papers came before the Chiefs of Staff on 29th September, 1943, and in their minutes?
it is recorded that General Brooke and Air Marshal Portal disagreed with the Admiralty recom-
mendation and expressed the view that C.O.H.Q. would work better with a single Head, who could
co-ordinate and drive forward the training research and development of combined operations, and
that experience had tended to show that responsibilities of this nature might not be efficiently
discharged without the direction of a single Head.
The Chiefs of Staff Committee unanimously agreed that, in the new circumstances the size of
C.O.H.Q. should be reduced and it was decided to appoint an impartial authority to report on the
whole question without waiting for the appointment of a new Chief of Combined Operations.
The Committee then sent their views to the Prime Minister and invited Air Marshal N. H. Bottomley
to make the necessary investigations and report.
The Report of the Bottomley Committee
The Bottomley Committee reported to the Chiefs of Staff on 13th October, 1943, and the Air
Marshal added a note to his conclusions by way of explanation.
In this note he stated that, although his terms of reference did not touch on the subject of the
relations between the C.C.O. and the Chiefs of Staff, that subject perforce came under review during
his examination of the organisation of C.O.H.Q. Opinions had been expressed on the desirability of
maintaining the then existing relationship, especially as regards its effect on the status of the C.C.O.
As then constituted, C.O.H.Q. was independent of the Service Ministries, and the Prime Minister,
as Minister of Defence, was its ministerial head and answerable for it in
stat, reporactice hasion it to the Chine without at it Marsha liontive ed, that wie of
The Air Marshal continued, that whether
the changed responsibilities called for any change in this practice was a matter on which the Chiefs
of Staff could best advise.
It had been suggested that, in view of the reduced responsibilities, the C.C.O., particularly in
the planning and mounting of operations, might now be responsible for his functions to the Minister
of Defence through the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
Air Marshal Bottomley although offering advice only on the status of C.O.H.Q., saw nothing
derogatory to the status or damaging to the present prestige of C.O.H.Q. in requiring the C.C.O.,
as a matter of normal procedure, to report to the Minister of Defence through the Chiets of Staft.
If called upon to do so, the C.C.O. would still be in a position to answer directly to the Minister of
Defence and would continue to sit in committee with the Chiefs of Staff whenever
matters
apprope anto his desponsibilities were under discussion.
It was observed that this would relieve
he Minister of certain matters of detail.
1 C.O.S. (43) 588 (O), dated 26th September, 1943.
2 C.O.S. (43) 230th meeting (O), dated 29th September, 1943.
0x9tt
WO 277/21
27
