one establishment, and not one for home or European use, and one for
elsewhere; and the problem of the provision of troop-carrying transport.
home organization, on a three-company commodity basis, was based on the
assumption that, in Western European theatres, the division was the normal
fighting formation, and that it would operate on a narrow front.
But the
difference from divisions in other theatres had made it necessary, when pre-
paring formations for despatch abroad, to convert divisional R.A.S.C. from
the three-company to the four-company basis.
This was an undesirable state
of affairs from the training point of view, as the divisional R.A.S.C. had not
been exercised in its new form before it went to an active theatre of operations.
In regard to troop-carrying, G.H.Q., Home Forces required R.A.S.C.
troop-carrying units sufficient to provide 100 per cent. lift for each normal
infantry division, or three G.T. companies per division; 100 per cent. Lift
for each independent infantry brigade, or one G.T. company for a brigade;
and 33 per cent. lift for each lower scale division, or one G.T. company for
each division.
This represented a total of 53 R.A.S.C. units solely for
the tactical movement of troops in the United Kingdom.
A proposal was consequently made, and strongly urged by D.S.T. on the
grounds of economy in manpower, to provide the necessary lift by the inclu-
sion of two platoons of 30-seater troop-carrying vehicles in each infantry
brigade company.
This would reduce the amount of vehicles and personnel
required to move an infantry brigade by 33 per cent.
There would be a
saving in manpower of 92 all ranks for each brigade lift. On the other hand,
the proposal added 200 vehicles to the division, at a time when every effort
was being made to reduce its establishment of vehicles; and it also meant that
this transport was locked up on a specific task, which led to a lack of
flexibility.
Recent experience of highly mobile operations indicated that a
heavy strain was placed on rearward transport echelons.
In Libya, 38 G.T.
companies had been required to maintain the comparatively small force south
of Benghazi, and even this number was insufficient to maintain the momentum
of the advance.
There were therefore serious objections to locking up trans-
port in special tasks in the forward area, which could not be made available
for general transport duties, if urgently required for such a purpose.
This
view carried the day, and no troop-carrying element was included in divisional
R.A.S.C., although reorganization on a group basis,
with four companies
each of two platoons, was effected for home or Western European use.
Second Line Transport Scales Reviewed
The whole question of divisional organization was in the melting pot at
this time (early 1942) and various aspects of it were
the War Office.
being examined at
The "Evet um mite was considering the scale of M.T;
vehicles to be allowed in War Establishments, and in particular examined
the second line scales of transport for all formations in all theatres of war.
not susceptible to reductions.
The conclusion was reached that ta DA SC transport unite in general were
vehicles in the divisional R.A.S.C. was recommended.
On the contrary, an increase in the number of
This increase was
three 3-ton lorries per infantry battalion for the carriage of greatcoats and
anti-gas equipment, to be balanced by a corresponding reduction in the first
line transport of battalions.
The committee found that both armoured and infantry divisions, already
more heavily encumbered with transport than their German counterparts,
had increased that transport materially as a result of various reorganizations,
additions to establishments, etc., during the past two years, but that nic
material reduction was possible in either type of formation unless a basic
alteration in the composition of the formations themselves was contemplated.
It followed that any increase in transport, as the result of any new decision,
should be avoided, and if it were necessary it must be met by a corresponding
reduction elsewhere.
" New Model" Divisions
A basic alteration did in fact take place in August, 1942, in the organization
of certain divisions, which were then known as " New Model" divisions and
armoured divisions.
The armoured divisions consisted of an armoured brigade and a lorried
infantry brigade, with divisional troops, and the R.A.S.C. element was there-
fore to consist of an armoured brigade company, an infantry brigade com-
pany, and a divisional troops company.
A general transport company was
at first included for the carriage of the personnel of the infantry brigade; but
it was later decided that a separate company was unnecessary, and two
platoons were added to the divisional troops company in substitution.
The
total allotment of platoons was then ten.
The "New Model" divisions consisted of two infantry brigades, a tank
brigade, and divisional troops, and their R.A.S.C. element comprised two
infantry brigade companies, one tank brigade company, and a divisional troops
company.
There was no troop-carrying element, and the total allotment of
platoons was nine.
The brigade companies were not regarded as part of the
brigade groups, but formed part of the divisional troops.
A measure of
flexibility was given, by reverting all vehicles, nominally allotted for the
carriage of R.E. stores, ordnance stores, anti-gas reserves, and blankets, to
the divisional troops company, where they would be held as a pool for actual
allotment as required.
Supplies in both types of division were carried on the
double echelon system.
Tank transporter companies were made corps or Army troops, allotted
on a scale of one for an armoured division, but not as part of the division.
Infantry divisions continued to consist of three infantry brigades and
divisional troops.
Corps Troops R.A.S.C.
At this time, the organization of corps troops R.A.S.C. was as follows: —
(a) Basic Corps Troops.
One headquarters,
corps troops R.A.S.C.
One corps troops ammunition company.
One corps troops petrol company.
One corps troops supply company.
These companies were second line transport, and consisted of
two transport platoons each, with composite or ammunition platoons.
One headquarters' corps transport column.
One G.T. company, as third line, with four transport platoons and
an ammunition platoon.
WO 277/21.
27
Wo 27126
