troops, and food deficiency diseases did not arise, the ration being propely
balanced.
The provision of a small but highly stimulating ration supplement to
troops subject to long periods of stress was successful. Its issue was con.
fined to A.F.V. crews.
sweets, and 2-oz. chocolate.
It consisted of 1/160th gallon of rum, 2-z. boiled
No great difficulty was experienced in moving supplies from the man
Base Supply Depots to railheads.
The operational loading of supplies in
ships, was, however, a different matter and required a "balanced ration"
which could be taken into immediate use when landed, no matter how long
held in the, ship before being discharged.
In the absence of Compo pack
rations, of which there were none in the Middle East at that time, th
only method of ensuring the arrival at seahead of a balanced ration was
to load supplies in balanced units of, say, 100 tons or fractions thered,
according to the shipping
space available.
This was unsatisfactory from
the shipping aspect as it broke up stowage, and created sorting difficulties
for shore personnel; but the need for a balanced ration which could be
accepted for immediate use outweighed the shipping disadvantage.
P.O.L.
Once the offensive was under way, the rise in consumption of P.OL.
was little more than counter-balanced by the rising production of returnable
containers and
the
increasing imports of jerricans and americans, and
non-returnable tins still had to be used.
The vast proportions of the matter may be judged from the figures for
the provision of containers.
In November, 1942, factories in Middle East
were producing non-returnable tins at the aggregate rate of four million
month.
Shipments
of jerricans and americans from U.S.A. totalled
846,000 and from the United Kingdom a million.
One and a half million
jerricans were captured.
The United Kingdom also sent two million 4-gallon
cans and drums.
In all, the number of returnable containers in circulation
in Middle East and North Africa exceeded four million, and yet the pro,
of non-returnable tins continued to increase, reaching its
four and a hall million in Middle East in January, 1943, after vis peak i
was a steady decline.
One cause of the insufficiency of returnable con-
tainers was certainly the failure of consumers to return them for reline.
a problem that was never fully solved in this theatre.
carriage by
The supply of 4-gallon tins was adequate to meet all demands, bit
sea presented
a number of problems.
Throughout
campaign the number of ships specially fed be carrying cased petrol
was never sufficient to meet requirements.
The necessity for casing
tins for conveyance by ship was in itself a problem.
Imported timber shooks
(crates) soon
unitate for wooden cases, but was never available in sufficient quantit
became unobtainable.
The fibre-board carton was a good
and the same applied to collapsible wire-bound boxes.
Locally produced
crates, made from scrap timber of palie-bound, boxes unsatisfaciony.
Mast antil Tom 1943, that the sen transcores, uthorities agreed to per
4-gallon tins to be shipped uncased or uncrated.
Libya, a new complication developed.
vessels with camelin-dicks developed. Owing to the shortage of shiping.
During the last baile of
210
ins could not be stacked more than 14 high, even crated, without risk of
collanse sufficient returnable containers had to be found to make up the
bottom stowage of such ships, and this strained resources to the limit
complicated loading programmes.
East was for many months absorbed entirely by the R.A.F.
the advance began, the demand for crums increased enormously, owing to
the need to stock airfields immediately they were captured.
The original
monthly requirement of 70,000 drums a month was trebled, and the in-
creased commitment was only met with dificulty.
As the advance proceeded, temporary refuelling points, consisting of
barrels and returnables, both filled at Alexandria and from road tankers,
were established at many of the bulk refuelling points which had been
destroyed during the retreat earlier in the year.
It proved unnecessary to
use the ex-Italian road tankers, as so many enemy containers were captured
that there were always sufficient containers available at refuelling points
into which road tankers could be emptied, and newly captured road tankers
were used for storage, bulk refuelling, and as balance tanks. Permanent
refuelling points with tankage were finally erected, or adapted from ex-enemy
installations, at intervals from Mersa Matruh to Ben Gardane in Tripolitania.
Mobile petrol filling centres proved invaluable in the forward areas for
filling containers, and they were also employed in operating, erecting, and
maintaining refuelling stations and bulk outfits, in operating petrol depots,
and in port detachment work in forward areas.
Enemy demolitions of tankage at Benghazi and Tripoli were very ex-
tensive and thorough, but the Royal Engineers repaired them skilfully and
expeditiously; and facilities for filling containers were developed at those
places which were to prove of the utmost value during the subsequent opera-
tions in North Africa and Sicily.
Responsibility for Maintenance
G.HO. Middle East remained responsible for the maintenance
Eighth Army until the end of the North African campaign in May, 1943.
War Office was responsible for First Army, and Washington for the American
Forces.
Six months previously an Allied Force Headquarters (A.F.H.Q.),
a joint British and American organization, had been set up in Algiers; it
included a Petroleum Section, the equivalent of the S.T.2 branch of a
British H.O.
When the North Africa campaign closed, A.F.H.Q. assumed responsi-
bility for making demands for P.O.L. for the whole of the Allied force in
the area under its control.
against these demands from Middle East sources, and D.S.T. Middle Bast
War Office prescribed the quantities to be supplied
had a watch de mried over the fidens and delivery of these orders.
The extent of the osponsibilify of Middle East for the maintenance of
forces engaged in operations in Sicily and Italy is described in the next
Ration Strengths
Appendix VIIIA.
The ration strengths in Middle East throughout the War are shown in
211
westert
117
WO 277/21
27
W0271/26
