537 П
L.C.T. (4)-Bow view.
this expedition?
The first question asked me was: 'And who would you name as commander of
I replied :
amphibious operations for
' In America I have heard much of a man who has been intensively studying
many months.
I understand that his position is Chief
Combined Operations, and I think his name is Admiral Mountbatten.
of
better than none;
Anyone will be
such an operation cannot be carried out under committee command.
But I have heard that Admiral Mountbatten is vigorous, intelligent and courageous, and if
the operation is to be staged initially with British Forces predominating, I assume he could
The records show that during the summer and autumn of 1942, the Combined Commanders
devoted great study to the question of where the initial landing for Operation " Round-up" should
be made.
This study was rendered possible by two facts :—
(1) The dropping of " Sledgehammer" owing to the emergency of "Torch" (North Africa).
(2) The Prime Minister's dictum that any landing on the Continent must be one that
envisaged no withdrawal.
The divergence of opinion was at first very acute, but C.C.O. stuck to his point with continued
and inflexible persistence,
and gradually the trend of thought veered to the C.O.H.Q. opinion,
North-West Europe
" The Selection of Assault Areas in a Major Operation in
1943, the relevant paragraphs of which read as follows :—
"SCOPE OF THE STUDY
(1) The selection of assault areas in any major operation of whatever scope in North-West
Europe, depends on a number of factors many of which are constant.
An examination
of these factors which are unlikely to change quickly, will permit certain basic deductions
to be made as to the limitations and possibilities of the alternative assault areas
open to selection.
(2) This study therefore is confined to that object and is intended to form the basis on which
future appreciations can be made and to which it may be attached.
(3) In Part I these constant factors are considered in general and certain important
deductions are drawn.
In Part Il these deductions are applied to the various assault
areas, and conclusions drawn as to the type of operation that might be possible in each,
provided suitable resources can be made available.
SUMMARY OF PART II
Potentialities of the Sectors
The suitability of the various sectors considered may be summarised as follows : —
Dutch
Not suitable.
Belgian
Suitable only for an assault by a limited force provided there were few enemy
reserves and German morale is very low.
Pas de
Calais
Seine
Suitable only for a feint or diversion in order to provoke an air battle under
favourable conditions.
Suitable only for a secondary assault in support of a force previously landed
further west.
Caen
Suitable for an assault by a large force provided the east beaches of the
Cotentin
peninsula are included to secure
Cherbourg, and that the assaults
on both the Caen and Cotentin Sectors take place simultaneously or closely
following each other.
Subsequent operations to capture the North Seine
and Breton group of ports would be necessary.
Cotentin
Suitable for a limited operation provided airfields can be developed quickly.
The neutralisation or capture of Alderney
and possibly Guernsey
will be
necessary if the west beaches are required.
Suitable for an unlimited operation by a small force if the scale of enemy
resistance is low, but not so low as to permit operations in the Belgian Sector.
Necessary if an assault is to be made in the Caen Sector.
Brittany
and Biscay
Suitable only for subsidiary
operations to
reduced to an extremely low order.
isduct has taken place elsewhere, provided thture large ports after a
main
Âir Force has beer
1 C.C. (42) 108, dated 5th February, 1943.
57
WO 277/21
27
30
Sicilian landing- Pioneers and R.E.s wading ashore.
(C52794)
