Chief of Combined Operations and
Staff Officers-June, 1942.
Chief of Combined
Operations
CONFIDENTIAL
Vice-Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten.
Lir Vice-Marshal Robb, R.A.F.
Brig. Wildman-Lushington, R.M
Commodore Ellis. R.N
Maj.-Gen. Haydon.
Rear-Admiral Horan, R.N.
Group Capt. Willetts, R.A.F
CHAPTER 1
EARLY HISTORY AND THE YEARS PRIOR TO
THE OUTBREAK OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR.
Section (i)
Prior to 1914.
Section (i)
The First World War, 1914-1918.
Section iii) Between the Wars, 1919-1939.
SECTION (i)
PRIOR TO 1914
Early History and Early English Disabilities
Before the days of mechanised warfare, there was little or no necessity for special ships or craft
for the conduct of amphibious operations.
Generally, the ships and boats of early times were small
and well suited to land infantry on beaches; in fact, a sheltered beach was for thousands of years
a perfectly normal landing place for the shipping of the world, except at the largest and most
important ports.
Moreover, defensive fire power in the modern sense of the word being practically
non-existent, the invader was at no great disadvantage compared with the defender.
The defender
was at a very real disadvantage because, even supposing his intelligence
correctly indicated the actual point of landing, communications difficulties would prevent him
from deploying his land forces quickly enough to forestall the descent by a more mobile force from
the sea upon the selected beach."
Even if the defender overcame this difficulty, his weapons probably
gave him no special advantage in a battle against the invaders on the beach itself.
One solution
to this dilemma of the shore-bound Commander was to take to the sea, thus removing the dis-
advantage of relative immobility ashore, and fight a land battle at sea.
This solution recurred to
succeeding defenders of England throughout the Middle Ages and, where properly executed, was
invariably successful.
Where the anti-invasion fleet was not organised in time, or not provided at
all, and the highly organised professional forces of the foreigner or usurper could get ashore, the
problem of raising adequate land forces in time, and of defeating him, assumed almost impossible
proportions.
Examples may be taken from the history of Norse and Danish invaders, William the
Conquerer himself, the landing of William of Orange, and the startling initial successes of the
15 and the '45 Rebellions.
The basic military organisation of the Shires of Saxon and even Norman England, enabled
English forces to be defeated piecemeal.
Only a wealthy and strong monarch could produce a
large enough force and effect a sufficiently rapid concentration to defeat the invader once ashore.
Harold, having
defeated an invading force in Yorkshire, marched south to meet death and
defeat at the hands of his new enemy, not on the beaches, but as a result of a common ruse in a
set battle behind Hastings.
Whoever had been the victor, he would have found himself and his
army in an
era of fierce local, almost parochial patriotisms, at odds with the English populace.
Not because he was foreign but because he had an army, and all armies of either side then lived,
with noteable lack of tact and self effacement, off the countryside.
To secure the political fruits
of a victory, the first essential in England was to get rid of the victorious army, which left the victor
dangerously exposed to the machinations of his defeated foe.
The unique military and governmental qualities of the Norman kings and many of their
successors enabled them, firstly to appreciate correctly these facts, and secondly to produce the
organisation and discipline either to turn them to their advantage or to suppress the more serious
manifestations of a widespread and unruly local patriotism.
It is only since 1066 that England
has enjoyed a relative immunity from invasion.
Any serious force, unmet or undefeated at sea
would.
once ashore, take the country.
In the long period of absence, for political reasons, of an
adequate standing army in peace, absolute domination of the narrow seas and acknowledgment of
this by gun salutes was no mere piece of arrogance.
It was the military prerequisite of the
existence and independence of England herself.
(C52794)
e2q7
WO 277/21
48
27
30
