centres: two Bulk Petrol Storage Companies; and eight Bulk Petrol Transpor
Companies.
There was a great shortage of trained P.OL. personalit
the War Office.
theatre, and no P.O.L. units at all, and persistent requests for these rese
But it was one thing to demand these units, and even to the
and another to ship them.
and train them in the United Kingdom, as was done throughout 1940 and ly
had become something more than a nuisance value.
By this time, enemy action in the Mediterany
Plant and stores ness
sary to implement the main bulk storage schemes made a heavy cal on tre
portation resources, as did the regular maintenance shipments of P.O,L, it
continued in spite of losses of many thousands of tons by enemy action. Th
problem of transporting units in addition was acute, and a continuous eld
for transportation space went on.
a particular convoy was accepted.
Thus, only one unit out of 13 offered for
Petrol Control Staff
In addition to the P.O.L. units sent out from the United Kingdon
certain special units were raised within the theatre.
The first of these wa
the Petrol Control Staff.
The necessity for this appeared at the end of 194,
when it was found to be essential to have a petroleum officer with a smal
staff at Alexandria, primarily as an accounting unit to take in charge allison
made by the oil companies to the Army, and also to regulate despatches ad
shipments in conjunction with movements and transportation and the d
companies.
Later, similar arrangements were made at the three other min
ports, Suez, Haifa and Beirut.
Previously, it had been necessary for the oil companies to voucher ot
despatches to consignee units all over the theatre, and to await the retur
of the vouchers before they could be paid.
This led to serious delays it
settlement.
The Petrol Control Staffs proved to be an essential link in the proble
organization which was built up in the Middle East.
Their functions w
defined in 1942 in the following terms:
(a) Liaison with D.S.T.; S.T., Command; Movements and Transport:
tion; Sea Transport Officer; petrol units within their spheres of opte
tions; Civil Oil Companies within their spheres; other formation, ch
as necessary.
(b) Co-ordination of provision and supply of P.O.L. from ilali
W.D. installations within their areas, according to demands.
(e) Coordination of despatches, in accordance with priorities aid don.
from petrol units or civil oil companies.
(d) Regulation of deliveries to petrol units so as to maintain stocks at
levels laid down; for this purpose, they received a copy of wes
stock states.
(e) Supervision and check of loading and unloading of all W.D. pet
consignments passing
through their accounts.
Action in case
bad or careless handling.
Provision of adequate dunnage.
that only containers in good condition were loaded.
(f) Ensuring that leakers
in dumps, etc., under their supervision the
dealt with quickly and eficiently to prevent avoidable 10ss.
(& Inspection eat of noducts being troduced to 055. an
action where unsatisfactory.
160
Supply Reserves, 1941
From the supply angle, manpower shortage made the holding of the five
months' reserve and working margin for the proposed strength of 800,000 a
difficult problem, and it was consequently decided later in 1941 to reduce the
number of days' reserve of certain commodities.
The scale of reserves in Middle East had to allow for the time taken by
shipping to go round the Cape of Good Hope, in case of the closing of
the Mediterranean to our ships by enemy action.
During 1939
and 1940,
reserves of 120 days were built up and maintained, but War Office notified
Middle East that this should be raised to five months.
This level proved to
be only a target, as the influx of troops caused a decline in the reserve position,
and when, in February, 1941, the reduction of the reserve from five months
to three was authorized, the actual effect on the position was scarcely percep-
tible.
Subsequently that year, the policy was stated to be to maintain a G.S.
reserve of three months, with a Q.M.G. reserve (otherwise working margin,
or maintenance stocks, see Chapter XII, Section 4) of two and a half months.
to cover the time taken for the voyage from the United Kingdom or U.S.A.
This meant that there should be a maximum reserve of five and a half months,
and a minimum of three.
A difficulty also arose in regard to the holding of a large reserve of supplies
from the (as it proved) exaggerated insistence on dispersion as a means of
protection against air attacks.
Depots were spread over very wide areas,
which enormously increased the task of providing rail and road communi-
cations for them, besides complicating their administration.
Additional Commitments
As the war went on, besides the planned commitments, other liabilities
arose for which long term provision could not be made. These included the
occupation of Crete, the establishment of dumps in Greece, the transfer of
supplies to the Greek Government, the maintenance of the 130,000 prisoners
captured in the first campaign in the Western Desert and of the civilian popula-
tion of Cyrenaica, the establishment of reserves in the Sudan for the campaign
in Eritrea, and the transfer to Greece of large quantities of supplies to main-
tain the force sent there at the close of the Libyan campaign.
As far as the civilian population of Cyrenaica was concerned, the
Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (O.E.T.A.) was responsible for
demanding on S.T. the requirements of essential commodities for its food.
The intention was, however, that, as soon as it could be arranged, O.E.T.A.
should license firms to import these commodities through Middle East Supply
Centre and United Kingdom Commercial Corporation (see below).
while, S.T. had to provide from Army stocks, demanding if necessary on War
Office and M.E.S.C.
First delivery was made to R.A.S.C. supply depots, for
onward despatch in accordance with O.E.T.A. instructions.
Similar arrange-
ments were made in other occupied territories in Middle East.
In November, 1940, Middle East assumed responsibility
for the supply
services in Aden, on which the forces in Somaliland were to be based.
The
RAF had previously been responsible with the help of India.
strength was about 20,000.
commitment.
India provided a number of supply units for the
161
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
