per cent. of its transport,
At the beginning of August, Eighth Army was deficient of about 25
including R.A.S.C.
second and third line.
addition, many vehicles wene in cien co nation after long use in the cing.
The task of making good the deficiency was complicated by there factors-
(a) New formations arrived frich the United Kingdom withou tit
full scale of transport,
which was, in any case, lower than the
found by experience to be essential for desert warfare.
(b) Unbalanced intake of vehicles; for example there was for a to:
a great shortage of 15-cwt. trucks and "bantams" (an early name d
jeep), and 3-ton lorries had to be issued instead.
(c) A great proportion of new vehicle intake at this time consisted
of 30-cwt. non-desert-worthy vehicles, and it was necessary to equip
a number of general transport companies with these, and to employ
the units in the main base area, instead of companies equipped with
desert-worthy vehicles, the latter being released for work with
the Army.
By Ist October, formations had been brought almost up to scale, and
en a number of vehicles not in first class condition were replaced.
Provision of Transport Units
In previous campaigns, there had not been sufficient third line transpot
upport maintenance over long distances by road for other than small
The problem in August, 1942, was to provide for Eighth Army be
ximum number possible of third line general transport and tank trans
orter units.
The parget was the equivalent of 36 3-ton G.T. companies,
minter atits The target was the curansporter companies, and one bik
petrol transport company.
By the fine com offensive began, this had been done and GHO beh
in addition a small reserve of seven general transport companies.
all of the transport companies earmarked for the Army
were actually with
at the start of the offensive, some being employed in the Delta or in
Palestine and Syria and held available at a day or two's notice when the
them arose as the advance
progressed.
G.T. companies
cluded nine 10-ton companies, and 41 3-ton of which one was Austalia.
tree South African, two Sudanese,
Mauritian, and two Palestinian).
one East African, one Ceylonese, one
Two of the water tank companies wit
Palestinian, and the vehicles were of 350-gallon capacity.
The tank trans.
porter companies included 18 here of toons and 12 light platoons.
In addition to the water tank
companies,
held in 44-gallon drums lined with hard bitumen,
ample water reserves were
in 4-gallon petrol
and in 2-gallon welded
road,
tail
containers (Tucans) for
despatch
by
water
or ship. and three
ships and pumping it ashore.
water barges were held for receiving water
from
Build-up of Reserves
Holdings in
This presented few difficulties, as the L. of C. was short.
the main base aren were genarolly adornate and owing to the
of Lighth Army to the
general considerible amount co transpon
proximity
was avaiable to augment the railway.
202
In outline, the following were the preparations made: —
(a) Eighth Army operational dumps.
Supplies:
Seven days for 10 Corps
Five days for 13 and 30 Corps.
P.O.L.
500,000 gallons for 10 Corps.
(b) Railhead stocks.
Three days' average issues of supplies, ammunition, and P.O.L.
Air Supply
Considerable attention was given to this method of supply, which might
be the only method of maintaining detachments temporarily isolated.
Ample equipment
was provided
and a stock of the
more common
natures of ammunition, supplies and P.O.L. was held ready packed.
the event no call was made on air supply.
P.O.L.
Petrol consumption was now an ever-growing factor in operational plans,
and P.O.L. accounted for over 60 per cent. of the total maintenance ton-
nage for the forces engaged.
The extent of the increase
may be gauged
from the tact unal
calculations for reserves were now
based on a con-
sumption figure of five gallons a vehicle a day, instead of four as formerly,
and on 20 divisions,
at 5,500 vehicles each, for 75 days; a total of over
40 million gallons of M.T. petrol alone.
Petrol supply
was ample, however, and the main difficulty
was the
provision of sufficient containers to meet the heavy demands of the Army
for dumping programmes,
for the establishment of reserves at railhead,
and, as the date of the offensive approached, for the loading of ships in
reddiness for supply by sea.
The factories were worked to the maximum,
and deficiencies were made up by despatches from Palestine.
It was appreciated that demands for P.O.L. would be governed by the
progress of
operations, and were bound to fluctuate.
The day-to-day re-
quirements of the Army were therefore sent to G.H.Q. by mid-day before
the evening of despatch.
A pool of rail wagons was kept ready loaded
with P.O.L.
The P.O.L. in the ships
was loaded on a set pack, and any
balancing was effected by road and rail.
El Alamein to El Agheila
The Eighth Army
offensive began on 23rd October, 1942, and, after
12 days of hard fighting,
the Army was in pursuit of the enemy forces.
This pursuit continuedias fat as El Agheila, close to the eastern frontier of
Tripolitania, where the enemy had prepared defensive positions.
The distance
covered was 778 miles in 20 days.
Time was then reanirad for both onerational and administrotive reasons,
to prepare for the next phase.
tenance.
The Army had temporarily outstripped main-
This had been
captured
based on
the polley
that, until Benghazi
fed bu
the force should be maintained from Tobruk, which
would he
Benghazi
both rail and sea as soon as this
could be arranged; and, after
road.
taken,
through that
being made there both
sea, and by road from railhead
Tobruk.
delivery Forward delivery was by
203
Mars micro 0.5 mm
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
