DIRECTIVE TO THE DIRECTOR OF COMBINED OPERATIONS
Lt. -General A. G. B. Bourne by the Chiefs of Staff in June, 1940.
The responsibilities of the Director of Combined Orisestions were laid down in a directive issued t
In view of the changes which have
taken place since that date, it is desirable that these responsibilities should be re-defined.
At the same time, it is to be recognised that the division of responsibility between the Director a
Combined Operations on the oue hand and the Joint Planning Staff on the other is not capable of precise
Theations ta ways be border-line cases which will have to be settled as they arise by mucial
General Scope of D.C.O.'s Responsibilities
2. She Director of Combined Operations is responsible under the general direction of the Minister
of Defence and the Chiefs of Staff, for :—
(on the colar ot to top pen orgas or a perily, i Jadin retro in.
(b) The supervision of the technical training in landing operations if such other troops as may
trom time to time be earmarked for enterprises which call for this particular type of training.
(0) The development, including experiment, research and trial, of all forms of special equipment
and craft required for opposed landings.
(a) The initiation, within the general policy prescribed, and the planning and execution of
operations by the Special Service Troops, reinforced if necessary by small forces naval.
military and air-which are not normally under his command.
For the purpose of making plans he may have any assistance he requires from the Joint Planning
In this connection, the Prime Minister has laid it down as a guide that the Director
of Combined Operations should be responsible for the planning and execution of raiding
operations which involve not more than 5,000 men.
(e) The provision of advice to the Chiefs of Staff on the technical aspects of opposed landing
operations. When the Chiefs of Staff Committee are considering an operation which involves
an opposed landing, the Director of Combined Operations should be present when that part
of the plan is under discussion.
Similarly, when the Joint Planning Staff are directed to prepare or wish to suggest outline plans for
an operation which involves an opposed landing, they should first consult the Director of Combined
Operations.
Subject to :—
(a) his concurrence that the opposed landing is practicable ;
(b) the general nature of the project being approved by the Chiefs of Staff and Defence
D.C.O.'s staff and the Joint Planning Staff will work in conjunction; the Joint Planning Staff preparing
the General Plan and the Director of Combined Operations' Staff preparing that part relative to the
Subsequently the Commanders designate will consult the Director of Combined
Operations and his staff when working out their plans.
The above does not apply to the work of the F.O.P. section, who will receive their instructions both
as to what they plan and who they consult, from the Minister of Defence office.
(f) The provision of advice to the Chiefs of Staff on the tactical use and allocation of carriers and
landing craft for combined operations.
The Director of Combined Operations will be
responsible for the training of naval personnel in so far as opposed landings are concerned,
including officers and men of carriers, landing craft and beach parties.
He will have under his command and operational control carriers and landing craft for raiding
ipsrs, which will include such transports as are from time to time allotted by the Admiralty for
3. The routine administration of the Special Service Troops including maintenance and movements,
will be the responsibility of the War Office.
The D.C.O, is, however, responsible for advising the War
Office as to how these units can best be organised, armed, equipped and located, to meet his particular
Special Equipment and Landing Crait
Services Training and Development Centres
4. The Director of Combined Operations will have under his command and direction the Inter-
Authority for Operations
in accordance with the direction of the Prime Minister and Minister of Defence.
5. The general policy for raiding operations will be laid down from time to time by the Chiefs of Staft
206
SECRET
C.O.S. (41) 629
16th October, 1941
APPENDIX 5
WAR CABINET
CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE
COMBINED OPERATIONS AND RAIDS
Note by Secretary
The attached directive,* as approved by the Chiefs of Staff, is circulated for record purposes.
Great George Street, S.W.1.
(Signed) L. C. HOLLIS.
* Annex I.
ANNEX I
DIRECTIVE TO THE ADVISER ON COMBINED OPERATIONS
1. You are appointed Adviser on Combined Operations (short title Commodore C.).
General Responsibility
2. Under the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff you will :—
(a) Act as technical adviser on all aspects of, and at all stages in, the planning and training for
combined operations.
(b) Be responsible for co-ordinating the general training policy for combined
three Services (see para. 5 (a) below).
dou wining on one come rations for the
and Schools of Instruction.
(c) Study tactical and technical developments in all forms of combined operations varying from
small raids to a full scale invasion of the Continent.
(d) Direct and press forward research and development in all forms of technical equipment and
special craft peculiar to combined operations.
Planning
3. The procedure by which planning for large scale operations will be carried out is shown in Annex II.
You will note that it is incumbent upon you to give technical advice upon all plans for combined operations
at all stages from their inception to the point when they are finally approved.
It is equally incumbent
upon the Commanders and Staff to seek your technical advice at all stages of planning.
4. The procedure with regard to small raids will be similar to that of large scale operations, with
the exception of raids on a very small scale which are carried out by Special Service Troops only.
these operations you will appoint the Force Commander, subject to the approval of the Chiefs of Staff;
and you will be responsible for the detailed plan.
(a) Preside over an Inter-Service Committee consisting of the A.C.N.S. (Weapons), Admiralty,
and the Directors of Training at the War Office and Air Ministry.'
This Committee will
formulate the training and technical policy for combined operations and will maintain
close liaison with the organisation for the development of airborne forces.
(b) Be responsible for co-ordinating the teaching at such schools of instruction or training establish-
ments as it mav be found necessary to set up.
(c) Command the Combined Training Centres* at which the training of formations and units
in combined operations will be carried out under their Commanders and with the technical
advice of the Staffs of the Centres.
This advice will be your responsibility.
* These include Initial Training Centres such as H.M.S. Northney and H.M.S. Tormentor and Raiding
Craft Bases such as Brightlingsea and H.M.S. St. Helier.
(a) Advise, as required, Commander, subsequent to thie penintment for so goation, on
the technical training of their forces.
Tactical and Technical Developments and Special Equipment
Inter Survice i met up ten the don the audience of in Poty donito Conta do On rations 9p
will deal with questions e detailed inspection, training, equipment and administration.
207
estat 14
WO 277/21
27
3ф
