units using normal Army equipment were first employed late in 1942 in the
North African landings and clearly indicated many deficiencies.
By March, 1943, a Beach Recovery Committee had been set up Within C.O.H.Q. Thereafter
a R.B. M. Experimental Party and an American Recovery Party wire established at C.O.Xt
the problem as it related to landing craft.
In the very short time available, trials with and modifications to existing equipment was
carried out in anticipation of the Sicily landings.
In the event, the following equipment was
Bulldozers, light and heavy.
10-ton recovery trucks (American Wrecker type).
Scammel recovery trucks (British).
D.U.K. W.s.
Le Tourneau Crane with tractor.
Subsequent reports indicated that the light bulldozer was not a success but the heavy version
was excellent if improved waterproofing
(to give deeper wading) and some armour could be
incorporated.
Recovery trucks and D.U.K.W.'s were all moderately successful in their roles, but there clearly
emerged a requirement for a heavy, tracked armoured recovery vehicle capable of operating in watet
7 to 8 ft. deep and of towing, pushing and winching.
The Le Tourneau Crane, which had been adapted from civilian use, was immediately successful
and largely responsible for keeping the beaches clear of stranded craft.
The Le Tourneau was a
tracked crane which, when coupled to a tractor that provided the lifting and motive power, was
capable of lifting and moving craft requiring repair or refloating.
As a result of this experience, trials were carried out which produced improved versions of all
the foregoing and, in addition, a Beach Armoured Recovery Vehicle (B.A.R.V.).
The B.A.R.V. was basically a Sherman tank with its turret removed and with metal sides
built on to allow continuous operation in water up to 9 ft. deep.
It was very successful and was
widely employed with the improved bulldozers for the Normandy landings.
In the meantime, and partially as a result of Normandy where large numbers of landing ships
and craft became stranded, it was realised that equipment was required to salvage landing craft
which were beyond the capabilities of any mobile crane. The Admiralty therefore developed, as
the result of trials, a form of inflatable Recovery Gear. This was known during its early develop-
ment in 1945 as the Sausage Slipway; it consisted of a series of inflatable fabric sausage-like
bags which could be inserted below the landing craft and, when inflated, enabled the craft to be
rolled either into or out of the water. Trials were promising although the weight of the larger tank
landing craft caused the bags to burst. Experiments were still in hand to strengthen the design
SECTION (iji)
MISCELLANEOUS PROJECTS IN PREPARATION FOR OPERATION " OVERLORD"
The Construction of Hards to Facilitate Vehicle Embarkation
In considering the Army requirements for large scale landings in France, it was apparent that,
even with all the port facilities on the south coast working to capacity, there would still be a need
for other means of embarkation if the rate of but drup as to a acity the at the necessary speed.
C.O.H.O. proposed that the L.S.T.s and L.C.I.s could use the sheltered beaches round the
coast, but it was soon found to be quite impossible to use the beaches themselves as only a little
traffic soon churned them up and made them impassable. It was therefore decided to use Hards.
which a number of the Hards would be built under Admiralty direction.
A Committee under the Chairmanship of a C.O.H.O. repretlentative worked out a scheme by
except above the high-water mark, was impracticable as it was unlikely to stand up to the heavy
the foreshore and embark between the high- and low-water marks.
The desion of the Hards was difficult bernse tanks and vehicles were required to traverse
To lay permanent concrete,
seas in winter.
To overcome the difficulty, the War Office produced a flexible concrete mattress.
This was made up in sections which could be lifted by four men. Each section consisted of pre-cast
concrete, reinforced with steel wire.
The average Hard absorbed 4,000 of these sections and
hundreds of miles of this mattress was constructed and eventually used in all theatres of the
European war.
The "Habbakuk" Project
The scheme was to construct one or more floating airfields in the form of giant aircraft carriers
made of ice.
300 ft. beam, with a speed of 7 to 10 knots.
The approximate dimensions of these novel ships were to be 3,000 ft. long and
The method of propulsion was to be by electric motors
fitted outboard or in nacelles, and the design included refrigerating plant with pipes embedded in
the outer skin to keep the walls permanently frozen.
This project, started in C.O.H.Q. by Mr. Pyke and given the title " Habbakuk," was evolved
to overcome the problem of providing fighter cover for landing on the French coast, other than in
Pas-de-Calais area.
It was also thought that it would be useful as a floating airfield in mid-Atlantic
for convoy protection or to support American amphibious operations in the Pacific.
Very small scale trials of blocks of ice soon showed that they lacked tensile strength to resist
shock and, if bullets were fired at the block of ice, it would be shattered.
So Mr. Pyke suggested
using 5 per cent. paper pulp mixed with the ice; the resulting substance, which was named Pykerete,
had astounding qualities.
It was almost as strong as concrete and, when bullets were fired at it,
they ricochetted off without damage to the Pykerete.
In the opinion of the C.C.O. this brought
" Habbakuk" within the bounds of possibility.
Following on from this, Pykerete had the advantage that all above water damage from bombing
or shell fire, which in any case would be no greater than comparable damage to concrete, could
instantly be put right by pouring in liquid Pykerete and freezing it. A scheme for providing coffer
dams to put over parts of the ships that had been torpedoed was also produced, so that liquid
Pykerete could be poured down below the surface of the water.
It was estimated, however, that
it would take between fifty and seventy torpedoes to damage " Habbakuk" to the point of putting
it out of action. A further advantage with Pykerete was that a comparatively small refrigerating
plant would be necessary to keep the ship frozen even in tropical water.
At the Quebec conference in 1943, " Habbakuk" was finally withdrawn, since the three
reasons for its inception were otherwise dealt with as follows :—
(1) The Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander accepted that the assault on the
coast in the Baie de la Seine was possible after all, and this would be feasible because
fighter protection could be provided from England by using long range fighters fitted
with extra tanks as originally urged by C.O.H.O.
(2) The Allies had decided to seize the Azores, whether Portugal objected or not, and these
were to be used as the mid-Atlantic airfield.
(3) The Americans had on order such a vast number of conventional aircraft carriers and
had got such complete control of the Japanese submarine threat that an unsinkable
floating airfield was no longer needed in the Pacific.
Power-Driven Rivers
Another of Mr. Pyke's schemes was for the construction of power driven rivers.
Uphill Rivers,"
as they were known, were to consist of 8-in. pipelines running from ship to shore
and from shore forward to the scene of an assault, up which stores could be passed to inland dumps.
As the name implied, the pipes would carry water boosted through them by special pumps
set at intervals on the line.
This would help solve the problem of bridging the water-gap and
would have been of particular value in Far Eastern operations where they would have assisted in
overcoming the obstacles of greater distances, lack of communication facilities, coastal swamp and
impenetrable bush. The scheme was never progressed for a variety of reasons, the main ones being
the difficulties of laying the pipeline in time for it to be effective when most needed, the packing
of stores to fit it and its vulnerability.
Tank Flotation Devices
There was a requirement to land tanks very early in the assault to provide support for the
infantry.
It was considered that this requirement might not be adequately met by tanks wading
from landing ships and craft.
It was therefore decided, in August, 1940, that a swimming tank
should be developed and by September, 1940, the I.S.T. D.C, issued their first concrete suggestions
and commenced liaison with the Director of Tank Design and D.N.C.
70717
WO 277/21
3ф
