No staff requirements as such were laid down for the earlier L.C.T., the first of which was
completed in November, 1940.
It was a ramped, flat bottom craft designed to carry three or four
tanks in the hold and to have a speed of 10 knots; its manœuvrability and sea-keeping qualities left
a good deal to be desired.
A number of these craft were shipped to Alexandria in sections and
prod at e deral in ta rent to are to the envie vehicle and on
and in the supply of Tobruk.
to break out and join up with the relieving forces in December, 1941.
In general, the L.C.T. development did not keep pace with the production of heavier tanks.
Various improved types of L.C.I. were built, but the trend of design of these craft was towards
alries tensed with better sea-keeping qualities, improved arrangements for the accommodation of
tank crews and increased endurance.
All these qualities were ultimately achieved without the loss
of good beaching characteristics even on flat beaches.
Intermediate types, L.C.T. (3) and (4), made primarily for a cross-Channel invasion, were
used operationally by the British in North Africa, Sicily, Italy and Normandy.
proved a very good general purpose craft, but it was the L.C.T. (4) for which one finds the first
recorded staft requirements. (They were in fact the first staff requirements laid down for any
type of landing craft.) These were :—
Beaching draft-tanks 3 ft., vehicles 1 ft. 6 ins., on a 1 in 150 beach.
Protection on very limited scale to wheelhouse, etc.
Utmost simplicity so as to facilitate production.
No armament.
Low Silhouette.
Seaworthy up to sea force 4.
Twin screw, endurance 500 miles.
To carry six Churchill or nine Sherman tanks.
However, as a result of estimating that 2,150 L.C.T. of existing types would be required for
" Overlord" and in view of the fact that this number could be neither produced nor manned, a
smaller type of L.C.T., the L.C.T. (5) was produced.
Carler deck i Tre that hi (5) has the aded. Tre at it cold be man capture on baring
quantities in the U.S.A. and shipped across the Atlantic without difficulty.
Their disadvantage
to pration is the de. pasage involved we shit, they it asse tra sported to th shine
Ferry Craft (which was their original name), they were used with every success in all theatres
of war. This L.C.T. and parallel U.S. types constructed between 1942 and 1944 were adequate
for the purposes for which they were designed, but lacked the qualities necessary for long sea
voyages and therefore, in view of operations in the Pacific, new large L.C.T. were developed,
culminating in the L.S.M. of U.S. design and the British L.C.T. (8).
The former proved successful
in the later part of the Pacific war, but the latter were not built in time to take part in active
Although Tank Landing Craft were intended primarily for the carriage of armour and vehicles,
these vessels were adapted to a variety of uses.
They were used as salvage vessels, mobile repair
units, fire support craft, rocket support craft, casualty stations and for the anti-torpedo net defence
However, none of these functions were other than a matter of convenience, no other available
vessels having the requisite size, stability and beaching qualities.
Landing Ships Infantry. (L.S.I.)
Assault Landing Craft to the scene of operations.
at far back as 1938, it was agreed that it would be necessary to convert special ships to carry
weight of the proposed L.C.A. was 10 tons.
Warships were unsuitable because the lowest
Thus the main staff requirements were laid down
Speed 17 knots.
To carry an infantry battalion (less its transport) aras to land them in waves in about
Range, minimum 1,000 miles.
Troops to be embarked for not longer than 7 days.
To meet these requirements, Glen Line's merchant ships were nominated for conversion on
the outbreak of war, but an alternative plan to convert them to Fleet auxiliaries for a projected
operation in the Baltic (" Catherine") prevented their use as infantry landing ships until early
1940 when the course of the war had altered.
L.S.I.s, 1940
Glengyle, Glenearn and Glenroy were put in hand as L.S.I. (L.) (troop capacity 36 officers and
500 men) during the summer of 1940 and were despatched in February, 1941, to the Mediterranean
Particular stress had been laid on the necessity for each ship to be able to land all her
assault troops in one flight of landing craft; this was possible at that time due to the relatively
small number of assaulting troops in a Commando.
In addition, two Dutch cross-Channel Steamers Queen Emma and Princess Beatrix (troop
capacity 30 officers and 350 men) were taken over and made into what were later known as Landing
Ship Infantry, Medium (L.S.I. (M.) ).
Finally five small Belgian Dover-Ostend ships, Prince Charles, Prince Leopold, Princess
Nor convertes To phone Cool and pere i a (tap a Parity i Thin 2y, Small
The last named was sunk by a collision in a fog before she had worked up, but was
replaced later by her sister ship Prince Albert.
As well as the Infantry Assault Ships, three R.F.A. oilers, Dewdale, Derwentdale and Ennerdale,
were specially fitted to take a deck cargo of L.C.M. To hoist these out, special gantries had to
Landing sited anty upper deck.
Hence it was that these ships came to be known later as
Probably as the result of what had been seen of Japanese operations during their campaign
in China, two Harwich-Zeebrugge train-ferries were fitted to carry landing craft, which could
be launched over the stern on rails. These were slow ships of short endurance and, although
they did not take part in any overseas operations, they were invaluable for ferrying landing craft
round the coasts of the British Isles and were employed in the Normandy landings.
Late in 1940, the Royal Scotsman and the Ulster Monarch were converted.
capacities, for short passage only, were 30 officers and 450 men, and 60 officers and 520 men
respectively, but having cabins where other ships had promenade decks, were unsuitable for
fitting gravity davits and were fitted with spurs to hoist the landing craft which were then secured
L.S.I.s, 1941
Meanwhile, the British India Company's ships Karanja and Kenya (renamed Keren), which
were still under the Red Ensign, had been used as landing craft carriers at Dakar.
they were commissioned as H.M. ships and, together with a number of large Red Ensign ships also
acting as landing craft carriers, joined a force being mounted and trained for long-range operations.
The capacity of these two L.S. I. (.) was 80 officers and 1, or daen and in oddition they costa
carry in the holds thirty 15-cwt. trucks or the equivalent.
be hoisted fully loaded, nor did their spacing allow the craft to be stowed inboard.
were carried at davits; and two L.C.P. and two additional L.C.A. could be hoisted out by derrick
an operatan i trise wich trios embarked, a bote ply of lord and hal nar the pto at of
improvements in the internal communications, workshop accommodation and other ships' adminis-
trative requirements, which the developing assault technique showed to be needed.
L.S.I.s, 1942
impry the hang be a 42, then tid as an pratin. (L andal" or mou the Tany hac
been fitted with the additional communications, operations rooms and staff offices that the S.N.O.L.
had found necessary.
Close attention was now being given to the problems of the re-entry into Europe which it was
hoped could be mounted in 1943.
Channel conditions would allow the use of smaller ships, which
were available and which were unsuitable for long voyages, and thus the larger ships could be released
to ocean trooping for which they were urgently required. The requirement, therefore, was for ships
able to carry a comparatively large number of troops who would be embarked for short periods
175
WO 277/21
27
30
