quantities by grades required at each railhead, for off-loading trains at rail-
quant ind for transportation by road to destinations as directed by the naval
authorities.
In ordet to ensure that there would be no shortage of fuel or lubricants for
ferry-craft operating off the beaches in the theatre of operations, it was
arranged that beach dumps should be formed from P.O.L. carried as deck
cargo by every
L.S.T.,
M.T. ship, and coaster.
The last-named, when
carrying ammunition, however, were not to carry petrol in this way, but only
derv and lubricants.
A scale was laid down of the stocks to be maintained
on each type of vessel, varying from 93 jerricans on a small stores coaster to
620 on a M.T. ship.
The original arrangement was that only sufficient P.O.L.
would be issued from these stocks to complete the beach dumps to scale, and
the vessel's stock was then made up to scale on return to the United Kingdom.
This meant contacting every vessel to ascertain how much it required. Later,
vessels handed over all filled containers to the beach dumps, and were com-
pletely replenished in the United Kingdom.
Hospital carriers were prohibited
from landing either filled or empty jerricans in the theatre of operations.
The provision of this P.O.L. in the dock areas, and its placing on board,
was effected jointly by commands and War Office.
Assistance to Commands—P.O.L.
The assistance afforded to commands in connection with the P.O.L. mount-
ing arrangements included the loan of late-phased P.O.L. units of 21 Army
Group, and the provision of additional equipment.
The 21 Army Group
units included two Petrol Tin Factory Operating Companies, a Mobile Petrol
Filling Centre, and a Base Petrol Filling Centre.
Generally, these manned
"ad hoc" depots in the marshalling areas.
Although they were not engaged
in the rôles which they were meant to fill in N.W. Europe, this work gave
them useful experience in handling petrol, and in working together as teams.
Care was taken that they did not lose their identity and were not unnecessarily
tan South-Fasten Command, any assistance required was provided
by supply unit personnel under S.T. 6 arrangements.
in May, 194er Setach ments drawn from late-phased P.O.L. units of 21
Army Group were placed at ports for duties in connection with the loading
They worked under the direct orders of S.T. 2, War Office.
August, 1944, y worked under the their ortational roles, and theit place
was taken by three port detachments specially formed.
The equipment
provided consisted of roller conveyors, waterproof covers for stocks, and
620-gallon portable tanks for decanting leakers.
Water Transport Units
The various water transport companies allotted to 21 Army Group had
heen assisting in the training of troops at the Combined Onerations Training
craft, and their work with these new and unknown ships, in close co-operation
They were equipped for this purpose with various types of landing
with the Navy, was excellent and earned high praise.
able experience in the handling of assault craft in landing Operatione in varied
They gained consider-
weather conditions. and achieved a high standard in handling small craf
The opportunities for training personnel to a high standard of navigation, of
to manage large craft were, however, negligible.
328
In January, 1944, the COmpanies were withdrawn from combined opera-
tions at the request of 21 Army Group. and equinned for their anarational
This proced tan cared out at West Mersea, Essex, operational
adequate accommodate compagood sheliered moorings, and washieh had
Boat Stores Depot.
training unit.
One company was retained in Scotland as a continuation
The two Military Oil Barge Companies were, with the agreement of
21 Army Group, at first retained in the United Kingdom, where they were
urgently required for carrying water to R.N. and other vessels in ports in the
South of England before the operation began, and afterwards
employed on cross-channel traffic.
to vessels
They were originally lent until D +30,
but this was later extended to the end of July, as replacement vessels were
not available.
They were not finally released until September.
This work
was done on behalf of the Admiralty and of the Directorate of Sea Transport,
M.O.W.T.
Considerable assistance was given to the Movements and Transportation
services by the R.A.S.C. Water Transport Organization.
In June, 1944, the
RAS.C. vessels " Sir Evelyn Wood" and " Despatch" were allocated to
Q. (Movements), and employed on the cross-Channel shipment of stores and
supplies.
Then launches were provided for the use of Movement Control,
South Coast ports, from the existing resources of R.A.S.C. vessels in Southern
Command.
An unexpected and apparently unplanned rush of demands for servicing
their craft was received from various transportation units, etc.
About thirty
craft were concerned along the South and South-East coasts. These demands
were met, but only at the expense of other administrative duties; the personnel
of water transport companies worked day and night without sufficient rest.
Mounting Arrangements-Water Transport Units
The craft of the Fast Launch Company and Harbour Launch Company
moved round by sea from Essex to the Isle of Wight.
The rest of the units,
however, including the company workshops, were sent by road and rail to
concentration areas at Bury St. Edmunds and Brighton.
As it was con-
sidered that areas at Bury require workshop attention after therage
round, 21 Army Group agreed to the workshop personnel being concentrated
in the Isle of Wight.
This was done, but before they could do any work they
embarkation.
were ordered to the company concentration areas on 25th May for immediate
There appears to have been no valid reason why the units
should not have proe apedars sea has a whole except for their vehicles, or at
least been concentrated in the vicinity of their vessels.
As it was intended that the varcele of the commanies should cross the
channel under their own nower. the normal scale of vessel equipment had to
be augmented inir own lowing ways.
Additional jerricans
of fuel were
Additional barley floats
carried on each fasthe foot sive increased range.
were carried.
The smaller (40-ft.) fast launches were fitted with two stretchers,
A special medical pack was provided and issued to each crew.
to enable
launches to enable them to sleep aboard when necessary.
crew to live afloat.
Hammocks were issued to the crews of harbour
Small cooking
Each
stoves. and self-heating soups. were issued to harbour launch crews.
329
ve29177
WO 277/21
27
NO277721
