CHAPTER 18
THE BEACH ORGANISATION
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to trace the part played by the Combined Operations Command
both directly and indirectly, in the development of Beach Organisation during the War.
The task is complicated by the fact that development proceeded independently in different
theatres at the same time, and involved the intimate welding together of all three Services within
one Organisation. Thus, in order to produce a connected history of the development of the beach
organisation, it has been necessary
to follow progress chronologically in the different theatres,
and to take the problems of all three Services together as a whole rather than deal with each
To avoid clouding the main issue, which is already sufficiently complex, the problems of sea-
ward and air defence have not been included.
But it will, of course, be realised that these are
complementary problems, and that no operation involving the beach organisation could be under-
taken without due consideration being paid to them.
For a similar reason, no attempt has been made to describe in detail the part played by beach
organisations in the many operations in which they took part during the war.
However, as far as
possible, where operations produced lessons which influenced development or technique, reference
nas been made to them in the text.
The Background to Development
Before the war, the responsibility for the development of material, technique and tactics
for all Inter-Services operations had been vested in the Inter-Services Training and Development
Centre at Portsmouth, the Centre being responsible to the Inter-Services Training Sub-Committee of
the Deputy Chiefs of Staff Committee.
However, in June, 1940, when the Directorate of Combined Operations was set up in the
Admiralty, the Directorate assumed responsibility for the activities of the Inter-Services Training
and Development Centre, this responsibility being taken over in turn by C.O.H.Q. when it was
set up a month later.
From this time, therefore, the responsibility for the development of a suitable Beach Organisa-
tion together with the responsibility for stating requirements for special equipment arising from it,
was that of the Combined Operations Command.
The Position at the Beginning of the War
At the outbreak of war, the system of beach organisation laid down in Chapter 23 of the
" Manual of Combined Operations, 1938"
No formed beach units, as such, existed.
It was intended that personnel needed to work on the beaches following an amphibious assault,
should operation, ben tet Serve it par the landing son a not a manitements of up b-
resumed. The early capture of a port was considered at the time to be essential in any combined
operation, beach maintenance being regarded as an interim measure of short duration only.
ever, an Inter-Services system for the command and control of beaches was laid down, and this was
the nucleus around which subsequent development was to take place. The system was as follows :-
A naval officer was appointed Principal Beach Master.
Officer Landing, and controlled all landing craft and personnel within the naval area.
He was responsible to the Senior Naval
task was to ensure the most rapid discharge and turn-round of landing craft, consistent with
meeting military requirements ashore. He exercised control over the beaches, which were sub-divided
into sections and landing points, through Beach Masters, Assistant Beach Masters and Beach
Lieutenants R.N. respectively.
was known as the Principal Military Landing Officer.
He worked in close conjunction with his Army equivalent, who
The Principal Military Landing Officer was a " Q" Staff Officer. He was responsible to the
Force Commander for clearing the dumps and supervising the arrangements for guiding troops
and by an Assistant Military Landing Officer on each section of each beach.
forward into assembly areas. He, in turn, was assisted by a Military randing Officer on each beach,
The Early Development of Beach Organisation
At a meeting of the Future Operations Planning Section on 21st September, 1940, it was agreed
amongst other matters that the D.C.O. should be responsible for :-
(1) Working out in detail a beach organisation, and
2) The technical development of beach piers, cranes, etc., for landing stores on the
Following this decision the D.C.O. forwarded to the Admiralty and the War Office, a
memorandum on Beach Organisation prepared by the Commandant, Inter-Services Training and
Development Centre. He proposed that Vice-Admiral Combined Training at the C.T.C.,
which had opened recently, should have on his staff representatives of the transportation staff, to
assist in beach organisation training;
and raised the question of maintaining
party instead of forming ad hoc units with ordinary regimental personnel for operations as they were
planned, as was the existing practice.
There followed a period of discussion between the D.C.O., the War Office (Directors of Move-
ments and Transportation), the Inter-Services Training and Development Centre and the Air
A number of meetings were held at C.O.H.Q., the results of which can be summarised
(1) The D.C.O. assumed responsibility for co-ordinating work on the beach organisation and
(2) The War Office undertook the provision and storage of specialised equipment to meet
requirements stated by the D.C.O.
(3) The scope of the Beach Organisation was to be extended beyond that of maintaining a
small force, and developed so as to cater for the maintenance via the beaches of a larger
force for a considerable period.
(4) Training at the C.T.C., Inveraray, was to cover the period from the initial landing up
to the capture of a port.
(5) The basic organisation for the control of beaches laid down in Chapter 23 of the Manual
of Combined Operations was to remain in force.
(6) The War Office were to provide selected Docks Operating Companies and Field
Companies, Royal Engineers, for training at the C.T.C.
(7) Labour on the beaches was to be undertaken by pioneers.
in estimating er develope to place in pecial guing this time. on a ta lagedly engaged
organisation and formulating plans for training.
The Formation and Training of Naval Beach Parties
A meeting was held at C.O.H.Q. in December, 1941, which was attended by representatives of
110 Force, Vice-Admiral Combined Training and various Admiralty Branches at which it was
decided that eight Brigade Front Naval Beach Parties would be required by the end of 1942.
Each party would be required to handle the boats required to land a brigade.
It was agreed that a Brigade Front Beach Party should consist of :—
1 Lieutenant R.N.
Principal Beach Master.
3 Lieutenants or Sub-Lieutenants.
Beach Masters.
3 Lieutenants or Sub-Lieutenants
Assistant Beach Masters.
48 Ratings.
Each Brigade Front Beach Party was to be known by letter, A, B, C, etc., and consisted of
three sub-units numbered Al, A2, A3, etc., each sub-unit being designed to operate on a Battalion
Front.
It was also decided at the same meeting that the training of naval beach parties would be
carried out in close conjunction with Army Beach Groups whose training was to start shortly.
The training of naval beach parties started at Inverkip in April 1942, on the basis of one naval
sub-unit to an Army Beach Group.
A record was maintained showing which sub-unit trained
with which Beach Group, so that both could be called together again when wanted for an exercise
or an operation.
On completion of training, personnel of naval beach parties were retained within
the Combined Operations Organisation.
141
WO 277/21.
27
3Ф
