East. As the whole situation was regarded as being one of extreme urgency,
and their investigations had to cover not only the
Western Desert, but also
base organization, and several other countries which formed the Middle Bast
Command, their progress had to be carried out in a rapid fashion.
The principal recommendations contained in the report which they made
were : -
(a) The merging of the vehicle provision and maintenance of the two
corps into one, to be called the Royal Army Transport Corps; or
alternatively,
(b) the appointment of a Director of Mechanical Maintenance, to co.
ordinate that service, and to rank with the D.O.M.G. and be set
over the D.S.T. and the D.O.S.
(c) The setting up of a central provision branch, to co-ordinate all orders
for M.T. stores, etc., and to prepare provision for M.T. vehicles.
(d) The appropriate reduction of 3-ton vehicles in second and third line
transport units, and their replacement by 10-ton lorries to carry an
8-ton load.
Their recommendations, were, therefore, not entirely revolutionary.
There
is no doubt, however, that from the practical operator's point of
view, and
with the resources then generally available to the Army and which could be
reasonably expected to be made available from the War Office, some of the
opinions expressed in the reports are debatable.
Thus, the adoption of 10-ton
lorries for second line transport would undoubtedly have reduced the flexi-
bility of that echelon; and their views probably did not take into account
the very restricted productive capacity in the United Kingdom to provide this
type of vehicle, a situation which, strangely enough, persisted until the end of
Action in Middle East
The recommendations of the technical advisers were not carried out in
the Intendant-General's recommendation, a
Mechanical Engineering Resources (a brigadier), to act as inspector of work-
shop resources to the D.Q.M.G., Middle East, and to direct and control all
Army and R.A.F. (M.T.) workshops, was appointed in September, 1941.
The controller's charter was to initiate improvements, and to distribute the
load so as to obtain the maximum output from all S.T., Ordnance, and R.A.F.
M.T. workshops; and he had power to decide, in the light of operational
and technical requirements, which shops should be devoted primarily to
the repair of specialist vehicles or assemblies.
A panel of the Intendant-General's organization was also set up to advise
on vehicle maintenance. It was composed of representatives of S.T., Ord-
nance, and R.A.F., under the chairmanship of one of the technical advisers:
but the latter resigned his appointment after attending one meeting, and lett
the command. The Central Provision Board was also instituted.
In December, 1941, G.H.Q., Middle East, submitted to War Office a re
On the subject of the repair of mechanical vehicles in the field (reproduced in
Appendix VIC) which summed up the situation in an impartial and adequate
It evidently had a very considerable influence on the decision
ultimately taken by the War Office, as described below.
Proposed abolition of Workshop Platoons
Meanwhile, the question had once again been debated in War Office of
the abolition of R.A.S.C. workshop platoons, leaving in transport companies
only the driver-mechanics, and one fitter (vehicle-mechanic) for each transport
The proposal to do this was based on the system of wholesale re-
placement of assemblies, instead of these being repaired in second line work-
shops. From the R.A.S.C. point of view, this took no account of the close
relationship in transport companies between the transport platoons and the
The proposed system would have meant a very large increase
in the tonnage of spare assemblies passing up and down the L. of C., between
divisions and the base, with consequent added strain on the available transport.
Nothing further came of the proposal; but it is noteworthy in this connec-
tion that the R.I.A.S.C., which had been organized on the same lines as the
R.A.S.C. in regard to workshops, lost these in April, 1939, with consequences
almost disastrous, as will be seen in Chapter X, Section 1, and Chapter IX,
Formation of R.E.M.E.
The evidence from various sources was considered, on a very high level,
to be sufficient to justify a fundamental change in the existing organization for
vehicle provision and maintenance, and this was consequently effected in the
A new corps was formed, to be known as the Corps of Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers (R.E.M.E.), which was intended ultimately to
absorb the whole R.A.S.C. workshop repair organization, as well as that of
In order not to impair the efficiency of the machine, as it was then working,
both at home and overseas, the process, as far as the R.A.S.C. was concerned,
was to be carried out gradually, in two phases.
Phase I
The first phase, initiated in April, 1942, comprised the following re-organi-
(a) R.E.M.E. absorbed completely the engineering side of the R.A.O.C.
(b) All R.A.S.C. vehicle repairs, except those carried out in the R.A.S.C.
workshop platoons (which would continue to exist as part of all
R.A.S.C. transport companies), were transferred to the new corps.
(c) The provision, storage, and issue of M.T. vehicles, including spare
parts, tyres, and assemblies, were concentrated in the R.A.O.C., under
This meant that all R.A.S.C. heavy repair shops, except one which was to
be retained as an artificer training unit (see Chapter XII were transferred
to R.E.M.E.: while all R.A.S.C.
M.T. stores depots and vehicle reception
depots, the R.A.S.C. vehicle census branch, the M.T., R.A.S.C., central pro-
vision office, and headquarters, M.T. depots, R.A.S.C., were transferred to
The operative date was generally 1st June, 1942.
89
WAsTe 14
we 277/215
27
WO27726
