and N.C.Os. to command their platoons and sections, and direct the use of
anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons.
The plan for the operation of transport companies on the L. of C. in
advance of railhead as the " Crusader
to run platoon convoys.
offensive progressed was therefore
The headquarters of transport companies were to
be distributed along the route.
Servicing of vehicles would be carried ou
at respective company H.Q., when lorries were on their way back to railhead.
Cs.R.A.S.C. L. of C. transport columns, in command of various sectors of the
route, were to arrange for breakdown squads to retrieve and repair casualies
in their sectors.
The workshops of all companies were to be available to deal
with vehicles needing attention, irrespective of the unit to which they belonged.
Water Supply
The carriage and distribution of water, which was not envisaged to any
great extent in pre-war planning or orders of battle, became a standard SI.
commitment.
The importance of this service appeared in the operations in
Cyrenaica between December, 1940, and February, 1941, and was summed up
in the following terms: —
" Water should be looked on as simply one other essential commodity,
such as petrol, to be transported from its nearest base to the troops,
rather than as a local product which either crops up conveniently when
required, or does not exist at all.
A commander's freedom of action
should no more be restricted by the absence of locally produced water,
than it would be by the absence of locally produced petrol. A proper
organization
for the long
distance supply of water is essential to all
operations in desert areas."
sonal discomfort.
Difficulties were at first experienced, mainly due to limited filling facilities;
and to delay at the delivery end, owing to the necessity for refilling containers
received the same day.
The arrangements were consequently reviewed, and
before the second battle of Libya, four sets of containers were provided,; one
to be with unit's "B" Echelon, two with second line, and the fourth at the
water point at F.M.C. In addition, Water Issue Sections were formed, wit
duties at F.M.C. analogous to those of supply personnel.
first R.A.S.C. units.
They were not at
Additional Administrative Units Required
General Wavell insisted from the first on the absolute nest to t
establishment of the administrative services on a proper and adequate basis.
in order that they might be prepared for vices maintenance of the reinreas,
of fighting troops arriving in Middle East.
the subject continued throughout 1940.
The discussion with War Office o
To Decembar that war GHO Middle Fast submitted a damand
additional administrative units, which was resisted by War Office who wante
to send more fighting troops in the available shipping.
isserted that, ever since the outbreak of war, there had been a shortage of
administrative units in the theatre, both divisional, base, and L. of C., and that
reinforcements for these had lagged. It was this lag which he was trying to
overcome.
He also pointed out that climatic and desert conditions caused
a high rate of wear and tear, which necessitated a large number of such units
as M.T. workshops.
The R.A.S.C. were as much aflected as any other service in the latter
respect.
From the transport point of view, the increase in the number of
troops involved the provision of a large number of additional vehicles, with
consequent increased load on the vehicle maintenance organization.
existing R.A.S.C. base M.T. installations
The
proved inadequate to meet the
commitment, in spite of additional accommodation being taken over, and the
output of overhauls for a month being increased from 16 to 48.
The existing depot was expanded in August, 1940, into a H.R.S., M.T.S.D.
and V.R.D., while a further set arrived from the United Kingdom in September
that year, and a third a year later.
The task of those at the War Office who had to provide units, supplies, etc.,
was complicated by the fact that the basis of planning for the Middle East was
changed several times during 1940, owing to manpower shortage, lack of
shipping,
and the fluctuating operational situation, while the
despatch of
R.Ä.S.C. units from the United Kingdom was of course affected by the fall
of France and the consequent necessity for re-equipping the forces in the
United Kingdom.
Many units were formed in the theatre from drafts and
from locally available personnel.
The build-up of R.A.S.C. units in the Middle East is shown in Appendices
VD, VE and VF. Few arrived until the latter part of 1940.
The first con-
siderable increment was the Cavalry Divisional R.A.S.C., in January, 1940,
consisting of three Territorial companies which had undergone great expansion,
one company being of little value until it had undergone intensive training.
ayy never functionra line transport, and later becoming second line com-
They never functioned in their proper rôle, being brought from Palestine to
panies serving armoured formations.
A Supply Personnel
Company of
headquarters and four sections arrived in August, 1940, but the position
regarding supply units was never very satisfactory.
At the end of 1940,
the requirement of field force, base and L. of C. supply units, for a force of
16 divisions, was stated as seven base provision officers, 22 B.S.Ds., Type
"B", 48 D.I.Ds., 15 field bakeries, Type " A", and ten field butcheries and
cold storage depots. The majority of these were to be found from the United
Kingdom, but some were to be converted from static units already in Middle
East. Thus, five supply depots became B.S.Ds., two field bakeries became six
field bakeries, Type "A",
18 D.I.Ds. and ten field butcheries.
and about ten supply personnel sections became
In the case of transport units, only the personnel and headquarter vehicles
were sent from the United Kingdom, the load-carriers being issued in Middle
East from direct shipments from North America.
In this connection, see
below on the subject of the provision of vehicles.
As far as P.O.L. units were concerned, the requirement for manning the
bulk installations involves were various schemes, and for carrying out the
distributive duties, had, by the beginning of 1941, risen to ten petrol depots,
Type "A"
, seven Type
"B", and 12 Type "C'"; five Base Petrol Filling
(37452)
159
M 2
-7
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
