supplies of South African origin under South African supervision, and South
were to be represented when purchases,
or imported, were made on behalf of South African troops.
While the supply personnel of the M.F.F. came by sea, the M.T. came
It was obvious that the move of thousands of vehicles and men
by sea would be an excessive burden on shipping resources, and this was
Vehicles were railed as far as Broken Hill, in Northern
Rhodesia, and thence driven 1,500 miles to Nairobi, along what was known
as the Great North Road. This route was reconnoitred in June, 1940, bridges
were strengthened, and by the end of July the flow had begun.
divided into two parts, which followed each other on consecutive days. In
all, about 13,000 out of 15,000 vehicles passed along this route, but, in
spite of the difficulties of the road and the inexperience of many of the drivers,
not a single vehicle was left derelict on the road.
in Nairobi, went into a pool in a temporary Vehicle Reception Park, and
thence were issued to units as necessary.
The South Africans brought their
own Mobile General Workshops, so that they were self-contained in this
Supply Situation, 1940
The influx of all these troops placed a strain on the East African supply
system which it had never been designed to carry.
By the end of January,
1941, the feeding strength reached 122,000, comprising a heterogeneous collec-
tion of races, which required six main ration scales and numerous subsidiary
ones (see Appendix IX).
In August, 1939, the War Office had agreed that the Kenya Government
in co-operation with the other British
East African Colonies, etc., would
be responsible for the collection, provision, and delivery to military supply
depots, of all food supplies.
The provisioning was to be arranged through
the Kenya Farmers' Association (K.F.A.).
If the latter were unable to
maintain the West Africans when they came, then supplies would be sent
from the United Kingdom or Middle East.
After the outbreak of war, the East African Governments appreciated
that increasing demands would be made on the food stocks in the East
African Colonies, both by the civil and the military authorities.
therefore established a Supply Board to co-ordinate these requirements.
consisted of four executive sub-sections, with power to control food products,
imported goods, timber, and their prices.
It did not exercise control where
supplies were plentiful, and distribution efficient, but operated only in cases of
Each sub-section included military representation.
The K.F.A. was responsible for ascertaining the sources of supply of
commodities for East African troops, and the quantity of supplies
available for the military beyond the requirements of the civilian population.
It was also responsible for keeping in touch with neighbouring territories,
and ascertaining what surplus foodstuffs could be made available from them
for military purposes.
It kept the G.O.C.-in-C., East Africa, informed on
It was considered that such a system might, however, break
down under the stress of a local campaign, and a military organization, the
Branch, was formed to discharge the functions formerly
392
As far as the maintenance of the South African troops was concerned,
it was at first suggested that they should be maintained from the Union;
but War Office considered it would be unwise to have two systems of main-
tenance in one command, and proposed that the Union should undertake the
maintenance of European troops, and the Kenya Government that of coloured
troops.
Eventually it was settled that troops from South Africa would be
maintained from the Union in all commodities except those in plentiful
supply locally.
The dried fruit, tinned milk, tobacco, and some minor items
of the European ration, also came from the Union, all other commodities
on the European scale being provided locally except for M. and V. ration,
which came from the United Kingdom.
through the B.S.D.
native ration scales were obtained by local purchase, and were not provided
This last factor largely affected the organization of East African Base
and L. of C. supply units, which were organized specifically for the tasks in
that theatre, and whose establishments bore no direct relationship to their
British counterparts. Any attempt at comparison was further complicated
by the fact that a very large proportion of the personnel of these units
consisted of African troops, or African or Asiatic non-combatants.
Another question which had to be settled was that of the control and
maintenance of reserve supplies in East Africa. In the summer of 1940, these
stood at only 30 days, and War Office proposed a reserve of 150 days of
supplies of all items.
This called for the provision of a large quantity of
One factor in the situation, from the War Office point of
view, was that it had been found in practice that, as a Colonial force grew,
the local Government often could not meet its liabilities, and was apt to make
sudden calls at short notice on War Office resources.
reported that the reserves could be built up to the required figure, including
the tinned commodities, if sufficient tin-plate could be made available to
enable canning to be carried out locally.
This was arranged by S.T.6.
P.O.L. Situation, 1940
The supply of P.O.L. was also a heavy burden on the E.A.A.S.C. Until
May, 1940, P.O.L. for the Army and R.A.F. in East Africa was obtained
under Government contract direct from the oil companies.
of the Union Army and Air Force units, it was estimated that monthly
consumption of M.T. and aviation spirit would increase from 60,000 to
three million gallons, and from 40,000 to half a million gallons, respectively.
The oil companies in East Africa had limited resources in installations,
and it was undesirable for the Union Forces to deal with them independently.
A Petrol Section, under an A.D.S. (Petrol), was therefore formed, to under-
take provisioning and supply of all M.T. and aviation spirits for the com-
bined forces in the command.
The Army thus arranged all purchases,
itritin being made through the military P.O.L. organization.
At first,
here were seven separate classes of consumer, but these were reduced to
lice, .e., ground forces, R.A.F., and S.A.A.F.
The Mou.was a as ele to tate met to me to
imposed too heavy
Upalien but the huge increase in petrol consumption
wurden and the work was taken over oy the soul Aucan base rue
Bulk Storage Depot, and Base Petrol Filling Centre.
These maintained
393
W9s7x7/14
WO 277/21
27
wO 27776
