SECTION 3.-MALTA
Until the entry of Italy into the war in June, 1940, and the fall of
France, Malta's part in the war had been insignificant, and the garrison was
In the altered circumstances, it was obvious
that its strategic position would make it a target for enemy atacks, and that
it must be held at almost any cost.
Its defence against intense air attack over
more than two years is a matter of history.
With the final defeat of Germany and Italy in North Africa, the pressure
on the Island was relieved, but it then served as a base for the invasion
In peace-time, the R.A.S.C. organization was similar to that in any large
station at home, except that there was an A.D.S.T. in addition to an O.C.,
The A.D.S.T. also carried out the
duties of district barrack
officer until February, 1939, when a command barrack officer was appointed.
There was a small supply depot, which issued rations to the troops in
the ordinary way, the system of messing being the same as that in force at
The depot also held the two months' reserve of the main items.
was a cold store capable of holding 1,100 tons of meat, and of producing the
The R.A.S.C. bakery had a bread produc-
well in excess of requirements.
Fresh items of the ration
were obtained by local purchase.
The M.T. company consisted of about 40 vehicles; these were supplemen-
ted by hired transport as necessary.
Requirements of P.O.L. were obtained from the local oil company agents;
a reserve of 100,000 gallons of M.T.
petrol was maintained by the con-
All reserves were held in bulk storage above ground; a small
reserve of lubricants was also held by the supply depot.
Barrack services were carried out in the usual way. Military require-
ments of coal were met by local contract for coal imported from the United
Kingdom under commercial arrangements.
Water transport consisted of a few vessels, manned by civilian crews
and administered by the officer i/c transport, which carried out the usual
target-towing and harbour duties.
Planning for War
Mobilization arrangements for supplies aimed at provision of a six months®
reserve for 6,000, rather more than double the normal peace strength.
the intention to disperse half the entire holding to what were termed " pre-
arranged caches "
service scale of rations was to be introduced on mobilization,
and with this end in view certain stocks held by N.A.A.F.I. were to be taken
It was planned to supply the N.A.A.F.I. with bread and meat to a
maximum of half defence ration scale for naval and military families, who
were to be accommodated in a " families centre" on mobilization.
The construction of an underground cold store had been contemplated
for some years, and was approved in May, 1939, as a result of a recommenda-
tion by the Inspector, R.A.S.C., that it was a necessity.
The project had
been rejected by the Army Council in 1937 as the cost would have been
£32,000, plus £8,000 for the naval extension.
In the absence
of such a
store, plans were in hand to earmark civilian cold storage as a measure of
dispersion.
War Office approval was sought in June, 1939, for the erection of a
new
supply
depot above
authority for the erection of eight store huts.
ground, but this was not obtained, apart from
The joint War Office and Air Ministry mission which went to Egypt in
February, 1939, to examine the question of bulk storage of petroleum pro-
ducts, also visited Malta.
The Air Ministry had in hand there
scheme for aviation petroleum products, but there was no plan for special
storage for other requirements.
The mission considered that the importance of Malta in a world war,
particularly in case of control of the Mediterranean being lost to another
power, merited the laying down of siege reserves of petroleum products on
the most comprehensive scale.
It therefore recommended that a
precisely similar to that of the Air Ministry, for a fully protected under-
ground bulk oil installation should be instituted for motor spirit stocks.
This recommendation was not accepted, largely because of
difficulties anticipated in hollowing underground tankage in the rock.
consequence, storage was inadequate, and great difficulties were experienced
in maintaining the island during its siege, petroleum fuels and lubricants
having to be supplied, with inevitable loss, from the United Kingdom, Middle
East, and the U.S.A.
Instead of the larger scheme, approval was given for
the construction of bulk storage tankage for 300 tons (90,000 gallons) and
for a small can-filling plant.
The military reserve of P.O.L. had been placed by War Office at six
In order to comply with this, 30,000
M.T. petrol in cans and drums was dispersed throughout the island under
R.A.S.C. control.
To provide for distribution from the can-filling plant,
when established, 6,000 2-gallon cans were sent from the United
It was the intention that normal day-to-day requirements should
from the agents, either in bulk into kerbside pumps which were being in-
stalled in barrack areas, or in 2-gallon cans; the reserve was to be held in
the military bulk storage and thence filled into cans.
To supplement the W.D. transport on mobilization, civilian vehicles were
to be impressed with drivers, who would come under military control.
scheme, which was worked out in conjunction with the civil police, maintained
a register of all vehicles.
In consequence of a War Office proposal in 1938 to increase the garrison,
the transport establishments had then been reviewed.
unsatisfactory for the expansion of R.A.S.C. transport services to be based
upon impressed vehicles and civilian drivers, two standard transport com-
This was rejected by War Office on the grounds of
expense involved, shortage of supervisory personnel, and the possibility of
organizing the existing company to meet commitments.
In February, 1939, War Office authority was given for the holding of
M.T. spares for W.D. vehicles to be increased to six months' requirements.
