suficiently high to avoid the necessity for withdrawing them all at once on
mobilization.
The withdrawal of a number was of course inevitable, as the
primary object of their employment in military offices in peace was to provide
a reserve of trained clerks for the initial requirements of the B.E.F., and as
a nucleus for reinforcements, and for new formations subsequently raised.
The Militia and the R.A.S.C.
In May, 1939, the Military Training Act became law, requiring the registra-
tion for military training of men between the ages of 20 and 21.
When called
up for training these men were known as Militia-men.
The allotment of militia-men to the R.A.S.C. was based on 4,000 men
annually.
Of their six month's service, these were to spend two months in
the R.A.S.C. Militia Training Battalion, and the balance in operating units.
The allotment by trades was: Supply Clerks 450; T.M.T. Clerks 270; M.T.
Artificers 348; Bakers 42; Butchers 30; and Drivers, I.C. 2856.
The R.A.S.C. was guaranteed priority of men who were qualified drivers
and tradesmen, and therefore only military training was given in the battalion
except in the case of clerks, who did five weeks' specialist training there.
The
R.A.S.C. Militia Training Battalion was specially formed for the purpose, as
the existing R.A.S.C. Training Battalion was fully occupied in training the
normal recruits.
The staffing of this battalion with officers, N.C.O instructors
and other personnel, was a heavy drain on the exiguous resources of the pre-
war R.A.S.C. units, which had to give up a large proportion of their best men.
Arrangements were made for the militia-men to be trade-tested on arrival
with their service companies, etc., and for continuation training where neces-
sal y.
The scheme emphasized that all militia-men must be employed at their
trades.
Actually, only two intakes of militia-men were made to the R.A.S.C.,
one of 659 in the middle of July, and one of 586 in the middle of September.
The former proved a useful asset in the Companies to which they were posted
on mobilization.
During late 1939 and early 1940, a total of 3,000 militia-men
were transferred to the R.A.S.C. from R.A. units in the B.E.F.
Defects in Planning
The principal and fundamental defect in the pre-war planning for the
expansion of the R.A.S.C. on mobilization, was in regard to the provision
of personnel.
There was, and regrettably still is, a mistaken idea, based
no doubt on wishful thinking, and this again on financial stringency, and
the unwillingness of the Briton to be trained in peace-time, that the administra-
tive services will operate well enough in war if they have a nucleus of trained
officers and men, the balance being made up of " men off the street", possibly
with some skill in the specialist line concerned, but with no military training
or discipline.
The conditions which the pre-war Army was taught to expect in the wat
when it came were described as being such as to call for the highest standards
of training and discipline.
less than in other arms.
This dog finch as so call for tin the R.A.S.C., no
to an enormous extent with untrained civilians.
Yet the R.A.S.C. of the B.E.F. of 1939 was diluted
How could it have been
hoped that these men would stand up to the conditions expected had activ
operations begun immediately on the arrival of the Force in France, instead
of our being given a respite of so many months during which these men at
least received some training and discipline?
As it was, the supply service broke down in the early days, as will be
described in Chapter IV, and this was aggravated by the fact that supply
units at the Base were composed principally of untrained personnel.
ine
transport units were hard put to it to perform their tasks, for many drivers had
little experience, and many of the experienced drivers knew nothing of the
maintenance of their vehicles.
A company, with a combined second and
third line rôle, included, out of a total of 700 men, 50 regulars, 80 regular
reservists, R.A.S.C.,
40 militia-men, 175 Royal Artillery horse-drivers as
loaders, a few volunteers with some previous military experience, and 350
civilians with no military background whatsoever.
Only ten per cent. of the
N.C.Os. existed at the outset, the rest had to be found from the available
material.
Some of the officers were civilians in uniform.
Could such a unit
have carried out at once a difficult and important rôle, in active operational
conditions?
It is a fact that, in the early part of 1939, a scheme was approved for the
increase of the peace-time cadre of the R.A.S.C., which would, if there had
been time to implement it fully, have ameliorated the situation on mobilization
very considerably.
Thus, the peace-time establishment of a transport company
was intended to be five officers and 180 other ranks; and it was also proposed
to provide a sufficient number of officers on the peace establishment of the
R.A.S.C. to ensure that there was an adequate margin to permit of their being
properly trained.
On the outbreak of war, however,
the scheme had not
progressed much beyond the appointment of a number of short service com-
mission officers to the R.A.S.C.
No cadres existed in peace for Base and L. of C. supply units.
It became
plain, as the result of experience in France, that peace-time cadres should exist
for all R.A.S.C. task force units, as well as for those which would be required
in the United Kingdom.
There was, however, in the planning a failure to
appreciate that the static supply, transport, and barrack services, at home and
overseas, must carry on when mobilization came, and must expand at once
to supply and serve the units being mobilized and trained.
They should not
be denuded of personnel in order to make good deficiencies in field force units,
as occurred in 1939.
That the R.A.S.C. maintenance services for the new
armies forming at home did not break down was the result of a notable effort,
due in no small measure to the tireless efforts of elderly recalled officers and
ex-soldiers, and to the fact that it was carried out without interference from
the enemy.
Personnel of RA.S.C. companies and other units, and R.A.S.C. personnel
of formation headquarters, were posted to their war tasks only on mobilization.
They should have been trained in peace for their war rôles, or at least informed
of them, so that they could be in some degree prepared for them.
It is true
that regulars were detailed for their war rôles before mobilization; but this
was nullified in 1939 by all allotments being revised shortly before the out-
break of war, the new ones taking effect from 1st September.
An individual's
attempts to prepare for his war rôle were thus stultified.
WO 277/2k
27
WO 277/26
