troops, highly organised, armed and battle-trained, who await us in their much-vaunted
impregnable defences, and our troops, who must of necessity launch their assault at the end
of a cross-Channel voyage with all its attendant risks, must be reduced to the narrowest
possible margin.
Although much can be done to this end by the means available and likely
to become available to us in the United Kingdom to influence these factors, we are largely
dependent upon events that will take place on other war fronts, principally on the Russian
front, between now and the date of the assault.
I therefore suggest to the Chiefs of Staff that it is necessary, if my plan be approved,
to adopt the outlook that Operation 'Overlord' is even now in progress,
and to take
all possible steps to see that all agencies that can be brought to bear are, from now on,
co-ordinated in their action as herein below described so as to bring about the state of
affairs that we would have exist on the chosen day of assault.
tily, Tuenture to draw attition othedange of doing direct comparisons between
and Operation
" Overlord.'
No doubt
the experience now being
gained in the Mediterranean will prove invaluable when the detailed planning stage for
Overlord" is reached, but, viewed as a whole, the two operations could hardly be more
dissimilar.
In 'Husky' the bases of an extended continental coastline were used for a
converging assault against an island, whereas in 'Overlord' it is necessary to launch an
assault from an island against an extended continental mainland coastline.
Furthermore,
while in the Mediterranean the tidal range is negligible and the weather reasonably reliable,
in the English Channel the tidal range is considerable and the weather capricious.
The "Quadrant » Conference, 11th-25th August, 1943
The plan proposed by General Morgan was taken by the Chiefs of Staff when they sailed for
the Conference
at Quebec (" Quadrant
") in the Queen Mary on 4th August, 1943. During the
voyage the C.C.O. arranged for D.X.S.R. (Captain Hussey, R.N.) to give an exposition on : —
(1) Proposed modifications to merchant ships for launching amphibians.
(2) Proposed modifications to spud pierheads for unloading L.S.T. and L.C.T.
(3) On two developments for making temporary breakwaters.
The most important decision at the
"Quadrant " Conference, as far as C.O.H.Q. was
concerned, was that taken at the Combined Chiefs of Staff meeting on 19th August, 1943, and in
C.C.B. 319 the following is found :-
have ahave at hied the outline plathe entral Morgans or operation Operaros
' Overlord' and
" Quadrant " Conference, was the employment of
another one of in tane molo the co of. point of view, this ch wes discussed at the
This force was composed of
American and Canadian volunteers and was originally formed at the instigation of the C.C.O. for
operations in cold climates such as Northern Norway.
trained had not been employed.
Up to date, this force although formed and
keep it in being.
The question of its future use was discussed and it was decided to
This was a fortunate decision as it proved its worth later in South-East Asia.
In order to obtain battle experience, elements of the force operated in a Commando role at the
Anzio landing and, also, with the U.S. Forces in the Aleutian Islands.
During the Conference, the question of the setting up of a South-East Asia Command was
discussed at length. It was decided to appoint a Supreme Commander to that area in the same way
that General MacArthur commanded in the South-West Pacific.
later, was Admiral Mountbatten.
directive for the Supreme Commander and eventually one was approved.
Careful study was given to the
This, as will be seen
66
TAEDTLES
CHAPTER 8
CHANGES AT COMBINED OPERATIONS HEADQUARITERS DURING 1943
THE ADMIRALTY TAKES OVER THE ASSAULT FLEET
Institution of a Combined Operations Joint Planner
In becoming a full member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee in March, 1942, the C.C.O. found
himself at a disadvantage in that he exercised little influence or control over the Joint Planning
Staff, who were producing papers for the Chiefs of Staff.
The effect of this was that, after being
riefed at C.O.H.Q., he could alter the paper, if there was any point with which he disagreed, onl
when it had reached the Chief of Staff's level
He, therefore, instituted a Combined Operations
Joint Planner, of whom Brigadier M. W. M. MacLeod was the first,
until replacement after an
aircraft accident on returning from the Casablanca Conference, by Brigadier A. H. Head.
The C.C.O. then persuaded the Director of Plans to allow the Combined Operations Joint
Planner to sit with them as a fourth member whenever they were preparing papers with a combined
operations aspect.
This arrangement worked well because it meant that the Combined Operations
Joint Planner was able to see practically all papers destined for the Chiefs of Staff at their formative
stage.
The influence of C.O.H.Q. was thus greatly increased and there was a reduction of friction
and disagreement at all levels.
No single innovation enabled C.O.H.Q. to influence the conduct of
the war so strongly as the creation of this post with the prestige which the holders achieved for it.
The Combined Operations Joint Planner accompanied the C.C.O. on his visits to North Africa,
Malta and Sicily and, as far as planning was concerned, became his right-hand man.
The Admiralty Takes Over the Assault Fleet
At a Chiefs of Staff meeting held on 27th November, 1942, the First Sea Lord pointed out
that, as the Assault Fleet had reached such large proportions, the time had come for the Admiralty
to relieve the Combined Operations Command of this commitment.
He suggested that the Deputy
First Sea Lord, the C.C.O. and the Controller should go into this question and forward their
recommendations.
Early in 1943, the Deputy First Sea Lord submitted his proposals, the main feature of which
was that the Admiralty should take over the functions of Rear-Admiral Landing Craft and Bases
(R.A.L.B.) by setting up various Combined Operations branches within existing Admiralty depart-
ments.
These proposals were approved and the Admiralty absorbed its new responsibilities by
setting up the following :-
(1) A Directorate of Combined Operations Personnel (D.C.O.P.), which worked directly under
the Director of Naval Personnel.
(2) The Director of Naval Equipment Combined Operations (D.N.E. (CO) ), who was already
established in the Admiralty, absorbed the functions of the Engineering Section under
R.A.L.B.
(3) An Assistant Directorate of Operations Division (A.D.O.D. (CO) ) which absorbed the
Movement and Craft Section under R.A.L.B.
(4) A Deputy Directorate of Plans Division (D.D. of P. (CO) ) which absorbed that section
of the naval staff under R.A.L.B. which had been concerned with combined operations.
(5) A Directorate of Requirements and Organisation, Combated Operatim (D R.O..00)).
later known as the
Directorate of Combined Operations
Into this were absorbed certain staff functions previously carried out in C.O.H.Q.
Appointment of Rear-Admiral Commanding Combined Operations Bases, North (R.A.C.O.B. (N))
Thus the department of R.A.L.B. became absorbed into the Admiralty, a fact that was promul-
gated on 13th August,
1943.
However, the bases and personnel which were now occupying the
coasts of Scotland had become so numerous and dispersed that it was considered necessary to
have a Flag Officer in that area.
Accordingly, the appointment of Rear-Admiral Commanding
-7
WO 277/21
27
3ф
