CHAPTER 17
COMBINED OPERATIONS SIGNALS ORGANISATION
The Inter-Services Communications Committee
In October, 1941, when Commodore Lord Mountbatten was appointed Adviser on Combined
Operations, there was no signal department at Combined Operations Headquarters.
There was
at this time an Inter-Services Committee sitting at the War Cabinet Office whose directive was to
investigate and report to the Chiets of Staff Committee on " Communications in Combined Oper-
This subject had in the past received little attention and, in view of the likely course of the
war, was obviously one of great importance.
This Committee was under the Chairmanship of a
Captain R.N. with naval, military and air force members and was then at work on its first report.
The naval member had, incidentally, been involved in the abortive Dakar operation and was
acutely aware of the lack of up-to-date doctrine on this subject, and the absence of the necessary
specialised ships, equipment and trained personnel.
With the arrival of the new Adviser on Combined Operations, a naval signal officer was
appointed to C.O.H.Q. as Signal Officer Combined Operations for inter-Service signal duties and,
almost immediately, took over the Chairmanship of the above-mentioned Committee in addition
to his duties at C.O.H.Q. It was soon realised, however, that the scope of the signal work at C.O.H.Q.,
both in connection with the signals of the growing Combined Operations Organisation and the
development of combined operations communications technique, then practically non-existent,
It was therefore decided, in agreement with the Chiefs of Staff
Committee and the Service Ministries, that the Committee should move to C.O.H.Q. to complete
its work and that the naval, military and air force members of it should join C.C.O.'s staff under the
Chairman who, as a Captain R.N., became Chief Signal Officer Combined Operations.
In the course of their deliberations on the subject of " communications in combined operations,"
the Inter-Services Communications Committee submitted six reports during the period from
December, 1941, to May, 1942. The subjects of these reports were as follows :-
(1) W/T equipment.
(2) Support control.
This included the H.Q. Ship requirement.
(3) Cyphers, codes and code names.
(4) Line communications.
(5) Radar.
(6) Anglo-American signals co-operation.
The succeeding paragraphs cover these reports in greater detail.
W/T Equipment required for Combined Operations
By December, 1941, the report on WI equipment had been passed by the Combined Operations
Committee and was forwarded to the Chiefs of Staff and Service Ministries for early action in view
of the unsatisfactory state of affairs. All Services stressed the urgent need for specialised equipment,
(1) Light, portable and waterproofed equipment for beach operation. Some of that
recommended for combined operations purposes eventually passed into much wider
use (e.g. Nos. 22 and 46 sets).
(2) Additional equipment, especially R/T sets and VH/E sets, for rapid installation in ships
of all kinds in order to increase their communications facilities at short notice.
(3) Provision of transportable or mobile R/I equipment and Warning radar for ground-air use.
The Headquarters Ship
The Committee then continued its work at C.O.H.Q. and produced, in January, 1942, its second
report which dealt with " Support Control in Combined Operations,"
communications which had, in the past, been far from satisfactory.
an aspect of amphibious
It was during the preparation
of this report that the idea of the H.Q. Ship was resurrected as a matter of urgency, and practical
recommendations were made for its fulfilment; earlier concepts were rejected as too limited and
slow of execution, and the Committee's opinion was that the signal communications in an amphibious
operation could not reach the required standard of efficiency without the use of such ships.
their opinion, also, the special amphibious ships and craft then being built, the army formations
then undergoing or about to undergo amphibious training and the air force units which would
eventually be used, could not be employed to the best advantage unless H.Q. Ships were provided,
from which combined control and communications could be exercised.
The Chiefs of Staff Committee noted the report and decided that this matter should be pursued,
but this course was not without difficulties since various disadvantages
There was the acute shortage of shipping which caused the Ministry of
War Transport to be averse to providing any ships for the purpose.
that it was desirable for the naval, military and air Commanders to be together during an operation,
the naval Commander had in the past always been in a man-of-war, the military Commander was
in the habit of landing at a very early stage with his troops, and the air Commander
remaining at a shore headquarters where very full communication facilities were availab preferred
It was realised that the full air communications and radar requirements could not be fitted in
the H.Q. Ship and that the ideal would be one with an associated fighter direction (or perhaps
air control) ship, but, with the shortage of shipping, this ideal was agreed to be unattainable at the
After various meetings between the three Services to decide on communication requirements
for such a ship, an armed merchant cruiser, H.M.S. Bulolo, was made available and was taken in
hand in April, 1942, at Messrs. Green and Silley Weir, Royal Albert Docks, London, for conversion
to a specification produced by C.O.H.Q.
The communication requirements were briefly :—
V/S-standard of cruiser flagship.
W/T and R/T-
-approximately 19 transmitting sets, 23 receiving sets.
D/F-navigational only (H/F D/F was not a requirement).
L/T-line terminals for both speech and telegraph circuits.
The conversion of H.M.S. Bulolo was completed by mid-June, 1942. Later H.M.S. Largs was
converted and she, with H.M.S. Bulolo, took part with success in the North African operation. It
was by then recognised that the H.Q. Ship was an essential feature of an assault force and further
ships were converted. There was still, however, great difficulty in obtaining suitable ships owing
to the grave shortage of shipping and constant opposition was met from officers who disliked
" putting all the eggs in one basket."
The counter-argument that the eggs could not otherwise be
carried, however, won the day and was justified by events.
The American authorities had by now
adopted the idea and produced several excellent H.Q. Ships built to
specification, which was, nevertheless, based directly on that of H.M.S. Bulolo.
the Continent, a large number of H.Q. Ships, both British and American,
nec ring to CO H.Q. Specification.
of H.Q. Ship and the Landing Craft Headquarters, both of which were built
Cyphers, Codes and Code Names in Combined Operations
Most of these requirements were covered by the programme for common
systems which were then in hand for the three Services and later included the U.S. Army and Navy,
but several special Combined Operations pamphlets were required and these were compiled at
C.O.H.Q.
They included the Combined Operations Signal Book, the Combined Operations Code
and Landing Craft Signal pamphlet.
Line Communications in Combined Operations
The fourth report, which was also sent in by the Inter-Services Committee in February, 1942,
coal it operation, Petity the question of cros cha pet alephone and tear reference to a
were discussed and, secondly, the line requirements to serve the shore headquärters.
Meetings were held with the G.P.O. and the earmarking of cable ships, the manufacture of
submarine cable and the building of static and mobile terminals were put in hand. At a later date,
after the range of V.H/F communication had been further investigated by C.O.H.Q. and tested in
133
WO 277/21
27
3ф
