The organization of the W.A.A.S.C. supply units was regarded by the
War Office as unsatisfactory.
It had come into existence piecemeal during
a very difficult period.
There was no adequate equivalent of the D.I.D.,
and the B.S.Ds. and field bakery and field butchery installations had been
formed as new ports and centres grew up.
It was, however, realized that the
basic organization in West Africa in no way compared with other types.
The new establishments, as approved locally in October, 1943, were there-
force accepted, although War Office held that one War Establishment for
a basic unit, and the use of two or three of these together where necessary
would have been less cumbersome than to have several different types of
The new establishments included: B.S.D., Types
"B", and
"C"; D.I.D.; Field Bakery Section; Field Butchery Section.
The Command soon passed
from being a potential theatre of opera-
tions against the Vichy French in West Africa to the rôle of raising two
divisions and other troops, and would be the field for recruiting and training
of Africans for service overseas.
The maintenance of a considerable R.A.F. strength, mainly British, and
expected to increase, prevented
a reduction or dilution of the R.A.S.C.
supply services, which also rendered a number of services to the civil
authorities, particularly in respect of dock clearance.
There had been a considerable degree of Africanization, but some aspects
of the units affected were not altogether satisfactory.
The education which
fitted an African to be an efficient member of a supply unit also enabled him
to engage in the illicit disposal of supplies if he was not closely controlled
by British supervisors.
The change-over from a field service system to a
semi-regulated system of accounting increased the need for European super-
vision, and another factor was an expected increase in the dispersal of supply
The considerable amount of supply services performed by the R.A.S.C.
for the R.A.F. raised the question of manpower.
It was suggested that
the War Office should press the Air Ministry for the allocation of an entitle-
ment of manpower to assist in the provision of British personnel for these
It was not a question of merely lending R.Á.F. personnel, un-
trained in R.A.S.C. duties, but the transfer of 70 " bodies" from an apparently
lavish R.A.F. " ceiling" to a very restricted Army " ceiling", on a scale of
one for 160 R.A.F. feeding strength.
reasonable proposal, but it did not come to anything.
This seems to have been a very
By 1944, the S.T. supply units in the command had been organized on
a static basis; i.e., there were M.S.Ds. in Nigeria and the Gold Coast, and
command supply depots in all four colonies according to strength.
Supplies
Supplies in West Africa were an important feature.
ration scales, European and African.
There were two
Some of the
European and nearly
all the African items were actually produced in West Africa, and the aim
throughout was to make the four colonies together as
possible.
self-supporting as
Inter-colonial shipping was largely used to rectify local shortages,
and demands on other parts of the world were cut to a minimum.
426
The initial policy of the command was to make use of the local Govern-
The R.A.S.C. were to arrange the
ment organization as far as
purchase and issue of all African rations, and to make as much use as
possible of local produce for British troops.
Demands for the four colonies were centralized and sent to War Office
through Command H.Q.; but it was emphasized
shipments should be made to individual colonies.
This was not always
Supplies for Nigeria were known to be shipped to Sierra Leone, the
War Office reply to a protest being a suggestion to send them on by train!
With the object of reducing demands on the War Office to the minimum,
the possibility was examined of eliminating, from both European and African
scales, any commodity whose retention was not essential; of effecting any
practicable reduction; and of substituting, wherever possible, local foodstuffs
for those which had in the past been imported from the United Kingdom.
Reductions in the ration scale were thus effected to the extent of saving
263 tons a month in the quantity of foodstuffs imported from the
To relieve the difficult situation caused by a complete lack of fresh
vegetables in Sierra Leone and the inconvenience experienced in shipping
them from Nigeria, Gold Coast, or South Africa, a scheme was initiated
for growing them on the spot.
This was organized on a unit basis.
were provided under War Office arrangements, and sold to units who cultiva-
ted their own land.
The produce was sold to the W.A.A.S.C. at local market
value, and distributed fairly among units.
Provisioning of R.A.F.
In 1940, a R.A.F. station was established at Takoradi, Gold Coast. There
was at this time no military supplies organization in the colony, and, with
War Office concurrence, the R.A.F. made arrangements for the shipping of
foodstuffs, some of these being drawn from S.R.Ds. in the United Kingdom.
In the early days, some difficulties arose between the Army
R.A.F. because of competition for local resources and differences over the
allocation of cold storage facilities.
Even after the R.A.S.C. organization
had been established, the R.A.F. at Takoradi wanted to be independent of
Army administration, and this was permitted for a time.
At Freetown and
Bathurst, however, the Army was responsible for all supply services for
As pressure to reduce shipping from the United Kingdom increased,
it became apparent that it would be an advantage, from the
and shipping aspects, if all the R.A.F. in West Africa were
nearest appropriate R.A.S.C. supply organization.
Eventually, it was agreed
between War Office and the Air Ministry that the R.A.F. should draw supplies
in bulk from the military authorities in West Africa.
The W.A.A.S.C. were
to act as a supply depot, and the R.A.F. to maintain their existing D.I.D.
and domestic supply system.
Africa the commodities obtainable there and not locally.
The Army was to order in bulk from South
It was unfortunate that there was a difference between the
R.A.F. ration scales, the latter being the better, and the issue of the Army
ration therefore caused a great deal of discontent.
The R.A.F. in particular
objected to yams and margarine, and insisted on being issued with fresh
