(h) Use of Airborne Troops
The Havre-Calais area, which was most favourable from the point of view of air support
under a British-based fighter ' umbrella,'
was now heavily defended by the enemy.
smaller enemy guns of from 4 to 6 inches had all been sited so that they could defend their
own beaches.
The coast was shallow and so honeycombed with wire and pillboxes that
attack in this area was virtually impossible unless the German batteries could be mopped
up by airborne troops.
The Second Brigade of the British Airborne Division was now form-
ing and, on completion of this Division, it was hoped to form a second, but the bottleneck
was troop-carrying aircraft. It was vitally important that the maximum number of trained
airborne troops and aircraft should be available for the final operation.
U.S. Navy Views
Unites view Naval chi by th (tam khi, me the or Nau immediataly, shed by the
He held that
the U.S. Navy was already fully occupied with operations in the Pacific and that it would severely
tax his resources if he was to undertake the provision, training and manning of landing ships and
General Marshall indicated that, if necessary, this was a
craft required for the European theatre.
task that could be undertaken by the U.S. Army, whereupon Admiral King, rather than surrender
the birthright of the Navy to the Army, decided that the Navy would play its part.
Consequently,
he sent Vice-Admiral A. Kent Hewitt to England to work with the C.C.O. in London to ensure
that the technique developed by the two Navies was the same.
It was Admiral Hewitt who
subsequently commanded the Western Naval Task Force in Operation " Torch" and the Western
Task Force in Operation "Husky."
Allied Signal Communications
is that en the in of mie et Chis O. Set at most interesting decisi made at the meting
" The Chief of Combined Operations in London has already a small staff containing
communications officers from all the British Services and also representatives of the U.S.
Navy and Army.
This staff is developing the special communications technique required
for the proposed operations on the Continent. It is suggested that, to ensure speedy action
this staff should be developed into a Combined Organisation fully representative of both
American and British Services, with executive powers of decision and action.'
The Committee decided that :—
Theatre, to ensure the co-ordination of training and technique between the forces of the
two nations and to co-ordinate questions involving communications pertaining to the special
combined operations."
It was also noted that :-
"Assault Headquarters ships were being built which would act as Divisional Head-
quarters, and would be run ashore to prevent sinking by enemy action.
plotting rooms, map rooms and had very extensive wireless equipment.
They contained
Each
of these
Headquarters Ships would contain the Commanders of the three Services responsible for the
divisional front, and arrangements were being made for cables to be run out to them from
England as soon as they had been beached.
The Combined Signal Staff under the C.C.O. had prepared the lay-out of these ships and the
Admiralty had one in hand, H.M.S. Bulolo, almost completed at that time.
Further the Combined
Signal School, H. M.S. Dundonald II, was actually training the personnel required to man the ships
Thus it came about that, for all the landing subsequently carried out on the Continent,
the Combined Operations Organisation was responsible for the signal and W I communications,
both in the provision and design of material and in the training of the personnel.
C.C.O.s Interview with the President
United States.
Before he returner to Eneland. the C.C.O. had a five-hour interview with the President of the
British Chiefs of Staff for the re-entry into the Continent.
Putang this interview he discussed the general siteatien with te views held by the
On his return the C.C.O. reported' very fully to the Chiefs of Staff and the Prime Minister
on what had taken place.
had said to the latter to the President as follows :-
After seeing the Prime Minister the C.C.O. sent a summary? of what he
and the Chiefs of Staff.
propose recapitulating here what I told the Prime Minister.
I pointed out that you stressed the great need for American soldiers to be given an
opportunity
of fighting as soon as possible, and that you wished me to remind the Prime
Minister of the agreement reached last time he was in Washington,
that in the event of
things going very badly for the Russians this summer a sacrifice landing would be carried
out in France to assist them.
I pointed out that no landing that we could carry out could
draw off any troops, since there were some 25 German Divisions already in France and
landing craft shortage prevented our putting ashore an adequate number.
The Chief
German shortage lay in
fighter aircraft and all our efforts were being bent towards
provoking fighter battles in the West.
I said that you have asked for an assurance that we would be ready to follow up a
crack in German morale by landing in France this autumn and that I had given you an
assurance, that such an operation was being planned and was at present held at two months'
notice.
I pointed out that you disit wish to see a troitil asliers and ossi, possibly.
that a complete collapse of Russia had made a frontal attack on France impossible.
that you had asked whether we could not get a footing on the Continent some time this
year, even as late as December, in which case you would give the highest possible priority
to the production and shipping of landing craft, equipment and troops.
The need for
securing a port for supplying the troops made it clear that we should have to capture a port
such as Cherbourg and hold a suitable line such as the Cherbourg peninsula, possibly
expanding across towards St. Nazaire and eventually holding the whole of Brittany.
I made a point that you were sure that, in any case, when the operation came off we
should have to secure the Atlantic ports and not go rushing off in the direction of Germany
until we were firmly established, unless German morale had really cracked.
I pointed out that you did not like our sending out Divisions from England while
7
e294
WO 277/21
27
3
Morocco with a view to joining hands with the Army of the Nile and reopening the
Mediterranean.
In the latter connection I told the P.M. how much you had been struck
in a recent telegram by his remark:
' Do not lose sight of ' Gymnast.'3
for European soldiers to fight in.
As the result of the recent losses inflicted by the U.S. Fleet on the Japanese Fleet,
particularly their aircraft carriers,
there was a general desire to take the offensive from
Australia, using the existing U.S. Marine forces and combat shipping.
General Marshall had suggested going for Timor and General MacArthur had telegraphed
on his own suggesting making for Rabaul.
I said that you and General Marshall were
anxious that two British aircraft carriers with their destroyer screen should join the American
naval forces in Australia to support these operations,
suggestion that the amphibious force which had assaulted Madagascar should be used for
operations against the Japanese. ...
I was so thrilled and heartened by all I saw in America, particularly by the American
Army, which is forging ahead at quite an unbelievable rate.
On 17th June, 1942, the Prime Minister, accompanied by the C.I.G.S., flew to America.
main object of the visit was to reach a final decision on operations for 1942-43.
1 Q303 on 16th June, 1942.
2 The White House Papers of Mr. Harry L. Hopkins by Robert E. Sherwood.
* An operation planned for Bizerta, North Africa, in January, 1942, but which did not take place.
