The eventual plan was that one force should establish a raiding base in the Loften Islands
and, operating from there, should disrupt the sea communications between Northern and Southern
Norway (Operation " Anklet"), while another force was to raid the port and anchorage of Vaagso
Operation " Archery").
For the Loften Islands, the two Infantry Assault Ships (L.S.I. (S) ) Prince Albert and Princess
Josephine Charlotte were to be used with No. 12 Commando, Special Operations Executive (S.O.E.)
and a small detachment of Norwegian Forces, whilst the Prince Charles and Prince Leopold with
No. 3 Commando were detailed for the Vaagso operation.
Reorganisation at C.O.H.Q.
Concurrently with the planning and execution of these operations, the reorganisation of the
staff and work at C.O.H.Q., in order to comply with the altered directive, was taking shape.
Broadly speaking, the reorganisation divided the Staff into Operations and Administration
Groups.
In the former were found the Intelligence Planning and Training Sections, while the latter
consisted of a Naval Staff which dealt with the personnel, material and ships and craft movements.
There was a Communications element in both groups.
All the sections of the Operations Group, which are discussed in greater detail below,
Inter-Service.
This team was later completed with the arrival of United States officers in 1942,
thus setting up an historic precedent as the first integrated, Inter-Allied, Inter-Service staff.
Intelligence Section
Quite logically, the first section to be formed was the Intelligence Section.
This came
into being on 16th December,
when Wing
Commander The Marquis of Casa Maury,
R.A.F.V.R. became the Senior Intelligence Officer.
Working
under
him was an Inter-
Services Staff consisting of officers from all three Services.
They collected the available
intelligence from the Intelligence Staffs of the Services Ministries and co-ordinated it so that
the most up-to-date joint intelligence was always available to the planners or Force
Commanders.
The intelligence collected and co-ordinated was passed to the Target Committee, who
recommended the suitable objectives for raids to the planners.
Planning Section
The Planning Section at first dealt with all plans for projected operations or raids but
it was soon found necessary to introduce a form of specialisation.
This consisted of dividing
the section into those who were principally concerned with long term or invasion plans, and
those whose chief concern was the planning of raids.
Training Section
Both naval and combined training was in the hands of the Vice-Admiral, Combined
Training Centre (Vice-Admiral T. J .Hallett) and assisting him was Major-General, Combined
Training (Major-General J. S. Drew), the Army representative. At first, their headquarters
was at Inveraray but it was soon decided to transfer it to Largs, where the headquarters of
the Expeditionary Force had been established.
They also had offices at C.O.H.Q.
As the result of Exercise " Leapfrog," Lieutenant-General H. G. Alexander had
recommended the setting up of an establishment for training a force close to the combined
training areas on the west coast of Scotland.
The C.C.O. enthusiastically supported this
and the Hollywood Hotel at Largs was taken over and used throughout the war as the
Headquarters, not only for the Expeditionary Force, but also for the officers controlling the
Combined Operations activities on the west coast of Scotland and in the Firth of Clyde.
The Communications Section
In November, 1941, a Committee, consisting of officers of all Services, was sitting at
on " Communications in Combined Operations."
attention but was now one of paramount importance.
This subject had in the past received little
This Committee was presided over
by Captain A. E. Scott-Moncrieft, R.N, and wasathen at work on its lisa report on W/T
equipment required.
Signal Officer Combined Operations.
Farlo in Decemher 1011 Commander M. Hodges, R.N.. was appointed to C.O.H.O, as
appointed elsewhere so as a matter of course Commandor Hodoes relieved him as Chairma
About the same time Captain Scott-Moncrieff was
of the Committee.
It was soon realised that the scone of the signal work at C.O.H.O. both
in connection with the signals of the growing Combined Operations Organisation and in the
development of combined operations communications technique (then
practically
1OI-
existent), was far too great for one officer. It was therefore decided, with the Chiefs of Staff
approval, that the Committee should move to C.O.H.Q. to complete its work and that the
naval, military and air force members should join C.O.H.Q. staff under the Chairman who
became Chief Signal Officer, Combined Operations.
During the early days of 1942, the Committee produced reports on Support Communi-
cations required in combined operations, Cyphers and Codes, Line Communications with
reference to large scale operations on the Continent, and Radar in combined operations.
The Raiding Authority for North-West Europe
The question of command in raids was one to which considerable thought was given.
before in our history had the question of command in three elements been considered.
Never
When, in
October, 1941, Commodore Mountbatten took over from Admiral Keyes, a situation had arisen
which had no precedent and consequently had to be resolved.
The position then was that C.O.H.Q. controlled, administered and trained all the specialised
amphibious forces in the United Kingdom, including the Special Service Brigade (Commandos),
and all assault shipping and landing craft.
The licence to raid the coast of France and the Low
Countries was held by the General Officers Commanding-in-Chief of the various Home Defence
Commands.
Just as each of the latter had his own sector for the British coast to defend, so also
had he a sector of the enemy-occupied coast to mark.
The Generals regarded the hostile coast as the
front line facing their armies across a watery no-man's-land which they had no means of crossing.
The only area, in which Combined Operations forces could operate without infringing on the
prerogatives of the Army Commanders, was the Norwegian coast.
Far-reaching changes became necessary at the beginning of 1942 when it was decided, as a part
of the strategy of the war, that a series of raids, becoming progressively greater in scale, should be
undertaken.
In the system finally evolved in May, 1942, the C.C.O. became the mounting authority for all
raids in North-Western Europe.
His functions were as follows :—
(1) To prepare an outline plan.
(2) To obtain the approval of the Chiefs of Staff.
(3) To appoint Force Commanders with the approval of the Chiefs of Staff.
(4) To allocate and assemble the requisite specialised forces.
(5) To assist and advise the Force Commanders in the preparation of the detailed plan.
(6) To provide any additional intelligence or equipment which the Force Commanders
required.
(7) To assist and advise during the rehearsal and training stage.
On first being appointed, the Force Commanders always worked at C.O.H.Q. where they
produced the detailed plan based on the outline plan.
to the mounting area to superintend the training and rehearsals and to produce the operation orders.
do Commander as a ba
As soon as this was completed, they moved
When it came to the execution of a raid, the C.C.O., from the beginning, took the view that the
Naval Commander in-Chief, in whose area the raid lay, must retain overall command in that area
and of all ships
and craft, including landing ships and craft, and escorts therein.
heretore.
although the C.C.O. was responsible for making and presenting to the Chiefs of Staff the inter-
Service plan for a raid and for supervising the
preparations and rehearsals, the final executive
order was given by the Naval Commander-in-Chief.
For really important occasions the C.C.O.
always went to the Naval Commander-in-Chief's Headquarters and the decision was made, either
to sail or nor to sail, jointly.
It was also the responsibility of the C.C.O. to arrange any independent air action other than the
normal air protection organised by the Combined Area Headquarters.
For instance,
, C.O.H.Q.
had to arrange the whole of the air action at Vaagso and the independent bombing of St. Nazaire
when the latter port was raided.
Further, the policy was that members of the Planning Section should accompany all raiding
forces so that they would have first-hand information of the operation, gain experience and, by
their presence, inspire confidence in those taking part.
In fact C.C.O. wanted to make it quite clear
that there was no
"back seat driving" in any of the operations.
C.C.O. himself was forbidden
to go on any raids by the Prime Minister who even reproached him for trying out an early form of
one-man submarine (the Wellman) by himself.
21
+17
WO 277/21
27
3
