Owing to the enormous quantity of transport required to maintan to
petrol supplies of the Fleeth a front becaras stan Tobruk, it a lie.
sidered in 1942, that, if ever a front became stabilized between Tot
and Benghazi again,
it would be
Tobruk to as near the stabilized line as possible.
worth laying a 4-inch pipeline toa
It was estimated tha
on a desert L. of C. 300 miles long, the provision of a 4-inch line vih,
capacity of 180,000 gallons a day would effect a saving of 9,000 person.
4,700 vehicles,
450.000 4-gallon returnable cans (or 50,000 / 60,000 4-gallo
tins a day), and 22,000 gallons of petrol a day for load-carrying vehicles,
as compared with maintaining the supply of the same quantity of peted
in returnable containers carried in 3-ton vehicles.
As the line never became
stabilized west of Tobruk after June,
1942, the scheme was never de
veloped.
There was also a proposal to lay a 6-inch line westwards fro
Alexandria to the Western
Desert, but the rapid advance of the Eighth
Army after the battle of El Alamein made the laying of the line unnecessary.
Bulk Distribution
Bulk distribution was developed, as equipment began to arrive during
the latter part of 1941, along three separate lines: -
(a) Main route refuelling points, for the fuelling of convoys on al
the main Middle East routes.
(b) Bulk outfits in unit lines, base camps and installations.
(c) Semi-bulk in returnable containers.
This was provided by:—
(i) Filling containers at main
route refuelling points, or bulk
outfits.
and issuing at outlying consuming points on the basis
of fulls for empties.
(ii) Allocating a number of barrels to a formation or area, und
Allocating a numble outs or in case of temporary out
tion, the barrels being filled by road tankers.
i ton, the barrels being files ay base installations and isis
them to consuming formations.
The refuelling of large convoys at main route refuelling stations vas
speeded up by laying out filled 4-gallon returnable containers in groups
of four or six in
" refuelling parks'
near the bulk refuelling system, so
that any number of vehicles up to 500 could be refuelled simultaneously.
Proposals to establish bulk refuelling points along the Western Desert
L. of C. were first made early in 1941; but they were turned down on the
grounds that the Western Desert battle was over, and the route woul be
very little used.
By the end of 1941, however, main route refuelling poins
and facilities for filling returnable containers had been established at tow
points, as far forward as Sidi Barrani.
bulk at these nints. and to maintain nearhu formations hu means of retu
The plan was to refuel convoys in
able containers filled there.
Calling points were tached forward and it was the intention to replace
As the battle moved westwards, barrel fed ro
these by bulk refuelling points.
May, it was cue ing poins and ins
to be destroyed or abandoned on our retreat to El Alamein.
Some of the earlier bulk refuelling outfits were erected under contract.
by the dion companies and some of the later main route refuelling
200
noints hy Works: but the majority were erected by the Bulk Petrol Storage
companies for the pipe and tank work, and works personnel for the roads
and concrete work.
In preparation for the offensive at El Alamein in November, 1942, a
number of non-runner Italian road tankers were brought up from Eritrea.
with the object of towing them out along the Western Desert road, and
using them as static tanks into
which Bulk Petrol Transport Companies
could discharge their loads, and from which vehicles could be refuelled and
containers refilled.
Solid Fuel, 1942
The closing of the Mediterranean in May, 1940, had necessitated drawing
on all available Middle East resources, and the entry of Greece into the war
in 1941 had increased Middle East requirements (including military, civil,
Admiralty, etc.) to 200,000 tons a month.
It was never possible for sub-
stantial stocks to be built up.
This, and the reduced amount
of coal
available from Calcutta (owing to labour shortage and shipping difficulties),
made it necessary to find an alternative source of supply.
By May, 1942, Middle East stocks were down to a dangerously low
level, and 75,000 tons from the United Kingdom, and 25,000 tons from
U.S.A. were shipped in May and June.
For the future, Middle East would
have to rely mainly on South African coal. Co-ordination of provision was,
therefore taken over bv
S.T.6, War Office, and Middle East ceased to
deal with India.
P.A.I.C. began to make independent arrangements for its
coal supplies.
By the end of 1942, Libya was included in Middle East
demands, now totalling 16,000 tons a month for military use.
Most of
this acts, now olin Africa, being shipped from Lorenzo Marques and
Durban through civilian agents.
At Durban, an Admiralty contract already existed which was used
by the Army until July, 1944, when the War Department made a direct
arrangement.
S.T.6 kept the Admiralty informed of requirements from
Durban; the Director of Sea
Transport notified Middle East and the
Principal Sea Transport Officer, Egypt, of sailings; and Middle East notified
P.S.T.O., Egypt, of discharge ports.
All military cargoes were ordered
to Suez, here, id de targave instructions as to their destination.
During the period from 1st August to 22nd October, 1942, preparations
Preparation for Eighth Army Offensive
were in progress for the proposed offensive by the Eighth A any.
cluded the making she proposes and wastage in personnel and equipment,
the building up of the forward stocks necessary for the
planning to ensure that
momentum of the pursuit.
the administrative resources could maintain the
fow armoured disions seven infantry divicions and three Allied inde-
The strength of Eighth Army
time the offensive opened was
pendent brigades.
201
Mars micro 0.5 mr
WO 277/21
27
WO 27726
