R.A.S.C. Water Transport
During the period between the wars, 1919-1939, the only water transport
belonging to the Army was the War Department Fleet, which as controlled,
administered, and operated, by the R.A.S.C., although all the crews were
its functions were to move Army stores coastwise in the British
(sles, to the Rhine Army, while that existed, and sometimes to Gibraltar and
Malta; to run a boat service for rations, personnel, water, etc., to forts of.
shore, and to provide target-towing services for the coast artillery.
was also represented in small detachments at overseas stations.
The Fleet
The R.A.S.C.
wes esponsible for discharging military stores at those ports, and often
provided the embarkation staff officers.
During the war of 1939-1945, the Fleet, which became known as the
R.A.S.C. Fleet in 1945, not only continued to carry out the same duties on an
enhanced scale, but also undertook many new commitments.
Some of the
latter required the provision of military crews by the R.A.S.C.; for example.
Motor Boat Companies, Caique Companies in the Levant, Coaster Companies
in Italian waters, and a variety of special units for the war in the Far Bast,
as well as the crews for fire boats.
The duties performed by these units were
varied, including the maintenance and operation of the Naval boom defences
at Algiers, the provision of launches for security duties and for convoy control
stats, patrol duties (see Chapter XII) and the landing of a force from ship
to shore in a combined operation.
Throughout the war, the R.A.S.C. Boat Stores organization provided
not only the W.D. Fleet, but also the transportation service, with all require-
ments of marine stores, and made provision arrangements for R.A.S.C. craft,
and their spare parts.
The introduction of the amphibian
vehicle, and its allotment to the
R.A.S.C. to operate, gave that corps a new commitment in the carriage of
cargo discharged from ship to shore, a function previously the prerogative
of the Transportation service.
Inland Water Transport, R.E.
The transportation service only began to operate vessels after the outbreak
of war in 1939, when it started collecting special vessels, such as dredgers,
hoppers, etc., required for port construction and repair.
Then the Inland
Water Transport, R.E., which had been established in the war of 1914-1918
for use on the French canals, and later on the rivers in Mesopotamia (Iraq),
was revived.
I.W.T. operating companies were formed, some of barges for
canal work with the B.E.F., and some of barges, lighters, and tugs, for pot
work.
Launches, borrowed from the Navy or the R.A.S.C., but manned by
transportation personnel, were used for domestic and inter-communication
purposes.
"Z" craft coasters.
In the Middle East and S.E.A.C., I.W.T. companies also operated
The activities of the two services tended to overlap.
For example, the
Transportation service carried stores in bulk in " Zv craft from Alexandria lo
Tobruk, and a few months latter the R.A.S.C. carried stores in bulk from
Algiers to Bone and Philippeville, and later in caiques from Egypt to the
100
Definition of Responsibility
In order to avoid confusion, a definition of responsibility between the
Transportation Service and the R.A.S.C. was called for, and the Army Council
accordingly laid down the policy in this respect in June, 1944.
the instruction is given in Appendix VIIB.
A copy of
Broadly, the R.A.S.C. was made
responsible for all craft required for inter-communication and distributive
movement of personnel and material, while the Transportation Service was
made responsible for the craft required for port working and bulk distribution
of stores.
This was considered the only possible solution to the problem during the
war.
Experience pointed to the inadvisibility of two services operating similar
forms of transport for a common purpose, but also that it was not always
easy to comply with the definition of responsibility. Local topographical con-
ditions, and the exigencies of operational requirements, sometimes caused
difficulties, as in Burma, when both I.W.T. and R.A.S.C. carried out distribu-
tive duties on the Chindwin; while examples of the R.A.S.C. doing bulk move-
ment work were the Military Oil Barge Companies, and the dumping of
ammunition.
The actual definition was capable of interpretation in different ways.
The
R.A.S.C. was to be responsible for inter-communication craft; and this was
rightly interpreted as meaning that they should provide launches in a port
in the same way as they provide staff cars on land.
But it was also stated
that the Transportation Service should be responsible for the craft required
for port working, and this could be interpreted as including craft to take
officials about a
harbour.
As the decision on policy was a war-time measure only, it was reconsidered
after the war; and the principal factors involved, and the conclusions reached,
are recorded in Appendix VIIC.
Motor Boat Companies
Motor Boat Companies were originally formed in order to meet the require-
ment for water transport units, manned by military personnel, to undertake
an operational rôle with a force in an overseas theatre, analogous to that of
a G.T. company on land.
In the first place, two such companies were formed in the latter half of
1940, on a special establishment, for the operation of 40 launches each,
organized in sections of ten.
The first company was employed as a training unit; the second had a
special rôle which is described in Chapter XII, Section 3.
Motor Boat Companies did not always operate launches only,
but were
also employed to man other types of craft.
Thus, in North Africa, they
operated a variety of captured or requisitioned vessels.
The tendency
waS
for a motor boat company to give place to a water transport company when
and where operational conditions permitted the employment of civilian crews
and such crews could be obtained.
101
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
