were shipped.
Most formations arrived incomplete in transport and were
not brought to full strength in vehicles until the D -28 convoy had been
discharged, by which time the campaign was practically over.
Division had less than two companies.
Six general transport companies
had not arrived when the campaign ended.
There was only one Motor
Ambulance Convoy at work, helped by a platoon of an Ambulance Car
Company.
There was no movement of P.O.L. in bulk by road tank lor
during the campaign,
because
the Bulk Petrol Transport Companies dic
not arrive in time; a heavy strain was thus thrown on
the available return-
able cans.
It is true that the transport actually available was sufficient, and
it is doubtful if there would have been room on the roads for the G.T.
companies;
but planning
was held to be at fault in
putting divisional
transport as far back as the D +28 convoy while space in earlier convoys
was allotted to G.T.
companies, including
two
10-ton
companies which
could not leave the main roads.
In the volcanic country, all movement off the road was prevented as
it ran through a wide belt of lava overgrown with cactus.
There was a
general scarcity of roads, other than rough tracks, and this resulted in a
degree of traffic congestion, which would have been disastrous if the Allies
had not had complete air supremacy. This also permitted free movement
by day.
Pack Transport
Pack transport was urgently needed before the pack transport companies
in the trans of Bate could arrive, and it was necessary to improvise it
by requisitioning all sorts and conditions of animals.
Much time was lost
in collisis ninese i sorts rovis on saddlery, and in supervising loaders, and
a severe drain was imposed on formations in the provision of mule-leader
and packers.
was imposed & Divisationhich had used it in North Atria.
and pack diss Apart from 78 Division with any knowledge of pack tran:
port.
The improvised substitute for the trained and experienced units was
at best unsatisfactory, and was considered to have retarded the progress of
at least one division.
with North African drivers were sent over to Sicily at the beginning of
Against the advice of the S.T. experts, two of the R.A.SC. companis
August without their mules.
which had come from Gibraltar.
These were left behind with the company
panies actually took an active part in the campaign, and that during the
In the end, only two troops of these com-
Water Transport
Two good schooners were made available for the R.A.S.C. at Syracus
1 a mo Con came up from North Africa
to onerate them, as well as two others fone of 400 tons) for running stores
forward from Syracuse to Riposto, on the coast road to Messina.
used again for the supply of Anzio.
the coast to supplint where the infantry had arrived, but which could tot
loaded with supplies and P.O.L. on a L.C.T.,
Another device may be mentioned under this head, which was to br
which then took
be reached by road transport overland.
262
Allotment of Units
In view of all the discussion over the Order of Battle of supply units,
it is of interest to note the position a few days before the end of the
campaign.
For a feeding strength of 146,500, there were actually operating
three B.S.Ds.,
four R.A.S.C.
and one
Royal Marine D.I.D., one Field
Bakery, one Mobile Field Bakery, one Royal Marine Bakery, and one Port
Detachment; while there were in reserve one B.S.D., one D.I.D., one Field
Bakery, one Field Butchery, one Port Detachment, and three Beach Group
D.I.Ds.; and, in addition, one Base Provision Office, four D.I.Ds., and three
Field Butcheries did not reach Sicily until after the island was conquered.
The excessive allotment of R.A.S.C. units for the campaign in Sicily
made it more difficult to provide such units for the projected operations in
Italy.
Units included in the " Husky" Order of Battle were not allowed
to be taken into account in the Orders of Battle for Italy, even though
there was little prospect of their arrival in Sicily in time to be of use in the
campaign there.
Consequently,
other units had to be found in North
Africa and the Middle East to make up the requirements for Italy, and it
was not until later that units originally earmarked for Sicily were trans-
ferred to the Italy Order of Battle.
SECTION 3.-ITALY
The Country and the Climate
The topography of most of Italy gives great advantage for defence or
delaying action.
The "toe" is wild and mountainous, with limited roads.
The "heel", and the country between Taranto and the Foggia plain, are
mainly flat with good communications.
The Salerno beach-head was a small
plain, dominated by hills inland.
The Anzio beach-head was also a plain,
but not dominated to the same extent.
The principal feature of the peninsula is the Apennines, the mountain
chain running the whole length of the country, with spurs running cast and
hills.
There were many rivers to be crossed, often commanded by ridges of
The problems of movement and supply were extremely difficult.
was not until the fate movement the campaign that the Allied forces
emerged on to the plain throuch which runs the River Po.
The climate halain through whit on the administrative aspects of the
campaign.
Heavy rain in the autumn of 1943 impeded operations on the
east coast, and at in in the February and March, 1944.
Snow and ice
interrupted
movement over
wide areas in the winter, and
mud
seriously infuence movement over in the mountains.
The invasion of the mainland of Italy began on 3rd Sentember, 1943,
Outline of Operations
when Bighth Army, comprising 13 Corps,
and effected a landing.
right and 5 Division on the left, crossed the straits of Messina from Sicily
with 1 Canadian Division on the
with the Allies.
as soon as invasion hegan lund the nonulation was generally co-operative.
Italian Government requested an armistice
This operation was able to as " Baytown".
and DUKWe were able to go backwards and forwards without interference.
The landings were virtually unopposed, and the landing craft
263
Mars micro 0.5 mm
WO 217/21.
27
WO 277/26
