Royal Marine Boom Patrol Detachment
This unit, under the cover name of the Royal Marine Boom Patrol Detachment, had been
formed, in July, 1942, from selected officers and other ranks of the Royal Marines.
They had
been specially trained in the use of canoes with the object of carrying out operations, either of
reconnaissance or attack, against targets which could not be dealt with by other means.
The detachment underwent very severe endurance tests, and were expert in the use of "limpet"
mines." This form of attack was specially useful against ships in harbours where it was not desired
to employ aircraft in bombing, owing to the presence of neutral or friendly inhabitants.
This force
from its inception was under the command of C.C.O.
On 30th October, 1942, the following letter was sent by C.C.O. to the Secretary to the Chiefs
of Staff Committee. :—
" Operation
'Frankton' has been planned to meet Lord Selborne's requirement,
referred to in C.O.S. (42) 223 (0) and subsequent papers, that steps should be taken to
attack Axis ships which are known to be running the blockade between France and the
Far East.
Both seaborne and airborne methods of attacking the ships have been
carefully
examined, and the plan now proposed is the only one which ofters a good chance of success.
On an average, between six and ten blockade runners are usually found alongside the
quays at Bordeaux, in addition to other shipping.
It is hoped to deal with at least six
blockade runners.
Briefly, the plan is for one officer and five other ranks of the Royal Marine Boom
Patrol Detachment to paddle up the River Gironde in 'cockles,' 2 moving during the hours
of darkness only, and to place 'limpets' on the water-line of the ships they find at Bordeaux.
The ' cockles' will be carried to within nine miles of the mouth of the river in a submarine
detai will be on passage to normal patrol duty and thus will not require to be specially
Frankton.'
At their meeting on 3rd November, the Chiefs of Staff " approved the plan for Operation
No. 1 section R.M. Boom Patrol Detachment under Major H. G. Hasler, Royal Marines, was
selected to train for this operation.
The following programme was carried out :-
31st October-ith November.
In H.M.S. Forth, with six cockles Mark II, developing the
technique of hoisting a boat out fully loaded (480-Ib, load including crew) by means of
a tackle and an extension girder 4 ft. long on the muzzle of the gun of a
submarine.
Training included dummy limpet attacks and 24 hours' training in P. 339.
10th-14th November.
Carrying out exercise " Blanket" (attack on Deptford from Margate,
via River Swale).
19th-20th November. In H.M.S. Forth preparing and packing stores, testing hoisting gear
under full load, swinging compasses, field training ashore, fusing limpets, etc.
30th November-5th December.
photographs and reconnaissance reports.
On passage in H.M.S. Tuna, briefing crews, study of air
The cockles embarked in H.M.S. Tuna were launched off the mouth of the Gironde River at
about 8 p.m. on the night of 7th December.
the Admiralty, dated 29th April, C.C.O. reported as follows :—
In his report on the operation to the Secretary of
on Operation ' Frankton.'
Ity, dated 29he wil, the Deep ot the force Commander (Major H. G. Haster, R.M.)
piratie sit canes, each manned by two Royal Marines, which were launched from
H.M.S. Tuna off the mouth of the Gironde River, one was damaged in launching and never
the Gironde.
loft the cahmarine two were concited in tidal tree and one lost touch at the mouth of
The remaining to canoes manned respectively by Major Hasler and Marine Sparks
and by Corporal Laver and Marine Mill spects reached their objective 50 miles up
the Gironde River and attached the limpets to six ships.
There is good reason to believe that at least three and probably five ships were holed, of
which at least three are believed to have been blockade runners.
Stall explosive charges which could be secured to the hulls of ships by electric magnets and which were
Design wall semi-folding cande, quick to onet and capable of carrying two men and 200 lb. of stores.
116
this country.
Of the personnel engaged, Major Hasler and Marine Sparks have successfully regained
Lt. MacKinnon is believed to be a prisoner of war.
to have been found drowned by the Germans at the entrance of the Gironde River.
Marine Moffat is known
is known of the fate of the remainder.
Nothing
This brilliant little operation carried through with great determination and courage
is a good example of the successful use of ' limpeteers.'
From documents captured at the end of the war, it is now clear that the following ships
sustained damage :—
Alabama
five limpets exploded.
Tannenfels ..
two limpets exploded.
Dresdan
two limpets exploded.
Portland
one limpet exploded.
A further explosion occurred on the seaward side of Sperrbrecher 5. No damage was caused
and it was presumed that the explosive charge had dropped off the ship's side and exploded on
the river bed.
R.M. Detachment 385
This detachment was specially formed early in 1944.
It was composed of ranks who were highly
trained canoeists and trained, to a moderately good standard, as swimmers.
It formed the general
purpose part of the Small Operations Group, whose task in S.E.A.C. was to provide small parties
of uniformed troops trained and equipped to operate against targets on enemy-occupied coasts or
in river and lake areas.
Other units in the Group were Combined Operations Pilotage Parties,
a Special Boat Section and a Sea Reconnaissance Unit.
It is of interest that the setting up of
this Group was the first attempt made to co-ordinate the activities of various units with similar
roles which had previously operated as " Private Armies." It is also of interest that the Small
Operations Group was commanded by a Royal Marine officer, Colonel H. T. Tollemache.
Full details
of the work of the Small Operations Group are given in Appendix 22.
Miscellaneous
Tasks
In addition to the major roles which the Corps was called upon to fulfil in Combined Operations,
there were many others, smaller and, maybe, of a more temporary or ad hoc nature.
Particularly is
this true in the case of N.W. Europe where :-
(1) R.M. Port Parties fulfilled a multitude of roles during and after " Overlord" in France
and Belgium.
(2) R.M. Signallers (800 personnel) played a large part in naval communications ashore.
(3) A R.M. Provost Company landed with Forces "G," " J" and "S" in the initial assault
on the Normandy coast and was wholly engaged in operational duties on the beaches
for the first fourteen days.
(4) R.M. Engineers, from the earliest days of the operation, performed a variety of tasks
in France.
(5) The R.M. Engineer Commando provided Landing Craft Obstruction Clearance Units
during the assault and afterwards took part in operations inshore as demolition teams
with ist and 4th Commando Brigades.
(6) R.M. Armoured Support Group.
Originally it was intended that this Group should man
Centaur
tanks mounting a 95-mm. gun,
which would act as a ready-made turret in
L.C.T. (A.).
The craft would beach
and the unit (then known as the R.M. Support
Craft Regiment) would operate as Field Artillery from their beached craft.
The role
in which the Group finally operated added a third task, which was to strengthen the
fire of the divisional artillery and, with this end in view, the tanks went ashore and
operated up to ten miles inland.
This chapter would not be complete without reference to the part played by Royal Marine
Officers within C.O.H.Q.
Officers of the Corps were to be found in all branches of the staff and wer
concerned in all its various activities.
In particular, the first Director (later Deputy Director of
Combined Operations) from 21st July, 1M.
1940, until 13th November,
1940, was General Bourne ;
Brigadier Wildman-Lushington
was
Adviser to
C.C.O. and later Chief of Staff from
19th December,
1941, until 20th December,
1943 ; and Brigadier V. D. Thomas, R.M., was Chief
of Staff from 21st December, 1943, until 22nd September, 1946.
117
WO 277/21
27
30
