SECTION 6. -AZORES: ST. HELENA: FALKLAND ISLANDS
The occupation of the Azores in October, 1943, was a R.A.F. responsi.
therefore carried out at the Air Ministry.
The Force included the Royal Navy and R.A.F., the Army providing all the
services, including the R.A.S.C.
The R.A.F. were at that time inexperienced in operations of this type, and
little thought appears to have been given to the allocation of responsibilities
There was a D.A.A. and Q.M.G. in the force head-
quarters, but no S. and T. representative, and in the initial stages of working
The original requirement was for two supply detachments on special
establishments to maintain 3,500 and 500 respectively, including P.O.L. duties,
the operation of a small hand bakery, and butchers to supervise the killing and
issuing of fresh meat.
These detachments were later merged in the general
R.A.S.C. detachment, which comprised four officers, and 99 other ranks of
It was not clear at the planning stage that the force was intended for the
Azores, the plans and numbers were changed several times, and planning was
eventually for a strength of 3,200.
A D.I.D. was established on 10th October, 1943, the day of landing, and
Compo rations were issued until 22nd October, supplemented by fresh bread
within three days by the use of a civilian bakery.
Full scale rations were
issued 14 days after landing.
The main difficulty was the lack of covered accommodation for supplies.
The supply of tarpaulins and store tents was inadequate as a protection
against rain and the high humidity.
The Portuguese Military Governor set up a Food Commission, consisting
of the O.C., R.A.S.C., and two Portuguese representatives.
Its terms of
reference were to allocate local supplies to the civil and Portuguese military
population, and also to the British forces under the terms of the Anglo-
Portuguese Lend /Lease agreement. It fixed all prices of foodstuffs.
In order to supplement the local sunnlies of fresh vegetables seeds were
obtained from the United Kingdom, and by the middle of 1944 a good range
of fresh vegetables was provided.
A detachment of the R.A.F. on an island 75 miles from the main force
was provided with bread from the R.A S.C. bakerv, enough for four days
being flown weekly. Local bread of noor anality was issued for the other
This was unsatisfactory, and the use of bread-preservative was
introduced, which enabled bread to he sunnlied for seven dave a weak in
weekly consignments.
can be kept in excellent condition after a week.
It was proved that bu the use of preservative hread
There was no A.C.C. officer with the force hut a catering officer D A.F.
carried out these duties for the Army in addits to those for hia own Service.
436
P.O.L. and Solid Fuel
At first all P.O.L. was supplied in packed form from the United Kingdom.
Later, when U.S. forces arrived, it all came from the U.S.A.
The principal U.S. interest in the Azores was at first the large airport of
Lagens on Terceira island, which was a main terminal for the heavy U.S.
trans-Atlantic air traffic.
Later, they proposed to establish a new airport on
another island, and move their personnel from Lagens to it.
This meant their
relinquishing responsibility for the maintenance and operation of the bulk
petrol installation at Lagens in April, 1945.
The Air Ministry consequently
asked if the Army could take over the commitment, as the R.A.F.
still be using the airfield there.
The installation consisted of 16 main storage tanks of 155,000-barrel
capacity, and 12 1,000-barrel service tanks.
These were filled from ocean
tankers which moored about 600 yards off shore, and discharged through
submarine pipelines.
The majority of the storage capacity
was used for
Issues were made in bulk to aircraft refuelling vehicles and
to M.T. vehicles.
As tankers could not always berth in bad weather, a packed reserve was
held in 44-gallon barrels, amounting to 15 days' consumption of aviation fuel
and 30 days' of M.T. spirit.
As the most suitable R.A.S.C. unit to take charge of the commitment, a
Petroleum Bulk Storage Platoon (Light) was allotted, with a Fire Fighting
Section, A.F.S., attached.
One of the officers was a petroleum engineer and
chemist, the latter qualification being necessary for quality
control, as the
U.S. laboratory had withdrawn to the new airfield.
It was agreed that samples
of incoming cargoes would be flown to the U.S. laboratory, but that sufficient
equipment would be left at Lagens to enable the necessary daily tests to be
Initial supplies of coal and coke were shipped in July, 1943, under S.T. 7
arrangements, at the scale of one lb. coal per man per day.
As amenities
improved this was gradually raised to two lb. in summer, and three ib. in
winter.
Local discharging facilities required all shipments to be bagged.
They
were made from the United Kingdom against monthly demands averaging
150 tons a month.
In August, 1944, the possibility was investigated of the garrison obtaining
its fuel from M.O.W.T. bunker stocks in the Islands; but it was found that,
owing to the lack of off-loading facilities and of suitable vessels to transfer
the fuel to the islands occupied by British troops, such a procedure
would be
less economical than shipping from the United Kingdom.
The R.A.S.C. transport element of the force consisted of one transport
platoon, with one electrician and two fitters. This was intended to cover the
initial off-loading of stores.
All vehicles were pooled and the original idea was to run them for
24 hours a day.
On first arrival, there was no proper control.
transport officer was posted at the main quay, to prevent vehicles being over-
loaded and nominally to act at M.T. officer; he was given no powers of
