By the end of the campaign in North Africa, the major equipment of all
armoured formations was Sherman and Churchill tanks, involving movement
by Diamond T transporters.
The light transporters were consequently of
little value, except for stores lifts.
Machine-gun carriers, which had been
conveyed on the light transporters, could be carried on normal 6-ton or 10-ton
lorries.
Mixed companies were unsatisfactory, and complicated the spare
part situation.
Reports from the theatres of war regarding the operation of tank trans-
porter companies recommended the abolition of the light transporter, and
its substitution by the Diamond T.
The surplus of the light type was con-
deficiency of 10-ton lorries for L. of C. services, and for heavy loads at home.
dented in o 15-om liral set ce lose-carriers, i order to help out the
Rôle of Transporter Companies
The primary functions for which tank transporter companies were intended
were the following: —
(a) Strategic.—The conveyance of tanks and crews during the approach
march to the assembly area, resulting in conservation of track and
general wear.
(b) Tactical.—Transport of tanks to their forming-up positions ensuring
their arrival with crews fresh, fuel tanks full, and avoidance of break-
(c) Reinforcement.—Forward delivery from railhead or seahead of re-
placement tanks to the battle area.
(d) Salvage.—Recovery from the battle field, and transport to railhead
(e) Mobility.—Assisting armoured division workshops by transporting
tanks under repair which might otherwise have to be abandoned.
The standard procedure for the supply of reinforcements of personnel
and armoured fighting vehicles to armoured formations in the field was laid
Tank transporter companies, R.A.S.C., were to be
used for the forward delivery of tanks at stages in the R.A.O.C. and/or R.A.C.
chain of delivery, as might be necessary.
Returning transporters would, after
effecting delivery to a formation, be employed as far as possible to evacuate
vehicles from the workshops of the formation.
The delivery of R.E. assault vehicles (A.V.R.E.) forward of tank railhead
was normally to be by R.A.S.C. transporters, sufficient tank drivers being
borne on the strength of vehicle parks near tank railhead to ensure that
vehicles could be loaded on transporters.
In the event of R.A.S.C. trans-
porters not being available, vehicle parks were to deliver to a vehicle delivery
point.
Units of Assault Engineer troops would then send back drivers to
collect and take forward to units.
Owing to the shortage of 40-ton transporters, a General Staff decision was
taken that transporters were only to be included in the establishments of
Tank Transporter Companies, R.A.S.C.
This did not apply to tank recovery
vehicles on the strength of R.E.M.E. units, or mean that the R.A.S.C. vet
to take on tank recovery work.
At the same time, it was seen that it would
be advantageous for R.A.S.C. tank transporter drivers to be trained in the
78
elements of tank recovery, and the handling of damaged tanks, and arrange-
ments were made accordingly.
(See also Chapter VI.)
Tank transporters were often employed in the carriage of heavy lifts,
both in the United Kingdom (see Chapter XII, Section 2), and in theatres
overseas, e.g., in India, (see Chapter X).
They were also used in 21 Army
Group to increase the lift of stores on the L. of C., as described in Chap-
ter VIII.
Deficiency of Motor-cycles
The possibility arose in August, 1941, of a new factory having to be set
up for the manufacture of motor-cycles, against an estimated deficiency of
50,000 machines in the requirement for 1941-1942.
The Ministry of Supply
was pressing home production to the full, and also pursuing the possibility
of Canada making a motor-cycle to W.D. pattern; but the latter project
entailed a nine months' delay in starting production.
The " Jeep"
A possible alternative to the motor-cycle was the U.S. Army reconnaissance
car, known then as the " blitz buggy", and finally as the " Jeep".
This was a
vehicle with four-wheel drive, and a pay-load of 5-cwt., and it had an excellent
cross-country performance.
Trials were made of this vehicle against the W.D. motor-cycle combina-
tion.
The results went in favour of the Jeep, which gave excellent perform-
ances in all tests.
The question was then examined of the extent to which R.A.S.C. motor-
cycle requirements could be reduced by substitution of the Jeep,
was found that, in Middle East, 60 per cent. of motor-cycles could be so
replaced, and in other theatres 15 per cent. Motor-cycles had proved almost
unusable for convoy control over the long distances and heavy going of the
Western Desert, and were generally carried in lorries for inter-communication
work when units were stationary.
These figures implied a saving of 15,000 motor-cycles, and an additional
requirement of 12,000 jeeps.
Orders were at once placed on U.S.A. for a
total of 10,000 jeeps, of which one-third were on R.A.S.C. account.
It is scarcely necessary to record here the popularity and valuable services
of the jeep,
which proved itself in many theatres, not least in the Far East,
where the difficult terrain often permitted the operation of mechanical trans-
port only in the shape of jeep cars and trailers.
Its popularity led to excessive demands, and to a considerable degree of
improper use; and, in July, 1943, it became necessary to fix the policy of
allotment of jeeps.
In view of the shortage, this was limited to all Field Force
fighting headquarters and units; administrative headquarters and units, in-
duding R.A.S.C., were to continue to use the normal two-seater car, and not
the jeep, except of course in transport companies equipped with the latter as
their task vehicles.
In October, 1944, in view of the jeep being essential for Far Eastern opera-
tions, a warning was sent out that production, which was all in U.S.A., might
not be equal to meeting all the large requirement.
It was, therefore, necessary
that all possible steps should be taken to safeguard existing assets, and to build
79
(37452)
G 2
WO277/2k
27
WO 277726
