The Alternatives.
Cherbourg Peninsula or the Pas de Calais
The planning continued mainly on operation " Sledgehammer." On 26th March, 1942, C.C.O.
produced a short paper' on the acquisition of dumb barges for the carriage of motor transport.
On 27th March the report? from C.-in-C., Home Forces, A.O.C.-in-C., Fighter Command and
C.C.O. was sent to the Chiefs of Staff.
It stated:—
" (1) Our broad conclusions are as follows :—
(a) The limited object given by the Chiefs of Staff can be achieved by air action
alone.
(b) Unless German morale is broken, we do not consider that a re-entry into France
with the resources at our disposal in 1942 is likely to be successful.
(c) Should, however, circumstances force us to take military action on the Continent
during 1942 we lean towards the Pas de Calais but, before coming to a final
decision, we require further time to investigate other possibilities.
investigations are being pressed on as rapidly as possible.
(2) We wish to draw attention to the fact that, if a combined operation is to be carried
out at all this summer, a decision will have to be made without any further delay."
The choice of the Pas de Calais area was dictated by the range of fighter support but opinion
at C.O.H.Q. was not in favour of a landing in this area for the following reasons :—
was most heavily defended by the Germans.
Their gun defences dominated the
narrow strip of water through which our ships and craft would have to sail.
(3) Any forces landed would have to be supplied across open beaches, exposed to the full
effect of the prevailing wind in the Channel and to the greatest rise and fall of tide.
(4) Only the most perfectly trained personnel could have a hope of succeeding against the
opposition that was to be expected and it was thought that, with the little training
they had had up to date, they were not fit for the task.
However, so as to be prepared for the operation, training was intensified in all the establishments
in the Combined Operations Command.
The Chiefs of Staff considered these two reports at their meeting on 28th March. The following
remarks were made by C.C.O. :-
" The C.C.O. said he fully realised the arguments in favour of the Pas de Calais area but
there were certain points about the Cherbourg operations which he thought merited further
aramination.
He was not yet in a position to say that a landing on the scale proposed in
the Pas de Calais area was a practical operation and he added that, with the lines of com-
munication which would be available, it seemed that the re-embarkation would be a very
difficult task. We should certainly have to leave behind most of the equipment and probably
many of the personnel. He suggested therefore that the operation in the Cherbourg peninsula
should be examined in further detail.
This he thought would not interfere with the Pas de
dumb barges.
The meeting asked for a further report and agreed in principle to the requisitioning of a thousand
In the next few days reports were submitted by the Admiralty on the availability of Tank
Landing Craft and the provision of naval forces.
On 7th April, the three Commanders reported
that the maintenance problem
again and concluded " ht the operation is practicable against the present scale of defences, provided
numerous risks.
can be successtullv overcome.
Among the recommendations they made were :—
They also called attention to
(1) " Planning for an alternative operation should be carried on
Sledgehammer.'
concurrently with
luring the assembly and training period
Raids on a scale larger than hitherto carried out should take place
(2) " Operation " Round-up' should be based on Operation' Sledgehammer' as ..
(3) " Force Commanders should be appointed forthwith."
are to operator in sled ehmer as
(4) " Priority to be given for such work and equipment.
1 C.O.S. (42) 76, dated 26th March, 1942.
essential to the operation."
2 C.O.S. (42) 77 (O), dated 27th March, 1942.
32
STAEDTLER
This report was taken at the chits of Staff meeting on Sth April, 1942. In commenting on
the Report the C.I.G.S. (General Sir Alan Brooke) said i-
in the original directive for planning Operation ' Sledgehammer, the object laid
down was to make Germany employ continuously her air forces in the West in conditions
advantageous to ourselves, in order to reduce German air support available for the Eastern
head within the advantageous area of fighter cover.
Furthermore, judging by the size of the
no longer existed.
He did not agree with this change of object or with the assumption. ...
Later, he goes on to say :—
" It was suggested that, although the conditions under which Operation ' Sledgehammer'
could take place were unlikely to present themselves, it might be advisable to have plans
prepared in case conditions similar to those needed for Operation ' Round-up
in the latter part of the year."
The Committee therefore invited
(1) The C.-in-C.,
Forces, the A.O.C.-in-C. Fighter Command and the Chief of
Combined Operations to investigate what action could be taken by the armed forces
in the West to help Russia in the event of her being hard pressed by the Germans this
summer;
2) The A.O.C.-in-C., Fighter Command, in consultation with the A.O.C.-in-C., Bomber
Command to prepare an appreciation under the following terms of reference :—
" How to inflict by air action the greatest possible wastage of the German Air
Force in the West immediately after the launching of the German spring offensive,
to assess this wastage and to estimate the air situation resulting from it.'
Later in the same meeting, the following decision was recorded :-
" The Committee approved the proposal that the responsibility for planning Operation
'Round-up' should be
rought into line with that for Operation ' Sledgehammer,' i.e.
it should be transferred to the C.-in-C., Fighter Command (and other R.A.F. Commands as
necessary) and the Chief of Combined Operations, the Naval Staff being fully consulted."
sized raids was the only practical solution.
On 16th April, the Chiefs of Staff ordered the preparation of a memorandum for planning and
rocedure, and agreed the appointment of the Force Commanders
namely Vice-Admiral B. H.
lamsay, Lieutenant-General E. C. A. Schreiber and Air Marshal T. Leigh Mallory.
They were
accommodated at C.O.H.Q. in Richmond Terrace.
The Combined Commanders were still divided as to the best locality on the French coast for
either " Round-up
or " Sledgehammer.'
It will be recalled that the Army and the R.A.F.
favoured the Pas de Calais because of the fighter cover that could be guaranteed in that area,
whereas the opinion held by the C.C.O. and the staff at C.O.H.Q. was that the French coast from the
River Canche to Cherbourg should be the scene either of one or both operations, and that the fighter
aurcraft could be fitted with long range tanks to make them capable of operating in the Cherbourg
and/or Baie de la Seine areas.
Further, the " Habbakuk"
project was being investigated; this
had as one of its objects the provision of floating airfields in any area of operations.
C.O.H.Q.
was firmly opposed to an attack in the Pas de Calais area where the Germans had developed a really
powerful coast defence system, which could dominate ships in that area, and had established defence
in depth from the coast which, from our air reconnaissance, appeared to be very formidable.
It the Combined Commanders' Meetings, the C.C.O. repeatedly
pointed out these facts and
he was at pains to show that the continental channel ports from
Le Havre to the eastward
were all shallow ports with narrow entrances and capable of complete protection by minefields.
On
the other hand, the
ports to the westward, notably Cherbourg, were deep-water
ports with wide
entrances, which could not be so easily mined and which were not nearly so well defended.
In fact
the Pas de Calais project did not take into account the advantage given to our forces by the
possession of the local command of sea communications, as did the western area.
Another point of difference between the C.C.O. and his military and air force colleagues was
that he was of the opinion that the Army, on landing in the Baie de la Seine, should turn westward
1 C.O.S. (42) 21st Meeting (0), 8th April, 1942.
33
WO 277/21
27
30
