In Corps F.M.C.
2-3 days; in 13 Corps, F.M.C. re-
serves went up to 7 days during
the last winter battle in the Apen-
nines.
In D.M.A.
Usually one days' reserve, but some-
times as much as seven days.
The maximum
reserves
With Units
were
those
recorded
necessitated by the
weather and terrain in the Apen-
nines during the winter of 1944.
1945, i.e.,
10 days for all units
forward of the passes (4 with units
and 6 in R.A.S.C. dumps), 3 days
with units south of the passes.
Base Supply Depots
In this campaign, B.S.Ds. were employed more often than not at ports,
though in a few cases they were located at Advanced Bases inland.
Because of the enormous tonnages which had to be handled during the
early days of the campaign, conditions in the B.S.Ds.
chaotic.
It was necessary to work 24 hours a day, and there was no respite
in which to clear accumulations.
All available supply personnel were
pressed into service.
At Naples, a concentrated G.H.Q. supply installation was established,
consisting of a H.Q., C.R.A.S.C.,
Supply Units and three B.S.Ds.
the 22-months build-up for the May, 1944, offensive, these depots had an
average daily turnover of 4,000 tons.
There was considered to be a need
for the reintroduction of the type ""A" B.S.D. for use in such places.
Owing to the shortage of B.S.Ds., the policy was adopted of restrictin
their allocation to depots, where a minimum of 5,000 tons of supplies was
Field Supply Depots.
Depots below that tonnage were looked after by D.I.Ds. acting as
As the result of experience in this campaign, it was considered that,
during the early stages
pressure work building up stocks for an offensive the efficiency of a B.S.D.
of an overseas operation, and in times of high
depended upon the following factors: —
(a) An Offer Commanding who is a good organizer and has drive
and initiative.
(b) Well trained and reasonably experienced personnel.
(c) Adequate and suitable labour.
(d) Sufficient transport for internal work.
conditions in the B.E.F. in 1939.
The second of these is narticularly interesting in comparison with the
Detail Issue Depots
Advanced
The majority of the D.I.Ds. in Italy
Base, only six out of 17 being with formations.
were employed at the
Do this type ok out in the Medle the in mation, it was ruled that a pie
274
should be regarded as being capable of feeding 20,000 troops, instead of
the scheduled 7,500.
An example of the strain under
which these units
worked in this campaign was seen at Anzio, where for some time the only
tvo D.I.Ds, available received supplies from the sea, held reserves of two
million rations, and made issues to 42,000 troops.
The same factors were
considered to apply to D.I.Ds. as to B.S.Ds., as mentioned above.
Composite Platoons, especially those of Artillery Platoons, were often
detached to operate as D.I.Ds. and run supply points.
One such fed an
average of 40,000 men, with a peak of 78,000.
Frozen Meat
No frozen meat. could be issued to troops in Italy or Sicily
until
October, 1943, mainly owing to the lack of cold storage in Sicily.
The
situation was changed when Italian ports with ample cold storage space
became available.
There
were
also enough refrigerated railway
wagons
available in the theatre for full distribution.
Arrangements were made
for supply by
coaster from Middle East, a vessel with 5,000 tons being
sent direct to the latter theatre from South America to enable the extra
load to be carried.
Maintenance of the supply proved difficult, owing to the lack of small
refrigerated vessels in the Mediterranean; so the Ministry of War Transport
agreed to maintain the Italian theatre by
direct ocean-going vessels and
to dispense with coastwise traffic from the Middle East.
To make this
possible, it was essential to increase the holdings of the Italian cold storage
depots.
A ship with a capacity of 3,000 tons was used as a depot ship,
and a store of 2,000 tons capacity was constructed at Malta.
Special Demands for Compo Pack
A supplementary demand was made on War Office by A.F.H.O. in the
latter applementary demand was made mpo rations, intended to be used
parly for issue to forward troops at Christmas, and partly to build up a
reserve for projected operations, expected to take place in the spring of
These operations did not actually take place, but the rations arrived
in time to cover the operatiot s in Greece in December, 1944, and January,
No forecast had been given to the aT Direntorate of the latter
operations, and, until Nd been given , it had been understood that Middle
Fast would be responsibi. for anarations in Mease and the neighbourine
Ration Scales and Strengths
in due course by the War Office.
responsibility for introducing and amending ration scales, subject to approva
i in met tas chairman. and repre
New and amended scales were considered
sentatives of the Director of Medical Services, the Financial Adviser, anc
the Chief Catering Adviser, were the members
1A list of the ration scales in force under A.F.H.Q. is given at Appendix
275
WO211/2t
27
WO277/26
