reserve was held in packages. In Italy, the stock of filled containers was
sinained at a minimum level of 15 days for the forces on the mailin.
exclusive of holdings in advance of Army rear boundaries.
There was no
excland fast rule as to the amount to be held in different types of con.
tainers, but the guide figures were: —
100-octane
100 per cent. barrels.
Kerosene
100 per cent. barrels.
Derv and M.T. 80
...
25 per cent. cans, 75 per cent. barrels.
Bulk Supply
The work of rehabilitating bulk storage installations was carried out
partly by U.S. engineers, partly by the R.E.
with R.A.S.C. assistance, and
partly by the civilian operators of the oil companies.
As the Armies advanced up the peninsula, the operation of installations
in the rearward areas was handed over to the Italian equivalent of the
British Petroleum Pool Board, a small control staff from a Bulk Petrol
Storage Section being left as long as there was any W.D. petrol left in the
storage.
Pipelines were used to the fullest possible extent, both for air and
land forces.
The vast Foggia airfield system was supplied exclusively by
pipeline under U.S. arrangements, while the U.S. Army was also responsible
for the three 4-inch pipelines which were run from Naples to within ten
miles of the front at Cassino.
In the spring offensive of 1944 a single line
was extended to Rome.
On the Eighth Army front, a pipeline was con:
structed from an installation near Ancona to Army pipeheads 120 miles
In the spring of 1945, it was agreed that the R.A.S.C. should take over
the maintenance of the line and for overhauls of engines, pumps, etc.
Bulk Petroleum Storage Comnan a Ctorage Section. and tun Mohile Petro
Filling Centres were initially detailed for the task,
Petroleum Installations.
Losses a petrol the ask leaks in the pipelie
under a C.R.A.S.C,
by the extent of black market dealings among
Pull supply to the Fighth Army was started in November. 1943, and
four special trains
composed of rail cistern wagons (as tank wagons were
called to distinguish them from trucks for conveving armoured fighting
forward daily.
vehicles) each containing 30000 gallone in eir to eight wagons. were sen
Petrol points were established in all norts and towns and along
Various tunes of units were used for this work, including Composi
panies, Mobile Petrol Filling
Base Petrol Filling Centre.
Platoons of Bulk Petrol Transport Companies, Bulk Petrol Storage.
Centres,
Type Petrol Depots,
unit for petrol point work This meth, because there was
fically designed for the purpose.
This method of using any avalate an
It was wasteful of personnel particia
278
difficulties arose.
same see a a ei: and the pie eno died to to
The Base Petrol Filling Centre, organized in improvised sections, proved
a partial solution, but a specially designed unit was undoubtedly needed.
In 21 Army Group, a similar requirement was to be met by the formation
of a Petrol Station Company (see Appendix IIK).
The Lines of Communication
There was no regular road L. of C. transport service from Naples and
Bari to the Army Areas, partly because the geographical shape of the
country lent itself to the development of coastal traffic, with its vastly greater
carrying capacity, and partly because there was a railway running up the
centre of the peninsula from Naples to Arezzo.
It was, however, necessary
for one period, when bridges on this line were washed away, for G.T.
companies to ferry a daily tonnage of 2,500 tons across a 16-mile gap.
Stores were moved forward to Army Railheads or Roadheads by three
methods: -
(a) By direct shipment into Advanced Base ports, thence by rail and
(b) by coasters, including R.A.S.C.-operated schooners, from Base ports
to Advanced Base ports, and thence on as before;
(c) by rail direct from Naples to Arezzo, and thence on.
Until A.F.H.O. took over the rear areas of Italy from H.Q, A.A.I.,
the static H.Q. of L. of C. Areas, etc., were responsible for the forward
movement of stores from Base to Army Railheads.
Afterwards this became
the concern to. A. BS acting through its subordinate Cs.R. A.S.C.
Supply Units and Petrol Installations, in conjunction with Movements and
Army H.Q. sent its demands for all commodities to A.F.H.Q., based on
seven day perioda the demands baing submitted 14 dave in advance and
specifying the rais, the de roads deing each formation under command.
Army areas were organized on normal lines.
Supplies arriving at Army
railheads were held in
P.O.L. was stored in depots. but bulk M.T. petrol was delivered by pipe-
depots established in the vicinity.
line from Advanced Base installations to Army pipeheads, supplemented by
rail tank wagons as required.
control Army Railhead.
Eighth Army had a special Area H.Q. to
The normal principle in Fiohth Army was to use two Petrol Depots
or railhead, and to leap-frog one depot ahead of the other during an advance
• to hold packed stocks (200 miles for the force) at roadhead and /
Army Pipeheads were usually run by pipehead detachments formed from
a Composite Platoon of a Bulk Petrol Transport Company under Army
This detachment was responsible for regulating the flow
tank lorries into the filling points,
the gallonage taken from the pipehead, ascertaining from M.P.F.Cs.
recording the number of vehicles, and
from corps and Army Petrol Supply Points (P.S.Ps.) the time of road tanl
orry arrivals. and regulating the flow of road tank lorries to F.M.Cs.
279
wer
wO277/t.
27
W027//26
