Owing to the enormous quantity of transport required to mainlin the
petrol supplies of the Eighth a tro etcards from Tobruk, it was die
sidered in 1942, that,
and Benghazi again,
if ever a front became stabilized between Tone
Tobruk to as near the stabilized line as possible.
it would be worth laying a 4-inch pipeline tina
It was estimated that
on a desert L. of C. 300 miles long, the provision of a 4-inch line with
capacity of 180,000 gallons a day would effect a saving of 9,000 person
4,700 vehicles, 450,000 4-gallon returnable cans (or 50,000/60,000 4 glin
tins a day), and 22,000 gallons of petrol a day for load-carrying veils,
as compared with maintaining the supply of the same quantity of petr
in returnable containers carried in 3-ton vehicles.
As the line never became
stabilized west of Tobruk after June, 1942, the scheme was never de
veloped.
There was also a proposal to lay a 6-inch line westwards from
Alexandria to the
Western Desert, but the rapid advance of the Eigh
Army after the battle of El Alamein made the laying of the line unnecessary.
Bulk Distribution
Bulk distribution was developed, as equipment began to arrive during
the latter part of 1941, along three separate lines:
(a) Main route refuelling points, for the fuelling of convoys on all
the main Middle East routes.
(b) Bulk outfits in unit lines, base camps and installations.
(c) Semi-bulk in returnable containers.
This was provided by:—
(i) Filling containers at main route refuelling points, or bul
outfits,
and issuing at outlying consuming points on the bais
of fulls for empties.
(ii) Allocating a number of barrels to a formation or area, unil
All eating a of mulk outits or in case of temporary ore-
tion, the barrels being filled by road tankers.
Filling returnable containers at base installations and issuing
them to consuming tormations.
ling
of large convoys at main route refuelling stations vas
laying out filled 4-gallon returnable containers in groups
"refuelling parks", near the bulk refuelling system, s
f vehicles up to 500 could be refuelled simultaneously:
blish bulk refuelling points along the Western Dest
ade early in 1941; but they were turned down on the
Desert battle was over, and the route would be
and facilities for filling returnable containers had been established at four
Ey the end of 1941, however, main route refueling pins
points, as far forward as Sidi Barrani.
bulk at these points, and to maintain nearby formations by means of return
The plan was to refuel convoys in
able containers filled there
As the hatle moved westwards, barrel-fed re
fuelling points were
tainer filling facilities had reached Tobruk and Capuzzo; but all these had
these by bulk refuelling points.
pushed forward and it was the intention to
By May, 1942, refuelling points and on;
to be destroyed of abandoned on our retreat to El Alamein.
Some of the earlier bulk refuelling outfits were erected under contrac
by the civilian oil companies, and some of the later main route refuelling
points by Works; but thand lark work, are eby the Bulk Petrol Storage
Companies for the pipe and tank work, and works personnel for the roads
and concrete work.
In preparation for the offensive at El Alamein in November, 1942, a
number of non-runner Italian road tankers were brought up from Eritrea,
with the object of towing them out along the Western Desert road, and
using them as static tanks into
which Bulk Petrol Transport Companies
could discharge their loads, and from which vehicles could be refuelled and
containers refilled.
Solid Fuel, 1942
The closing of the Mediterranean in May, 1940, had necessitated drawing
on all available Middle East resources, and the entry of Greece into the war
in 1941 had increased Middle East requirements (including military, civil,
Admiralty, etc.) to 200,000 tons a month.
It was never possible for sub-
stantial stocks to be built up.
This, and the reduced amount of coal
available from Calcutta (owing to labour shortage and shipping difficulties),
made it necessary to find an alternative source of supply.
By May,
1942, Middle East stocks were down to a dangerously low
level, and 75,000 tons from the United Kingdom, and 25,000 tons from
U.S.A. were shipped in May and June.
For the future, Middle East would
have to rely mainly on South African coal.
Co-ordination of provision was
erefore, taken over by S.T.6, War Office, and Middle East ceased to
deal with India.
P.A.I.C. began to make independent arrangements for its
coal supplies.
By the end of 1942, Libya was included in Middle East
demands, now totalling 16,000 tons a month for military use.
Most of
this came from South Africa, being shipped from Lorenzo Marques and
Durban through civilian agents.
At Durban, an Admiralty
contract already existed which was used
by the Army until July, 1944, when
the War Department made a direct
arrangement.
S.T.6 kept the
Admiralty informed of requirements from
Durban; the Director of Sea
Transport notified Middle
Fast and the
Principal Sea Transport Officer, Egypt, of sailings; and Middle East notified
P.S.T.O., Egypt,
of discharge ports.
All military cargoes were ordered
to Suez, where Middle East gave instructions as to their destination.
Preparation for Eighth Army Offensive
During the pe Preparations August to 22nd October, 1942, preparations
were in progres rid roproposed offensive by the Eighth Army:
clded the making good of losses and wastage in personnel and equipment
the building up
planning to ensure that the administrative resources could maintain the
of the forward stocks necessary for the offensive, and
momentum of the pursuit.
The strength of Eighth Army at the time the offensive opened was
pendent brigades.
four armoured divisions. seven infantry divisions, and three Allied inde
201
Mars micro 0.5mm
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
