at the after end of the tank deck which was particularly obvious in long seas.
This necessitated
each one being strengthened to overcome this defect.
The D.N.E. (C.O.), by dint of very great
effort, managed to get this fitted to the L.C.Ts. required so that they were able to sail in time to
take part in the operation.
In addition to the L.C. T.s, a request was also received for all the available Landing Craft Flak
(L.C.F.).
These were accordingly prepared for the ocean passage and eventually took part in the
assaulls
L.C.T. Officers
To navigate the L.C. T.s for an ocean passage, the Admiralty were unable to supply from General
Service the number of officers required
The training of the officers employed in L.C.T.s only
comprised a course in pilotage which did not include deep sea navigation.
It was therefore
necessary to institute courses for these officers in astral navigation.
These courses were carried
out at the Major Landing Craft Tank Headquarters (H.M.S. Dinosaur) at Troon and lasted three
weeks in which time the officers, through intensive studies, became sufficiently proficient and not one
L.C.T. got lost on the way.
Support Fire
Amongst the many deliberations of the planners, the question of support fire in the assault
was a major concern.
The importance of this was fully realised at C.O.H.Q. and every means of
getting the Rocket-fitted L.C.Is. (L.C.T.(R) ) into commission and carrying out trials were em-
ployed.
There was opposition amongst both the users and the designers who were very doubtful
of the success of the project.
The C.C.O., however, was most insistent and the trials of the first
craft were carried out on 21st April and several L.C.T. (R) took part in the actual operation in July.
These, together with the L.C.G. armed with 4•7 in. guns, which were also used in '
proved their worth.
Beach Reconnaissance
The Naval Commander-in-Chief (Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham) for Operation " Husky"
anxious to ascertain the gradients of the beaches selected for the landings.
Here
again C.O.H.Q. helped.
As the result of previous operations the Combined Operations Pilotage
Parties (C.O.F.P.s) had been formed.
These consisted of officers specially trained to carry out
beach reconnaissance at night and included one naval navigation specialist and one Royal Engineer
officer.
The technique employed was for a submarine to take the party close in to the beach, they
would then proceed ashore in a Folbot and return on completion of their reconnaissance to
the submarine.
All trained parties were placed at the disposal of the Commander-in-Chief directly his request
was received.
It is interesting to record some remarks made by
the Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean (Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham), in his report on the operation to General
licennowel.
"COLLECTION OF BEACH INTELLIGENCE
Much credit is due to the officers and men of the C.O.P.P. beach reconnaissance parties
for their arduous and hazardous efforts to obtain details of the beach gradients and
sand bars... •
The estimation of beach conditions and gradients by air photography and study of
but where sand bars exist
there i hope a substite tore i in ich of atare so the services of these gallant
parties will continue to be necessary. ..:
Mounting for Operation " Husky"
and Force "V":
mount, on the Clyde, two of the major components of the assault forces.
Force "W," which was to have a period for training in the Suez Canal area, sailed on
16th March, 1943, and was routed via the Cape of Good Hope.
28th June.
Force "Y" carried out training at the C.T.C. Inverary and was sailed from the Clyde on
This Force was routed through the Straits of Gibraltar and took part in the assault of
Sicily from the west.
50
SECTION (iii)
THE LESSONS LEARNED FROM OPERATIONS " TORCH" AND " HUSKY"
The Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean (Admiral Cunningham) in his report to General
Eisenhower summed up the lessons learned as follows :—
" Lessons of the Landings
(1) The need for faster and more seaworthy craft for the landing of supporting arms.
(2) The enormous value of the L.S.T. as a means of rapid landing of reinforcements.
'and the need for a means of crossing it.
(3) The importance of the water gas. side carried' pontoon; but it is only suitable
means so far devised is the
(4) The profound effect that D.U.K.W.sl have had in amphibious warfare.
(5) The importance of early hydrographical survey of the bars to find the gaps which
(6) The need for augmentation of labour in beach groups and stevedore gangs in merchant
ships to ensure rapid unloading over beaches.
(7) The importance of Senior Air Officers with executive powers and a full knowledge
of the plan to accompany the Naval Commanders in the assault.
(8) The importance of A.A. fire discipline particularly in minor craft."
All these things had been given careful study by C.O.H.Q. and had been continually advocated
02747
1I7
WO 277/21
27
30
1 Production Code name for wheeled amphibians which, like Tanlis, has remained,
and become the
ordinary name for them.
51
