Conclusion
The part played by the Royal Marines in Combined Operations it ve old War II has been
the Corps it is ofinterest to enumerate the main roles performa by them in the Normandy invasion.
summarised in this chapter under its main headings.
ine sive a final picture of the part played by
Some seventeen thousand Royal Marines were in action, by far the largest Royal Marine effort of
the war.
The following were the main activities :—
Five R.M. Commandos and 4 S.S. Brigade H.Q. with tasks ashore.
R.M. Landing Craft; more than two-thirds of the L.C.A. and most of the minor craft in
the Build-up Force were manned by Marines.
R.M. Armoured Support Group.
Guns crews of L.C.G. and L.C.F.
A red.
Detachments in H.M. Ships in the Bombardment Force, several detachments were in
greater than normal strength.
Naval Camp Staffs on both sides of the Channel.
R.M. Provost employed on beaches in naval ports and attached to Commandos.
R.M. Port Parties in three ports on the Normandy side.
R.M. Hard Parties loading craft on the U.K. side.
CHAPTER 16
CLOSE SUPPORT AND COMBINED OPERATIONS
BOMBARDMENT UNITS
Section (i)
Section (ii)
Close Support.
Combined Operations Bombardment Units.
SECTION (i)
CLOSE SUPPORT
Introduction
The question of air support is not considered in detail in this chapter as to a very large extent
it is either strategical in its conception or conforms to the systems employed in the normal
land battle.
The problem of close support of an assault was one of many considered by the I.S.T.D.C. in
its early days.
Their initial efforts were concentrated on the question of providing the assault
troops with covering fire during the vulnerable period of the approach to, and the crossing of the
beaches.
The first practical achievement towards the solution of this problem was the production
of a few small and lightly armoured support craft, which could be carried to the scene of operations
and could accompany the leading flights of landing craft to the beach.
When combined training
first started at the C.T.C. Inveraray, support landing craft armed with a naval 4-in. smoke mortar
and two 0•5-in. machine guns were the only form of close support craft available for assault, but
t was not long before C.C.O. asked the War Office for Daimler armoured car turrets with 2-pdr
guns to be provided for a new, heavier support craft.
The pre-war manuals on Combined Operations envisaged that heavier support would be provided
by warships whose fire was to be controlled by Forward Observation Officers (F.O.O.s) landed
with the assaulting troops.
The details concerning provision and training of these F.O.O.s early
in 1941, is dealt with in the second section of this chapter, but suffice it to
summer of that with, in the second section of this chapter, sestfie it osa. here, tha tis the
formations already under training.
concerned with this problem and sought advice from C.O.H.Q.
In January 1942, C.C.O. convened a meeting to consider the control of bombarding ships
allotted for support of an assault landing; representatives of the three Service Ministries, 110 Force
and the Senior F.O.O. were present.
all types of support and that warships, although initially allotted in support of specific units, should
remain under a central control which could re-deploy them as the situation demanded.
Once these principles were established, the necessary communications and codes were drawn
up to put them into effect.
Ministries in the preparation of procedure manuals and signal books, which were issued by C.O.H.Q.
in the summer of that year.
At Dieppe, the theory of control stood the test of action, but the fact that the fire power
available was inadequate to the extreme stood out with distressing force.
The support landing
craft had not sufficient fire power nor were they heavily enough armoured, the Hunt Class destroyers
also were inadequate for their role as they could not stand up to the fire from coast defence batteries
that were inadequa previously neutralised
threes was not nistries, C.C.O. and S.O. Force
It was not until after Dieppe that really serious thought was given to the problem by the
It was brought home to all, that heavily armed
support craft were required to provide effective neutralising fire on
the beaches, and that the
provision of the right type of support for the Army, once they were ashore, was a problem needing
further special study.
119
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
118
