As the Army advanced, and the demand for road transport incred
more and more third line transport was required and during the
23rd October to
13th November, 1,000 3-ton lorries were issued i he
R.A.S.C. for units other than those at the time with the Army.
these vehicles, eight G.T.
companies were refitted.
The wear and tear of desert warfare on transport called for the hits,
possible standard of vehicle maintenance, and only by a strict adheren:
to this
high standard and to the application of the task system of man.
tenance was it possible for the vehicles of the R.A.S.C. companies to tel
kept going efficiently under the heavy strain imposed on them.
Preparation for Further Advance
The next phase of the operations was planned to open on 13th December,
and the interval was spent in building up maintenance reserves for th
new advance
The port of Benghazi was operated to the maximum extem
possible, but heavy storms reduced the flow by sea, and the best that cou
be done through this channel was not in itself sufficient to meet requite
ments.
At Tobruk, 300 miles to the east, there was a surplus of capacity
over demand.
As much road transport as could be spared by the Amy
was therefore used for moving stores of all natures from Tobruk to th
Benghazi area. During the three weeks, about 750 tons a day were carried
forward by
this means, involving the employment of the equivalen d
15 3-ton G.T. companies.
The Advance Resumed
On 13th December, the enemy was found to be withdrawing from the
El Agheila position, and the advance
went forward rapidly, Buerat, 20
miles farther west, being reached on 29th December.
There the enemy took
up a defensive position,
facing 30 Corps, which was composed of one
armoured division,
Corps was located in the Tobruk area.
one armoured brigade, and two infantry divisions. 10
The road L. of C. to the forward formations was about 425 miles, and
To make
there was little possibility of relieving this by sea
transport.
matters more
difficult.
4th January,
there was a severe storm at Benghazi on 3nd ad
day until 19th January.
which led to a drop in delivery by sea of over 1,000 tons
All available Army third line transport was alrea
employed on lifting maintenance requirements forward by road.
MT. to lift from railhead to Benchazi was essential and reduction of the
maintenance commitment forward of Benghazi was also necessary.
contender therefore nated the move lovard of 10 Con a go t
so enabling all the first and second line
transport
columne to onerate on tha Tohruk-Benghazi road link.
transport to be
means, the equivalent of 15 3-ton G.T. companies was made available, and
the total lifted forward was
raised to an
compensating very largely for the reduced capacity of Benghazi port
of 1,500 tons a day
Further expedients to increase the third line lift were as follows.
(a) The second line transport of two armoured and one infantry
sions. withdrawn after
the bottle of El Alamein,
she Army, giving the equivalent of seven and a quarter 3-10n GiT
companies.
204
(b) Ten and a half G.T. companies, which had been working in the
Delta,
had been released as required from G.H.Q. reserve,
had been increased
as fast
possible,
In
which
anticipation
further demands that would be made by the Army as soon as the
L. of C. extended.
One Sudan Defence Force 3-ton company was
brought across via the Kufra Oasis.
A 10-ton company was croani.
zed from the personnel of a tank transporter company, for
which
there were then no transporters available, but a number of 10-ton
lorries had been received from overseas.
At this stage, the Army had the equivalent of 58 3-ton
G.T.
companies, and
even this was barely sufficient.
The road L. of C.
stretched for 674 miles from Tobruk through
Benghazi to
Sirte,
or, as the crow flies, slightly farther than from London to Prague,
Airfield and road construction work was heavy and an increasing
commitment, and many companies were required at both Tobruk
and Benghazi for the working of the port and railhead areas.
The task of G.H.Q. was, therefore, to provide further transport
companies by the formation and equipping of new units as personnel
and vehicles became available; by creating civilian companies for
work in the Delta and Palestine to replace military companies which
could then be sent to the Army; and by further depleting the meagre
resources of the main base area.
This was done, and certain import-
ant works in the Delta and Palestine were brought to a standstill
until other arrangements could be made.
The resultant difficulties
lad to be accepted, as the primary object was to give the Army th
ransport required to enable its task to be fulfilled
Advance to Tunisian Frontier
The advance against the enemy defences began on 15th January, and,
in spite of delaying actions and demolitions, Tripoli was occupied on
23rd
January, and the Tunisian frontier was reached on 13th February.
When
Tripoli fell, 10 Corps transport was moving about 750 tons a day, but there-
after reductions were made, until a week later the regular operation of convoys
on the Tobruk-Benghazi route ceased altogether.
At the same time Eighth
Army road transport was delivering a daily average of about 800 tons from
Benghazi to Tripoli, a distance of about 600 miles.
The latter port was soon
open to ocean-going ships, and by 23rd February it was possible to dis-
continue this road lint
At the same time, the bulk petrol storage in-
stallations at Tripoli were ready for use; a tin-filling plant with a capacity
of 12 000 tins a day wae moved there and all available returnable container
were retained for filling.
In addition to the shipments of P.O.L. to Tripoli, the needs of Malta,
Beneha, ind to the ship elts do P. supplied, and demands tong this:
period on the main base reached their peak, approaching 4,000 tons a day.
Tin-illing factorin base reacwere worked 24 hours a day.
that to drairanst sue ly ors yela and the s, dan.
reserves was also a serious factor, and reserves
Increased issues were
made of preserved me tond tinned vegetables and surplus stocks of tinned
equivalente in DT De were called into PS Ds for despatch to the Army..
the result of these dustments the despatch of balanced rations continued
throughout the campaign.
205
(37452)
Mars micro 0.5 mm
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
