The Last Phase
By 21st February, the advan oed elements of Eighth Army we
contact with the enemy on the outer defences of the Mareth In.
concentration then began of the
of this line.
forces required to drive the enemy al
Maintenance of these forces was by road from Tripoli, and tong
the distance was comparatively small, 175 miles, the problem was dili
because of the nature of the road, the last 50 miles of which was in oy
condition, and part a narrow causeway across the marshes. Heavy to g
maintenance traffic had to be carried out, as well as the concentration of ti
Army and Air Forces.
The strictest road control was necessary. GHO
continued to send forward to the Army all the road transport that col
be spared, providing during this period a further one and three quata
10-ton G.T. companies, bringing the total road transport provided to ta
equivalent of 63 3-ton G.T. companies.
Of these seven and a half wer
operating in Cyrenaica.
The activities of Eighth Army in the last stages of the campaign i
Tunisia are described in the next chapter.
Second Line Transport Organization and Operation
The first battle of Libya had proved the desirability of organizing send
ling trans for operations de in pest o Dosed to here this on d
any rate for operations in the
Where this system va
employed in subsequent campaigns,
the layout finally developed in Eight
Army was as follows: —
(a) Intantry Brigades. -One 3-platoon company each, carrying anno
tion, supplies, and P.O.L.
Infantry brigades operating with armour
formations had an additional 3-platoon G.T. company for trop
carrying.
(b) Armoured Brigades.-Two armoured brigade companies each. A
of four platoons, carrying supplies and ammunition;
platoons, carrying P.Ö.L.
(c) Divisional Troops, in both infantry and armoured divisions- To
companies were allowed on the establishment. but in practice the
tillotment for this purpose varied considerably to suit local one
7 Armoured Divisional Troops: one Independent Platoon.
Each Armoured Brigade: two Armoured Brigade Companies, "A"
"A" and "B".
" B".
Each Motor Brigade: one Motor Brigade Company.
50 Divisional Troops: one Independent Platoon.
51 Divisional Troops: one Divisional Troops Company.
Infantry Brigades, 50 and 51 Divisions: one Brigade Company each.
121 To fantry Brigade: one Brigade Commense nd one CT. Compan
carrying)
(for troop
206
Normally the policy was to locate these companies at short distances
on the forward route from F.M.C., where they were available for calling
forward when required, but were not congesting the divisional area when
Companies
were often called forward initially to a rendezvous,
the location of which was decided by CRA.S.C, in conjunction with "Q'
staff, and from which they could be ordered onwards to replenishment areas,
This anticipatory move was necessary, since replenishment areas frequently
could not be fixed in advance owing to the fluidity of operations.
usual policy was followed of keeping as much as possible on wheels; i.e.,
as soon as second line transport had transferred its load of supplies, P.O.L.,
and ammunition to units' first line transport, it returned with the minimum
of delay to F.M.C. for refilling.
Many modifications had necessarily to be introduced from time to time
to meet varying conditions.
For example, second line units
were often
withdrawn to supplement third line, as rail communication could not keep
pace with the rate of advance maintained during the latter stages of the
march to Tripoli and the Mareth line.
At times. first line transport was
even used as third line, but this was not really successful, owing to the lack
of experience of this type of work on the part of the personnel concerned.
On the other hand, the elasticity of the G.T. company organization made
transfer from second to third line duties comparatively simple.
The scale of transport in divisions was sufficient to permit of their
moving forward with as much as six days' food and three days' each of
petrol and ammunition.
Difficulty occurred when the additional quantities
of ammunition and petrol were all consumed in one day, and replacement
of the original amounts carried became a problem.
There were generally
10 to 12 transport platoons in an infantry divisional R.A.S.C., and 16 in an
armolited civiciAn
The extra platoons were made up from whatever trans-
port units were available for allocation to divisions.
Corps and Corps Troops R.A.S.C. Companies did not always function
as such, but were often reformed as G.T., Tank Transporter, and 2nd Line
Companies.
G.T. Companies were normally used to perform the task of
Corps Troops Second and Third Line units.
Water Supply
During the final operations,
eight Water Tank Companies were em-
ployed, grouped under a C.R.A.S.C.
for come each can c0o cellans total lift 19 000 gallons. Although
Calculations were based on 60 tankers
the maximum capacity of the tankers was 350 gallons, the lower figure
allowed for leakage in route, spillage during filling, and the small quantity
inevitably remaining in ouch, vehicle after it was supposed to be empty.
As cach company was actual y equipped with 66 vehicles, the calculations
also allowed for the as actua cent, spare.
It would have been operationally
unsound to rely on these as being permanently available.
The capacity of the proper tank lorries available was insufficient, aid
they were succest the supplemented by the use
3-ton lorries.
of 44-gallon drums
lo the vehicle floors.
A company of 3-ton lorries had 350-gallon tanks bolted
(37452)
207
Mars micro 0.5 mm
was 947
117
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
