(4) Three Commanders Beach Organisation corresponding roughly in status with Commanders
Royal Artillery, together with the necessary staff should be appointed.
(5) The naval chain of command during the build-up and maintenance period should be
standardised.
(6) Certain extra officers to strengthen the naval and military links during planning,
training and execution of operations were required.
(7) The Beach Signal Organisation needed reorganising.
(8) Naval basic Beach Training Centres should be placed under the direction of the C.C.O.,
so that both Services would be taught the same doctrine in beach organisation.
The Beach Brigade Establishment
As a result of the C.C.O.'s recommendations based upon the C.O.H.Q. Committee's examination
of the beach organisation required for the Far East, the War Office announced that the existing
Beach Sub-Area and Beach Group Organisations would be superseded by an organisation known as
a Beach Brigade.
This organisation was designed to handle 1,000 tons of stores rising to 1,500 tons
of stores per day over the beaches ; and it was intended that one Beach Brigade should be allotted
per assault division.
It is interesting to note that the Infantry Battalion round which the old Beach Group was
built was to be replaced by working companies, organised on Pioneer Company establishments.
In addition, brigade troops were shown for the first time as "basic" and " non-basic," the
former being those regarded as essentially an integral part of the organisation for training and
operations, and necessary to foster team spirit and esprit de corps within the brigade.
Beach Organisation and Maintenance for the Long Range Assault in the Far East
In June, 1945, a Combined Operations Pamphlet was published which dealt with : the division
of responsibility between the three Services; the Command and functions of the new Beach Brigade
Organisation; the organisation and handling of Beach Brigades and Beach Groups ;
the operation
of the ferry control organisation; and the development of beach maintenance.
In fact, it can be
said that it summarised the development of beach organisation as at the end of the war.
The Formation of 22nd Beach Brigade for Operations in the Far East
In May, 1945, the War Office gave authority for the formation of 22nd Beach Brigade at the
C.T.C., Dundonald.
The brigade consisted of 100th and 101st Beach Groups and was organised
on the new establishments which had been recommended by the C.O.H.Q. Committee and agreed
by the three Service Ministries.
Training started at the C.T.C., Dundonald, but was discontinued
at the termination of hostilities with Japan, when orders for the disbandment of the brigade
were issued.
Conclusion
It has been the purpose of this chapter to follow the gradual evolution of the beach organisation
throughout the war and, in particular, to trace the part played by the Combined Operations
Organisation both at home, where it can be said to have been largely responsible for training and
development, and abroad, where development, although independent, was influenced to a great
extent by information summaries and pamphlets published in London and by visits of liaison
The fact remains that, from a system of control of beaches laid down in the 1938 Manual
of Combined Operations which was all that existed at the beginning of the war, the Beach Brigade
Organisation containing elements of all three Services was evolved by the end of the war.
Beach Brigade Organisation was never tested operationally as the collapse of Japan took place
before the training of 22nd Beach Brigade at Dundonald had been completed.
It was, however,
developed almost entirely by C.O.H.O. as a cumulative result of operational and training experiences
required in the future.
It will undoubtedly form the framework of any beach organisation which may be
Post-War Development
Beach Brigade as a permanent peace-time formation.
In March, 1946, proposals were put up to the War Office for the establishment of a Territorial
Brigade was formed in October, 1946.
Arising out of this, 264 Scottish Beach
150
CHAPTER 19
COMBINED
OPERATIONS ORGANISATION FOR EXPERIMENTS,
TRIALS AND DEVELOPMENT
Section (i)
Section (ii)
The Inter-Services Training and Development Centre (I.S.T.D.C.) up to April, 1942.
The Experimental Section of C.O.H.0.
Centre (C.O.D.C.), April, 1942-August, 1942.
Section (iüi) The Directorate of Experiments and Staff Requirements (D.X.S.R.), later becoming the
Directorate of Experiments and Operational Requirements (D.X.O.R.), August, 1942-
Section (iv) The Combined Operations Experimental Establishment (C.O.X.E.), August, 1942-
October, 1943.
Section (v)
Reorganisation to prepare for the war in the Far East, October, 1943 to the end of the war.
Introduction
WO 277/21
27
3ф
The detailed story of the many trials and experiments is dealt with in other chapters of this
history.
The evolution of the Combined Operations Organisation for experiments, trials and
development is traced from 1935 through the years prior to the war, to the first two years of the
war, through the period required for the preparation for the Invasion of Europe, thence to the
preparation of the Far East and so to the end of the war and the reorganisation required for peace.
Together with the phases mentioned above, the growth of the experimental side is intimately
linked with the changes made in directives issued to successive Directors or Chiefs of Combined
Operations on appointment concerning their responsibilities for development of equipment required
for combined operations.
SECTION (i)
THE INTER-SERVICES TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (I.S.T.D.C.) UP TO
APRIL, 1942
The Work of the I.S.T.D.C. up to the Outbreak of War
In 1935 the Imperial Defence College, all three Staff Colleges and the Directorate of Sea
Transport recommended the establishment of an Inter-Services
Committee to investigate the
problems connected with opposed landings and the institution of a Combined Services Training and
Development Centre charged with the duty of developing the material required for opposed landings.
These proposals were not approved by the Chiefs of Staff at their 178th meeting on 16th June,
In 1936 and 1937 there was general dissatisfaction concerning the readiness for action of
British Amphibious Forces.
The Military Staff College particularly had protested on the inadequacy
of knowledge and development in combined operations.
As a result of this, the Chiefs of Staff
agreed to set up a Sub-Committee of the Deputy Chiefs of Staff Committee with the following
(1) To study Inter-Services exercise and present collated and agreed reports on the lessons
learned.
(2) To make recommendations for the study of problems of Inter-Services operations.
(3) To make recommendations for the development of equipment for Inter-Services operations.
(4) To keep under review the Manual of Combined Operations (previously the responsibility
of the three Staff Colleges).
This Committee, known as the " Inter-Services Training Sub-Committee of the Deputy Chiefs
of Staff" (D.C.O.S. (L.T.)), consisted of the Assistant Chief of Naval Staff, the Director of Military
Operations and Intelligence and the Deputy Chief of Air Staff or their representatives.
151
