On first being appointed, the Force Commanders worked at C.O.H.Q. and produced the
As soon as this was completed they moved to the mounting
detailed plan based on the outline plan.
area to superintend the training and rehearsals and to produce
the operation orders.
With regard to the execution of a raid, the C.C.O. took the view that the Naval Commander-
in-Chief, in whose area the raid lay, must retain overall command of that area and of all ships, craft
and escorts serving therein.
Therefore, although the C.C.O. was responsible for making and present-
ing to the Chiefs of Staff the inter-Service plan for a raid and had superintended the preparations
and rehearsals, the final executive order was given by the Naval Commander-in-Chief.
For really
important occasions, the C.C.O. always went to the Naval Commander-in-Chief's Headquarters
and the decision on whether or not to sail was made jointly.
It was the responsibility of C.O.H.Q. to arrange any independent air action other than the
normal air protection organised by the Combined Area™
Headquarters.
For instance,
C.O.H.Q.
had to arrange for the necessary air action at Vaagso and the independent bombing of St. Nazaire
when the latter port was raided.
Further, the C.C.O. always insisted that members of the planning staff should accompany
all raiding operations so that they would have first hand information on the operation and gain
experience.
The Raids on Vaagso, Bruneval, St. Nazaire
From the time of the appointment of Admiral Mountbatten as Adviser on Combined Operations
(A.C.O.), until the climax of raiding at Dieppe, the build-up was continuous.
During this period
three minor raids took place which were completely successful and contributed to the confidence
with which later raids were mounted.
The aims of the attack on Vaagso Island were twofold.
The naval task was to capture, or
destroy merchant shipping found in Ulversund off the port of Vaagso.
The military task was to
destroy or capture enemy troops or equipment, to destroy industrial plants, to seize documents,
codes and instruments, to arrest Quislings and to withdraw Norwegian volunteers for the Free
Forces. A naval officer, Admiral Sir J. C. Tovey, was placed in supreme command of the operation
and by 12th December, 1941, most of the forces had been assembled and training, which included a
realistic landing on a small island in Scapa Flow, had begun.
The raid was executed on 28th December, and a total of 16,000 tons of shipping was destroyed
and the tasks of demolition completed.
Air support was successful in preventing damage to the
British ships and in sinking one vessel in an enemy convoy.
Vaagso, although a comparatively
small operation, was significant in that it was a true combined operation in which all three Services
were engaged and, although the limited but severe opposition was not able to prevent its complete
success, it provided a more rigorous test of combined operations than had hitherto occurred.
After Vaagso came the Bruneval raid on 27th February, 1942.
This very small operation was
designed to avoid rather than to seek opposition, and had the single objective of the capture of
the radar installation.
This was achieved by very careful planning, close co-operation of all three
Services and determined execution; it is an excellent example of its kind.
The third raid under review is that on St. Nazaire on 27th March, 1942, when the principalaim
was the destruction of the lock gates and the mechanism of the large dock which was the only one on
the Atlantic seaboard capable of taking the German battleship
Tirpitz.
Subsidiary objects were
to destroy the smaller lock gates and any other installations, which would facilitate the servicing
of U-boats, and to destroy any U-boat or shipping which might be found.
In addition to achieving its main aim, that of making the dock unusable by Tirpitz, the success
of this operation provided an uplift of morale to our forces and the country as a whole.
Many
Germans were killed (some by their own fire), a U-boat was probably sunk, several enemy aircraft
were destroyed and valuable experience was given to planning staffs and personnel taking part.
An important lesson was also learned from the Air point of view; an air raid had been planned but,
Since the tantrustions wee that no bombs were to be dropped on occupied territory unless the
target could be seen clearly, and in this case the visibility was bad, the effect was to alert the defences
but not to occupy their attention. This may have contributed to the fact that British casualties
were higher than would probably have been the case had the air attack taken place. It thus became
unless its effect can be guaranteed to be decisive.
apparent that air antion over a defended area should not be used where surprise mau be vital,
Events Leading Up to the Dieppe Raid
In October, 1941, C.-in-C. Home Forces sought approval of the Chiefs of Staff to carry ott
battle experience.
raid on the ben, ta ConiC Fame Fordes sought approval of the Chiefs ovide his troops with
The Chiefs of Staff agreed to these proposals and subsequently instructed
Cine Tome Forces to undertale a large saale raid of some duration with a target dote of spring,
86
STAEDTLE
1942 ; he was instructed to prepare plans in consultation with the A.C.O. and the appropriate Naval
and Air C.s-in-C.
placed at his disposal.
The forces which it was estimated would be available by spring,
1942, were to be
factor was ships and craft which amounted to a total of two
L.S.T. (L.), ten L.S.I. (M.) and L.S.I. (H.)1, three L.S.G., fifty L.C.T., plus minor landing craft.
Dieppe as the target for a raid of this kind was first examined by the Target Committee of
C.O.H.Q.
in early April,
plan under
1942, and by the middle of the month, work had began on an outline
Naval Force Commander for the event.
the general direction of Captain Hughes-Hallett, R.N., who was subsequently had
Representatives of the General Staff Home
by then already joined the planning syndicate in accordance with the procedure agreed by the
Chiefs of Staff, whereby, in any raid
involving forces within the Home Forces Command, a small
number of selected officers from within the Command should be associated with the preparation of
the plans.
Shortly afterwards, C.-in-C. Home Forces delegated his authority in the matter of this raid to
Lieut.-General Montgomery,
then G.O.C.-in-C.,
South-Eastern Command and, when Canadian
troops were chosen to carry out the raid, Lieut.-General Crerar, Ist Canadian Corps, was designated
to concert Canadian arrangements with C.O.H.O.
[wo plans were produced, the first, involving a frontal attack on the town, was the one
eventually adopted.
The frontal attack was to be supported by two inner flank attacks at Puits
and Pourville and two outer flank attacks against the coast defence guns at Berneval and Varenge-
ville-sur-Mer. In the initial plan, the outer flank attacks were to be made by airborne troops but,
due to the extra weather limitation imposed if these troops were used, they were subsequently
replaced by Commandos.
In the initial discussions, it was agreed that the Naval C.-in-C. of the nearest Home Port
would, as a matter of convenience, be appointed the Supreme Commander of the raid. He was not,
however, to be responsible for the events between the time of landing and of re-embarking.
was also agreed that there should be Joint Command. On 9th May, the outline plan for the operation
known as
• K11T.tei
was submitted to the Chiefs of Staff Committee for their approval which
was given on 13th May.
the Military Commander (Major-General Roberts) and the Air Commander
Air At e-Ma stage Leish-Mallory) were both appointed, but the Naval Commandet (Rs F-Admiral
Baillie-Grohman) who was then absent in the Middle East, was not appointed until ist June.
Almost immediately, with the example of St. Nazaire fresh in the minds of the planners, a
ruling was sought from
the Prime Minister on the subject of the blind bombing of targets in
Occupied France.
The Prime Minister stated that, although the existing ruling should be maintained
generally, an exception could be made in the case of a coastal raid.
In the event, use was not made
of this concession since it was considered by the Military Commander that the destruction of large
numbers of houses by bombing would probably prevent tanks from operating in the streets of
the town.
A detailed and rigorous training programme was then carried out and, when the troops were
deemed sufficiently trained, a full-scale exercise,
" Yukon I," was held.
This exercise was not a
success, many of the L.C.T.s were late, some of the landings took place at the wrong time and in
broad daylight, the liaison between the Royal Engineers and the Infantry was defective and the
Infantry progressed inland at a very slow rate.
C.C.O. therefore decided to hold a second exercise, since known as " Yukon II," on 23rd June
and it was agreed to carry out the operation at the first favourable date after 24th June.
While
waiting the order to proceed, the troops remained in the Isle of Wight or on board the assaul
hips which were sealed
The weather became unsuitable during the last week in June and the first week in July, and
on 5th July the operation was postponed.
In the discussions which followed, C.C.O. directed
he Force Commanders to consider a modified plan whereby the operations would take plac
on one tide, whereas the original plan had involved two tides.
The main advantage of the modifie
pi one tide, whereas the or could be increased because the duration of the operation would be
reduced, but, on the other hand, the compression of the time-table would
operations ashore. The plan commended itself to the Force Commanders and was adopted, but
the continued unsuitability of the weather caused the cancellation of the operation on 7th July.
On cancellation, the forces were dispersed. It was difficult to assess the effects on security of
sending 6,000 men, all of whom had been briefed for the operation, from the Isle of Wight where
they were isolated, to the mainland where the usual leave facilities were available.
There is no
doubt that rumours were rife for some time after the dispersal, but when the operation finally took
place, there is very little doubt that tactical surprise was achieved.
1 Landing Ship Infantry (Hand-Hoisting).
0274*
7
WO 277/21
78
27
