schedule.
Had the
enemy interfered with the disembarkation and planned
deployment of the B.E.F. in September and early October, 1939, the supply of
petrol might well have failed.
As it turned out, the absence of active opera-
tions by the B.E.F. meant that even the available output could not be
absorbed, and it was frequently necessary to suspend production at both
factories.
This fact does not of course justify the state of affairs which
existed on the outbreak of war. That failure to maintain the B.E.F. did not
occur was sheer luck.
The shortfall in packed petrol had some value however, for it led to enquiry
into ways and means of augmenting the supply of spirit, both by distribution
in bulk, at least on the L. of C. and at the base, and also by means of a system
of supply based on the use of returnable cans.
Transport
During the preparatory period before mobilization, in August, 1939, the
arrangements for the deployment of A.D.G.B. were put into effect and, in
general, worked satisfactorily; but see, in this connection, Chapter XII,
Section 1.
Agreement had been obtained to the requisition form for use in the
impressment of vehicles being signed by Inspectors of Supplementary Trans.
port, instead of by command H.Q., as had hitherto been the legal procedure.
This expedited the impressment process considerably.
On Ist September, 1939, mobilization having been ordered, C.I.S.T. was
directed to begin impressment, and M.T.S.D. to take immediate action for
the purchase of spare parts for impressed vehicles on pre-arranged plans.
All mobilization arrangements were very much complicated by the eleventh
hour decision that the modified first contingent figures would take effect from
1st September.
This involved considerable acceleration of the impressment
scheme, and recasting it at very short notice.
whole, as planned.
However, it operated, on the
The whole business of communication had to be carried
out by telephone, as telegrams and letter post proved too slow.
C.I.S.T. was
in direct telephonic communication with district inspectors.
A statistics
branch was established to compile daily states, which brought to light any
likelihood of shortage at any collecting centre; adjustment was then affected
by either concentrating on that centre, or by transferring from another.
The flow of vehicles was maintained, though impressment officers were
forced to work very long hours, and 20 others had to be taken on.
Cars and
motor-cycles were impressed new from agents and factories, and arrangements
were made to take further production as necessary.
2nd to 11th September, an average of 1,200 vehicles a day
During the peak period,
The Inspectorate Headquarters was assailed frequently by
was impressed.
Ministries, local
public bodies, business houses, etc., demanding exemption from impressmen:
of certain vehicles, but exemptions were only agreed in exceptional circum:
The agreement with the Ministry of Transport was revoked by them, and
transport was requisitioned without any regard to it.
This resulted in a loss
to the Army of 7,000 earmarked vehicles, and greatly interfered with the pro
gres of impressment. In addition, a number of the vehicles, which othet
Departments had, before mobilization, agreed micht he immressed were il
fact required to be retained for essential civilian services.
Apart from these difficulties, some defects showed themselves in the
arrangements for impressment.
The necessary additional officers for impress-
ment duties should have been selected in peace-time, and given details of what
their duties would be, instead of their being hurriedly posted to their duties
on
mobilization.
Selection was essential, because unfortunately instances
were revealed of dishonest transactions, and of the impressment of vehicles
unsuitable because of their bodies being of the wrong type, tyres being hope-
lessly worn, and mechanical condition very bad.
Lists of equipment on the
vehicles should have been shown on the documents, as well as a note of the
items included in the prices assessed for the vehicle, so as to obviate the loss
to the War Department which might otherwise occur through loss or pilferage
en route to the vehicle collecting centres.
The return of peace-held R.A.S.C. vehicles to V.R.D. and V.C.Cs. for
conversion, and the completion of R.A.S.C. units with their necessary trans-
port, proceded according to schedule, as did also the functions of the R.A.S.C.
M.T. depot in regard to the despatch of reserve vehicles, bulk stocks of spare
parts and stores, and machinery, to the base M.T. depots of the B.E.F.
Water Transport
Mobilization and the embodiment of the Territorial Army, the latter
particularly in respect of the coast defence organization, placed a very severe
strain on the small number of craft available to the W.D. Fleet for the greatly
increased administrative and training commitments.
Although contracts had
been placed for the building of additional craft, serious delays in delivery
occurred, owing to the high priority of other services. Implementation of the
plans proceeded
nevertheless, and selected officers were attached to the
A.D.M.Ts. establishment for training in administration, chartering and survey
of vessels, and the system of maintenance by contract which had been adopted.
Four Water Transport companies began to operate in the United Kingdom
in January, 1940.
Barrack Services
Shortly after the outbreak of war, it proved impossible to cope by means
of the peace-time system of War Office contracts, with the constantly increasing
demands for fuel, light, and water for new camps and requisitioned buildings.
It was consequently necessary to rely on contracts and agreements, formal
or otherwise, arranged locally by officers i/c barracks.
The Home War Establishments for these services in home commands,
which came into force on mobilization, were not much larger than the Peace
Establishments; in some cases, they were actually reduced, due apparently
to the incorrect assumption that the work of the barrack department would
be less after the departure of the field force.
A number of quarter-masters of the R.A.S.C., who had been employed as
officers i/c barracks, were withdrawn on mobilization to fill appointments in
the B.E.F., as were many of the R.A.S.C. soldier clerks employed in barrack
offices; pensioners and reservists were also called up for service.
In spite of
these difficulties, the barrack services in connection with the mobilization of
units were carried out as planned.
45
(37452)
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
