Maps showing the locations of installations have been excluded, as the
intention has been to describe the principles on which the organization
worked,
rather than the exact details of place and lay-out.
Diagrams of
systems of maintenance are difficult to reproduce, and have been avoided.
The aim has been to write the story objectively, and to let the facts speak
for themselves, allowing the reader to draw his own conclusions.
As a rule,
any lesson has not been expressly stated, except where it might not have been
self-evident.
Sources of Information
The material used in the compilation of this history has been drawn from
a diversity of sources, as the following account will show.
Historical records were prepared in the various branches of the Directorate
of Supplies and Transport at the War Office, covering the developments and
activities of each during the war, and dealing with the progress of events in
theatres of war overseas only in so far as they came within the sphere of War
Office administration.
The role of the Directorate in regard to those theatres
varied considerably.
In the earlier campaigns, such as that of the British
Expeditionary Force in 1939, all the planning was carried out by the War
Office, which was also responsible for subsequent maintenance, and exercised
a considerable influence on the conduct of affairs in the theatre.
Planning
for the invasion of North Africa was carried out by the staffs of the formation
headquarters taking part in the operation, and the part of the Directorate
at the War Office was to provide the requirements in units, transport, supplies,
ele.
Planning for the invasion of Sicily and Italy was carried out entirely
at Allied Force Headquarters, North Africa, and the War Office gave what
assistance was called for, and was not directly concerned in the subsequent
happenings.
The S. and T. Directorate, War Office, had little directly to do
with the campaign in Burma until nearly the end of 1943, as the maintenance
of that theatre was the responsibility of G.H.Q., India, with its own Directorate
of Supplies and Transport; that at the War Office was then required to take
a more active part in connection with the theatre, and did so to an increasing
extent therefter
The scope of these branch histories is therefore somewhat limited.
They
were written to record, on broad lines, the progress of the war as seen from
the War Office.
They tend to disregard the fortunes of a campaign once the
initial planning had been successfully put into effect and the necessary
provision arrangements were working satisfactorily, unless some unforeseen
contingency demanded special action to assist.
Otherwise,
attention had
necessarily to be focused on the preparations for
some other operation,
planned to be carried out perhaps many months ahead.
The War Office
story does not, therefore, as a rule include much detail about events in the
theatres of war overseas.
In most cases, however, this information is available in the story of the
cumpaigns and theatres which was compiled by the local S. and T. headquarters
during and after the war.
Much invaluable historical material was thus
saved from oblivion, and collected at the R.A.S.C. Trial matentre at Alder-
These records have been largely drawn upon in the compilation of
facilitate more intimate research if desired.
this history, and a list of them is included in Annendir XTTTA. in order to
Other sources used have been commander's despatches; official histories;
formation records; War Office correspondence; reports of commissions and
committees; training and technical pamphlets.
Where all these failed to pro-
duce the required information, a number of individual officers have contributed
to it from their personal knowledge and experience.
The present historian
desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to these and to the many others,
known and anonymous, who have contributed in one way or another to the
compilation of this book.
Summary of the Contents
The history starts in Chapter II with an account of the pre-war organiza-
tion of the Directorate of Supplies and Transport at the War Office, and in
commands and formations, its responsibilities and functions, and its develop-
ments during the war.
Of the latter, the most notable was the breaking oft
from the two main branches of Supplies and Transport of four new deputy
directorates, to deal with (1) petrol, oil, and lubricants, (2) barrack services,
(3) catering, and (4) water transport, respectively, as these subjects grew to
dimensions large enough to warrant a separate branch to handle each of them.
Some account is also given of the pre-war organization of the Royal Army
Service Corps, through the agency of which the work of the Supply and
Transport services of the British Army was principally effected during the
war.
Section 2 of this chapter describes the pre-war planning for expansion
in case of war, and Section 3 the way in which the mobilization of the R.A.S.C.
and the supply and transport services was carried out in 1939.
In Chapter III, the development of the organization of the R.A.S.C. services
in the field is traced, from their initial form with the B.E.F. in France in 1939
to that which maintained 21 Army Group in 1944-1945.
This forms the
background to the story of these
services in the chapters dealing with the
various active theatres of war, and should be read in conjunction with them.
The introduction of new forms of transport, amphibian and air and tank
transporter among them, and the development of old forms, such as water
transport, is also described in this chapter; and the momentous story of the
change in the system of vehicle maintenance is told.
Developments in con-
nection with supplies and P.O.L. are also noticed.
Chapter IV deals with the British Expeditionary Force, and shows how
in various important respects the pre-war planning was found to have been
unsound when it came to be put into practice.
The lessons to be learnt here
are perhaps as important as any in the book, since the shortcomings and
mistakes were such as might only too easily recur in years to come.
The
operations themselves were too brief to enable much to be learnt from them,
but some useful reorganization was nevertheless effected afterwards.
Chapter V describes the ill-starred expeditions to Norway in 1940, and
the occupation of Iceland and the Faroe Islands.
Chapter VI is the story of the war in the Middle East, mainly that of
the campaigns in the Western Desert.
The supply and transport organization
in this theatre was almost entirely unplanned,
and developed by force of
circumstance along lines of its own.
Perhaps the most important features of
this process were the introduction of the idea of the maintenance area, which
was to become the standard method in all other theatres, and the breaking
WAsTe 17
WO 277/21.
27
W027 1/26
