The normal procedure at that time i be ail facilities did not eid
far enough forward, was to
extend the L. of C. to roadheads, using L. d
C. transport companies under control of D.D.S.T. Army.
At road heads.
distribution was made to formation transport (third line and supply coline
dumps being established if necessary.
During these operations, however,
third line and L. of C. transport resources were pooled, and were operati
as a double echelon from railhead to F.M.Cs., which differed fundamemalh
from the normal roadhead.
They catered for all types of commodity, and
were farther forward.
The services concerned were responsible for keeping
stocks at F.M.Cs. up to the level laid down by corps.
It is not too much to say that, without F.M.Cs., administration during
the subsequent campaign would have been virtually impossible.
As had
been anticipated, the F.M.C., particularly when situated in desert othervise
completely devoid of any form of administrative centre,
than ever a desert centre.
So sited as to be within second line reach of
formations, and at the same time to have the maximum possible protection
against raiding parties or breakthroughs,
their
protection was of vital
interest to formations based on them, and tended to influence the cours
of operations.
Thus, in the latter half of November, 1941, the F.M.C. main-
taining 30 Corps was located at a point just north of which Rommel passed
in his counterstroke of 24th November; but the third line transport from
railhead continued to ply up to it, undeterred by air attack or raiding
parties, so that the corps was maintained throughout a delicate situation.
As a result of experience, F.M.Cs. were able to move at very short notice
and to re-establish themselves with the minimum of dislocation.
L. of C. Transport Columns
Railhead, or seahead where this took its place, of roadhead, was unite
Army control, whereas F.M.Cs. were under Corps.
Movement between rail-
Army control Whereas F..C. Were Army, Partly under Corps, contro
Fresh directions were therefore necessary at the point where convoys passed
from Army to Corps control.
This was effected by D.D.S.T., Army, estab-
lishing control centres on the L. of C.
centres had to be such that effective control could be exercised on loadin
The number and siting of these
and unloading, interception and diversion, assembly and forward move, of
all convoys.
Headquarters of L. of C. Transport Columns, R.A.S.C., were used lo
where they
name into existence at tha come time ge HO FMCs.
method of handling them was evolved in the attack which began on 18th
These headquarters were new to Middle Eash,
November.
Tram the feet although in thenty thare headauarters migh.
command a number of companies, in practice they tended to act as terminals
for lorry-operated lines of communication, and therefore a forward head.
quarters would find itself in the vicinity of a F.M.C.
Close liaison was
necessary. and was
developed,
Transport column H.Quickly their respective F.M.CS., and this co-operato
between these forward L.
became a matter of routine.
to enable control of the 23 G.T. companies
Five H.Q., L. of C. Transport Columns, were allotted to Eighth Arm
to be decentralized.
These H.Q. were sub-allotted to Corps in proportion
and Water Tank Companies
186
1o the number of companies placed under Corps control for third line duties.
Without them, control of the large atimer of transport units would have
been impossible.
Wireless communication was found to be essential to their
efficient operation.
Preparations for Second British Advance
in preparation for the advance (planned to begin on 18th November) of
the British force, now called Eighth Army. From the S.T. point of view, the
important features of the administrative plan were the following:
(a) The establishment of three forward bases, stocked with supplies
of all natures;
(b) the creation of adequate reserves at the existing railheads;
could be continued from the railhead.
The factors affecting the administrative plan were: time, transport, the
capacity of the railway, labour, and water.
The problem resolved itself into
a matter of making the most effective use of all available transport resources,
in the wider sense of the term, for bringing up supplies of all natures to
complete the dumping programme, to build up reserves, and for the con-
struction of the forward railhead.
Dumping at the forward bases
be completed by 12th November, when all load-carrying transport was
be withdrawn to load at railheads preparatory to the concentration of 13
and 30 Corps.
bases and the desert railhead.
In the period of stocking up the forward bases, Eighth Army had some
24 G.T. companies and 7 Water Tank Companies, which were sub-allotted
in accordance with the estimated maximum turn-round during the first phase
of the Operation.
13 Corps had six G.T. and one Water Tank Companies,
30 Corps 15 G.T. and six Water Tank, while three G.T, companies were
Army reserve, for railheads, Army Troops, and R.A.F.
The total strength
to be maintained was 118,000 men and 17,600 vehicles, with an estimated
daily maintenance tonnage of 3,000 tons.
Rations were to be on the battle
scale. at 3 lb. a man:
water was allowed at & gallon a man/ vehicle for
each day; petrol at 50 miles a vehicle for a day.
The reserves in the forward bases were built up with difficulty, as they
represented the difference in maintenance requirements between what could
he delivered forward daily, and what would be actually consumed. Depend-
ing on the degree of move, ment and of ammunition expenditure, the reserves
would be unlikely to last a fortnight.
The possibility of having to make use of air supply was not overlooked,
and a small quantity of ving to and P.S.L. was held pre-packed at Matruh.
The supply of water by this means presented a problem in respect of the
choice of a suitable container.
It was finally decided to drop the water in
187
westert
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
