Until the development of rail and port facilities had been effected, the
road maintenance lift had to be increased by deser possible means, and
some of the expedients adopted to achieve this are described here.
Extra vehicles were issued to companies for the original run up from
R.MA.; these were gradually absorbed, until companies were operating on
their own 100 per cent. task vehicles only.
A 40-ton tank transporter company was converted for load-carrying, by
welding on to each trailer a base and sides of airfield track.
could then carry 163 tons of supplies, 36 tons of ammunition, or ten tons of
Five G.T. companies were brought up to their full War Establishment,
and 30 additional 3-ton lorries were issued surplus to War Establishment,
12 800-gallon tankers were issued additional to
each of the seven bulk petrol transport companies employed on forward main-
Two 10-ton G.T. companies were further equipped with 5-ton
A.A. R.A.S.C. platoons were released from their special tasks, and the
equivalent of eight platoons was formed from A.A. first line transport.
Additional transport was also provided by War Office, as described below.
Additional Transport Units Provided
A special demand was received in War Office from 21 Army Group on
3rd September, 1944, for the urgent formation of two transport companies,
each of four platoons, to collect R.E. bridging equipment in the United King-
dom and deliver it to bridge sites in France.
A provisional War Establish-
ment was drawn up, and arrangements were made to raise the units from the
resources of a Training Brigade, R.A.S.C.
Against an urgent requirement received at the same time for additional
transport companies for 21 Army Group, two companies from A.A. Com-
mand, and two from the War Office Airfields Transport Column, were made
available and reconstituted as four-platoon companies.
They completed their
preparations in six days, and proceeded to N.W. Europe.
Urgent needs for more road transport, for service on the extended L. of C,
came in to War Office on 15th September.
12 companies were required, to
be ready between 18th and 24th September.
were found from A.A.
Command and C.(M)T. Companies.
A total lift of 9,756 tons was thereby
added to the resources of 21 Army Group.
petrol, five with supplies, and two went unloaded.
Five companies went loaded with
In order to take over the control of these companies from the outset of
their operational duties, three Headquarters, C.R.A.S.C, Transport Columns,
were formed and sent out.
The consumption of P.O.L. had doubled during the second half of August,
and stabilized at about 4,000 tons a day of all products.
tion was effected during the early stage of the advance by means of packed
Forward distribu-
petrol transported by road from R.M.A. to Army roadheads.
In order to
increase the bulk petrol lift,
70 additional 800-gallon road tank lories
350
mere issued to Bulk Petrol Transport Companies surplus to establishment
and early in
September a further 84.
2,300 tons of packed M.T.
Between 5th and 10th September,
spirit were delivered by air to the Brussels
As an experiment, bulk petrol was delivered to Lille by means of long
in petrol and aircraft.
range tanks of Liberator aircraft, but the idea was abandoned as wasteful hoth
By 18th September, the pipeline had reached Rouen, and filling centres
were established there to deal with the very large accumulations of jerricans
Meantime, the first pipeline of Pluto had been laid to Cherbourg, ericans
being put in working order.
When Ostend was liberated on 9th September,
it was chosen as the advanced port for bulk petrol storage, and the first
tankers discharged there on 29th September.
Stocks of packed products in
the United Kingdom were now so limited that despatch had to be reduced
in October to the production rate of 350 tons a day.
Solid Fuel
In the first six weeks, locomotive coal was no great problem; but, as soon
as the break-out took place, in late July, the question became increasingly
urgent and important.
The main difficulty was an almost entire lack of suit-
able deep-water berths at which to discharge cargoes.
Using small tidal
ports meant ships drawing not more than 12 feet in many instances, and
such vessels were extremely scarce.
On account of demolitions and mines, it was eight weeks before Cherbourg
could be used regularly for coal discharge.
resorted to of half-filling railway waggons which would otherwise have been
shipped to the continent empty, in spite of the delay caused by sending the
wagons first to British collieries to load.
Bulk shipments had begun by the middle of August, and rapidly increased
tom 60,000 tons in Se bember to 250,000 tons a a month in the early part of
1945, about 225,000 tons of shipping being employed.
The ports used at
first were St. Brieuc, St.
Dippe. Late rieuce its extended over a wider area, until they included
also ports in the Souter eS France, Norway, Denmark, and Holland.
System of Demands and Control
While 21 Army Group was in command of all Allied Forces in N.W
Europe, it submitted to
War Office demands covering both British and
Amercan requirements of solid fuel.
Alier 21 Army Group and the American Forces came under a suguine
Allied Commsadar on tot cantamher CET A E calidated the requite
them to S.T. 7 as demands.
ments of all Army Croung cheoled and approved them and transmitted
To administer the chinning programme the Minictry of War Transport
Fuel and Power, 21 Army Group, and the U.S. Army, were all represented
set up a committee, on which the War Office, S.H.A.E.F., the Ministr
Though discharges in the early months continually failed to reach the monthl
targets set, and thereby caused much vexation to the French, this committee
great extent.
communications and loading and discharge arrangements to a
1A2
(37452)
351
Wes747/17
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
