In March, 1941, War Office agreed to a proposal from Middle East that,
as long as the Western Mediterranean was closed to shipping for Malta, the
simplest procedure would be for that garrison to demand on Middle East for
all requirements, and for Middle East to include provision in their demands
on War Once.
This had in fact been done for some months past, but the
demands had been kept distinct, and separate shipping arrangements had
been made.
Middle East also proposed to supply all perishables to Malta,
which could be met from their stocks as and when Malta could accept, and
when freight was available.
Malta should adopt the Middle East ration scale.
It was agreed that, to simplity matters further,
Middle East also under-
took to provide the civil foodstufis requirements of Malta, which till then
had been co-ordinated with military requirements and supplied under War
Office arrangements.
Middle East Supply Centre
The Middle East Supply Centre (M.E.S.C.), forming part of the Easten
Group supply and provision organization, was established for the co-ordina-
tion of provision of local and imported foodstuffs,
It was closely
connected with the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation, a body set up
by the Government to carry out commercial transactions outside the scope
of the existing Ministries.
The basic supplies obtained by the W.D. through
M.E.S.C. were as follows:
(a) Flour, wheat, barley, millet, rice, sugar and coffee: requirements of
these were obtained by direct demand on M.E.S.C.,
normal contract procedure (except when M.E.S.C. could not supply).
(b) Mealie meal: demand from M.E.S.C. when supplies were not forth.
coming from South Africa.
(c) Dried fruits: provision was centralized through Ministry of Food,
M.E.S.C. acting as buying agents.
Costs were agreed locally between the Army and M.E.S.C., and the value
of purchases was notified to War Office, who settled with U.K.C.C. in London.
Ration Scales
A number of different ration scales was produced to meet new and variet
requirements. A list of some of these, and the details of the principal scales
in force in the Middle East, are in Appendix IX.
The process of amendment
and consolidation was more or less continuous.
The question of ration scales was in fact one of the main supply problems.
When the ME
and some of the difficulties encountered may be mentioned.
Field Service Scale was introduced, a scale was compiled to local ental
Cypriots, which caused discontent among them, and also among Males
domiciled in Egypt,
accustomed to
European food
Eventually, satisfaction was achieved with a scale drafted in Cvorus befor
The feeding of the Free French Forces in Syria presented a proble
which was solved for the time being by their adopting the French system d
" Intendance", of living
on the country.
This was suspended when is
162
implications were realized by the War Office and the Treasury, and sub-
stituted by an abridged ration scale, supplemented by a capitation allowance
to cover items not on the scale.
of the British ration.
The total cost was not to exceed the value
At the beginning of 1944, 30 ration scales were in force in Middle
In order to simplify this situation, most of the Allied troops were asked
to accept British rations, with the result that almost all troops, of European
origin as distinct from native Asiatics or Africans, ultimately did so.
categories which drew British rations, and those which retained separate
scales, are shown in Appendix IX.
The composition of the Middle East "battle ration" scale raised an
important question of policy.
In order to make it more attractive, Middle
East had made certain alterations, which it later referred to War Office for
approval.
Before the operations in early 1942, Eighth Army
generally
received the ordinary ration scale, including frozen meat, fresh potatoes,
vegetables, fruit and bread; only the very forward elements received the battle
scale.
When the enemy offensive opened and until the Army reached El
Alamein, it was necessarily maintained on the battle ration.
The preserved
meat and tinned sausage included in the scale could be varied as necessary
within the framework of the full B.T. scale.
In addition, Middle East pro-
posed to increase the cigarette ration from 7 to 10 cigarettes a day. S.T. 6,
War Office, agreed to the introduction of the scale; but financial agreement
could not be obtained on all the details, and particularly to the increased
ration of cigarettes in excess of 2 oz. a week.
The S.T. view was that the
C.-in-C., Middle East, was entitled to fix his own ration scale, " in the case
of active service operations in the field", as laid down in Allowance Regu-
lations.
The financial view was that, even so, this did not preclude War
Office from commenting on it, or from saying that the action must be modified.
The D.S.T. then represented the matter to the Q.M.G., on the grounds
that the C.-in-C. was the one person best able to judge the military situation,
and to frame the suitable ration scale; and that War Office should only inter-
vene when the question of availability of a commodity arose.
Thus, if War
Office saw that the scale fixed would lead to difficulties of supply, the
command should be told,
and alternatives suggested.
In this case,
increase in cigarettes. could have no practical effect on shipping.
O.M.G.
supported this,
and supplemented the argument with the statement that
NAA.F.I supplies were most dificult to deliver to troops in the desert.
Financial approval was then given, though the merits of the D.S.T's. arguments
were not accepted.
A copy of the scale is at Appendix IX.
Automatic Shipments of Supplies
In order to enable War Office to arrange for the appropriate quantities of
supplies to be shipped automatical with the reinforcements sent out to the
Middle Bast, ship cod mutomati ally wit, 1940, sent War Office two sets of
The first of these showed the scale on which
required to be held in the command.
The second was a ready reckoner,
showing the requirementhe commodities per 1,000 British troops for 150
days' reserve and 30 day's initial feeding.
163
+ 17
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
