South France, and if some of these operations were less successful than had been hoped, it was not
necause of any technical failure to get ashore in face of opposition. Difficulties of maintenance and
Low Countries in support of the left flank of the advancing Allied armies, of which the landings in
build-up of supply across beaches were largely solved.
A series of amphibious operations in the
Walcheren were the most notable, were undertaken by Royal Marine and Army Commando
The following paragraphs appear in the records of the Yalta Conference :-
A new European problem facing C.O.H.Q. was the technique of a large scale assault river crossing
" Exchange of Information with regard to River-Crossing Technique and Equipment
Admiral Leahy said that at the first meeting between the Heads of State, the British
Prime Minister had raised the question of exchanging information with regard to technique
and equipment employed by the Soviet Forces in river crossings. At the present time, in view
of the Allied proximity to the River Rhine, this was a most immediate problem for the
There were now two officers present from General Eisenhower's Headquarters and it
appeared highly desirable that they should meet with the appropriate Soviet experts on the
spect of the technique and equipment employed by the Red Army in major river crossings
Thus the Allied Armies on the Western Front could obtain
the benefit of the experience of the Red Army in this matter. He would therefore very much
appreciate if General Antonov would indicate whether this could be done and, it so, would
make such arrangements as were practicable for the officers from General Eisenhower's Head-
quarters to meet with the appropriate Soviet Officers.
General Antonov said that the Soviet Army was always ready to share its battle
experience with its allies. However, at the moment there were no specialists in this technique
available and he would like therefore time to look into this matter. He would furnish the
Admiral Leahy thanked General Antonov for this very satisfactory reply."
Subsequent to the Yalta Conference, General Laycock (C.C.O.) and Brigadier Head, the two
officers from General Eisenhower's Headquarters referred to above, went on to Moscow.
they had discussions with Russian representatives on river-crossing technique and elicited a great
deal of frank and useful information on Russian methods of crossing rivers.
SECTION (ii)
MINES, BEACH OBSTRUCTIONS AND THEIR CLEARANCE.
CRAFT AND VEHICLE RECOVERY.
Defences in U.K.
The need for beach obstructions in World War II first became apparent in this country in 1940.
Much of the work done was due to the policy of blocking all exists from the beaches by the use of
barbed wire, concrete obstacles and mines.
On the beaches themselves, large numbers of beach
mines were laid above the high water mark. Underwater obstacles were, in general, limited to
tubular scaffolding barriers and some barbed wire. In critical areas along the south-east coast, some
flame barrages were installed.
Defences against Allied Operations
When the Germans, in their turn, had to consider the defence of European beaches, a similar
policy of blocking beach exits was at first in favour and it was not until the beginning of 194,
atter Field-Marshal Rommel took over, that the policy of defeating the landing on the beach came
There were, therefore, only natural obstacles on the beaches themselves to be overcome by
with obstacles although a few booby-traps were encountered.
our assauting forces at Vaasso and Dippe, In the latter operation, the beatance the be not las
exceptionally well covered by accurate and well-directed fire from weapons of all calibres.
Sicily too followed this pattern although mines were encour g-red towards the back of the beach.
However, they gave but little concern as the bulk were still awaiting arming and laying.
Various e?'5 riments with underwater obstacles had been carried out by the enemy in 1943, and,
in February, 1944, the erection of obstacle barriers was started in earnest on the North Sea and
Atlantic Coast beaches.
192
The German intention was to create continuous belts of obstacles against landing craft
along the entire length of all possible beaches, priority being given to those beaches most favourable
for landings.
unobstructed.
Only rocky beaches which were considered completely inaccessible were to be left
Destruction by Heavy Charges
C.O.X.E. carried out trials in May, 1944, of destroying obstacles similar to the German types
by means of depth charges placed by small craft. L.C.T. (4), L.C.A. and L.C.V. (P.) were all
used and, on the whole, the method was fairly successful although it involved a lot of manœuvring
by each craft.
system was not, however, adopted in " Overlord."
The L.C.V. (P.), being easily handled, was the best craft for this purpose.
Early in 1943, experiments were carried out using an L.C.A. fitted with a number of ahead.
throwing weapons on the lines of the Hedgehog mounting and using Hedgehog rounds to destroy
anti-tank mines on the beaches.
anti tanks weapon the the hest See sid not vetera, prove to eh ate be are of a trol
their weapons), but the Hedgerow itself more than proved its worth.
Trials were also carried out at C.O.X.E. to see if L.C.T.s could ram their way through obstacles.
It was found that the L.C.T. (4) could get through two or three rows of normal obstacles (German
types) with little or no damage, although the wrecks of the obstacles might still be a danger to
This method cannot, of course, be recommended when the obstacles are mined
"Overlord" where a lot of ramming was done, the mined obstacles did cause a good deal of damage,
although most vessels still landed their loads.
When it was known that the Germans were using the floating " Hayrick" mines and "Nut-
mines, light V-shaped sweeps of tubular scaffolding were designed by C.O.X.E. to fit
on to the bows of minor craft and also L.C.T. (4).
The sweep was intended to divert the floating
mines or to actuate the " Nutcracker" mines ahead of the craft; although a number of craft
were fitted prior to " Overlord", there is no record of their employment.
Following "Overlord," a pamphlet was written, which included the known and anticipated
problems to be encountered in the Far East, and was issued as a very comprehensive report in
Thereafter the problem was studied at C.O.X.E. (India) where trials of a similar
nature were carried out against the defences produced by the Japanese.
with light obstacles
likely to be encountered in Far East assaults.
A much heavier how sweep was later designed it Counted for dealing v. th lind obtaces
by two winches. In trials it was successful but was never developed owing to the end of the war.
The Americans also experimented with a heavy V-shaped bumper fitted to L.C.M.s.
Beach Recovery Equipment
Coincident with the development of the Beach Organisation, as related in Chapter 18, were
the trials and experiments to produce suitable specialised equipment for the units employed on
Two of the great problems here were :-
(1) To salvage and refloat landing craft which could not retract under their own power
(2) to salvage and clear the beach of vehicles which became stuck either in the water or on
the beach itself.
As a further complication it was found necessary to lift beached landing craft, when refloating
them, in order to avoid damage to propellers and rudders.
With existing equipment this was a
tedious process as no single vehicle could at the same time lift and tow or push the craft.
The two problems were closely inter-related and were tackled respectively by the Navy and the
Army working in the closest co-operation which included specific instructions to Army units to
hold, on call, a percentage of their equipment for naval use.
1 Combined Operations Headquarters Bulletin X43.
193
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
