L.C.A.s were used successfully in raids and in the assault phase of every major British operation.
It was inferior to its American counterparts, L.C.P. (L.) and L.C.V. (P.), in speed, manœu vrability
and seaworthiness but had the advantage of greater protection and troop-carrying capacity, also
disembarkation could be carried out from the L.C.A. more quickly and it was more silent and had
a smaller silhouette.
Landing Crait Personnel, Small. (L.C.P. (S.))
This boat was ordered early in 1942, as a " second flight assault craft." The idea was that
it should be of such a size that it could be carried at the average liner's lifeboat davits, or inboard
under the standard L.C.A. davits, and that it should be of simplified construction so as to facilitate
production.
The staff requirements were :—
To carry twenty-five men.
To have minimum crew.
To be easy to produce.
Speed 6 knots.
Weight unloaded not more than 3½ tons.
Length not to exceed 30 ft., slings at extreme ends.
Draft, loaded, not to exceed 1 ft. 9 in.
No protection.
To meet these requirements a plywood planked, flat-bottomed design was adopted (the first
all-plywood boat to be approved by the Admiralty.
The craft had a pointed bow, a transom stern
and the boat obtained a speed of about 8 knots with a single L.C.A. engine.
The propeller worked
in a tunnel.
The first few L.C.P. (S.) were very poor going astern but after a slight modification to
the tunnel they were generally satisfactory.
They were never used as intended, but they served
the invasion fleet as trot boats for which their robust construction suited well.
Later, some of these craft were converted as "water ambulances" and were fitted with
stretchers which could be hoisted at the davits in hospital ships, but were not satisfactory as they
were very wet boats in a seaway.
Landing Craft Personnel, Medium. (L.C.P. (M.))
This boat was specially designed toward the end of 1941 for assault or raiding operations on
rocky beaches in Northern waters.
It was based on the Northumbrian fishing coble.
Staff requirements were :-
To carry thirty-five men in addition to crew.
To be hoisted at L.C.A. davits.
Very good sea-keeping qualities and high standard of manœuvrability on shallow draft.
Single screw.
Robust construction so as to suit it for rocky landings.
Good retractability.
No protection.
The design of the boat finally adopted resembled the coble very closely. It was clinker-built
with a high pointed bow and transom stern.
hand-winch were fitted.
The screw worked in a tunnel. A kedge anchor and
It was propelled by a single Scripps engine, which gave a speed of about
9 knots, and the boat was provided with steps on the inside and outside of the bow instead of a
ramp for disembarkation of troops.
They were never used in the capacity for which they were
designed but ultimately they became despatch and trot boats to assault forces.
Landing Craft Personnel, Large. (L.C.P. (L.))
raiding purposes.
Early in the war, consideration was given to obtaining a fleet of small craft that could be used for
There was no surplus building capacity in the U.K, and recourse was had to the U.S.A. potter
investigation of a number of different types, an initial order was placed for 50 "Eureka'
These boats were built by Higgins Industries of New Orleans.
It is alleged that they were originally
designed for the rum-runners operating off the coast of Florida and therefore were fast (20 knots),
drew very little water and were capable of jumping a bar or submerged log.
The boats were mass-produced on somewhat novel lines, with sides of bonded and laminated
coxswain had control of the throttle and gear lever as well as the steering wheel.
plywood. They were fitted with a single engine of 250 h.p. and proved magnificent sea-boats. The
m To 5 Truth other er a died at Perenorth in November, 1940 and y
modifications were necessary :—
the following
Silencers and sound-proof padding round the engine casing.
Self-sealing petrol tanks.
Screening and bonding.
Davit hoisting eyes.
A long gangplank stowed on top of the canopy which could be launched forward over a
roller in the bow in order to enable the troops to disembark quickly on beaching ;
Stronger cleats and rope fenders.
It was not possible to have these modifications carried out in the U.S.A., so arrangements
were made to take all craft in hand on arrival, although it took about two months to catry
them out.
At that time the craft were called " R" (for raiding) boats, later changed to " R" craft and
later still to L.C.P. (L.).
The first craft was fitted with a Hall Scott Invader engine but, owing to shortage of these engines,
the remainder of the first 150 had to be powered with Kermath 160 h.p. engines which were not
nearly as satisfactory.
Invaders or Gray Diesels.
Later, all the Kermath engines were replaced by Hall Scott, Hudson
The initial order for 50 was increased and finally reached a total of 262 but, before these were
built, Lend-Lease was in operation and the Americans were mass-producing L.C.P. (L.) for their
own use. 900 L.C.P. (L.) and L.C.P. (R). were finally allocated to the British out of a total American
production of 4,851, after which production was switched to the L.C.V. (P.), the American equivalent
of the L.C.A.
When the U.S.A. came into the war and decided on large-scale production of these craft, orders
were distributed to a number of manufacturers, in addition to Higgins Industries, and the design
was slightly altered.
The canopy that had been fitted to meet British requirements was no longer
fitted and two gun rings forward were introduced on which light machine-guns could be mounted.
Although the British design was much preferred in the U.K., the American design had to be
accepted.
These craft were used in all British amphibious operations as despatch craft for H.Q. Ships,
as control craft and, in "Overlord", as smoke layers for the protection of the anchorages.
One of the main disadvantages of the L.C.P. (L.) compared with the L.C.A. was that there was
no protection and, in 1941, it was approved to fit L.C.P. (L.) with armour (10-1b. plating), bolted on
to the outside of the hull.
This reduced the speed by several knots and it is questionable whether
the small amount of additional protection was worth the loss in speed.
Landing Crait Navigation.
(L.C.N.)
In January, 1942, it was decided to convert a number of L.C.P. (L.) as navigational leaders
to enable them to navigate accurately when leading raids on the French coast.
one craft per flotilla was taken in hand and fitted with an addit french coast, a Ph this pur and
Q.H. 2 type radar.
These craft were known as L.C.P. (Sy.)—for Survey.
Later experience showed that this was not sufficient, and in 1944 a more ambitious conversion
was decided upon called L.C.N. Although L.C.P. (L.) were really too small to carry all the equipment
Te d, the the eat were compete in tis toel apart it it ca pet at one doveres the
equipment fitted comprised :—
Standard and steering compasses.
Echo-sounding gear.
Taut wire gear (9-mile reel).
Bottom log.
Trainable A/S oscillator for detection of F.H.830.
Q.H., Loran or Decca receiver (according to the system in use in the operational area).
Good facilities for chart work.
WiS. two witte and to portable i transeivers.
Loud hailing equipment.
WO 277/21
27
