action on the peninsula would be short and decisive and the Turkish guns dismounted.
The
force, which had been landed, would then be available for such operations in the vicinity of
Constantinople as might seem appropriate.
A supplementary report by the Hon. Sir Thomas Mackenzie provides, what further experience
has proved, a sound summary.
" In my opinion, which I express with all deference, the forcing of the Dardanelles
was a practicable proposition had the authorities approached the problem with the recognition
of the nature and extent of the difficulties that confronted them and made adequate provision
and exhibited the necessary strength of purpose to carry the operation through to the desired
end.
History has demonstrated and expert opinion supported the view that a combined
naval and military attack would ultimately offer the only chance of a favourable issue.
The authorities should, I consider, have launched this combined attack only after thorough
preparation, and I regard the preliminary bombardment of the outer forts on 3rd November,
1914- ordered by the Admiralty without consultation with the War Council-as an almost
irreparable mistake. Its effect was to draw the attention of the Turks to the possibility of
an attack in force on the peninsula, and there is no doubt it prompted them to make good
use of the time which intervened between the November bombardment and the military
landing on 25th April, 1915, in the way of improving their defences.
The Blocking of Zeebrugge
Although the blocking of the canal at Zeebrugge, on the night of 23rd April, 1918, was a naval
operation in that it was carried out by ships, the diversion on the Mole was entrusted to the Royal
Marines; and the Royal Air Force were to carry out a raid with the aim of distracting attention
from the real operation.
Unfortunately owing to thick mist and rain the latter were unable to play
Many lessons, which bear on the conduct of Combined Operations, may be learned from
The aim was clear cut: to block the entrance of the Bruges canal.
The landing on the
Mole was a diversion to distract the attention of the enemy from the ships as they passed the guns on
the breakwater. Special craft and appliances were prepared for the assault. Secrecy was meticulously
observed. Finally, the whole organisation was under the command of one man, Vice-Admiral Keyes,
who, as the Chief of Staff to Sir John de Robeck at the Dardanelles, had bitter experience of what
a landing in the face of opposition entailed.
Despite the fact that the withdrawal added one more complication to the normal hazards of
such a plan, the operation was a success.
Losses were comparatively light although the attack
was made on the most heavily fortified part of the coastline occupied by the Germans.
A few illustrations of the special preparations necessary for these operations are emphasised
hereunder in support of the general principles for the conduct of Combined Operations which will
emerge in later chapters.
First and foremost, all the ships and craft used in the operation were specially adapted for their
Secondly the officers and ratings, all volunteers, were assembled about two months prior to
On board ship or ashore, they were specially trained, under conditions of the most
stringent secrecy.
Finally, all training conformed to a carefully thought-out plan prepared by the
Admiralty planning staff over which Admiral Keyes presided before being appointed to take
command at Dover.
The haphazard methods of Gallipoli were completely absent. The object was clear, full
preparation was made, every detail was rehearsed and, above all, secrecy was preserved.
Students of combined operations are well advised to study the orders for the operation and
to see what provision and pre-vision were put into the plan.
The detailed work was immense and
every eventuality that was foreseeable was considered.
SECTION
(ili)
BETWEEN THE WARS, 1919-1939
Reduction in Armament Expenditure
reduction in armament expenditure.
The end of the 1914-18 War and the prospect of a long peace no ate the sia prete
The " Ten-Year Rule"
ten years) was in force and the money voted to the Services was only sufficient to preserve a static
encielley.
There was very little research and experiment.
The war experience of the Army imbued all ranks with a fearful regard for the defensive power
of small arms fire.
As for Combined Operations, it was regarded as suicidal to approach a defended
beach in ships' boats, the only craft available.
Further, the awful prospect of having to get out of
these open boats to land on an enfiladed beach was not considered, quite rightly, to be
an operation
of war.
In spite of the successful application of principles in the Zeebrugge operation, it was some
time before military thought looked further than the carnage at " V'
Beach, Gallipoli, to the
deficiencies of material and planning which were its cause rather than the actual superiority of
defensive fire power.
The First Landing Craft
About 1922, the question of the design of a Motor Landing Craft (short title M.L.C.) arose.
After considerable discussions as to which Service would have to pay for it, a prototype was
constructed; it was a flat-bottomed craft with a square bow and stern and propelled by water jet
propulsion. 1
This form of propulsion was designed to avoid damage to screw propellers when the
craft grounded.
Its unloaded weight was approximately 20 tons.
In the summer of 1927, this craft underwent trials but was not a great success.
With the
wind astern it made about 6 knots, but the engines were so noisy that all chance of tactical surprise
in the assault was extremely doubtful.
In 1930 there were three of these craft in existence.
In 1935 Italy declared war on Abyssinia. This brought amphibious warfare to the fore again
as landings in the Red Sea and even in Italy were considered.
All that happened was that the
existing landing craft had bullet-proof plating fitted to the coxswain's position and an order was
placed for six more landing craft but it was not until the winter of 1938 that these were delivered.
The Sino-Japanese War
Late in 1937, the Japanese carried out amphibious operations at Tientsin and Shanghai.
Our naval forces, who were in the vicinity, saw, much to their surprise, a Landing Craft Carrier
(a ship of about 10,000 tons) arrive and launch landing craft over her stern, two at a time. Here
was the youngest naval power showing us the way both in design and technique. That great thought
and ingenuity had been given to Combined Operations by the Japanese was clearly shown.
Manual of Combined Operations
Since 1921, the Staff Colleges of the three Services had spent a month of their courses studying
Combined Operations, this month usually terminating in a week at Camberley.
The study of Combined Operations was thus kept alive and a manual was gradually compiled
which was published as an Inter-Service Confidential Book in 1925.
This superseded the four
paragraphs in the 1914 reprint of the Field Service Regulations.
Later editions of the Combined
Operations manual were published in 1931 and 1938.
Naval Proposals for the Formation of a Committee and a Centre
On 22nd February, 1936, the Director of the Royal Naval Staff College wrote a letter on the
subject of Combined Operations to the Admiral President of the Naval War College. The full text is
shown in Appendix 1.
The document reveals that the Staff College fully realised the importance of the part the
Navy would have to play in any amphibious expedition and frankly stated that, as a sea power, the
predominant partner in any operation was the Navy.
As such the Navy should take the initiative
for the design and provision of craft in the organisation required for mounting an overseas
expedition and in the supply of any special equipment required.
In forwarding the letter, the Admiral President of Greenwich College suggested that a permanent
committee should be set up to consider the subject and that a small training and development
establishment of the three Services should lead to
" real and rapid progress.
1 A petrol engine drove a centrifugal pump which produced a jet of water and thereby pushed the craft ahead
or astern depending upon how the jet was directed.
+17
WO 277/21
27
30
