A better plan
waS.
however,
adopted, whereby convoys with stores
and supplies for Sicily and Italy Were loaded on a variable corps bai,
including a proportion of G.H.O. Army, and L. of C. troops, plus resenes
to be built up outside North Africa.
Thus it was made possible to divert
a corps
"pack", made up of so many ships, to whichever ports would
be most convenient when the time arrived.
30 Corps in Sicily was reckoned
initially at 120,000, and 5 and 10 Corps at 130,000 each.
1944, it became possible to call ships forward from the U.S.A. specially
loaded for discharge at the advanced ports in Italy.
improvement on the existing method of diverting normally-stowed ships to
the forward ports, and obviated the unbalanced stocks of supplies which
inevitably resulted from that method.
SEE.
In the summer of
This was a great
Shipping difficulties were encountered.
Cargoes consisting of a single
commodity presented problems of distribution to base depots.
They were
necessary at one time owing to causes beyond the control of War Office,
who alleviated the difficulty
by arranging for such ships to be discharged
at more than one port at A.F.H.Q. discretion.
Extra tonnage of supplies
was sometimes shipped to take advantage of space available; but this could
not always be accepted in Italian ports, which entailed wasteful diversion
to North Africa.
Transportation did not check the out-
turn of supplies from ships, and it was therefore necessary for S.T. to
arrange this.
In this way, it was possible to ascertain the stocks on parly
discharged ships and stocks in transit between docks and depots, and also
to compare receipts against advised deliveries.
This checking threw a very
heavy burden on R.A.S.C. supply units, not designed to undertake this
additional responsibility.
Short Supply from U.S.A.
By the end of 1944, certain supplies, hitherto received from USA.
were becoming increasingly difficult to obtain.
Thus, 1,500 tons of choco-
late, packed for European civilian relief purposes, had to be used for mina,
needs but the packing woe uncritable for decratch to Ttaly and the whol
consignment had to be repacked.
stocks of this commodity in A.F.H.Q. depots had been completely exhausted.
By the time this was completed, reserve
More serious was a short-fall of 6.000 tons
equivalents.
of tinned bacon and
This was made up by shipping bacon from the United King:
obtaining bacon from Canada.
dom, and from a Middle East surplus drawing on A.F.H.O. reserves, an
The lack of shipping from U.S.A. to C.M.F. in January, 1945, combined
with the
"back-log"
against earlier demands,
now amounting
tons, also complicated the supply position in
call forward more of its reserves from Miadle East including 6000 tons
Italy, and A.F.H.Q. had to
Eventualte the 4f1. long astated to an ond ca in on tons, and
this was attributed to the demands not neing made sufficiently far ahead.
They were therefore to be placed cir monthe in advance of delivery.
Demands and Provision
for all troops maintained by the British in British North African Force an
for all troops maintained by the British in British North African Force five
At the beginnina of tha Italian campion the monthly demand for supplie
Central Mediterranean
Force, was isnt to War Office by
months in advance
This woe later incrossed to sir and a half months
272
In the early months, there were considerable discrepancies between the
bulk tonnages for supplies demanded by "Q" Branch, A.F.H.Q., on " l'"
Branch, War Office, for each convoy, and the tonnage of the detailed break-
down of supplies sent by S.T., A.F.H.Q., to S.T.6.
This was because of
two factors.
Insufficient time was given to S.T., A.F.H.Q., to calculate
the detailed breakdown of supplies by commodities, with the result that
rough estimates had to be made; and there was no definite authorized per-
centage to be added to net weights to bring them up to gross weight.
Both
these points were cleared up in due course.
In December, 1943, a modification was introduced, in that S.T., A.F.H.Q.,
became responsible for bidding two months in advance of loading for the
tonnage necessary to ship A.F.H.Q. demands made five months in advance
of consumption.
At first it was difficult to do so without knowing exactly
what quantities the War Office proposed to ship from the United Kingdom
and U.S.A. each month, but this gradually adjusted itself as the system got
into its stride.
Reserves
It was decided to divide the 60 days' reserve for troops in Italy equally
between North Africa and Italy, where 15 days' working margin for the
forces on the mainland would also be held.
In this way, it would be
possible to place reserves at convenient places for an estimated number of
divisions, and to minimize double handling of stocks built up in North
Africa. In effect, North Africa was to be the main base, with an advanced
base in Italy.
The rate at which these reserves would be built up was at
first calculated as one day in two days, later reduced to one day in four
The Staff decided in December, 1943, that the holding of supplies should
be 45 days' G.S. reserve, and 30 days working margin.
D.S.T., A.F.H.Q., did
not agree with the latter figure.
In his view, a working margin of 45 days
was necessary to matter figureces for delays and difficulties in redistributing
supplies within the Meditarranenn theatre. and in fact he continued to
formulate his demands editerra basis.
In the end, the Staff agreed that the
size of the working maron that babe settled by the Services concerned.
The G.S. reserve as not all held in A.F.H.O. area, 15 days being
in Middle Bast, as exp was not hip her vi.
In the spring of 1944, it was ruled that the 30 days' G.S. reserve held
North Africa
in AFLO dad chould he colit in the proportions of about one third in
and two thirds in Italy.
By September that year, port
capacity in Italy made it possible to hold the whole 30 days there.
stacks in North Africa were gradually moved across and. after January,
1945, the troops remaining in North Africa were maintained from Italy.
The reserves held in Army, corps, and divisional areas varied from time
to time accordino to the circums ances andallows t
In Army B.S.D.
4-10 days; but on one occasion Fifth
Army also held 5 days as G.H.Q.
reserves in Army area.
273
7
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
