(c) Fixed commodity third line companies were to be abolished in all
theatres, and third line work, except for supplies, would be done by
standard companies.
These would be provided and operated on a
pool system, and would take the place, not only of the large and
unwieldy third line petrol and ammunition parks, but also of many
other types of R.Á.S.C. specialized transport units.
This would
simplify establishments, and consequently save overheads.
(d) Second line transport was to be organized as follows:-
(i) Home or European theatres.
The Divisional R.A.S.C. organiza-
tion was to consist of three
"commodity" companies.
The
establishments would allow of an extra company being formed,
should it be desired to operate in four groups, i.e., divisional
troops and three brigades.
Platoons would be standard.
Scales
of petrol and ammunition would remain unchanged.
(ii) Middle East and Eastern theatres. There would be a " group"
divisional
R.A.S.C.
organization of four
companies,
each
having ammunition and petrol platoons, and supplies being
carried in two echelons.
(iii) Corps and Army Troops.
The second line companies, both for
home and Middle East, were to be based on carrying the same
scales of ammunition and petrol as before, and on standard
(e) The organization of R.A.S.C. transport companies was to be based
on a standardized transport platoon, the latter designation replacing
that of section, which was now to be used to describe the sub-units
into which a platoon was divided.
Standard companies would be
allotted standard platoons as required.
Standard platoons would be
based on a fixed carrying capacity of 90 tons, or one battalion of
infantry.
The 3-ton lorry, as the normal load-carrying vehicle of the
R.A.S.C., was taken as the basic vehicle, and the normal transport
platoon would therefore consist of 30 3-ton lorries.
also the most convenient to group into one unit, from the point of
view of technical control and operation.
The total number of platoons provided was to be calculated, not
on carrying on wheels the equivalent amount of petrol and ammuni-
tion to that in second line, but on the total maintenance requirement
for petrol plus ammunition, with allowance for such miscellaneous
tasks as R.E. stores, water, etc.
With from two to five platoons in
a company, the normal lift of a company would then be from 180 to
450 tons.
In regard to the large number of vehicles of other types
operated by the R.A.S.C., from 10-ton lorries down to (at that time)
15-cwt. trucks, the normal platoon was also to consist of 30 load-
carrying vehicles.
(A) To permit specialist functions to be carried out, sub-units of specialist
personnel, appropriate to the particular task, were to be added to
what would otherwise be simply General Transport companies.
The consequent reorganization, which was authoritatively described as
being the most outstanding reform in military administration of modern
times, was put into effect without delay.
Standard Components
Under the new organization, standard transport companies were built up
from the following standard components: —
Headquarters of a Mechanical
Transport Company ...
...
Transport Platoon
....
...
With capacity to command and ad-
minister two to five transport platoons
and necessary specialists.
To operate 30 task vehicles, drivers
being provided on the basis of 25 per
cent. reliefs.
Ammunition Platoon (later re-
designated as
General Duty
Platoon)
Supply Platoon ...
To provide for ammunition duties in
divisional ammunition companies, etc.
To provide supply details for one
echelon of a divisional supply com-
pany, to operate a field supply depot,
or undertake similar duties.
Composite Platoon
To provide ammunition, POL, and
supply
duties
to
an
armoured
brigade, or similar small formation
or mixed body of troops.
Relief Driver Increment
..•
To provide additional relief drivers
for 30 task vehicles, if it were neces-
sary
to
increase
the
proportion
allowed in
the
normal
transport
platoon; and to provide a pool of
loaders.
Workshop Platoon
Organized on existing lines, but of 11
different sizes (Serials 1 to 11), to fit
varying sizes of company.
The composition of the various types of Field Force R.A.S.C. M.T. units,
as reorganized, is shown in Appendix IID; the composition of the standard
components is shown in greater detail in Appendix IIC.
Results of Re-organization
The reorganization was put into effect in the United Kingdom in August,
1941, and quickly proved eminently
satisfactory, both on a short and on a
long term view.
Its first fruits were a saving of over 12,000 personnel and of 1,600 vehicles.
Regarding the latter, the new organization actually provided for a greater
lifting capacity than the old, but did this by increasing the size of the vehicles
in certain units.
The larger lift was thus achieved with less vehicles and
considerably less men.
Put in another way, the saving amounted to about
15 per cent. in the number of personnel required to operate and maintain a
major force, because of the application of the pooling system.
(37452)
WO 277/21.
27
WO27 7/26
