Air Despatch
During Stage 3, the importance of the airlift became paramount. 21 Army
Durisked for the pre-planned lift of 1,000 tons a day to be implemented.
Going the week ending 9th September, 16,000 tons of petrol and 300 tons of
Durines were delivered; the next week, priority switched to ammunition, of
which 2,300 tons were delivered,
together with 800 tons of petrol and 300
tons of supplies.
Within two days of the liberation of Brussels, airfields in
tons ares vere put into operation before a roadhead could be established.
that are a period of five weeks at this time, the Evère airfield in this group
Durined 18,000 tons of freight, or an average of 400-500 tons a day, not allow.
ing for non-flying days, which happened two or three times a week.
In September, 1944, one of the R.A.F. Groups which were operating on
Air Supply services from airfields in the Swindon area moved to Essex, so as
to be nearer the Continent, in consequence of the successful progress of
operations in N.W. Europe.
This required the move of a considerable
portion of the Army Air Despatch organization, not only of the personnel,
but also of existing pre-packed dumps; and the latter had to be re-formed in
the new area.
The airborne invasion of Holland was the first major test of air mainten-
ance operations.
1 Airborne Division was supplied in daylight on the four
days following D-day, and 475 sorties were flown with pre-packed stores
ejected by R.A.S.C. two-men despatch crews, who suffered casualties of 165
missing and 37 wounded, or over 20 per cent.
Operation " Market Garden"
This operation consisted of two parts; the airborne invasion of Holland,
known as Operation " Market", and the ground operations connected with
the
airborne landings,
which
were known as
Operation
" Garden".
"Market" was the famous Arnhem operation.
The operation had to begin at a time when the administrative resources
were barely able to support it.
The estimates of rail and other capacities had
proved too optimistic, with the results that although it was supported with is
major requirements of rations, petrol and ammunition, this was only achieved
at the expense of other requirements of Second Army and First Canadian
Stocks in the roadhead concerned were low, and the lines of communicat
tion to the R.M.A. at Bayeux were stretched to the limit.
No pause to build
up stocks was possible it ux were stre hea too be launched successfully.
The administrative build-un was not helned by the necessity for using
800 3-ton lorries to bring up bridging equipment from the R.M.A.
meant using 6-ton and 10-ton lorries to lift sunnlies and other uneconomica
loads for such vehicles.
Two platoons of tank transporters were modified
for Inad carving and in eight teela lifted a total af 20 000 tons over a
distance of 194,000 loaded miles.
take its own third line lift from roadhead to Field Maintenance Centres, as
30 Corns. which was responsible for the oneration. was directed to under
Army transport could not be spared.
obtained by dumning the loads of the first and second line transport of the.
Eight platoons of transport lift were
352
seaborne elements of 52 Division.
prepared to accept corps tasks to the extent of five platoons for an indefinite
Each other division was ordered to be
Part of a fast road convoy, called "Red Ball", operated by the U.S.
Forces, was made available to bring in 500 tons daily to the roadhead.
principles of this system, and the views of the D.S.T., 21 Army buad. The
proposed application of the system to the British L. of C. transport, are no the
in Appendix VIE.
Maintenance Arrangements
The two U.S. Airborne Divisions engaged in Operation "Market" were
maintained from British stocks as far as common user items, e.g, P.O.L. and
supplies, were concerned, although later U.S. rations were issued.
It was the
plan that the airborne formations should be maintained by air from D-Day
(ie, 17th September) to D +5; but arrangements were also made to main-
tain the U.S. Divisions by land from D-Day in an emergency, and 1 Airborne
Division similarly from D+3.
With the exception of Guards Armoured Division, which was ordered to
hold eight days' supplies and 200 miles of P.O.L., and all Corps Troops, which
vere restricted to four days' supplies and 150 miles of P.O.L., all the forma-
tions within 30 Corps which were to make contact with the airborne forces
vere to hold six days' supplies and 250 miles of P.O.L. for each vehicle. They
vere also ordered to carry double second line holdings of 25-pr, ammunition,
but were warned that they might have to carry on with depleted second line
holdings after that, owing to shortage of stocks.
Course of the Operation
All three divisions
made successful landings, and simultaneously the
Second Army attacked on the ground.
The automatic drop of supplies for
all the airborne formations was successfully carried out.
The next day, the
maintenance by air of 1 British Airborne Division was not successful, owing
to intense anti-aircraft fire making the dropping inaccurate.
Contact was
esablished by the land forces with the U.S. Divisions, but not with the British
Division.
All three continued to be supplied by air, although not adequately,
oving to inaccurate dropping as a result of heavy anti-aircraft fire and misty
At the crucial moment the weather turned against the Allied forces.
Eremy resistance stiffened. and the flving in of reinforcements and supplies
for the hard nressed Britich formation orew procreccively more difficult a
the weather got worse.
which the ground forces were trying to force their way, an instance of this
There was considerable confusion in the area through
being thet when a pA a mmany was taking supplies from a capturec
dump at the
German dump, they captured 75 of the enemy who were trying to use the
same time.
the night of the me time, September.
The 1 Airborne Division was withdrawn on
There were no doubt a number of causes for the withdrawal of
1 Airborne Division from the Arnhem operation. but one of the greatest con-
S.T. Services in the Airborne Division
tributor see fate to into do to sit with its essential daily
Wes7et/17
WO 277/21
27
N027 7726
