On the other hand, the D.S.T. ceased to be responsible for the heavy
repair of R.A.S.C.-operated W.D. vehicles, and for the provision of vehicles
and spare parts, and their storage, when these functions were transferred to
the Director of Mechanical Engineering, and the Director of Warlike Stores,
Organization of the Directorate
These duties are obviously very diverse, and it has been at all times a
matter for debate as to whether the two services, supplies and transport, should
not be divorced.
This possibility was in fact, visualized in Field Service
Regulations, Vol. I, 1930, where it stated that: —
" In the case of a war of the first magnitude, the services of supplies
and transport may be separated, each service being under its own head.
the Director of Supplies and the Director of Transport respectively."
This arrangement was the case at the War Office in the War of 1914-1918.
Separation did not however prove necessary in the War of 1939-1945, except
in the B.E.F., France, during the period December, 1939, to June, 1940; and
the successful operation of the two services under one head, both at the War
Office and in every other theatre of war, may be considered sufficient proof
of the satisfactory nature of the arrangement.
This principle also applied to
the head of the supply and transport services with Commands, Armies, and
lower formations.
Each of the services included under the Directorate was, however, separately
organized and controlled throughout the chain of command, although they
often worked in close co-operation, and were mutually inter-dependent.
The personnel of the services under the Supply and Transport Directorate
were provided by the R.A.S.C., except for catering whose personnel belonged
to the Army Catering Corps.
R.A.S.C. officers were interchangeable between
all the R.A.S.C. services, but the other ranks were trained only in one or other.
In the course of the War, the two main divisions of supplies and transport,
at the War Office, threw off part of their responsibilities to newly-formed
sections of the directorate, and new activities were added, but the principle
remained basically the same.
During peace, and up to the outbreak of war, the establishment of D.S.T's.
personal staff was three officers; the Director himself, a Major-General; the
Inspector of the Royal Army Service Corps, also a Major-General: and a
personal assistant to the D.S.T.
On mobilization, this establishment was increased by the addition of a
D.D.S.T. (brigadier, as deputy to the D.S.T., and soon afterwards an Assistant
Inspector (brigadier) was also appointed.
i May, 1940, a staff captain was added, with the primary duties of progress
and liaison officer between D.S.T. and the S.T. Branprimary with A.G.8; and
in January, 1941, a D.A.D.S.T. was added to the staff of I.R.A.S.C.
in July, 1943, a Brigadier S.T. operations was added to the D.S.T. staf,
wild the duties of co-ordinating, on behalf of the D.S.., S.T. organization
and operational activities, between S.T., Q., and General Staff branches.
The Directorate of Supplies and Transport at the War Office was at the
time of the outbreak of war in 1939 organized under the Director in two
branches dealing broadly with the two subjects respectively.
That dealing with supplies was, for the sake of convenience, known as
Q.M.G.6, and that dealing with transport as Q.M.G.3.
Later, these designa-
tions were changed to S.T.6 and S.T.3 respectively.
The initial organization, scope, and subsequent development of each of
these sections and their off-shoots (which became independent branches of
the Directorate), are described below.
Mention must also be made of the branch of the War Office which dealt
with the personnel affairs of the R.A.S.C.
Until 1929, this work was carried
out by a branch of the S.T. directorate, known as Q.M.G.5, which maintained
officers' records, effected their postings, and controlled their promotion, and
also dealt similarly with other ranks through Officer i/c R.A.S.C. Records,
and with the civilian employees working under the R.A.S.C., e.g., in the
barrack department.
The branch was under an A.D.S.T.
In 1929, the responsibility for personnel employed under the D.S.T. was
transferred from the Quarter-Master-General to the Adjutant-General, and
Q.M.G.5 was consequently
transterred to the latter's control, as A.G.8/
Q.M.G.5, under an officer who held the dual appointment of A.A.G. and
A.D.S.T.
A.G.8 dealt with military personnel, and Q.M.G.5 with civilian
The Adjutant-General took over the responsibility for the distribution of
individuals, their postings, transfers, and
records, and controlled the work of the Officer i/c R.A.S.C. Records.
D.S.T. was responsible for the distribution of units, training, and matters
affecting civilian employees.
The A.A.G./ A.D.S.T. acted as a liaison officer
between the Adjutant-General and the D.S.T., and these officers worked in
close collaboration in all matters in which they were jointly concerned.
In 1940, Q.M.G.5 was redesignated S.T.5.
S.T. Representation in Commands, Formations, etc.
Up to the time of the outbreak of war, the D.S.T. was represented at the
headquarters of the principal commands in the United Kingdom and overseas
by an A.D.S.T. (colonel); at those of smaller commands, and of districts, by
an Officer Commanding, R.A.S.C. (lieut.-colonel or major).
These officers were the advisers of their commanders on all supply and
transport matters, and, under their direction, the executive duties of these ser-
vices were carried out by the R.A.S.C.
Os.C., R.A.S.C., as their title implies,
were also the regimental commanders of the R.A.S.C. personnel, and respon-
sible, in that capacity, to the local commander, and not to the A.D.S.T., who
was responsible for their technical supervision.
The barrack services in the larger commands were supervized by a Com-
mand Barrack Officer, and not by the A.D.S.T., except that the latter was
responsible for the provision and quality of fuel.
Os.C., R.A.S.C., were
responsible for the executive duties in the Supply and Transport Services, and
for general supervision of the Barrack Services.
These duties were actually
carried out by Officers in charge of Supplies, of Transport, and of Barracks,
respectively.
In smaller stations, however, an O.C., R.A.S.C., might himself
1I7
WO 277/21.
27
WO27 7/26
