The field service bulk ration had almost entirely superseded Compa packs
by 21st July, but it was almost entirely a preserved ration, except for bread,
Which began to be available on a limited scale of 3-0z. from 16th July.
had been delay in the field bakeries getting to work, owing partly to dificuly
in finding sites with suitable water supply.
Plans were in hand to provide
fresh items to take the place of the tinned equivalents.
Insulated meat pits
and ten-ton portable cold stores were constructed in order to enable frozen
meat to be supplied.
Seventy tons of storage space for frozen meat became available as early
as 24th July, and meat was shipped accordingly.
Shipments were also made
to enable trials to be carried out of some experimental 25-ton non-refrigerated
pits..
These were at Arromanches, and consisted of chambers, 16-ft. 2-ins. by
5-ft. 9-ins. by 11-ft. 6-ins. high.
They were completely below ground level.
the walls and doors being of wood frame covered with corrugated iron both
inside and out, with a 9-in. space between.
The top and floor were of con-
crete.
Each had a capacity of 40 tons of boneless frozen meat.
It would
have been better if they had been rather smaller, as they had to be filled up to
get the best results, and the tonnage was then too big for quick turnover. In
general, however, they were a most useful improvisation,
and meat would
keep in them for about ten days in reasonable weather.
Once started, the flow steadily increased.
the theatre were surveyed at the end of July, and the following situation was
found.
Fifteen ten-ton cold stores had arrived, and five of these were in operation
at Arromanches.
The other ten would be ready by 24th August.
760 tons of civilian cold storage had been discovered, and these installa-
tions were being rapidly repaired.
The " pits" would hold over 300 tons by 24th August.
M.O.W.T. had produced an old refrigerated ship of 700 tons capacity,
which was being taken into service as a floating store.
Two 80-ton barges
were in reserve
P.O.L. Situation, End of Phase 1
Imports of P.O.L. averased 4,500 tons a day, of which half was in bulk,
against an average daily consumption of P.O.L. products of 2,000 tons a day.
The restriction of movement un the bridgehead reduced petrol consumpion
minimum, and by 5th August the stock of M.T. spirit was 66,000 tons,
or 33 days' stock.
SECTION 3.—THE BREAK-OUT AND SUBSEQUENT ADVANCE
The second phase lasted from 26th July to 26th September, 1944, and is
administrative aspects are divisible into three stages:-
(a) The break-out from the Normandy bridgehead and the advance to
the line of the Seine, which was reached on 25th August.
(b) The crossings of the Seine, up to the capture of Brussels and Antwer!
on 3rd and 4th September-
-period of very
Second Army advancing of an avergoe rate of 40 miles a day.
(c) The operations to exploit to East and North, terminating in the
operations called " Market Garden", which included the air-
borne landings of the ke raore Division and of
346
Stage 1
Progress had been slower than the planning estimates, and it was necessary
to face the possibility of 21 Army Group spending the winter south of the
Seine, on which line or on that of the Somme it was considered certain that
the enemy would impose a delay on our advance.
Stocking of the R.M.A.
therefore continued against this eventuality and the breaks in day-to-day
maintenance due to winter conditions that might be anticipated.
When the break-out occurred, every available lorry was mobilized and
given to the Armies, except for a bare minimum of G.T. companies which
had to be retained for port and beach clearance work.
In order to give
further help, practically all L. of C. units were grounded (i.e., immobilized),
and their transport was diverted to support the advance.
Transport was the
big administrative problem during the first and second stages of this phase.
There was no anxiety as to the availability of supplies, the crucial problem
was that of getting them up to the fighting formations, and of keeping pace
with the very rapid rate of advance.
As the Armies advanced, they were at first maintained from the R.M.A.,
but, as the distance increased, it became necessary to interpose new road-
heads, which were opened on 24th and 26th August for the
Canadian and
Second Armies respectively.
The latter formation had formed an inter-
mediate echelon, known as a " cushion", five days before.
These cushions
were normally the dumped requirements of Corps, brought forward on third
line transport to a position in front of the main roadhead, sited in relation to
and in the direction of the next roadhead to be formed farther ahead. At this
time, Second Army had six G.T. companies from G.H.Q. resources under
command. All issues of petrol to the Armies were in pack, but, at the opening
of this phase, L. of C. units were beginning to receive their petrol in bulk,
which released jerricans for the impending advance.
Until the crossing of the
Seine, the physical distribution of petrol to the armies caused no difficulty.
Stage 2
From 22nd August onwards, more and more transport had to be provided
lo enable roadheads to be stocked. It had been planned to establish road-
heads at
of 50 to 100 miles apart,
and to stock them
to a maximum of five days' holding of all stores, but this system had to be
modified, owing to the extreme rapidity of the advance
The entry into
Brussels and Antwerp increased the length of the L. of C. by about 3000
miles, but on thn twerp increas enabled the advance base to be established in
the later port as shen has the approaches could be cleared of the enemy,
instead of, as had soon the original intention, in the Havre-Rouen area.
In the process of reaching those places, administrative problems of extra-
ordinary magnitude had to be solved.
It was vitally necessary to exploit to
the full" the disorganization and retreat of the enemv.
Exceptional measures
were necessary to anizatie this
8 Corps was grounded, and all its second line
transport, as well as 50 per cent of its first line transport, was temporarily
withdrawn and used to assist in the task of maintaining the two corps whick
were racing forwand in the advance
All third line transport was pooled, and
placed directlv under Armv control. and the tasks of all supply colums wer
347
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
