A practical solution was eventually found in the shape of a portable
steel petrol tank of about 620-gallons capacity, i.e., a 3-ton lorry load when
fled which was at the same time of sufficiently light construction to enabl
t, when empty, to be manhandled into and out of standard Army lorries
Facturing capacity, and for this reason, and because the us were dificulties in
The production of such tanks in quantity was, however, limited by manu-
making the tanks fast in lorries, they were hardly ever used for the purpose
for which they were originally intended.
A considerable number were however
in use in 21 Army Group as static tanks in unit lines, thus facilitating bulk
supsy. It was proposed to use them in amphibian vehicles in the Far Bast
for bulk transport purposes.
The story of the development of the returnable
later chapters, in the U.K. in Chapter XII, Section 5, and
container is told in
overseas in
Chapter VI onwards.
The possible use of solidified petrol for supply by air was investigated in
1944, and the conclusions reached are discussed in Appendix XM.
Transport Developments
Basis of Divisional Organization Changed
Opinion on the principle underlying the Divisional R.A.S.C. organization
soon began to undergo a change as a result of practical experience, both in
France and in the Western Desert, so that when a War Office Committee (the
"Bartholomew" Committee) examined, in the winter
of 1940-1941, the
question of the future organization of the Army in the Field, its most important
conclusion, from the R.A.S.C. point of view at least, was that the basis of
organization should be the brigade group, as the lowest self-contained fighting
formation.
In consequence of the alteration of the basic principle involved, the D.S.T.
examined the problem of adapting the R.A.S.C. divisional organization, not
only to meet this new factor, but also with the object of increasing, if possible,
the flexibility of operation demanded by modern conditions of warfare, whil
achieving some economy in personnel.
Provision had also to be made for
some changes in the composition of a division.
A new divisional R.A.S.C. organization was therefore designed under hi
direction, consisting of three " commodity" companies, each of four "group'
sections.
There were also proposals under consideration for the introductios
of standard components of R.A.S.C. field units.
General Wavell's Proposals
At this moment, the Commander-in-Chief, Middle East (then Gener.
Wavell submitted to War Office certain proposals for the alteration of th
R.A.S.C. organization, based on actual practice in the African campaigs
He pointed out that the existing British Army method of maintenance n
based largely on the system employed on the Western Front in the War!
1914-1918. This assumed that the division was the unit,
and that it w
moved into or out of a front as a complete entity tis third line transport g
a network of railways behind the Army so that the division could be mat
specified quantites of various commodities.
spanized in corps units, with sub-units allotted to divisions for carriage,
It also assumed that there wit
tained within 80 miles of railhead.
56
Middle East System
In the Middle East, however, they were operating on a different basis.
There was no network of railways.
Divisions did not operate as a unit on
a broad front.
Brigade groups were frequently detached to operate indepen-
dently.
The long distances from railhead or " sea-head"
prevented the
operation in Middle East of the accepted system.
These factors, in the Western Desert, led to improvisation from the start.
During the advance in that area, the system employed was to dump stocks of
supplies, petrol, and ammunition, until a certain number of days' reserves had
been accumulated in the forward area.
When this was complete, the advance
was resumed, and continued over a certain distance, say, 70 or a 100 miles.
On
completion of the advance, all transport was employed to build up ammunition
for a bombardment, e.g., at Bardia and Tobruk, or sometimes to build up
stocks of petrol and supplies.
This was the method commonly adopted in
warfare in Eastern conditions, where also brigade groups were often employed
independently.
The system was, in fact, that, instead of organized third line
transport, they used a "pool" of reserve M.T. companies to build up stocks
as required.
There was no manhandling between reserve M.T. companies and
third line companies, but the former ran right through from rail- or sea-head
to field depots, from which second line companies drew.
It was uneconomical
to hold petrol and ammunition on wheels in third line transport, as provided by
the normal system;
instead, they formed advance dumps of the various
commodities, which might be termed field supply, petrol, and
ammunition
depots.
Recommended Organization of Formation Transport
General Wavell therefore recommended that the second line R.A.S.C.
organization for an infantry division should be similar to that for an armoured
division, with three brigade group companies and a divisional troops company,
each company consisting of an ammunition section, a petrol section, and a
supply section.
There should be no organized third line transport, as was then included
in the normal British system.
Corps troops companies would draw from
field depots, in the same way as divisional companies.
In each division, there should be a D.I.D., to handle petrol and supplies,
and an ammunition section (ordnance) to operate at the field depots.
units should be strong enough to have a detachment to take charge of an
old dump being cleared, or a new dump being formed, while the field depots
were working.
He recommended that these proposals should be approved for adoption in
the Middle East, pointing out that, if a British division were to go from
Middle East to form part of an Army in Europe, it would be a simple matter
to change from the brigade procedure to the divisional procedure, but that
it was not so easy to change from the divisional to the brigade system.
These
proposals thus called for four " group" companies per division,
each of three " commodity" sections, while those of D.S.T. were for three
" commodity" companies, each of four " group" sections.
Each set of
proposals thus provided the same total number of sections per division, a
57
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
