gun craft mounting two 4-7-in. naval guns in turrets. At the same time, an idea for mounting
rockets it .C. L. put forward by Combined Operations Development Centre (C.O.D.C.) was given
every couragement by C.C.O., who saw in it a method of providing a great weight of concentrated
fire on beach defences.
do at crete died a main one to Co., on 8 Friend it ip
each of them with 792 Rocket Projectors by Ist May.
Both these experiments proved successful and work was put in hand in March, 1943, for the
conversion of further L.C.T.s.
As a result, nine L.C.G. (L.) (manned by Royal Marines) and
three L.C.T. (R.) were constructed in time to take part in Operation
The L.C.G. (L.)
were able to stand close inshore and engage pillboxes and bunkers with direct fire and cover the
approach of the leading waves.
Once Forward Observers were landed, these craft, grouped in
threes and under the control of a Bombardment Liaison Officer, were able to provide indirect fire,
when stopped, on area targets.
The L.C.T. (R.), mounting 1,000 5-in. rockets in fixed mountings with a set range of
3,500 yards, fired on to the beaches some 10 minutes before touch-down, with devastating effect on
the enemy, and at the same time gave enormous encouragement to the assault troops.
Self-propelled Artillery
On 15th March there was a meeting to discuss the requirement of S.P. artillery. This was
attended by representatives of the Director Royal Artillery, the Director of Artillery, and G.H.Q.
Home Forces.
The conclusions reached were :—
(1) That there was a definite requirement for S.P. 25-pdrs. in assault.
(2) On the basis of 8 Assault Brigades, each supported by 48 S.P. 25-pdrs., this would
amount to the provision of 384 equipments, not including reserves.
(3) Investigations should be made as to whether S.P. artillery could be waterproofed during
manufacture.
Trials were therefore carried out under the direction of S.O. Force "J," firing S.P. 25-pdr.
field guns from L.C.T.s approaching the beaches; a technique was evolved enabling the Field
Regiments of Assault Brigades to provide covering fire on the beach area during the run in of the
leading waves.
Support in the Assault against a Heavily Defended Coast
C.C.O. had at this time been considering the establishment of a permanent Support Committee
in C.O.H.Q. to prepare Fighting Instructions covering the use of fire power in the assault, but, at
an executive meeting on 6th April, it was decided that the work of the Committee should be
restricted to the preparation of a technical pamphlet, as Fighting Instructions must be written by
Force Commanders.
The Committee was established under the Chairmanship of D.D.X.S.R.
Thing the site, to a sulation with the Service Ministries, produced a paper. " wasterations
governing the support of a seaborne assault against a heavily defended coast.
by C.C.O. to the Chiefs of Staff, as a result of which the First Sea Lord proposed' that a Committee
of all three Services should be set up to study the problem of the provision of close support of
troops on a heavily defended coast.
At their 190th Meeting on 17th August, the Chiefs of Staft
agreed to this proposal and directed that an Inter-Services Committee should be set up as a matter
of urgency with the following composition and terms of reference :—
" Composition: Chairman : to be nominated by C.C.O.
Terms of
War Office and by the Áir Ministry.
The Committee to have power to extend its membership to include, inter
alia, the Chief Scientific Advisers and to consult any
concerned.
the authorities
To consider all existing means of
providing fire support when landing forces
on a heavily defended coast, and to make recommendations, as a matter o
urgency, for improving the degree of support."
1 C.O.S. (43) 464 (O).
of Air Vice-Marshal R.
The Inter-Service Committee first met at C.O.H.Q. on 4th September, under the Chairmanship
Graham (A.O.C.O.), the
members being Rear-Admiral
Major-General J. A. C. Whitaker, Major-General W. J. Eldridge, Air Vice-Marshal W. A. Coryton
and Air Vice-Marshal Breakey.
C.-in-C. Fighter Command, C.-in-C. Bomber Command, VIlI and IX U.S. Army Air Force,
21 Army Group, the Air Liaison Officer (Tactical Air Force) and C.O.H.Q. were present at the
majority of the meetings.
Among the papers considered were all those submitted previously to the Chiefs of Staff by
C.C.O. All existing means of support and those under development by C.C.O. were considered at
subsequent meetings.
The Graham Report
The final report of this Committee was taken by the Chiefs of Staff' on 23rd December, 1943,
together with a seven-page covering note summarising the scope of the investigations, the conclusion
and recommendations.2
should continue to :—
As far as C.O.H.Q. was concerned, it was recommended that action
(1) Augment the fire support from landing craft and special craft in any way possible.
(2) Investigate further the explosive head and/or fusing of 5-in. rockets.
(3) Improve the arrangements for aircraft recognition and control of A.A. Fire."
The Chiefs of Staff agreed that the proposals submitted for improving the degree of fire support
should receive attention of the highest priority and, when promising, should be developed.
The report became known as the Graham Report and was finally published as a Cabinet paper®
on 7th January, 1944. This paper had a wide distribution to planning staffs and, on the request
of C.C.O., copies were sent to D.C.O. (I.), D.C.O. (M.E.), C.T.C. Largs and Combined Operations
Staff S.E.A.C. It consisted in the main of statistical data governing weight of support required to
neutralise or destroy various types of target under various conditions and was therefore a guide
for planning, but it put forward no new methods or suggestions as to how close support might be
provided in future operations.
About this time the paper produced by the Assault Warfare Committee for the Inter-Services
Committee was published as a Combined Operations pamphlet entitled " Support of the Assault,"
with the object of presenting the problem of support in a seaborne assault against a defended coast
at so son trous afe; ph depicting the combined resusies of the tams for the antiable for
types of seaborne and airborne support. C.O.H.Q., shortly after this, published the first pamphlet
on the technique of firing S.P. artillery from L.C.T.s.
The responsibility of keeping the Graham Report under review, and revising it in the light
of operational experience, was delegated by the Joint Technical Warfare Committee to one of its
sub-committees, on which C.O.H.Q. was represented by Professor Bernal and Commander Unwin.
This sub-committee studied the recent American operations in the Pacific and drew comparisons
between the weight of fire support put down by U.S. Forces and the theoretical scales recommended
It was found that only one-third of the theoretical scale was used and it
Mate on there a proposal that a scients the fe exp ence on thy wai to the ot scat
to America to make a detailed study of the effect of fire support in the Pacific.
This proposal was
agreed by the Chiefs of Staff, * so the Senior Scientific Adviser to the War Office, who was due to
visit the B.J.S.M., was briefed to study this aspect of the war.
and the depost dificult problem stil end art; the he C. Close supper deten i th
gap, but, as stated previously, production fell far short of the requirement which was now assessed
by the C.O.S.S.A.C. planners as 36 craft for each Assault Division.
Two-thirds of these craft were
required for H.E. support and one-third for dealing with concrete emplacements.
Ver a C (.) had proved itself creative in define it 4)C. and donate mum bor
forward a proposal to C. in-C. Portsmouth, whom the Admiralty had made responsible
1 C.O.S. (43) 314th Meeting (O).
≥ Subsequently circulated as C.O.S. (43) 769 (0).
3 C.O.S. (43) 770 (O).
* C.O.S. (44) 127th Meeting (0).
WO 277/21
27
30
