A dumb barge has, as its name implies, no means of propulsion and, further, the goods which
it carries are, in the normal course of events, hoisted in and out by cranes.
Designs were produced in C.O.H.Q. whereby doors could be fitted at the stern of a barge to
allow vehicles to be driven in and out.
to fit a proportion with large outboard self-contained units.
-Contained me the Prose had to Couty, in as deaded
The work of conversion was undertaken in small yards on the banks of the Thames and in
Southampton Water; it was both quickly and efficiently done.
By the target date, 30th June,
1942, 925 had been converted to carry vehicles and guns, 25 as fuel carriers and 15 were under
conversion as repair barges.
When, early in 1943, the date for the invasion of France had to be postponed, it was decided
to convert a proportion of these to fulfil special tasks, some for carrying anti-aircraft support weapons,
some for landing craft repair facilities, whilst others were equipped as water, petrol or oil barges
and a few were even converted into floating kitchens.
About 200 of the barges were powered by Ford engines, and others had outboard motors, but
the remainder had to be towed, generally by trawlers.
At Normandy, the Landing Barge Force, which was split between the British and U.S. Forces,
did invaluable work in providing an essential feature of the ferry service after they had discharged
their initial cargoes.
They were also used at Le Havre and later in the Scheldt Estuary.
Neverthe-
less, barges can only provide a makeshift contribution to short range amphibious warfare.
They
are useless for assault purposes; very dependent on good weather, both for the crossing and
beaching ; and, finally, cannot operate efficiently in non-tidal waters.
SECTION (iji)
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MINOR LANDING CRAFT
Landing Craft Mechanised. (L.C.M.)
The original L.C.M. was built in 1920 as a result of requirements put forward in 1918.
Requirements then were :—
To land a light tank, or a platoon, on moderately shelving beaches.
To have good power of retraction.
Protection against small arms fire.
To be capable of being hoisted by the derricks of existing merchant ships.
The first boat built in 1920 differed little in dimension from the L.C.M. (1) of World War II. She had
a very low freeboard, carrying the load on a deck above the waterline and discharging it by a
bow door with a double folding action. She had 10-lb. bullet-proof bulwarks and a protected
conning position. Her light weight was just under 20 tons.
Because of the retractability require-
ment, she had water jet propulsion (Hotchkiss). This system of propulsion, though sound in
theory, was ineffective.
The design was repeated with minor improvements in 1930 and again during the Abyssinian
crisis when several craft were built. They still had jet propulsion, but a different type (Gill).
One of their defects was the way in which the deck, if flooded, drained into a sump and, if
the sump was not pumped out, it overflowed back on to the deck and the craft lost stability and
Another defect was the very poor speed, which was not more than 5 knots despite two 60-h.p.
petrol engines.
In 1938 the L.C.M. was redesigned (by Thornycroft) on the instructions of the Inter-Services
Training and Development Centre.
but with propeller drive and a single ramp.
The new craft was designed to meet the same requirements,
She then had a much longer clear deck within the
same overall dimensions and no sump. A speed of just over 7 knots was obtained with the same
not be driven on steel.
This craft, like its predecessor, had a wooden deck as it was thought that tanks couid
180
A number of vessels of this design with minor improvements were built in the U.K. under the
name of L.C.M. (1) and used in every European operation during the war. Their chief duty was
the discharge of stores during the build-up phase, but a limited number were used for assault
purposes to carry high priority stores and small vehicles.
and higher speed.
During the war the gudio desi in as to aris disper caryag apacity, eate stability
of being able to hoist such vessels from davits; this requirement was therefore dropped.
An intermediate type, L.C.M. (3), was designed and produced in the U.S.A. by Messrs. Higgins
of New Orleans in 1941.
This L.C.M. was modified, in November 1941, as a result of British sugges-
tions and a large number of these craft were subsequently used by both British and U.S. Forces in
all theatres as ship to shore ferries.
The L.C.M. (3) was capable of lifting 30 tons of stores or small
When supplies of L.C.M.s (3) from America became difficult, production in the U.K. was
switched to the L.C.M. (7), which was a slightly larger version of the L.C.M. (3). It was designed
to be large enough to carry a bulldozer without being too large to be hoisted and carried in a
merchant ship.
Staff requirements were :—
To carry a 30-ton tank or vehicles.
To be capable of being hoisted out of a merchant ship fitted with a 25-ton derrick.
Speed 11 knots.
To land vehicles on moderate beach slopes.
No protection.
Reliable compass.
The design was worked out by Messrs. Thornycroft, who also built the prototype. The builder's
trials were successful but later experience showed that, the ramp, as fitted, was too short, and the
hand winch, used for the kedge and for hoisting the doors as in the L.C.M. (1), was not reliable.
The later deliveries had separate winches for the kedge and doors and a surf breakwater
The L.C.M.s (7) were not completed in time for use in World War II operations, but they
remained, after the war, the standard L.C.M. in the U.K. It seems certain that this type of vessel
cannot be entirely satisfactory unless it is also capable of carrying armour into the assault or across
In these circumstances the L.C.M. (7) has proved too small and there is little doubt that
future designs will have to be much larger.
Landing Craft Assault. (L.C.A.)
In 1939, two prototype L.C.A. were completed to meet requirements laid down by I.S.T.D.C.
One was designed and built by Fleming Propulsion, Ltd. and the other by Thornycroft.
The two boats were similar in that the engines and conning position were aft, and the troops
were carried in a hold compartment forward.
They sat on low benches, fitted a few inches above
the keel and disembarked over a bow ramp.
Protection was fitted on the sides of the boat on the
half-deck and on the deck abaft the engine room.
The Fleming boat was built of a metal called Birmabright, the Thornycroft of wood. The
Thornycroft boat was a better sea-boat and much better silenced, which for raiding purposes was
a very important consideration.
This boat was adopted and formed the basis of the staff require-
ments, which then became :-
Total loaded weight not to exceed 10 tons so as to enable boats to be lifted at merchant
ships' davits.
Speed 10 knots.
Low silhouette and silent running.
To carry thirty-five men, plus a crew of five.
To have bullet-proof protection to the sides and deck.
Draft not to exceed 1 ft. 9 in.
Endurance, 90 miles.
From 1941 onwards various slight modifications and improvements were made, but the design
remained substantially the same throughout the war.
WO 277/21.
27
