employed on the distribution of supplies, one was for medical services, and
the other two were for general duties.
The contracts for hired vehicles then
lapsed, as the majority of the civilian transport had then been impressed.
Co-ordination of Supplies
Early in 1940, the Malta Government, in consultation with the Services,
co-ordinating
materials and foodstuffs for the island, in
minimum, maintain fortress reserves uniform, and minimize the effect of the
The basis of the scheme was agreement between the Colonial
Office and the Service Ministries as to the reserve to be held, which was
accepted at six months, with two months' working margin.
A Committee for the Co-ordination of Supplies was set up in the island.
At the outset, the S.T. items affected were flour, wheat, petrol, kerosine, coal,
coke, and Diesel oil; later, in 1942, a number of other items
The committee submitted bulk demands for the whole island,
but this did not modify existing arrangements under which Services
Departments placed their normal monthly demands and reported their stock
their various directorates at War Office, etc., and in Middle
East. The system worked very well throughout the period it was in operation.
Arrangements for the maintenance of Malta were co-ordinated between
all the various ministries concerned, namely, the War Office, the Admiralty,
the Colonial Office, the Air Ministry, and the Ministry of Shipping.
provided for all demands being co-ordinated on the island, which would
indicate any priority of shipment.
Services were to demand on their respec-
tive branches in the United Kingdom, except that consolidated demands
would be made for certain commodities, which included fodder and wheat,
The Admiralty was responsible for the provision of
coal, after the system of supply by contract ceased to be practicable. Demands
which involved shipment from the United Kingdom were dealt with by a
committee under the Ministry of War Transport.
send most of the Army requirements for Malta in Middle East convoys.
arrival in the Middle East, Malta cargo was transhipped, and sent back to
the island with articles of local purchase, imports from India, Australia, etc.,
in periodical convoys.
Supply from Middle East
The latter arrangement did not last long, and in the autumn of 1940, it
was decided to supply Malta from Middle East. Malta's demands to the
end of the year were met from the United Kingdom, together with sufficient
additions to make stocks in the island up to 240 days.
This represented
six months' reserve and two months' working margin, the amount being
limited by considerations of turnover and the availability of storage space.
Stocks and reserves included provision for both Regular Army and locally
embodied troops, the latter having previously been fed from civil resources.
From January, 1941, Malta's requirements were included in Middle East's
monthly demands, but shown separately.
412
Middle East had insufficient cold storage accommodation to hold meat
for delivery to Malta. War Office, therefore, undertook to supply all Malta's
future requirements of certain perishable foodstuffs,
military, e.g., beef, mutton, pork, butter,
margarine, and crated cheese.
Demands for these supplies were made by Malta on Middle East, and repeated
to War Office, with military and civil demands shown separately.
adjustment was made between War Office and the Colonial Office.
ments from Australia were made when possible, with a view to immediate
onward shipment from Port Said, and coinciding with shipments of other
of Malta's requirements.
For various reasons, the site of the cold store in Malta
settled, until, in July, 1941, the project was dropped owing
other schemes.
The existing military cold store received
direct hit
which reduced its capacity by 300 tons.
Accommodation for supplies proved a great problem.
completely destroyed by enemy
struction of an underground supply depot, at an estimated cost of £86,000,
authorized by the War Office, to hold an eight months'
16,000, but owing to the claims of higher priority schemes, this was abandoned.
In any case, unless air-conditioning had been installed, it would only have
been possible to store tinned supplies in this depot, on account of damp.
Owing to the shortage of material and labour, it was not possible to
build new supply stores above ground, and it became necessary to disperse
stocks over a number of small stores, wherever accommodation could be
By 1942, there were 100 of these, and, in 1943, 120.
great difficulties of distribution when ships arrived and had to be unloaded
quickly; of turnover, involving daily collection from a large number
dispersed stores; and of safe custody.
Ration Scales
The Field Service Ration Scale laid down in Allowance
Regulations
was in operation from the outbreak of war until July, 1942, when a new scale
known as the Malta Defence Ration Scale, was issued by War Office.
1943, owing to the changed situation, this was redesignated the Malta F.S.
Throughout the period 1940-1943, scales of issue were, however, depen-
dent upon the stock position, which fluctuated considerably.
the scale, or substitutions, were effected in conjection with the local medical
During the lean period, the ration to be issued to the garrison
was, to some extent, increased or decreased in relation to the quantities avail-
able for the civilian population; thus it was not permissible for the military
authorities to increase the scale of issue of any " co-ordinated" item without
the approval of the Defence Committee.
Slight reductions were effected in the scale at intervals up to April, 1942.
With the deterioration in stocks
position, and the shipping situation, the
first really drastic reductions came in May, 1942, when a special scale came
413
(37452)
1 B
