The Deputy Chiefs of Staff instructed D.C.O.S. (I.T.) to consider the question of establishing
an Inter-Services Training and Development Centre
(I.S.T.D.C.).
Recommendations for its
organisation and terms of reference were submitted to the Chiefs of Staff and agreed, in July, 1938,
The centre was set up at Eastney, Portsmouth, where its proximity to the R.M. barracks was an
advantage, as the latter were always willing to help in experiments and the provision of personnel
and equipment.
The I.S.T.D.C. consisted of a Captain R.N., (Commandant), a Major, a Wing
Commander and a Captain R.M. (Adjutant).
Its terms of reference were to study the development
of matetial, technique and tactics for all Inter-Services operations.
It is important to notice that
these terms of reference included the study of all forms of Inter-Services operations and were not
confined to opposed landings.
In August, 1938, the I.S.T.D.C. submitted an interim report in which the main recommenda-
tions concerned with combined operations were :—
(1) That a landing craft carrier should be provided by the Admiralty.
(2) That designs should be prepared for a self-propelled assault landing craft to carry a platoon
of infantry at 8-10 knots and to have a low silhouette so as to attain some surprise.
(The forerunner of the L.C.A.)
(3) That experiments should be carried out with beach piers over which to discharge stores.
D.C.O.S. (I.T.) disagreed with (1) and suggested converted merchant ships instead.
orders for one self-propelled landing craft to be constructed.
should investigate the use of infra-red rays for beach finding; the problems of naval gunfire
in support of the Army; and of the beach piers for the discharge of stores.
In September, 1938, at the time of the Munich crisis, the I.S.T.D.C. was disbanded, but
started work again in 1939. Activities were nevertheless restricted and a few L.C.A. and L.C.M. and
one L.C.S. only were constructed.
This relatively insignificant development of amphibious ships and craft in readiness for a war
which was clearly imminent, may be explained by the reluctance of the Admiralty to provide
adequate sums for amphibious material out of Navy votes. The minutes of the meetings of the Chiefs
of Staff in December, 1938, reveal the trend of thought at that time :—
General Ismay.—" We should be making poor use of our strong suit, command of the sea,
if we relegated Combined Operations to the background of our war plans."
"War Office felt strongly that the time was long overdue for provision of modern
amphibious material and they were prepared to take
their share, provided that the
principle of the Admiralty responsibility remained unchanged."
"Air Ministry did not think the landing of troops against opposition was a likely form of
operation for British troops in the near future.'
" Admiralty could not visualise any particular combined operation taking place, and were
not, therefore, prepared to devote any considerable sum of money to equipment for
combined training.
in peace time."
In any case, only a limited amount of expenditure could be justified
it was agreed that the cost of providing the small quantity of material for the
I.S.T.D.C. should be shared equally between the three Services.
A list of the more important subjects being studied at I.S.T.D.C. in early 1939 gives some idea
of the work of the centre :—
Dropping troops by parachute.
Landing water and petrol in amphibious operations.
Use of amphibian tanks.
Methods of crossing underwater obstacles.
Maintenance and supply from the air.
Use of ships as headquarters for amphibious operations.
Production of a floating pier.
Provision of landing punts for coastal raids.
Eto this list it wilbe seen that amphibious operations played a large part in the work of I.S. I.S.T.D.Ce
although their terms of reference were the study of all Inter-Services operations.
officers of the centre did much: they lectured at the Staff Colleres and elsewhere ; they spread their
In addition the
knowledge of amphibious operations and the experimental work being done, but the précis of these
WO 277/21
L.S.T. (2) with N.L. pontoons stowed on ship's side.
L.S.T.3- Beam view.
(C52794)
