The total loss of R.A.S.C. vehicles was over 20,000 with 7,000 motor-cycles.
As some indication of the quantity of supplies abandoned and destroyed, it
is recorded that the stocks held in base and L. of C. area fell, in the week
ending 26th May, by about 20,000,000 rations.
In the early days of the war, the possibility had been foreseen of it being
necessary to destroy large stocks of packed and bulk P.O.L. in France, to deny
them to the enemy.
An inter-services committee, on which S.T.2 was repre-
sented, was therefore established, with the object of co-ordinating Service
action in this direction.
Much vital information on continental installations
and refineries, their lay-out, capacities, etc., and technical directions for their
sabotage or destruction, were provided by S.T.2.
It was on these reports that special R.E. demolition parties went into
action in France, and that the R.A.F. were given daily targets of places
where demolition parties had been unsuccessful, or which were no longer
accessible to our ground forces.
Besides this, personnel of petrol depots and
of divisional R.A.S.C. destroyed a certain amount, particularly where packed
stocks were concerned
Altogether, it is estimated that, when these operations
ceased in June, some 1 million tons of petroleum products had been destroyed.
On receiving the Cabinet decision to evacuate finally, S.T.6 arranged at
once for voyage and landing rations to be placed on board all vessels, includ-
ing M.T. and stores ships, in which the B.E.F. was to be embarked.
It is
an unfortunate fact that civilian labour employed in the S.R.D., Barry, showed
an unpatriotic reluctance to work overtime in this emergency, and S.T.6
was obliged to send in supply details to ensure that the work was completed
in time.
Arrangements were made by S.T.3 for the reception and disposal of
R.A.S.C. vehicles evacuated with the troops; but less than 350 were got out
from Western France, and large numbers were rendered useless before being
abandoned. About 20 cars were taken from Marseilles to Gibraltar.
The feeding strength of the B.E.F. rose from 70,000 at 20th September,
1939, to its peak of 400,000 at 15th May, 1940. Four-monthly figures are
shown at Appendix VIIIA.
129
WO271/21
27
ЗАЕ
W0277/26
