CHAPTER III
R.A.S.C. SERVICES IN THE FIELD
SECTION 1.-ORGANIZATION
Having described the organization by means of which the supply and trans.
port services of the Army were controlled before and during the war, we now
pass to a consideration of the machine which actually
carried out those
services, i.e., the R.A.S.C., in all its numerous manifestations.
The R.A.S. C. services in the United Kingdom are dealt with in Chapter XI
Here we shall deal only with the organization of those services in the Field,
and the methods and means which they employed to carry out their task,
The original R.A.S.C.
organization for the maintenance of the B.E.F
in France is first described, and then the various developments will be traced
That original organization was modelled, in its general lines, on that which
had been successfully employed in the war of 1914-1918.
The system rested
on the base supply depots, whose r么le was to take in bulk supplies from over-
seas, except for those requiring special arrangements, such as frozen meat,
but including petroleum products; to hold the authorized reserves;
forward supplies to the troops in the forward area, and at the base and on the
L. of C.
At the outset of the war in 1939, each B.S.D. consisted of five sections
(of which No. 5 was a petrol sub-depot), and was designed to maintain
85,000 troops.
the various factors of the strength, anticipated movement, and operational
r么le, of the force to be maintained, so as to avoid any possible shortage. (See
also Chapter XII in connection with reserves.)
Bread was supplied by field bakeries, organized in three sections, each of
which was equipped with 16 Baker-Perkins double-deck steam field ovens, and
had a daily productive capacity of 30,000 lb.
Meat supply depended primarily on frozen meat.
in such cold storage accommodation as might be made available by the
French. It was handled by the Field Butchery and Cold Storage Depot.
Despatches from the B.S.Ds. to the forward area were made in daily pack:
trains, each containing one day's supplies, normally for one corps.
Despatches
of bread and meat from the field bakeries and the field butchery were c
ordinated with, and included in, the pack-trains.
At supply railheads, the
contents of the train were taken over by a railhead supply detachment, ani
issued in formation bulk to the divisional and corps troops supply columns
for distribution to the troops.
Any balance remaining from the contents d
the trains was transferred to reserve dumps near each railhead.
P.O.L. was sent up to petrol railheads as necessary.
At the base and on the L. of C., issue of supplies was made through det
issue depots, each manned by one section of a supply personnel compan
troops daily, and also to issue P.O.L. in detail.
consistine of one suhaltern and 15 other ranks. and designer to feed 7,5
from the B.S.D. as necessary.
These depots were stocke
46
The scheme for the maintenance of the field force included the holding
of stocks of seven days' supplies and P.O.L. near each railhead.
The necessity
for moving one day's supplies at a time to and from these dumps created
a need for a transport unit to do this work, and a L. of C. (Railhead) M.T.
Company, R.A.S.C., was provided for it.
This unit had one section to work
at each of the five railheads visualized.
It was considered that these sections
would give a measure of mobility to the reserves held in the dumps, and
would also be capable of either covering any interruption of normal flow up
to railhead, or, in the event of mobile operations developing, of providing
any extra echelon required between supply columns and either railhead or
dumped reserves.
Transport in the Forward Area
The R.A.S.C. organization in the forward area, i.e., in advance of rail-
head, consisted of transport units with various r么les, for which they were
specifically designed.
The supply service was only represented by
details
attached to these units, as necessary for specialist supply duties.
These units
were classified in three main categories, i.e., Divisional R.A.S.C., corps troops
R.A.S.C., and G.H.Q. companies.
This transport was otherwise classified as second or third line transport.
Third line transport was that which normally operated from railhead to re-
filling points; at these, empty second line transport vehicles replenished as
necessary, and then carried the loads forward to delivery points, where they
were transferred to units' first line transport.
This last was the transport
forming an integral part of units of all arms, and carrying their immediate
requirements of ammunition, food, petrol, equipment, etc. In R.A.S.C. trans-
port units, the first line vehicles were otherwise known as " domestic", to
distinguish them from the "task" vehicles which carried out the operational
r么le of the unit.
Divisional R.A.S.C.
The Divisional R.A.S.C. organization
consisted
of a Headquarters,
C.R.A.S.C., and three companies, organized on what is called the
6 Com-
modity" basis; that is to say, each company carried only one of the three
main commodities, ammunition, supplies, or petrol, for the whole division, as
opposed to the " Group", or " Composite"
basis, where a company carried
some of each commodity for the group of units it served.
The " Commodity" basis of organization was adopted in accordance with
the theory held before the war, no doubt as a consequence of the experience
of the war of 1914-1918 in France, that the division would always be working
as a whole, and that the brigade group acting independently would be a rare
phenomenon, for the maintenance of which improvised arrangements would
suffice.
It will be observed that, in fact, independent brigade groups were a
problem in the first month of the war; and the principle of the indivisible divi-
sion was later to be discredited, the R.A.S.C. organization being altered
accordingly.
The three companies were called, respectively, the divisional ammunition
company, the divisional supply column, and the divisional petrol company.
(37452)
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277726
