(b) Increment.
For each armoured division, or infantry division, one G.T. com-
pany of three platoons, as third line transport.
This scale of transport provided capacity only for the carriage of ammuni-
tion, petrol, supplies, anti-gas reserves, R.E., ordnance, and wiring stores, and
left no margin for a reserve.
It was then decided that corps troops R.A.S.C. should be organized as
" composite", as distinct from "commodity", companies, so as to conform
to the divisional R.A.S.C. organization.
The new arrangement was more
economical in manpower and transport than the allotment of three companies
each of two platoons for the carriage of second line commodities for corps
troops.
The new lay-out was as follows: —
Corps Troops R.A.S.C.... ...
Two corps troops composite
panies,
each
consisting
com-
of
three
3-ton transport platoons and
one
composite platoon, as second line.
One light A.A. regiment platoon, in-
cluding both second and third line,
and consisting of two sections of
6-ton, and three sections of 3-ton,
lorries.
One corps bridge company.
One motor ambulance convoy, of
three transport platoons and one
medical platoon.
Corps Transport Column (Third
Line) ...
For each armoured division, one G.T.
company of two platoons of 6-ton
lorries, and one platoon of 3-ton
lorries, and an ammunition platoon.
For each division, one G.T. company
of three platoons of 6-ton, and one
platoon
of 3-ton, lorries, and an
ammunition platoon.
For each infantry division, one G.T.
company of four platoons of 3-ton
lorries, and an ammunition platoon.
For corps troops, one G.T. company
of three platoons of 3-ton lorries,
and an ammunition platoon.
The total of 180 lorries in the two corps troops composite companies
allowed a margin of 42 lorries as a general transport reserve to carry addi-
tional commodities, or move the casualty clearing stations,
otherwise mobile.
which were not
The corps troops G.T. compasta included a transport
66
reserve of 54 lorries, available inter alia for the movement of replacement
reach 100 tons a day in times of intense operations.
assemblies between third and second echelon workshops, a load which might
Motor Ambulance Convoys
The medical services of corps had been reorganized in July, 1942, in
order to give, amongst other advantages, greater mobility and flexibility, and
to provide sufficient transport for the evacuation of casualties.
The aspect
of this which particularly affected S.T. was that the Motor Ambulance Convoy,
previously a medical unit with a transport wing, now became a R.A.S.C. unit
commanded by a R.A.S.C. officer, as it had been decided that this type of
unit should be commanded and administered by an officer with expert know-
ledge of transport organization.
The unit remained under the operational
control of the administrative medical staff.
The new War Establishment was
on the standard component principle, with the attachment of a medical platoon,
consisting of R.A.M.C. personnel, to cover the medical care of casualties while
carried in the R.A.S.C. vehicles.
Third Line Ammunition Services
It was suggested in January, 1943, that the R.A.O.C. organization should
take over the third line ammunition for field formations, and hold this forward
of railhead in the form of " Field Reserves ".
However, the new R.A.S.C.
organization of second and third line transport services had been effective
since August, 1941, and no recommendations had been received from active
theatres of war that an organization, as suggested, was necessary, so nothing
came of the proposal.
Tank Transporter Companies
A new scale of allotment of tank transporter companies was applied in
January, 1943, on the basis of providing a one-third lift to all armoured or
tank brigades.
The company was increased to a three-platoon unit, in order to provide
for the additional commitment of the carriage of self-propelled artillery, R.E.
tanks, etc., included in the standard composition of armoured formations and
the New Model Infantry Divisions.
One company was also allotted to each
division, independent armoured brigade, or tank brigade.
The scale for
L. of C. tank ferrying services was left to S.T. to decide, according to local
conditions.
Corps Troops R.A.S.C. Changes
The organization
of corps troops R.A.S.C.
was somewhat altered in
April, 1943, to meet changes in policy, and was then as follows:-
(a) Basic Corps Troops.
(i) Corps Troops R.A.S.C.
Two corps troops composite com-
panies, as before.
One bridge company (see Chapter III,
Section 2).
(ii) Corps Transport Column
One corps transport company (the
former G.T. company redesignated).
One M.A.C.
One light A.A. regiment platoon.
One anti-tank regiment platoon.
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
