CHAPTER 6
THE SWITCH TO THE MEDITERRANEAN.
THE NORTH AFRICA AND
SICILY CAMPAIGNS
Section (i).
North Africa, Operation " Torch"
Section (in).
Sicily, Operation " Husky"
Section (ini).
The Lessons Learned from Operations
" and " Husky"
SECTION (i)
NORTH AFRICA,
OPERATION " TORCH"
The Decision to Invade North Africa
Early in July, 1942, General Marshall and Admiral King, Chiefs of United States Army and
Navy Stats, accompanied by Mr. Harry Hopkins, visited this country to continue the discussions
begun in Washington.
As the result of their deliberations, it was decided that a landing on the North African coast
was to be the major operation in 1942 (Operation "Torch").
Further, it was decided that
it was to take place as soon as possible and that operations on the Continent of Europe were to be
confined to raids.
abandoned but the tempo was to be slowed down because the North African operation would take
such a large proportion of the available personnel, equipment and shipping.
Role of C.O.H.Q. in " Torch"
The decision on "Torch" was made on 28th July, 1942, and on that date the C.C.O. appointed
five planning syndicates from the planners at C.O.H.Q. to consider the five separate assaults
envisaged.
On 7th August C.C.O. personally offered all his planning resources to General D. W.
Eisenhower, U.S. Army, who had just been appointed Allied Commander-in-Chief for the operation.
On the same day Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, who had originally been appointed to the command
of the nava lies for geration" to ch Pint Lord yied Naval Commander for this
Shortly afterwards the Allied Commander-in-Chief asked for the services of the Intelligence
Staff at C.O. H.Q. and also those of the Director of Experiments and Staff Requirements (D.X.S.R.).
This request was at once agreed to by the C.C.O.
The planning of this operation entailed, not only the difficulties of such a large scale effort in
what was virtually a new type of warfare, but also the complications inherent in an allied operation
where the organisation, equipment, staff system and even to some extent the language of the two
FE sta the first, the Allied Commander-in-Chief insisted on an integrated staff; each section
of the staff being romanced of officere of all Carinac of anch nationalite Cil the conior one in each
section acting as the head of that section irrespective of his nationality.
The planning officers lent bu the CCO were distributed in the sections as the Allied
Commander-in-Chief thought best and so they were associated with the plans from the beginning
There was great merit in this arrandement hecause the Amian concent of combined oneration
or as they called them, amphibious operations, was at this time. verv different from the techniqu
evolved at C.O.H.Q. by trial and error and in the hard school of practical experience.
Transfer of American Troops from Ireland
garrisoning Northern Ireland.
As part of the plan, it was decided to use in the assault the American troops which wer
country and landed as near their ports of embarkation as possible.
This meant that thou hand about from there to this
Owing to the fact that shipping
44
for this move was not available, C.C.O. was asked to help. By dint of using the only available
L.C.T.s in U.K. waters, the troops with their vehicles and tanks were ferried across the Irish Sea
and landed where required.
crews,
This was done to the detriment of the training of the landing craft
and, to a certain extent, of combined training which meant having to accept incompletely
trained crews for many of the L.C.Ts.
Headquarters Ships
The Headquarters Ships to be used on the operation were H.M. Ships Bulolo and Largs.
The
former was ready and worked up but, as a result of exercises and discussions, certain modifications
in detail were found necessary and at once carried out.
The need for a second Headquarters Ship
H.M.S. Largs was due in the U.K. about a week later.
was apparent in the planning and arose when
By using Bulolo as a model and obtaining
a large amount of equipment from all three Services, she was fitted out in Liverpool in about a
month.
This was only possible because of the detailed and continuous supervision and instructions
provided by C.O.H.Q. working without prepared drawings or specifications.
In addition eight ships, in which were embarked the Senior Naval Officers Landing (S.N.O.L.),
were fitted as Brigade Headquarters Ships and Keren and Karanga were brought up to date.
The modifications were similar to those in Largs and would not have been possible if suitable
equipment had not been prepared and pooled at the request of the C.C.O.
Special Operations
Before leaving the part played by C.O.H.Q. in the
planning and mounting of Operation
"Torch", mention must be made of one important exploit.
out an operation known as"
The Spatial BootS ation e the Special Ses vice Biade wo et Com and. Coicene canted
This officer with two other Commando Officers arranged
the landing of Major-General Mark Clark, U.S. Army, and his staff on the north coast of Africa;
they landed from folding canoes, known as " Folbots,
launched from a submarine.
The conference
with the French authorities which followed was successful in that French troops eventually came
over to the side of the Allies.
Visit of General Patton
General George Patton, U.S. Army, was appointed to command the American assault at
Casablanca. On hearing of this, he at once visited London and, during his short stay in August,
1942, spent considerable time at C.O.H.Q.
He appealed to C.C.O. for advice.
Accordingly C.C.O. suggested that he should take back
with him to the United States Major-General Truscott, who was the Chief of the American Army
Staff at C.O.H.Q. and further the C.C.O. undertook to provide him with a team of Inter-Service
Inter-Allied planners.
General Patton gratefully accepted this offer which resulted in General
Truscott being given command of the landing at Port Lyauty in Operation " Torch" ; subsequently,
in Operation
Husky," he commanded the Licata landing.
The C.C.O. urged General Patton to direct the landings from a properly equipped Headquarters
Ship but the latter was of the opinion that this would not be necessary and stated that he would
prefer to be in the flagship of Admiral Hewitt, U.S.N., who was commanding the naval forces.
The C.C.O. pointed out that, when the French Navy appeared, this flagship, a cruiser, woul
pursue any French ships and told General Patton that he would then be quickly removed from the
scene of action and unable to control his landing.
General Patton decided to accept the risk to
his later consternation and regret, for just as he was on the point of going ashore to take over
command on land, the cruiser (U.S.S. Augusta), in which he was embarked, went off at full speed
after some French destroyers with General Patton as an impotent spectator.
This incident finally convinced the Americans of the need for providing properly designed and
fitted Headquarters Ships on the British model.
Admiralty Remarks
The following remarks in an Admiralty report on the mounting of " Torch" are interesting :-
"As soon as it became clear that our policy was switching to North Africa, control
became more difficult, as the northern bases in the U.K. were involved, which had never
been controlled satisfactorily by the local Naval Commanders-in-Chief.
In fact, it can be
said that during this period of mounting ' Torch,' the Admiralty largely lost control of the
situation.
It should be remembered however that speed of mounting and secrecy were the
essential factors and the contributions
of C.O.H.Q. to this mounting operation were
1mmense.
7
0294г
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
