There was at first confusion on the quay, especially as four hatches were
being worked at once to speed up turn-round; but it was found better to
work only one hatch, and one echelon of transport was allotted to each
service, R.E.,
R.A.S.C., and Ordnance.
Night work had to be stopped
after four days, as the services personnel were exhausted.
One of the main industries of Madagascar was meat-canning, and there
was therefore no difficulty in getting fresh meat, and a contract had been
Bread was being issued the next day, although the
plan had allowed for biscuit being issued for 60 days.
Seven days after
the landing, the force was on fresh rations, and all composite ration packs
There was however some difficulty in arranging for fresh
fruit and vegetables until the natives returned after their flight into the
The 48-hour mess-tin ration proved adequate, except that some of its
contents were unsuitable for use in hot climates.
The chocolate, cheese, and
dripping spread, melted in the heat of the sun.
It was observed that new vehicles should be avoided for assault opera-
Those which accompanied the force were new
They had to go all out from the moment they landed on the beach.
On 1st July, 1942, Madagascar was placed under East Africa Command,
and, on lst September that year, Mauritius, Rodriguez, and the Seychelles
were transferred from India Command, the whole becoming the " Islands
Operation " Streamline Jane"
The attitude of the French
authorities continued unco-operative, and
our shipping was being sunk in the Mozambique Channel. It was possible
enemy submarines were receiving assistance from French ports,
and this had to be eliminated.
Further operations were therefore necessary
to extend our control over the whole island, and were carried out in
September, 1942.
The force included four infantry brigades, one of which was mounted
from Mombasa, the others being already at Diego Suarez, and comprised
British, South African, and East African troops.
In order to provide suffi-
cient M.T. for the operations, five and a half Reserve M.T. Companies had
to be sent from East Africa; and the provision of the necessary reserves of
supplies, petrol, ammunition, etc., and of personnel to man the L. of C.
installations, was a severe strain on the sender resources of East Africa
Besides the Reserve M.T. Companies, there were the second line com-
panies of three of the brigades; there was one Main Supply Depot, which
carried out the functions of a Base Supply Depot; and three D.I.Ds. and
seven P.O.L. Sections made the detail issues.
Mounting Arrangements
The arrangements for embarkation of the force from East Africa were
unsatisfactory in certain aspects, of which the most important was the error
in calculation as to the space necessary for the shipment of M.T. vehicles.
406
It was discovered that this had been worked out by dividing the cubic measure-
ments of the vehicles into the cubic contents of the ships' holds, apparently
Owing to contrary orders, vehicles
could be stowed one on top of another.
arrived at the port with only sufficient
petrol in their tanks to permit of their being shipped, and they all had to
be refuelled in difficult circumstances.
Packed fuel was all contained in 4-galion non-returnable tins, in cases.
The only returnable containers available, a few 4-gallon drums, were used
to hold the vehicle petrol reserve.
Supply loadings from Mombasa comprised two days' mess-tin ration,
ten days Compo, and 30 days' bulk supplies for the assault force; two days'
mess-tin ration, and an average of ten days Compo, with 90 days' bulk
supplies, for the first and second reserves.
Four automatic shipments were
also sent from the United Kingdom without demand.
At the end of Septem-
ber, 1942, the responsibility for the maintenance of the force passed from
War Office to East Africa Command, and so continued until the end of the
war on a normal basis.
The Operations
The first landing took place at Majunga, on the north west coast of
the island, on 10th
September, 1942, and
completely
successful.
Tananarive, the capital, was occupied on 23rd September, and hostilities
eventually ceased on 5th November, 1942.
There were no remarkable features of the campaign, from
point of view, except that the East African brigade was split
three fighting groups, each of one battalion, one battery, one
a Field Company, one section of a Field Ambulance, and a supply,
and ammunition detachment, with a mobile workshop detachment, of the
Brigade Group Company, E.A.A.S.C., the latter, less its detachments, forming
the Administrative Group, with
reserve supply, ammunition, and petrol
It was found possible to supply a great part of the food-stuffs require-
ments of the force from local resources, particularly the fresh items and
Objections were however raised by the British troops to
of the humped native cattle, as it was believed that the hump was a diseased
growth, an idea of course totally unfounded.
The British blockade of the island had been so effective that there was
found to be a complete lack of petroleum products on the island.
motor vehicles had been obliged to use a sugar-cane alcohol, called Carburon.
A factory was taken which had a producing capacity of over 5,000 litres a
day of this fuel, which could not be used for our military transport as it
It was used in requisitioned transport,
with the addition of 10 per cent petrol.
Feeding Strength
The approximate feeding strength at the close of the campaign was 9,000
Europeans, 17,500 Africans, and 400 Asians.
407
