commodity.
To get nearer to the obiective of issuing a complete ration
some items had to be demanded by quantity, additional to
the automatic
shipments.
At the twn main hase norts. it had aroved quite impossible to cope with
anthing like the tonnage of sumolies that the War Office wanted to put in.
Thing iko the ton ton ons between them, o ta if tip, uposed figure ol
that much each.
The PS Ds had meagre cover and facilities, with no prospec
of increase for several months.
The hours of daylight were shortening
Develoement of the Base was difficult, owing to the poor nature of th
ground. Door rail facilities. and consequent long manual haul. Strong opposi
iron was expected to the acquisition of the premises required, as civilian lie
tion trade were still proceeding, and the British were tied to fitting in with
these factors.
in the war of 1914-1918, that part of France occupied by the
British was, to all intents and purposes, a piece of England.
All this led to the paradoxical situation that, while on the one hand.
D.S.T., War Ofice, was anxious to increase shipments of supplies to 8.000
tons weekly (no more than enough to meet known commitments and build
up adequate reserves before shipments were interrupted by enemy action),
and the B.E.F. were complaining of the inadequacy of their stocks, on the
other hand the latter said they were quite unable to increase the intake, as
there was nowhere to put the supplies when they were received.
It was
estimated that only one-third of the requisite cover and handling facilities
were available.
Conditions in France made it difficult to discover the actual supply state.
On 27th September, it was said to be as follows: -
In B.S.Ds., total ...
days.
Arriving at Rouen
2 days.
In D.I.DS.
1 day.
In transit to forward area, rations in advance ...
2 days.
In addition, I Corps and a division had moved up with two days' supplies
each in their supply columns.
It was desired to build up a forward reserve of seven days, with a working
margin of five days, as the minimum.
Measures Adopted
The crux of the problem was seen to be the necessity for shortening the
L. of C.
Hitherto, it had been understood that the opening of Rouen as an
advanced base was regarded as impracticable, owing to the risk of enemy
air action.
The decision to do so at this juncture was taken as the result of
a number of policy reasons, of which the supply position was a most impot-
Events then moved rapidly.
opened in forty-eight hours.
The advanced base supply depor
By the 27th September, two days' supplies wit
already arriving there, and it was proposed to put in 1,000 tons a week.
solely to build up the reserve.
3,000 tons a week at Rouen.
By 10th October, they were able to accep.
base ports.
This gave the required relief to the two main
By 11th October, the general supply situation was better.
The B.S.Ds
had eight days' stock, with four more coming
in; there were six days id
110
D.I.Ds. and pack trains; total, 18 days,
or two days short of the War
Office estimate of what there should have been.
The balance was probably
accounted for by the stocks known to have been accumulated by formations.
From this time the situation steadily improved.
Local Resources
During this period of crisis, the demands on local resources of course far
exceeded what had been anticipated.
The French Intendance met its com-
mitments for what had been arranged, and gave great help; but their ration
constituents were very different, and the scale smaller than ours.
Tea, sugar,
and jam were bought in Paris, but quantities were limited, and the French
authorities became anxious about the prolonged strain and the rising num-
This may have been behind instructions given to the Financial Adviser,
B.E.F., that purchases from the French should be restricted to the minimum.
This was interpreted as
" having regard to availability in practice, and to
economy".
It is only fair to the supply service to say that a large amount
of local purchase took place of stores other than supplies.
It had been foreseen that local purchase would have to be decentralized,
probably to Os.C. units in the initial stages, and that it would therefore be
essential to institute, as early as possible, a system of supervision and control
of local purchase and accounting.
A selected officer was consequently
attached to the staff of the D.S.T., B.E.F., to organize an investigation and
requisitioning department on sound lines from the start, and to visit the
various R.A.S.C. organizations, both supply and transport, to give advice and
assistance in accounting, and to report to the D.S.T., where difficulties had
arisen.
In November, this department was partly absorbed into a Central
Purchasing Organization formed to deal with the requirements of all Services.
The balance of the personnel continued to be employed on the executive
work of local acquisition of supplies.
Miscellaneous Supply Services
At the end of September, the two field bakeries were not yet in produc-
tion, as it had not been possible to fix their locations, nor were they up to
their full complement of ovens.
Provision of these was a bottle-neck, taking
five weeks, and it was expected to delay the departure of the third bakery
which it was foreseen would be required.
There was some difficulty at first in obtaining adequate cold storage in
France.
All the accommodation at Brest was claimed by the French; but by
the beginning of October 3,500 tons were available, including that at Nantes
and Le Havre.
The reserve was shipped by 16th October,
and thereafter
shipments were regular.
No organization for barrack services was planned for the B.E.F., these
functions being otherwise provided for, although Q.M.G. 6, War Office, which
dealt with the provision of fuel, illuminants, disinfectants, etc., through the
barrack department in the United
Kingdom,
was equally concerned with
these commodities through the R.A.S.C. supply service in the B.E.F.
No special organization was planned for the handling of solid fuel prob-
lems in the B.E.F.
War Office policy was to exploit local resources of solid
fuel as far as possible, except for steam coal, which was shipped from the
United
Kingdom by
the
Transportation
Directorate of the
War
Office.
111
37452
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
