by that time they would have been unusable.
As it was, of course, con.
sumption increased enormously in May.
There was then enough aviation
spirit in France to maintain a peak air effort for some months.
Much surplus and rapidly deteriorating aviation spirit was salvaged
the BAse derated at store saks designed to feed the bil
petrol filling centres.
For three months the two bulk petrol transport com-
panies were almost exclusively employed on this work.
More Supply Personnel Required
By 20th October, the size of the force in France was well above the total
originally planned and for which provision of sun ly units had been made.
persion. the very long L. of C. and the inadequacy of establishments for the
and it was still growing rapidly.
This fact, taken in conjunction with dis.
orio they had to carry in practice, made it necessary to ask for additional
supply personnel.
Nery commitments for such personnel were forecast for
a second medical base, two embarkation supply depots, and D.I.Ds. at new
locations.
These demands were not met promptly, however.
By November, there
was a time-lag of three months in this respect, i.e., one month for approval,
and two months for provision, which was slower than the probable expansion
rate.
Two particular requirements had emerged from the start of the campaign;
first, the need for more officers and staffs for local purchase and requisitioning
than were allowed in War Establishments; second, the need for executive
officers and staffs to handle and issue petrol. Both of these were needs which
should be anticipated for any and every campaign.
Supply Difficulties Summarized
The break-down in the supply services, which in fact occurred, though
the troops did not go short of food, may be attributed fundamentally to
faulty planning and excessive regard for security.
There was an insufficient provision of supply units, perhaps in any case,
but certainly when there was an increase of the strength of the force, which
was not balanced by an increased provision of supply units.
This insufficiency was increased by the inadequacy of the existing unis
for their task, in strength, training, ability, and organization.
Responsibility
for this state of affairs must rest mainly on national policy and inclination,
which had failed to produce the necessary men or money, and the, perhaps
consequential, wishful thinking, which supposed that duties
on which the
maintenance of the whole force depended and which would at best have taxed
the capacity of trained and experienced men, could be successfully performed
by hastily assembled bodies of untrained and undisciplined personnel.
work was made more difficult by the exigencies of issuing a complicato
ration, of which even the Regular R.A.S.C. had little experience, and whic
comprised a very large number of items all in separate packs.
The machine was upset by the introduction of methods of loading thing
therefore counteract.
of which the supply service had not been warned, and which it could not
There had been apparently inadequate reconnaissan
and preparatory liaison in France. or Intelligence was sadly at fault or th
116
results were misleading; otherwise, the situation which arose at the ports
might have been anticipated.
Initial Arrangements Criticized
The Director of Supplies and Transport, B.E.F., made the following com-
ments on the arrangements for the move of the Force to France, and its early
days there.
The experience gained at the beginning of the campaign in France was
that unless a complete breakdown in Supplies was to be risked, it was essential
that rations should arrive before troops, petrol before vehicles, and trained
stafi to handle these supplies ahead of both, together with means of move-
ment, including local road transport and labour.
To achieve this, it might, as often as not, be essential to misappropriate
temporarily part of the dock transit area for the handling of supplies, and
issuing them to incoming troops, for a period covering fully the time required
to establish the temporary supply and petrol depot, and to build up a safe
working margin, which would include the full time-lag in days required
before rations and petrol can reach all troops at their furthest locations.
was vital that the date and density of intake of supplies should be such as
would ensure the early building up of reserves.
It was important that troops
and vehicles, other than such small advance parties as could be subsisted
locally, should not be landed until initial supplies were available, not only
at the ports of entry, but also in the assembly or concentration areas to which
troops might move more rapidly than the rate at which the working margin
could be established. It was necessary that transportation and other troops,
necessarily the first to land to work the ports, should be accompanied by
rations held under unit control.
For ease in handling and distribution, these
rations should be as simple as possible; and this modified ration might be
used with advantage for all troops until the supplies had been established as
described above.
Transport; Shipment to
France
While the necessary vehicles had been provided, and the units duly mobi-
lized, the shipment of the transport to France was carried out in a manner
which might have proved serious if active operations had begun at once.
The divisional and corps troops R.A.S.C. companies were despatched in
the order, ammunition, petrol, supplies, although it was essential that vehicles
to carry supplies, and supply personnel to break bulk and distribute, should
arrive with, or even ahead of, the first troops at the ports, assembly or con-
centration areas.
Improvised arrangements had to be made for the issue of
rations and petrol, and this threw an additional strain on an already in-
adequate supply system.
Some R.A.S.C. transport units were split up, a large
part of their personnel travelling as rail parties on both sides of the Channel,
although the orders governing the move of the B.E.F. definitely stated that
this should not be done.
Companies landed with only the personnel immedi-
ately required to man the vehicles although the remainder could easily have
been carried in unit vehicles.
This trouble was accentuated by the vehicles
of companies being shipped in too many vessels; e.g., 220 vehicles of one
117
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
