These men were urgently required to operate three platoons of DUKWs
in the Sicilian landings, and did so successfully.
Further particulars are con-
tained in Chapter VII; it is sufficient here to say that the DUKWs un-
questionably fulfilled their primary function of conveying cargo direct from
ship to inland dump, thus saving much handling.
This was the first time
that the British Army used DUKWs for beach maintenance,
and many
valuable lessons were learned; principally, that the control of DUKWs in an
operation was a major problem if efficient use was to be made of them.
Beach Group Organization
Certain important decisions were taken during 1943, regarding the organi.
zation and employment of DUKWs.
The first concerned their position in connection with the beach groups,
the R.A.S.C. component of which was to consist of an amphibious general
transport company, a D.I.D., and a small petrol depot.
It was laid down that,
as a short term policy, the operation of load-carrying amphibians would be
a R.A.S.C. responsibility; and that amphibian jeeps might be operated by any
unit of a beach group, but that the R.A.S.C. would train "Other Arm"
personnel in their use.
The second stated that the standard R.A.S.C. "brick" system was
generally applicable to amphibians, the normal transport platoon organization
being employed with such additional personnel as might be necessary.
completion of their tasks on the beaches, these platoons would revert to normal
load-carrier duties; that is to say, the personnel would operate ordinary load-
carriers, but the DUKWs would not be used in that way.
Amphibious General Transport Company
The Amphibious General Transport Company, as then organized, was in
fact basically a normal G.T. company, consisting of a H.Q., M.T. company,
four transport platoons, two relief driver increments, and a workshop platoon,
Serial 3.
Instead, however, of operating 120 task vehicles (i.e.,
those of four
platoons), it only operated 90 amphibians.
It was considered that, in this
way, with reinforced platoons working in shifts, the amphibians could operate
continuously by day and night, apart from proper maintenance requirements.
Experience proved that the maintenance of amphibians was a matter of
the highest importance, and that it was much more involved than the normal
system, as applied to road transport vehicles.
This was principally due to
the effect of sea-water, and the amount of stripping required in carrying out
simple repairs.
An increment of artificers was, therefore, added to the work.
shop platoon of a General Transport Company employed on amphibious
duties, and extra equipment was also provided to facilitate maintenance.
To enable control of amphibians to be exercised during operations fast
launches were (after experience in Sicily) provided from motor boat con-
panies.
When beach group working ceased, the amphibians were withdra
from the company, which then took over normal load-carriers, and operate.
on the L. of C., until again required for duty with the beach group.
tenance party.
additional artificers remained meanwhile with the amphibians as a mis
84
Policy for operation of Amphibian Vehicles
The agreed War Office policy for the operation of amphibian vehicles was
notified to 21 Army Group in August, 1944, to assist that Headquarters in
regard to the operation of its L.V.Ts.
The current policy,
whereby the R.A.S.C. were the sole operators of
amphibians and special load carriers, remained unaltered.
The R.A.S.C. units operating amphibians were of two types, viz., those
equipped permanently
with amphibians, i.e., those forming part of beach
groups and reserve of Army troops; and those having a dual rôle, i.e., divi-
sional, corps, and Army troops, and those forming part of beach groups in
European operations.
When amphibians were required to replace normal first line vehicles of all
arms for short periods, they were to be supplied as complete turnouts by the
R.A.S.C., in the same way as pack transport is provided.
For the policy laid down regarding the operation of amphibians in the
war in the Far East, see Chapter XI.
Transport for Mountain Division
When the organization and training of a Mountain Division was considered
in October, 1941, the need was expressed for a pool of snow-tractors and
sledges for use in advance of roadheads of these divisions in mountainous or
other snow-covered terrain.
In support of this contention, it was argued that,
if roadheads could not be guara
teed within two miles or thereabouts of
infantry brigade reserves, or of gun positions, some pool of R.A.S.C.-operated
tractors and sledges would be necessary unless forward units were to detach
personnel and vehicles from their fighting duties to form an echelon of trans-
port, which was essentially R.A.S.C. work.
It was agreed that this echelon should be a R.A.S.C. responsibility.
The
type of tractor was to be a light semi-track vehicle, with ski-runners, each
towing three sledges of about 10-cwt. capacity.
Tractors and sledges would
be carried in trailers to the actual place where they were to begin operations.
The scale of allotment of animal transport companies to a Mountain
Division was fixed at four, under a pack transport group.
" Weasels " for use in Snow
The matter remained in abeyance until, in August, 1943, proposals were
made by 52 Division in regard to the employment of special snow-vehicles.
The suggestion was to equip four transport companies with light cargo-
carriers, known as
" M.29's",
or
" Weasels".
These were tracked un-
armoured load-carriers, capable of carrying four men, and functioned well
in snow; they also gave a good performance in swampy country which
defeated even pack mules, and were fully amphibious in calm water.
It was anticipated that 1,500 of these vehicles would be in R.A.S.C.
possession by the spring of 1944.
Two general transpott companies were allocated as M.29 companies, sA.
cadres of officers, drivers, and workshop personnel were sent to the U.S.A.
for training. A major, R.A.S.C., was added to the staff of C.R.A.S.C., 52
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
