up stocks. No further issues of jeeps were to be made to non-Field Force units,
Home Forces, A.A. Command, or non-operational theatres.
In the case of
operational theatres, battle casualties would be replaced as far as possible.
Use of Trailers
The expedient of the use of trailers in Army units was recommended by
the Eves Committee, which examined the scale of M.T. vehicles allowed
by War Establishments.
The argument usually advanced in favour of the
use of trailers was that they enabled a greater load to be conveyed by one
prime mover, with consequent economy of vehicles, personnel, and petrol.
It was true that trailers were in considerable use by civilian hauliers for
the carriage of goods over long distances, e.g, in the United Kingdom, and
it was evident that this would not have been the case if it were not a commer.
cially profitable proposition.
From the military point of view, however,
there were a number of objections to the use of trailers, at any rate in the
forward area.
The principal of these were the unsuitability of trailers for use
on soft ground, owing to the high degree of rolling resistance: the difficulty
of manhandling them, whether empty or loaded; and the need for tyre equip.
ment to be uniform with that of the towing vehicle, since otherwise tyre
failure resulted.
In the Western Desert, particularly, the general use of
trailers was considered to be impracticable, owing to the rough nature of
the terrain encountered by operational units, and because the type of trailer
available would not stand up to the difficult operating conditions.
Trailers
were however used in that theatre with 10-ton lorries, as early as 1941.
The technical view was therefore that trailers were only suitable for
employment on the L. of C. and at the base, and even then their use would
be governed by local conditions.
The advice tendered was therefore that
provision and operation in overseas theatres should be on a pool basis, and
that distribution in base and L. of C. areas should be left to the D.S.T. of the
force concerned.
It was suggested that trailers might be provided for
R.A.S.C. base and L. of C. transport units on the basis of one in three of
the total task vehicles.
The War Office policy was, however, enunciated that the use of trailers
with W.D. transport was to be expanded, and that every vehicle on the L. of
C., capable of towing, was to be provided with a trailer.
Normal maintenance lift on the L. of C. was, until the adoption of this
policy, based on prime movers.
During the North African campaign, and
the desert warfare which preceded it, it had been found that it was necessary
to supplement this lift by the allotment of trailers, which provided a bigger
lift with fewer men than might otherwise have been necessary.
It was the
simplest and possibly the only way in which capacity could be increased
without any corresponding addition in manpower.
21 Army Group asked for trailers to be allotted to G.T. companies on the
L. of C., on the basis of one 2-ton trailer per 3-ton vehicle, plus 10 per cont.
spare, and one -ton trailer per 6-ton or 10-ton rigid, as opposed to seni:
articulated, vehicle. This was agreed in principle, aldoush production dit.
and availability of supplies.
culties made implementation of the policy dependent on operational prioritie
80
Provision
The War Office decision to expand the use of trailers involved the provi-
sion of thousands of these vehicles, ed from he types ical transport en.
The
25-cwt. American type was preferred from the technical transport point of
view, because of its lighter construction and other mechanion as antages.
four-wheeled 5-ton trailer, for use with 6-ton and 10-ton lorries, produced in
pursuance of the new policy, was modified as the result of practical experience
to include side loading in addition to tailboard loading; removal of super-
structure; and maximum lock to the front axle. A four-wheeled steel platform
type, of 4-5-ton capacity, originally designed for the carriage of smoke
generators, but obsolete for that purpose, was accepted subject to user trials.
The provision of trailers for use by Station Transport Companies in the
United Kingdom had been examined in 1940.
The R.A.O.C. pattern trailers
suggested for the purpose weighed over three tons unladen, and were there-
fore too heavy, and quite unsuitable for use with the four-wheeled 3-ton
lorries of these companies.
The requirement was considered to be for the
2-ton type.
Trailers in Operational Units
Trials were carried out of 1-ton trailers in connection with beach group
exercises, but they proved entirely unsuitable for this sort of operation, and
they also had the drawback for normal use of being difficult to manhandle.
Airborne 10-cwt. trailers were part of the equipment of airborne composite
companies, R.A.S.C., both for load-carrying and for workshop equipment.
Trailers were used to a very considerable extent with jeeps in the opera-
tions in Assam and Burma.
In this connection, see Chapter XI, and also as
regards the use of trailers for technical workshop purposes in the Far Eastern
theatre.
Bridge Companies
The bridging equipment carried in the field park companies,
infantry divisions, and the field park squadrons of armoured divisions, was
only sufficient to meet immediate tactical requirements.
R.A.S.C., were provided to supplement those holdings, and effect maintenance.
They carried pontoon and bridge equipment of all sorts.
They included a
detachment of R.E. personnel for technical duties, including the maintenance
of bridging equipment, advice to the O.C. Company on technical questions
of the type of equipment required to be sent forward, the employment of the
company, etc.
The R.A.S.C.
were responsible for the operation and main-
tenance of the vehicles, and for the delivery of bridging equipment at the
required place and time.
At the outbreak of war, bridge companies were organized in six sections,
and equipped with 3-ton, six-wheeled, lorries with special trestle bodies.
They
were Corps Troops units, and were allotted on the scale of one for each corps.
After the return of the B.E.F., their establishment was reviewed in the
light of the current policy of reducing the number of types of standard
bridging equipment; of allotting to divisions the minimum amount of bridging
equipment necessary to enable them to deal with minor obstacles; and of
keeping a reserve of bridging material at, or in front of, railhead, to be sited
WO277/2k
27
WO277/26
