Personnel of this company took part in various active air supply opera-
During four months beginning March, 1944, a detachment of 20
air-despatchers was employed in many operational flights over Italy and
Yugoslavia, dropping supplies to Allied prisoners of war who had escaped
from camps in the north of Italy, helping to maintain the partisans in
Yugoslavia, and supervising the dropping of liaison officers and agents behind
the enemy lines.
In August,
1944, the unit carried out supply by air to
the force engaged in the invasion of the south of France; but in this case,
for a number of more or less technical reasons mostly outside the control
of the R.A.S.C. personnel, dropping was not a success.
Shortly after, the company carried out air supply of units of the
Parachute Brigade which had landed in Greece as the spearhead of the
British occupational force in that country.
Finally, during the winter of 1944-1945, over 1,400 missions were flown
to drop supplies to Italian partisans behind the German lines in Northem
Italy.
After this, although the organization made all preparations for
air supply in connection with the operations of Eighth Army, for one reason
or another this form of supply was not after all required, and the Air
Supply Base stood down in May, 1945.
Water Transport Units
At the beginning of the campaign in Italy, the Motor Boat Company,
based on Tunis, Was operating pat in North African and Sicilian waters.
When the scene as operating tians shiNed to Italy, the company movel
forward and began to operate
on the coasts of that country.
craft were sent out from the United Kingdom to supplement the unit'
strength, and chartered schooners were also taken over as described below.
It became evident that the Motor Boat Company would have to undertake
a rôle more like that of a Water Transport Company unless some other
arrangement was made.
urgent necessity as it was realized that the control of DUKWs demanded
Planning for forward commitments also became an
the use of fast launches and parent ships during landing operations.
of DUKW companies had only amphibian ieens in which to exercise control
of their task vehicles in the Sicilian landings and these had proved unsatis
factory, being
unseaworthy.
a function of Motor Boat Companies.
The provision of these fast launches became
accordingly formed in October, 1943 and two more in April and May, 1944,
A Water Transport Company
to cover the opening of additional ports and the ever-growing coastwise
launches for duties comparable with those of staff cars ashore, and manning
At the end of 1943, the M.B.C. was operating about 400 vessels, providing
cargo-carriers up to 100 tons' hurden carrving out distributive services b
water analogous to those of formation transport companies on land
thus an essentially operational rôle, which it performed entirely with military
The Water Transport Company, as in other theatres, was operating larger
288
military supervision.
Its craft were supplementary to the L. of C. rail and
road transport lifts, and the unit was in effect a waterborne G.T. company,
and undoubtedly did much to help in relieving the heavy load on the
overworked land communications.
The maximum number of chartered vessels operated by the water trans-
port companies was 110, and they ranged up to 2,500 tons.
most of the work performed consisted of coastal runs between the ports of
Sicily and Italy, and up the coast of the mainland, but craft also went to
Corsica and Sardinia, to Yugoslavia in support of the Partisans, to the
North African ports, and to Malta.
Towards the end of the campaign, the
bulk of the traffic shifted to the Adriatic.
In all, nearly 200,000 tons of
stores were carried by R.A.S.C. vessels in under a year.
Although it was theoretically the responsibility of the owners of chartered
vessels to carry out the repairs and maintain the vessels in a seaworthy
condition, in practice it was found necessary to organize and operate full-
scale shipyards and workshops in order to ensure that the work was properly
Premises were therefore requisitioned by two of the
Transport Companies, which supervised the civilian artificers and labour
All kinds of overhauls and repairs were executed at these
shipyards and workshops.
Military cadres, to be supplemented by local civilians, of two
one for North Africa and one for Italy-were sent out in
the early part of 1944 to provide for the needs of the growing strength of
War Department vessels and of transportation craft.
Spares and equipment
had been obtained from the Royal Navy, but this could not continue.
Control of Schooners
In the early days of the invasion, there was a scramble for the many
excellent schooners found in the Southern Italian ports.
Officers of the
Motor Boat Comps no found the vessels they wanted, and notified the local
Sea Transport Officey. too then chartered the ships.
The first attempt at
reconciling the confir, who ties was the formation of the Allied Schooner
Control Committee.
port Officer, the Ministry of War
It included representatives of the Divisional Sea Trans-
Transport, the American War Shipping
Administration. MiniMovemeNs), Transportation (US), S.T. (H.O. AAL),
the Allied Control Co Movem, id the Italians.
In effect, the D.S.T.O. controlled the operations of all schoo ars, ad
his agent.
in the case of craft on the strength of R.A.S.C. units the R.C. onto a as
used by "Q"
The greater part of the tonnage under
R.A.S.C. control was
(Movements).
Surplus R.A.S.C. craft were detailed by a
Schooner Control Staff, composed of Sea Transport Officers.
When
the D.S.T.O.
A.F.H.Q. arrived in the summer of 1944, it was decided that
should
detailing schooners limiting himself to declaring
discard a great part of his
executive function in
interested party should hold.
the gross tonnage
each
The R.A.S.C. share of the total Italian schooner
fleet was put at 125 vessels with a tonnage of 25,000 tons.
289
