Second Army supply roadhead was organized under a C.R.A.S.C., Supply
Units, who had under his command: -
(a) two B.S.Ds., holding total stocks equivalent to five days' reserve for
the Army, with one days' maintenance stocks.
They might either
issue and receive on alternate days, or one serve two Corps, and
the other one Corps and Army Troops;
(b) four D.I.Ds., whose duties were respectively: —
(i) feeding local units;
(ii) in charge of the supply railhead, responsible for checking
trains and loading transport to B.S.Ds.;
i dealing with coal, fresh meat, and bacon; and
(iv) partly feeding the R.A.F. in the area, and partly assisting a
B.S.D; and
(c) four Mobile Field Bakeries, baking bread for one corps, Army troops,
and R.A.F., and capable of producing 44,000 rations each daily.
It may be noted here that two Corps had each two Mobile Field
Bakeries under command.
For the receipt, storage, and issue of P.O.L. in each Army roadhead, a
C.R.A.S.C., Petroleum Installations, was allotted.
The main concern was
with packed items, and bulk petroleum was only a small proportion of the
total handled. A pipehead was never taken into the Army roadhead area.
The units under command consisted of two Petrol Depots, Type "B",
three Type "C", and, where the roadhead was within reasonable turnround
distance of pipehead, an average of three M.P.F.Cs.
An average set up was
for one " B"*
the other «" type and one "C" type depot to be operating in a roadhead,
type and one "C"
type stocking the new roadhead, and the
third "C" type to be employed in railhead duties, including the receipt and
despatch of empty containers.
A stock of about 26,000 tons of packed
petrol was held.
The reason why bulk supply was not more widely used was the shortage
of tank wagons and lorries, and the waste
of time resulting from sending
petroleum in bulk over a long distance when the wagons had to return empty.
Field Maintenance Centres (Forward Maintenance Areas)
Corps Transport was responsible for stocking Field Maintenance Centre:
from Army roadhead, and often had to be assisted by Army or Divisiona
transport in this task.
The S.T, units available for use in two F.M.Cs. for each Corps were two
DTT.Ds., one Petrol Depot, Type "C", and two Composite Platoons, the lanter
drawn from Corps Troops Composite Companies.
one F.M.C. to be onerated. at the same time as one farther forward was being
This allotment enabled
Normal holdings of commodities for which R.A.S.C. were responsible in
a FMC were two dave rations and one dave maintenance stocke two of
three days' petrol (about 200,000 gal one day 3.50 tens of ammunition.
These reserves were under the control of Corps.
342
Corps Transport
The second line lift for Corps Troops did not exist as such in practice.
niher Corps Troops units were under command of one of the divisions, in
which case their second line lift was carried out by Divisional second line
manort, supplemented if necessary from the pool of Corne transport: or
transport as far as supplies and P.O.L. were concerned.
they were in Corps area, and able to draw from Corps F.M.C. with first line
The basic Corps R.A.S.C. organization consisted of two Corps Troops
Composite Companies and a Corps Transport Company, comprising altogether
222 3-ton lorries, 12 10-ton lorries, and 36 tippers.
The tippers were never
ailable for general duties, owing to the heavy demands of the R.E.
available transport was, therefore, the equivalent of 8z 3-ton platoons.
The
The normal daily lift of a Corps was between 800 and 1,000 tons, and the
basic Corps transport therefore required to be capable of lifting about 900
tons. As the bulk of this tonnage was petrol and ammunition,
converted into 300 3-ton loads, i.e., ten 3-ton platoons.
was therefore inadequate, and necessitated the sub-allotment of transport
from Army resources, or drawing on divisions, especially during the move
of F.M.Cs. or any rapid build-up of ammunition or petrol.
transport was mostly engaged on the lift from Army roadhead to F.M.Cs.
This departure from the procedure laid down in the War Office instructions
came about owing to the greater flexibility it permitted in arranging last
minute changes in Corps requirements, due to fluctuations in the tactical
situation, particularly
as direct wireless communication
existed between
D.D.S.T. of Corps and his Transport Column.
The D.D.S.T., Corps, was also
better able to say whether he could carry out dumping programmes, troop
moves, etc., at short notice with the transport at his disposal.
Before an operation began, "Q" Army held a conference, at which "Q"
Corps and D.Ds.S.T. attended and bid for their requirements of transports.
Allotment was made as necessary, and subsequently adjusted up or down as
the situation demanded.
Divisional R.A.S.C.
Divisional second line transport drew from F.M.Cs.
As a rule, the only commodity kept on wheels in the division was
ammunition, and that was usually limited to a proportion of certain types
As everv vehicle in the division could normally run 100 miles on the petro
in its tanks, and another 100 on the reserve carried in all vehicles, there was
long advance.
No need to keen a reserve of petrol on wheels, except during a rapid and
Supplies had to be afi-loaded for the purpose of breaking
bulk, so there was no object in keeping them on wheels.
were holding three davs' ratione including two davs' Compo. and armoured
divisions five to sir davs' rations includine three davs' Compo
Wherever possible, divisions used one bulk-breaking point and one supply
the same place.
point for all the units of the division, and, again where possible, these were
bulk breaking point which suited them ne they could get ordnance stores
As many units as could do so, drew supplies direct from the
mail, etc., more easily that way, than at a supply point farther forward
also saved second line transport, as will be shown below.
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
