Part II.-D.C.O.(I) Responsibilities
4. Provision of Naval instructors at, and landing craft and crews for, combined training
establishments.
Liaison with Naval authorities on Naval facilities required for exercises.
Is the medium for acceptance of Naval units for training at combined training establishments.
Provision of RA.F. instructors and RA.. units for Sombini o Asations training, other than
he provision of aircraft for exercises (through Air Command, South-East Asia (A.C.S.E.A.)).
6. Provision of amphibians, through S.E.A.C. and Director Weapons and Equipment (D.W.E.), for
use at combined training establishments.
7. Provision of combined signal units and F.O.B.
parties for training at combined training
establishments as required (through the authorities concerned).
8. Provision, through D.W.E. and other branches of G. H.Q. (I, of special items of equipment peculiar
to combined operations on demand by D.M.T. for use at combined training establishments.
9. Provision of combined operations films from Combined Operations Headquarters (C.O.H.Q.),
the United States of America, the Services Film Centre, etc., as required.
10. Provision of combined operations publications, photographs and models of beaches for combined
training establishments.
11. Provision, on demand by D.M.T. and through Military Secretary's (M.S.) Branch, of instructors
from outside India for combined training establishments.
12. Refresher courses and liaison visits ex-India for instructors in combined operations, on demand
by D.M.T.
Part III.-Joint Responsibilities of D.C.O.(I) and D.M.T.
13. Production of training directives and reports on training and exercises.
14. Training cycles and training plans, in accordance with the demands of planners.
15. Postings and personal matters affecting all combined operations officers sent out to India
specially by C.O.H.Q. since 15th October, 1943.
(These are Combined Operations Command personnel
and Chief of Combined Operations (C.C.O.) has a prior lien on their services, before they are posted away
from combined training centres.)
16. Trials at C.T.C.s of equipment, new tactical methods, etc., which cannot be adequately carried
out at the Combined Operations Development Centre (C.O.D.C.).
Note (ili) The above only deals with training matters and does
D.C.O. (1) for advice, development
not affect the responsibilities of
(including the C.O.D.C.) and
contact
combined operations authorities, which remain as laid down in D.C.O. (I) directive.
with other
APPENDIX 19
DIRECTIVE FOR THE DIRECTOR OF COMBINED OPBRATIONS (INDIA), SEPTEMBER, 1941
Title
Short
1. The title of the Directorate will be the Directorate of Combined Operations (India).
title D.C.O. (I).
Responsibilities
2. The directorate forms part of the General Staff Branch and the Director is immediately responsible
under the Chief of the General Staff (C.G.S.) to the Commander-in-Chiel, India (C.-in-C. (1)) for :-
(a) Advice on all matters concerning combined operations.
(b) Development of technique in combined operations (see Annexure I).
c) Dissemination of policy and of information regarding combined operations technique by means
authorities in India.
230
(a) Advice to the General Staff Development Policy Committee regarding :-
(i) Development of equipment,
ii) Modifications to existing equipment,
(iii) User trials,
Centre (C.O.D.C.) at the request of this Committee.
/ out experiments and trials as required at the Combined Operations Development
(e) As a result of (d) to give advice to H.Q. Supreme Allied Commander South-East Asia (H.Q.
S.A.C.S.E.A.),
the requirements for training.
regarding the adoption of new types of equipment, their scales of issue and
Authorities outside G.H.Q.
3. He will be available to give advice on matters affecting combined operations and assistance in
experiments, as required, to naval and air authorities in India and South-East Asia Commands.
4. D.C.O. will maintain close liaison with combined operations authorities in all parts of the world
by letter and by personal contacts in order to be able to keep authorities in India up to date in the
latest developments.
Training
5. (a) D.C.O. is responsible for advising the Director of Military Training (D.M.T.) on training in
amphibious operations.
He has the right of direct access to the Chief of the General Staff
C.G.S.) should he consider that his advice is not being acted on to the best advantage.
b) D.C.O. will act as the link between the D.M.T. and the Royal Navy, Royal Indian Navy,
Royal Air Force and Indian Air Force on matters of training in combined operations.
(c) D.C.O.
and his staff will be entitled to visit combined training establishments in order to
fulfil these responsibilities.
6. Relations with the Combined Signals School (H.M.S. Braganza III) and No. 5 Combined
Operations Bombardment Unit are shown at Annexure II.
~0294
WO 277/21
27
3ф
ANNEXURE I
RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMBINED OPERATIONS POLICY AS BETWEEN
D.C.O. AND ARMS AND SERVICES DIRECTORATES
The direction of policy
the rese direction of pip for any particular And Service as regards combined persons ity tor
advising the Branch concerned.
2. At the same time the parent Branch/Directorate is responsible for keeping D.C.O. fully informed
of the latest developments in organisation, equipment and technique of the Army or Service for which
they are responsible.
3. The policy for combined operations technique of the particular Arm or Service as finally decided
is then promulgated by D.C.O. in accordance with paragraph 2 (c) of this directive.
ANNEXURE II
RELATION OF D.C.O. WITH No. 5 COMBINED OPERATIONS BOMBARDMENT UNIT
AND COMBINED SIGNALS CENTRE
(H.M.S. " Braganza III ")
No. 5 Combined Operations Bombardment Unit
1. (a) Commander-in-Chief, Eastern Fleet (C.-in-C., E. F.) is responsible for the combined bombard-
ment efficiency of the Unit.
(b) D.M.T. is responsible for the efficiency of the observation training, basic dryshod and wetshod
training for the inclusion of Bombardment Unit in all major amphibious exercises.
(c) D.C.O. is responsible for advice to the C.-in-C., E.F., and the D.M.T. and for the provision of
special equipment for this training.
(d) The Support Bombardment Recce Committee is an advisory body to advise C.-in-C., E.F.,
on all matters concerning bombardment.
(e) C.B.L.O. is responsible to the C.-in-C.,
Tр..
for the general efficiency of his Unit,
correspond with the D.M.T. on all matters of army and amphibious training and with Direc-
tors of Royal Artillery (D.R.A.) in the case of artillery technical matters.
231
