necessary personnel to supply their own Services.
to be responsible for the supply and maintenance of the R.N.
The Admiralty undertook
and R.A.F.
remaining in Iceland after December, 1942, and also asked the U.S. authori.
ties to provide bread for all British personnel.
On this basis, War Office
left the B.S.D., one D.I.D., and part of another, and two sub-sections of the
field bakery, to operate until the Americans took over the bakery commit.
ment.
The Admiralty took over all victualling
services in Iceland from Ist
January, 1943, except for a bakery which would be operated by the R.A.F.
until the U.S. Army
could arrange the bread issue.
Meantime, R.A.S.C.
personnel operated it, being relieved, after some delay, by R.A.F. bakers.
All British Army supply units had left by February, 1943.
The ration strength of British troops reached its peak of 24,600 in August,
1941, and thereafter fell gradually to 10,000 in May, 1942, and to 300 in
November, 1942.
By the latter date, R.A.F. had grown to 3,500 and R.N. to
1.250.
The maximum total of all categories was about 27,000.
P.O.L.
The supply of P.O.L. was from the United Kingdom in packed form, until
October, 1941.
The tins were at first shipped in cartons, but in June, 1941,
supplies of pulp for cartons were cut off, and wood had not been available
for cases for a long time.
The experiment was tried of loading a cargo of
uncased non-returnable tins of petrol and derv for Iceland, to determine
whether or not naked tins, properly stowed, could stand an open sea voyage
without unjustifiable risk to the ship, its company or cargo.
It was not
satisfactory,
loss on voyage being eight per cent.; this excluded loss ashore.
The poor out-turn was attributed to the fact that no dunnage was used
between the tiers in the ship.
As in some places the height of stow was ten
tiers, this caused a crushing load on the lower tiers.
A second experimental cargo was loaded, but it shifted, and the ship was
diverted to Northern Ireland. It had a list of 17 degrees, caused by loose
petrol from crushed cans.
Loss was estimated at 127 per cent. to 15 per
cent.
In view of this, no further trials of shipment of uncased petrol were
made.
In 1941, it was
proposed to ship petroleum products direct from Noth
America to Iceland as a financial economy.
This was accepted in principle
by D.S.T., the only question being the method of supply.
At this time, the
American Forces in Iceland were receiving their supplies in bulk from USA
and decanting from tankers into 50-gallon barrels.
This was a most unsatis
factory process, and they were trying to get supplies in 4-gallon non-retumabt.
In these circumstances, it was considered preferable to continue shiy
ments from the United Kingdom in non-returnable containers for the Brich
garrison, until U.S.A. could ship this form of package in U.S. vessels diren.
However, by now Washington had arranged for shipments in 55-U.S, sal,
distribution.
returnable barrels, together with a good supply of 3-gallon drun for let
direct on B.A.S.,
Consequently demands were to be made by A.D.S.T., Toelank.
Washington.
The P.O.L. for the British force was at first consigned separately from thi
for the itS true hut thie estem of dual importation save place to a
arrangement where bovision of the petroleum requirements of the Bris
140
force would be the responsibility of the U.S. Navy Department, demands
being placed on the U,S. Naval Operating Base in Iceland.
All British stocks
f P.O.L. were then handed over to the Americans, who were to hold the
necessary reserves on British behalf.
This continued until September, 1943, when on the suggestion of B.A.S..
Washington, it was agreed that the British should take over the joint supply
of P.O.L. to the British and U.S. Forces in Iceland.
This released the four
fast tankers then employed in maintaining the supplies, and three destroyers
engaged as escorts.
R.A.S.C. Units Employed
The R.A.S.C. units in the force in Iceland eventually consisted of the
following : -
(a) One reserve M.T. company, composed of three sections of 3-ton
lorries, one section of 30-cwt. lorries, and two workshop sections.
(b) One base supply depot.
(d) One field bakery plus one sub-section.
(e) One field butchery.
(f) Four petrol depots, two of which were formed from the petrol section
of the B.S.D.
(g) One motor boat company.
Faroe Islands
R.A.S.C. Organization and Duties
The force detailed for the occupation of the Faroe Islands included a
small R.A.S.C. detachment, consisting of one captain and some supply per-
sonnel, later increased by the addition of a subaltern and 20 other ranks.
The original officer had to carry out a number of duties not all normally
those of an Officer i/c R.A.S.C. Duties.
They included supplies, land and
water transport, barrack services, hirings, movement control, and camp com-
mandant.
When the second officer arrived, his time was devoted almost
entirely to hirings.
The duties of movement control involved the receipt and despatch of
all naval and military stores.
There was some friction with other arms, and
criticism of the R.A.S.C. in this connection, as it was apparently not realized
that this function was additional to the normal duties of the R.A.S.C., and
that the detachment had not been designed to enable the extra duties to be
performed.
The O.C., R.A.S.C., in reporting this to War Office, suggested that he
should only be responsible for stores and supplies consigned to the R.A.S.C.,
and not be obliged to accept receipt of consignments for all units and services.
S.T., War Office, agreed that the additional duties in respect of embarkation
and movemenice, agreed that the addition a dueAF, were more than could
be carried withot duties for theraper R.A.S.C. duties.
The Director of
Movements was accordingly informed that it was impossible for the R.A.S.C.
clement in the Farcesingly informdesigned to deal with S.T. problems only,
141
(37452)
717
WO 277/21
27
N0277/26
