The Technical Transport Branch, which had dealt with M.T.S.Ds. and
H.R.Ss., disappeared in September, 1942, in consequence of the transfer of
those installations to R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E. respectively.
The strength of R.A.S.C. personnel in Middle East rose by August, 1943.
to 80,000 all ranks, and the number of R.A.S.C.-operated vehicles to 28.00
S.T.2 was then organized in two parts, Provision and Technical, and a Peto.
leum Chemist had been added.
S.T.3 included A.D.S.T. (Plans) and A.D.T.
The Inspectorate of M.T. and P.O.L., for which see later in this
chapter, came directly under the D.S.T.
this time is shown in Appendix IVB.
The lay-out of the Directorate at
S.T., Eighth Army, was organized under a D.D.S.T.,
assisted by an
A.D.S.T., with a D.A.D.S., D.A.D.T., Staff Major (Petrol), Major (Requisition
ing), Major (Petrol Inspector), and a Staff Captain (Personnel).
Situation, June, 1940
When Italy entered the war in June, 1940, the garrison of Egypt consisted
of the 7 Armoured Division, 4 Indian Division less one Brigade, part of the
New Zealand Division, and 14 unbrigaded infantry battalions.
The foremost defended positions were at Mersa Matruh, over 200 miles
west of Alexandria and about 120 miles from Sollum on the frontier between
Egypt and Libya.
Railhead was also at Mersa Matruh, and from that terminal
7 Armoured Division had to be maintained on the frontier, where it was
engaged in an active rôle of continual raids and minor attacks by small mixed
columns.
The administrative problem was considerable, on account of the
inadequacy of the Divisional R.A.S.C., which was only sufficient to maintain
the division from Sidi Barrani, 70 miles from Mersa Matruh.
System of Maintenance
The normal system of daily maintenance from railhead forward was a
that time based on the chain: railhead-refilling point-delivery point.
latter was the point at which supplies were handed over to the unit, and was
at or near unit first line transport, "B" Echelon, i.e., the administrative port
The maximum distance from railhead to delivery point was fixed at 80 milks
split, according to traffic and tactical conditions, between second and hid
In 7 Armoured Division, in June, 1940, none of this held good, Potent.
delivery points were 150 miles from railhead; operations were excel!
often, any landmarks.
taking place in a vast expanse of desert without road, villas, .
tions,
Delivery points, as laid down in Field Service Rest
were impossible, and a substit, syste dof daily and period org
tional maintenance had to be devised, suitable to the peculiar conditions.
worked out in the following way.
for ammunition.
The improvised third line transport covered about 90 miles, or even 100-10
between
them.
Then 60.70 miles were covered by second and first li
drivers and vehicles under desert conditions.
Of this, second line covered 40 miles, a heavy strain o
"B" Echelon of first in then
port was strengthened to cover the balance.
150
Replenishment System
The next problem to be solved was that of transferring the supplies, etc.,
from second to first line, in close
proximity to a superior hostile air force.
Doing this at night produced problems insoluble as a regular practice, and
it was decided that the solution was dispersion, presenting a target difficult
to locate, and not worth attacking if located.
The system adopted was as follows.
The same R.A.S.C. vehicles, as far
as possible, carried the same loads each day for the same fighting unit.
ke.
plenishing points for brigade groups were selected by map reference and a
time was fixed (these were changed frequently, even daily, for security). The
vehicles of second and first line transport approached the point from opposite
directions widely dispersed in desert formation (i.e., on a broad front) with
vehicles allotted to units arranged from right to left in one echelon and from
left to right in the other on a pre-arranged plan, so that they came opposite
to each other.
Both halted about a mile from the area.
Then the R.A.S.C.
vehicles dumped their loads and withdrew.
First line transport then advanced,
loaded, dumped empties, mails, prisoners, etc.; the R.A.S.C. then picked these
up, and replenishment was finished.
In course of time brigades reduced this
to a drill which could be completed in less than an hour.
Sometimes small
dumps were left and picked up next day, or ammunition was taken farther
forward.
As a corollary of brigading the echelons, Brigade "B" Echelon Com-
manders and Divisional "B" Echelon Commanders were appointed.
This system proved effective in avoiding bombing, and there was only one
recorded instance of a severe attack on a replenishment area.
The system,
using modified methods, was subsequently employed by every division operat-
ing successfully in the Western Desert.
Introduction of Field Supply Depots
In the initial stages of the war in the Western Desert, there was no difficulty
in maintaining supply as far as railhead. Supplies were sent up by pack train
from the base supply depot at Abbassia in accordance with demands placed
by the railhead supply depot.
The strength of the force at that time was only
30,000, and there was no difficulty in finding the necessary rolling stock.
head.
The real problem was that of insufficiency of transport in advance of rail-
In order to provide the necessary third line link, the whole of the
econd line of 4 Indian Division was used, supplemented by a Reserve M.T
ompany and a Water Tank Company, R.A.S.C
These were comparatively
recent raised units, the former composed of Cypriots and the latter of locally
enlisted British nationals.
These third line units worked to a refilling point
near Sidi Barrani.
This point, which dealt with rations, water, and petrol,
and functioned for some months, was manned by supply
personnel of 4
Indian Division.
Ammunition supply was separately organized.
At the same
time, certain reserves of rations, water, ammunition, and P.O.I. were estab-
lished forward of the ref ltions, we, trom which first or second line transport
could draw in the event of enemy action interrupting third line supply by road
from Matruh.
These dumps, which were dispersed, camouflaged, guarded, and even in
some cases given AVA protection, vese referred to, suficiently correctly in the
151
27
WO277/
