During the Normandy invasion, the Headquarters of the Allied Army and Naval C.s-in-C. were
placed near this Combined Headquarters, thereby increasing its scope after building up its resources
as a communications centre; this could not have been done but for the permanent arrangements
already established.
The next Combined Headquarters to be constructed was at Dover. After considerable
discussion as to its location, it was decided to excavate under the existing tunnels of the Castle
where the staff of Vice-Admiral, Dover, was already housed. renty of time was available and a
very good headquarters was constructed which, however, was never fully used since the objectives
finally chosen for the invasion operation did not call for an assault headquarters
headguarters was, however, exploited as a key point in the cover plan, in the furtherance of which
the work put into it and the W/T facilities provided were most important factors.
The third Headquarters, originally considered as the least important, was at Plymouth. On
this Occa thin discussion as to its location was even more protracted, but a decision was finally
reached to excavate an extension to the existing Area Combined Headquarters.
Various delays were
experienced and it was only completed shortly before the invasion, in which it was of major
importance to the Western (American) Task Force.
Signal Maintenance Depot, Ashford
To cope with all the special equipment now required for combined operations, a signal
maintenance depot was established at Ashford, near Staines.
Here was stored and maintained the
necessary equipment that might be wanted in an operation, and this could be issued at very short
notice when required, complete with the requisite ancillary gear such as batteries and crystals.
This was a requirement not formerly met under normal naval conditions because ships were selt-
supporting in this respect. On completion of operations, this equipment was returned and repaired
or reconditioned as necessary.
Modifications to existing equipment to meet special requirements could be quickly carried
out at this depot, whereas it could not be done elsewhere without upsetting the normal work of
lorries were evolved
and fitted at Ashford. Many were later sent abroad and still more were used for the invasion. A
mobile crystal grinding unit was also designed and a small number were used both abroad and at
home.
This organisation was later expanded with sub-depots added and was of great value in
The Dieppe Raid, August, 1942
During 1942, various small raids culminating in Dieppe took place. In addition,
many more
raids were mounted, and even more planned. For these the signal department of C.O.H.Q. prepared
the outline signal plan, obtained or improvised the special equipment to be used, made arrange-
ments for the specialised personnel and supervised their training.
Each operation had its own
special requirements and special equipment was invariably needed. The various types of special
radio equipment required are too numerous to mention but were mainly concerned with the problem
of getting to the right place.
This problem came to a head during the preparations for the Dieppe raid when, in a rehearsal,
various elements of the force failed to make landfalls with anything like the necessary accuracy, due
to the difficult tide conditions in the Channel. The R.A.F.
"Gee" apparatus had, a year or two
previously, been discarded for naval purposes owing to the lack of range which it was thought to
poses when working in ships. Initial trials carried out by C.O.H.Q. had shown that the signal could
be held to good distances, but neither had the range nor the accuracy been definitely established. It
was, however,
decided to rely on this apparatus as being the only aid likely to achieve the necessary
results; additional ships and craft were hurriedly fitted and the necessary personnel trained in its
Use Ati the operation, this method proved a success and a big programme of fitting in Combinet
operating in areas covered by the R.A.F. " Gee" chains.
more precise results for minesweepers in the invasion of Normandy and which was under strenuous
development for other purposes, was also adapted and spooredy ay the ic mialty on the advice
oqe aula good ecample, but only one of manv. of the equipment of one Service being
only with the Service Ministries, but also with the experimental and research establishments of all
of very great value to another Service, and for this purpose C.O.H.O. kept in very
close touch not
three Services. Another example is given by the loge auleloped rocket craft which called for a
very high degree of accuracy in positioning and ranging if the desired effect was to be achieved.
slightly modified for the purpose.
This problem was overcome by the use of the R.A.F. H2S equipment, used in bombers, being
136
Spitsbergen. 18 Aug. 1941.
Lofoten Ist. 4.Mar.41.
Vaagso. 27th. Dec. 41.
Walcherer. 15* Nov.44
SEN Are 2P. 49 Aug 12.
Shine con 23% mug tha
Elba. Ist. 17m Jun.44.
Arzio. 22 *dJar. 44.
North Africa. 8*:Nou.42.
Partelloria. lI* JuM. 43.
Sicily. 10th.July. 43-
Termoli. 6*r. Oct. 43.
INvaSION of Italy. 3rd Sept. 43-
hi hat
Aegear Raids. 1943-1945
Beda Littoria. 17th. Nov. 41
(Rommela, Headquarters)
Din do Taneit
Cape Town
COMBINED OPERATIONS - WORLD WAR II
(BRITISH ONLY)
99257- E110-11EE -(MED)
• Moscow
Новій родно.
O Tehran
o Delhi.
Akyab. 3ra Jam 45.
Rangoon. 2*d May 45.
годо не евон 1216 45.
Ramree Isl. 218 Jar45.
Madagascat 5. May 42.
Ramree IsI.-Cheduba Cheduba lar 45.
Kangaw. 221d Jan 45.
Letpan: 1g"*. Mar. 45.
