The Commands were told that over insurance must be eliminated, as it
was vital that good feeling should not be impaired when the British Army
estimates were scrutinized.
In the past,
considerable latitude had been
allowed to all overseas commands, in placing demands on War Office, and
these had, to a great extent, been accepted without question.
This was re-
garded as the ideal system, provided always that overseas commands exercised
the utmost economy.)
War Office now had to submit the actual quantities of supplies re
quired for overseas theatres, and to state the number of days when equiva-
lents (if any) would be issued.
Overseas commands had, therefore, when
formulating demands, to calculate the requirements of each item in accord-
ance with the agreed number of days of issue, in order that requirements
already submitted by War Office should not be refused.
The expected shortage of shipping became a fact very shortly after-
wards.
Owing to lack of vessels, it proved impossible to carry out all the
shipments due from North America; representations to Washington revealed
that the supplies were available, and that the problem was entirely one of
shipping space.
Thus began
the U.S.A.
" back-log",
, which
was to get
worse as time went on, and to reduce reserves of some commodities.
Civil Affairs Supplies
The original idea underlying the policy governing Civil Affairs supplies
was that the organization,
as a separate service,
should be capable of
dealing with all aspects of its administration.
Mainly because supplies would
have to go through the military movement channels, it became evident
that S.T.,
War Office, would have to take a hand in the arrangements.
The policy was then enunciated, in December, 1943, by the Q.M.G., that
all Civil Affairs requirements should normally be formulated by the theatre
concerned; that General Staff and Heads of Services should advise the
Director of Civil Affairs on the merits of the requirements, saying whether
they conflicted with military needs; that Services should, at the request of
D.C.A., initiate provision of commodities to be procured in, or by, the
United Kingdom; that Services should arrange storage, progressing, account-
ing, and calling forward, of Civil Affairs stores; and that they
should be
responsible overseas up to the point at which they handed the supplies
over to Civil Affairs.
An Army Council paper followed; its conclusions are summarized as
follows: —
The War Cabinet had decided that supplies of food and other
commodities for North-West Europe should be procured by the military,
on the basis of the requirements for the entire liberated areas
"hiatus
distribution
countries concerned.
The responsibility
for
areas " (those not affected by
direct
military
occupation) was
still
undecided.
The standard, by which the
validity of any
Civil Affairs
requirement was to be judged, was whether it was an essential provision
to prevent a degree of civil disease and
unrest
that might prejudice
military operations.
Only sufficiens and unrest be imported to bring
average consumption, including local
resources,
2,000 calories a
head a day.
This standard fell very
substantially
short of the
nutritional level envisaged by the calrylations of the Young Commite,
296
mitment.
a body which had produced detailed figures of the total feeding com-
The process by which Civil Affairs requirements were to
formulated,
examined,
approved.
laid down by Q.M.G.
and
procured, was that already
The D.S.T., War Office, was made responsible
for arranging with the Ministry of Food as necessary, all matters relating
to the reception, packing, storage, and despatch overseas of Civil Affairs
The result of this decision was that S.T.6, War Office, acting on the
request of D.C.A. throughout,
became responsible for procuring through
the Ministry of Food, and channelling through (up to and including the
point of shipment),
all Civil Affairs supplies,
American zones in the theatre, whose procurement had been allocated as
Washington,
for calling
forward all Civil Affairs supplies for the British zone, that had been alloca-
ted to U.S.A. or Canada for procurement.
Although the primary responsibility for the allocation of supplies lay
with D.C.A., it was essential for S.T.6 to be conversant at all times with
the details of current maintenance arrangements for forward planning.
S.T.2 was responsible for provision of P.O.L., as a common user item,
to the Civil Affairs organization where there were existing military installa-
tions, or where delivery was
convenient.
Planning for Overseas Maintenance
The provision of the supply requirements
of the British forces, after
they landed on the continent, was planned in considerable detail.
Until
about D + 60, maintenance was to be carried out in accordance with a plan
pre-arranged
with 21 Army Group.
The schedule of pre-arranged main-
tenance loadings of main ration items is given in Appendix VIIID
ATter.
that date, maintenance would be against firm demands submitted by 21
Army Group to War Office, and would follow the normal overseas main-
tenance procedure.
It was intended that, in due course, a large proportion
of the supplies would be shipped direct to the theatre from the country
of origin.
Shipment Arrangements
In order to reduce rail transport to a minimum during the
period of
active operations,
certain S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. were to be
used only for
certain dates and ports, as follows:
D to D+7
Supplies for loadings in these dates were to
come from the S.R.Ds.
at Glasgow and
Lancaster, and the M.S.D. at York.
D+ 8 to D + 30
Drawings for these dates were to be: —
For loadings on the south
coast, from
M.S.Ds.,
Ascot, Reigate and Hereford.
For loadings
in
London,
from M.S.D.,
Bedford,
and S.R.Ds.,
Tilbury,
Vic-
toria
Dock,
and
Barby (Northants).
For
loadings in Southampton,
from
S.R.Ds.,
Steventon and Swindon.
For loadings anywhere, S.R.D., Osterley.
297
West 17
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
