Companies, and the personnel had to be trained in six weeks.
At the end
Cothat time, they were called upon to take part in an operation, which was
satisfactorily carried through, apart from the fact that these vehicles proved
unable to work in mud.
Later, the regiment took part in the crossing of the
River Po, and operated a ferry service across the river.
It was considered
to have played a key part in
Eighth Army operations.
Another form of amphibian operated by the R.A.S.C. was the Stormboat,
for which the drivers were provided by a DUKW company.
These were
shallow draft boats, with a
50 h.p.
outboard motor,
and were used for
ferrying troops and stores across rivers and lakes.
They took part in a
number of active operations.
Pack Transport
The campaign in Italy could not have been fought without pack trans-
port.
Long-term planning had, indeed, been going on in
the War Offic
during 1943 in regard to the provision of pack transport for mountain
warfare in a Mediterranean theatre, but this did not result in any pack
transport units being made available from the United Kingdom for the
first winter in Italy.
The need for such transport soon became apparent,
and two North African companies were sent over, but they could not cover
more than a small sector of the mountainous front.
Companies were there-
fore extemporized, using British cadres to supervise Italian Army personnel,
A third North African company was followed by seven Indian and six
-ypriot companies from the Middle East, further Italian Army units, and a
forth African company with Italian muleteers
These units did very good work in the appalling weather of the fit
winter, but worse was to come the next winter in the mountains south of
Roloona, when, in order to meet the severe conditions of sumply obtaining,
two more Italian Pack Transport Groups of four companies each were
formed, making a total of 13 Italian Army companies.
The British cadres
in this case were drawn from the two British Pack
Transport Companies
sent out from the United Kingdom, see Chapter XII, Section 2.
During the first winter campaign, the pack transport companies often
had their efficiency reduced. owing to mistakes made in their employment.
These mistakes were in most cases, due to insuffcient knowledoe on the
part of personnel of the emploving units of the requirements of animal
transport units, e.g., loading mules too early before the starting time, failure
to off-load during enforced halte of more than half an hour overloading,
unbalanced loading, failure to provide adequate
These mistakes were not in fant confined to the troops engaged in
rations for drivers
the campaign in Italy,
Assam and Burma.
They resulted in undue wastage caused by sore backs
and were also in evidence to fourteenth Army in
and lose of condition and this of courge complicated the roblem,
sufficiently difficult, of maintaining an adequate supply of animals in face
of a world shortage.
arms in the principles of animal management, at least when they are likely
The necessity for
instruction
of personnel of all
to employ pack transport, and for the rigid enforcement of the rules,
clearly shown.
286
Mule Leading
It was considered that, if sufficient manpower had been available, all
Pack Transport Companies should have had one man for each mule, instead
of one man for two mules as was the allowance in this campaign.
A good
many mules were lost through falling down mountainsides, and some of
these accidents might not have happened if the animals had been individually
It was found to be better to untie the second mule from the first, and
let it follow.
Another advantage of the increased scale of drivers would be
that, in times of good going, it would allow one man to rest—an important
point, as the men usually became more exhausted than the mules.
It is
worth noting that the Germans and Italians considered one man for each
mule essential, while the French
companies kept sufficient surplus
men
to send forward when the terrain made this advisable.
It was found that
the best method of preventing a stampede was dispersion, and hobbles were
seldom, if ever,
used in Italy.
Even if each hobble had a quick release,
there might be delay in getting animals off the line.
Dispersion was also the
best protection against falling fragments of A.A. shells, which caused more
mule casualties than direct enemy air attack.
Pack Distribution Centre
Lack of specialized knowledge of pack transport equipment among
R.A.O.C. personnel in Italy made it necessary to attach a R.A.S.C. saddler
serjeant to Ordnance to supervise the sorting of equipment.
A special
unit, called a Pack Distribution Centre, was also formed to speed up the
time between indent and delivery.
It consisted of one officer, trained in
pack duties, an issuer, and a clerk.
Ordnance agreed to hold a substantial
stock of expendable stores at Army Railhead, and it was arranged that
all indents should be roassed to Ordnance through the Centre, which held
a reserve, and issued the stores immediately, re-imbursing itself when the
indents were met by Ordnance.
The officer i/c of the centre kept in touch
with Pack Groups and units, and if necessary rationed the available stores
to ensure that all got a fair share.
He also developed production from local
resources.
Air Supply
After the Taranto landing and subsequent operations on the east coast
of Italy, most ot l Airborne Division was withdrawn to the United Kingdom,
leaving one Parachute Brisade, ind part of the Light Composite Company.
The role of Pae chute Brigade, ain paicient R.A.S.C. personnel in Italy in
the duties necessare was to stapply of the brigade by air in any future
operation it might be called upon to perform.
A G.T. company was accordingly put under training with a view no
its hind he toadertake the whole process of air sunnie organizine
the base packing stores and desnatching them from aireraft and para-
chuting a pecting s organize a dropping
However, although
parachute centions were trained it ae then dacided that the GiT company
should onlv despatch stores from aircraft in flight. or deliver bu
to captured airfields, and that formations, including the Parachute Brigade
should organize their own dropning tones as best they could
(37452)
