and they were fired out and had a number of accidents as the result of a
hits on their convoys.
The A.D.T. asked War Office for a reinforcement
they were not allowed ashore.
trained and experienced diesel drivers, and S.T.3 sent 200 via Calais, bur
As late as 26th or 27th May, the divisional R.A.S.C. were still opening
supply petrol. and ammunition points, or dumping supplies and ammunitio
and leaving signboards and guides to direct those for whom they were man
one ammunition company formed its last ammunition point on 29th.
Within the perimeter there were hundreds of loaded supply lorries o
R.A.S.C. units which had been refused entry to areas alloted to the form
dumps and accumulating food on the way, and distributing food and cigarett
tions they served, but which had got in by devious routes, picking up suppl
to the troops they passed.
Various R.A.S.C, units manned improvised D.I.Ds. in the perimeter, cu
issued the supplies they collected.
The task of feeding the troops was carried
on in one way or another to the last possible moment.
Evacuation- Arrangements in United Kingdom
R.A.S.C. road transport was organized to convey B.E.F. personnel, bot
fit and casualties, from ports of disembarkation to entraining places and ti
disperse them from terminal stations to reception camps.
Reserves of road
transport were prepared to bridge any gap due to breakdown caused by
enemy action in rail services to these ports.
The arrangements included the provision of 200 civilian motor coaches in
Kent for disembarkation services, and to augment rail services;
these were
organized by the personnel of an M.T.S.D. then forming in the R.A.S.C., MT.
Depot at Feltham.
An ambulance car company was allotted to Easten
Command for duty mainly at disembarkation ports.
S.T.4, War Office, was responsible for the organization,
preparation
cooking, and service of refreshments at the halting places, established at k
railway stations in the United Kingdom for the feeding of the troops evacu:
Buffet feeding was arranged at ports.
The object of the scheme was
that troops should not be congested at the ports at which they arrived. Th
pressure was such that, at one time, trains passed through halts at the not
of one every eight minutes, and each carried an average of 600 troops.
the peak period, one station was serving 24,000 rations a day.
on the way to the reception camps. the troons were given haversack rations~
At the hals
pies, sandwiches, fruit, tea, chocolate, and cigarettes.
On arrival at the camps
they were given hot meals.
A typical meal at a halt consisted of meat, chox.
and jam sandwiches; meat and fruit pies; hard-boiled eggs; fresh fruit; choo
late; cigarettes and matches.
A major problem was the provision of cup.
as the troops had no utensils. this was solved by the production of waxpap:
To meet the requirements of staff and equipment for the stations, teams
of instructors and students were sent from the Tandon District School
at others working under extra pressure.
necessary to withdraw personnel from some stations to supplement the si
The allotment to stations was elastic, as it was
126
Catering advisers in the commands concerned were in charge of the
catering arrangements at railway stations, and command catering advisers
supervised those at the reception camps. Local councils and voluntary organi-
zations were called on to assist.
Disposal of R.A.S.C. Personnel
R.A.S.C. personnel evacuated from Dunkirk were dealt with in the first
place in a similar way to the troops of other arms.
They did not all arrive
in formed units, as the policy had been to evacuate first all specialists and
highly-trained men.
They had, therefore, to be sorted out, and the original
units reformed.
The R.A.S.C. Mobilization Centres, the institution of which had been
opposed within the directorate at the War Office on the grounds that no
other arm had such establishments, and that they were not really necessary,
abundantly justified themselves at this crisis.
But for them, the task of re-
forming shattered units would have been far more formidable.
The Director
of Staff Duties described them as being as valuable to the country as gold
mines.
R.A.S.C. personnel of non-divisional units arriving in the country
were instructed to report at one of the centres.
There they were passed
through methodically and expeditiously, everything possible being done for
their comfort.
The staffs improvised accommodation, obtained clothing,
bedding, and cooking equipment, and ensured that every man got sound sleep
and plenty of good food.
Morale was very high.
Supply and Transport; South of the Somme
Important British forces remained south of the Somme after the main
B.E.F. had been cut off.
The D.D.S.T., L. of C. area, became the representa-
tive of the D.S.T., and controlled all S.T. services for those forces, as well as
taking over control of the R.A.S.C. base installations, which had till then
been G.H.Q. controlled.
The most urgent of the problems confronting him
was the continued provisioning of these
troops,
and the
maintenance of
R.A.S.C. installations and transport units at a high pitch of efficiency.
The ration strength at 30th May was 180,000; by 4th June, it was down on
the L. of C. to about 125,000, concentrated in pockets of 20,000 to 40,000 at
Le Mans, Nantes, Rennes, and Rouen.
The three B.S.Ds. at the beginning
of June held in all 30 days' rations for 180,000 men.
But that at Le Havre
was so vulnerable that, although explicit authority was not given until 5th
June, it had in fact been clearing supplies for some time past, and by the 7th
it had evacuated almost all its holding, chiefly to the other B.S.Ds.
The
remaining stocks were mostly destroyed by air raid that night.
The total holding of the petrol depots, in bulk and cans, was estimated at
not far short of 100,000 tons, the maximum daily consumption of the British
Forces remaining in France being placed at 650 tons.
Over a million return-
able cans had been lost, including 300,000 in one raid on Le Havre; but the
daily output from the tin making and filling factories in the United Kingdom
was 1,200 tons,
stocks
of tinplate were
satisfactory, and owing to
the
abnormally low consumption overseas before 10th May, there were large
stocks in hand in the United Kingdom.
The most acute problem was R.A.S.C. transport.
At least one-third of
that on the Lute proud eas lost. while the rest was very disorganized,
127
(37452)
K 2
wes747/14
WO277/2k
27
WO 277/26
