LOCAL AND AIR DEFENCES
11. Obviously the principal bases from which any large operation of this nature is conducted, will
become the targets for
enemy air attack at a very early stage of the operation.
It is therefore essential
become the ost careful appreciation of the scale and form of such an atatik, and to plan and install the
additional defences necessary in good time.
So mana te noted, bored por the surpion that i preta ton by the Chile on to
their maximum
is pacity, and that Southampton individually, and the remainder collectively, are vital
to the success of the operation. It would also be safer to assume that the enemy will become aware ovital
preparations for some weeks before the operation begins.
12. In so far as smoke screens may be adopted as part of she AlA detentes, it is most important
that the new screens should be in operation many weeks before assembly of the forces begins.
the enemy's attention will be drawn to the area, and secrecy will be compromised.
the enemys atten to be able to screen the Southampton area as effectively as the Germans screened Brest.
In this connection
13. The Director of Local Defence (Admiralty) has confirmed that in his opinion the seaward
defences of the ports in the south coast area are already adequate, and that no fürther action under
that head will be necessary.
14. No particular difficulty is foreseen in moving the necessary additional minesweepers into the
Southampton area,
, but the Director of Minesweeping (Admiralty) has expressed the opinion that the
minesweeping problem will be formidable.
Whatever measures are taken there are likely to be periods
when the approach channel to the port of Southampton is dangerous from mines.
The question will
then arise, and must be settled in advance, whether traffic should be suspended under such conditions,
whether the operation will be less dislocated by continuing to run shipping and accepting a proportion
15. To meet the U-boat threat, it will be necessary to provide the maximum possible scale of
anti-submarine patrols.
The Director of Anti-Submarine Warfare (Admiralty) has pointed out that the
The Admiralty were informed,
however, atle meting, theis toeshipping to be sate inestion during the pirate vene operation,
when disembarkation was taking place over the beaches.
The anti-submarine problem is therefore to
protect continuous steam of independent shipping travelling both ways across the Channel for a period
COMBINED HEADQUARTERS
16. Whatever chain of Command is adopted, it will be necessary to provide for the supreme
command of the assault forces themselves.
This involves the provision of Headquarters for a combined
military authority, in supreme command of the assault, sufficiently in touch with the immediate situation
to throw in reserves at the proper place.
17. It has been agreed that this supreme command of the assault forces can best be exercised, in
the special case of operations against Northern France, from Combined Headquarters, on the coast, in
The Divisional Commanders of individual divisions taking part in the assault will work
from H.Q. ships as already approved in principle.)
18. Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, at present visualises the need for Combined Headquarters
at Portsmouth and at Dover in that order of priority.
19. A small body, representing the various interested authorities, has been set up under the chair-
manship of a senior staff officer of the Combined Operations Headquarters,
detailed plans for these Headquarters. This body is being guided by the following instructions:—
(i) Maximum use to be made of existing operational Headquarters, and the facilities, of all three
Services already established in this country.
*) The man i thin Chi, Motel it dare i dutie the operation, most not preo exer the
Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth, or the Vice-Admiral, Dover,
(ti) Operations rooms and communications for the Combined Headquarters must be placed
(iv Accommodation, on the other hand, is to be provided either on the surface of underground
as may be most convenient, and the
economical basis possible (i.e., Active Service conditions).
accommodation is to be planned on the most
(») Pendins the completion of detailed plans, work on the new Headquarters at Portsmouth will
be pressed forward as fast as possible leaving as much spare space as possible.
(vi) The administrative Headquarters of technical and other authorities not directly concerned
with the operational control of the forces taking part, will in general be established in the
liaison officers being maintained at Operational Headquarters,
various departments concerned will make their own propoed, keeping the C.C.O. informed
214
APPENDIX 9
COMBINED OPERATIONS ORGANISATION- RECONSTITUTION
The Combined Operations Organisation is under the Chief of Combined Operations (short title
C.C.O.).
The Chief of Combined Operations attends meetings of the Chiefs of Staff as a full member
whenever
major issues are in question and also, as heretofore, when his own combined operations,
any special matters in which he is concerned are under discussion.
His appointment carries the rank of Vice-Admiral in the Navy, Lieutenant-General in the Army and
Air Marshal in the Royal Air Force.
2. He advises all Commanders-in-Chief and Force Commanders in connection with any combined
operations which they are carrying out. It is incumbent on any Commander-in-Chiet planning a combined
operation to consult him when practicable at the earliest possible moment, and to keep him in cormed of
any change in date or plan, as well as of the result.
3. Under him there are a Vice-Chief of Combined Operations (Major-General) a Deputy Chief of
Combined Operations (Air Vice-Marshal) and an Assistant Chief of Combined Operations (Commodore)
and a Chief of Staff.
The short titles of these officers are : V.C.C.O., D.C.C.O., A.C.C.O., and C.O.S.*
4. There is an inter-service staff headed by Naval, Military, Royal Air Force and Royal Marine
Advisers on Combined Operations. This staff also assist in planning those raids which are carried out by
the forces directly under the command of the Chief of Combined Operations and are available to advise
Commanders-in-Chief, in the planning of combined operations to be carried out under their jurisdiction.
5. There is also a Signal Section under the Signal Officer, Combined Operations (S.O.C.O.), which
comprises Signals Officers from all Services who also constitute a permanent
Combined Operations
Communications Committee.
6. An Inter-Service Intelligence Section under the Senior Intelligence Officer, Combined Operations
(S.I.O.C.O.) is responsible for all matters of intelligence in connection with combined operations.
Section also includes a Security Officer and a Liaison Officer with the Ministry of Information.
7. The technical officers on the staff of C.C.O., namely, the Senior Engineer Officer, Combined
Operations (S.E.O.C.O.), and the Senior Construction Officer, Combined Operations (S.C.O.C.O.), advise
on naval technical matters in planning.
* V.C.C.O., Major-General Haydon.
D.C.C.O., Air Vice-Marshal Robb.
A.C.C.O., Commodore Ellis.
C.O.S., Brigadier Wildman-Lushington, R.M.
COMBINED OPERATIONS HEADQUARTERS
at 1, The Combied Of Vation 1, 2o quan, - (rip one a linald in the house ant neve
as well as providing accommodation for Force Commanders and their Staff while planning specific
operations.
9. Within the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff Committee this Headquarters will control, in
conjunction with the Admiralty, the detailing and movements of all assault shipping and landing craft
n the Rritich Tsles.
COMMAND
10. All combined operational establishments and bases in the British Isles,
the Special Service
Brigade (Commandos) and No. 1441 (C.O.) Flight are under the command of the C.C.O.
These establishments are at present :—
Location.
H.M.S.
Establishment.
Monck
Dinosaur
Louisburg
Dundonald
Dundonald II ..
Avarat
Headquarters Combined Training (H.Q.C.T.)
Headquarters of Captain Commanding Tank
Landing Craft.
Combined Operations Base
Combined Training Centre
Combined Training Centre
Combined Signal School
Combined Training Centre for R.A.C.
215
Largs, Ayrshire.
Troon, Ayrshire.
Roseneath, Dumbarton.
Inveraray, Argyllshire.
whengate, Ayrshire.
Auchengate,
Ayrshire.
Castle Toward, Argyllshire.
2e779714
WO 277/21
27
3ф
