reduction of three on the original organization; but Middle East required ..
additional company H.Q., and an increase of manpower of about 20
division, excluding the personnel for the Field Depots.
per
Supply and Transport Recommendations
The calls for transport units by G.H.Q., Home Forces, and for overseas
theatres, were continuous at that time.
Shortage of personnel was the factor
governing provision, and there seemed little likelihood of this being remedied.
The only alternative, from the S.T. point of view, was to remodel existing
transport units, so that the assets in drivers were more evenly distributed, and
were so organized that adjustments in driver scales could be made without
continual amendments to War Establishments.
It was considered that these
objects could be achieved by the re-organization of R.A.S.C. transport unis
on a standard basis.
At that time, all these units were "tailor-made", i.e., each was designed
to fit exactly a particular task.
Their size was governed entirely by the nature
of their work, and they consequently varied considerably in this respect.
This
resulted in the uneconomical use of personnel in the way of overheads.
The
specialized companies were comparatively rigid in organization, and had to
be added to, or adapted, if required to undertake duties not of the nature for
which they were originally designed.
On the other hand, the scales of drivers then in force,
and the basic
R.A.S.C. organization for Field Force needs, had been arrived at, as the result
of continual and careful consideration over a period of years, and departure
from the principles established could only be accepted with full appreciation
of the additional risks involved.
The existing scales of labour for loading
R.A.S.C. transport were based on peak loads at railheads and refilling points,
and for a war of continuous movement; if they were reduced, labour would
have to be made available from other sources to deal with peak loads.
Any new organization, in order to be worth while, would have to produce
three advantages, i.e.,
(a) Economy must be achieved in personnel and vehicles.
(b) Companies must be general purpose units, organized to undertake
any transport task, as only thus could a saving be made in the toll
number of units to be provided.
(c) The system must be flexible but not complicated.
Economy in personnel was particularly necessary, as the R.A.S.C. va
short of 70,000 men; but there was an increasing demand for transport unis
as Field Army units were completed in equipment, and, in spite of 2l
menanan tolen. by increasing intate and transferring men from other ar!
the deficiency would remain at 60,000.
D.S.T. therefore recommended, as a solution of the problem, the adoptin.
stant transome the eatient of the aristing sections), operat-
ing a fixed number of general service vehicles with minimum practicable scales
of driver personnel.
Adjustments to meet conditions of abnormally ardos
duty, heavy mileage, difficulties of terrain, climate, etc., where the minimi
scales would impose too great a risk of breakdown. could be met by th
addition of standard sub-units of relief drivers, allotted to transport units
as dictated by the rôle the latter were required to perform.
The general effect of these proposals would be: —
(a) To modify the safety margin of personnel which then existed in the
War Establishments of many R.A.S.C. transport units.
(b) To render all
R.A.S.C. General Transport units interchangeable as
to rôle.
(c) To
eliminate the majority of special War Establishments, on which
R.A.S.C. second and third line transport units were then organized.
(d) To provide more flexibility in administrative control.
(e) To reduce the number of loaders (at that time provided on a scale of
one per supply, petrol, or ammunition,
vehicle) to a unit pool, to
be supplemented when necessary from other arms.
(f) To impose greater responsibility on junior officers and N.C.Os., by
increasing the working capacity of sub-units, and therefore decreasing
As regards the employment of third line transport, it was pointed out
that corps petrol parks and corps ammunition parks, the units referred to in
the Middle East proposals, existed as such oniy to conform to the General
Staff policy, that fixed reserves of petrol and ammunition should be main-
Such holdings were uneconomic
in transport, except in periods of operational stress; but, so long as the doctrine
remained in force, the third line transport units must remain, and be identified
In fact, how-
ever, it was known that local conditions commonly led to the diversion of
It was therefore
suggested that, in future, the deviation should be regarded as normal, and the
carriage of fixed quantities of petrol and ammunition as exceptional.
Reforms Introduced
When the whole question was examined at War Office in May, 1941, the
following conclusions were reached:
(a) As considerable experience had been gained in the working of trans-
port units, it was possible to relate organization to the actual require-
ments of the war as it was being fought.
Much greater flexibility
was now required, particularly in respect of third line transport, which
was in fact never used in the way for which it had been designed.
A
pool system was far preferable.
Under the new proposals, standardization of transport units would
be made possible, and ought to be adopted to the greatest possible
extent, as it would lead to economy and flexibility.
(b) The rigid system of carrying fixed quantities of ammunition, petrol,
and other stores, in various echelons on wheels, was abolished.
There
would still be the same lift available and it would be for "Q" staff
to arrange what quantities should be carried.
Ammunition, etc., could
be dumped, and transported from dump to dump, by standard com-
panies as necessary.
This would ensure freeing the maximum amount
of transport for general use.
59
W2s77/17
WO 277/21.
WO 277/26
