authority of King's Regulations, and of the Rules for the Control and Use of
W.D. Transport, the load-carrying transport, including cars, of all units of
all arms of the Service, was, when not required by the unit for training, at the
disposal of the R.A.S.C. officer i/c transport for general transport duties.
Officers i/c transport in the United Kingdom arranged for the conveyance
of military stores and baggage by rail, for the registration of the relevant docu.
ments, and for collection and delivery at terminal points.
At stations abroad,
they were also responsible for the arrangements for the loading and discharge
of army stores conveyed by sea, their warehousing, and delivery to consignees.
Oficers i/c transport also supervised the operation and employment of
those vessels of the War Department Fleet located within their respective areas.
A.D.M.T.
The Assistant Director of Military Transport, who was a R.A.S.C. officer,
acted directly under the Director of Movements and Quartering, War Office,
and was responsible for the general administration of the W.D. general service
vessels, and for the conveyance of stores to or from certain Central Ordnance
Depois, the Royal Arsenal and the Royal Dockyard, Woolwich, and other main
stores depots. He was normally responsible for chartering vessels for coastal
freight.
Oficers i/c Transport referred to him when consignments of stores
exceeding ten tons deadweight had to be conveyed between stations at home, in
order to ascertain whether the service could be carried out by W.D. vessels.
On the formation of S.T.1, to deal with R.A.S.C. water transport, the
appointment of A.D.M.T. lapsed.
Formation of S.T. 1—Water Transport
The branch of the S. and T. Directorate, known as S.T.1, was formed
in August, 1940, to administer and control the water transport services of
the R.A.S.C., including the
Water Transport Companies, the Motor Boat
Companies, and the Boat Stores Depot.
responsibility, partly of the Assistant Director of Military Transport and
partly of S.T.3, the latter for motor boat companies only.
At the request of the Admiralty, S.T.1 became the War Office co-ordinating
branch for all demands for Admiralty-controlled craft required for military
services.
The volume of work in the branch steadily increased with the growth d
the Fleet, and new commitments, such as the fire-boat sections, were under:
taken.
In consequence, the branch was upgraded to a deputy directorak.
under a D.D.S.T. (Colonel), as from 3rd August, 1944.
three sections, with functions as follows:
It was organized it
S.T.1.
—Policy and administration
of motor boat companies and
water transport companies, R.A.S.C., at home and overses
S.T.1 (a) - Organization, policy, and operation, of R.A.S.C. water trade
port units.
Liaison with the M.O.W.T. and with Direct t
Small Vessels Pools, Admiralty. Co-ordination and provis
policy for all R.A.S.C. marine stores.
S.T.1 (6).- Provision and maintenance of R.A.S.C. vessels.
Scales an
issues of vessels' stores and equipment.
Pay and allowan
questions: transfers of personnel: promotions and records!
30
service of civilian crews.
Preparation and issue of fleet orders.
Navigational and general administrative questions.
S.T.1 (c).—Design, construction, and conversion, of R.A.S.C. vessels,
machinery and equipment.
The detailed lay-out of the branch as it was organized at 1st September, 1945
is in Appendix VIIA.
Responsibility for Waterborne Craft
In June, 1944, it was found necessary to establish a dividing line between
the functions of the Directorate of Transportation and the Directorate of
Supplies and Transport, in respect of the provision, manning, operation, and
maintenance, of water-borne craft.
The War Office directive which effected this is given in full in Appendix
VIIB.
The general principles enunciated were that the Directorate of Trans-
portation was responsible for craft forming an integral part of bulk movement
for the L. of C.; and the Directorate of Supplies and Transport was responsible
for craft employed on inter-communication, and the movement of personnel
and distribution of stores.
(See also Chapter III, Setion 5.)
War Department Fleet
Before the outbreak of war in 1939 the War Department Fleet, administered
and controlled by the R.A.S.C., consisted of 66 craft all told throughout the
world.
These were owned by the War Department, their crews being civilians
employed under normal civilian staff regulations.
Responsibility for the organization, administration, and control of the
Fleet was vested in the Assistant Director of Military Transport, located at
Woolwich Arsenal.
Included in his establishment were civilian technical
advisers and overseers, who supervised the overhaul and maintenance of the
craft operating in the United Kingdom.
Coasting vessels of the Fleet were used, in this country, for the conveyance
of W.D. cargoes between military stations on the seaboard.
Unit baggage,
ammunition, R.A.S.C. supplies, and barrack stores were carried in this way,
and Royal Naval and Royal Artillery gun equipment was moved from Wool-
wich Arsenal to ship-building yards and emplacements.
Other craft were used in ferrying personnel, and the carriage of stores
and fresh water, to outlying sea-forts.
Steam and high-speed motor target-towing craft met the training require-
ments of the fixed defences for practice seawards; and range launches ensured
the safety of other craft, when shooting was in progress at practice locations.
Only a few craft were maintained overseas. i.e.. at Gibraltar. Malta, Middle
East, Singapore,
Hong Kong,
Bermuda,
and Jamaica.
They were mostly
steam target-towing craft and range launches, with a few Governors' barges.
The wartime developments are described in Chapter XII, Section 3.
SECTION 2. PLANNING FOR EXPANSION IN WAR
Supplies
Planning for expansion in time of war in connection with supplies, was
directed towards meeting
two basic commitments: first the maintenance of
the B.E.F.; and, second, that of the vastly increased strength of the forces in
31
37452)
wO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
