the movements of convoys in the forward areas from an Army H.Q. many
miles (sometimes 200) behind.
Also, when operational considerations aros.
necessitating
the diversion
of Army convoys to new locations of ther
retention under load or for troop-carrying,
the whole of Army's catchul,
balanced transport calculations were upset, and a transport crisis occurs
at the time when it was essential to avoid it.
Third Line Transport
The allocation of a fixed amount of third line transport to a cops
enabled the latter to make a definite plan, and also to use its transpot
as operational needs dictated.
During the campaign, third line G.T. companies operated over distances
up to 200 miles from railhead or seahead, and the turnround was thus
400 miles.
On such turnround, the
problem of carrying
P.O.L., food,
and water for the convoys became of major importance.
The daily despatches from Tobruk to Msus amounted at times to 200
lorries a day, and the petrol alone for the round trip for these vehicles came
to 16,000 gallons.
With lubricants, rations, and water, from 35 to 40 3-t0n
lorries were necessary for the domestic maintenance of the convoys. It was
no use delivering 50,000 gallons of petrol, the average daily figure, at F.M.C,
and then having to withdraw 8,000 or 9,000 gallons for the return journey.
This aspect of transport maintenance had to be considered when the tonnage
capacity
of third line transport was worked out.
These operations proved that R.A.S.C. transport could be operated on the
desert, running for continuous periods with reliable results, provided that
the mileages did not exceed 60 miles a day.
This allowed time for meals,
rest and maintenance, and could not be exceeded, except for brief periods,
without risk of a breakdown.
Enemy Counter-offensive
The policy of building up reserves of ten days in Benghazi and two in
Msus was never implemented, as the enemy began his counter-offensive on
21st January,
and we fell back before it.
There were then only
very small stocks of supplies in the forward area, and 13 Corps practically
exhausted the P.O.L.
The supply of 13 Corps and 4 Indian Division was maintained throughout
stocks in Benghazi before we evacuated the place.
the retreat without difficulty.
By 6th February, the situation
was
stabilized, with 13 Corps holding
the Gazala-
-Bir
Hacheim line, and 30
tion about the frontier.
Corps preparing a defensive posi
The Battle Ration
The Battle Ration. which was not intended to be used for more than
seven to ten davs at a time, was during the operations early in 1942 feed
for as much as three months uninterruptedly.
This was not due to any
lack of sunnies. but to a staff dasicine which hold the variety of the
ration to be insufficient justification for the
involved in its issue
800 battle rations could be loaded in every lon
great transport commitment
the decision had been necessary, because the memory of the prolonged issue
against only 545 full scale rations.
It was regarded as unfortunate
192
of bully beef and biscuit lingered to the exclusion of those periods when a
full ration, including frozen meat, was issued in very adverse circumstances.
In fact, the battle ration was suppremened as far as possible up to the
Field Service scale, and E.F.I. stores were provided.
Ihis worsened the
transport situation, and there were also heavy demands for R.E. defence
stores.
Adequate supplies were maintained to the forward troops, though
on little or no margin, and the subsequent retreat was not attributable to
failure in this respect.
Water Supply
During these operations, a development in respect of water supply was
the transfer of the responsibility for controlling water points in the F.M.Cs
from Corps
Water Oncer,
R.E., to the R.A.S.C.
Water Issue
Sections
were made R.A.S.C. units, with some R.E. personnel.
Water Tank Com
panies were grouped under a H.Q., L. of C. transport column, which was
located at loading point, i.e., pipehead.
The average delivery was & gallon
a man a day.
On the Gazala Line
While 13 Corps was on the Gazala line, dumps of all commodities were
built up in the forward area in defended posts, at a distance of about 40
miles from Tobruk, whence the stores were drawn.
Very large quantities
of defence stores and mines were also moved forward. This work completely
absorbed the second and third line companies of 13 Corps for several weeks.
The old-style refilling points had been reintroduced for a time on
account of the
fluid situation,
but the dumping programme made this
impossible, and F.M.Cs. had to be started again.
Even then, the General
Staff insisted on having one complete refill of ammunition for the whole
corps maintained on wheels.
Meanwhile 30 Corps had cleared the situation on the frontier, and was
establishing large reserve dumps in three defended areas.
The Corps had
little transport, as it had only
One division, and it had therefore to be
supplied by Eighth Army G.T. companies.
Preparation for the Eighth Army counter-stroke began in March, 1942.
Railhead was pushed forward to Capuzzo, and stocks were built up there,
and at Tobruk, and Belhamed.
By 26th May, however, when the enemy
forestalled our offensive with his own, the target figure for petrol, 12,000
tons out of a total of 27,000 tons for all commodities, was only about 70
per cent. complete.
The deficiency was mainly a matter of sea transport,
owing to heavy shipping
losses,
but leakage was a contributory factor,
necessitating the write-off of 2,800 tons.
Retreat to El Alamein
The Eighth Army counter-attack on 5th June failed, and by the middle
of the month maintenance er-at forward troops was a matter of day-to-day
arrangement.
the forward bases, the maintenance of divisions was far more complicated.
While Corps could draw in third line transport from one of
Where possible, divisions intenanisades were maintained from those bases
direct, but F.M.Cs. isions and bp and closed down like mushroom growths.
30 Corps employed " mobile F.M.Cs.".
Mars micro 0.5mm
17
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
