Both types were essentially land vehicles with the ability to float and manœuvre in water. In
consequence their seagoing performance was limited.
The original vehicles were all of American
design and production.
They were of exceptional value in operations against beaches which were separated from the
open sea by reefs or sand bars as, for example, the Pacifc Islands, or by swamps or soft mud as
found on the Burmese and Malayan coasts.
The wheeled amphibian, known as the D.U.K. W. carried alta dot 23 tons with a speed on land
of 50 me healed knots knots in the water, It could be launch hite deep water from a landing ship
of rat an. carry its load straight across the beach to the hinterland. A it had no ramp, it was
used almost exclusively as a carrier for personnel and stores. It was not armoured and, due to its
light weight (7 tons), it could be hoisted at L.C.A. davits.
The tracked amphibian, known as the Landing Vehicle Tracked (L.V.T.) was evolved from a
vehicle designed in the thirties to assist rescue work in the Mississippi floods, Besides carrying troops,
it was also a cargo carrier, of approximately four tons capacity.
This vehicle had a ramped stern
and could carry small vehicles in place of personnel or stores.
Being tracked, it had a superior
performance over difficult terrain but was naturally much slower than the D.U.K. W., speed being
approximately 25 m.p.h. on land and 4} knots in the water. Its weight, 14 tons, precluded it being
hoisted at davits; it was normally launched into deep water from landing ships or craft.
The forerunners of both these vehicles were demonstrated at C.O.D.C. in May, 1942. C.C.O.
was impressed and, after later trials of both tracked and wheeled types, he recommended that they
be obtained from the U.S.A. for British use.
The Americans used D.U.K.W.s in the North Africa Landings in November, 1942, and the
British received a number of these vehicles thereafter. They were handed over to the R.A.S.C. and
were first employed by British Forces for the Sicily landings. They were most successful and played
an important role in both the assault build-up and maintenance phases.
The D.U.K.W. was
universally popular and was widely used thereafter in all theatres in a variety of roles including :—
(1) Load carrier and troop carrier.
(2) Air/sea rescue vehicle where mud or sand-banks were prevalent in coastal areas.
(3) Casualty evacuation direct to hospital ship for personnel wounded in the assault.
Later the L.V.T. was also adopted by the British and was employed both by R.E. and R.A.S.C.
units in amphibious operations.
An Assault Regiment of troops carrying L.V.T. manned by R.E.
was employed in the assault on Walcheren in November, 1944, and an R.A.S.C.-manned Regiment
was used for the crossing of Lake Commacchio in Northern Italy in the final break-through early
Two Assault Regiments were formed and manned by the Royal Marines for the Far
Eastern theatre, but the war ended before they could be employed operationally.
C.O.X.E. carried out trials and experimental modifications to all these vehicles to enable artillery
equipment to be carried and fired during the approach to the beach.
modified the L.V.T. to a tracked mobile workshop.
C.O.X.E. also successfully
The latter modification enabled damaged
L.V.T. to be repaired in the forward area and so return to the battle with the minimum loss of time.
Trials were also carried by C.O,X.E., before issue to our forces, of L.V.T. modified by the
Americans as light self-propelled artillery and flame throwers.
In the meantime, C.C.O. had incorporated his requirements into the pilot models to suit them
for operations in the Far East. These pilot models of both wheeled (Terrapin) and tracked (Neptune)
were produced and sent to C.O.X.E. for trails and evaluation during 1945. In each case the current
Comstican equivalents were used as the standard for comparison aid both British types were initially
considered below standard. This was due partially to over stringent staft requirements and partially
for the Far Eastern theatre.
to the prad of development on account of the many pessing demands for war materials at that time
In addition C.C.O. initiated staff requirements for a larger amphibian for Admiralty use. Unlike
its predecessors, this version would be basically a water-borne craft with a limited performance on
details of this staff requirement were finally agreed.
A further approach to the problem of bridging the water-gap was that of enabling vehicles,
stores and equipment to be landed through the water, direct from the bow ramp of the landing ships
nd craft. This would infinitely speed up the process of discharging the vessels and would reduce
the requirement for pontoon causeways
and shallow draft ferries.
It would, however, involve
movement through water between 3 and 6 ft. deep whereas most vehicles could only wade in calm
water up to 18 ins. deep.
The idea was not completely original, as some light tanks had been waterproofed for training
during the period 1934-1936. This enabled them to wade up to 3 ft. and to be used in conjunction
with the prototype L.C.M. of that day. The idea was, however, not pursued beyond the point of
enabling tanks to cross shallow fords, etc., and was not at that time applied to any other type of
With the development of special landing ships and craft, the wading requirement came to the
fore and, in 1941, was under serious consideration both in C.O.H.Q. and the Ministries responsible
for design and development of vehicles.
Force 110 was, at that time, engaged in carrying out experimental work and exercises concerned
with sea-borne landings and was responsible for developing the fundamental principles and original
materials to enable certain vehicles to wade in 3 ft. of water.
By August, 1941, the progress was sufficiently promising to enable C.C.O. to invite all the
Ministries concerned to a meeting to discuss the possibility of increasing the wading capabilities of
armoured fighting vehicles, carriers and motor transport.
On 14th April, 1942, on the recommendations of C.C.O., it was agreed that armoured fighting
vehicles should be enabled to wade in 6 ft. of water and all other vehicles in 3 ft.
During the early days of development, vehicles waterproofed to 3 ft. were used operationally
at Madagascar i Suc, st, ed chu wall resis terrote chi to the us un Die satin
Armoured Division were specially off-loaded at Glasgow to be waterproofed by teams from C.T.C.,
Inveraray, before taking part in the North Africa landings in November, 1942.
Simultaneously, waterproofing methods were evolved for equipment, guns and small arms.
Trials and training in waterproofing materials and techniques were carried on in widely
separated establishments under the direction of C.O.H.Q.; the separate Arms Branches of the
Service Ministries followed by setting up training establishments overseas as, for example, in
North Africa in preparation for the Sicily landings.
Development went on in this way until June, 1943. It was then agreed that to avoid confusion
and duplication, the whole question of waterproofing should be centralised.
D.M.E. at the War Office was directed to take over control and he formed a new branch of
his Directorate for the purpose. A Waterproofing Committee on which C.O.H.Q. was represented,
was also set up under his Chairmanship.
By September, 1943, great progress had been made and various wading depths had been agreed
to cover the requirements of all types of vehicles and vessels likely to be employed by British and
American Forces in France and the Far East.
In addition to depth, there was the time of immersion element to be settled.
notably self-propelled artillery, were required to go into action while remaining in a hull-down
position in the water for up to forty-five minutes as against the six minutes required for most other
types. In January, 1944, C.C.O. again studied the requirements of the different war theatres and,
as a result of his recommendations, standards were set which covered all requirements on a global
made y hintie, To .., had develo at their training resources to such a desh the they were
of the armoured fighting vehicles in the assault waves which remained a unit responsibility.
In December, 1944, the Combined Operations School of Waterproofing was established at
Bideford to replace the various organisations which had existed hitherto, and to train personnel for
This school was capable of training one British Infantry Division and one
Army Tank Brigade simultaneously.
Tar ti was precuenty derided hore vut tat al training of the UK The scho a ta in the
closed in September, 1945, leaving the Army solely responsible for all future waterproofing activities.
(C52794
02747/17
WO 277/21
27
3ф
