Supply Situation, 1941-1942
divisions, as in June, 1942.
In November, 1941, the planning basis was expanded from 16 to 2)
Including the
R.A.F., this meant a plans)
feeding strength of 900,000. Reserves at 120 days amounted to lin
tons, and, as existing accommodation was 140,000 tons, and further bit.
ing was in hand, there was no difficulty in this respect. In fact, when d
construction was completed by the middle of 1942, the storage situation tel
entirely satisfactory.
The supply unit situation was the reverse.
Because of the vital necessit
for giving priority to fighting troops, administrative troops were mon
often than not shut out of convoys, and between June, 1941, and Jun:
1942, only six B.S.Ds., 13 D.I.Ds., one field bakery and two field butchers
arrived in Middle East.
Shortage of B.S.Ds. and D.I.Ds. in particular wa
severely felt, and the existing units worked under a terrific strain. Te
former were holding 15,000 to 20,000 tons, instead of 7,500, and the late
with a planned feeding strength of 7,500, were feeding an average of 1,00
to 20,000 troops, and up to 50,000 and in one case 60,000.
The provision of D.I.Ds. for Eighth Army was the most difficult pro
lem, and this threw an additional burden on the Base and L. of C. unit
Each corps required three D.I.Ds. for manning the R.A.S.C. element d
F.M.Cs.
These also were overloaded; at one F.S.D., 130,000 rations an
120,000 gallons of petrol were issued in eight hours, concurrently vit
receipts.
The increased feeding strength necessitated the provision of the
more B.S.Ds., and the allotment of bakeries was changed to eight To
"A" and 20 mobile.
It was the intention to send out only two of the
latter from the United Kingdom, together with equipment for the balane
latter free the United Kingdom, totre by converting Type "A " bakis
This conversion was not effected, however, partly because the mobile bakeri
were not regarded as entirely satisfactory
for desert warfare, and party
because, for operational reasons, the time factor involved in convension di
not make it worth while.
Owing to the mobile nature of the operations,
bread production in the forward area was as a rule impossible,
A further commitment was the replacement of a B.S.D., Field Buck,
and nine DIDs. lost in Greece and Crete and a B.S.D., a DID, and )
Field Bakery lost in Tobruk.
The situation was not made easier by still further responsibilities which
were placed on
Middle East Command.
that responsibility for the maintenance of the forces in Persia and Ir
In January, 1942, it was agrea
should be transferred from India to Middle East.
troops in those countries would still actuall come from India, which won
Supplies for the Indian
be responsible for provicion until the and of 1947 when existing provi
would have been exhausted.
an independent command.
Next, the Admiralty asked if naval requirements of common-user in.
In fact, in September that year P.A.I.C. beak
of foodstuffs for forces in the Mediterranean
areas could be obtained
from local Army sources.
East agreed, as this number would not have any noticeable effect on proy.
sion arrangements, and economy in shipping and transport would prob
The strength involved was about 30,000.
warning be increased to a degree that would prejudice military stocks in Egypt.
A proviso was made that the
naval strength should
196
In the spring and summer of 1942, about 100,000 Polish troops and
civilians were evacuated from Russia to Persia and Palestine.
They
fed from Tenth Army stocks which were replenished by India and Middle
Two factors complicated the issue:
the alinculty or obtaining ever
approximate estimates of the numbers in each flight, and the apparent
reluctance of the Russian authorities to co-operate fully with the
and Polish authorities.
The problem of providing subsistence was at first
simplified by the fact that a full ration was unnecessary, the starved condi-
tion of the refugees requiring a gradually increasing scale.
A reserve of 1,350,000 rations on a special scale was laid down at the
Persian port of entry against any unforeseen commitment.
Releases from
this were only to be made on prior sanction of the War Office; it was feared
that if supplies were sent into Russia, they would be misused.
Civil Reserves
The low level of civil food stocks in Middle East was a matter of con-
cern to S.T., as,
although they
were primarily the responsibility of the
Colonial Office, low reserves for civilian commitments might make calls
on military stocks necessary.
In March, 1942, in particular, the reserve
of wheat, flour, and rice for civil needs in Palestine was very low.
M.E.S.C. was the authority immediately responsible.
It was also respon-
sible for the supply of wheat, flour, and sugar to the Army in Middle East.
The view of the Army authorities was that, if civil stocks were low, the
reserve stocks held by M.E.S.C. must also be low.
The Colonial Office had
no power to do anything in the matter.
At the end of 1942, there were again shortages in Palestine of cereals,
fats, and sugar.
The situation would obviously have been most unsatis-
factory, in the event of operations involving Palestine, had civil reserves
been less than the military G.S. reserves.
P.O.L. Situation, 1942
Cany the middle of gitional can-making and filling plants, was prodeci-
By the middle of 1941, the construction of the reserve storage in the
ing on a high priority.
By 1942, the problem of the supply of petroleum
products had ceased to be one of availability,
and had become one of
distribution and transportation.
This change since the early days was a
clear indication of the progress made, and a fair measure of the success of
the joint planning of the Army and the civil oil organization to ensure
an adequate supply of oil for the Middle East Forces.
the
The general policy was now settled.
The whole area was supplied from
crude output of the Iraq, Persia, and Egyptian oilfields.
The area
covered Egypt,
Eritrea
Palestine, Turkey, Syria, Cyprus,
Malta, the Sudan,
The refineries at Haifa produced the output of petrol and derv
for requirements nortie of the Canal, while those at Suez, helped by Abadan,
dealt with the requirements south of the
Aviation spirit all came
from the Abadan refinery.
1942, the output was 300,000 tons
of 90 and 100 on refinery, sutilient for current needs; by the end of the
year, this had been do split, and a target of 800,000 tons a year set for the
future.
197
Mars micro 05mm / C
17
WO 277/21
27
WO27726
