The Raid on St. Nazaire, Operation " Chariot"
In their search for suitable targets on the French coast, the Intelligence Section,
January, 1942, proposed St. Nazaire.
early in
the German battleship Tirpitz.
Here was the only dry dock (Forme Ecluse) that could take
were employed in the battle of the Atlantic.
The enemy were using the port as a base for their submarines which
Further, a study of the available intelligence revealed
a flaw in the defences of the port which had been planned with insufficient regard to the possibility
of ships passing over the mud flats at high water spring tides.
C.C.O. also learned that, some time
previously, the Admiralty had considered an attack with the object of destroying the big dock,
but for various reasons the project had been shelved.
out this operation and, by the end of January, an outline plan was prepared.
However, C.C.O. was determined to carry
The original plan was for an expendable ship, carrying about two hundred troops and drawing
not more than twelve feet, to ram the lock gate.
The troops were then to disembark on to the gate
and followed by the ship's company, all were to take cover behind an air raid shelter in the vicinity.
A very heavy charge, built into the ship, and scuttling charges were then to be fired, with the
object of blowing a large gap in the outer gate and causing the ship to disintegrate and sink. An
M.T.B. was then to pass through the gap and fire her torpedoes at the inner gate.
This would render
the large basin or wet dock (Bassin de St. Nazaire) tidal which would be very detrimental to the
ships and submarines berthed therein.
Immediately after the big explosion, the troops would
carry out demolitions within the dockyard subsequently embarking near the entrance to the lock
in some six or eight motor launches which were to accompany the expedition for this purpose.
Simultaneously with the amphibious raid, a sustained air raid was to be carried out with the
object of creating a diversion.
The plan was quickly approved by the Chiefs of Staff and, on the recommendation of the C.C.O.,
the Commanders were appointed.
Commander R. E. D. Ryder, R.N., was appointed to command the naval craft taking part in
the operation and, as the majority of the military forces to be employed were drawn from No. 2
Commando, the Officer Commanding the latter (Lieutenant-Colonel A. C. Newman)
became the
Military Commander.
As the operation was to be mounted and would take place in his area, the Commander-in-Chief,
Plymouth (Admiral of the Fleet Sir Charles Forbes) would exercise the functions of the Naval
Commander in-Chief.
The C.C.O. invited these officers to meet him at C.O.H.Q. to discuss the plan.
The expendable ship provided by the Admiralty was the ex-American destroyer H.M.S.
Campbeltown (Lieutenant-Commander
This ship had recently been fitted for
boom-breaking trials and so could deal with the floating boom which had been shown by air
reconnaissance to be in place outside the dock gates.
When the Commanders closely studied the plan, differences of opinion arose.
Colonel Newman
disliked the idea of having all his troops in one vessel.
Commander Ryder was concerned lest
the tidal data should prove erroneous and the ship run aground in consequence.
The Commander-
in-Chief, Plymouth was advised by his staff that the destroyer would bounce off the dock gate.
Consequently an alternative plan was proposed which envisaged the troops being taken in motor
launches and, having landed from them, would carry out the demolitions including the dock gates.
The C.C.O. did not agree with the alternative plan. After consultation with the Engineer who
designed the dock gate, he was convinced that the destroyer would not bounce off when she hit the
gate.
The Commander-in-Chief, Plymouth also insisted that the exploding of the big
the Campbeltown would kill every one within half a mile.
On this point the C.C.O. had been guided
by the chief expert on blast of the Ministry of Home Security, who was convinced that the raiders
need run no risk from blast.
The Final Plan for Operation "Chariot"
Eventually a new plan,
which was in the nature of a compromise,
was adopted.
Campbeltoren was to ram the dock gates, her crew with certain milifary details were to abandon
ship over her bow and a delay action fuse was to be used for exploding the big charge.
meant that the inner dock gate would not be torpedoed.
The remainder of the military forces were to be taken to the scene of action in motor launches
which were also to be used for the withdrawal.
This latter arrangement did not recommend itself to the C.C.O. since a single destroyer
accompanied by a motor torpedo boat and followed at a discreet distance by the motor launches
for the withdrawal worla have itod lue attention than the whole force with their sonorts steaming
22
Results of Operation
"Chariot "
The results of the operation are best described in the report of the Commander-in-Chief,
Plymouth :-
" The principal object of the attack was achieved as the large lock capable of taking
the Tirpitz should be out of action for a considerable time.
(Actually it was never repaired.)
The outer caisson was destroyed by the blowing up of the Campbeltown and the demolition
parties destroyed the pumping station and the operating mechanisms of the outer and
For success surprise was essential.
The unseen passage to the Loire was due partly
to favourable weather conditions, which helped to prevent the force being detected from
the air, and partly to careful routeing to keep the force out of the track
reconnaissance flights by the enemy
of Zenits and
U-boat at 0815 on 27th March by H.M.S. Tynedale.
It was also due to the almost certain sinking of a
That surprise was not complete was principally due to the weather, always a doubtful
factor, preventing accurate location of targets by bomber aircraft.
three located the target but only four dropped their bombs.
Of 62 bombers all but
was sufficient to ensure that every A.A. gun in the neighbourhood was manned and ready
to open fire at any moment.
As these guns were in no way worried by falling bombs they
were able to concentrate their fire on the M.L. when the alarm was given.
M.L. engines, which on a still night are clearly audible three miles away, was an additional
A second raid " Myridon" with Bayonne as the obiective had been platied to sharinise
Owing to unfavourable moon and tide conditions on the date fixed for
it was not possible to proceed with " Myrmidon"
and it eventually took place on 4/5th April.
Conditions were not too favourable and although landing craft were manned and lowered, the
swell proved too high for a landing to be effected.
Capture of Madagascar, Operation " Ironclad "
Concurrently with the planning and preparation for Operation "Chariot", another operation
was decided upon by the Chiefs of Staff.
This was the capture of Madagascar, which, at the time,
was in the hands of the Vichy French.
Towards the end of 1940 the Joint Planning Staff had considered the question of the capture
of this island.
on the flank of our sea communications in the Indian Ocean.
the planning of this operation to a standstill and it was not heard of again until the entry of Japan
into the war at the beginning of December, 1941.
The plans were reviewed at once and preparations were made to mount an operation which
went by the name of " Bonus."
With the assistance of the planning staff at C.O.H.Q., the Executive
Planning Section of Plans Division of the Admiralty produced a plan which had as its object the
capture of Diego Suarez, which was the chief port in the island, and was also a defended anchorage.
The outline plan was ready just before Christmas and it envisaged the employment of 102 Royal
Marine Brigade under Major-General R. M. Sturges, Royal Marines in the assault.
at once started training for its role and carried out a full scale rehearsal, Exercise " Charcoal.'
The project was shelved early in 1942 and it was estimated that it would take a period of
ninety-one days from the issue of the preparatory orders before the assault could take place.
the event, the time taken was fifty-two days.
The success gained by the Japanese in their operations in the Malay peninsula in December,
1941, and January, 1942, brought the operation to the fore again.
important to make sure that this large island, with its good harbours and facilities, should not be
allowed to fall into the hands of the enemy.
Accordingly, the Chiefs of Staff considered the question, this time as a matter of great urgency.
They decided to mount the operation at once and to use for the assault the 29th Infantry Brigade
in place of the Royal Marines because the former was, at the time, embarked in the assault ships
lying in the Clyde, preparatory to carrying out an exercise at Inveraray.
This decision was taken
without the knowledge of the C.C.O. who
was at Dartmouth inspecting Commandos.
the Chiefs of Staff decided to retain C.C.O.'s nomination of
Major-General Sturges, as the
Military Commander.
23
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
