an L.C.T. in desi ete at nas also tinted known as the Landing Craft, Gan (I.C.G.). This was
Further, all landing craft were adapted so that on the run-in, the personnel aboard could use
their weapons, including the guns of the tanks when embarked.
Beach Parties
The need for well trained and efficient beach parties was again emphasised by this operation.
In consequence, C.C.O.
set up a special school for these units at Ardentinny in Loch Long which
was commissioned as H.M.S.
Armadillo in November, 1942.
At the same time the title for the
Beach Parties was altered to Beach Commandos.
Tanks in the Assault
At Dieppe, the tanks had found themselves in great difficulties because they had all been
landed in daylight with the leading waves in the face of defences which dominated the beach and
against tank obstacles which had not been breached.
The lesson from this was that the tanks
should not be landed until the defences had been captured and the obstacles cleared.
A school of instruction in the breaching of beach obstacles was subsequently set up and produced
the technique and equipment that was required.
Arising out of this, the question of the removal of underwater obstacles which might hinder
the landing craft on their way to the beach, was also investigated.
Eventually the Admiralty
undertook this responsibility.
Beach Recognition
The difficulty of making certain that the landing craft landed the troops in the right place
was again made evident by the experience of all the forces landed.
The C.C.O. decided that this
could only be rectified by a special course for officers who would have to guide in the leading
fights.
Accordingly, a Beach Pilotage School was set up at Glen Caladh, near Tighnabruaich,
which was commissioned as H.M.S. James Cook in September, 1942.
Headquarters Ship
The need for a properly fitted Headquarters Ship was again made very apparent.
A destroyer,
H.M.S. Calpe, carried out this duty at Dieppe.
Although it was only a short daylight raid, her
limited wireless installations were overloaded with the signal traffic.
It was unfortunate that the
new L.S.H., H.M.S. Bulolo, was not available for the operation but she had only just been completed
and had not been properly worked up.
Arising out of the provision of fighter protection for the ships, the need became apparent for a
ship from which the fighters could be directed and controlled.
The Signal Division at C.O.H.Q. were
charged with the production of the designs and, in consequence of their efforts, Fighter Direction
Ships took part in all subsequent operations against the Continent and proved their worth.
ofit hearia variet in ly was at fier op bed to fi coto being i noted by at.
ạt Uxbridge. He did, however, forsee that there might be a need for fighter direction by destroyers
in an emergency and, therefore, allowed arrangements to be made for this purpose.
Nevertheless,
during the operation, when it became apparent that fighters could no longer be effectively controlled
from Uxbridge, he passed over all fighter direction to the destroyers on the spot.
Formation of Force "J"
Before "Jubile" took place, it was realised that ad hoc arrangements for landing craft forces
Forces must be organised well in advance.
The need for discipline, morale,
tactical integration and competence are not disputed in the case of war vessels, troops and air
functions, therefore precisely the same should apply to ships and craft in an assault force.
addition, a Commander cannot cater for administrative needs it the administration is not one of his
responsibilities. The Naval Force Commander reported on the subiect before the operation and was
strongly supported by the C.-in-C. who naturally distiked the presence in his aréa of large foxces
administered by authorities extraneous to the naval chain of command.
From this proposal Force
This was supported by the
Admiraltv Int actually opposed by various administrative authorities and by many in C.O.H.Q
should have been formed earlier and might have produced more raids and further success.
was formed which no doubt in the light of subsequent knowledge,
SECTION (iji)
THE STRATEGIC VALUE OF THE OPERATION
Winston Churchill in his book "The Second World War," makes the following
observations on the value of the Operation.
" Our post-war examination of their records shows that the Germans did not receive,
through leakage of information, any special warning of our intention to attack.
However,
their general estimate of the threat to the Dieppe sector led to an intensification of defence
measures along the whole front.
Special precautions were ordered for periods like that
between 10th August and 19th August, when moon and tide were favourable for landings.
The Division responsible for the defence of the Dieppe sector had been reinforced during
Tuly and August, and was at full strength and routine alert at the moment of the raid.
The Canadian Army in Britain had long been eager and impatient for action, and the main
part of the landing force was provided by them.
The story is vividly told by the official
historian of the Canadian Army and in other official publications, and need not be repeated
Although the utmost gallantry and devotion were shown by all the troops and by
the British Commandos and by the landing craft and their escorts, and many splendid
deeds were done, the results were disappointing and the casualties heavy.
2nd Division, 18 per cent. of the five thousand men embarked lost their lives and nearly
two thousand of them were taken prisoners.
to the results. It would be wrong to judge the episode solely by such a standard.
Looking back, the casualties of this memorable action may seem out of all dr pition
occupies a place of its own in the story of the war, and the grim casualty figures must not
class it as a failure. It was a costly but not unfruitful reconnaissance in force. Tactically it
It shed revealing light on many short-comings in our outlook.
It taught us to build in good time various new types of craft and appliances for later use.
We learnt again the value of powerful support by naval heavy guns in an opposed landing,
and our bombardment technique both marine and aerial,
Above all it was shown that individual skill and gallantry without thorough organisation
and combined training would not prevail, and that team work was the secret of success.
This could only be provided by trained and organised amphibious formations. All those
Strategically, the raid served to make the Germans more conscious of the danger along
the whole coast of Occupied France.
This helped to hold troops and resources in the West
which did something to take the weight off Russia.
Honour to the brave who fell.
Their sacrifice was not in vain."
Copies of the very full report on the Dieppe Raid, which contained complete details and all
the lessons learnt, were widely distributed, often by C.C.O. personally,
at such conferences as
Casablanca and to such Commanders as General Eisenhower and General Alexander.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
1 The Second World War, Volume IV, pages 458, 459.
2 Colonel C.O. Stacey, The Canadian Army, 1939-45.
43
