The Beach
After crossing the water-gap, there remained usually an area of difficult terrain to be crossed
before teaching the fim ground upon which the Army's equipment was designed to operate. This
antone tenned the beach. The variety of conditions which very be encountered is infinite and almost
every amphibious operation of the last war was launched over a different type of Deach. In studying
beach conditions the following factors must be taken into account :—
Material mud, firm sand, soft sand, sand dunes, clay, gravel, stones or rock.
Stope "steep to" allowing landing ships and craft to land their loads dryshod, or flat
he"lett a long wade through shallow water to dry land from the point where the or fat
grounded.
With the usable portion of beach might be restricted by natural or artificial obstacles.
Depth-the distance from the water's edge to the hinterland which would vary with tide
False Beaches - reefs, sand bars and obstacles which would prevent vessels discharging direct
on to the true beach.
Tides and Currents the presence or absence of which was a vital factor in the use of any
beach.
For example, the Sicily landings were carried out over fairly flat narrow beaches which had little
depth and were unaffected by tide.
The beaches used in Normandy, however, were very flat, wide,
backed in places by dunes or cliffs and altering considerably in depth with each tide.
In the Pacific, the problem was aggravated by coral reefs which protected many of the landing
areas, while in Burma and Malaya,
soft mud backed by mangrove swamps created further
The problem of crossing the beach fell naturally into two main categories—
(1) the landing of personnel, and
(2) the landing of vehicles, stores and equipment.
Each category required the development of special equipment some of which is described below.
Landing of Personnel
As a rule, the special ships and craft could discharge men on to the beach in water less than
waist deep with the assistance of a simple ramp extending from the deck over the bows to the
shallow water beyond. However, to facilitate operations by Commandos, underwater swimmers and
special reconnaissance parties, it was necessary to develop equipment which would enable small
forces to surmount, complete with their weapons, an obstacle considered impassable and thereby
achieve surprise in an attack upon the enemy, or to reconnoitre unseen an enemy-held area.
The extent of the development and trials work involved will be appreciated from the fact
that there were, at one time, 200 different items which were not obtainable through normal
Service channels.
In order to provide these items at short notice for an operation, without loss of security, it
was found necessary to set up a Combined Operations Stores Depot.
1942, and began to function just before the raid on Dieppe.
This depot was established in
It continued until the war ended,
when the individual Services assumed responsibility for all remaining equipment.
Some of the items were required on a very wide scale, such as equipment for underwater
had to be scaled.
sain mers, whereas others were of limited use only, such as Commando operations where cits
requirement included :-
Equipment developed as the result of trials at C.O.X.E. for the Commando cliff assault
Cliff Assault Ladders, both rigid and flexible, some sectional and others extending to 60 ft.
Gantry and Powered Winch to enable stores and heavy equipment to be hauled rapidly up
Further tasks of special units were those of reconnit sance and underwater demolitions.
190
To fulfil the requirements of small specialised units, a range of rigid and non-rigid canoes was
evolved, some of which could be propelled by outboard motors in addition to paddles, oars or sails.
Much associated equipment was also developed for use by personnel operating
02707/17
WO 277/21
27
30
Underwater writing tablets for taking notes.
Shallow water diving gear was issued to underwater swimmers and Landing Craft Obstacle
Clearance Units. It consisted basically of a two-piece rubber suit jointed at the waist, which covered
the wearer completely, leaving only the head and hands exposed. This suit could be used by itself
" with the addition of " swim fins"
on the feet, to assist swimmers in shallow water operations.
When required for prolonged underwater work, a self-contained breathing set could be added
enabling personnel to remain submerged for about 20 minutes. Oxygen supply for the breathing
apparatus was not the only limiting factor in remaining submerged, as a man's hands rapidly become
numb in cold water. The use of gloves to offset this was impracticable due to the consequent loss of
Underwater demolition charges were developed, which could be used by swimmers, with a
suitable delay fuse to destroy underwater obstacles, bridge supports, enemy shipping, etc.
necessity they were small and easily handled, and were fitted for attachment to smooth surfaces
of a variety of materials such as ships hulls and concrete piers.
Landing of Vehicles, Stores and Equipment
Vehicles, particularly wheeled vehicles,
required a firmer surface than that offered by soft
sand, mud or loose shingle, and it was therefore necessary to provide some form of roadway from
the foot of the bow ramp of landing ships and craft, through the water-gap and across the beach
to the firm ground beyond.
The requirement was for something portable, both by vehicles and teams working from landing
ships and craft; to be easily laid by unskilled personnel working by night or day without the use
of special tools; economical to maintain; and, finally, to provide an adequate bearing surface for
all types of vehicles employed in an operation.
The requirement therefore evolved into a roadway which would fulfil as many as possible of
(1) Be easily supplied from existing Service materials.
(2) Be easily transported in normal load carrying vehicles.
(3) Be portable in sections or rolls by teams of men.
(4) Be easily laid above or below water, by unskilled personnel from the point where landing
ships and craft would beach.
(5) Be capable of rapid laying in the first instance so as to allow the vehicles required in
the early stages of an assault to be driven ashore.
(6) Be capable of subsequent strengthening with the minimum of additional parts, to carry
the heavy traffic required in the build-up and follow-up phases.
Army equipment employed to traverse sandy or swampy areas already existed, some of which
could be adapted, either complete or in part, for the purpose.
C.O.X.E. (U.K.) and, after its formation, C.O.X.E. (India), were charged with trying out the
various materials and all their possible combinations to ascertain :—
(1) The best solution for each condition of beach.
(2) The best way of providing the required materials, i.e. in cut short lengths in " packs", or
in rolls.
(3) The best ways of laying, maintaining and operating the roadways.
Experiments were continuous and covered the production of training and operating instructions
as well as technical data and advice.
New Problems in Europe, 1945- River Crossings
In Europe, assaults on beaches had become, if not stereotyped, at least widely understood.
Suitable equipe, ent was in the main available, as were staffs and men trained in is nor.
landings had been made behind the enemy lines in Italy, besides the big operations in Normandy and
