invasion of Europe would have to be tackled.
With the major European tasks done or in hand
Admiral Mountbatten was, in August,
1943, appointed S.A.C.S.E.A. and, after a short interval
Major-General Laycock was appointed C.C.O.
On 27th November, 1943, the new C.C.O., Gre oral paycace, was issed a new directive by
the Chi 23 ot Staft in which the folowing points were of importance to the Experimental Branch b
" Under the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff you will :
(a) Study tactical and technical problems of amphitious operations, including small scale
raids, and formulate doctrine and staff requirements.
(3) Direct and press forward research and development in all forms of technical equipment
including craft peculiar to combined operations.
In addition to your responsibilities in the U.K. you will also be responsible for the
co-ordination of development in combined assault training and technique among British
authorities overseas,
and for ensuring,
far as possible,
doctrine by Allied authorities both in the U.K. and overseas."
the adoption of a common
In spite of the changed wording of the directive as far as experiments and trials were concerned,
there was little change in the character of the work of D.X.O.R.
Of the four functional groups
set up within C.O.H.Q. as a result of the Bottomley Report, the Directorate came under that of the
Director of Combined Operations (Naval) (D.C.O. (N.)) whereas previously D.X.O.R. had dealt
with C.C.O. direct. The work, including that of D.C.O.(N.)'s group, was as follows : —
(1) All developments regarding ships, craft, weapons and equipment.
(2) Experiments and trials other than user trials.
(3) Coordination and development of all Inter-Services Signals and C.O.H.Q. Signals
(4) Technical information and data; the preparation of technical pamphlets and information.
(5) Control of C.O.X.E.'s work.
(6) Proposals for user and tactical trials related to the above functions.
(7) Study of technical reports from outside sources and circulation within C.O.H.Q.
From this, the functions of D.X.O.R. can be clearly seen as, in effect, all the above with the
exception of sub-paragraph (3), were his concern; the Directorate was slightly reorganised to
conform to the general reduction in staff throughout C.O.H.Q. It is interesting to note in the list
given above that the promulgation of information was now in the form of technical pamphlets.
This was in accordance with the new scheme working throughout C.O.H.Q. of publishing informa-
tion in the form of the Monthly Information Summary, or, for individual subjects, in the form of a
bulletin. Information received as the result of trials, was sent out at once to the authorities most
intimately concerned and later published for all outside authorities in the form of a bulletin or article
Preparation of these for the Press necessitated a great deal of work and,
although the Training Branch were responsible for issue, a special officer was necessary in D.X.O.R.
to handle the vast quantity of material as, in fact, the subject matter of most bulletins and the
Monthly Summaries was provided by D.X.O.R. officers.
This officer became part of the Technical
In addition, the Technical Data Section had the services of an official photographer;
and, a little later, a Dark Room was set up to cope with the enormous demand for photographs
both from within C.O.H.Q. and from outside authorities.
In 1944, therefore, C.O.H.Q. was working under the functional group system and D.X.O.R.
had settled down as a part of the D.C.O. (N.) group.
The Amphibious Warfare Committeel and
Sub-Committee continued to function as before and a new directive was issued in March, 1944.
The tenno or tererence were sumat to the eather arecue, sandy. the brady and trew oral
actical and technical problems connected with amphibious operations throughout the world and
making recommendations to the Executive.
on the main Sub-Committee and the work was classified under three main headings:
D.X.O.R. and A.D.X.O.R. represented the branch
(1) Initiation of the study of new problems or new aspects of old ones.
(3) The study, with a view to making recommendations, of the technique and tactical
(2) Investigation of problems passed to them for consideration.
developments of Allied and enemy nations.
" Formerly the Assault Warfare Committee. The change of the title became effective in January 1944.
not recommend the development of any major items unless Amphibious Warfare Committee's
and the Executive's authoritity were obtained.
" The Committee is not to initiate action for carrying out experiments and trials,
involving major expenditure or effort by outside authorities, without the prior authority
D.X.O.R. is responsible for carrying out such experiments and trials as may effect his
department in connection with the requirements of the Committee, and for following matters
up with the appropriate Service Ministries as may be requisite."
D.X.O.R. officers, therefore, besides forming the necessary link with the outside authority
responsible for the development of any particular project and being responsible for the arrangement
of the many trials needed, had also, to prepare many papers for the consideration of the Amphibious
Summary or complete bulletins on varying subjects took up a considerable amount of time.
The Effect of the Invasion of Europe on Trials and Experiments
After the assault on North-West Europe, a small committee was set up to study all reports and to
make recommendations for future action, particularly with regard to the war in the Far East.
considerable amount of the work undertaken by D.X.O.R.
from this committee's recommendations.
during the following months arose
For the remainder of the year 1944, D.X.O.R. was fully occupied in assimilating the lessons
learned in " Overlord," and C.O.X.E. was conducting trials and experiments which were necessary
Knowledge of conditions in the Far East was somewhat slight in British
circles, but realising this, C.O.H.Q. obtained permission for a party of observers to be attached to
the U.S. Forces in the Pacific during their island-hopping campaigns.
Armed with a formidable
questionnaire from C.O.H.Q., observers took part in all the major U.S. amphibious operations in
the S.W. Pacific and a great deal of useful information was collected from their reports which
guided all branches of C.O.H.Q. in planning technique,
tactics and developments for the Far
Eastern War. There was also close liaison with S.È.A.C., copies of projects and reports were
sent to the Combined Operations Division and conversely the Combined Operations Division
sent to D.X.O.R. many requirements which needed development and trial.
D.X.O.R., D.D.X.O.R. and D.D.C.O. (Mil.) helped considerably to put the problems in the correct
perspective, both in C.O.H.Q. and in S.E.A.C. Later in the year, a Director of Combined Operations
appointed to represent C.C.O. in India and the relationship between this Directorate and
In September, 1944, following the successful invasion of Europe, a new directive was issued to
C.C.O. In this directive, the sections of importance to D.X.O.R. were : —
" (2) Under the general direction of the Chief of Staffs you will :
(a) Study tactical and technical problems of amphibious operations, including small
scale raids, and formulate doctrine and prepare staff requirements.
(b) Initiate demands for research and stimulate action for the development of all forms
of technical equipment, including ships, craft and vehicles.
In overseas theatres you will be represented by Directors of Combined Operations, who
will be under the orders of local Commanders-in-Chief.
Such Directors of Combined
Operations will be responsible for technical advice in accordance with the doctrine for
amphibious operations approved by you."
Minor changes should be noted in this directive, particularly the paragraph stating thạt
C.C.O. will initiate demands for research and stimulate action for development.
illustrates the task of D.X.O.R. who did not carry out developments or research although he had
a considerable watching brief on many developments and put out the demands for research to the
Organisation Overseas
As work continued for the Far East, it became clear that authorities in this country could not
wholly and satisfactorily carry out all the developments and trials necessary owing to the very
different conditions found in that theatre of war.
Much useful and rapid work could be done in this
country because of the advantages of the long-established experimental centres and facilities for
manufacture and modification, but these did not supply the whole solution.
The Directorate of
Combined Operations (India) and the Combined Operations Division at S.E.A.C. had been set up;
and C.O.H.Q. and D.X.O.R. were very closely linked with them and exchanges of needs and
information were regular, but the necessity for some experimental establishment in the Far East
to t, COX. train in torme it i cal control o DoC.. More and more apparent. As a
167
WO 277/21
27
3ф
