a tanker berth built in the Great Bitter Lake, the latter with the Suez installa-
tions, and the two areas together.
R.A.S.C. Situation on Outbreak of War
At the time of the outbreak of war with Germany, the situation of the
R.A.S.C. services in the Middle East was satisfactory, except for a general
shortage of personnel, and the very low peace establishments, which had to
be supplemented by introducing civilians so as to release the few available
soldiers for duty in the Western Desert.
The shortage of transport was not
so greatly felt, as a certain amount of local transport and drivers could be
found.
Two reserve M.T. companies were formed at the end of August, 1939,
one with Indian drivers, and the other from Cypriots and Maltese residents
in Egypt.
Although Italy did not enter the war until June, 1940, her large armies in
Libya constituted a grave threat to Egypt, and it was necessary to be pre-
pared for an Italian attack at any time.
7 Armoured Division accordingly
moved out to the Western Desert.
Its divisional R.A.S.C. was a pool of 96
load-carriers, organized to the best advantage.
This was short of actual re-
quirements by 200 lorries at least.
The R.A. Group, an improvisation, had
a Group Company, but this needed 25 more lorries and 125 more men.
The R.A.S.C. situation was not improved in the months which preceded
Italy's entry into the war.
A large part of the Regular officers, 50 per cent.
of trained drivers, and many clerks, had been sent to the United Kingdom. A
continuous process of dilution by semi-trained personnel had gone on, and
this had impaired the efficiency of the R.A.S.C. units to such an extent, that,
by January, 1940, many of them were unfit to take the field. In one draft from
the United Kingdom, only 10 per cent. of the so-called drivers could drive.
One R.A.S.C. company was converted into a training unit for Cypriots.
A provisional Field Service ration scale was introduced for all troops in
Middle East in September, 1939, with a messing cash allowance of 12d. per
man per day.
Construction began at the end of 1939 of the storage for petrol reserves
provided under the Gebel Dave scheme, but did not proceed very rapidly. It
soon became evident that the estimated consumption of 125,000 to 150,000
gallons a month would be exceeded once active operations began.
The normal Barrack Services organization continued to function in respect
of troops in permanent accommodation, but not for those in transit and other
war-time camps.
In these, the accommodation stores were dealt with by the
camp staffs, or by units in occupation, direct with R.A.O.C. while fuel, ligth,
and disinfectants, were treated as supply services.
The increased Peace Establishments for barrack services continued in fore
until they were replaced by War Establishmenta in 1970; But no considerate
addition of personnel was then necessary, as the commitment was confined l0)
pre-war accommodation.
Four officers were added to the staff of the Com
mand Barrack Officer for duty as Inspecting Conservaney Officers, to super-
vise the operation of the conservancy contracts in the numerous camps.
Until Novemher. 1939. coal for military use in Egypt was obtained under
local contract. Then authority was given to buy it from the Egyptian Stal
148
Railways, but the supply from this source was soon found to be unsuitable
for use in cookhouses.
Arrangements were therefore made for India to supply
all Middle East stations.
The procedure was roundabout, through War Office
and the India Office.
Organization of S.T. Directorate
When Middle East Command was formed, its Headquarters included a
D.D.S.T., who was upgraded to D.S.T. (brigadier) during 1940.
The question
of dividing the Directorate into a Directorate of Supplies and a Directorate
of Transport was considered, but D.S.T., Middle East advised against this,
on the grounds principally that there was an increased amount of planning
involved in dealing with the various spheres of operations in Middle East,
and that in consequence the two branches must be linked in one head, a D.S.T.
The Directorate assumed executive control in June, 1940. It consisted at
first only of a Supplies and a Transport Branch, but by August that year a
P.O.L. and a Local Resources Branch had been added.
Each branch was
under an assistant director.
With the increased importance of Middle East consequent on Italy de-
claring war, and the growing feeding strengths and numbers of vehicles, the
Directorate had to expand, amongst the additions being a M.T. Inspectorate,
Catering Adviser, Indian Provision Branch, and Bakery and Meat Inspectors.
The first of these is dealt with later in this chapter.
The Indian Provision
Branch eventually became S.T.3(c).
It consisted of an A.D.T. and a
D.A.D.S.T., both from the Indian Army, and its responsibilities were as
follows: —
(a) Advice to D.S.T. on all matters appertaining to the R.I.A.S.C. in
connection with Indian divisions in Middle East.
(b) Liaison with A.G. Branches in connection with R.I.A.S.C. personnel.
(c) Advice to D.S.T. on matters of animal transport, both R.A.S.C. and
(d) Liaison with D.S.T., India, regarding R.I.A.S.C. in Middle East.
By November, 1941, the strength of the supply and transport units in
Middle East had risen to over 16,000 vehicles and about 50,000 personnel, and
the Directorate was then organized as follows: -
(a) Supplies Branch, under a D.D.S. (Colonel), divided into S.T.1 (Sup-
plies), under an A.D.S.; S.T.4 (Local Resources), under an A.D.S.T.;
and S.T.5 (Indian Provision), under an A.D.S.
Attached were the
Catering Adviser and Meat Inspector.
(b) P.O.L. Branch, under a D.D.S.T. (Colonel), and known as S.T.2.
(c) Transport Branch, divided into S.T.3(a) Technical, under a D.D.T.
(Colonel), and S.T.3(b) Transport, also under a D.D.T. (Colonel).
S.T.3(b)
was
sub-divided into
S.T.3(b).1 (planning);
S.T.3(b).2
(vehicles); S.T.3(b).3 (personnel); and S.T.3(b).4 (census).
Attached
was the C.I.M.T.
In December, 1941, the appointment of D.S.T. was upgraded to Major-
General, and authority, was also siten tor one of the deputy directors in she
Directorate to be pity was also gadiet, in the capacity of deputy to the D.S.T.
7/77
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
