From the P.O.L. point of view, the whole aper was considered as one
an "A" Type Petrol Depot functioning as H.Q. of each section.
depot under the control of C.R. A.S.C., and was operated in two sections with
issued and received on alternate days.
A transhipment area was established in each roadhead from about D+s
It consisted of an area suitably placed between the beaches and
the depots where loads could be transferred from DU Woto lorries in order
to admit of the most efficient and economical working of both forms of trans.
"These transhipment areas were under the control of Q (Movements),
put were staffed largely by R.A.S.C. personnel from the G.T. and DUKW
companies, and representatives of other services were present to advise on
the sorting of commodities and their despatch to appropriate depots. Each
area was designed for handling 2,000 tons a day.
A transhipment area was basically a point at which one form of R.A.S.C.
transport handed over to another form of R.A.S.C. transport, and it therefore
appeared that it was entirely a matter for R.A.S.C. responsibility, and that
the control and operation of a transhipment area should be handed over to
the R.A.S.C., in order to avoid the confusion and unsatisfactory results which
in fact occurred.
The arrangement was that Transportation Branch super-
vised the actual transhipment and the labour, while the R.A.S.C. handled the
transport.
Crane Transport Platoons
In order to provide the personnel required to operate the large number
of mobile cranes necessary to carry out the task of transhipment, two late-
phased Mechanical Equipment Companies,
R.E., were brought forward and
employed on the work.
When it seemed probable that they would be required
to carry out their proper role, it was suggested that the R.A.S.C. should under-
take the commitment.
As it was becoming increasingly evident that tranship-
ment areas should be organized and staffed by the R.A.S.C. to the greatest
possible extent, this was accepted by D.S.T., 21 Army Group.
Crane Transport Platoons, R.A.S.C., were accordingly formed on a special
establishment.
They were designed for a particular task at a minimum cost
in personnel, and it was not claimed that the organization was ideal for any
theatre.
Before the beginning of September, however, when these units were due
to take over, the maintenance conditions
changed,
and they never
actually operated in a transhipment area, but were used for a variety of tasks
connected with dock clearance.
The opinion of 21 Army Group was that, in any operations involving
beach maintenance transhipment areas would have to be formed and that it
was a logical development that the link between the DUKW bringing in the
stores, and the lorry taking them away, should be
R.A.S.C. also.
D.S.T.,
War Office. did not agree however. as the R.A.S.C. had not the requisite
tradesmen, and the new establishme as the ReAgac, brigade provided for
the cranes being manned by transportation personnel.
that the G.T. companies working on the dumps should have an element of
But it was arranged
mobile cranes to assist in off-loading at the
dumps.
338
System of Maintenance
This is a convenient point at which to describe the system of maintenance
which was actually in use in 21 Army Group, so that the references made ir
the subsequent narrative to the various links in the chain may be more clearly
understood.
The organization and methods now described are of course
those which became normal practice in the course of the campaign, course
not necessarily those in operation at this actual stage of it. It will be obserare
that the system employed varied in some respects from the procedure laid
down by the War Office in its instructions on Maintenance Organization in
the Field, issued in February, 1944, as described in Chapter III, Section 1.
In general, the process of build-up visualized in the War Office directive
as that adopted in 21 Army Group, i.e., the rear maintenance area was
eventually established, and from it roadheads were pushed forward, from
which were replenished the Field Maintenance Centres.
In this connection,
it is necessary to explain the variation of nomenclature of this organization, in
order to avoid confusion. The Field Maintenance Centre was developed in
the campaign in the Western Desert, as described in Chapter VI.
When the
system in which it had a place came to be generally accepted as the standard
procedure, it became known as the Forward Maintenance Area, and this was
the term used in the system laid down for 21 Army Group to follow.
Because, however, a large part of the staff of 21 Army Group was drawn
from Middle East sources, and were more familiar with the term Field Main-
tenance Centre, it was this which was commonly employed in 21 Army Group.
After the war, it was to be designated the Corps Maintenance Area.
Employment of Supply Units
Reserves were held in Base Supply Depots located not only in the con-
temporary equivalent of the base (the rear maintenance area), but on the
L. of C., at the Advanced Base, and at Army roadheads.
these depots varied from 5,000 to 10,000 tons.
added to a B.S.D. to increase the latter's capacity; it might be employed on
recovery work or for normal depot work.
DIDs. were employed on a variety of other tasks, e.g: -
(a) receipt, holding, and issue, of forage, and of coal;
(b) handling captured enemy supplies;
(c) receipt and despatch of air freight; and
(a) operation on the L. of C., in the Army area (at railhead or roadhead),
where D.I.Ds. and Composite Platoons
of Corps Troops Composite Companies were interchangeable.
Employment of P.O.L. Units
The small " brick" unit, capable of being combined with others to form
a lareer unit proved to he the most practical organization in the case of
Petrol Depot,
the most
Tune "p" which was emploved in a variety of roles, e.g.:-
convenient component
(a) to control wasading at a petrol railhead;
(b) split to control unloading at one netrol railhead, and loading of
empty containers at a second railhead;
339
WO 277/21
27
WO27726
