Development of F.S.Ds.
ber, 1940.
The Italians advanced eventually, and reached Sidi Barrani on 16th Septem-
The next stage was our preparation for a counter-stroke in
December of that year.
The force available was 7 Armoured Division, 4
Indian Division, 16 Infantry
Matruh garrison, a total of 31,000 men.
Brigade, one battalion of tanks, and the Mersa
The plan involved moving the troops 70 miles in M.T., and the only trans.
port available for the purpose was the improvised Reserve M.T. Companies
carrying out third line duties for 7 Armoured Division.
To remove these
would disorganize the normal system of supply during the operations, as, even
if railhead for the two divisions were at Matruh, this was still beyond second
line reach of the troops engaged in operations.
Thus came about the decision
to establish field, or forward, supply depots (F.S.Ds.), which were to be the
fore-runners of Field Maintenance Centres (F.M.Cs.), and so of Forward Main-
tenance Areas (F.M.As.).
The preparations for the attack were carried out under cover of a pre-
tended exercise. The actual plan required that reserves should be put down
forward of the normal refilling area, so that, as the troops went forward, they
could be maintained therefrom by second line transport. These reserves were
put down as two F.S.Ds., ostensibly for the same purpose as before, actually
for consumption during the first few days of the advance.
They were on a
divisional basis.
Their contents were designed to cover the anticipated five-
day operation, and consisted of: -
Supplies, five days at a reduced preserved scale; petrol, 100 miles for
all vehicles; ammunition,
two lifts of second line scales; and water, two
days (200,000 gallons /
of water were taken forward in 2-gallon cans,
or in rectangular tanks, of the type used for static water supply).
The stocking of the F.S.Ds. involved the divisional second line transport
being worked very hard at a time when it badly needed all the rest possible;
and ample time for maintenance; but there was nothing else for it.
The Mers
Matruh garrison only had enough transport for daily maintenance.
The Campaign of 1940-1941
The attack went according to plan, even better, and the F.S.D. systen d
maintenance was continued, as the only one possible.
Transport available was
insufficient to maintain the momentum of the advance on a day-by day bui
from railhead or from Sollum and Tobruk, as these ports became arlie.
Therefore a halt had to be called, while a FS Ds. were established nod
forward by the scanty resources of third line transport.
Meanwhile, second
line drew from F.S.Ds. farther back.
This process was continued throughout
the advance,
was established.
cach F.S.D. being allotted a serial identication number s
At one point in the advance, it was necessary for al aut
owing to the heavy consumption.
Was Gret Tina one pontansport to go backa FS.D. for youition
of first and second line.
First line transport was thus dong t that
F.S.Ds. dealt in ammunition,
water, P.O.L.,
and supplies.
manned, often inadequately, by a D.L.D., Or part Of One, Or by an front
154
collection of supply and transport personnel drawn from anywhere, while a
few R.A.O.C. personnel struggled with the ammunition.
As far at least as
the commodities mentioned were concerned, the expedient of the F.S.D. was
thoroughly justified by the results.
For stocking the F.S.Ds., the available transport was supplemented with
Egyptian Army units, and with captured vehicles;
although much of the
captured transport was lost to general use, as units which had hitherto been
on a very limited scale for the carriage of their requirements commandeered
it for their own use, and would not relinquish it.
In addition, Italian main-
tenance had been bad, and vehicles were often not in good condition; and also
most of them had Diesel engines with which British drivers were unfamiliar.
The rapid advance took the S.T. Directorate by surprise.
No prepara-
tions had been made and no plans formulated for the provision of the neces-
sary supply units to cope with the requirements of the long L. of C.
The
situation was further complicated by the very large number of prisoners
amounting to 130,000 in all, of whom the majority were Africans. No special
provision had been made for such a contingency, and in the ration scale which
was hastily drawn up only such items as could be produced locally were
included, as far as this was possible.
Only tea and margarine had to be
provided from imported stocks, and the additional large commitment did not
in fact unduly affect the general supply position.
Large stocks of enemy
supplies were captured, and these were used to feed the prisoners in the for-
ward area.
The supply service in the Western Desert was indeed considerably strained
during the advance, owing to the insufficiency of administrative units, and it
was only due to improvisation that maintenance was carried on.
A B.S.D. was established in Tobruk in February, 1941, to receive supplies
coming in by sea; and a small supply depot was set up in Benghazi by a detach-
ment of another B.S.D.
A bakery was divided between Tobruk and Benghazi.
Detail issues were carried out by F.S.Ds. formed from the few D.I.Ds. and
supply personnel sections available at that time.
The following quotation from "Lessons of the Cyrenaica Campaign" is
of interest in the circumstances: -
"When account is taken of the fact that the force which left Mersa
Matruh had to subsist during the battle of Sidi Barrani on field depots
previously established in a lightly held forward area, it is a matter of
congratulation that, during the subsequent long and rapid advance, there
was no failure in the delivery of supplies, motor fuel, ammunition, or
water."
As the advance went on, ports were opened in succession as sea-heads
Sollum, Tobruk, Derna, and finally Benghazi.
After that, there was no port
short of Tripoli, 600 miles farther on.
Any further advance must therefore
have depended on road transport, which was not available in suficient quantity
to permit of this.
German air attacks made it impossible for shipping to continue to be sent
to Benghazi, with the made hat all supplies had to be brought from Tobruk,
which involved lengthening the land line of communication to the forward
troops by more than 200 miles.
Nearly all the available transport had to be
155
we2947/I7
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
