unsuitable for European troops, and the pineapple too acid; but the guava
was found to have a very high ascorbic content, and it was recommended
that the addition of this source of vitamin C should be accepted, and that
guava pulp should be added to all jams made in West Africa.
Taken as a
whole, the jams did not provide enough variety to be the sole supply for the
command.
For fresh meat supply, cattle had been bought from the French at £7 a
head, and marched down under military arrangements through the Gold
Coast hinterland, with a mortality sometimes reaching 50 per cent.
In 1944,
new arrangements were made, under which cattle would cost £10 to £12 a
head, but the contractor would move the cattle, being responsible for all
losses on the way. In view of the saving of shipping, the arrangements were
approved.
Frozen Meat Supply
There were insufficient cattle in Sierra Leone Area to meet all Army
requirements.
As Freetown was also the Naval station on which the South
Atlantic Squadron was based, there was a Naval victualling organization,
which had no cold storage accommodation ashore, but kept a refrigerator ship
always in the harbour.
Arrangements were accordingly made for the Naval
victualling stores officer to supply meat for European Army personnel, local
supplies being adequate for African personnel.
Ten-ton cold storage plants in the other colonies were used to hold meat
between slaughtering and consumption a day later.
Otherwise it had to be
consumed within a few hours.
Ration Strengths
Ration strengths in the four colonies for the years 1940 to 1945, are shown
at Appendix VIIIA.
P.O.L.
Before the war, there was no R.A.S.C. petrol organization in West Africa.
There were civil bulk installations at ports in Nigeria, Gold Coast, and Sierra
Leone.
The civil authorities had a drum-filling apparatus at Apapa in Nigeria,
and a plant for making and filling 4-gallon non-returnable tins at Takoradi.
Co-operation
with these authorities, and their ability to meet the Army's
requirements in war-time, were considerably more successful than in the
case of other supplies and transport.
An enormous amount of petrol was lost by the use of the 4-gallon tin,
which would not stand up to the climatic conditions nor to the rough hand-
ling to which the African subjected it.
After June, 1943, 44-gallon barrels
were used, but this involved a great deal of extra work for supply depots, as
the petrol had to be decanted in 8-gallon drums for issue to field force units.
A drum refilling centre and a petrol depot would have been justified at least
in Nigeria in 1942-1943.
Target figures and authorized reserve varied con-
siderably from time to time with the general military situation, but the figures
laid down were seldom attained.
available to meet commitments.
Sufficient stocks were, however, always
P.O.L. was handled by the ordinary supply organization.
430
Organization of W.A.A.S.C. Field Force Units
which consisted of: —
The early organization of the W.A.A.S.C. was by brigade groups, each of
(a) Headquarters.
(b) Supply company.
(c) Petrol company.
(d) Ammunition company.
(e) Reserve M.T. company.
(f) Field supply depot.
(g) Detail issue store.
This proved to be a very cumbrous organization, especially in administra-
component units.
tion, with the headquarters in some cases as much as 500 miles away from its
In January, 1942, these units were reorganized into Brigade Group Com-
panies and General Transport Companies, F.S.Ds. being abolished.
A Brigade Group Company consisted of:
(a) Headquarters.
(b) Three transport platoons.
(c) Two R.D.Is.
(d) Workshop platoon of two sections.
(e) Supply platoon.
(* Composite platoon.
A General Transport Company was similarly constituted, except that it
usually had one more transport platoon, and had no composite platoon.
In most cases, the personnel of the composite platoons and supply platoons
of the Brigade Groups, together with those of the supply platoons in the
General Transport Companies, were used to operate the Supply Depots.
At the end of 1942, a further reorganization was carried out, as in the
light of experience it was considered that the existing organization failed to
achieve its object of maintaining the troops up to 300 miles in front of rail-
The Composite Platoon especially was held to be quite inadequate for
It was therefore proposed to reduce the radius of action to 210
miles, and to base the system of supply on preserved rations supplemented
In the Brigade Group companies, Composite Platoons were abolished, and
Ammunition Platoons substituted; and, in the General Transport Companies,
Supply Platoons were
The G.T. companies formed the link
between Railhead and the Brigade Group companies.
Railhead Supply Detachments were formed, to receive from pack trains,
issue to G.T. companies, and hold a reserve of rations and P.O.L. at railhead.
A transport unit peculiar to West Africa was the Auxiliary Group, con-
sisting of porters, carrying loads on their heads.
These groups were at first
W.A.A.S.C.,
but later became infantry.
They
were trained in head load
carrying, bush clearance, and track discipline.
They later did useful work
in the Burmese jungle.
431
(37452)
