a 25 to reinforce the Group and to provide
the Headquarters and Base Staff.
Ceylon, to which the parties moved from India in April, 1944.
The site for the base was chosen at Hammenhiel on Karaitavu Island, off the Jaffna Peninsula ir
and by the instructors under training for R.M. Detachment 385 in the following months.
They were joined there by C.O.P.P.4
la wont of the camp was ple tue toud decided: and camp construction started under arrangements made
period matters were under the control of It. -Col. H. G. Hasler, D.S.O., O.B.E.,
During this
R.M. and the general
by C.-in-C., Eastern Fleet.
i a on l2th Tune, 1944, and Colonel H. T. Tollemache
arrived from England the next day and assumed command.
basic training of units, to study new methods of operating and to carry out trials.
A Training and Development Unit was later formed as part of the Headquarters, to co-ordinat
The Headquarters and
Base Staff were also increased in the light of experience.
It was not until March, 1945, however, that all
the new staff appointments were filled.
R.M. Detachment 385 operational ranks arrived at Hammenhiel Camp at the end of July. "C"
Group S.B.S. and C.O.P.P.3 also arrived during this month.
With the arrival of the Sea Reconnaissance Unit in November the Setall Operations Group reached
its maximum strenoth of Operational units, viz.: - Four C.O.P.P.s, R.M. Detachment 385 of three Troops,
Special Boat Section of three Groups, and Sea Reconnaissance Unit of four sections.
Functions
The functions and method of control of the Small Operations Group were laid down in Supreme
Allied Commander's Operational Directive No. 14, to C.-in-C., Eastern Fleet.
Broadly, command and
administration were vested in C.-in-C., E.F., and general policy and operational control were retained by
the Supreme Allied Commander.
The annex to this directive stated the functions of the Group as being :—
"To provide small parties of uniformed troops trained and equipped to operate against
enemy coastal, river or lake areas, using as their final means of approach various types of small
craft (all of less capacity than 12 men), inflatable boats, paddle-boards or swimmers.
The
personnel of S.O.G. will not be qualified to work as agents."
This annex also stated that:—
" In order to prepare them to take part in such operations, S.O.G. personnel should be trained
to carry out the following tasks :—
(a) Reconnaissance of enemy beaches, seaward approaches, beach exits and coastal defences,
or alternatively, enemy territory near river banks or the shores of lakes.
(b) Small-scale attacks on objectives in coastal, river or lake areas, including demolitions
ashore and attacks on ships in harbour.
(c) The provision of markers and guides for assault landing by larger forces, which may be
either sea or airborne.
(a) The landing and re-embarking of agents, or stores for such agents, from small boats.
(e) Seizing intelligence data and enemy equipment.
(f) Providing diversions.
(g) Any other type of operation which calls for basic S.O.G. training.
Component Units
C.O.P.P.-C.O.P.P.s were commanded from January to March, 1945, by a Lieut.-Commander and
each consisted of four officers and five ratings (naval) and one officer and two other ranks (R.E.).
teams were specially trained to carry out detailed reconnaissance and survey of enemy beaches,
These
approaches and land exits and the
seaward
ransported to the area in either a submarine, H.D.M.L. Of minor landing, cratt, depending on the task
ncluded a number of fully qualified navigating and hydrographic officers
provision of markers and guides for a subsequent assault.
They
In operations, parties were
The final approach and the task itsalf was carried out in canoes and by swimmers operating from them.
General Purpose Teams
The other units were considered to be general purpose units, capable of undertaking raids and
Datrols for general reconnaissance. demolition tasks. sabotage, capture of prisoners. attacking ships in
tasks for which they were trained.
The deference between them law sa, sin their methods of nontonnh than in the actual
(a) R.M. Detachment 305 as commanded hu a maior and each troOp wae slan commanded by
a major and consisted of five officers and 24 other ranks.
operationally trained from January, 1945.
Its troops were considered
(b) S.B.S. were commanded by a major as also were the three groups,
of four officers and 16 other ranks.
each of which consisted
sources, mainly Commandos.
The S.B.S. Troops were all recruited from Army
The main differences in the training of these two units was that S.B.S. had more training
in operating ashore and were already trained parachutists: R.M. Detachment 385 had a
wider training in boat work.
(c) S.R.U. was originally commanded by a Lieut.-Commander, R.C.N.V.R. and later by an Army
Captain.
Each
all services.
section consisted of two officers and ten other ranks,
who were drawn from
Although the unit was considered to be general purpose, the men had under gone
special training in long-distance swimming, landing and withdrawing through heavy surf,
addition, all men completed the Army Parachute Course at Ringway.
the use of paddle come end he era tea ache no we gen breathing S.. arrived
at Hammenhiel Camp, the sections were trained in the use of small boats and navigation.
Limitations
The limitations of S.O.G. teams were twofold— those imposed by the training of teams and those
imposed by their establishment.
In the first instance they could be used only in roles tailor-made to their particular type of training
and, in the second, they were dependent on a higher formation for maintenance.
Designed to operate
by air or by sea from an established base, teams possessed no general duty men and were entirely
operational.
Planning
The following types of S.O.G. operations were carried out :-
(a) Independently
Mounted Operations in which the Commander, S.O.G. was responsible for the
planning and mounting of the operation, using the facilities of all superior headquarters
concerned.
b) Force Commanders' Operations in which teams were detached to Force Commanders for use in
conjunction with major operations.
The Commander S.O.G. was then responsible only for
the selection of the suitable teams for liaison
and advice to the headquarters concerned.
The planning and mounting was the responsibility of the headquarters to which they were
attached.
Independent Operations
fourtin ten in bendent operations in til were carried out, of which three wes
done by C.O.P.P
These operations can be sub-divided in three
categories :-
Total
(a) In connection with future operations.—Reconnaissance of beaches and
airstrips and deception raids
10
(b) Attacks on enemy coastal objectives
(c) Operations for clandestine organisations.—Landing or picking up of agents-
landing of stores
Sumatra (" Frippery"),
Under the first category, bach recomises for a Dagescald lading we made dene)
(" Baboon" and " Copyright") and Malaya (" Confidence ")
These operations, with the exception of "Copyright," in which one officer and two other ranks from
R.M. Detachment 385, together with the senior R.E./C.O.P.P. officer and an attached R.A.F, officer
took part, were all carried out by C.O.P.P.s.
to the area of the operation and the tasks themselves were carried out we ca uses.
In all cases, submarines were used to transport the party
The most interesting of these operations was " Confidence," partly because of the difficulties which
Were encounterps over the Morib bet bick
vere encountered in the operation itself and partly because the information was later used in the
The object of this operation was to carry out a reconnaissanc
st three ber a large-scale landing.
of three beaches in the area of Port Dickson and the approaches to them in order
to ascertain their
C.O.P.P. 3 was chosen for the operation and H.M. Submarine Seadog
was allotted for the passage to and from the area.
On the night 9th/10th June, a reconnaissance of one of the Morib beaches was carried out.
canoes, carrying eight all ranks, were launched from the submarine for this task.
It was discovered by
he leader of the party at the time the canoes were due to return to the submarine, that two of them were
missing.
They had failed to rendezvous with the " link" canoe which was fitted with " Bongle" for
homing to the submarine.
On return to the submarine it was also found that they had not homed direct
to her, by means of their R.G. equipment.
Before the S./C.O.P.P. returned to the submarine a thorough
Bathe case are ten the no a to aman even of the ta or day got on the , . .
neither case was there any sign of the missing canoes.
and C.O. of the sume any secided to camel the remainder of the reconnaissances and to return to the base.
