was then 1 lb. five days a week.
This was changed in August, 1943, to
14-oz., seven days a week, an increase of 3,500 lb. a day.
This necessitated
11 bakers and three issuers being added to the establishment. It was planned
that in the event of a siege the bakeries should continue to produce bread
as long as possible, and sufficient reserves were held to provide an issue
of bread for the whole siege population every third day, biscuits being
available for the remaining days.
Transport
The local M.T. company, R.A.S.C., at the outbreak of war consisted of
These proved inadequate to meet the increased requirement of
war conditions, and during 1940 50 additional lorries were added to the
unit. 20 cars evacuated with the R.A.S.C. detachment from Marseilles were
a useful windfall.
The garrison increased rapidly between June, 1940, and January, 1941,
to three times its original size.
R.A.S.C. establishments did not keep pace,
which resulted in the unsatisfactory expedient of attaching personnel from
other arms to both the supply and transport esablishments to eke out the
inadequate and consequently overstrained R.A.S.C. personnel.
over 50 attached infantry drivers, the company had vehicles off the road for
The embodied M.T. section of the Gibraltar Defence Force
was supposed to produce 67 other ranks, but this was never realized.
officers and 11 other ranks, R.A.S.C., were added to the establishment of
the company in May, 1941.
Two Independent Transport Platoons, R.A.S.C., were sent out to take
part in the construction of the airstrip, and were controlled and administered
by the R.E. until June, 1944, when they were attached to the local R.A.S.C.
company.
Recreational Transport
Gibraltar was told in December, 1943, that recreational transport con-
cessions for military personnel stationed in the Fortress must be brought
within the general conditions applicable to troops in the United Kingdom.
An application for special concessions for Gibraltar was made in October,
1944, but these were considered by the War Office to be covered by the
increased delegation of powers to commanders overseas.
Pack Transport
In July, 1941, the first steps were taken to form a pack transport com-
pany in the Fortress, consisting of one officer, 44
It was intended to meet operational requirements in siege
ferred to North Africa (q.v.).
Becoming surplus to requirements in June, 1943, it was trans-
The Ministry of Food objected to hay being sent from the United King-
dom to Gibraltar for the animal transport, as the supply in the country was
inadequate for its own needs.
The M.O.W.T. could not provide shipping to
convey hay from Canada, and Gibraltar was, therefore, told to buy locally.
If this proved too expensive or was impossible, demands were met from
North Africa, or by direct shipment from the United Kingdom.
Water Transport
Before the war, there were only four vessels on the strength of the
W.D. Fleet at Gibraltar.
On the outbreak of war, the necessity for main-
taining an isolated defence detachment made it necessary to add a civilian
It was difficult to obtain civilian crews, and this led to
the employment of soldiers from other arms, who volunteered for the duty and
were ultimately transferred to the R.A.S.C. and remustered in their proper
There were two water transport services peculiar to the command, i.e.,
the provision and operation of craft on anti-sabotage patrols inshore, which
was carried out by half a dozen requisitioned vessels manned by an indepen-
dent company; and deep-sea dumping of ammunition.
There were difficulties in maintaining the vessels of the independent
The water transport services at Gibraltar were increasing in the
latter part of 1943, owing to the opening of the Mediterranean; and, al-
though the number of vessels was sufficient to meet general requirements,
provision of further vessels was necessary.
To maintain the service
satisfactorily, vessels were being employed on a continuous basis and for
unusually long hours, to the detriment of general maintenance.
In view of all these factors, certain reforms were initiated, and in due
course implemented with good results:
(a) The establishment of a water transport company with proper accom-
(b) Proper maintenance arrangements, including the use of a slipway.
(c) The despatch of military
personnel from the United
Kingdom to
make the unit up to the requisite strength.
Barrack Services
The barrack services continued to operate during the war in accordance
with the normal peace-time organization.
Before the war, direct supplies of coal for the garrison were arranged
as necessary by the War Office.
Throughout the war, however, military re-
quirements were obtained from Royal Navy stocks, as this saved shipping
by permitting co-ordinated demands for naval and military coal.
Petroleum, Oils and Lubricants
The joint War Office and Air Ministry Mission which went to
in February, 1939, to examine the question of bulk storage
products, also visited Gibraltar.
The position there presented no great prob-
lem, and simple and practical recommendations, made and accepted on the
spot, served the Fortress successfully throughout the war.
All imports came through the Naval Stores Officer, who was Fuel Con-
troller for the Colony, and the R.A.S.C. drew from naval stocks.
SECTION 5.-WEST AFRICA
Introductory
In any consideration of supply and transport duties in, or
with, West Africa, certain special features have to be borne in
they greatly affect organization and administration.
no due in in conne ad
423
