attention of that corps, with a view to bringing it into service.
Supply by
air was, up to 1945, the latest innovation in this line, and eventually became
a recosnized means of maintenance, and the responsibility from the Army
point of view, of the R.A.S.C.
The Army was however slow to take advantage of the tremendous
possibilities opened up by the development of Air Transport; or perhaps
it would be more correct to say that the Army had to deny itself the use of
this new form of transport while the whole resources of the aircraft industry
were directed to the production of bomber and fighter types. It is not within
the scope of this work to attempt to assess the relative values of the difierent
types of air activity; but it is relevant to record an authoritative opinion, that
of the head of the supply and transport services on the spot, that it was
probably no exaggeration to say that the history of the Western Deser
Campaign would have been far different had the R.A.S.C. been able to use
an adequate air transport fleet at the time of the first advance to Benghazi in
Characteristics of Air Transport
During the war of 1939-1945, a transport aircraft only carried about the
same load as a 3-ton lorry, but the combined factors of speed, range, and
immunity from difficulties of broken country might enable a dozen aircraft
to deliver supplies at the same rate as a whole general transport company.
Apart from the consideration of traffic congestion on
vulnerability, this would represent a substantial saving in manpower.
The carriage of stores by air may be necessary either as a substitute for,
or to supplement, land and sea transport.
It may be needed also to increase
the freedom of manoeuvre of land forces.
It may be used when operational
needs dictate that stores be delivered quickly; when the land or sea lines
of communication are not yet established, e.g., in the case of airborne,
airtransported, or sea-borne, troops; when the mobility of land forces would
be impeded if supplied by land and sea transport; when defence of the land L.
of C. is impossible or undesirable, e.g., in the case of Long Range Penetration
Groups; or when the land or sea L. of C. are cut or reduced in capacity.
To meet these requirements, stores might be airlanded by aircraft of
gliders, or dropped with or without parachute.
The dropping method was
slower and more expensive in equipment, and stores were therefore airlanded
whenever possible.
Definition of Supply and Maintenance by Air
The duties involved in the operation of supply and maintenance by ait
were defined as follows.
(See also Chapter VIII.)
"Supply by air" was the term used to cover carriage by air of stores
from a main base to an advanced or forward base, or from an advanced bag
to a forward base. Stores were airlanded at a delivery airfield in the advance
" Maintenance by air" was the termtiessed to cover the carriage of al
commodities required by a formation to enable it to fight.
This might include
the carriage forward of reinforcements, and the evacuation of casualties,
material, and selected prisoners of war. In this case, stores might be air-
landed at forward delivery airfields or glider landing zones, or dropped on
dropping zones near the formation to be maintained.
Development of the System
The system outlined above was not, of course, a matter of sudden invention,
but of gradual evolution.
Maintenance by air may be said to have begun, as
far as the war of 1939-1945 was concerned, with the flying over of food to the
Advanced Air Striking Force in France in September, 1939, and the next
example was the attempt to get food to the B.E.F. in May, 1940 (as described
in Chapter IV). But these were spasmodic efforts, and no special technique
was evolved. As the war went on, air transport made much progress, and
maintenance by air came to be regarded as a normal substitute for land
Gradually, a technique of maintenance was evolved, but the
organization required, and the division of responsibility between the various
Services concerned, were not clearly established until the whole matter was
reviewed by an Inter-Departmental Committee in September, 1943.
It was then decided that the R.A.S.C. should be responsible for duties in
aircraft in connection with freight, when this was necessary; for packing
stores and containers, panniers, etc.; and for the loading of aircraft, under the
direction of Movement Control in the case of bulk movement of stores from
the United Kingdom to an overseas theatre, and under the direction of
C.R.A.S.C. in the case of detail movement of stores for the maintenance of a
formation.
This left to Movement Control the responsibility for calling for-
ward bulk stores to base airfields, and for allotment of priorities in the case of
general freight movement.
The piloting of transport aircraft, and the general
management of airfields, were recognized as the responsibility of the R.A.F.
Task of the R.A.S.C.
The responsibilities of the R.A.S.C. involved the performance of the
following tasks: —
(a) The provision of terminal organizations for transport from depots,
receipt, sorting, and packing of stores for air transit;
(b) the transport of stores from the packing area to loading point on the
airfield;
(c) the loading of aircraft for dropping or airlanding;
(d) the provision of despatching crews, to travel in the aircraft when
supplies were to be dropped, except when bomb-cell containers were
(e) the marking of dropping zones and glider landing zones, and the
receipt, unloading, and distribution of stores transported by air; and
parachutes and panniers, and their preparation for
return to supply loading airfields.
While some of these duties were normal supply duties, others were a
departure from R.A.S.C. routine, for which thorough training was necessary.
The R.A.S.C. personnel responsible for stowage of the cargo in an aircraft
had to know where the load could be stowed, and where it could not, and
which were the strong points of the structure to which the load must be
(37452)
W97797/17
WO 277/21.
27
W0277726
