Civil Food Reserves
While War Office was not, of course, primarily responsible for the feeding
of civilians in overseas commands, it readily offered assistance in cases
where difficulties were encountered, either by the civilian authorities overseas
or by the Colonial Office in the United Kingdom, in maintaining the civilian
ration and food reserves.
It was the practice throughout the war for the
Colonial Office to keep the War Office informed as to the level of reserves,
and the supply situation generally affecting the civil authorities overseas.
As far as West Africa was concerned, problems were continually arising
on the maintenance of civilian reserves by the Colonial Office.
Although
the target was a 90-day reserve, this was not always kept up, and some
anxiety was felt when there was a possibility of French retaliation against
Sierra Leone and the Gambia for the Allied operations in North Africa.
The Resident Minister asked for additional shipping to restore the situation,
but, in fact, it was not this that was the crux of the matter, but the inadequate
discharge capacity at Freetown and Bathurst. It seemed as if the Admiralty,
the War Office, or the Colonial Office would have to forego shipping
space or a port of discharge, and that priorities would have to be re-
adjusted in favour of civil food.
No settlement was really reached, though
the menace receded before the situation became dangerous.
The normal
import programme covered requirements for current consumption.
A particular feature of the difficulty was the requirement for employees
of the contractors engaged in building airfields to draw rations and buy from
N.A.A.F.I.
much wider consequences.
The number was only 150, but the precedent might have had
In view of the urgency for the completion of
the airfields, however, the War Office felt obliged to agree.
Military Reserves
Early in 1942, instructions regarding the reserves to be maintained in
West Africa were issued by the War Office.
They stressed that it was
absolutely essential that the full G.S. reserve was maintained in all four
To assist in this, the following arrangements were instituted.
working margin should be kept up to 60 days maximum, over and above
the G.S. reserve of 90 days.
The G.S. reserve was later raised to 120 days.
Hitherto the working margin had only been
To avoid inter-
colonial transhipment, direct shipment to each colony from South Africa
should be asked for.
In order to avoid a breakdown of supplies, West
Africa should give South Africa an estimate of six months' requirements,
asking if the quantities required would be available.
Reserve Level Reviewed
The reserves to be held in the command were reviewed in January, 1945,
and S.T.6 resisted any reduction, on the grounds that there had been failures
in local supply which had necessitated protracted work in finding alternative
means of provision.
The additional time taken on this,
added to the six
weeks period between ships, brought the demand period to well over 60
allowed to fall.
days, which was the lowest level to which the command reserve was ever
Further, even if the level of reserves
90 days, there would be no appreciable saving in manpower.
were reduced to
mand reserve was therefore retained at 120 days.
' 'The com
428
Later in 1945, the command reported that, owing to frequent unreliable
delivery of supplies from South Africa, and also to the late cancellation of
demands, it was impossible to maintain reserves, and even issues of items
in the ration scale.
The trouble affected Gambia and Sierra Leone parti-
cularly, as their consignments were transhipped at
resulting in several weeks' delay due to inter-colonial shipping difficulties.
was, therefore, proposed that demands should be placed on War Office, where
knowledge of the shipping situation and direct communication with South
Africa should enable difficulties, which could not be dealt with in the com-
mand, to be adjusted and overcome.
Shipments from U.S.A.
The policy of shipping supplies direct to West Africa from the U.S.A.,
when originally considered, was rejected, for the following reasons.
colonies, although when taken collectively they might représent a
substantial tonnage, became, when split up into four parcels, too small for
the British Food Mission in Washington to handle.
Most of the American
shipping only went to Freetown, and consignments would have to be trans-
shipped there for the other colonies.
Coastwise shipping was often not
available, and in any case unreliable.
Finally, the American shipping line
running to Freetown had curtailed their service drastically, as their ships were
held there for very long periods awaiting discharge, owing to congestion at
Extensive warehousing schemes were in progress in the U.S.A., however,
which would enable the Food Mission to make small shipments.
regarding shipments could now be reconsidered, and direct shipments began
in the autumn of 1942.
Local Resources
In 1943, War Office agreed that overseas commands should make the
possible use of local products, but that
channelled through War Office.
demands should be
At the same time, it was laid down that
commands should always refer to War Office for consideration of the possi-
bility of securing an alternative source of supply in any case where the price
of a locally produced item was considered excessive.
West Africa made considerable local purchases throughout the
resulting in considerable saving of shipping space.
adopted, and experiments made, to develop supply from local resources, are
A bacon factory was established in Gold Coast, which produced the total
requirements of the colony.
this commodity has a bad reputation in tropical climates.
This was a rather remarkable achievement, as
has shown that, provided it is properly handled under supervision, it can be a
perfectly safe article of diet, and a welcome variation from the tinned product.
The curing process rendered bacon safe for consumption, but sausage meat
was doubtful, and had to be consumed on the day of issue.
Jams were manufactured from various local fruits (banana, paw-paw and
ginger, pineapple, solanberry, and guava), and samples were sent for examina-
War Department analyst.
He considered the banana
429
