These rations had been issued to units, beginning in April, either in their
normal stations of in the concentration area, and the issue was now practi
cally complete.
Issue was made through C.S.Ds., which drew on their parent
M.S.Ds., specially stocked for the commitment.
In addition, nearly 35,000 Compo rations, plus rum, tea, sugar, and milk,
had been pre-loaded in the transport of three titish and three Canadian
had try Divisions, and of 1 and 30 Corps, for landing on D-day; and a
Further 85,000 Compo rations, plus self-heating soup, and tea, sugar, and milk,
turd been pre-loaded in transport of 8 and 12 Corps for issue in the assembly
areas overseas about D + 8.
(b) Marshalling Area, including the marshalling area staff.—Here the F.S.
(U.K.) scale only would be issued.
The feeding of the field force troops was
to be carried out on a " hotel" system in the transit camps; i.e., all meals were
to be provided under static arrangements, and units had no responsibility in
regard to messing.
The organization of these messing arrangements was the
responsibility of the Catering Branch, and details of the organization are
contained in Appendix XIB.
All troops were to be issued in the marshalling area with landing rations
for 48 hours, and with a bag ration.
The landing ration comprised the
following : -
(i) Two 24-hour rations (one assault, one normal).
(ii) One tin of 20 cigarettes, one water-sterilizing outfit.
(iii) One emergency ration.
(iv) One Tommy-cooker, complete with six hexamine tablets, and six
refill tablets.
The bag ration, consisting of 6-oz. of sweet service biscuits, and two
2-oz. bars of eating chocolate, was for consumption in, or on the way to, the
embarkation area.
It also included a packet of chewing gum, as a remedy for
sea-sickness.
At the special request of the C.-in-C., 21 Army Group, troops
landing on D-day, D + 1 and D +2, were to be issued also with one 12-0z tin
of preserved meat.
and pack rations was complete, and each command had enough on the ground
By 26th May, the distribution in bulk to commands of landing rations
to meet the total requirements of all troops passing through their areas.
would he hnt tea and four Garibaldi biscuits each man, with an additional issue
(c) Embarkation Areas.- In these areas, the normal issue to force trops
if troops were delaved in the areas of 4-07 hread or 3-0z. service biscuit,
2-oz. cheese in tins, four additional Garibaldi biscuits, and two 2-oz. bars of
chocolate.
The pravicion of the hot tag wac the recronsibility of the Catering
Branch (see Appendix XIB).
Embarkation areas held a reserve of all items normally required for issue
either in marshalling or embarkation areas.
To carry out the work of placing rations on craft and ships, for the ration
ing of which the Army was resnonsible. an S.T. embarkation organization was
set up in each command, staffed by personnel lent by non-mounting com-
mands, stiffened by the personnel from the R.A.S.C. port services, and trained
in embarkation supply duties.
320
Victualling of Ships and Crait
The Army was responsible for
indicated below, all other vessels being the responsibility
placing rations on ships and craft as
M.O.W.T. These rations were known as the Locker Pack.
of the R.N. or
(a) Sea passage, and ships' reserve, rations: —
Landing ships (infantry) wearing the Red Ensign; personnel ships:
M.T. ships; M.T. coasters; and stores coasters.
(b) Sea passage ration only: —Landing craft.
The sea passage ration, for eating during the voyage, consisted of Compo,
type "F" (that requiring the least cooking, i.e., only hot water for tea, and
self-heating soup, plus self-heating cocoa for assault troops only.
Two days'
sea passage ration were loaded, except in the Thames area,
were necessary owing to the longer passage.
where three days
The ships' reserve ration was purely in case of breakdown, damage by
enemy action, or unforeseen delay at sea, and consisted of two days' rations
of preserved meat, biscuit, tea, sugar and milk, jam, and chocolate.
Some vessels were to be pre-loaded with personnel from D - 4 onwards.
To maintain them on board for this period, and to provide for a possible
postponement of D-day,
extra sea passage ratidns were loaded up to a
maximum of eight days.
Where cooking or heating facilities were available
in such caser.
Compo packs other than type
"F" were loaded to give
variety in the diet, and arrangements were made to supply fresh bread in
addition to the biscuit in the Compo ration.
This was to be done either by a
daily delivery of freshly baked bread or by initial provision of the total
required baked with bread preservative incorporated, which would keep loaves
fit for consumption for at least 14 days.
L.S.Ts. earmarked for the evacuation of enemy prisoners of war had
preserved meat, tea, sugar, and milk put on board for them, but the victualing
of the escorts was a R.N. responsibility.
Miscellaneous Supply Arrangements
R.A.F. personnel travelling by sea were to pass through the normal move-
ment machine, and to be issued with rations, etc., as for Army personnel.
The same rule applied to the National Fire Service personnel forming the four
columns concentrated to thire-fighting overseas in case of emergency.
A.F.V. rations were made available for issue with replacement A.F.Vs.
24-hour rations were held as a reserve for air/sea rescue launches, and
2-man A.F.V. packs were issued for use by R.A.F, salvage units when away
from their billets and unable to cubsist with thair normal ration cards, and
also for conductina parties for special survey stores.
The replenishment of ambulance trains in the United Kingdom receiving
and distributine sacualtian foam the satisant wad the rachancibility of certain
R.A.M.C. depots in the South-Eastern counties.
These drew fresh com-
modities from as De non-perishable supplies being issued al
rationed by the Army; Home ambulance trains carried six days' reserve of
Both military and civil emergency medical staffs were
hospital supplies for tients and come had a supplementary reserve or
321
wester+
-7
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
