easily outweighed the disadvantages and it wad hold in insulat proposition to
make a
' milk round" delivery of hot cooked food in insulators to perhaps
eight or nine detachments spread over a wide area.
After the break through, and during the advance to Antwerp, it was a
question of getting the men fed rather than how well they were fed.
Cooks
quested continuously; afterwards, a re-action set in and it was necessary to
take action to get back to former standards.
This entailed frequent visits to
takes by Catering Advisers, who had to be with the troops at all times, as it
was only by studying the problems at first hand that they were able to assist
units to attain a high standard of messing.
Airborne Troops
A Catering Adviser was appointed to H.Q., Airborne Corps, but this
headquarters did not move into
the theatre, and, when the airborne troops
were actively engaged, control was assumed by a Corps Catering Adviser in
the Area.
The inclusion of a Catering Adviser in Airborne Divisions proved
its worth.
. In operations, he did his usual work, and, on return, sorted and
redistributed personnel, which was essential owing to the heavy casualties.
All A.C.C. personnel with Parachute Battalions were trained parachutists.
They became front-line soldiers on occasion, and at Arnhem, 22 were killed
and 31 missing.
Cooking Apparatus
When the whole force was being subsisted on the field service ration scale
it became necessary to improvise ovens.
The standard of improvisation was
high, proving that training had been on the right lines.
Improvisation was also rendered necessary as the result of the shortage
of hard fuels. It was inadvisable for units to rely entirely on their petrol
cookers, because the life of these,
if in constant use, was extremely limited.
Cooks were therefore encourased to do as much cooking as possible on
improvised equipment, in order to save the burners of the petrol cookers for
moves and emergencies.
The doe fuel in good supply was dery, and the
catering department consequently looked for the best way of using this for
cooking purposes.
An improvised burner, known as the "Trombone", was
introduced, and was soon in extensive use throughout the theatre.
Air Despatch
By the end of June, the R.A.S.C. air despatch organization in the United
Kinedom, set up for the purnose of handling the supply and maintenance
commitment for ground forces, was actively engaged in carrying out schedule
This was put into operation within a week of D-day, and thereafter
continued as a matter of daiye routine until the end of the war in Europe,
required the carriage of 20 or 30 tons daily of ordnance stores of every sort,
of blood plasma, and of airmail and newspapers.
When the Airborne Division was committed in France, the D.D.S.T., Air-
borne Forces, who was responsible for the supply of the formation.
for the assistance of the air despatch organization.
A H.Q., C.R.A.S.C. Air
Despatch, was therefore lent to Airborne Forces.
This brought the number
336
of Cs.R. A.S.C. concerned with Air Despatch up to three, and a H.O., Com-
mander,
Air Despatch Group,
R.A.S.C. units of the organization.
R.A.S.C., was formed to co-ordinate all
The pre-packed stores, held for the maintenance of the Airborne Divisions
and S.A.S. Brigade, were the responsibility of this group, and administered
through C.R.A.S.C., Air Despatch, but they were not amalgamated with the
stocks intended for the maintenance of ground forces.
If and when airborne
forces were committed to operations based on the United Kingdom, any
residue of the Airborne Divisional R.A.S.C, was to be placed under the
operational control of C.R.A.S.C., Air Despatch, to provide continuity
maintenance for their divisions, but was only to be used for the supply of
airborne formations.
Rear Maintenance Area
The plan prepared before
D-day was that when the bridgehead had
extended sufficiently far inland and operating troops moved beyond first line
transport reach of beach maintenance areas, a rear maintenance area would
be established farther inland, staffed by larger types of Base and Advanced
Base Depots.
These depots were to be fully stocked before operating forma-
tions were based on them for maintenance.
This plan was not put into effect, owing to the rate of extension of the
bridgehead being slower than had been anticipated, so that the ground selected
from the map for the location of the R.M.A. was still in enemy hands when
it became necessary to establish that area. In place of the planned R.M.A.,
therefore, two Army roadheads were set up, considerably closer to the beaches
than the projected R.M.A.
In these roadheads the larger depots were estab-
lished, and their stocking was carried out as originally planned.
The organi-
zation of Army roadheads is described below.
When these two roadheads had been functioning for some time, they were
taken over by Army Group, and jointly considered as, and named, the Rear
Maintenance Area, although continuing to be operated separately, and known
as R.M.A. East and R.M.A. West respectively.
The arrangement for the
supply, transport, and P.O.L. services in each part were similar, and was on
the following lines.
A C.R.A.S.C., Supply Units, had under him the following units:
Eight B.S.Ds.; eight D.I.Ds:; two Field Bakeries; eleven Mobile Field
Bakeries; and two Field Butcheries.
The B.S.Ds. had a target holding of
about 10,000 tons each, and none of them was required to receive and issue
at the same time. This was possible owing to the relatively large number of
units of this type which were available.
true misture of the oneration of peDe was presented. for example, these
In consequence, it is doubtful if a
Units would Marmally have had to errect to receive and issue concurrently
Two of the DiD. have had tal and fresh vegetables
respectively,
remainder being attached to B.S.Ds. to assist in sorting and recovery work
Similarly, a CRA SC Petrol Installations was allocated to commanc
the R. A.S.C. P.O.L. units in R.M.A.
These included, for each part of the
R.M.A., three Petrol Depots,
Type "C"
Type
"A",
seven
Type
" B ",
, with six Mobile Petrol Filling Centres.
337
V0294
12 7
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
