In 21 Army Group, B.S.Ds, were located as far forward as Army road.
heads.
The term "Type " B"" was deleted from the tile of the unit at the end
of 1943 as this was then the only type in use; but type "A" depots wer
introduced for employment with South East Asia
Command, having the
addition of a butchery section.
In this connection, and in regard to the re-
organization of base and L. of C. supply units for the war in the Far East,
see Chapter XI.)
The appointment of Base Provision Officer was introduced in the early
part of 1940 as the result of experience gained in France.
The function of
this officer was to control a group of base supply depots, together with the
requisite field bakeries and field butcheries and cold storage depots.
was responsible, as far as the B.S.Ds. were concerned, for their technical co.
ordination, stock supervision, and policy-holding maintenance, and for the
control of inward and outward movement at each depot.
An analyst was
included in the establishment for the purpose of advising units under the
B.P.O's. administration on matters arising out of his technical inspections, or
raised by the units themselves, e.g., in regard to the quality of supplies
received.
When Field Force War Establishments were standardized at the end of
1943, Base Provision Officer (Supplies) was reorganized as a Headquarters,
C.R.A.S.C., supply units, and the C.R.A.S.C. was given command of the
subordinate units as a function additional to technical control.
Field Bakeries
Two important developments in regard to bread production in the field
took place in 1940.
The first was the practical trial of a mobile field bakery.
The idea for this had originated with the then Inspector of the R.A.S.C. before
the war, and he had persuaded a firm of bakery equipment manufacturers to
produce prototypes of a mobile field bakery oven and machinery trailers.
With these as a basis, an experimental unit was formed.
Trials were successful,
and the first mobile field bakery was formed in December, 1940.
By the end
of the month, it was producing its full 21,000 lb. of bread daily, and it con•
tinued to exist throughout the war as a training unit for all subsequent mobile
field bakeries, and as a producer of bread.
The U.S. Army was so impressed
with the equipment of our mobile field bakeries that they adopted it in sub-
stitution of their own, as described in Chapter XII.
The other development was the reorganization of the six original large
field bakeries into a number of small units more suitable for modern needs
The new units were called field bakeries, type " A",
and were designed to
operate 16 mark II ovens, and to produce 30,000 lb. of bread daily.
Each
was capable of sub-division into four sections or eight sub-sections, all able
to work independently.
This, of course, gave much increased flexibility d
location and employment. At the end of 1941, a number of these units wet
reoranited de bald hateries milal for reasons explained in Chanter XII.
The establishments of the mobile field bakeries were later revised, by thi
being raised from a two-shift to a three-shift basis. which increased norn.
capacity to 30,000 lb.
Although the combination of technical and regiment.
was refused.
responsibilities thus brought about, was excessive for one officer. a secon
"The new organization was not annlied to units at home.
Experience in 21 Army Group proved that the maximum production of
a mobile bakery over a limited period was 35,000 lb. daily, and that of a bakery,
type " A", was 45,000 lb.
Output per man was, for the former, 473 lb., and
for the latter 337 lb.
There was thus
considerable saving
in the mobile
bakery, and it had other advantages over the more static type.
An experienced
mobile bakery could produce 20,000 lb. of bread for issue 24 hours after
arriving at a new site, whereas a field bakery required three days as a minimum
for the same operation.
The mobile bakery could move 12 hours after pro-
duction ceased, the field bakery took 24 hours.
The mobile unit only needed
four 6-ton lorries to move it, and eight to make it fully mobile, whereas the
field bakery required 30 3-ton.
The mobile bakery required •6 gallon of Derv
per 100 lb. of bread produced, compared with i5 lb. of coke for the field
bakery; there was thus greater ease in supply of fuel to the former, and an
economy in transport for fuel.
Field bakeries (mobile) were re-organized, as field bakery companies and
platoons, for the war in the Far East (see Chapter X).
Special Ration Packs
In consequence of the difficulty experienced in issuing the full field service
ration scale in France in the early days in 1939, it became evident that a more
limited and more easily handled form of ration was necessary in the opening
stages of a campaign, than was provided by the full field service scale in bulk,
with all its numerous commodities and alternatives.
A composite ration pack
was therefore devised, and soon proved its value.
It was the forerunner of
a long series of special ration packs, designed to meet various requirements.
These packs were simply the collection in one package of a fixed number of
complete rations on a specially designed scale.
Their provision was essential
to provide adequate and varied rations in conveniently sized packs for special
operations, e.g., assault landings, jungle patrols, and long-range penetrations,
etc.; to facilitate rapid distribution during the first phases of operations; to
save shipping space which would otherwise be required for transporting bakery
equipment, cold storage plants, frozen meat, etc,; to ensure that the troops had
food available in the most convenient form during periods when normal
feeding and cooking on a unit basis were operationally impracticable; and to
ensure that the weight of rations carried, either on the man or in unit transport,
was reduced to an absolute minimum consistent with fighting efficiency.
In designing such packs, S.T.6 and the Army dietetic experts were bound
by certain essential limitations, both in size and weight.
This called for much
ingenuity in order to devise a ration which had the maximum calorific value,
contained an adequate variety of palatable foodstuffs, and required the mini-
mum amount of preparation before it could be eaten.
A restricting factor of great importance was the necessity for the fullest
economy in the use of tinplate and other types of packing material.
As far
as the food was concerned, the W.D. laboratories were continually experiment-
ing with new types of concentrated and canned foodstuffs, and successful
products were incorporated as soon as they could be.
In view of the restric-
tions, it can fairly be claimed that the special pack rations were the best that
could be produced, and were in every way ideal for their particular purposes;
they all stood the test of practical trials under field conditions.
Indeed, in
53
WO 277/21
27
WO 27726-
