moment, the latter became closely associated with the military side of the planning and attended
the principal meetings of the planners.
When Canadian troops were chosen to carry out the raid,
and his representatives became associated with the planning.
the designate utenant diner A mYD. G: Crera, Ist Ist Canadie asSociated conche Canadian
arrangements with C.O.H.Q.
Two plans were produced. The first, sponsored by C.O.H.Q. Planners, was to make no frontal
assault, but to land two battalions at Puits and two at Pourville keeping two battalions as a
floating reserve, while a seventh battalion was to land with a battalion of tanks at Quiberville.
The second plan, sponsored by the Home Forces Planners, was that Dieppe should be assaulted
by a frontal attack delivered against the beaches of the town itself and supported by two flank
attacks, one at Puits, one and three-quarter miles to the East of Dieppe, and the other at Pourville,
one and a half miles to the West.
Simultaneously, or shortly before, parachute and glider-borne
troops were to capture two heavy batteries of coast defence guns, one of which was situated near the
village of Berneval, some six miles to the East, and the other near Varengeville-sur-Mer, some
three and a half miles to the West.
On 18th April, 1942, a meeting took place with the Vice-Chief of Combined Operations
(Major-General j. C. Haydon) in the Chair.
It was attended by the Deputy-Chief of the General
Staff (Major-General Gregson Ellis and Brigadier-General Staff (Plans), Home Forces (Brigadier
McNabb) and by the G.O.C., Airborne Division (Major-General F. Browning).
The pros and cons
of the various points of landing were discussed and the conclusion was reached that a frontal assault
would have to be included in the plan.
It was considered that this assault should be made only
after the two flank attacks had been successfully made in darkness against the two heavy batteries.
The frontal attack was to be preceded by heavy air bombardment.
conclusions are discussed in more detail below.
The naval opinion was that, although a frontal
attack was hazardous, it was perfectly feasible so far as the Navy was concerned. C.C.O. personally
expressed his dislike of the frontal assault but was prepared to let Home Forces decide.
On 25th April, the first formal meeting was held to consider the plans for the operation with
the C.C.O. in the Chair. The Deputy-Chief of the General Staff, Home Forces, attended and the
question of a frontal assault was discussed.
The army representatives explained the reasons which led them to favour this form of assault.
In the first place, to land any forces as far West as Quiberville would make a surprise attack on
Dieppe more difficult to achieve. In the second place, tanks landed on that beach would have to
cross two rivers which might prove to be formidable obstacles.
In these circumstances, the bridges
over them would have to be seized at a very early stage in order to make sure that they were not
demolished by the enemy. Thirdly, all available intelligence at that time showed that Dieppe was
lightly held by a single low-category battalion supported by about ten A.A. guns, three or four light
anti-aircraft guns, one four-gun dual-purpose battery and four coast defence batteries. Furthermore,
the troops in Dieppe, numbering, it was thought, not more than 1,400 in all, could not be strongly
reinforced for some time. It was considered that after five hours, the total number of reinforcements
which could reach them would not exceed 2,500 men; only from the eighth hour of the attack
onwards might important reserves begin to arrive, mainly from Rouen and from the East.
at the end of fifteen hours, the maximum number of enemy troops which might, in the most
favourable circumstances, be brought into action, would be in the neighbourhood of 6,500 men.
Despite these considerations, the naval Planners still expressed doubt about the frontal
assault, but not on naval grounds. The C.C.O. supported the naval Planners and only yielded after
pressure from the Home Forces representatives. It was again emphasised that the frontal assault
cal he free dover a bom. This bok or then to be of more tim inters cy and t the
thought that the defence would be too confused by it, and by subsequent attacks from low-flying
aircraft, to be in a position to offer stout or prolonged resistance.
The bombing was to be carried
out both from high and low level, the high-altitude attack being made against the sea front and beach
The question of fighter cover and air support for the land forces was debated at some
length for it was realised that support from the air would be of paramount importance.
The plan, which included a frontal assault, preceded by bombing, was then adopted.
nt th May, 1942, the outline plan for the operation was submitted to the Chiefs of Stafi
Committee and on 13th May, that Committee approved the plan as the basis for the detailed planning
which was to be carried out by the Force Commanders.
The proposal of the C.-in-C., Home
Forces, that the troops to be used should come trom the Canadian poses was approved, and the
Military and Air Force Commanders were appointed.
Army, and Air Vice-Marshal Leigh Mallory, R.A.F.
They were Major-General Roberts, Canadian
command of Rear-Admiral H. T. Billie Grohman who was, at that time, on his way home from
The naval forces were to be under the
Alexandria, where he had been in charge of combined operations activitine,
In forwarding the Outline Plan to the Chiefs of Staff on 9th May, the C.C.O. made the following
remarks :—
" (1) I forward herewith the outline plan for a raid on Dieppe to be carried out during the
latter part of June.
(2) This operation will be of great value as training for Operation " Sledgehammer" or any
other major operations as far as the actual assault is concerned.
throw light on the maintenance problem over beaches.
It will not, however,
(3) The plan has been drawn up in consultation with the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief,
South-Eastern Command, who concurs in it. I ask the approval of the Chiefs of Staff: -
(i) For the outline plan.
(ii) For permission to assemble and train the requisite forces.
(i) For the appointment of Force Commanders and their staffs to date 12th May,
The Chiefs of Staff gave their approval.
Proposed Air Attack on Dieppe gets Cabinet Approval
On 19th May, 1942, a minute was sent to the Prime Minister pointing out that, under the present
Cabinet ruling, targets in occupied France could only be bombed when weather conditions were
such that accurate attack could be expected and that this restriction had already proved a handicap
The example of the attack on St. Nazaire on 28th March was quoted.
On that occasion, aircraft of Bomber Command arrived over the town and woke up the defences,
but were debarred by their orders from creating the diversion, which was an important part of the
plan, because low cloud conditions prevented them from seeing the dock area which was their
The memorandum went on to explain that such conditions might recur and, therefore,
the Chiefs of Staff hoped that the Cabinet ruling might be relaxed in so far as combined operations
were concerned. On ist June, the Chiefs of Staff were informed that the Prime Minister was still
opposed to the indiscriminate bombing of French towns at night, but that an exception would
be made in the case of a coastal raid.
On 5th June, an important change in the plans was made. At a meeting attended by the Force
Commanders, representatives from
C.O.H.O. and Lieut.-General Montgomery,
South-Eastern epresent, wes took the Chai, it was ice-Caband Mohe mi, a ChieVe
bombing of Dieppe.
The Air Force Commander was of the opinion that the bombing of the
port itself during the night of the assault would not be the most profitable way of using bombers
and might only result in putting the enemy on the alert. In the view of the Military Commander,
the destruction of large numbers of houses and the setting on fire of a considerable portion of the
town would prevent tanks operating in streets choked with debris.
High-level bombing was therefore
abandoned in favour of diversionary air attacks.
Intention and Plan
The intention of the operation, as given to the Force Commanders in the outline plan, was as
" A force of Infantry, Airborne troops and Armoured Fighting
vehicles will land in
the area of Dieppe to seize the towe wild then tee bank.
This will be held during daylight while
the tasks are carried out.
The operation will be supported
by fighter aircraft and bomber action."
Briefly the plan adopted by the Force Commanders consisted of flank attacks by parachute
troops on the batteries to the East and West of the harbour entrance and, 30 minutes after these
attacks, a frontal assault on the port by the main body.
The withdrawal was to take place on a rising tide just before dark and the naval craft required
for the withdrawal were to remain in the vicinity of the port until required and then make their
own way back.
WO 277/21
27
30
