The new organization was in due course adopted by the Dominion, Indian,
and Colonial Army Service Corps.
It proved adaptable to all types of opera-
tions, and enabled a much more flexible and economical use of transport.
The establishments of the standard components underwent little modifica-
tion in the light of practical experience.
It was necessary to vary the number
of vehicles in a transport platoon only in exceptional cases.
The number of
different workshop serials was later reduced from 11 to five.
The task of forming a new type of unit was enormously simplified, as it
was now only necessary to decide how many of each type of standard com-
ponent it should include, instead of having to draw up a complete new war
establishment.
The number of types of unit was reduced from 53 to seven.
The new organization was also applied, in a rather more flexible form, to the
Command (Mixed) Transport Companies, formed to carry out static admini-
strative transport services in the United Kingdom. (See Chapter XII, Sec.
tion 2.)
Principles of Use of R.A.S.C. Transport
The principles which were to govern the method of handling R.A.S.C.
transport units after the reorganization were laid down in the following terms.
In companies allotted to formations for second line duties, the vehicles
were to be regarded as a pool of transport, to be used in the most flexible
manner possible to meet the specific commodity duties for which they were
allotted.
As a general rule, in Infantry Divisions at home and in theatres of war
other than Middle East, the second line R.A.S.C. systems of supply would
continue to be organized on the basis of single commodity companies; i.e.,
there would be divisional ammunition companies, divisional petrol companies,
and divisional supply companies.
For infantry divisions in Middle East, for all armoured formations, and for
independent brigade groups, one R.A.S.C. company would be provided for
each brigade or equivalent group of units, to carry out supply, ammunition,
and petrol duties for the brigade or brigade group.
The organization was,
however, sufficiently flexible to allow of a change from the single commodity
system to the brigade group system, if circumstances required.
In place of the organization which had been in the past regarded as a
third line service, provided by corps ammunition parks, corps petrol parks,
and their equivalents in other formations, a pool of R.A.S.C. general trans-
port companies would be placed at the disposal of formation commanders,
who would be responsible that the reserves of ammunition, petrol, etc., hel
on wheels, were sufficient, and not more than sufficient, to cover all their
actual tactical requirements.
In this way, the tendency to lock up vehicles
under special loads for long periods would decrease, and the total availability
of load-carrying transport for general transport duties would be grealy
Interchange of duties between troop-carrying and general load-
Permanent variations in the hasic size or organization of units were not to
be allowed hut frimmondore micht use the fovibility mada mossible
by the interchangeability of components to make administments to meet
temporary requirements dictated by operational or administrative considera-
tions.
The New Organization in Practice
Under the new organization then, the divisional R.A.S.C., other than in
Middle East,
at first consisted of three companies, viz., an ammunition
company of four transport platoons, a petrol company of two
transport
platoons, and a supply company of three transport sons. me act, oving
to shortage of personnel, the ammunition companies at home never had
more than three platoons.
Certain fundamental changes in the method of operating the newly designed
units had to be accepted.
The outlook of the " Q" Staff, and of the C.R.A.S.C.
of a Division, and of the Os.C., Divisional R.A.S.C. Companies, had to be
that of operators of a pool of transport, to be used to the best advantage to
meet the needs of the moment.
The exact number of vehicles for each ton
carried for each sub-formation or unit was no longer the yardstick, but,
instead, each company commander had placed at his disposal the necessary
tonnage to carry out his task as a whole.
The divisional supply
company,
which replaced the former divisional
supply column, lost none of the latter's duties, but was no longer divided into
echelons, each with a separate entity.
This meant that the two echelons
had to be produced from three platoons, to deliver supplies to units on altern-
This involved the splitting of one platoon, a somewhat awkward
arrangement, which could, however, be made easier by more careful planning
On the other hand, the new unit had a lift of 12 tons
In the ammunition company, the four transport platoons enabled the hold-
ing of four equal reserves of all natures of divisional ammunition; but the
whole was intended to be regarded as a pool of ammunition-carrying trans-
port, rather than as so many lorries allotted to gun ammunition, so many to
Two officers and three N.C.Os. were added to the headquarters of a
C.R.A.S.C. of a division, to form the temporary H.Q. of a fourth company,
if it was desired to reorganize on a Group basis.
In the corps and L. of C. areas, this element of pooling assumed even
greater importance.
In the corps, for instance, it might be necessary at times
to use most of the available General Transport Companies for ammunition,
and at other times to switch them over to petrol.
Corps H.Q. had to be ready
to arrange for the custody and control of any loads dumped in consequence
of the company being switched from one duty to another.
In the employment of transport on a pool basis in this way, it is of course
most important me to lose sight of the necessity for ensuring that adequate
time is allowed for the personnel to rest, and for the maintenance of vehicles,
and that transport is not employed continuously on a succession of different
tasks.
Home or European Organization Revised
The result of experience of the new organization made it evident that
some revision was necessary, for two reasons: the desirability of having only
(37452)
F2
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
