Seaward end of " Spud Pier" showing flexible roadway.
Allied landings in Southern France.
WO 277/21
CHAPTER 21
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MATERIAL AND RESOURCES
OTHER THAN
SHIPS
AND CRAFT
Section (i)
Bridging the Water-Gap.
Section (i)
Mines, Beach Obstacles and their Clearance. Craft and Vehicle Recovery.
Section (in)
Miscellaneous Projects in Preparation for Operation " Overlord".
SECTION (i)
BRIDGING THE WATER-GAP
The Army Landing Problem
The provision of specialised ships and craft for amphibious operations gave rise to fresh problems
which had not previously arisen in connection with the development of Army equipment.
The Army (and the ground elements of the R.A.F.) had designed their equipment specifically
to suit the land battle and to be transportable by hitherto orthodox methods which included
facilities for assembly and organisation before being committed to battle.
The situation now demanded that they should emerge from the ships and craft on to a hostile
shore, where they would be confronted with an enemy ready to receive them in prepared defensive
positions.
Units must therefore arrive on the shore in tactically correct formations and with
their weapons and equipment prepared for immediate action.
Thus the requirements of large scale amphibious operations affected the modification of a
great mass of equipment to a greater or lesser degree. The extent to which C.O.H.O.
was responsible
for the initiation and direction of these developments varied with the nature of the equipment,
and also with the evolution of the C.O.H.Q. organisation.
Initially C.C.O. was charged with the direct responsibilty for the development of material
that would be needed for all kinds of landing operations but, at that time, the material resources
at his disposal, in the shape of the I.S.T.D.C., were quite inadequate for any systematic or com-
prehensive examination of the material aspects of combined operations.
This is borne out by the
nature of the organisation eventually set up to deal with material matters.
The Combined
Operations Experimental Establishment (C.O.X.E.), when formed in August, 1942, was essentially
a trials centre, not a development centre, and development work was carried on by the establishments
of the Service Departments at C.O.H.Q.'s request.
material matile, the des, es ordination a pr steeti nee constion of Cel vet. in
Of the many problems to be solved, that of landing in tactical formations, complete with the
equipment appropriate to different types of units, was met by developing the series of specialised
ships and craft described in Chapter 20.
The next problem was to enable the Army to cross the
water-gap.
Pontoons and Associated Equipment
The water-gap consists of the distance to dry land through shallow water from the point where
these specialised vessels ground.
Under ideal conditions this distance is bridged completely by the bow ramp of the vessel,
whereas under adverse conditions, such as a very flat beach, some hundreds of yards of shallow water
remain to be traversed.
Many beaches had slopes between 1/90 and 1/175, whereas the L.S.T. were only capable of
discharging tanks and vehicles direct if the beaches had a slope of 1/40 or steeper. Tideless seas
made the question of landing both tanks and vehicles particularly difficult.
1 Appendix 3.
3ф
(C52794)
