Nevertheless, in October, 1940, the C. in-C, Middle East Midd proposed the setting up of a
Combined Operations School with an Inter-Services Staff in the Middle East, as a wing of the Middle
East Staff School.
The War Office, after consultation with the other Service Ministries and the
D.C.O., agreed to this proposal. Colonel MacLeod, who was the Commandant of the Inter-Services
Training and Development Centre at the time, was appointed G.S.O.1 of the new school on the
advice of the D.C.O., so that his experience with the Inter-Services Training and Development
Centre could be used to the best advantage and to ensure that training and instruction in the
Middle East was carried out on similar lines to the U.K.
The school was opened early in 1941 as a C.T.C. at Kabrit, at the southern end of the Great
Bitter Lake, taking the C.T.C. at Inveraray as a pattern.
A naval establishment, H.M.S. Saunders,
was set up nearby to accommodate naval personnel and crews of minor landing craft.
141, although suffering considerably from shortages of equipment and having to depend largely
upon local resources, beach organisation training had been started in addition to running normal
combined operations courses.
Experimental work on pier construction, the clearing of beaches,
demolition of underwater obstacles, etc., was also carried out at the C.T.C.
periodic progress reports
being sent to C.O.H.Q. at home.
The technique taught at Home and in the Middle East was the same.
and development in the theatre progressed along very similar lines subject to local operational
necessity and limitations of equipment.
The Landings in North Africa, Operation " Torch"
Tandings in of early Beach Groups, which had started at the a Du dond, ats
and provided a number of trained units
Expeditionary Force which were employed on Operation
"Torch" in November of that year.
Unfortunately, from the records now available, it is not possible to state, by number, the Beach
Groups which took part in the operation, as the various sub-units and detachments comprising
them were shown as such and not as formed Beach Groups.
(Operation " Ironclad ") earlier in the year.
A great many reports covering experiences gained on the operations were received by
These were evaluated and produced in pamphlet form under the direction of the
Reports on the working of the
Beach Organisation during the
operation showed that the organisation was to tied. Thire on a general lack of tran the
and dicipline, and esprit de corps was poor.
complete exhaustion of docks operating personnel after 24 hours.
So far, the Beach Organisation
had been subjected to a minimum of operational difficulties and, had it not been possible to
capture a port in the early stages of the operation, it is doubtful if the organisation could have
continued to maintain the forces ashore.
Field Marshal Alexander in his Despatch (The Conquest of Sicily), referred to Operation
" Torch" as follows :—
" It is still an essential element of the doctrine of amphibious warfare that sufficient
major ports must be captured within a very short time of the initial landings to maintain
all the forces required for the maintenance of the objective; beach maintenance could only
be relied upon as a very temporary measure."
Technical Training Wing of the Combined Training Centre, Dundonald
As a result of experience gained in training Nos. 1 and 2 Beach Groups and as the technique
formed with the sole responsibility for training Beach Groups.
more apparent, the C.C.O. decided that a proper staff should be
Accordingly a special wing was
formed at the C.T.C., Dundonald, in November, 1942, for training Beach Groups, which was known
as the Technical Training Wing.
This wing completed the training of Nos. 3 and 4 Beach Groups
and 103 Beach Sub-Area Headquarters which had formed recently and were under training at the
of using pioneer labour in Beach Groups was re-examined.
As a result of experiences gained on operation " Torch," the question
There were two very definite schools of thought regarding the use of infantry of pioneers as
the nucleus of a Beach Group. Those who favoured an infantry nucleus did so because full advantage
could be taken, within the Beach Group, of the well-proved chames of command of the infantry
fight on the beaches, if required, was also a valuable asset.
battalion and because improved esprit de corbs and morale resulted. The fact that infantry could
morale suffered; that infantry were more likely than pioneers to become involved in the land battle,
resulting in a vacuum on the beach; that pioneers, providing they were carefully selected and kept
together after an operation, worked well and their morale
However, largely because
of the difficulty of keeping Beach Group personnel together after an operation, it was decided that
subsequent Beach Groups to form, should do so around the nucleus of an infantry battalion.
The Training of R.A.F. Beach Units
At the same time (1942), it was decided that R.A.F. Beach Units should be formed in parallel
with Army Beach Sub-Areas and that they should train and be despatched overseas with the Beach
Group to which they belonged. Nos. 68 and 69 R.A.F. Beach Units accordingly started to train
with 3 and 4 Beach Groups at the C.T.C.
The R.A.F. Beach Unit consisted of one Beach Unit
Headquarters, attached to the Sub-Area Headquarters; and two Beach Flights (one Flight per
R.A.F. Beach Units were designed to supply the technical knowledge, not possessed by the Army,
concerning R.A.F. equipment and stores; and to safeguard the sorting, assembly and forwarding
of equipment, stores and vehicles peculiar to the R.A.F. The formation of R.A.F. Beach Units
completed the inter-Services representation within the Beach Organisation.
The Birth of the " Overlord" Beach Organisation
It was by now quite clear that, if a re-entry into Europe was to be made in the future, there
would be an increased need for the formation and training of Beach Units.
The decision to form a Technical Training Wing for the training of Beach Groups was therefore
followed by a letter from the C.C.O. to the War Office in which he pointed out the paramount need
for a properly constituted unit to undertake the various duties included under the heading of
" Beach Organisation."
A copy of this letter is at Appendix 24. In this letter he proposed :-
(1) That approval in principle be given immediately to the establishment of Beach Groups,
the preparation of a War Establishment for the Group Headquarters and the appoint-
ment of Group Commanders and their staffs.
(2) That detailed consideration be given to the preparation of a suitable War Establishment ;
this to be undertaken by the War Office, assisted as necessary by representatives of
G.H.Q. Home Forces and C.O.H.Q.
(3) That one Beach Group should be formed immediately in each Command in the U.K.
(4) The formation of such further Beach Groups as may then be considered necessary as a
result of projected future operations.
Thus was born the " Overlord" Beach Organisation, and the Technical Training Wing of the
C.T.C. at Dundonald started to operate in its primary role,
the training of Beach Groups
for " Overlord."
The Formation of Middle East Beach Bricks
It will be appreciated that although the question of re-entry into Europe remained uppermost
in mind, the change of strategy following " Torch" and leading up to the projected landings in
Sicily and subsequent operations in the Mediterranean, caused attention to be focused on the
Middle East for a time. It is necessary, therefore, at this stage, to examine what progress had been
made in that theatre.
In October, 1941, the C.-in-C. Middle East had set up a Directorate of Combined Operations
with a small Inter-Services Staff at G.H.Q.
This Directorate was responsible to the C.-in-C.
Middle East for the direction of the C.T.C.
Middle East, which had been established at Kabrit.
It was not in any way responsible to the C.C.O. and liaison between the Directorate and C.O.H.Q.
The idea, that some organisation was required to control activities on the beach during an
assault landing, arose as a result of interviews with officers who had taken part in Operation
" Ironclad," the Madagascar landings.
The Directorate of Combined Operations Middle East,
was at hit th Via to g done, a lite trition came thou rom CO a by hang
of liaison officers, Monthly Information Summaries and pamphlets,
there was proceeding along the same lines.
establishment for a Beach Brick.
WO 277/215
27
3ф
