A.F.V. 2-man packs and 10-oz. tins of A.F.V. biscuit.
trains were provisioned in the first place by the Ministry of Health for 14 days
Casualty evacuation
on a special scale.
Replenishment was a W.D. responsibility on the Home
Ambulance Train Scale.
A camp was established at Shoreham to accommodate up to 30,000
refugees for 48 hours.
Responsibility for them would pass to the Home Ofice
when they left the camp, but while there the Army was to feed them. No
special ration scale was decided.
Accounting
In order to simplify accounting during the mounting of " Overlord",
certain modifications in the system were introduced in April, 1944.
F 158 were not compiled when troops switched over to F.S. (U.K.) scale.
Indents were submitted on A.F. F 757 or A.B. 55 (the field service indent),
and the transaction was complete after the issue of the rations and scheduling
on A.F. F 759 (see Appendix VIIIG).
Assistance to Commands
In order to enable those commands on which the burden of mounting
"Overlord" would fall to carry out their task, War Office arranged to pro-
vide them with additional assistance, with effect from 1st April, 1944. The
other commands were called upon to lend personnel from their C.S.Ds., and
the response was sufficient to meet the requirements of the mounting com-
mands in regard to the operation of their depots.
Further, when the war
establishments of C.S.Ds.
were revised in February,
made for inclusion in the War Office Pool, for subsequent allocation to
Southern and South Eastern Commands, of two Special Duties Depots, each
comprising two officers and 29 other ranks.
A number of supply units, included in the 21 Army Group Order of Batle,
were made available for employment in marshalling areas, until required for
duty overseas.
Of these, five D.I.Ds. were allotted to Southern Command
to remain til. +60, sed five to Soul Eastern Command, to remain till
1 + 42
"A number of field butcheries and C.s.Ds, were similarly lent for use
as D.I.Ds. in marshalling areas for varying periods which ended betven
D+30 and D + 90.
They were allotted as follows: -Five to Southern Com-
mand, five to South Easten Command, ane to Eastern Command, and three
to London District.
No bakery units of 21 Army Group could assist in providing commands
bakeries (mobile) was therefore made between non-mounting and mounting
requirements during the mounting.
A rearrangement of the home field
commands to increase the production capacity in the latter.
Special action was taken to ensure that none of the units of 21 Army
Group employed in United Kingdom in these ways used their own technical
equipment (AF. G 1098), as this was packes ways to be called forward.
Port Services, Supplies
There were ten Port Detachments, R.A.S.C., in the United Kingdom
Organization and twelve more were lent bust "emy Group until at least
D+60. These units sunervised the shipment of supplies. and renorted dail
to War Office the quantities loaded, the information being at once passed on
to 21 Army Group.
322
For duties at the ports and hards, Special Duties Sections, each consisting
of a subaltern or
been included in the establishment of the R.A.S.C. Port Services (home) at
Warrant Officer 1, and 14 storemen and issuers, had
Glasgow, Liverpool, and Newport; and these were detached to the mounting
commands when they were needed in the embarkation areas.
nection, see also in Chapter XII, Section 4.
In this con-
Supply Situation before D Day
The provision situation, in respect of supplies, was satisfactory by March,
1944.
By 26th May, all supplies for the period D day to D +7 had been
loaded into vessels, the dead-weight tonnage being some 8,000 tons.
The
loss by pilferage, out of 246,000 cases of Compo loaded, was 28 cases, or
about •01 per cent.
The following undertakings were still incomplete on that date, but not
necessarily behind schedule.
complete.
Pre-loaded transport was about 95 per cent.
Supplies for D +8 to D+17 were being called forward from
S.R.Ds.
Supplies from D+18 to D+30 had been demanded on C.P.O.
(F.S.), and tonnage bids had been submitted to movements branch
Reduction of Rail Freight Traffic
In December, 1943, M.O.W.T. asked War Office to do everything possible
to reduce freight traffic on the railways during March and April, 1944, when
the resources of the railways were likely to be severely strained.
The average
monthly number of railway wagons used for the conveyance of replenishment
supplies from M.S.Ds. and S.R.Ds. to C.S.Ds. was 1,500.
The intake of
C.S.Ds. in January and February, 1944, was therefore increased, so as to
reduce intakes in March and April to the absolute minimum.
The delivery
of over 4,000 tons of supplies was thus expedited.
At the end of February, 1944, it was found necessary to go on bringing
forward supplies in this way, taking into C.S.Ds. during March the maximum.
quantities which wous way,mally have been delivered in April and May.
The process went would normand of May, 1944, when the situation regarding
normal supply de on until the eat C.S.Ds, were stocked, as far as accommoda-
tion allowed, to feed to the end of August, 1944. The arrangement contri-
buted materially to the ease of movement of traffic in the early stages of the
actual operation, and it had the advantage of greater distribution of stocks.
Maintenance shipments to all overseas theatres were also
doubled during
January and February.
The Army road transnort sustem was of cource affected by anv chane
initiated bu store-holdino directorates that involved additional road move
As a result of pressure orate the past two years, the bulk of inter-
depot transfere of stores had been concentrated on rail as far ne the principa
ordnance depots were concerned.
rail from ordnance denote for ultimate local distribution was about 22,000
The average weekly tonnage handled by
The bulk of these stores was sent to various railheads all over
country and thence distributed by vehicles of C. (MT. companies: in this
connection, see Cha dis in, section 2.
transport was tied un to central ordnanda denote for intaral or local delivery
In addition, a very large amount of
323
7/17
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
