being sunk.
This of course unset the arrangements made for despatch fro
S.R.D., intended to ensure the arrival in France of a balanced ration, on the
assumption that each train-load would be loaded complete on to one ship,
instead of being spread over several.
on arrival in France, the mixed cargoes
were discharged on to the quays, and there stacked until they could be sorted
and got away.
This position was further comnlinted hu the fact that the transit sheds at
the do position l as the buildings on which the maintenance project de
pended for the initial accommodation for the base depots, were full of French
civilians, who had fled westwards from the threat of air attack.
thus no place to which to clear the supplies from the docks.
Ships were going over in convoys, and, on their arrival, priority of clear.
ance was give to ammunition, while supplies waited their turn, which in:
peded the regular flow.
Another factor contributing to the difficulties of the supply system was
that, while units were supposed to land with the unexpired portion of their
voyage and landing rations in their possession, in fact many had loaded these
supplies in their first line transport, which had then been separated from the
parent unit, and despatched in M.T. ships to another port.
The two did not
come together again for some days, but meantime the units had to be fed.
Even had the conditions in France been ideal, instead of chaotic, the
Base and L. of C. supply units were not really equal to their task.
The basic
trouble was that the personnel composing them were, to a very great extent,
young, junior, and inexperienced. A number of the officers had been com-
missioned from the ranks of the Territorial Army since the outbreak of war,
and few had the necessary military or technical experience.
There were not,
in any case, enough units, and those existing were deficient of personnel; thus,
the two B.S.Ds. were still 333 per cent. under establishment on 25th
In the circumstances, they did wonders. The D.I.D. at Le Mans issued
40,000 rations in one day, besides handling hundreds of tons of canned petro-
leum products; and another fed 15,000 troops daily.
Finally, the organization of B.S.Ds. and Supply Personnel Companies was
In face of the demand for dispersion, they were not capable of being
split up into self-contained sub-units, able to operate away from the parent
The sections were too dependent on their headquarters.
The D.D.S.T. B.E.F. said that the type of officer required for the DID:
was the extemporary A.S.C. Supply Officer of the war of 1914-1918, as he
had the necessary experience of dealing with troops, and would not be bluft
The War Office proposed to send out Emergency Reser
Officers and young officers, as supernumeraries, to learn their jobs in active
service conditions; but B.E.F. commented that they were already very busy
teaching officers, as, in both supply and transport units, there was only or
Regular officer each.
In such conditions, even a simple ration would have been difficult for de
untrained, inexperienced, and untried personnel of the B.S.Ds. and DD.I.Ds. BU
The complicated full Field Service ration,
natives, proved too ambitious at this stage.
with its numerous alter.
The conclusion was reached that
108
the scale was too varied for immediate application, and that we were trying
to be too luxurious, at the expense of providing the vital ration items.
rations to be issued in the early stages of a campaign should be as simple as
possible, and this should continue until the supply system had been properly
established.
In fact, this point of view commended itself so strongly to the
Quarter-Master-General at the time that he decided that a simplified ration
in a simplified pack was necessary, and this led eventually to the introduction
of the Composite Ration Pack.
But, even if this had been available in
September, 1939, while it would undoubtedly have made the situation easier.
trained personnel would still have been needed to handle the different packs.
The supply organization was further strained by the fact that no adequate
provision seems to have been made in the maintenance project for a number
of commitments which it might have been thought would have been foreseen.
These included petrol control, and the development of bulk supply; a long line
of communications; varied dispersed locations of troops; arrangements for
the co-ordination of supply depots, bakeries, and meat stores, located at
widely separated centres, with the poorest of communications.
Numerous
parties, from 800 to 2,000 strong, in special trains, had to be fed, though they
were not allowed for in the original project, or were quite outside it.
In this connection, the D.Q.M.G., B.E.F., writing at a later date, ex-
pressed his grave concern on the subject of the insufficiency of R.A.S.C.
supply personnel.
He said there were not enough supply sections to man
stations additional to those contemplated in the original project.
In the
original plan, supply staff was allowed for manning railheads on the scale
of one supply railhead and one petrol railhead for each Corps; but this proved
quite inadequate by November.
In practice, both for geographical and
administrative reasons,
additional railheads were needed to serve G.H.Q.
troops separately.
He was also faced with the possibility of railheads on a
brigade basis, while divisional railheads might easily become normal.
With
the existing War Establishments, staffs for additional railheads could only be
improvised, which was far from satisfactory.
He represented that some
adequate tolerance seemed wise for any campaign to allow for such contin-
gencies, but it had not been given.
Even if the units had been there, as he
pointed out, one officer and a handful of men were insufficient to run a D.I.D.
handling supplies, petrol, and local resources.
The cumulative result of all these difficulties was a bad and persistent
time-lag, which heavy subsequent shipments intensified rather than remedied.
The long L. of C. and the necessity for issuing outlying detachments with a
week's ration at a time dissipated stocks, and increased the period on which
the working margin required to be calculated to 20 days,
exclusive of any
shipping delays.
Until this was complete, issues could not be made to troops
coming in.
Port D.I.Ds. ran dry as fast as they were stocked, for few troops brought
rations ashore.
D.I.Ds. up-country were only kept going by the local resources
provided by the French.
The way in which the supplies had been despatched to France, and condi-
tions on their arrival there, had made the issue of a complete ration prac-
tically impossible.
The consumption of tinned pack was unavoidably heavy,
whereas it had been hoped to conserve a good proportion of this type of
109
137452
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
