and the co-ordinating headquarters, where the existing
specialised knowledge was available.
Command was joint and worked well. In fact, although hard lessons were yet to be learned in the
execution of major operations, the general pattern of the organisation required had been set.
Operation " Torch," North Africa
After Dieppe, the next landmark is Operation " Torch," executed in November, 1942.
this time, the entry
of America into the war had increased the rate of build-up.
Since this
operation was by far the largest so far carried out, only some of the more interesting developments
will be considered.
The operation, which had been planned and mounted from the U.K.,
right time.
obtained at Dieppe.
A good deal more was learned from "Torch." The Force Commanders were worried about
the nature and gradients of the beaches on which it was proposed to land.
To overcome this
difficulty, a small party of naval personnel were ordered to make a preliminary reconnaissance
by canoe carried in a submarine to the vicinity of the beaches.
At the last moment this was
cancelled and a periscope reconnaissance was substituted.
Similar tasks had already been carried
out during the preceding 18 months by personnel of the Special Boat Section; these were the fore-
runners of the Combined Operations Pilotage Parties, whose value was proved in this operation
and who were later employed in every theatre of war.
On the beaches, it was shown that some form of Army beach organisation was necessary in
addition to the Naval Beach Parties, since some small ports were not captured as quickly as had
been hoped ; stores were landed on the beaches and then loaded into lorries by Pioneers.
In addition, various new ships were employed, including the American A.P.A.s1 and A.K.A.s.?
The Americans soon realised the need for closer inter-Service co-operation, when their Army and
Naval headquarters were 100 miles apart with liaison practically non-existent.
Finally, the lesson
of Dakar that H.Q. Ships were necessary was repeated for the Americans, when General Patton
and his headquarters aboard the cruiser Augusta, not only found the accommodation and
communication facilities quite inadequate, but were also carried away on a purely naval operation
during the attack on Fedala.
Operation " Husky," Sicily
After " Torch" came " Husky." As with "Torch," planning was done by the Force planning
staffs, many of whom had already been a part of the Combined Operations Organisation
Major-General Truscott, the Commander of " Joss
" Force, was the head of the first detachment of
American Officers to become a part of the integrated C.O.H.Q.).
The operation was witnessed by
C.C.O. who, immediately on his return to U.K., submitted to the Chiefs of Staff, a report stating
the principal lessons learnt in the operation.
Many lessons were learned.
One of the most interesting was the fact that the unexpected
and adverse weather conditions, which were encountered on passage and during the assault itself,
contributed to the almost complete surprise obtained, since the enemy did not believe that an
assault would be attempted under such conditions.
In this operation the new American L.S.T. (2) were used for the first time in comparatively
large numbers.
wet it rot very tongly and the supery cat, patien
Towards " Overlord," North-West Europe
After Sicily, there came the assaults at Salerno and then
Anzio in the Mediterranean ;
parallel with these were the many island-hopping operations carried out by the Americans in the
Per East. These operations, important and bitterly fought ass came dou taught lew lessons which
were applicable to assaults against larger land masses, although more specialised development
Occurred such as the replarment of short range TCT hu its ocean-going ennivalent. the L.S.M.
for " Overlord.
But these operations apart, the overall progress of the war had already begun to set the stage
1 Assault ships carrying personnel mainly.
2 Assault ships carrying cargo mainly.
During discussions between the C.C.O. and Lieut.-General Morgan (C.O.S.S.A.C.) on the
preparations for
' Overlord" it became apparent that
required, the provision of equipment and on planning.
guidance was needed on the training
Consequently, a conference (" Rattle'
was convened by C.C.O. in June, 1943, to study the various combined operations problems of
Forces and Fighter Command,
This conference was attended by the Commanders-in-Chief Portsmouth,
C.O.S.S.A.C.,
MacNaughton of the Canadian
Commanding
Army,
General E.T.O.U.S.A.,
General
ind representatives of the three Service Ministries anc
C.O.H.Q.
As a result of this conference the C.C.O. drew the Chiefs of Staff's attention to the variou
points which had emerged and on which immediate and authoritative decisions were required.
These included the problems of fire support in the assault, the necessity for a daylight assault
owing to the vast number of mixed groups of craft involved, the need for one central co-ordinating
authority for the development of artificial harbours (" Mulberry"), the need for the provision in
adequate numbers of amphibians and many other problems.
Assistance with planning and training continued into 1944, but apart from this, the work of
C.O.H.Q. in connection with European operations was largely finished. It is therefore appropriate
to record, at this stage, that the greatest amphibious operation of all time was launched only by the
mighty effort of two great nations and that almost every aspect of the nations' resources was
involved at some stage or another.
The preparatory part played by C.O.H.Q., however, was vital;
evidence of its work was to be found in the design of ships, in the technique employed by the
supporting ships and craft and in the training of officers and men.
Operations Against the Japanese
Before " Overlord,"
preparations had already begun for the intensification of the war against
Japan, and it was possible to concentrate the activities of C.O.H.Q. with this aim in view.
Two
main tasks were undertaken.
By agreement with the U.S. Chiefs of Staff, a team of observers
proceeded, in the middle of 1944, to the Pacific where they witnessed and reported upon all major
operations undertaken from then until the conclusion of the Japanese war.
The second main task
vas an examination of the availability of suitable ships and craft for operations in the Far East anc
is a result, recommendations were made to the U.S.A. which in turn resulted in the peak rate of
L.S.T. production being maintained.
Redeployment of forces in the Far East, however, proved difficult and slow, and although the
Imerican advances gathered momentum, only a minor British operation at Rangoon occurred
in which no opposition was encountered. Had the war continued, the prepared plans and the vast
amount of experience gained would have been put into practise as men and material arrived.
Conclusion
The story of Combined Operations is long and detailed, and it has only been possible to refer
in this chapter to some of the landmarks in that story.
There is no doubt of the value of the work
of the Combined Operations Organisation, but where it begins and where it ends is hard to define.
Much was gained from the system whereby planners, trained in amphibious warfare, were integrated
into planning staffs,
or attached as advisers or observers.
Nevertheless, the recording of its
shortcomings as well as its successes may contribute to that most desirable end, that the hard-won
lessons do not again have to be bought unnecessarily dear.
7
WO 277/21
27
3
(C52794)
91
