Naval Training Establishments
As previously stated, the Combined Operations Base at Rosneath was transferred to the
Operation torchies hih and disgus it on the they cond use it as a mounting bao thi
This had a disastrous effect on the whole combined operations programme of
expansion and training. The training activities, which were carried out at Rosneath, were transferred
to Inveraray where encroachment facilities were granted in certain of the Army camps.
was a temporary measure and saw C.O.H.Q. through the difficult period of mounting
" Torch."
In December, however,
the American authorities gave back Rosneath and it was re-
commissioned. But, this time, it was decided not to put down permanent roots there, but to use it
as a British base for mounting the operations which were known to be impending in the Mediterra-
neal. However, it was quite evident that the Combined Operations Organisation could not carry
out naval training satisfactorily under the conditions existing at Inveraray.
The D.C.T. stated that
he could not accept the naval training being done in a Combined Training Establishment. Further,
he insisted that the Navy must be trained in its own art before it met the Army for combined
training.
About this time, the Admiralty decided to transfer the cadets from the Royal Naval College at
Dartmouth to Eaton Hall, and the Combined Operations Naval Training to Dartmouth. In order
to compete with the increased intake, a holiday camp at Brightlingsea was requisitioned.
The
former
of these establishments was commissioned as H.M.S. Efingham and the latter as
H.M.S. Helder.
Expansion was taking place elsewhere during the summer of 1942.
The naval wings of
the C.T.C. at Auchengate and the Combined Signal School, which had been transferred to
Auchengate from Inveraray, were commissioned as H.M.S. Dundonald I and H.M.S. Dundonald II
respectively, on 1st April, 1942.
H.M.S. Dundonald I, although situated on W.D. property, had no
combined training commitments but, having a naval staff, was responsible purely for the initial
training of ratings for major landing craft.
On the other hand, H.M.S. Dundonald II as the naval
wing of the Combined Signal School, carried out the combined training duties of the naval wing
of the C.T.C. Dundonald I.
The Naval Training Wing for the L.C.T. training of Royal Armoured Corps personnel was
established at Castle Toward, C.T.C., in November, 1941.
This naval wing was commissioned as
H.M.S. Ararat on Ist June, 1942, and subsequently changed its name to H.M.S. Brontosaurus
on 7th August of that year.
Training for Operation " Torch"
The assault on North Africa was mounted from the U.K. and carried out by the British First
Army and the American II Corps.
At a meeting held at C.O.H.Q. on 14th August the minutes record :—
"It was noted that no British Military Formations required Combined Operational
Training other than rehearsals but that two Regimental Combat Teams (corresponding to
Brigade Groups) of the 34th United States Division had to be trained.
As the planning progressed, it was found necessary to arrange for the training of three more
Regimental Combat Teams making a total of five; this was carried out under emergency arrange-
ment at the Combined Operations Centres on the west coast of Scotland.
In addition, the American " Shore Parties" were trained with the Beach Commandos under the
Combined Operation Staff.
Training stated :—
All this training took place in abnormal weather. In his report the Major-General, Combined
"It is generally agreed that not for a generation has so wet a summer and autumn
been experienced on the west coast of Scotland."
during the whole period.
From the weather records at Inveraray, it appears that the rainfall averaged one inch per day
the the naval side, the partly-trained landing craft crews had also to complete their training
and the new entries had to be given a full course.™
To do this the training staff had to work at full
pressure. That their trainine was a success was well demonstrated en route to North Africa when one
of the American assault ships was torpedoed 150 miles from her objective.
were embarked in their landing craft and set off in them.
place.
Then and there the troops
They were 24 hours late at the landing
On the other hand, in his covering remarks on the lessons learned in Operation "Torch,"
Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham the Naval Commander-in-Chief, states : 1
" No officer commanding
1101t WIlT
ever be satisfied that he has had adequate
preparation and training until his unit is trained and equipped down to the last gaiter
putton. There are times in history when we cannot wait for the final polish.
I suggest it should be made widely known to all units that, for ' Torch' particularly,
we could not afford to wait and that the risk of embarking on these large scale operations with
inadequate training was deliberately accepted in order to strike while the time was ripe.
We must now push forward our training so that such a situation cannot arise again.""
Special Training
In addition to the training of the fighting formations, special training was undertaken in the
following:—
Fire Fighting.
Some 75 officers and 680 men of the Royal and Merchant Navies
received instruction,
before the expedition sailed, from the Combined Operations Fire
Fighting School at Rosneath.
and instructed their officers and men in their duties.
Also, officers from the School visited the Red Ensign ships
Damage Control, Unexploded Bombs, Aircraft Recognition.
Training in all these subjects
was organised by C.O.H.Q. and carried out as far as time and opportunity permitted.
Communications.
Much of the complex signal plan was prepared by the Combined
The advice and resources of the Combined Operations Organisation
which had gained considerable operational experience in Madagascar,
minor operations and exercises, were placed at the disposal of the Allied Command.
Altogether some 100 officers, and 1,000 other ranks of all Services who took part in the
operations had special signals training in the Combined Operations Command.
at the Combined Signal School (Dundonald II) was fully extended in providing, training
and sorting personnel. The following were provided, trained and operationally ready :—
6 Naval Beach Sections.
12 F.O.O. Parties.
75 per cent. of the Landing Craft Signalmen required for craft.
2 R.A.F. Force H.Q. Sections.
2 R.A.F. Advanced Landing Ground Sections.
R.A.F. Light Warning Set Sections.
Effect of Operation " Torch " on Training
It was possible to mount the operation only by :—
(1) Stopping all combined training after 15th August, 1942.
2) Taking crews of landing ships and craft that were not fully trained.
3) Taking a large proportion of personnel from the bases and training centres and even
C.O.H.Q., using the numbers so gained to supplement the men available for the force.
This meant that the long-term plan for the expansion of the Combined Operations Command
to enable the large scale assault on the Continent to be made was considerably delayed.
After the sailing of the convoys for " Torch," the main problem facing C.O.H.Q. was to train
the raiding force, Force "J,
complete with craft and crews, and weld it into a proper naval
assault force. In addition, the training programme would have to be stepped up to compete with
the greatly increased intake and the craft used for this training had to be prepared and modernised.
The months of November and December saw this all going ahead reasonably smoothly.
In December, 1942, the programme of training and refitting after " Torch" was further delayed
by the serious storm which damaged so many landing craft and facilities at Inveraray.
Strategy for 1943, Training for Operation " Husky"
At the Casablanca Conference it was decided to proceed with the assault on Sicily.
The
training of the forces to be employed had, of necessity, to be carried out locally and the C.O.H.Q.
training staff were asked to assist.
117
WO 277/21
27
3ф
