Petrol, Oil and Lubricant Situation, 1945
lowards the end of the war, the P.O.L. situation in East Africa was that
consumption of M.T. spirit was about 4.500 tons a month.
M.T. spirit,
erosine, and derv were brought in bulk in ocean-going tankers from the
Persian Gulf to Mombasa, where they were discharged into civilian storage.
Replenishment was effected, in the central area from Mombasa; for Moga-
liscio and the islands, except Madagascar, by shipment in packed form from
lombasa; for Madagascar, packed from South Africa: for the Northern sub-
rea, from Aden in barrels; for Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, br bull
from civil stocks at Beira in Portuguese territory, and railed thence in tank.
magons to internal filling plants. Lubricants were delivered under War Otice
arrangements to Mombasa, and distribution was effected by rail and sea.
The ocean-tanker programme for the import of aviation spirit was co-
ordinated through the East African Aviation Petroleum Co-ordinating Com-
mittee.
Packed reserves were maintained by S.T., and distributed to airfields,
by sea, rail, or road, from reserve aviation depots.
regarded as "common user"
All aviation fuels were
stocks, available to all Allied air services.
P.O.L. depots in the command were a Base Petrol Depot at Mombasa, and
len other depots. Bulk storage under the W.D. totalled 32,000 tons, including
22,000 for naval fuel oil.
Madagascar
Operation " Ironclad"
Madagascar is a large island off the south east coast of Africa, from
which it is divided by the Mozambique channel. It is a French possession,
nd, after the capitulation of France, the French in the island adopted a
pro-Vichy attitude.
In consequence, it was decided to neutralize the naval
ase at Diego Suarez in the north of the island, and a British force accordingly
xoupied it in May, 1942.
The operation was known as "Ironclad", and
nas launched from the United Kingdom, all the troops engaged being British.
The force, as originally planned, consisted of 29 Infantry Brigade, 5
Commando, and ancillary troops.
The R.A.S.C. detachment included a small
R.A.S.C. headquarters. a D.I.D. and three other officers and 60 other
Before the landing took place, two other brigades were added to the
ice, but there was no corresponding increase in the strenoth of the R.A.S.C.
RA.O.C. vehicle mechanics.
hicles. which had been stowed for an ordinary move, and re-stowing them.
This required the disembarkation of all the
Ma tactical basis after waterproofing.
The landing took place on the morning of 5th May, and, after some
resistance,
ỉh May, 1942.
the French surrendered with all the honours of war on
octed by releasing the French Commissariat personnel on parole, and
There were about 4,000 prisoners to feed, and this was
wing it to them; this worked satisfactorilv on the whole.
As there was only one gole, and nsiderable difficulty was experienced in
Roading the ships, and this was further complicated by the ships being
Saded with all types of storeving them ixed, to come off in a certain priority.
405
