Operation " Avalanche"
The tenacious German resistance hire affected maintenance arrange.
ments from the start.
Beach Group D.I.Ds. and Petrol Depots could not
occupy the sites allotted to them in the plan, as these were still in enemy
hands.
Temporary dumps had to be established and there
congestion, aggravated by
the arrival of units,
was much
including a D.I.D. and a
M.P.F.C., which should have gone straight into Salerno, but could not as
the port had not been captured.
It did not in fact accept ships until 23rd
September.
Beach discharging proceeded, however, and went on till 5th
October.
Maintenance was carried on through the Divisional Maintenance Area
system, stores being drawn direct from beach dumps until 10 Corps broke
out of the beach-head.
Thereafter, F.M.Cs. were established in the usual
wav.
In 10 Corps, the responsibility for the S.T. maintenance of formations
and Corps Troops under command was divided in the following manner: —
(a) C.R.A.S.C., Corps Troops, was responsible for delivering supplies
to formations, and made detailed issues of supplies and P.OL.
to forward Corps Troops.
(b) C.R.A.S.C., Corps Transport Column, was responsible for delivering
P.O.L. to formations and to R.A.S.C. Corps Troops (for detailed
issue as above), and also controlled Corps transport.
R.A.S.C. supply personnel were the first to disembark at Salerno pori,
the party
including the staff of the Base Provision Officer (or C.R.A.S.C,
Supply Units), whose easly arrival was in contrast to what happened in the
Sicily campaign, when this vitally important officer did not arrive until long
after the battle was over.
of bulk supplies pending arrival of a B.S.D.
A Field Butchery was employed to build up stocks
Compo rations were issued until D+21 (30th September) when bulk
rations were available for distribution in accordance with the original plan.
At the end of the first 30 days, when the build-up of supplies should
have amounted to 15 days, the actual figures were as follows: with divsions.
four days; in corps and Army dumps, four days; due in three days' time,
two days; total, ten days.
This deficiency was due to several causes; the accelerated build-up of
troops to meet the critical situation at the beach-head; unforeseen issues
to U.S. troops and Italians; and the dispersion of the disembarkation points
An increase of 25 per cent.
was therefore added to the demand for the
lus 25 per cent.
When 10 Corps broke through, the
also assumed a normal aspect.
"B" type
maintenance layout for POL.
Salerno; and another took nuer the storks in the Corns Field Maintenano
Petrol Depot moved into
by Corps 3rd line transport.
Centre which was en built un to a fore holding of about 3.000 tons
Operation " Slapstick"
The Airborne Division was, in this case, seaborne.
The first wave of the
second
Division included 136 all rante be the divisional pAge and the
of the formation as quickly as possible on extemporized lines.
Their task was to requisition transport and to organize the maintenance
270
difficulty was experienced in obtaining sufficient M.T., but the railway
was in good condition, and a railhead was established behind the brigades.
Until the B.S.D. reached Taranto, the Divisional R.A.S.C. was responsible
for the passage of all stores from docks to railhead.
By 6th October,
the Divisional R.A.S.C. was operating two railheads, a Divisional Main-
tenance Area and four replenishment points.
By that time,
contact had
been made with 13 Corps, which proceeded to establish F.M.Cs., and the
normal system prevailed from then on.
Although sufficient transport was requisitioned to clear the ships and
to carry the supplies and P.O.L. obtained locally, there was never enough
for all requirements until the G.T. companies of the base organization
arrived.
This shortage resulted in one case in DUKWs having to be used
in a way for which they were never intended.
The speed and weight of
the advance up the east coast caused a crisis in the supply of P.O.L. which
could only be met at first (until a cased-petrol ship could be diverted to
Taranto) by rushing supplies from the west coast, where stocks were ample.
One company used for this purpose was the DUKW company from Sapri
which sent 70 amphibians loaded with P.O.L, across the peninsula, which is
about 80 miles wide at that point.
These were followed by convoys made
up of vehicles of all kinds.
The roads across the Apennines were bad, and
made worse by diversions to get round demolished bridges, and by rain.
bridging platoons and tipper platoon were all fully employed at this time
The bulk petroleum storage installations at the various east coast ports
were found to be in fairly good condition on the whole, but only
Bari
could receive ocean tankers, improvised arrangements having to be made
at other places.
Base Ports
The allotment of base ports to the British and Americans respectively
was governed primarily by the fact that the Eighth Army was on the east
side of the peninsula, and the Fifth (U.S.) Army on the west, but it was
impossible to reserve ports for one or the other.
Thus, the presence of
Brish formations ne port for Army necessitated the discharge of mish
stores at west coast ports.
Again, the only serviceable railway from the
base area to the Bighph Army aria started from Naples, which caused the
discharge of a large part of the British maintenance at that port.
advance to Rome and hauand and in the east coast freed the Adriatic port
of Ancona and this eventually became the Pritish Advanced Base, while
Naples and Bari wes eventually base ports.
Other minor ports were used
as sea-heads.
CRASC, Supply Units and Petrol Installations, supervised the receipt,
holdino in denote and forward movement to Armied of sunlies and P.O.L.
discharged at the main base ports, receiving their loading instructions direct
from S.T., A.F. H.Q.
Shipments of Supplies
At first, the ten-day convoys from the
West for the maintenance of
the operational situation.
AFHO. divarted attain misher to Tralian ports in accordance with
in Italy were consigned to North Africa and Sicily, whence
(37452)
271
Mars micro 0.5 mr
7
WO 277/1
27
WO 277/26
