The convoy system of running proved superior to that of free running.
The Americans adopted it after
experience
of the latter method.
normal convoy was a platoon, and the average number of vehicles in a
convoy was 29.
Statistics of the " Aid to Russia" lift are shown in Appendix VIG.
Besides the regular through traffic, the column was called upon to run
convoys to various destinations, with indirect aid, such as bitumen for roads,
food for civilian labour on the roads, aviation petrol, etc.
There was a separate arrangement in which three R.A.S.C., G.T. com-
panies took part, for the conveyance of petroleum products.
It was intended
that returning convoys should backload Russian M.T. spirit for use on the
route, but the Soviet could not supply this, owing to the demands of the
Buropean theatre, and their lubricating oils did not come up to the re-
quired specification.
This is dealt with in the P.O.L. section of this part
of this chapter.
In addition, locomotive fuel oil, timber, and bitumen, were
supposed to be back-loaded at the rate of 17,000 tons a month.
Other Transport Services
Besides "Aid to Russia" there were other large scale transport opera-
tions carried out by P.A.I.C.
A L. of C. Transport Column, consisting of four Indian G.P.T. com-
panies, was formed at short notice to organize a route from Kermanshah to
a railhead on the Ahwaz-Teheran railway, for the purpose of conveying
grain for the starving population of Teheran.
There was a shortage due
to the great Russian need of wheat, which was in turn due to the German
occupation of much of Russia's granary and to
scorched earth
policy.
In consequence, they took possession of all wheat in the part of
Persia they were occupying.
The demand was for 10,000 tons of grain
to be delivered by 10th January, 1944, and the first convoy set out on 15th
November, 1943.
Two companies ran 200 miles each way, and the other
two 150.
A further lift of 7,000 tons was asked for, and this was com-
pleted by two companies by mid-February.
In all, over two million miles
were run, with only 12 accidents.
Another important road transport activity was the cross-desert route,
from Baghdad to Palestine.
This was the only road connecting Iraq with
the Middle East, and it therefore, carried a very heavy traffic of troops
In order to make fuer use ve it, two special Railhead
were sent out from the United Kingdom. As P.A.I.C. became more dependent
on Middle East, the route assumed a much more important aspect.
the necessity for troop moves, Palestine and Syria were the nearest centres
to P.A.I.., with a suitable climate for British troops to enjoy leave in,
and thus Beirut became the centre for a P.A.I.C. summer leave camp.
One G.P.T. company was employed on troop-carrying from January, 1944,
to Haifa, a distance of 644 miles.
All travelling was by day, in five stages from Baghdad
The leave camp service started in April, 1944, and continued till afflet
chosen for their sturdiness and roominess,
and the choice proved good.
ming by this route was by night in the summer, and by day in the
riches impossible.
it when the longer nights and wet roads made night driving for long
From April to November, 70 convoys were formed
f half platoon strength, with ten men in a vehicle.
* 620 miles, performed in three days in summer; in winter it was double-
The route was
This had the disadvantage of making maintenance and repairs
it stevehicles left early and arrived after dark.
Maintenance and Control of Transport
in Midle East took over Tenth Army, the condition of the R.IA.S.C.
hot units in Persia and Iraq was, in general, very unsatisfactory,
roquence of their not having their own workshops.
fused in Chapter X, under India Base.
had far beyond their capacity,
and transport companies were often at
Inspections were many months in arrears, and
panies had as many as 66 per cent. of their vehicles off the road.
It was this state of affairs which led to workshop platoons being
thorized for R.I.A.S.C.
rand was so great that priority was necessarily given to companies allotted
ho operational rôle in South East Asia Command, and it proved impossible
quip units in P.A.I.C. in this way. It was necessary therefore to con-
me to depend on the old system.
A zone maintenance scheme was introduced in the command in the
ting of 1943, and continued until the end of the war.
mprove the standard of condition of vehicles in units which were not
to ta heir drivers to an efficient standard or to maintain satisfactorily.
It was intended to help small vehicle-holding units,
i not to relieve the ultimate responsibility of the officers commanding
it fit all M.T. units, both R.A.S.C. and R.IA.S.C., were made zone
saining units, but, as all that was required by the other units was firs
eatention, all zone maintenance was eventually carried out by R.I.A.S.C
is. This involved the T. A De of the G.P.T. companies maintaining no
i rio 1 70 vehicles, but So or 60 afiliated in admition.
iked satisfantarily otherwise and the standard of maintenance in the
is concerned improved.
An Insectorate of Road Transport was formed not to carry out
shia innections but to ensure that the limited transport resource:
re used in the most economical way.
ind, R.A.S.C. and the Inspectors, Majors,
The Chief Inspector was a Lieutenant-
id copies to D.S.T. and the local commander concerned; and they
sats of both "O" Staff and the D'ST. reporting direct to the former
led the report with the latter before submitting
amand continuously, and examined the transport situation in each area
Bation, both from the
and wholehearted co-operation.
Soment of inspectors to the staff of each Chief Engineer, to advise on the
transport as was available.
point of view of availability and of the use of
When their object had been realized, they
Later, the scheme was extended by
So aspecs of all
Although it might appear
9171/57
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
