the Dieppe operation, a plan was initiated known as the " south coast radio scheme." This enabled
V.H/F radio links to be used as soon as our invasion forces had landed.
Static terminals were built
on high ground at such places as Beachy Head and Ventnor (Isle of Wisht, and were connected to
the home a ses pees the south coast ; for landing on the far side, mobile equipment was
good communication was
established, in the early stages of the
invasion, between H.Q. Ships off the Normandy coast and any required locality in England.
Meetings were also held to warn the G.P.O. of the very heavy line requirements of the Combined
Headquarters which were being built on the south coast.
These requirements appeared to be
astronomical, but were inally met by the efforts of the G.P.O. and proved to be by no means
The fifth report sent in by the Committee dealt with radar requirements in combined operations
and included, inter alia, the recommendation for fighter direction ships.
shipping prevented implementation for some time,
but L.S.T.s were fitted as fighter direction
tenders before the Sicily operation, one with an R.A.F. mobile G.C.I. unit temporarily embarked
and operating on board. This requirement had been recognised when shipping had been sunk by
night bombers at captured ports during the North African operation, and the G.C.I. did much to
prevent repetition of this off the coast of Sicily. Later, more ships were permanently fitted and naval
fighter direction ships, which had not been fitted for an amphibious role, were reconverted.
invasion of the Continent, a large number of fighter direction ships and tenders took part, and
subsequently the L.S.T.(1) class were put in hand for conversion.
It is pertinent, at this juncture, to mention that, at C.O.H.Q. a study was made of the radio
warfare problems that would arise in a major Channel operation, including both the implementation
of cover plans and radio countermeasures against enemy radar.
The plans that eventually came
into operation in the Normandy invasion, especially in the latter field where conspicuous success was
achieved, owed much to these studies.
Anglo-American Co-operation in Combined Operations
The sixth and final report was completed in May. This dealt with the problem of Anglo-
American co-operation in combined operations.
In brief the report recommended that strenuous efforts be made to achieve the maximum
standardisation of methods between the various Services of both countries.
Later in the year, the Chief Signal Officer Combined Operations went on a short visit to
Washington to discuss combined amphibious communication technique with the Combined Com-
munications Board (C.C.B.) in Washington, with a view to the production of a combined publica-
tion on the subject. As a result of this visit, the C.C.B. sent a group of officers to London and a series
of meetings with the Signal Staff of C.O.H.Q. took place. A draft was produced at C.O.H.Q. and,
after it was agreed by the U.S. authorities, was published as C.C.B.P. 01.
The Formation of the Combined Operations Communication Committee
After the reports mentioned above had been forwarded, the Inter-Services Committee on Com-
munications in Combined Operations ceased to function as such, but the members continued
their work at C.O.H.Q., which included the follow up and implementation of the recommendations
in the reports.
They then formed the " Combined Operations Communications Committee," which
C.C.O. in his directive had been ordered to set up.
In order to cope with the additional work at C.O.H.Q. which was brought about by the rapidly
growing Combined Operations Organisation, it had become necessary to increase the staff of the
signal department so small naval, army and air force sections were formed under their respective
senior staff officers.
Signal Personnel and Training
During 1940, it became apparent that a combined organisation was required for training signal
personnel of the three Services and for co-ordinating their activities in
in which they might be taking part prior to operations.
any combined exercise
With this end in view, in the autumn of 1940, when Vice-Admiral Combined Training hoisted his
flag at Inverarav, a Lieutenant R.N., a Maior Royal Signals and a Squadron Leader R.A.F. were
appointed. These three formed a Combined Signal Board to establish a Combined Signal Schoal
and to plan and train for future communication requirements for amphibious operations.
The Combined Signal School at Inveraray, under the command of a Commander R.N., com-
menced to function as such on Ist November, 1941.
The school consisted of forty-five Nissen huts,
thirty used for accommodation and fifteen for lecture rooms, with a further nine huts in the course
of erection for additional classrooms.
The instructional staff totalled eight officers and fourteen
ratings from the Royal Navy and Army. The only R.A.F. Officer was the member of the Combined
Signal Board.
Early in 1942, it became apparent that more co-operation with the R.A.F. was needed and
that a landing strip was essential.
This was not available at Inveraray. It was therefore decided
to move the Combined Signal School from Inveraray to Dundonald, about 24 miles north of Troon,
Ayrshire.
The school was commissioned on 1st April, 1942, as H.M.S. Dundonald II, the name of
the ancient Royal Stuart stronghold close by.
Training of officers and ratings of all Services proceeded with ever-increasing tempo. Personnel
concerned included naval and army beach signal parties (trained together), forward observation
parties (comprising army and naval personnel), air force parties for forward air control and H.O.
Ship detachments which included naval, army and air force personnel. Special Naval Combined
Operations Signal Officers were also trained.
This school held up to 400 personnel and the
necessary landing craft; signal equipment and a mock-up Headquarters Ship were provided.
In addition, a school for landing craft signalmen was later established at H.M.S. Pasco on the Clyde.
This became necessary when it was finally agreed that landing craft needed signalmen and that the
only way to provide the necessary numbers, was to give Combined Operations seamen a short
signal course confined only to those aspects of signals required in landing craft. There was also a
Navigational Aids school at Northney, on Hayling Island, where the necessary personnel were
trained in the use of wireless, radar and infra-red navigational aids.
Beach Signal Sections
The necessity for specially trained naval and army beach signal personnel was recognised
in 1940 and, by the beginning of 1941, the first Beach Signal Section was formed and trained. A
further three sections had been formed by the end of 1941 and, by the time of the invasion of
Normandy, as many as eighteen Naval Beach Signal Sections had been formed and trained at the
Combined Signal School.
A naval section consisted of twenty-eight communications ratings under the command of a Sub-
Lieutenant R.N.V.R. who had been specially trained as a Beach Signal Officer. Once formed a section
carried out intensive working up as a team.
A physical hardening course was carried out during
which wet and dry landings from minor landing craft on to rocks and quays, up rope-ladders and
through surf were practised. Instruction was also given in the care and use of arms, first aid, map
reading and assault course, and battle training was undertaken in realistic conditions.
At a certain stage in its training, the Naval Beach Signal Section was joined to an Army Beach
Signal Section and the two sections became a unit which was then allotted to a Beach Group.
Advance training then proceeded.
Combined Headquarters
Very close touch was kept with the signal departments of the three Service Ministries and the
senior signal officers of each Service at C.O.H.Q. paid almost daily visits to the Directors of Signals
and their staffs at Admiralty, War Office and Air Ministry. In this way much time was saved,
misunderstandings avoided and paper work reduced to a minimum.
With the growing Combined Operations Organisation and constant dealing with various Service
authorities, a comprehensive signal office organisation was required at C.O.H.Q.
The existing com-
was manned entirely by personnel of the Women's Services and formed a separate section under a
W.R.N.S. Officer. The Duty Signal Officers were W.R.N.S., A.T.S. or W.A.A.F. in rotation and the
remainder of the staff came from the same three Services. A local combined method of message
handling was used inside C.O.H.Q. and all personnel were trained to use the necessary different
procedures when dealing with the various Services.
One of the tasks given to the signal department of C.O.H.Q. was organising the layout and
planning the communications of the underground Combined Headquarters which might be required
or the invasion.
The Portsmouth Headquarters, the excavation of which had already begun, was the first of
these and was finally the most important in the invasion. It was realised that this, although large,
would not be big enough for the final invasion requirements but, as it had a fixed completion date
for an operation which did not inally take place, there was no time to have manufactured the
necessary steel rings required for wider tunnels or to have additional excavations made.
135
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
