The original specifications of Russian oils received by War
cated that these, while of slightly lower quality than W.D. oils, were quite
usable in Army equipment.
ce indt.
there were signs of inadequate refining and non-removal of refinery process
chemicals.
Deliveries fell short even of that standard, and
any kind.
These made the oils quite unsuitable for British equipment of
The A.I.O.C. tried to re-refine them and make them fit for use,
but even after this had been achieved, it was not desired to expose military
equipment to the risk which the use of such oils entailed.
were, for the most part, handed over to the Iranian State Railways, but
the Russians objected very
The oils received
strongly, and asked for part of them back.
Eventually, the matter was settled by the substitution of 300 tons of H.D.
oils, which the Russians accepted.
Solid Fuel
While Persia and Iraq were under Middle East Command, the require-
ments of solid fuel for the British forces there were included in Middle
East arrangements.
At the end of 1942, P.A.I.C., as an independent com-
mand, began to forward its own stock states and demands to the War Office.
Early supplies of coal were despatched from India,
and,
owing to
lighterage difficulty, the Ministry of War Transport, at the request of S.T.6.,
War Office, tried to arrange frequent small shipments of 500 tons from
Bombay.
occasional "flatting "
These shipments were supplemented from South Africa, with
from U.S. ships.
Coke and charcoal were supplied
from India under arrangements made between P.A.I.C. and G.H.Q., India,
direct.
From September, 1943, South African
coal was supplied instead of
Indian, shipments being arranged by S.T.7, War Office, as necessary.
That
branch watched the stock position, and asked M.O.W.T. to allot a ship at
Durban when it was needed.
Supply was arranged through the civilian
agents there; and P.A.I.C. were kept informed of loadings through Q (Move-
ments) on details supplied by S.T.7.
Under the "Aid to Russia" scheme, 46 coal-burning locomotives were
shipped to Persia from the United Kingdom, and about 10,000 tons of
coal for them were included in the cargoes of the ships which carried them,
as " flatting ".
During 1942, P.A.I.C's. monthly coal requirements for all services were
5,000 tons, of which 1,000 tons were for the locomotives referred to above,
which had not yet converted to oil-burning.
The conversion of these engines
was continually pressed by S.T.7, and it was eventually completed early in
1944. In consequence, during 1944-1945, requirements of solid fuel dropped
considerably.
M.O.W.T.
bunker requirements
at Basra
declined, and
P.A.I.C. consumption fell to 1,500 tons a month, with a three months'
reserve.
SECTION 2.-EAST AFRICA
Introductory
Before the war,
British East Africa, which included the
colonies of
Kenya, Uganda, and Nyasaland, and the mandated territory of Tanganyika,
was under Colonial
Office
administration,
and no British
troops were
stationed there.
The garrison consisted of two brigades of the King's African
FI 7
WO 277/21
27
v 027772
