lectures show that technique and tactics were more heavily stressed than development and
experiment.
Experiment, nevertheless, went on and in June, 1939, in addition to problems already
being studied, the following more interesting points were added :-
Design of a tank landing craft.
Beach organisation.
Beach roadways.
Floating piers.
Transport of troops by air.
The Work of the I.S.T.D.C. during the period September, 1939- July, 1940
In September, 1939, on the outbreak of war, I.S.T.D.C. was again closed.
air force members
received new appointments, but the army
The naval and
November, 1939, the I.S.T.D.C. was re-formed. Its work was very similar to the earlier centre but
three points should be noted :—
(1) Its work was related closely to certain operations under consideration (e.g. capture of
the Dodecanese).
(2) It was much more than a development and experimental centre. Its members continued
to lecture at the Staff Colleges and other establishments and, in these lectures, tactics
and technique still took a more important part than development; and in April, 1940,
the naval and military members assisted in the preparation for the Narvik operation.
(3) Control was still exercised by D.C.O.S. (I.T.).
Combined operations, as they are known
to-day, were not under consideration and large scale work at the centre was not
contemplated.
A letter dated 13th November, 1939, gives a list of I.S.T.D.C. activities at that time; the more
interesting points are given below :-
(1) Watching brief in the production of the first L.C.A., which was constructed as a result
of I.S.T.D.C.'s recommendations.
Trials of proposed armament of support landing craft.
(3) Trials of new L.C.M. to be held in the near future.
(4) Use of L.N.E.R. train ferry as landing craft carrier.
(5) Tests of gravity type davits to carry L.C.A. and L.C.S.
(6) Modifications to the newly tested pontoon pier.
(7) Trials of ropeways and scaling ladders.
(8) Water supply by distillation of sea-water.
Work at I.S.T.D.C. continued along these lines through the early part of 1940. In June, after
Duner, when it was pier that col on oratioes trous a snees any the demo the defeat
Lieutenant-General Bourne (until then Adjutant-General Royal Marines).
His title was Com-
mander, Raiding Operations and Adviser to the Chiefs of Staff on Combined Operations. Raiding
operations were considered his primary role: as a second role the directive, I stated :—
" Your second role will be to take over command of the Inter-Services Training and
Development Centres and to act as our (i.e. Chiefs of Staff) adviser on the organisation
required for opposed landings. ... In addition, we wish you to press on the development and
production of special landing craft and equipment and to advise us, when the occasion
arises, as to its allotment."
The I.S.T.D.C. therefore came under the command of Lt.-General Bourne. There appears to have
been a certain lack of central direction and poor liaison with the planners with the result that the
new system perhaps gave the I.S.T.D.C. less direction than the old D.C.O.S. (I.T.).
Directorate seemed more concerned with its primary role, the planning and organising of raiding
operations using already existing material, and in consequence, experimental work lacked the very
necessary central control.
The Work of the I.S.T.D.C. when Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keys was Director of Combined
The period July, 1940 October, 1941.
Operation 1C0, With Genera one Sin Boat is i CO and Die or i combined
moved from the Admiralty to Richmond Terrace.
The I.S.T.D.C. remained under the D.C.O.'s
1 Appendix 3.
WO 277/21
27
30
(C52794)
