Similarly, one petrol point, one gun ammunition point, and one S.A.A.
noint served the whole division when this was practicable: but separate points
would be opened for each brigade if required, oRthose might be composite
points.
Often these points were established at the R.A.S.C. company location.
The Composite Platoons were usually broken down into their separate
elements, i.e.,
the supply personnel, who organized the bulk breaking point
and the petrol point, and the ammunition personnel for ammunition duties.
In most cases,
divisions,
both armoured and infantry, organized their
second line transport on a commodity basis, the most usual distribution of
tasks to companies being as follows: — one company, supplies; one company,
petrol; one company, gun ammunition; and one company, other ammunition.
An alternative was for one company to deal with both supplies and petrol,
and for the fourth company to be used for troop-carrying and general trans-
port duties
Commodity companies were found to have the advantages of: —
(a) permitting a more economical use of transport;
(b) greater simplicity of operation;
(c) greater ease of withdrawing transport for use with corps, and for
providing troop-carrying facilities.
At the same time, all
Divisional R.A.S.C. was so organized that, if a
brigade was required to operate independently, the necessary transport could
be immediately produced to accompany it.
Usually, a two-platoon company
was found inadequate for this purpose, and three platoons at least were
required.
The underlying principle was recognized, that the four R.A.S.C. com-
panies in an infantry division were a pool of transport, to be employed under
the centralized control of the C.R.Á.S.C., who allotted tasks through his
second-in-command to the various companies.
Divisional Administrative Areas
The idea of a Divisional Administrative Area,
more usually called a
Divisional Maintenance Area, as laid down by the War Office in February,
1944, proved unsatisfactory and unsound in practice.
The organization sub-
ordinated the operational role of units and their co-ordinated control by their
own commanders, to an inflexible grouped control by a commander who
could not know the technical requirements of all the elements in the Divisional
Maintenance Area.
by severely restricted.
The mobility and operation of R.A.S.C. units was there-
It was found preferable for Divisional R.A.S.C. companies to be located
neither in the vicinity of the Field Maintenance Centre nor in any form of
divisional administrative area, but to be so sited as to be most economically
placed between F.M.C. and delivery point.
" Economically
", in this case,
was not so much a question of georraphical distance as one of running tim
on the road afected by the chantity of traffic moving the condition of bridges
and the surface of the road.
for keeping divisional transport ahead of the growing stream of corps, etc.,.
Therefore the chief consideration was the need
units moving up behind divisions during an advance.
After only a short neriod at the heginning of the campaign. divisional
staffs generally accepted this view, and abandoned the system officially laid
344
Use of First Line Transport
In the old days, when the first line transport of infantry and artillery was
horsed, it was the accepted principle that the R.A.S.C. delivered at least to
mit first line transport, or even to gun positions, etc.
that first line
transport was mechanized, however, it had to be realized that the full trans-
port resources of the division were not being correctly employed unless full use
was made of first line transport.
This was considerable,
each battalion
laving a lift of about 60 tons in its first line transport, which was stalion
made full use of by the unit; and occasions were rare when at least hael dors
It could not be readily made available in an infantry division in an emers
gency.
While on the one hand, as stated above, Corps often needed help from
divisions in stocking F.M.Cs., on the other hand second line transport was
thable to carry out a heavy ammunition dumping programme without help
from Corps transport, which it could actually have undertaken if first line
transport had been fully used.
In this connection, it is of interest to note the views expressed for and
against a reorganization of first line transport with a view to attaining a more
economical use of transport in the field, in a paper written by the General
Staff, War Office, which is reproduced at Appendix VIF.
Transport Situation, End of Phase 1
Those transport units which were to constitute the basic Army transport
of Second Army were allocated to lift stores forward from transhipment areas
The remaining general transport was placed under H.Q.,
L. of C., who became responsible for the movement of stores in rear of the
Army roadheads.
From the transport point of view, this period was
characterized by the long hours of the drivers and the bad road conditions,
which were to have their effect on the vehicles at a later stage.
The build-up in the bridgehead increased to such an extent that it became
necessary to delay the despatch from the United Kingdom of some irans-
port units, on account of the congestion on the roads.
There tended indeed
is be a surplus of trans port cor the immediate task, but this reserv was
essential in case of a break-through.
It was fully recognized that, when
operations became more fluid, the necessary mobility to support the advance
-hould depend on the provision of suficient administrative, and particularly
transport, units.
was swinging in the Allied favour stens were taken to bring in extra trans.
As soon as it became apparent, therefore, that the pendulum
It was alan desidad to reduce the imnort of stores. ete through the Rea
Maintenance Area in order to release transport from port and beach clear-
Thus, eight DUKW
ance duties, and make it available for mobile operations.
companies were released for conversion to normal GT companies.
The reduction in imports wns made possible hu the satisfactory suppl
Supply Situation, End of Phase 1
situation. stocks in the Ri was ving reached the level of fourteen days
Strength of 700,000 by 5th August.
345
117
WO 277/21
27
WO277/6
