During the latter half of 1942, the Royal Engineers produced, for trials at C.O.X.E.
Vehicle Landing Ramp.
was very heavy and
cumbersome
and, to compete with flat
beaches, the equipment would have to consist of three sets each weighing 13 tons.
equipment was therefore discarded.
The Americans carried out trials of a Treadway Bridge.
This consisted of a "roadway"
supported on inflatable pontoons and was
their standard
Engineer
river-crossing
Fo enable this to be used in North Africa, a special platform was constructed in the L.S.T.
from which it was to be used and 360 ft. of bridging was hoisted on board and secured.
the ships neared their objective the pontoons were inflated and the bridging assembled on deck.
On arrival, the bridging was launched in lengths of 60 ft. and towed round to the bow door.
As the result of trials, certain modifications were introduced by the staff of D.X.S.R. and it
vas found possible to launch 360 ft. of this equipment in under two hours, and connect it from the
ship to the shore.
During his visit to the U.S.A. at the end of 1941, the D.X.S.R, had seen the Naval Lighter
Pontoon Equipment.
This had been designed by the American Navy for use in establishing piers
in istonds, which had been seized, so that stores and equipment could be landed quickly where there
were no facilities previously provided.
He considered this equipment could be redesigned and
modified to form pontoon causeways which could be towed by the L.S.T.
In November, 1942, when " Husky" was first broached, D.X.S.R. drew attention to the fact
that the L.S.T.s intended for this operation were not adapted for use on beaches with gradual slopes
and that some special equipment would be required for the slope of the Sicily beaches.
The American authorities were advised through the British Mission at Washington and several
signals passed on the matter.
It became obvious, however, that this requirement was not receiving
the attention that it deserved, and, in view of the imminence of the operation, the matter was
brought to the notice of the Chiefs of Staff Committee who decided that D.X.S.R. should at once
proceed to Washington to make inquiries on the spot and to stress the vital importance of this
The result of this visit is best described in the report made by D.X.S.R. to a meeting of the
Executive at C.O.H.Q. as on his return :—
"Bridging Equipment for L.S.T. (2)
D.X.S.R. stated that on his arrival in Washington on 4th March, 1943, no trials had
been carried out with the Naval Pontoon or Army Treadway Bridging, nor had any steps
been taken for the provision of this equipment, its assembly or shipment............•
Field-Marshal Dill and Admiral Noble had, subsequent to discussion with D.X.S.R.,
taken up the matter with the Combined Chiefs of Staff and as a result Admiral Kirk, U.S.N.,
had put at D.X.S.R. disposal two L.S.T. (2) in order that trials could be carried out with
the Naval Pontoon and the Treadway.
The trials were more successful than had been originally hoped.
With the Naval
Pontoon, M.T. was landed within ten minutes of the L.S.I. grounding while, with the Army
Treadway, this was done within three-quarters of an hour. Both types of equipment could
be towed from one ship to another.
The present position was that Naval Lighter Pontoons were being provided for one
L.S.T. in every six and a certain number of Army Treadway Bridging sets was also being
provided A the carim and Weten fat forenal seniower, ho could re alocie
pontoon equipment became available to the British.
It was not until the campaign in North Africa had been successfully completed that the naval
The pontoon cells were made up into rafts 175 ft. long and 30 ft. wide with shaped ends to
in the Sicily landings.
Ramps had been designed for the shore endat ti were not received in time for use
bridging equipment and fitted to one end of each raft.
were therefore constructed from Royal Engineer
landing craft.
These rafts were towed to the assault beaches by L.S.T. and manœuvred into position by minor
both en route and after arrival.
The rafts were a success although considerable damage was done by bad weather
186
The lessons learned from their employment in this campaign were that :—
(1) Ramps at the shore end were essential as an integral part of the raft.
(2) Anchoring arrangements were necessary both at the shore and the seaward end.
(3) Improved towing arrangements were necessary.
(4) It was extremely difficult to manœuvre landing ships and craft
and secure without damaging the raft.
up to the
seaward end
(5) Tracked recovery vehicles with winches ashore and tugs afloat were necessary as part
of the team responsible for operating the raft.
(6) Several rafts could be secured together providing a causeway
with extending " finger
piers" to enable simultaneous unloading of a variety of landing ships and craft.
(7) It was likely that less damage to and shifting of the raft would occur if it could be sunk
into position instead of floating.
(8) It was imperative that adequate " working up" should take place with operating teams,
ships, craft and vehicles to be employed in an operation.
Subsequently, during the preparations for the invasion of France, a great deal of work was
done in the U.K. to develop the equipment to its best advantage.
Some of these trials were carried out by C.O.X.E. while others were carried out by the individual
Service Ministries of the Ministry of Supply at the suggestion of C.O.H.Q. and attended by C.O.H.Q.
and C.O.X.E. officers.
Thus trials were carried out to determine :—
(1) How best to tow the rafts and the optimum size of rafts to stand Channel weather.
(2) The best form of ramp to use at either end of a causeway and the most effective machinery
for handling the ramps.
(3) How best to maintain the equipment in operation; the crews, vehicles and small craft
(4) What multiples of pontoon cells could be best used for the variety of purposes to which it
was proposed to put them.
(5) Comparison of floating and sunken causeways.
A considerable number of equipments were evolved as a result of all these trials and during
the Normandy landings N.L. Pontoon Cells, as they were officially titled, saw service in the following
(1) Causeways for bridging the water-gap between shore and L.S.T.s or L.C.T.s. These were
used in two ways principally,
(a) as floating causeways of constant length rising and falling with the tide, and
(b) as sunken causeways covering the distance across the beaches so providing a solid
roadway on to which vehicles and men could be discharged at all states of the
The latter had the advantage that it was more easily maintained in position and
was less susceptible to damage in bad weather.
(2) Large self-propelled rafts, working between ship and shore, fitted with ramps to enable
discharge either direct on to the beach or on to a causeway.
(3) Small self-propelled pontoons used as shallow water tugs.
(4) Piers and landing stages.
After the invasion of France was successfully completed, attention was directed to the special
problems raised by the vast distances involved in the Pacific war.
The C.O.X.E. (India) was charged with problems such as towing or carrying pontoons over
long distances and operations in soft mud and narrow rivers. One of the methods tried with the
L.S.T. was the side carriage method, but this did not prove very successful due to the weather,
on the one trial run to the Far East, causing one of the two pontoons carried to be sunk. The end
of the war with Japan put a stop to carrying out further trials.
The side carrying method was, how-
ever, used by the Americans throughout all operations in the Pacific with every success.
Amphibians
A further solution to the problem of making possible a quick build-up of stores and of bridging
the water-gap was the Amphibian.
Two versions were developed, one tracked like a tank and the
other with wheels like a normal lorry.
H• 2
187
17
WO 277/21
27
30
