The inexperience of drivers, resulting in innumerable accidents, the lack
of heavy repair facilities to enable the wrecks to be put on the road again, and
bad maintenance, were other contributory factors in a chronic shortage of
Inspectorate of M.T.
In June, 1942, the establishment of an R.A.S.C. inspectorate of M.T. in
Early in 1943, the command informed War
Office that circumstances peculiar to West Africa indicated that there should
be one Chief Inspector of M.T. for all transport in the command.
appointment was then on a R.A.S.C. regimental establishment.
posed that the M.T. inspectorate should be under R.E.M.E., as the military
authorities on the spot were confident that this arrangement would work
Africa Command, where there was a similar problem, to the effect that the
functions of the R.A.S.C. inspectorate were essentially those of detailed
examination and technical administration,
including accountancy, within
A.S.C. units, on behalf of D.D.S.T.
Detailed inspection of W.A.A.S.C.-
operated vehicles was incidental to this primary function.
The early assump-
tion of these full functions by the C.I.M.T., R.A.S.C., was most desirable, and
it was essential to retain him on a R.A.S.C. regimental basis.
That portion
of the inspectorate hitherto employed in connection with Heavy Repair Shops
and V.R.Ds. should be made available for employment under R.E.M.E.
West Africa replied that it was impossible to separate the R.A.S.C. and
R.E.M.E. Inspectorates, owing to reasons peculiar to the command, and
asked for approval of the continuation of a combined inspectorate, controlled
by R.E.M.E., 30 per cent. of the personnel to be R.A.S.C. The matter was
discussed by D.S.T. and D.M.E., and West Africa was informed that the M.T.
inspectorate (C.I.M.T.), R.A.S.C., was to remain a R.A.S.C. regimental
organization. As the predominating requirement, however, was the inspection
of vehicles on behalf of R.E.M.E., it was agreed that the R.A.S.C. inspectorate
should be at the disposal of R.E.M.E. for six months.
Recreational Transport
In September, 1943, Treasury approval was given to the relaxation of the
conditions governing the use of W.D. M.T. vehicles for recreational purposes
The limit of 20 miles for each journey, and the repayment
charges, were waived, subject to the discretion of divisional commanders or
The minimum of two miles each way, and the limit of one
journey a week for each individual, were to continue to stand.
Water Transport
There was no War Department Fleet in West Africa before the war.
Gradually vessels were taken into use at the main ports, until, with the
increase of traffic through West African ports involved in the build-up of the
forces for the Middle East and East African campaigns, there came the need
for a motor boat company in these ports.
434
A company was accordingly formed in the United Kingdom, and went to
West Africa in April, 1941.*
The European personnel sent out were cox-
swains, administrative, and workshop personnel only, the deck crews and
engineers being recruited locally into the W.A.A.S.C.
The unit took out a
considerable number of craft, and made up the balance of its requirements
by local requisition and purchase.
The company had a difficult career,
owing partly to the lack of proper slipways for the maintenance necessary to
counteract the ravages of the teredo worm, and partly to a lack of proper
appreciation by the staff of the correct principles of administration of water
transport. In spite of these disadvantages, it did most valuable work.
with only seven vessels working at Freetown, 12,000 personnel were carried
With the decline of West Africa as an active operational theatre, there was
no longer the necessity for an operational Motor Boat Company in the theatre,
and its functions were accordingly taken over by a static Water Transport
A basic trouble in the operation of the Motor Boat Company had been
the shortage of European staff. It is noteworthy that the R.A.F., for their
water duties, operated an apparently fully Europeanized service
This was an obviously anomalous state of affairs, and, added to insufficiency
of craft, it resulted in the military water transport service falling into bad
In considering the task confronting the commander of the unit, it is
necessary to realize the immense difficulties in administering a unit which
covered a coast-line equal in distance to that from London to Cyprus. Added
to this, the lack of rail and telephone communications between the colonies,
and the effect of continuous tropical rainfall, humid heat, rust, and mildew,
all complicated the satisfactory operation of waterborne craft.
An increase in the British establishment by five officers and twenty-two
other ranks, the addition of a number of vessels, and the provision of work-
shop and slipway facilities, eventually produced a satisfactory water transport
On the formation of the Army Catering Corps, the Commander, Sierra
Leone Area, in May, 1941, applied for a catering adviser to be posted to that
G.H.Q., however, only asked War Office for one catering adviser for
the whole command.
He duly arrived in Freetown, and was claimed by the
Commander, Sierra Leone Area, to operate as Command Catering Adviser
It was found that one officer, working from Freetown, could
not supervise the catering in the entire command, and an Area Catering
Adviser was accordingly obtained for each colony, the Command Catering
Adviser going to G.H.Q. in the Gold Coast, and dealing with that colony
Schools of Cookery to teach Africans to cook European rations were the
first step.
Later, when a field service ration was introduced for the African
troops, it was found to be imperative to teach the African soldier how to
cook African rations.
435
