experience, fully capable of carrying out their duties while under fire and
suffering from fatigue.
Untrained or partially trained men might hazard the
success of the expedition.
Moreover, it was most desirable that casualty
replacements should be easily forthcoming from sources capable of providing
equally efficient reinforcements in the numbers required.
The R.A.S.C. could provide not only all the services outlined above, but
also the necessary replacement of casualties; but, in order that their services
might be used to the best advantage, two conditions were regarded as of prime
importance: —
(a) The personnel and transport were to become an integral part of the
Division.
(b) The personnel must be regarded as permanently attached.
One infantry brigade company was required; but, owing to the limitations
imposed by shipping space and the lighter equipment of the division, the unit
could be on a lower scale than the normal Army unit of this type, and it was
therefore proposed that it should consist of a company headquarters, two
transport platoons, two R.D.Is., one composite platoon, and one workshop
platoon, Serial 3.
A L. of C. infantry brigade company, R.A.S.C., was then attached to the
Royal Marine Division to meet the needs of an exercise.
The Royal Marines
soon asked that this company should remain attached, as it was a valuable
adjunct.
This was agreed, and the R.A.S.C. unit was re-designated the Royal
Marine Division Composite Company, with a composition as proposed by the
Admiralty, plus a second composite platoon.
The one company was con-
sidered to be adequate for the limited rôle of the division, and the attachment
of a second company was consequently refused. In order to make a reserve
of R.A.S.C.-operated vehicles available, the Field Ambulance with the division
was to be equipped with 3-ton lorries; when these were not required to move
medical equipment, they would be available to the C.R.A.S.C. for general
transport duties.
The War Office had agreed to the provision of this company, as a unit
which would have to be provided in any case; and, if the R.M. Division took
part in a major operation, where their task was limited and their early with-
drawal probable, the company could be regarded as part of the transport
requirement of the force, and be left behind when the Royal Marine task was
finished and they had been withdrawn.
If the unit was not provided in the
Order of Battle, then it would have to be improvised, or provided at the
expense of a military formation.
D.S.T's. policy was opposed to improvised
units, or to units which, though trained, had not worked immediately with
the formation they served.
create their own second line services.
It was a question if the
Marines should
these, but for the Admiralty to produce the manpower.
It was reasonable for S.T. to provide
The Admiralty then decided that it could provide all the ancillary unis
but the medical and workshop personnel, and suggested that these should be
The War Office said it would provide all or none; but if it was to
be all, then the Admiralty should transfer manpower cover.
In August, 1943, all Army units of the Royal Marine Division were will;
for manpower.
drawn, to meet serious shortages resulting from the cut in the Army demand
74
SECTION 2.-SPECIAL TRANSPORT
Types of R.A.S.C. Vehicles-General Policy
It has always been the policy of the R.A.S.C. to avoid the employment
of specialized types of vehicles, as these cannot be switched from one job
to another when not needed for their particular task, and therefore stand
idle.
The maximum value is not therefore obtained from them; on the other
hand, they absorb as much manpower as general duty vehicles for their
operation and maintenance, sometimes more.
Flexibility is required in the
transport of a force, so that the maximum number of vehicles can be switched
to meeting urgent demands for carrying any type of load.
The " one-purpose"
vehicle is,
therefore,
undesirable; and demands for the inclusion of com-
panies so equipped in Orders of Battle were often scaled down in consequence.
Before the war, there were few special types of vehicle in use in the R.A.S.C.
Such as there were included technical workshop, stores, and breakdown lorries,
ambulances, and bridge-carrying lorries.
Situation on Mobilization
On mobilization, the vast majority of R.A.S.C. vehicles, apart from peace
holdings were civilian-type,
acquired by
impressment,
and by
no
lucaus
standardized.
As the war went on, and vehicles were acquired in bulk from
manufacturers, primarily for military purposes, they were fitted with standard
W.D. bodies.
Naturally, a process of modification went on, so that design
might be brought nearer to users' requirements.
Demand for Special Types
At a very early stage in the war, there began to be a demand for special
types of vehicles for particular natures of work which could not be carried
out by normal types of vehicles.
The rule against specialized vehicles did
not apply in most of these cases, as the requirement was generally for large
numbers of a type which it was certain would be constantly and fully employed
in their own tasks, and whose use would in fact often relieve other types of
transport, or effect an economy, or provide a more efficient method of doing
certain work.
Special Transport Units
The first units to be equipped with a new special type of vehicle were
the bulk petrol transport companies sent to France in December, 1939, to
carry out petrol distributive duties at the base and on the L. of C.
They
eased the strain on the organization for the supply of petrol by container.
These vehicles were not, however, completely useless for any other purpose.
In the winter of 1940-1941, when enemy air-attacks on the United Kingdom
were at their height, several bulk petrol transport companies were employed on
the carriage of water for the civilian population of London and other cities,
when the normal supply had been disrupted; and they also carried water on
occasion in overseas theatres.
The next special type of unit called for was the Works M.T. Company,
to consist mainly of tipping lorries, for use on R.E. works in the theatre
of operations, the construction of airfields, roads, etc.
No special provision
had been foreseen, or made, for this requirement before the war.
The tipper
WO 277/21.
27
WO 27726-
