Petrol was normally supplied to divisions in cans, but in static con-
ditions, e.z., before the crossing of the River Gargliano, it was sometimes
possible to send road tanker lorries direct to the D.M.A., where a detach-
ment of a M.P.F.C. filled cans.
This method had the dual advantage of
several handlings of cans, and of making formations
eliminating
"can
conscious
The tactical situation, the presence of rivers, and the state of the roads
(especially during the
winter
in the
mountains) often made it necessary
to form forward dumps in advance of the D.M.A.
An example of this,
and an indication of the difficulties of maintenance, is to be found in the
case of a force of four brigades with supporting troops in the mountains
north of the River Gargliano.
A base dump and two dumps in the
mountains were
established, the maintenance route being by jeeps and
trailers to the base
dump, and by pack transport to the forward ones.
Initially this force had been maintained for a week by DUKWs, which
travelled in convoys up the coast by night and discharged on the beaches.
During the winter of 1943-1944, the maintenance chain of divisions on
the Fifth Army front was as follows: —
(a) Roadhead or railhead.
(b) Road capable of taking 3-ton lorries.
(c) Road or track passable for jeeps only.
(d) Tracks passable only for mules.
(e) Porterage.
In the following winter, some of the 3-ton roads were only usable by
four-wheel drive vehicles, owing to the mud.
Divisional R.A.S.C.
The method of employment of Divisional R.A.S.C. differed in forma-
tions and according to circumstances.
Some instances are given below.
78 Division used its second line transport resources on a pool basis for
tasks as required.
One platoon was lent to C.R.E. for the carriage of
divisional RE, stores. this was replaced in the Divisional P.A.S.C. by a
platoon of "B" Echelon first line transport vehicles.
56 Division organized its companies on the following basis, in orde
to standardize the nature of work for each as far as possible:-
Divisional Troops Company ...
All ammunition replenishing.
A Brigade Company ...
All troop-carrying,
with six 3-ton
lorries attached from another com-
pany
The company was organized
in three platoons, each of 22 lorries,
i.e., enough for a Brigade lift.
A Brigade Company ...
All replenishment of supplies and
P.O.L.
A Brigade Company ...
All R.E.
work, and the remainder
of vehicles on call as required.
282
6 British Armoured Divisiom operan it normally on a commodity basis,
but each company was able in tetintain sts group independently if necessary.
but method of loading is of interest, a system which proved satisfactory in
three campaigns.
When the Division was committed in operations, second
ine transport was loaded in accordance with staff tables, the ammunition
and P.O.L. carried constituting the holding for successive D.M.As.
This
arrangement was simple; it was economical as the complete stock of the
.M.A. was automatically lifted forward on each move; and appreciation
of the stock position was facilitated.
When additional transport was re-
quired for a special purpose, e.g.,
ammunition dumping or extra petrol,
it was decided which vehicles should be oft-loaded to make it available.
HAr
an ammunition dumping programme, it was found safe as a rule to off-load
S.A.A. and some P.O.L.; for extra petrol, gun ammunition and heavy tank
ammunition could be off-loaded.
In 1 Canadian Corps, the practice differed between infantry and armoured
divisions.
In the former, the three Infantry Brigade companies were used
as commodity companies, and the Divisional Troops company for troop-
carrying and general transport.
The organization was, however, switched
to a composite basis occasionally and readily.
In the Armoured Division,
during active operations,
the Armoured
Brigade company, the Infantry Brigade company, and the Armoured Divi-
sional Troops company maintained their respective groups on a composite
basis; when the division was in reserve or in a static rôle, the system was
changed to a commodity, or semi-commodity, basis.
By semi-commodity
was meant, for example, that if the Armoured Brigade company was respon-
sible for su for example, that anth handled the ammunition for the Armoured
Brigade, as this was a specialized job.
The key-note was flexibility; it was held that success in the time y-
ment of second line transport lay in not allowing anyone at any time to
become wedded to a preconceived idea.
Beach-head Maintenance
An unusual method of supply was used to maintain the British and
ferry service 40 TaTe Cocaina 1 500 3-ton a 10 to lorries, was run
from the base at Naples.
300 lorries were loaded every day, 50 in each
L.S.T. the 1,500 tons carried being divided into 60 ner cent. ammunition
20 per cent, each supplies and petrol.
the same way.
lorries ran direct off the craft to the depots, and then returned empty in
The craft docked at Anzio, where the
Transport Availability
In times of stress in this campaion. ep during the first weeks after
dE 30 task vehicles for each platoon,
work the vehicles 20 hours a dav.
and it was sometimes necessary to
definitely, and as soon as the way; slackened it was found to be a good
This strain could not be endured in-
practice to limit availability to 29 vehicles a platove
This allowed every
283
wes
+717
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
