only. These requirements were met by the L.S.I. (H.) (Hand-hoisting) which carried six landing
craft at spse davits; the craft had to be hoisted by hand but the ships were later fitted
Ships were converted into L.S.I. (H.) both for
They carried about 30 officers and 400 men each.
After the assault, the landing craft
would be left in the operational area and the ships used as short passage troopers.
were originally ordered, but nineteen only could be found from the available shipping.
converted to White Ensign :
Brigadier, Duke of Wellington, Invita, St, Helier, the Royal Scotsman
were converted for service under the Red Ensign.
company Cross-Channel ships of low endurance, some of them coal-fired.
They were all quite
unsuitable for service outside the Channel, but they fulfilled their limited function for " Overlorde
General Somervell (Chief of the Service of Supply in the U.S.A.) suggested, in the early autumn
of 1942, that the shortage of L.S.I. (H.) should be made up by the employment of shallow draught
U.S. river steamers as L.S.I. and fourteen were selected, of which only four arrived in this
In the event it was not found possible to use them, except as accommodation ships at
Combined Training Centres.
In November, 1942, the Canadian authorities offered two ships for conversion into L.S.I.s (M.)
and the crews to man them.
This offer was accepted and H.M.C.S. Prince Henry and Prince David
were converted in Canada under Canadian supervision. They were larger ships than the Queen Emma
(gross tonnage 6,983 as against 4,135) and were given an increased armament of two director-
controlled twin 4-in. mountings, two hand-worked single Bofors all on the centre-line, and eight
Oerlikons. Communications to the existing S.N.O.L. or Brigade Headquarters' standard were fitted.
This was more comprehensive than previous installations in S.N.O.L. ships.
was retained and six L.C.A. and two L.C.M. (3) were carried at davits.
Their troop capacity was
30 officers and 500 other ranks. By the time the ships came into service, the requirement for carrying
L.C.M. had lapsed to some extent, owing to the difficulty of having L.C.M.s, converted for additional
hoisting, readily available.
Though the ships were converted generally to the British staff
requirements, inexperience in the type of work in Canada led to a number of minor alterations having
to be carried out while the ships were in the European theatre.
After serving with a R.C.N. complement, both in the Mediterranean and Home theatres of war,
they were due to be taken in hand in 1945 for further conversion for service in the Far East, which
included transfer over to the R.N., as Brigade H.Q.
Ships for a Commando Brigade.
was abandoned on the collapse of Japan.
Had further time been available, their 4-in. armament
would have been replaced by twin Bofors mountings which would have complied with the current
staff requirements and would have reduced the overloaded condition of the hulls.
Need for closer control during the early stages of an assault, which had been experienced in
Operation " Ironclad" and on many exercises, had firmly established the requirement for a S.N.O.L.
for each Brigade front.
Brigade Headquarters Ship.
This required one L.S.I. (L) in three to be fitted as a S.N.O.L. or
For "Torch" (North Africa only three White Ensign L.S.I. (L.) for S.N.O.L. were available
but the two extra required were provided from Red Ensign ships.
in this operation was Red Ensign.
The entire balance of L.S.I. (L.)
I.S.I. (M.) and (S.) were established as special duty or Commando carrying ships, working to
a flank or special objective.
Madagascar experience had shown the need for spare landing craft crews and bigger and
better-organised beach parties. All these extras, together with their equipment, had to be carried
the expense of the lift of fighting troops.
the he .., (.) with an increased bulk of landing craft spare air stores, all unfortunately at
L.S.I.s. 1943
Experience had shown that, while it was desirable for all L.S.I. to be White Ensign, it was
essential for the L.S.I. (L.) in which the S.N.O.L. was embarked and from which he exercised
The importance of gettine the assaulting infantry and the naval beach personnel ashore
quickly necessitated a larger number of assault craft per ship, spur or gallows davits being reluctantly
Naval experience in the Mediterranean generally, and " Torch" in particular, had shown the
orave risk of air attack to large ships and called for much improved H.A. protection.
A new set of
staff requirements covered these points with special modifications for L.S.I. (L.) carrying S.N.O.L.
The Glenearn and the Glenvoy had been severely damaged in the Middle East in 1941. Near
misses and direct hits by small and medium bombs, serious fires, damage from torpedo bombers
and serious stranding had in turn ravaged one
or the other. But the ships were still afloat and it was
clearly more economical to repair and refit them than to replace.
policy of the Alfred Holt Companies in setting a higher standard of construction and a greater
margin of safety for their ships in their original form must take credit for this. These two damaged
Glens were taken in hand and, after about six months in dockyard hands, emerged with three
director-controlled twin 4-in. mountings, generous batteries of Oerlikons,
accommodation, twenty-four L.C.A. at davits or spurs and the encreased S.N.O.L. requirements.
The losses of the large L.S.I. (L.) employed in "Torch" were causing the Minister of War
A paper of 24th May, 1943, drew attention to the position and pointed
out that the present L.S. I.s (L.) in use included nine liners of 15-23,000 tons.
Their use as assault
ships exposed them to exceptional risk and their retention for operational use, usually in the U.K.,
meant that they could not be used for trooping at any time.
The shortage of troops
and these ships could undoubtedly be most economically employed as troopers.
War Transport reported that no further suitable British ships of 15 knots or upwards were
The nearest existing ships to meet the ideal requirements were :-
Certain of the Dutch Jays.
Both types were operated by the American Army and Navy;
several of the Jays were then
trooping and the American programme still included a number of combat loaders under con-
The Minister of War Transport recommended that nine ships from American production
should be converted to British L.S.I. (L.) and should replace large liners, and, further, that another
four ships should be provided to cover estimated 1943 operational casualties.
types could, however, be provided, so it was decided that thirteen American C.I.B.1 cargo hulls
should be converted to enable the big troopers to be withdrawn. The C.I.B.s were converted specially
cross-Channel operation; they were to carry eighteen L.C.A.,
a maximum number of troops and be fitted with the best available close-range H.A. armament.
They were to serve under the Red Ensign and, for the first time, British L.S.I.s incorporated cafeteria
messing for the troops. These C.I.B.s started to arrive in Home Waters at the end of 1943, and
proved to be sound austerity L.S.I. (L.) for use in the Channel.
L.S.I.s, 1944
During 1944, every available landing ship was required for operations, and exceptional sacrifices
had to be made to refit landing ships, particularly the L.S.I.s, in time for " Overlord."
Except for
the few employed in the Mediterranean, every L.S.I. took part in this operation after a gruelling
period of training and, in some cases, directly following Mediterranean operations.
When ports were available, the L.S.I.s continued to work as troopers.
Two of the Weapon
class and the L.S.I. (S.) Prince Leopold were sunk in the Channel and several, including the Glenearn,
were damaged by mines.
WO 277/21
27
30
The successful L.S.I. (M.) was still wanted for Commando and raiding work but was suspect
for the arduous Far Eastern conditions. Built to light scantlings they were now, by the addition of
armament and considerable constructional weight, overloaded and there was little spare room for
improvements. They had, nevertheless, served magnificently in the Mediterranean and as far afield
as the Arctic Circle, Madagascar, the Equatorial West Coast of Africa and India.
Queen Emma, Princess Beatrix, Prince Henry
and Prince David, were sent East, their small
range, endurance and limited sea-keeping qualities being accepted.
(S.), the Prince Albert and the Prince Baudouin, were included, but the remaining three
steam Belgians were ruled out as wholly unsuitable for employment in the Far East.
In July, 1944, the U.S.N. asked for some L.S.I.s (L.) for special employment in the Pacific.
As an emergency and at short notice, two L.S.I. (L.) fitted for S.N.O.I.
duties, four Empire
Weapons and the H.Q. ship Lothian were mounted as Force "X" and sailed west-about.
L.S.Í. (L.) of this Force entirely failed to satisfy the Americans, partly on account of the living
1C.I.B. More generally known as the Empire Weapons class.
