The occupants of the missing canoes succeeded in getting ashore further south and joining up with
some guerilla forces, and returned safely.
The information gained included :—
(a) An accurate cross section of the beach including underwater gradient at selected points.
(b) The bearing surface of the beach, including details of the runnels above the water level.
(6) Details of underwater runnels and of a spit off the beach, including heights of tide and rates
observed on the edge of the spit.
(d) Samples of surface above and below water level.
(e) A periscope photograph showing the beach silhouette.
(f) Information about enemy coast-watchers,
As a result of the above information, plans were made for the landing of 34 Corps on the Morib
beaches and the beaches between Port Dickson and Cape Rachado.
The remaining members of C.O.P.P. 3
were to have been used for marking the channel and guiding the assault craft.
This was later cancelled
in view of the situation.
During the planning of the two operations on Puket Island, it was decided that three deception raids
should also be carried out in view of the risk of compromise.
Two of these were to be done in Burma
(" Bruteforce" and "Dandy
") and one in N. Sumatra (" Cattle ").
"Dandy" was abandoned and the
two others, "Clearance Able" and " Baker" (Malaya and Thailand) respectively, were planned in place ;
the first of these was later dropped.
"Baboon" and "Copyright" were carried out on nights 8th/9th March and 9th/10th March
respectively.
70111112
these
operations seven all ranks were lost.
In view of the increased risk
compromise, S.A.C.S.E. A. ordered two further raids to be carried out, one in Burma (" Fairy") and the
other in Nicobar Islands (" Defraud ").
These operations and the ones
mentioned above,
"Bruteforce," " Cattle " and " Clearance Baker," were carried out by R.M. Detachment 385.
namely
All were
successful except for " Bruteforce," in which the party was lost, and " Fairy" in which the party never
got asnore.
(Sprat by operation colving attacks ne was coastal i tives ward and carried out by S.B.S.
and " Baker") of which one was successful.
In this a road and bridge in N. Sumatra
was destroyed.
The operations undertaken for the clandestine organisations (I.S.L.D., Force 136, "E" Group
and O.S.S.) were all carried out by R.M. Detachment 385 and involved landings in every country in original
South-East Asia Command.
The largest of these operations was
in which 8,000 lb.
of stores were landed for the guerillas operating on the east coast of Johore, and 12 men were evacuated.
H.M. Submarine Thule was used for the operation, the landing being carried out in nine power-driven
and three dumb L.C.R.
Force Commanders' Operations
One hundred and fifty-four Force Commanders' operations were carried out, all of which took place
either on the Arakan coast or on the Burma rivers.
Every sub-unit with the exception of two of the
troops of R.M. Detachment 385 did at least one attachment to a Force Commander.
with the exception
All these sub-units
14th Army or 15th Corps.
of C.O.P.P., who were attached to F.O. Force "W", were attached either to
The operations on the Arakan coast included reconnaissance of defences, pre-assault surveys of
beaches, interrogation through an interpreter, the bringing back of other natives for interrogation at
base and acting as advanced party to a small Commando base.
period and "A"
In the initial stages of the Arakan campaign C.O.P.P. 8 was attached to F.O. Force " W" for a short
Group was placed under command of 3rd S.S. Brigade.
From 23rd November to
defences on the coast, in the Ramree Island and Taungup areas.
deth Decembe, "st toup 5. B.S, carried out a number of operations including reconnaissa cre of
20th That aton them Ki in Royalty are pro to Chet captor te hich They on sand
S.B.S. at the end of December.
They were relieved by
26th Indian Division in the drive south from Kyaukpyu by operating in the aure of Kamtee and Taungup.
Third Section S.R.U. also came under command of 2uth Divisating in the area of y and operated in the
Taungup area.
assault on Rangoon.
Finally, "C" Group S.B.S, and C.O.P.P. 9 accompanied the troops carrying out the
During this period C.O.P.P.s 1, 3, 4, and 9 had also been operating in the Arakan under F.O, Force
Island and in the area of Taungup.
Their operations included pre-assault surveys of bea oes ating in the ebon Peninsula, Ramee
reconnaissance patrols and "Jitter" parties across the rivers.
The operations on the Burma rivers included reconnaissane of river crossings, river patrols, land
240
The first sub-unit to operate with the 14th Army was "B" Group S.B.S., who operated from
1th November to 1 CoDecember, 1944, under command of 11th (E.A.) Division
They were responsible
if reconnoitring the crossing places on the River Chindwin for the assault brigade and for the remainidle
of the division.
across the river.
They also carried out several other tasks in conjunction with this information on o1
The S.O.G. Units took an important part in 14th Army's crossing of the River Irrawaddy.
crossings of 20th In 24th /visiOn ou 12th/13th February, 7th Indian Division on 13th/14th February
and 2nd Division on 20th/25 th February were reconnoited by sub-units of S.B.S, and S.R.U., who asy
guided the assault troops to the correct beaches.
"A" Group S.B.S. and Ist Section S.R.U. also operated on the Irrawaddy, from 15th April, 1945
to 28th May in conjunction firstly with 7th Indian Infantry Division and latterly with 20th Indian
Infantry Division.
These divisions were operating in the area of Seikpyu and had been given the task of
preventing the Japanese withdrawing from the Arakan across the River Irrawaddy.
conditions at the end of May, these sub-units were withdrawn.
In view of weather
Casualties and Total Number of Operations Carried Out
The total number of operations carried out was 174, and the casualties suffered were as follows :—
Killed
Three officers, three other ranks.
Prisoners-of-War
.. In Japanese hands :—
Three officers and one other rank.
(One officer subsequently liberated. Remainder
executed at Singapore in July, 1945).
Interned in Thailand :—
Three officers and one other rank (all liberated).
Missing
Three officers and six other ranks (two officers and
two other
ranks joined up with guerilla forces
and later liberated.
officer and four other
ranks still not accounted for).
Wounded
One officer and one other rank (both returned to
S.B.S.).
WO 277/21.
27
3Ф
241
