Mobilization Policy
The general policy was that, after 1st January, 1944, all units passed under
command of 21 Army Group one week after they completed mobilization.
Units which had completed mobilization by 3lst December, 1943, assed
automatically under command of 21 Army Group on Ist January, 1944, and
later units in accordance with the general policy, except in particular cases.
The latter included certain units which were engaged in essential work
in the United Kingdom connected with preparations for the overseas cam-
paign and mounting " Overlord", and special provision was made for these
to remain under War Office control.
General Plan for Mounting Operation "Overlord"
The plan for launching the assault forces required the establishment in the
United
Kingdom of zones,
through
which all
"essential troops"
those forming part of the assault and initial stages of the operation) would
pass on their way to the sea.
These zones, or areas, were called Concentration
Areas, Marshalling Areas, Embarkation Areas, and Hards, respectively, and
are defined as follows:-
(a) Concentration Areas.—Those for the concentration of elements of
21 Army Group, within a distance of 75 to 100 miles from points of
embarkation.
(b) Marshalling Areas.—Those to which formations and units proceeded
from concentration areas to be broken down into ship or craft loads.
This involved a stay in the Area of from six to 36 hours, according
to availability
of shipping.
Troops allotted to the initial lift of
shipping and craft also concentrated in the Marshalling Areas.
(c) Embarkation Areas.-Points of embarkation for troops and vehicles.
(d) Hards.—Artificial loading piers and ramps for troops and vehicles,
constructed at ports where embarkation facilities were limited, en-
abling vehicles to be driven direct on to ships and craft.
Division of Responsibility
21 Army Group were responsible for: —
(a) Initial preparation of unis, in conjunction with War Office, and their
movement to concentration areás.
(b) General administration of troops in concentration areas, and their
further preparation for the operation.
(c) Movement of troops from concentration areas to marshalling areas.
This was done by the Buildo Control Organization (B.U.C.O.).
War Office was responsible for:-
(d) Maintenance, including issue of equipment and stores, in concenta-
tion areas, as for units in normal locations.
(e) Final issue of equipment in marshalling areas, using the available
resources of G.H.Q., Home Forces.
(f) Organization of movement from marshalling areas to embarkation
points, and subsequent movement overseas.
3) Maintenance of the force from the main base in the United Kingdom-
318
This outline plan formed the basis for planning by the various branches
at the War Office.
An executive "Q" Planning Committee was formed to
coordinate the administrative action to be taken by War Office, 2l Ar to
Group, G.H.Q., Home Forces and Home Commands.
of the plans as evolved in detail by the Committee was carried out by Com
The implementation
mands, the nature of whose tasks is described below.
Southern, South-Eastern, and Eastern Commands, and London District,
were directly conting commanmounting operations, and were consequently
known as "mounting commands", while Northern, Western, cond Scotisy
Commands, which were not directly concerned, were known for convenience
as "non-mounting commands".
Assistance to Commands by War Office
Thirteen marshalling areas were set up in the southern counties of
England.
Of these, Southern and Eastern Commands had three each, South-
Eastern Command five, and London District two.
The additional work of
carrying out the duties required in connection with these areas was beyond
the unaided capacity of the commands affected, whose resources were only
designed to deal with normal commitments.
In order to ensure that they
were able to meet their liabilities, War Office provided assistance in the form
of additional personnel and equipment. The personnel was of three categories;
individual officers specially attached; units of 21 Army Group not required
till later; and pioneer labour lent at the expense of equivalent War Office
depot allocations.
Supply Situation, 26th May, 1944
Consideration of the supply problems of mounting " Overlord" began in
November, 1943, when basic decisions were taken.
By 26th May, when
stock was taken of the degree of preparedness in this respect, practically every-
thing was ready.
below.
Some of the principal supply arrangements are described
(a) Concentration Area.-It had been decided that the Field Service (U.K.)
ration scale was to replace the home service scale in the concentration area.
This decision wa to replace the homes would be unable to deal with the 23a.
cash allowance, and N.A.A.F.I. would find it impossible to provide the com-
modities required for purchase with that allowance.
It had, however, been
the intention to d for purchase thi latest possible date, owing to the lack of
variety in the field service scale.
In fact, the commands in the south of
Ensland had taken services. (Uk. Scale by 11th May, 194.
It was possible
tor the C.S.Ds. to to the f.S. Supies in the normal way.
Everything had
been done, in conjunction with the N.A.A.F.I., for the issue of fresh equiva-
lents to the F.S. (U.K.) scale.
total ration streneth in the south and south-east caused serious difficulties in
But the concentration of a large part of the
the supply of these commodities, and commands held reserves of tinned
Vegetables canned hanna and dried dead and beans for issue as alternatives.
A special weekly train brought potatoes from Lincolnshire.
second line transport.
four davs' Comno and Race and To of a unite two davs'. in their first or
provide for carly maintenance overseas, formations were to say
A.F. Vs. were to carry three days' A.F.V. packs.
(37452)
319
wet
WO27721
27
WO277/26
