H.M.S.
Establishment
Northney (includes
Northney II and III)
Tormentor
Helder.
Stopford
Dorlin
Initial Training Centre for Naval Combined
Operations
Personnel
(and
Combined
Operations Training
tol
South
Eastern
Command).
Raiding Craft Training Centre (and Combined
Operations Training
TOL
Southern Com-
mand).
Parent Ship of Raiding Craft Flotillas (and
Combined Operations Training for Eastern
Command).
T.L.C.
Training Base.
Special Training Establishment
Warsa.
Brightlingsea, b
Bo'ness, Linlithgow.
Dorlin
House
Argyllshire.
Acharacle,
11. Special combined operational ships commissioned as H.M. ships in the British Isles are under
the command of the C.C.O. except during the period when they are placed under the orders of a loree
Commander appointed for the execution of a specific operation.
The movements of such ships
arranged by the C.C.O. who will keep the Admiralty and the appropriate Naval Commanders-in-Chief
informed of projected movements.
12. Merchant Navy ships which may be allocated by the Admiralty for combined operational
purposes will be attached to the C.C.O.'s command or that of the Force Commander as the case may be.
CLASSIFICATION OF SHIPS AND CRAFT
13. The term " Assault Ship" covers :—
Infantry Assault Ships, Classes I and II (I.A.S.).
Hired Transports employed as Assault Ships.
Merchant vessels employed as M.T. Ships
ank Landing Ships, Classes I and II (T.L.S.).*
M.L.C. Carrying Ships (M.C.S.), and
T.L.C. Carrying Ships (T.C.S.).
14. The term " Landing Craft " covers :—
Tank Landing Craft (Marks I to V) (T.L.C.).*
Motor Landing Craft (Marks I and IÌ) (M.L.C.).*
Vehicle Landing Craft (V.L.C.
Assault Landing Craft (A.L.C.).*
Raiding Craft (R.C.).
Navigational Raiding Craft, and Coble Raiding Craft (C.R.C.).
* Consequent on an agreement reached with the U.S.N. authorities in 1942, the words Landing Ship
(L.S.) or Landing Craft (L.C.) were placed first and then the designation, e.g., L.S.T., L.C.T., etc.
15. The term " Support Craft" covers :—
Beach Protection Craft (B.P.C.).
Heavy Support Craft (H.S.C.).
Light Support Craft (L.S.C.).
Note.—The guns' crews for all support craft are found by the Royal Marines.
NAVAL ADMINISTRATION
16, The administration of the above Commands and attached ships, the naval units of which
continue to remain the C.C.O.'s responsibility unless they are permanently detached from the Home
Stations, is carried out as follows :—
17. The Rear Admiral Landing Craft and Bases (R.A.L. B.) is responsible to the C.C.O. for the
naval administration of all bases and establishments under C.C.O.'s command.
Establishments (and Attached Craft)
Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.)) will be administered by the
18. All northern Combined Anerations Bases (excluding those occupied bv the Senior Officer Assaul
Northern Bases (S.N.O.C.O.N.) on behalf of R.A.L.B.
Operations Base), Roseneath, is appointed
Senior Naval Officer,
Combined Operations,
" and as S.N.O.C.O.N."
The Commodore, H.M.S.
Louisburg (Combined
do ation ith local authoritien matters controlled by them hut matters of policy
19. S.N.O.C.O.N. is authorised to communicate direct with the
Admiralty on matters of routine
and matters directly affecting the Combined Operations Organisation are to be submitted by him t
20. R.A.L.B. administers the Southern Bases direct, for the present.
216
Normandy beaches-Coasters beached.
D.U.K.W.s taking stores ashore.
Normandy beaches-L.C.T. beached showing roadway.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
