S.T.7 (b). Comprising the fuel and light section of S.T.6; and carrying
S.T.7 (c). —Comprising the Inspectorate of Barrack Services, hitherto
under the Inspector of the R.A.S.C.
The branch was under a D.D.S.T. (barracks), (colonel); S. T. 7 (a) consisted
of an A.D.S.T. and a staff captain; S.T.7 (b) of an A.D.S.T., a staff captain, a
fuel technologist, and a stati captain (A.T.S.); and S.T.7 (c) of the inspector
of barrack services, graded as an A.D.S.T.
In October, 1943, two staff captains in S.T.7 (b) were upgraded to
D.A.D.S.T., and a staff captain was added.
The fuel and light section was
then divided into: (i) Home, under a staff captain: (ii) Overseas, a D.A.D.S.T.
and a staff captain; and (li) Fuel Technology, a D.A.D.S.T.
In September, 1944, in consequence of the extra work involved in the
Shipment of fuel to the continent for military and civil requirements, the
overseas subsection was increased by a second staff captain, and the home
sub-section at the same time took over from the overseas sub-section the re-
sponsibility for overseas fuel and light scales, and for editing overseas local
The staff captain in S.T.7 (a) was upgraded to D.A.D.S.T., and a staft
captain was added in May, 1944.
Barrack Services before the War
The duties of the barrack department before the war included the following.
relative to troops quartered in barracks, permanent hutments, and hired
(a) Equipment of W.D. buildings with furniture, utensils, etc.;
(b) handing over furniture, etc., to units;
(c) accounting for such stores on inventory;
(d) replacement of unserviceable or deficient articles;
(e) charges for losses or damage;
(*) operation of contracts, etc., for the supply of electricity, fuel, gas, and
water, for chimney sweeping, sanitary services, and window cleaning
(g) issue of, and accounting for, fuel, illuminants, disinfectants, and
miscellaneous items, and water;
(h) authorization of claims for lodging, fuel, light, stable, and ofir
(i allotment of quarters.
Issuing and accounting for camp equipment in tented camps was not!
barrack service responsibility; but officers i/c barracks were responsible it
the issue of fuel, light, and other barrack supplies, to such camps, if there s
no officer i/c supplies in, or conveniently near, camp.
These duties were the function of R.A.S.C. officers i/c barracks, who vit
as a rule quarter-masters of the R.A.S.C.
their staffs were entirely civilian.
Apart from a few military des
The executive duties were carried of
throuch established civilian emplovees (ex-warrant officers or senior N.C.O
known as expense store accountants and fuel and light accountants, accor
to their particular employment as dealing with accommodation stores or fi
24
and light.
Each of them was responsible for one or more units, according
to the size of the latter, and their geographical grouping.
Expense store accountants were responsible for the equipment of W.D.
buildings with the necessary accommodation stores, furniture, etc.; for keeping
a record in an abstract of inventories of the stores issued to each unit on
inventory; for preparing the inventory boards which contained a record of
every item of furniture, etc., in each room, building, etc., thus providing an
easy check at the annual, marching-in or out, or unit inspections; for holding
the necessary stocks of stores for replacement of unserviceable stores; for
making exchanges; for making the proper charges for loss or damage; and for
supervising conservancy services.
Fuel and light accountants supervized the receipt and issue of solid fuel
in and from barrack coal yards, and made periodic checks of the contents of
unit coal yards, read electric light and gas meters, and checked the unit fuel
and light accounts.
The storeman's duties in connection with barrack stores were carried out
by barrack labourers.
Command Barrack Officer
In peace, the barrack services in a home command were supervised by the
Command Barrack Officer, who was a retired R.A.S.C. officer re-employed.
He was responsible to the A.Q.M.G. of the Command, direct and not through
the A.D.S.T. of the Command.
In Northern Ireland District, the
O.C.,
R.A.S.C., performed the duties of the C.B.O.; London District came within
the jurisdiction of the C.B.O.,
Eastern Command.
In stations abroad, the
A.D.S.T. or O.C., R.A.S.C., did the work, except in Egypt, where there was
a C.B.O., a serving officer.
The C.B.O's. position was anomalous and loosely defined.
He was neither
a staff officer nor the head of a service, and his relationship with the Staff, and
the extent of his obligations,
were uncertain
He could issue no directives or
instructions to the O.C., R.A.S.C. of a district (on whom rested the responsi-
bility for the well-being of the barrack services) and, unlike the head of a
service, he had no power to deal direct with his subordinates in the command
on technical matters.
In consequence of the recommendations of the Committee on Barrack
Services, which sat in 1941, an Area Barrack Officer with the rank of major
was appointed to the establishment of each O.C., R.A.S.C., a district or area,
except in the Aldershot and London Districts, where there were already
District Barrack Officers.
These officers were to advise Os.C..
R.A.S.C., and
supervise the many newly-appointed officers i/c barracks, who had no training
in barrack duties.
Further experience proved, however, that these appointments, and that of
an Inspector of Barrack Services, still failed to produce the necessary degree
of co-ordination.
The basic trouble was the division of responsibility between
D.S.T. and D.Q.
This divided responsibility was reflected at the headquarters
of commands, in the anomalous position of the C.B.O.
In order to rectify
this situation, the D.S.T. recommended that the designation of C.B.O. should
be changed to that of Assistant Director of Barrack Services, thus establishing
him as head of a service.
As such, he would have the advantage of direct
contact with his subordinates on his own particular subjects.
At the same
25
we77e717
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
