provision of certain additional craft.
The formation of the two Water Transport Companies necessitate
and mails, between the
high priority and urgent commitment for the carriage of supplies, pers
Dodecanese
Fast craft were required to mog,
ca 300 milem, in antion ain. crosing the Mediterranean, 270 m luc
Islands, involving a weekly turns
rounds and the difficulty of collecting containers in the heavily mind an
carriage of mail, etc., by air, had been ruled out owing to the long thi
The type of craft chosen for
this work was the standard Tot ting
towing launch with the range-rake
and turret fittings removed. Void
were provided under arrangements between S.T.1 and M.O.W.I, and i
launches were also allotted from production in the United Kingdom.
The provision of harbour launches was also arranged with MONT
who allocated craft from their local building programme in Middle Ex
for service with the R.A.S.C. In June, 1944,
a demand for 108 launde
to meet the increasing Army services in Middle East, was wholly meth
construction in the Middle East, though certain engines were provided i
the Admiralty.
In December, 1944, it was decided that S. and T., Middle East wol
take over full responsibility for the water transport services, as defined i
the Army Council directive of 5th June, 1944 (see Appendix VIIB). Tis
decision was followed by the conversion of a motor boat company into tri!
water transport companies, the additional personnel being civilian crews.
Control of Barrack Services
In December, 1943, the administration of the barrack services in te
Middle East was transferred from O.M.G. Branch to the D.S.T., GHI.
M.E.F., in accordance with the new policy laid down by War Ofic (e
Chapter II, Section 1).
The provisions of that policy were not, however, adopted in Milde Bas,
in so far as they related to camo equinment as this was not consider.
practicable, in view of the large number of camps situated in isolate lodies.
ants the lack of suitable civilians for employment as expense stor 20e
ants to operate the system.
Expansion of Establishment for Barrack Services
to examine the matter on the spot.
In view of this variation, the Inspector of Barrack Services was sent o
would be
the R.A.S.C. barrack establishment were expandi
He came to the conclusion that econom
to permit of the introduction of the inventory book system of accoun
for accommodation stores and camp equipment (as described in Chapter X
of this book) for all barrack hutments, hirings and static camps.
As a result of his recommendations, certain additions to establishments
were approved, to be implemented in two phases.
Phase I included the appointment of an A.D.S.T. (Barracks) at GHO,
to control and co-ordinate the Barrack Services in Egypt,
214
CRETE
CYPRUS
JERUSALEM
1I7
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
