development of the tactical situation.
Forward of the advanced bass, i
100 miles of P.O.L., for the forces based on it.
was the intention to build up F.sS saseach holding ten days" supi, sat
were to be held near each F.S.D.
Two refills of ammunition
Forward dumps, which were to be stifled
by supply personnel of the formations being served, were to hold varios
quantities of supplies, and 100 miles of P.O.L.
At the time of the German invasion,
the maintenance situation was
that the Armoured Brigade,
with two second line companies, was being
maintained from two forward dumps, the N.Z. Division by first line trans
port from daily pack trains, and the Australian division, with corps trog,
from F.S.Ds.
A Base Supply Depot, Type "B", had arrived, and mamed
the Athens supply depot and the Advanced Supply Depot.
A field bakey
was
used to support the B.S.D., as contracts had been placed for bread
to be produced in civilian bakeries.
The greater part of the petrol supply was in 4-gallon non-returnable
tins.
The bulk petrol filling centre was used to fill 44-gallon drums with
aviation spirit.
The petrol depot worked in the north, mainly engaged in
the stocking and maintenance of forward dumps, while the Bulk Petrol
Storage Company was located in the south, and was employed in the rapidly
expanding P.O.L. programme, which involved the operation of 12 suppl
points: five for packed P.O.L., four for bulk and packed, two bulk storage
depots for R.A.F., and one M.T. pump station for local transport.
The R.A.S.C. transport consisted of three companies with the Armoured
Brigade, three Reserve M.T. Companies, about a platoon of other load
carriers, a few ambulances, and an Advanced M.T. Depot.
The Australian
and New Zealand divisions had their own A.S.C.
At no time during the
campaign was there any real shortage of transport to cover normal te
quirements, but it has to be remembered that demands which would hav
and working did not materialize, owing to the curtailment of the operations.
arisen when the permanent bases and installations were fully developerl
No anal hirinos
were possible, as all available civilian transport had ben
requisitioned by the Greek Army.
It was not always possible to meet abnormal and unforeseen demand
such as that for some hundreds of lorries to evacuate Greek troop tro
positions.
ne the Maced frontier. were sent as a gesture, but in fact never got
SO lorries, the only transport within two days' mand
through, as the line was cut.
Albania by R.A.S.C. and Dominion A.S.C.
Greek troops were, however, evacuated from
trains en route to ES De were destroved hu air attack and road convoys
On several occasions, supply
had to be hastily organized to complete the stocking.
There was in fact an order that no supplies or M.T. were to be made
available to the Greek Army, but this could not be complied with owing to
the inevitability of this should have been realized, and accepted as a probable
and political grounds.
It was considered that
liability at the outset.
A considerable number of vehicles were rendered unusable before the
were anandoned
transferred to new locations as the
Stocks of supplies in F.S.Ds. had been either issued
Dumps were
withdrawal proceeded.
maintained from Larisa by road convoy until the advanced base was over-
Thereafter, D.I.Ds. were established at railway stations along the axis
no failure to issue rations during the retreat.
of withdrawal, and were dura upey road convoys.
In this way, there was
A pre-arranged plan for dumping supplies and P.O.L. on the beaches
was put into effect.
To cope with unforeseen increases in the number of
troops to be located in the Nauplion-Argos area, a D.I.D. was sent there,
and all available local transport used to stock it.
It also had the merit
that it enabled troops who could not be embarked, and were still holding
out, to be fed.
The depot was still issuing rations up to the night of
27th/28th April.
The stocks remaining in the B.S.D. were handed over to
the Greeks, and the E.F.I. stocks to the American Red Cross.
Hiree were
forbidden, so that it was impossible to ensure the wholesale destruction of
P.O.L., but large quantities were denied to the enemy by puncturing tins.
A large number of forces evacuated from Greece went direct to Egypt,
but a considerable proportion was taken across to Crete.
The Campaign in Crete
Until the evacuation from Greece, the British garrison in Crete consisted
of one infantry brigade.
The only R.A.S.C. for the maintenance of this
force consisted of a D.I.D. and 36 3-ton lorries.
With the influx of British and Greek troops from Greece the total
strength of the Allies in Crete increased to about 28,600.
It was therefore
necessary to use the R.A.S.C. personnel who had come from Greece to
establisty a modified B.S.D., a field bakery, and three D.I.Ds., while the
Australian and New Zealand troops used their own A.S.C., and a petrol
depot was sent from Egypt.
The stocks of supplies originally laid down in Crete represented 30
days for 30,000, or about the actual strength during the campaign.
The troops were disposed in four main sectors, Heraklion, Retimo, Suda
Bay, and Maleme, but the lack of communicating roads and the shortage of
transport made any large-scale reinforcement from one part of the island
to another impracticable.
The groups at Heraklion, Retimo, and at Suda
Bay-Maleme, therefore had to fight as separate entities.
Reserves were laid down in the sectors before the invasion, on the scale
Heraklion
60,000 rations,
10,000 gallons P.O.L.
Retimo
Maleme
40.000
5,000
80,000
5,000
rations.
In addition, all units were ordered to draw and hold three days' reserve
The main attack began on 20th
May,
1941, with the air-landing of
paratroops and glider-borne forces.
These were continually
reinforced in
suceding days, until it was estimated that there were over 30,000 in the
overwhelmed,
Only small reinforcements reached the British, who were gradually
having no air support.
Much of the base area fell into
enemy hands on in May, ar sue trakion garrison was evacuated on the
183
wO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
