The Chiefs of Staff rejected their plan principally because it envisaged British forces leaving
Dakar in the care of Free French forces after an unopposed landing, whereas the Chiefs of Staff now
required a plan for the capture and holding of Dakar against opposition, British Forces being
withdrawn only after General de Gaulle had a firm hold on the country.
The Force Commanders,
who had been hastily appointed, were now told to produce a plan to suit the new requirement.
This was submitted to the Chiefs of Staff on 21st August, 1940,1
The force sailed from Liverpool
on 26th August for Scapa Flow from where, after only four days training, they left for West Africa.
Much detailed planning had thus to be completed on the voyage to the assault area.
The story of the operation, which was a failure, is given in outline in Chapter 11, and it is
relevant, here, to give only the two main lessons learned, as they had an important impact on
future developments.
These were :—
(1) The need for a joint organisation to co-ordinate the planning and control of such
operations (i.e. Combined Operations Headquarters with executive powers).
(2) The need for special Headquarters Ships from which command of an operation could be
exercised, as opposed to using a supporting warship which might become involved
in a purely naval action.
Raiding Forces Employed in Anti-Invasion Role from September until the end of 1940
During the latter half of 1940, after the return of the forces from the abortive attempt on
Dakar, a number of other operations were being conside ed in Combined Operations Headquarters.
Chief among these were
(the capture of the Azores),
" Shrapnel" (the capture of the
Canary Islands) and " Workshop" (the capture of Pantellaria).
These operations competed for the available resources at the disposal of the D.C.O.
There was
great uncertainty as to the necessity of any or all of the projects and this naturally led to confusion
and much wasted effort.
In September all the available Commandos and Independent Companies were placed under
the command of the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, for an anti-invasion role.
This prevented,
for the time being, any further raids being carried out because these forces were not released to the
D.C.O. until the end of the year when the direct threat of invasion had passed.
Responsibility for Re-Planning and Control of Operations, Early 1941
On 22nd January, 1941, the Operations Section of Combined Operations Division in the
Admiralty, was transferred to Training and Staff Duties Division of which it became a Deputy
Directorate but this made no difference to its relation with D.C.O. on the one hand and the rest
of the Admiralty machine on the other.
In particular it still retained its close relation with Director
of Naval Equipment (Combined Operations), the material implementation department and with the
personnel departments.
Other features, however, were introduced during this period, which sowed the germs of instability
in the Combined Operations Organisation.
For the prospective operations against the Atlantic
Islands, it was soon found necessary to establish a Senior Naval Officer Landings (S.N.O.L.) afloat,
under the orders of the Force Commander in the mounting area (the Clyde), mainly to administer
the ships and craft, whilst the Force Commander was planning in London.
When Inveraray was selected as the mounting area, a situation arose where there were two
authorities in the same area, one the Vice-Admiral Combined Training Centre, and the other the
S.N.O.L. who were both engaged on training and the development of amphibious material, then in
Furthermore, since the Force Commanders' planning teams were not concerned with
the long term requirements and were out of touch with the Combined Operations Section of the
Admiralty, considerable friction occurred.
This was not assisted by the fact that the staffs, both
in Inveraray and London, were endeavouring to carry out the same functions.
Each staff was
theposed of two Sections, one being concerned with the long term programme and the fitting of
the shot term requirements into it to the best possible advantage, and a second, dealing only with
shedi operations, which was disinclined to accept any limitations affecting their interests from
the long terms planners.
New Directive for the Director of Combined Operations (D.C.O.), March, 1941
The directive issued to General Bourne in June, 1940, had never been replaced. Now that the
scope of Combined Operations had become larger. the Chiefs of Staff decided that a new directive
was necessary for Admiral Keyes.
full text is shown in Appendix 4.)
Accordinely on 14th March. 1941, a new one was issued. (The
1 Combined Operations Headquarters War Diary 109.
14
This document gave to the D.C.O. the duty of training the Special Service Troops and landing
craft personnel.
The Independent Companies, which had been raised by War Office, were renamed
Commandos in November, 1940, and ten such Commandos were formed into five Special Service
Battalions each of two Commandos. 1
The new directive charged him with the initiation of operations
by these Special Service Troops and the responsibility for the planning and execution of raiding
wich Involve not more clan a vuu men.
He was to advise the Chiefs of Staff on the technical aspects of landing operations and be
present at their meetings when " that part of the plan is under discussion?
The administration of the Special Service Troops was to be carried out by the War Office,
but no mention was made about any ships or craft which might have to be employed in combined
operations.
Hence it was presumed that the Admiralty undertook this duty in the normal course
of business although the carriers and landing craft for raiding purposes remained under the operational
command of the D.C.O.
The Inter-Services Training and Development Centres were also to be under his command.
Operations Planned in the Spring, 1941
The main preoccupation of the Directorate of Combined Operations, at this period, was the
plan for the occupation of the Canary Islands.
This operation had many names but it was generally
known as Operation " Pilgrim."
The training of the forces required for the operation was carried out in the vicinity of the
Combined Training Centre at Inveraray.
The transports, as they became available, were used for
the accommodation of the
forces and a considerable amphibious expedition came into being.
This force was capable of a three Brigade lift and was the beginning of the Overseas Assault Force
as subsequently developed.
Delays were the rule, not only in the fitting out of the ships, but also in the delivery of the
landing craft.
Building schedules in the bases were never kept resulting in so much confusion that
it was well nigh impossible to work to any fixed programme.
Operations in the Mediterranean
On 1st February, 1941, certain Special Service Battalions were again split up and Commandos,
as units, once more came into being, Nos. 7, 8 and 11 Commandos being despatched on that date to
the Middle East.
Two Middle East Commandos Nos. 50 and 52 were added, together with a
Brigade Headquarters, and the whole was known as " Lay Force," under the command of Brigadier
Laycock.
In April and May, 1941, this force, which had only recently arrived on the station, distinguished
itself in Greece and Crete.
With its special training and the ships and craft it used, it established
a name for itself.
Unfortunately the pressure of events was such that it got diverted from its
proper role and was divided up and used mainly in evacuation duties, a reversal of the task for
which ships and craft had been intended.
The Commandos themselves performed constant and valuable service as rearguards.
Mainly
equipped with Bren guns, rifles, tommy-guns and knives, but without mortars, they were unable
to force the enemy to deploy and were constantly surrounded or cut off in their efforts to impose a
check but contriving to escape by night.
Planning of Long Term Requirements
Planning for long term requirements and a return to the Continent had not yet taken shape but
the Admiralty had started a programme for the entry of 115 ratings into the Landing craft Organ-
isation every three weeks. This was determined by the number of landing craft which were expected
to come forward and not with an idea of a great overall expansion.
It was a modest beginning
but it sowed the seeds for the eventual large expansion which took place.
There is little to record with regard to the development of the facilities during this period.
The work on the bases and training centres progressed slowly in continuation of the
plans already
made.
H.M.S. Quebec, the naval wing of the C.T.C. Inveraray, came into use and Dorlin House
(near Acharacle) was in constant use as the Advanced Training Establishment for raiding craft and
Commando troops.
1 Combined Operations Headquarters War Diary No. 92, page 10.
15
WO 277/21
27
