this inspectorate was slightly extravagant in senior officers, experience proved
this it achieved a great deal in effecting economies in the use of transport,
and in making
the force economically minded in respect of transport.
Another form of inspectorate was in connection with the transport fleet
of U.K.C.C.
S.T., War Office, sent out two officers and three warrant officers
as road inspectors, in order to increase the lift of stores by that organization.
Supply Services
Before the formation of P.A.I.C., demands for supplies had been placed
direct on India for items indigenous to India, and on Middle East for all
other items of supply, except those bought locally; the latter including grain
and dried fruits.
When it became an independent command, this procedure continued
until P.A.I.C. could
build up the
necessary administrative organization
for the preparation of direct demands.
December,
1942, the first of
these, for consumption in May, 1943, were submitted, to G.H.Q., India for
all items indigenous to India, on G.H.Q.,
M.E. for exportable items in-
digenous to that command, and on the local resources branch of S.T.
Directorate, P.A.I.C. for items obtainable within the command; and on
War Office for all other commodities.
Until May, 1943, the reserves
held in the command stood at 90 days
G.S. reserve, and 60 days working margin.
In June, 1943, the G.S. reserve
was reduced to 60 days, the working margin remaining as before.
By 1943, there were 18 various ration scales existing in P.A.I.C., but
many of these were seldom used.
The normal scales were the British Troops
Field Service including all nations but U.S. Army and Indians; U.S. Army;
Indian Troops Field Service; Women's Services; and Prisoner of War.
The ration strength of P.A.I.C. from September, 1942, to January, 1945,
is shown at Appendix VIIIA.
The climate of Iraq
and Persia is intensely
hot
in summer. and,
during the early part of the summer of 1942, ice was issued to British
troops (when it could be obtained from civilian sources), at a scale of 3 lb.
a man a day.
In August, however, when large numbers of troops, including
Poles, arrived in the command, the provision of an adequate supply became
a serious problem.
India took provision action for plants with a productive
capacity of 200 tons per 24 hours; but this was
insufficient,
and India
placed orders on War Office for a total capacity of 525 tons per 24 hours.
The first plant arrived in P.A.I.C. in the aptumn of 1942, but much of the
equipment from India was in very poor condition, and the ration had to
be reduced.
The strength of the command tell early in 1943, and the new
machinery from the United Kingdom was retained and substituted for the
unsatisfactory second-hand plant from India.
Feeding Persian Labour
The grain situation in Persia becasta caboin the autumn of 1942, and
the feeding of civilian labour eim became acute British Army in that country
became a S.T. responsibility.
It was agreed that, while the British Army
might be obliged to feed civilian employees, it was primarily the Persian
Government's responsibility to feed its own nationals, and the quantities of
food supplied would, therefore, be its arded nasilent to that Government.
382
Considering that so much oil was produced in the command, it might
be supposed that there would have been no difficulty about the supply of
petroleum products.
This was not altogether
however.
example, when the British force arrived in 1941, it could not get tinned petrol
because production was allocated to Middle East and other
It became evident that local and export demands on the oil
companies would have to be co-ordinated if confusion and possible break-
down of petroleum supplies were to be avoided.
It was therefore arranged between India and Middle East for Petroleum
Advisory Committees to be set up in Cairo and Baghdad, under the
chair-
manship of the local representatives of the Ministry of Fuel
and Power,
These officials acted very largely in a liaison capacity
between the oil companies and the military headquarters with advantage to
were in a position to co-ordinate,
examine,
commend for acceptance or otherwise the various requests, received almost
daily from the companies, for staff, equipment, rations, air defence schemes,
cle.
By September, 1942, the resources of the companies had been exploited
to the utmost in personnel, workshops, and material, and their services and
efficiency so deteriorated that they were obliged to call on the Services for
The Committees, which included representatives of the Services, oil com-
panies, railways, and other consumers, met monthly, and discussed problems
of production and supply of petroleum products, and co-ordinated demands.
Distribution of P.O.L.
The distribution of petroleum products within the Command was one
of the most difficult administrative problems to be solved.
Although P.A.I.C.
was not the main consumer of the products, it was responsible for ensuring
the satisfactory distribution and maintenance of working stocks for all users
in Persia, and exercised control of priorities as between road and rail trans-
port.
Railway locomotives are usually oil-fired in these countries, but in
this connection see below in regard to solid fuel.
The position was reviewed monthly with A.I.O.C. and consumers, and
a programme was agreed for distribution in bulk and packed form.
The
commitments were for R.A.F. supplies in Iraq and Persia,
including rein-
forcement aircraft flying to Air Command, South East Asia, British, American,
and Russian requirements, civil requirements (an acute problem in Persia),
and supply of aviation and motor spirit to Russia.
he to?a Tralsoor
employed on " Aid to Russia" was a very considerable part of the commit-
ment, including, at the beginning of 1944,
1,000 British military vehicles,
2,700 of U.K.C.C., and 4,000 of the American M.T. service.
P.A.I.C. assisted the initial operations and expansion of these fleets by
the provisions ss P.O.L. from Base Depots and Petrol Supply Points,
release of tankage for use at American staging posts, and by helping A.I., by
to increase deliveries from filling stations.
After June,
1943, an additional demand for aviation spirit for Russia
made the position extremely difficult.
The Russians commonly failed to
plan suficiently far ahead, and made substantial demands for oil without
adequate notice.
(37452)
383
1C2
