But in addition to the forces in the Mediterranean, it was decided to send a Canadian Division
from England and the American 45th Division direct from the U.S.A.
The training of the Canadian
Division as carried out in the C. T.C.s in Scotland under the C.C.O. To assist in the training of the
U.S.A. contingent, certain officers from C.O.H.Q. were sent to join the staff of the Combined
Operations Liaison Officer in Washington for loan to the 45th Division.
At Chiets of Staff meetings, the C.C.O. reported on the effect that the loan of both planning
and training staffs was having on the work at C.O.H.Q. at this time.
As a result of a change in the plan for " Husky" involving the employment of an additional
Division in the assault, the drain on the available ships and craft in the U.K. was increased.
resulted in a setback in the training of Force "J,
operational by early 1943. The reason
which it had been hoped would be fully
This
could be sent were those in Force
Belgian cross-Channel stein fo ming an ocean passage.
for this was that the only available ships and craft which
This at once raised the question of the L.S.I. (S) (ex
Their endurance was limited and
consequently they had to be fitted for oiling at sea.
the necessary modifications.
Thus, for all intents and purposes, Force "J
They therefore had to proceed to shipyards for
ceased to exist as from
the beginning of May. The Senior Officer and his Staff were, however, kept in being and instructed to
plan raids with whatever craft were left.
Combined Training for Operation " Overlord"
Once the plan for the invasion of Normandy was settled, the question of the training of the
naval and military
personnel was a subject which necessitated organisation and thought on a
national scale. C.O.H.Q. contributed advice, training publications and facilities, and the United
States Forces involved also adopted the C.O.H.Q. technique.
India, 1942-1945
In January, 1942, soon after the start of the Japanese war, a C.T.C. was set up at Kharakvasla
near Poona and, at the same time, a small Inter-Services Committee, to be known as Advisers,
Combined Operations, was established in New Delhi with the approval of the Chiefs of Staff.
The
object of this committee was to advise all Services and Force Commanders on planning and training
of combined operations and to maintain liaison with Combined Operations authorities in the U.K.
the Middle East and elsewhere.
A further C.T.C. opened at Madh Island, near Bombay, in December, 1942, where a Combined
Operations Force Headquarters was also established.
Early in 1943, that part of the Indian Expeditionary Force concerned with combined
operations moved to Bombay where five Indian Beach Groups were trained at the C.T.C.
Later in 1943, with the formation of S.E.A.C. and the crystallisation of the policy for the conduct
of war against Japan, it became apparent that the overall theatre strategy would include more and
more amphibious assaults against the enemy's lines of communications.
The scope of Director of
Combined Operations (India) (D.C.O. (L.) ), as the Inter-Services Committee had been re-designated,
was extended to allow for the training of a large number of formations and, in December, 1943, the
following additional training establishments were agreed by C.-in-C., India :—
A Mobile Combined Training Staff School,
Two Dryshod Training Teams,
An additional C.T.C. at Cocanada,
An independent Combined Operations Development Centre under direct control of
A Combined Signal School,
A Combined Operations Bombardment Unit,
as well as a number, of co-ordinating teams and groups.
At the same time the comnlementary naval trainino organisation was extended and came
under command of a Rear-Admiral, designated Senior Officer, Royal Naval Establishments (India
(SORNE (I.)), at Bombay.
The main factors which influenced combined operational training policy in India at this time
were as follows :—
Weather.
Since
Island and Cocanada were authorised.
Distances and Communications.
Divisions coming from the U.K. at the conclusion of the
German war would require both combined operations and jungle training.
Unless Jungle
Training Centres could be located nearer to C.T.C.s, much time would be lost during
transit periods with the result that the overall training target might not be reached.
Provision of Craft for Training. C.O.H.Q.'s appreciation of the availability of training
craft showed that the prospects of a greatly increased allotment to India was unlikely
until the end of 1944.
Early in 1944, 33 Indian Corps was rushed to Imphal and Kohima, and later manpower
shortages resulted in the reduction of training establishments. In the autumn, training teams were
the recapture of Malaya.
On the cessation of hostilities,
all commitments for combined operations training and
experiment ceased and by the end of 1945, only the new Combined Operations Establishment with
a link in New Delhi remained.
East Africa, 1943-46
In December, 1943, the question arose of reconnoitring Combined Training Areas for the use of
troops destined for S.E.A.C.
The Chief of Staff tabled a memorandum' to the Chiefs of Staff suggest-
ing the despatch of a team from the Service Ministries and C.O.H.Q. to reconnoitre suitable areas for
jungle and combined training.
The Chiefs of Staff decided at their meeting on lst December, 1943,
to defer the despatch of this inter-Services team until decisions on the strategy of S.E.A.C. had been
made.
Eventually, this paper was overtaken by events and, in fact, no reconnaissance was ever
made.
Subsequently, the subject was reopened in 1946 at the time of the Anglo-Egyptian negotiations,
when the Joint Planning Staff were instructed by the Chiefs of Staff to examine the practicability
of stationing in East Africa, the whole or part of our Strategic Reserve.
The Joint Planning Staff?
were of the opinion that the area as a whole offered excellent training facilities.
The coastal belt,
however, had the characteristics of being hot and malarial;
airborne and combined operations
training had of necessity to be carried out on the coast owing to the altitude of the interior.
C.O.H.Q. was represented by two officers, Colonel Hobbs and Lieutenant-Commander Adams,
on the Inter-Services Committee, 501 Mission, which carried out this reconnaissance. The " Report
on Combined Operations Training Areas in East Africa" recommended the selection of Kilifi as a
Combined Training Establishment in the event of the development of East Africa as a base.
Post-War Training
In May, 1945, C.O.H.Q. recommended to the three Service Ministries that a post-war Combined
Training Centre should be formed in the U.K.
This subsequently led to the establishment of the
School of Combined Operations at Fremington.
-7
WO 277/21
27
30
1 C.O.S. (43) 736 (0) dated 28th November, 1943.
99
* J.P. (46) 58 (Final) dated 25th March, 1946.
