Raids
In the early days of the war, raids, rather than assaults, were the major concern, the objects of
They were useful in sustaining the morale of the forces and
which were varied and often multiple.
the civilian population in the U.K. and their value for this purpose was frequently far in excess of
the material results achieved.
They were valuable, too, for training and, in almost every case,
lessons were learned both in detail and principle.
In addition to these general objectives,
there were the more specialised aims.
The raid on
Bruneval in February, 1942, was staged for the purpose of capturing parts of a new type of German
radar.
That on Glomfjord had the aim of destroying the hydro-electric plant.
The raid on Dieppe, in August, 1942, which was the largest raid of all, had as its primary object
the containing and destruction of some of the German fighter forces which, in turn, meant a degree
of relief to
Russia.
Without the lessons learned from this raid, a large-scale rehearsal for
"Overlord", the final invasion of the Continent could hardly have been so successful.®
First Raid on France, June, 1940
After the appointment on 12th June, 1940, of the first Director of Combined Operations,
Lieutenant-General Bourne, no time was wasted in implementing the directive to harass the enemy
and cause him to disperse his forces.
The first raid, which was made in the Boulogne area of France,
had a threefold aim; the primary aim was reconnaissance and the subsidiary aims were to kill or
capture as many Germans as possible and to destroy enemy equipment, in particular grounded
aircraft and petrol supplies.
The raid was successful in so far as some useful information was obtained and two of the
enemy were killed.
The raiding force, which consisted of 120 men from one of the Independent
Companies, was landed and withdrawn with only one minor casualty.
It was found that the steam yachts, which it was originally intended to use, were useless and
had to be replaced at the last moment by eight R.A.F. high-speed launches manned by civilian
crews.
These craft proved to be unsuitable, partly because of their excessive draft and partly
because the civilian crews lacked the necessary discipline.
Although reconnaissance was achieved and some damage was done, perhaps its greatest value
was that it provided experience, taught many lessons and proved that 120 men could be landed and
withdrawn without casualties.
The Raid on Guernsey, July, 1940
The next raid was carried out in mid-July, 1940, against Guernsey, but little was achieved
except further emphasis on the unsuitability of R.A.F. launches for raiding.
This was followed in
September,
1940, by the first attempted assault, which has an important place in the story of
Combined Operations.
Dakar, September, 1940
The Dakar Expedition was mounted in an effort to take advantage, after the fall of France, of
what was believed to be a fluid political situation.
It was hoped that the presence of the Free
French Forces under General de Gaulle would encourage those elements which were anti-Vichy and
make extended military operations unnecessary.
The political aspects of this operation, although
interesting in themselves, concern us little here, except in so far as they led to great haste in the
planning and preparation.
The effects of this haste were, firstly, that the various alternative plans
were laid with inadequate and uncertain information, secondly, that the Joint Staff did not begin
to function properly until it had set sail, and finally, that the only units and stores available at such
notice had been allotted, and in some cases embarked, for a totally different operation.
As the result of this ad hoc planning, it was realised by the Military Force Commander
would be paramount.
that an improved organisation would be required for operations where military considerations
He therefore pointed out in his report that there was a need for a central
organisation to co-ordinate combined operations and suggested that the D.C.O's staff should
toganisation to coordinate combined operations and suggested on, Dakar is important since it
forced at an early stage of the war the recornition of a need which later hecame more generally
understood.
However, in addition to this, Dakar demonstrated the need for adequate and efficient com-
municatiens in station to his, mala demonstrated the need for adequate fact that a special
Headquarters Ship was essential for a Force Commander in a combined operation.
This latter
lesson was learned ae a recult of the Military Commander and Lie hondanasters who were embarked
in the cruiser Devonshire, being carried away from their forces on a purely naval occasion, in an
84
STAEDTLER
Dakar, therefore, although abortive in its main object, has left its mark on later events, and
is an essential part of this story.
The Period September, 1940-December, 1941.
The next few months after Dakar are marked by apparently very little activity, but they were
in fact a period of consultation and preparation for the future.
For example, a number of passenger and cargo ships were being converted to L.S.I., or L.C.M.
carriers;
Combined Training Centres were set up in the Middle East and at Inveraray ;
Lieutenant-
General Bourne was succeeded as Director of Combined Operations by Admiral of the Fleet Sir
Roger Keyes and the building up of a staff had begun.
Various plans were being considered such as
the capture of Pantellaria, the Azores, Cape Verde Island, and the installation of the Free French
Forces in Dakar.
All this was taking place against the background of a possible invasion of the
U.K. and, in September, 1940, all the available Commandos and Independent Companies were
placed under the Command of C.-in-C. Home Forces for anti-invasion purposes and were not released
again to the D.C.O. until the end of the year.
Early 1941 saw the beginning of greater activity in matters of combined operations.
February, the first full-scale Brigade exercise was held at the C.T.C., Inveraray. In the same month,
the Chiefs of Staff, on the recommendation of the D.C.O., agreed to the assembly of a striking force
which was to be immediately available for amphibious operations in any theatre and, in April,
the Chiefs of Staff agreed to the construction of 200 L.C.T. (3).
There was therefore a continuous build-up against many difficulties, and although during
this period many operations were planned, some were not executed for various reasons,
Some
successful raids were made both in the Mediterranean and North-West Europe, beginning with the
airborne operation against the Apulian Aqueduct in Italy in February, 1941.
Other operations
included Loften Islands, Spitzbergen, and the exploits of Layforce in the Middle East.
Some of these raids had positive value. In December, 1941, at the Loften Islands, besides the
destruction of the fish oil factories and the sinking of over 18,000 tons of enemy shipping,
314 Norwegian volunteers were taken off, 213 enemy soldiers and civilians were taken prisoner
and 14 Germans were killed in an action with an armed trawler. The raid was a complete success
but, while it contributed to some extent to better inter-service co-operation and much to morale,
the absence of opposition and the fact that it was primarily a naval occasion prevented the
operation from advancing the technique of combined operations to any great extent.
Exercise " Leapirog," August, 1941
In March, 1941, on the recommendation of the D.C.O., the Chiefs of Staff agreed to the assembly
of a Striking Force to be immediately available for combined operations in any theatre.
This force
would be available to land in the Canary Islands should Germany invade Spain. It was to meet this
eventuality that all available ships, landing craft and raiding craft were earmarked for the use of
the striking force.
The operation was to be known as " Pilgrim". The Force Commanders were appointed and the
force was assembled to carry out training.
In August, a full-scale rehearsal, Exercise " Leapfrog",
was carried out at Scapa Flow. It was as a result of this exercise that considerable controversy
arose over the question of Command and Control and agreement on future policy could not be
reached between the Chiefs of Staff and the D.C.O.
As Admiral Keyes held strongly to his views
and was unable to accept those of the Chiefs of Staff, he was relieved by Commodore Lord Louis
Mounthatten
Command and Control of Raids
The
situation which now arose had no precedent and consequently had to be resolved
Drastic changes became necessary at the beginning of 1942 when it was decided, as a
strategy bathes be, that a cesar at the becoming pro reihe sit was decided, as a part on the
As a result, the system finally evolved in May, 1942, was that the C.C.O. became the mounting
authority for all raids in North-Western Europe. His functions were as follows :—
(1) To prepare an outline plan.
To obtain the approval of the Chiefs of Staff.
(3)
To appoint Force Commanders with the approval of the Chiefs of Staff.
locate and assemble the requisite specialised forces.
To help and advise the Force Commanders in the preparation of the detailed plan.
To get any additional intelligence or equipment which the Force Commanders required.
To assist and advise during the rehearsal and training stage.
0294г
7
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
