This establishment was similar to the C.O.X.E. in the U.K.
Projects were sent to it from
A close liaison was
to D.X.O.R. in order to
keep him informed and prevent dusiation Do the work at C.O.X.E.
(V.K.); similarly, copies of all C.O.X.E. (U.K.) projects were sent to D.C.O. (I.).
dealt with in the same way so that there was a complete interchange of information, supplementec
de the Monthly Information Summaries and bulletin, tor the monthly bullenn which D.C. On tec
The work done in India consisted of confirmatory trials in local conditions.
stated. X.. U.K.) and C.OX.E. (.) carried out similar trial in order to correlate results.
bi these, the trials of equipment in mud, swamp, fast-flowing rivers and undergrowth became of
great importance to both Centres.
Work continued for the Far East through the early part of 1945; in addition important trials
were arranged at C.O.X.E. preparatory to the Rhine crossing.
These trials were carried out as
emergency trials done on the highest priority and covered such points as:
Carriage of minor landing craft on tank transporters.
Launching of minor landing craft from tank transporters without the use of a crane.
Overloading minor landing craft with carriers or vehicles for a river crossing.
Handling of amphibians in fast-flowing river.
Amphibians and minor landing craft towing rafts in rivers.
The handling of these trials possibly showed D.X.O.R. and C.O.X.E. working at their best ;
the value of an inter-Services team, which had all the necessary contacts with the operational forces,
the Service and Supply Ministries was very clearly emphasised and the trials were carried out
expeditiously and well.
Reorganisation of D.X.O.R.
With the establishment of D.C.O. (I.) and the opening of C.O.X.E. (I.), a certain amount of
work, which normally would have been carried out by D.X.O.R., was done in India.
possible to make a reduction and reallocation of the officers in D.X.O.R. In the previous
organisation, a division had been made between the Trials Section and the Experimental Section;
this was a somewhat invidious division as it was not at all clear where a line could be drawn
While tasks carried out were fairly well understood within
C.O.H.Q., the instructions covering the new organisation made this quite clear:—
"The Experimental Section will be responsible for the initiation and conduct of all
trials and experiments, naval, military and air.
The Direction and Data Section will be responsible for the co-ordination of all
experimental work of the Branch, and also for any subsequent action considered necessary
such as, for example, the promulgation of reports to outside authorities. This section will
also be responsible for collation and maintenance of data and records."
With minor modifications, mainly reductions in staff, this arrangement remained in force until
the end of the war, when the Department was slowly reorganised on to a peace-time basis.
The Amphibious Warfare Committeel continued to function within C.O.H.Q. and as before
D.X.O.R. and G1 (Experiments) (late A.D.X.O.R.) were representatives of the Directorate on
the main and sub-committee respectively. As before, the work in D.X.O.R.'s branch was largely
concerned with these committees and in the arranging of trials and promulgation of information.
With the end of the war in Europe, the needs of the Far Eastern War were the main concern of
D.X.O.R. but, with the easing of tension, longer term policy came more to the fore and consideration
Ta given to many post- war problems. Certain reductions of staft took place within the Directorate.
In May, 1945, the division of responsibilities between the Admiralty and C.O.H.Q. was finally
decided, and the technical matters, in which D.X.O.R. was primarily interested, were agreed;
these were in conformity with the directive issued to C.C.O. in September, 1944.
In Tuly, the method of initiating experiments, trial and development projects was again
defined; D.X.O.R had for some time been working according to these instructions, but their
issue clarified the position defining more exactly his duties and function.
experiments, trials and developments.
eproduced in full in Appendix 28 and show clearly the exact way in which D.X.O.R. handled
These instructions are
1 See Appendix 27. Directive to the Amphibious Warfare Committee.
At the same time as the issue of this Acquaint, D.X.O.R. took over the responsibility for the
development of equipment for small scale amphibious operations which had previously been the
responsibility of the A/Q division of C.O.H.Q. By this action D.X.O.R. became responsible for all
experimental, trial and development work.
Until the end of the war, experiment and development for the Far East continued. In D.X.O.R.
the necessary knowledge and experience was gathered; the difficulties and problems in design,
development and trial of combined operations equipment were only too well known.
The manner
in which work should be handled and completed had been learned in the experience and evolution
of the Directorate through the years of war.
End of the War and Reorganisation for Peace
In August, 1945, with the end of the Japanese war, C.O.H.Q. and, with it D.X.O.R., began
to reorganise on to a peace-time basis. The Department was firmly established and working smoothly
and efficiently. In peace-time with a reduced establishment, it continued to work on long-term
The road from the I.S.T.D.C. had been long and changing; and D.X.O.R. had grown to a
vastly different and more important organisation than was visualised by the small group of men,
who gathered at Eastney in 1938 to study the problems of combined operations.
Since the end of the War, two Boards have been brought into being. First the formation of the
Amphibian Requirement and Development Board. Second, the formation of the Correlation of
Development Board.
As early as January, 1944, a meeting had been called to correlate the development of landing
craft and ships, and Army and R.A.F. vehicles and equipment; it was hoped, thereby, to ensure
that the Admiralty did not construct ships and craft unsuited to new and proposed Army and
R.A.F. equipment, and that the War Office and Air Ministry did not build equipment which was
unsuited to naval craft and ships. It was agreed that, when new landing craft were planned, an
inter-Services meeting should be called for correlation; also, that any problems which might
arise with existing craft and new or modiffed Army and R.A.F. equipment should be dealt with
by an ad hoc meeting. In fact, this suggestion did not work out, under war conditions. However,
with the end of the war, C.C.O. called a meeting to discuss the best methods of ensuring correlation
in the development of vehicles, equipment and craft, including amphibians,
carriage of these items in merchant ships.
This meeting decided to set up a Standing Committee for
this purpose, under the Chairmanship of C.C.O.
In spite of the urgent need for economy and reorganisation, it was decided that the C.O.X.E.
should continue in peace-time. Experience had shown that the organising and execution of trials
demanded highly specialised and skilled work requiring considerable appreciation of what to look
for and how to look for it and, unless personnel employed in this work were continually fulfilling
their function, valuable data would be lost through inexperience.
The necessity for continuiti
in such trials was considered to be of paramount importance for there was an obvious need for the
evaluation of equipment, produced for one Service and which might be of use to the others, being
examined by one establishment who was able to carry out trials bearing in mind the difficulties
and problems of each Service.
WO 277/21.
27
3ф
