existing major unit, usually an infantry battalion, supplemented by a Brick increment with naval
exiti. ma dements attached. A Brick was designed to control all activities on a beach on waich
part of an assault force was landed and through which it was subsequently to be maintained for a
certain period.
it to steres handling capacity was laid down as being 500 tons a day, discharged
from a maximum of six landing craft simultaneously.
In fact, there were no great differences in principle between the U. K. Brach Group Organisation
evolved by C.O.H.Q. and the Middle East Beach Brick Organisation.
There were, of course, many
differences in detail due to differing staff problems in the two theatres. This was inevitable.
The North Africa Beach Groups
To complete the story in the Mediterranean, it is necessary to state briefly what had been taking
place in North Africa.
In April, 1943, Allied Force Headquarters North Africa set up a C.T.C. at Djidjeli, the
instructional staff being largely provided from the U.K. by the C.C.O.
In addition to training
assault formations, the training of Nos, 20 and 21 Beach Groups was undertaken in May and June,
taken part in Operation
These Beach Gion ps Torre the Atten th one 1 tion 2 Beach Coups (V.K. pattern) which had
After the operation they were re-formed, their basic element
at tie but out com that the tient ratic at to air bon toloved in that hoo
Beach Groups had been hastily re-formed after Operation " Torch" for the subsequent invasion of
Each consisted of some twenty-four different units which was unsatisfactory both for
command and training.
The Landings in Sicily, Operation " Husky"
Many important lessons affecting beach organisation were learned on Operation " Husky"
and new equipment was tested which revolutionised thought on the scope of beach maintenance.
in anition Whip rate mena ted tried king to be made bety he hithe it Bet ty Brick
and the North Africa Beach Group.
The following British Beach Formations took part in Operation " Husky" :—
Nos. 3 and 4 Beach Groups (United Kingdom pattern).
Nos. 20 and 21 Beach Groups (North Africa).
Nos. 31-35 Beach Bricks (Middle East).
The value of the Naval Lighter (N.L.) Pontoon and the D.U.K.W. was established.
On 19th
July, 1943, Admiral Mountbatten forwarded to the Chiefs of Staff Committee his remarks on
Operation " Husky."
This paper was subsequently issued as a Chief of Staff paper' and promul-
gated to Commanders-in-Chief abroad.
It was based upon the C.C.O.'s personal experience of
the operation; upon conversations he had had with the various Commanders-in-Chief and other
Commanders concerned; and upon the experience of members of his staff who had been lent to
assist in various parts of the operation.
The C.C.O. made the following points in his report:—
(1) An efficient beach organisation, during both the initial landing and subsequent mainten-
ance period, has an enormous influence on both the military operations ashore and
the duration of risk suffered by large ships lying off-shore.
There were two main
Firstly, the procedure must be simplified and
standardised, and become a drill in which all personnel including landing craft crews are
carefully trained. Secondly, key positions in the control of this very important function
must be filled by first class naval and military officers.
(2) The training and provision of Principal Military Landing Officers and Military Landing
Officers should be the C.C.O.'s responsibility.
3) Specially trained personnel who form part of Beach Groups must not be broken up after
an operation, but retained to continue training for their next task.
(4) Three different types of beach organisation were in use during the operation.
organisation of Beach Groups should be standardised, ingen though particular
operations may involve special reorganisation of Beach Groups.
5) Weather conditions at the time of " Husky" were ideal for beach maintenance.
developed at the time, it was essentially a fair weather me for det maintenance and the
suspended when the sea is not sufficiently calm.
obiect should be to get such tonnages ashore on good days as to allow work to be
1 C.O.S. (43) 392 (O).
In addition, reports on " Husky" from many other sources were received by C.O.H.Q. These
were collated and published as a digest in October, 1943.
In addition to stressing the points
mentioned by the C.C.O. in his report referred to above, the digest included the following matters
of interest affecting beach organisation :—
(1) Maintenance over the beaches was well and speedily carried out. Conditions for the
build-up were good, with little enemy interference and calm seas. Both 7th and 8th
proved that. under
conditions and with adequate small craft and
D.U.K.W.s, maintenance of large forces over captured beaches is not only possible
but, under conditions pertaining in the Mediterranean, easier than expected.
(2) The Beach Brick and Beach Group Organisations were sound, but should be standardised.
The organisation should not be broken up after an operation, unless circumstances
fully justified it.
(3) The same naval parties should work with the same beach parties.
(4) A battalion of infantry should form the nucleus of a Beach Group.
(5) Still free fient part la the pro be of erosina the vorton is needed, in pite of
(6) Ships should anchor as close to the beaches as possible once coast defences have been
overcome.
This renders them less likely to sink when bombed and more immune
from submarine attack.
It also brings them within closer protection of the beach
anti-aircraft defences and has the overwhelming advantage of shortening the turn-round.
(7) The maintenance area must be sited only a short distance inland of the beaches to reduce
the turn-round as much as possible.
(8) British Beach Groups averaged a daily tonnage of about 500 tons.
The Formation of Headquarters Sub-Area (Beach) and Beach Groups
On 10th July, 1943, the War Office announced that the Army Council had decided to set up
for operations likely to involve a sea-borne assault, tactical and administrative headquarters and
formations known as Headquarters Sub-Area (Beach) and Beach Groups. The principles of beach
organisation were laid down as follows :-
(1) General Organisation.
The Beach Organisation would be based on a Beach Group which
was a composite formation containing a number of standard or specialised sub-units
together with a labour element. Beach Groups were to be alloted on the basis of one
to each assault brigade front and would be responsible for the movement of personnel,
vehicles and stores from landing ships, craft, etc., across the beaches to transit areas,
dumps and assembly areas.
The Beach Group was to be commanded by the Officer Commanding the Infantry
Battalion; the Infantry Battalion would find the bulk of the labour required.
Included in the Beach Group were signal elements, a Royal Engineer unit for
preparing tracks and exits from the beaches, stores holding and issuing units for all
main commodities and a recovery and emergency repair unit.
Anti-aircraft units would be attached to groups to meet operational needs.
Operational requirements might necessitate variation in the composition of the
standard Beach Group.
(2) The Beach Sub-Area.
Command of two or more Beach Groups would be vested in a
Commander, Headquarters Sub-Area (Beach) who was responsible for the layout
and operation of the beach maintenance area.
The Beach Organisation was responsible for the issue of stores from the
dumps. In certain circumstances there might be a pool of transport, controlled by a
Sub-Area (Beach) Commander, for delivery forward.
In order that beaches and the beach area could be properly controlled, all move-
ment, whether of stores or of personnel, of all Services in the beach area would be under
the control of the Commander Sub-Area (Beach).
(3) Subsequent Development.
Every unit of the Beach Group would be found by taking a
unit which has a place in the ultimate rearward organisation of a force, or by forming
a special unit, men of which would be later absorbed into units
Communication Organisation.
WO 277/21.
27
30
