The divisional ammunition company as organized in three sections, each
These carried fixed quantities of every kind of
of 25 load-carrying lorries.
ammunition and explosives used by the division.
Delivery
was normally
made to unit first line transport at ammunition points, but, in the case of
sun ammunition, it might be conveyed direct to batteries, especially when
dumping for a bombardment, etc. Replenishment was normally effected al
ammunition refling points from the third line transport echelon, the corps
ammunition park, which in turn refilled at railhead.
There was, however, con.
siderable elasticity allowed in practice; thus, the ammunition company vehicles
might go back to railhead and refill direct, or ammunition park forries deliver
their loads to batteries. where these arrangements saved time and handlin
R.A.S.C. responsibility for ammunition supply began at railhead, up to and
including which point it was an Ordnance service.
The divisional supply column was peculiar, in that it covered the whole
distance between railhead and unit transport, and thus combined both second
and third line functions.
To enable it to do so, it was organized in two
echelons, which delivered on alternate days, replenishing at Supply Railhead
on the intervening day.
This meant that, on any given day, a unit was
consuming that day's rations, while the next day's rations were in process
of delivery, and a third day's were in the other echelon of the Supply Column.
The column vehicles were met at supply points by unit guides or transport.
The Column had the necessary supply details attached to carry out
the work of breaking bulk (i.e., making detailed distribution between units,
in accordance with their requirements, of the supplies drawn in bulk from
railhead), and of accounting for issues. Each echelon was organized in four
sections, for divisional troops and three infantry brigades respectively. The
column also delivered ordnance stores, mail, and canteen stores.
The divisional petrol company was, in fact, only partly employed in the
carriage of petrol; it also included lorries for the carriage of anti-gas clothing
reserves, and for the blankets of the dismounted units of the division.
The
quantity of petrol carried represented 50 miles for all vehicles of the division,
exclusive of the divisional R.A.S.C., which could draw direct from third line
transport or from railhead.
The company was organized in three sections,
two for P.O.L., and one for blankets, etc.
Normally it delivered petrol a
petrol points to unit first line transport, and replenished at petrol refilling
point from the corps petrol park, the third line transport link, which drew
in turn from petrol railhead.
divisions.
The petrol park carried 25 miles of petrol for
Blankets were delivered and collected as ordered by the Staff.
Armoured Divisional R.A.S.C.
The Armoured Division which went to France in May, 1940, had for is
second line transport the following: one armoured brigade company for cal
of the two armoured brigades, one support group company, and one division.
troops company.
These were all composite companies.
remained in force until 1942.
This organizatio
Corps and G.H.Q. Troops Transport
For the maintenance of corns troops. there were corns troops ammuniti
companies and corps troops supply columns, operating on lines similar
48
their divisional counterparts, or detaching to divisional companies the appro-
priate vehicles for units of corps troops attached to divisions.
The corps
petrol park carried both the second and third line requirements of petrol
for corps troops, 75 miles in all.
G.H.Q. troops were provided for by G.H.Q. companies and G.H.Q. artillery
companies, comprising both second and third line transport elements.
Vehicles
of these companies were detached as necessary to the appropriate divisional
and corps R.A.S.C. companies, for the maintenance of the G.H.Q. troops and
artillery attached to those formations.
Principles of Employment of Formation Transport
The principle governing the employment of formation transport was that
units should not be diverted from their allotted rôles unless in exceptional
circumstances; and their vehicles were loaded in accordance with staff tables
which laid down the quantities of each commodity to be carried.
These loads
were not to be dumped to free transport for another rôle, but the loads were
to be retained " on wheels", in the vehicles.
This meant that one company
might stand idle under load, with no immediate demand for its commodity,
while another was hard put to it to meet abnormal demand for its speciality;
but the former could not be switched over to assist the latter.
The organization in advance of railhead was designed for normal con-
tinuous operation over a distance from railhead to delivery points up to
40 miles.
In emergency, and for short periods, it could operate up to 80 miles;
but the limiting factor was recognized that, if distances of this extent were
to be worked for long periods, the system would be overstrained, the time
necessary for rest and vehicle maintenance would be unduly curtailed, and
efficiency would suffer.
Comments on the Organization
The organization described above was, at the outbreak of war, almost
entirely theoretical, for it had never been fully tested.
Financial stringency,
coupled with shortage of personnel and non-availability of the commodities to
be carried, had prevented R.A.S.C. personnel being exercised over an extended
period, if at all, in the operation at full scales of men, vehicles, and commodities,
of any of the units described.
Few, if any, R.A.S.C. personnel had ever seen
specimens of all the different types of ammunition, or lorries loaded with their
scheduled contents of the various types, or had any practical experience of
the care, handling, and issue, of gun ammunition, grenades, and explosives.
Few had even seen a company at full strength on the road, let alone had
experience in managing an actual body of more than, perhaps, 30 vehicles.
The experience of the war of 1914-1918 was, in this case, of little assistance.
The double echelon system of food supply was that employed for the main-
tenance of the Cavalry Divisions in France in the mobile conditions of 1914;
but the R.A.S.C. were not then responsible for ammunition supply, except in
the third line transport echelon.
Petrol units were altogether new, almost in
the experimental stage, as no one really knew what would be the extent of
the commitment, or whether the proposed system of supply would be adequate
if heavy demands were made upon it.
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
