co-ordinating the demands for all support craft, to consider the possibility of mounting, two
Centaur tanks, armed with 95-mm. guns, on a platform in an armoured L.C.T.
readily accepted and C.-in-C. Portsmouth asked the Admiralty to make L.C.T.s available for
CaO provided Bombardment Liaison Oficers to a Sit in thir training which took
phase at studland Bay, where the I.,C,G. (th Were Notice, sho
The Admiralty agreed that the
tanks, which had been made available by the War Office, should be manned by Royal Marines,
at the Roya Marie Arade ava Supert de bat lions Sa. as vest we te i prime 00c,
that of providing close support for the assault battalions.
"H" hour, only a few moments behind the D.D. tanks.
fact that only 60 per cent, of their guns made the passage and that there was no F.O.O. within the
R.M.A.S.G., their effectiveness was limited.
Recommendations for the Far East
During the autumn of 1944, C.O.H.Q. devoted much time to the study of the system of control
of bombardment in " Overlord," with a view to improving it for the war in the Far East.
was sent to the three Service Ministries on 17th November, 1944, recommending certain increases
in Liaison Officers and Control Staff as well as additional means of communications, with the
object of reducing delays and ensuring that the guns and the various forms of observation were
used to the best advantage and where most needed by the Army.
These recommendations were examined in detail at an Inter-Services meeting at C.O.H.Q. on
Sth February, 1945, and, as a result, a new organisation was submitted to the three Service
Ministries.
On request from C.C.O., this organisation was promulgated through Inter-Service
channels as well as in Combined Operations pamphlet No. 7C.
The new organisation reinforced the principle of centralised control and made provision for
the control organisation being established ashore once Corps H.Q. was landed. This new organisation
was shortly put into force and had its one and only trial in Operation " Zipper" (Malaya).
As can be seen from the previous paragraphs, thought was being given to the requirements for
support in the Far East and, in accordance with the policy laid down by the Chiefs of Staff, it was
the responsibility of the Army to state their requirements in terms of weight of fire.
instigation of C.Ö.H.Q., the War Office held a meeting on 26th May, 1945, at which representatives
from C.O.H.Q. were present.
The scale of support craft required for each Assault Brigade was
12 L.C.S. (R.),
12 L.C.G. 1
(M.), 25-pdr.,
4 L.C.G. (M.), 17-pdr.
were then asked to plan production on the basis of six Assault Brigades, but it
was fully realised that owing to the production limitations, this quantity might not be produced
initially but that the ratio of the three types should be maintained.
It soon became apparent that the
shortage of support craft would in fact be serious and that reliance would have to be made on some
alternative and complementary means.
C.C.O. put forward proposals to the Admiralty and the War Office on how this should be done
and, at an Inter-Services meeting on 13th December, 1944, it was decided that the deficiency in
serious shortcoming, would have to be made good by mounting
would promulgate a technique for this as well as investi-
However, the situation was somewhat
eased by the retarding of the dates by which the three Assault Forces were to arrive in the Far East;
the final War Office requirement was for one Army Field Regiment (S.P.) to be mounted in L.C.T.S
for each Assault Division. The Admiralty were able to make available the following craft for
8 L.C.G. (L.),
24 L.C.G. (M.).
In the event, the war came to an end before the assault on Malaya had taken place and, when
Force "W" made their landing, no fire support was required.
It can be seen that the problem of close support was never mastered, principally due to the
fact that it was never possible to produce in sufficient quantities the right type of specialist craft
development of technique and equipment.
C.O.H.O throushout all the stages of the war, was the main instigator in the
124
SECTION (ii)
COMBINED OPERATIONS BOMBARDMENT UNITS
Training of Forward Observation Officers and Army Liaison Officers
On 15th June, 1941, the Commander of the Royal Marines Division wrote to the Adjutant-
General Royal Marines, on the question of the provision of Forward Observation Officers (F.O.O.)
D.C.O. Memorandum on " Opposed Landings."
He drew attention to the disparity between the " Manual of Combined Operations " and al
supply Naval F.O.O.s while the latter decreed that F.O.O.s would be Army officers and have Naval
signals personnel. The Commander of the Royal Marines Division favoured Naval F.O.O.s.
The matter was referred to D.C.O. who reaffirmed that F.O.O.s were to be Army officers,
principally because of their value on the tactical side.
Courses in naval gunnery at H.M.S. Excellent
for Royal Artillery Officers had already started and C.s R.A. of all the divisions of Home Forces
had recently carried out indoor exercises in conjunction with Naval officers from the Gunnery
The following month, eleven selected officers, who had already attended the course at Whale
Island, were sent to the C.T.C. at Inveraray for training as Forward Observers, or as Army Liaison
Officers (A.L.O.) for duty on board the bombarding ships. Naval Telegraphists were provided for the
with the Royal Marine Division which was, at that time, earmarked tore subsequati aine
and the first F.O.O. parties were formed.
Canaries (Operation " Pilgrim.")
Leap Toy, and at toe Fade the email the con the Rote al provide he , i hip inn
tactical information on the situation ashore, much to everyone's surprise.
In August, 1941, the Admiralty drew attention to the fact that twelve courses had been run at
H.M.S. Excellent and 179 Royal Artillery Officers had been trained there, but none of these had
actually observed the fire of H.M. ships due to the lack of a bombardment range. D.C.O. replied
that no further courses were necessary at the moment, but he was unable to get the Admiralty to
provide a warship for bombardment training or a suitable range. Meanwhile, most of the
who had been trained at Whale Island were attached to the newly-formed Force 110 for F.O.O. duties.
On 8th September, 1941, the Joint Commanders, Lieutenant-General Alexander and Rear-
Admiral Hamilton, wrote to the Admiralty, the War Office and D.C.O., expressing their anxiety
about the holding and further training of the twenty-three Royal Artillery Officers with their
twenty naval and ten army signallers.
The proposal submitted by the Joint Commanders was
ten oval and to m to than th pay, in the bit of the al ratin, i roo
parties and A.L.O.s as well as refresher courses of those attached to Force
necessitate the provision of suitable facilities, in particular a Naval Gunnery Officer Instructor,
rat they pulse provided in a naval establishment.
accommodation for the school of twenty-five officers and thirty naval
The War Office agreed with the Joint Commanders' recommendations for the training of
F.O.O.s and A.L.O.s, and promised to consider them in the plans, which were being drawn up,
concerning the whole question of training for combined operations.
A meeting was held in the
D.C.O.'s office on 6th October, 1941, under the Chairmanship of Lieutenant-Colonel T. H. Ely,
with representatives of the three Service Ministries, and the Senior F.O.O., Major A. T. Edgington,
R.A., to discuss the further training of F.O.O.s and A.L.O.s.
As a result of this meeting, D.C.O. made V.A.C.T.C. responsible for the tactical training of
F.O.0. parties and arranged with the Admiralty that a Naval Gunnery Officer would be added to
training of his bombardment teams.
instructed to form a Bombardment School.
It was also proposed that gunnery training should be
undertaken with H.M.S. Cardiff which was then based at Lamlash.
on the ritay in Pocabula by the captaca prat 15. 2. Cong, a and The War oil agorend
provide officers to meet D.C.O.'s requirements.
Madagascar, Operation " Ironclad," May 1942
During the autumn F.O.O. parties trained with 29th Independent Brigade and ten Officers
and nine ratings, under the command of Captain R. L. Spiller;
with Force 121 for the Madagascar operation.
Three F.O.O. parties landed with the assault and
(C52794)-
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
