supply to the hundred petrol depots which were opened, distribution being
effected by means of non-returnable 4-gallon tins, and 44-gallon barrels.
Estimates of requirements were given monthly to the oil companies, and
it was their responsibility to bring forward supplies accordingly.
ments were advised to the Petrol Section, so that the latter had a com.
prehensive picture of movement of stocks and expected arrivals.
discharge of tankers at one port only, both civil and military requirements
were reviewed at monthly meetings, and the final allocation of tanker
requirements to permit complete discharge was decided.
shipping was arranged in London.
Before the Petrol Section was established, the local stock situation was
by no means satisfactory.
The oil companies normally held six months
reserves against civilian requirements, but, while it was estimated that, in
the event of emergency, there would be about four months' supply of M.T.
spirit available for military purposes, no policy covering military reserves
had been laid down.
In November, 1940, therefore,
the question of future supplies of P.O.L. in East Africa, with special
reference to the probable situation which would arise if Mombasa were
put out of operation and denied as a port of entry.
The reserve figure
was then placed at nine months' M.T. spirit and 15 months' aviation spirit.
In order to make the increased storage available to hold these quantities,
which were 35 times greater than before, the oil companies agreed to re-
distribute their bulk storage.
M.T. spirit tankage was increased by 8,000
tons to 22,000 tons, and aviation by 6,000 tons to 8,000 tons.
panies came to an agreement among themselves whereby only one company
dealt with each separate petroleum product.
Alternative routes by which P.O.L. could enter East Africa were planned,
from South Africa, either through Broken Hill by road, or through
Dar-es-Salaam or Tanga, and the other from Leopoldsville, in the Belgian
Congo, by road and river.
In July, 1940, the only container in use was the 4-gallon non-returnable
tin, packed two to a case, the small returnable container not yet having been
The plants for can-making in
the Command
belonged to the oil companies, and of these two at Mombasa could produce
25,000 a day between them, and there was also a small plant at Zanzibar.
had been the intention to send a plant from Middle East to supplement these
local resources, but it was found that the installations at Berbera were
adequate to meet requirements without it.
To ensure adequate supplies of the non-returnable containers, provision
of tin-plate was arranged by War Office.
68,000 galvanized iron
44-gallon drums were obtained from South Africa and U.S.A.
The E.A.A.S.C. unit for carrying out P.O.L. duties on the L. of C. was
a Petrol Personnel Company, for the establishment of which see Appendix
IM. It will be seen that personnel for handling and distribution of P.O.L,
as provided in these units was not the same as for Petrol Depots, Types "A",
The arrangement saved personnel, and was operated on the
basis of each A.D.S.T. of an area being allotted the minimum numbers
necessary to man his P.O.L. depots.
The disadvantage was that super-
vision was not the same as it would have been in self-contained, standard
394
Preparation for the Offensive
Such then was the general situation of the E.A.A.S.C. in June, 1940,
when Italy entered the war, and it had not altered greatly by
that year, when General Cunningham assumed command, and
that he wished his forces to be thoroughly prepared for offensive action by
June, 1941. The interval would be
essential to enable the Corps to get
The M.T.S.D. (former M.M.T.T.S.) was exhausted; supply staff and
storage were inadequate to contend with the ever-increasing feeding strengths;
there was a serious shortage of trained officers, British N.C.Os., and artificers;
the H.R.S. had no machinery; the vehicle situation was gradually improving,
but was still unable to meet even existing demands, and yet expected to supply
the requirements of two brigades being formed, and of a L.
would lengthen with the success of the advance; and finally, there were two
S. and T. organizations, operating beside one another, but independently,
duplicating each other's work, with consequent wastage
All these problems had to be solved in
able, which was cut in half by the commander putting forward his plans
by four months.
There were, however, some assets.
The War Office had undertaken to
reinforce the E.A.A.S.C. with drafts of R.A.S.C. officers and other ranks;
and the shipment was promised of 5,000 3-ton lorries, including
of workshop, stores, and breakdown, vehicles, over a period of six months.
These made possible the formation of 15 new reserve M.T. companies, and
three more Infantry Brigade Group companies.
In addition, 3,000 lorries
and a number of smaller vehicles were brought through local agents.
promise did not however come to fruition, for after the arrival of the first
1,500 lorries shipped, Middle East claimed all the rest.
This loss caused a
shortage throughout the campaign.
A chronic trouble was the shortage of M.T. spare parts.
to a very great extent, to the failure of the South African forces to make
advance provision for an adequate reserve of parts.
to the possibility that an immediate and rapid campaign was visualized in
which the need for spare parts for new vehicles would be negligible, and
also that the period necessary for building up the L. of C. in preparation for
the advance was not included in the forecast of vehicle wastage.
it may, thousands of Fords came into the country with the Union forces, the
only provision for their maintenance being the Composite Stores, which also
handled all engineer and ordnance stocks,
to meet a quarter of the South African M.T. requirements.
service began to buy up all local Ford stocks; those of springs, radiators, and
armatures were soon exhausted.
Then the South Africans fell back on the
M.T.S.D., and the stocks which were being slowly built up for the E.A.A.S.C.
were soon swallowed up.
This blow crippled the M.T.S.D., and it had not
recovered long after the campaign ended.
On top of everything else, War Office told East Africa, in February,
1941, that difficulty in obtaining material had necessitated drastic cuts in
East Africa's demands for M.T. stores, which in any case were thought
to be excessive in relation to the number of vehicles maintained.
quarter of the quantities demanded were being shipped, but, where quantities
demanded seemed reasonable, further consignments would follow.
395
