CHAPTER 10
THE FAR EAST
South-East Asia Command
The break-out from the Normandy beach head and the landing in the South of France (Operation
"Dragoon") enabled the C.C.O. to direct all the energies of the staff at C.O.H.Q. to the problems
facing the Supreme Commanders in South-East Asia and the Pacific.
The reports sent in by the
observers in the Pacific were carefully studied and lessons co-ordinated and promulgated.
The following is an extract from the minutest of the Chiefs of Staff meeting on
13th October, 1944 :—
" Visit by Chief of Combined Operations to India and South-East Asia.
Major-General Laycock said that the bulk of the work in Combined Operations Head-
quarters would in future be connected with amphibious operations in the Far East.
therefore proposed, subject to the approval of the Chiefs of Staff, to pay a short visit to India
and the South-East Asia Command, in order to familiarise himself with the conditions
on the spot.
The Committee :—
Took note with approval of the proposed visit by the Chief of Combined Operations to
the Far East and invited him to make the necessary arrangements with the C.-in-C. India
and S.A.C.S.E.A."
The C.C.O. accordingly visited India during the latter half of November, 1944, and returned
to the United Kingdom in December.
set up his own Combined Operations section of S.E.A.C. staff.
S.E.A.C. formations already trained
in combined operations were by then committed to operations in Burma.
Directorate of Combined Operations, India
At this stage it is intended to revert to January, 1942, and trace briefly the history of the
Directorate of Combined Operations, India, between 1942 and 1945 and also give some notes on
the staff channels of communication and internal organisation in this theatre (Appendix 15).
In January, 1942, the Chiefs of Staff in New Delhi approved the formation of a Combined
Operations Advisory Committee to be known as Advisers Combined Operations, India (As C.O. (1)).
They consisted of one naval member, Captain Garnons-Williams, R.N., one military member,
Brigadier A. C. St. Clair-Morford and an air force member, Group Captain E. L.
Tompkinson.
Although the A.s C.O. (I) worked together in one office, they were each borne on the strength of
their individual Service Headquarters in Delhi.
The task of the committee was to advise the
Commander-in-Chief (India) and all Service and Formation Commanders on matters concerning
combined operations, and to maintain liaison with combined operation authorities in the U.K.,
Middle East or elsewhere.
In November. 1942, with the forming of Combined Operations Force Headquarters at Bombay,
the Ad Norembo, 1947, with the poting on the to Operati as me He Operations Directorate
on a larger establishment was authorised.
Operations (India), was Captain Garnons-Williams,
The Director, known as Director of Combined
R.N., who was assisted by three Service
The three Services continued to he horne on the stranath of their recnective headquarter
at Delhi, and a new brance of the ento Stat Contal Strenguartets India), known as S,D. a,
was created to hold the military establishment.
known as C.O.N.
General Feadquarters naval Headquarters was
1 C.O.S. (44) 338th meeting of 13th October, 1944.
76
STAEDTLES
The di
(Appendix
d to the Director of Combined Operations (India) by the Chiefs of Staff.
sorting of coi.
ncreased his responsibilities and included advice in planning, collecting and
Commanders,
erations intelligence and the supply of special combined equipment to Force
Centre at Madh Island.
as assistance in the raising and equipping of the new Combined Training
administering the training establishments.
Combined Operations Force H.Q. remained responsible for training and
In January, 1943, Captain Garnons-Williams, R.N., flew to the U.K. for a short visit, stopping
en route at Casablanca where he joined Brigadier Macleod (C.O.J.P.) who was returning from the
Casablanca Conterence.
Unfortunately the aircraft crashed on reaching Wales, incapacitating both
officers at a critical time for Combined Operations in India and the U.K.
Tomkinson thereupon took over as D.C.O. (I.).
Group Captain E. L.
In October, 1943, with the formation of South-East Asia Command and the probability of
increased combined operational training commitments, the Directorate was increased in strength
and status and became a separate branch of G.H.Q. (I.).
S.D. 14 was disbanded, but the R.N. and
R.A.F. Staff continued to be held on their respective headquarters.
Ra Seat RetinAtal, Major General Despictive meado it a Bie die in Dent Director
and Chief of Staff, and an inter-Service staff.
Rear-Admiral L. E. H.
Maund was appointed Director, and arrived in New Delhi at the
end of October.
The new directive from the C.O.S. Committee (India), (Appendices 17 and 21),
invested in him the responsibility for all military combined operations training, technical advice on
combined operational matters to C.-in-C. (I.) and Force Commanders, and the trial and experiment
of special equipment.
The existing combined operational training Establishments were placed
under his direct control and authorisation was granted for the raising of new establishments as
required in order to meet the training commitment.
In April, 1944, owing to the removal of all landing ships and craft previously allocated to
S.A.C.S.E.A. and the non-arrival of the expected reinforcements of men and shipping from the U.K.
combined operational training commitments in India decreased considerably.
Rear-Admiral Maund
was recalled to the U.K. and Brigadier A. Skeen became acting Director.
Reductions in staff were
made in the combined operational training Establishments on orders from the Manpower Control
Committee, but this did not, however, materially affect the directorate itself. Several officers were
sent to the U.K. on refresher courses.
Department of Military Training- 6, War Office (M.T.6)
a centralised authority.
He proposed that a separate branch of D.M.T.,
should be inaugurated to take over combined operations training and the administration and
organisation of the existing training establishments.
This proposal was agreed and M.T.6 came
into effect in early October, 1944.
The D.C.O. (I.) reverting once again to the role of adviser.
(Appendix 18.)
It will be recalled that, at about this time, the Supreme Allied Commander South-East Asia
began planning operations requiring amphibious trained formations and that those divisions already
trained were committed in Central Burma.
The commitment was too great to be undertaken by
M.T.6 and consequently the Directorate was again charged with this responsibility.
Major-General
A. R. Chater, Royal Marines, was appointed D.C.O. (I.) and assumed his duties in New Delhi in
late October,
1944 (Appendix 19).
It the same time, a proposal put forward by the C.C.O.
divorce the Directorate from G.H.Q. (I.) and give it equal status under Defence H.Q. with Flag
Officer Commanding Royal Indian Navy, G.H.Q. (I.) and Air H.Q. (I.),
was agreed by the
C.-in-C. (I.) and the Supreme Allied Commander, and came into effect almost immediately.
By January, 1945, the Directorate was expanded on a new War Establishment, naval and air
force personnel becoming an integral part of the Directorate.
The D.C.O. (I.), being now empowered
with direct access to the C.-in-C. (I.) on matters affecting combined operations, continued to use
M.T.6 as a link with G.H.Q. (I.) where co-ordination of training and movement of formations
were concerned.
In July, 1945, the probability arose of having to carry out combined operations training outside
the sphere of India Command.
As this called for the very closest liaison with S.E.A.C., it was
agreed by the C.-in-C. (I.) and the S.A.C., that the Directorate should owe allegiance to both
Commanders and be known as D.C.O. (India and S.E.A.C.) (Appendix 20).
77
WO 277/21
2:
7
