Lack of craft and equipment prevented the first wetshod signals exercise being held in India
until February, 1943, when the craft used in the Madagascar operations became available.
brigade wetshod exercise (" Viking") was then instituted.
Normal assault training and developments continued until another major change in organisa-
tion took place in July, 1943. The Indian Expeditionary Force formed from 10th Army, took over
control of Combined Operations Policy in India from 36 Division, which was then mobilised as a
normal Infantry Division.
The Indian Expeditionary Force carried out the planning and training
from Bombay and a new unit, 218 H.Q. Signals, was formed in July, 1943, to train and administer
all Army Combined Operations Signals Sections.
The lack of proper H.Q. Ships was severely felt in training but 218 H.Q. Signals were given the
task of supervising the conversion of existing ships.
A start was made by building a mock-up
H.Q. Ship at the C.T.C. Madh Island, which eventually became a model H.Q. Ship complete with
fighter direction communications.
The difficulty of running dryshod exercises without craft and H.Q. Ships was overcome by the
construction of three mobile H.Q. Ships. Each ship consisted of two units, one housing six receivers
and the other six transmitters with separated aerials carried on 48-ft. masts, so that the layout
was as near that of a real ship as possible.
These ships enabled a full scale divisional signals dryshod exercise to be run in August, 1943,
It was carried out in the Poona-Ahmednagar area utilising two Beach Signal
Sections and two Ship Signal Sections from 2 Division.
Towards the middle of October, a full scale wetshod exercise (" Otter") was arranged for
36 Division, in which Bulolo took part as Corps H.Q. Ship. This was the first time a properly fitted
H.Q. Ship had appeared in India.
A further change took place when the Indian Expeditionary Force faded out of the picture
and 33 Indian Corps took over combined operations work.
1944 brought a rapid growth in the whole Combined Operations Organisation in India. Plans
which had been awaiting sanction, either because of finance or policy, were put into effect and the
Signals branch expanded to meet expected training and operational requirements.
One of the most important changes was that Bandra ceased to be an army establishment in
January. Instead of remaining under 218 H.Q. Signals, it became a naval establishment named
H.M.S. Braganza III and was commanded by a Commander R.N. This brought the Signal School
into line with H.M.S. Dundonald II.
Early in 1944, all Signal Sections were allocated to Brigades or Beach Groups and were
carrying out dryshod exercises under their respective formations.
During the summer of 1944, 2 and 36 Divisions, followed by 15 and 25 Divisions carried out
training and exercises in combined operations.
All but two Beach Groups were disbanded. As a
result of these exercises, it was decided to reorganise the two existing Beach Signals Sections and
form the Beach Maintenance Area Signals Sections. Beach Signal Sections were to provide tactical
communications for the assaulting formations,
provide administrative communications for the Beach Group.
and Beach Maintenance Area sections were to
In August, 1944, 218 Indian Combined Operations Signals took the place of 218 H.Q. Signals.
The establishment on which 218 H.Q. Signals was raised was sufficient to control a unit, the strength
of which fluctuated between 500 and 800 personnel, with equipment which surpassed that held by a
normal divisional signals.
no H.Q. Ships
At this time, combined operations were being planned to take place on the Burma coast.
Braganza III at Bombay.
were available, H.M.S. Haitan was converted at
Colombo and completed by
Operations in S.E.A.C.
After the Arakan operations in early 1945, in which a Beach Signal Section was placed under
command of 26 Indian Division, planning for the recapture of Rangoon began in April and the assault
no one, however NiS. ay this tin the in i proper tole his had at ved Waw rey candl,
not be used as Brigade H.Q. Ships as they could not proceed up the Rangoon River until it had
been cleared of mines and any shoals located, therefore an IC He had to be used for Brigade
Headquarters.
138
A novelty was introduced in the shape of an I.C.I. (L) which was converted in 24 hours into a
" step-up
There was a 30-mile gap between the divisional H.Q. Ship anchorage and the
assault beaches and a relay link was necessary. As it happened, this craft was vital to communica-
tions and a serious breakdown would have occurred without it.
for Malaya at the end of the monsoon.
The fall of Range on in Man, sollo. ed closely he tad call ax Cor Comb, mea paratil workin
India and, for the first time, there was an abundance of everything, assault signals, ship signals,
H.Q. Ships and assault equipment.
When the Divisions embarked, they were superbly equipped and trained. Full scale exercises
could not be held owing to the unavailability of shipping and the monsoon, but the Divisions held
signal exercises before they set off.
For Operation " Zipper," the assault on Malaya, all the signal resources of Combined Operations
were needed. Two assault sections, two Beach Group Signal Sections and seven Ship Signal Sections
took part, in addition to one Ship Signal Section which took part in the landing at Hong Kong.
With the conclusion of these
operations individual sections were gradually disbanded and,
as there was no longer the need for 218 Indian Combined Operations Signals, the unit was broken up.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
139
