SECTION (iii)
THE DIRECTORATE OF EXPERIMENTS AND STAFF REQUIREMENTS (D.XSR.), LATER
BECONING THE DIRECTORATE OF EXPERIVENTS AND OPERATIONAL REQUIRE-
MENTS (D.X.O.R.), AUGUST, 1942- OCTOBER, 1943.
Formation of the Directorate of Experiments and Staff Requirements
The enlargement of the Experimental Section at C.O.H.O, by the absorption of part of the
of Combined Operations Experimental
Establishment!
C.O.D.C.
(C.O.X.E.) was an important step forward.
In August, 1942, C.C.O. issued a memorandum setting
ments and gave instructions on the manner in which he was to work with other branches of the
The memorandum also transferred the Technical Data Section, which had been
Stard guan C.S. H., Trem the Directorate of Combined Training to D.X.S.R.
The directive issued to D.X.S.R. included the following :-
(1) The D.X.S.R. was to be a member of the Combined Operations Council and Operations
Committee and was entitled to attend Chief Planners' Committee Meetings whenever
(2) The primary function of D.X.S.R. was that of formulating qualitative staff requirements.
The secondary function was that of arranging with the appropriate technical depart-
ments of the Service such experiments as are necessary to facilitate the formulation
of staff requirements and to establish the correct method of using equipment.
did not undertake development but, when necessary, arranged for it to be undertaken
by the appropriate Service Department.
(3) He was to co-ordinate all experiments and trials, other than naval service trials and
tactical trials, carried out by ships craft, formations and establishments under the
command of the C.C.O. and for this purpose was to maintain close liaison with the
staff of the Director of Combined Training, with the G.O.C. Royal Marine Division,
the Commander S.S. Brigade and with formations to which the C.C.O. acted in an
advisory capacity. In the case of naval equipment, for type trials requiring more than
the resources permanently allocated to the C.O.X.E., he was to apply through the
Naval Q Planner (N.Q.P.) staff for any additional resources needed."
tactical trials of naval equipment he was to transfer the matter formally to the N.Q.P.
staff to propose the nececessary programme.
(4) When, as a result of trials with a prototype, D.X.S.R. had put forward a recommendation
for production, he was to hand the matter over formally to the Q Planners concerned
who, thereupon, were to take over responsibility for initiating the necessary action and
for arranging all consequential matters of manning, training and maintenance.
(5) D.X.S.R. was to direct, on behalf of the C.C.O., the work of the C.O.X.E., Westward Ho,
instructions being passed through the Commandant and N.O. i/c Appledore.
In this directive two points should be noted :—
(1) The definite instructions that D.X.S.R. was to have access to the planners.
(2) That his primary function was that of formulating qualitative staff requirements;
secondly he was the co-ordinator of trials and experiments but he did not undertake
development which he arranged when necessary
Department.
with the appropriate Service
The Technical Data Section, which had previously worked under the Director of Combined
Training, was brought under D.X.S.R., partially Decayse orked inde that D.X.S.R. officers were
constantly in need of information from thic section. but mainly because the section needed to work
closely with the division responsible for developments, in order that the information in the Technical
Date Section could be kept up to date. The section was, of course, available to all within C.O.H.Q
and outside authorities.
expanded and moved to Westward Ho, North Devon, where it was kork a as C.O Xeption (iv) of this chapter, i
the spade work for Operation " Overlord,
With the enormous increase of work and with the growth of many committees required for
difficulties arose in D.X.S.R. owing to the staff work
appropriate branches of
Individual experimental officers were a satisfactory link between the C.O.H.Q., the
Service Ministries. C.O.X.E.. etc., but the immense task of correlating
reports and distributing them to outside authorities necessitated an increase in the strength of the
Staff Duties Section.
Throughout 1942, a great deal of the preparatory work for " Overlord" was carried out by the
various committees on which C.C.O. was represented; on many, his representative was D.X.S.R.
From the beginning of the year, there had been regular meetings at C.O.H.Q. to discuss development
and experimental work, and the small experimental section at C.O.H.Q. had done much to circulate
information on the results of trials and development within C.O.H.Q. and to Commands in this
country and overseas.
Experimental Sections of the " Round-up" Administrative Planning Committee (R.A.P. Committee)
Of the committees started in 1942, the most important was perhaps the " Round-up"
Administrative Planning (R.A.P.) Committee. This administrative committee studied the problems
the assault on North-West Europe possible.
of the invasion of Europe; it was advisory only, but themesults if its delib diations dit much tone be
sections, each responsible for the study of some particular problem or series of problems.
sections of most concern to D.X.S.R. were, that dealing with the Experimental Aspect, Combined
Operations Technique (Section FF) and the section dealing with Beach Equipment (Section O).
D.X.S.R. himself was convener of the former. Other sections on which D.X.S.R. was represented
R.E. works and stores, including bridging. (Section F.)
Water supply.
Petrol, oil and lubricants.
Ammunition, including R.A.F. bombs.
(Section L.)
Co-ordination of policy regarding maintenance and supply. (Sections M and N.)
Provision of transportation plant, equipment and stores for overseas. (Section BB.)
From this list can be seen the type of problems which were under review.
dealing with the experimental aspect came many requests from other sections for assistance. Terms
of reference for section FF were :—
(1) Co-ordination of all experimental work and development in
combined operations aspect of " Round-up " (original code word for " Overlord").
2) Initiation of experimental work and development of technique in the use of equipment as
requested by other sections of the R.A.P. Committee.
But both (1) and (2) were to be limited to the embarkation and disembarkation,
including the beach maintenance area and the port maintenance area, until normal
port working commences.
This section of the R.A.P. Committee met at fortnightly intervals through the later months of
1942 and a list published in October, 1942, of experiments and trials either in progress or recently
completed shows the magnitude and complexity of the problems on which the section was
(1) In progress :—
Special boats for bridging water-gap from beached coasters.
Tank flotation.
Bren carrier flotation.
Tank wading.
Waterproofing and wading of wheeled vehicles, including vehicle maintenance after
sea-water immersion.
Amphibians
Vehicle barges.
Hamilton mat pier.
Medium coasters to carry vehicles.
Landing of vehicles from Schuyts.
Petrol bulk landing.
Petrol cable.
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
(C52794)
