On 6th August, Admiral Mountbatten signed his first directive for the Commandant of the
C.O.X.E. The opening paragraphs of this directive include the following : —
" The object of the Combined Operations Experimental Establishment is the investiga-
rise antal or tie, patisalt landings catt holl wing mater fat beaches with vestige
The handling of stores and conveying these stores across the beaches; the wading of
tanks, tracked vehicles, armoured cars and wheeled vehicles; the landing of petrol in bulk.
Your investigations should lead, not only to the development of special equipment,
but also to the development in the technique of its use.
The authority for initiating the development of a particular type of equipment or for
There was already operating in the area, the experimental wing of the Department of Tank
Design of the Ministry of Supply, which was primarily concerned with the modifications to tanks
This wing was attached immediately to C.O.X.E. for administra-
tion and discipline.
The new establishment also absorbed a small Royal Engineers Transportation
Experimental Depot which had been operating for a short time in the area. This depot was engaged
on problems connected with the discharge of stores in assault landings.
As many of the problems
concerned Field Engineers, a Royal Engineer Field Wing was immediately started for work on beach
roadways and the demolition of both above and below water beach obstacles. It became apparent,
after three months, that the original war establishment was not sufficient to cope with the multitude
of projects, which were rapidly mounting up, and it was found necessary to include, as an integral
part of the establishment, a Naval Wing, a Royal Army Service Corps Wing and later a Royal
Artillery Wing.
that the establishment followed the general experimental policy laid down.
The workshops, tank hangars and stores were situated at Westward Ho, because, although
a great deal of work took place on the beaches in the estuary, it was necessary for the workshops to
be positioned as close as possible to the open beaches where most of the trials were carried out.
The establishment was a military one, consisting of some 30 officers and 500 other ranks but,
since nearly all the trials carried out had, to some extent, a naval aspect, the Commandant had
on his staff a Commander, R.N., as adviser on combined problems where craft were employed and
who personally conducted naval trials.
The establishment was primarily engaged in investigating the practicability of equipment
for the assault, or for the defence against seaborne landings; these investigations, by their special
nature, required the ability to understand the technicalities of the equipment and to make on
the spot modifications. In the course of these investigations it was frequently found necessary to
produce special equipment to meet some last minute requirement and to develop a technique
The original directive only covered a bare outline of the work which ultimately devolved upon
the establishment and space does not permit anything but a brief reference to some of the types
of projects and problems which were studied; it is indeed difficult to name any problem or piece of
equipment used in amphibious landings which did not, at some time, undergo examination by
this establishment.
Some Examples of the Experimental Work of C.O.X.E.
The Naval Wing of C.O.X. E. was responsible in the U.. for the initial operational trials of
landing ships and both major and minor landing craft, to ensure that they met the joint naval and
military requirements. In these trials, particular attention had to b they en to such items as the
hadling and manceuvrability of the craft on and ott flation caes to lovens hards; the draughts
and the depths of water at the bow of the craft for troop or vehicle disembarkation; the ability of the
craft to withdraw through surf and the efficiency of the anchors and winches.
craft were carried out locally with the approval of the Admiralty whilst other craft were converted
Many modifications to
o meet special needs. Other trials covered the discharge of vehicles from ships and craft by
pontoons and causeways, the swimming off of amphibians and D.D. tanks and the mounting and
firing of guns and self-propelled artillery from the tank deck of landing craft.
Associated with these trials were problems relating to the discharge of stores from cargo ships
and coasters by aerial ropeways, conveyers, amphibians and pontoon barges under every condition
likely to be encountered in an assault landing a during the dile phase a tee for the
cranes, tractors and stores handling equipment were tested and reported upon.
recovery of stranded major and minor landing craft and for the salvage of sunken vehicles were
also developed.
Extensive work was also done on the problem of the clearance of beach obstacles, which were
known to exist in Normandy, by the use of landing craft equipped with special devices and also the
clearance of beach minefields by the Royal Engineers. These obstacles had been secretly examined
on the Normandy beaches by C.O.X.E. officers during a night reconnaissance raid.
One of the many interesting war-time projects, which required the full resources of the establish-
ment, was the laying of an experimental undersea petrol pipeline, in association with the Petroleum
Warfare Department, across the Bristol Channel from Wales to North Devon,
34 miles.
From this, much valuable information was obtained and later incorporated in saluto
for the supply of petrol by pipeline to the Normandy beach-head.
C.O.X.E. was responsible for
laying, by landing craft, the pipeline from the pumping station in Wales to the Cable Ship Holdfast;
and the landing of the terminal delivery end from the Holdfast to the petrol storage installation on
the North Devon coast. The capacity of this pipeline was 120 tons per day and, for many weeks,
petrol was supplied to South-West England through this experimental pipeline. A fuller account
of this operation is given in Chapter 21.
C.O.X.E. was also responsible for the service trials of all amphibians in the U.K. in order to
evaluate their surf performance; their ability to traverse mud, shingle, and sand dunes; and their
troop and cargo carrying capacity.
Considerable work was done to confirm the best means of
evacuating casualties from amphibians to ships. All minor landing craft underwent comparative
trials with particular attention to their performance in high surf and the discharge of troops, stores
and guns under all conditions.
Waterproofing of vehicles was another problem on which a great deal of work was done. On
flat beaches there is always a water-gap between the landing ship or craft and dry land, through
which vehicles will have to pass.
The maximum depth through which an untreated vehicle could
wade was about 18 inches but, when it was known that the landings would be on the flat beaches
of Normandy, C.O.X.E. was called upon to produce a solution which would enable vehicles to safely
negotiate much greater depths. It was gradually increased, first to 3 ft. 6 in. and, by June,
1944,
all vehicles, guns and equipment could wade ashore in depths up to 4 ft. 6 in. As the sizes of craft
grew larger so these wading capabilities again had to be increased.
During the course of the wading trials carried out in 1943, it became evident that many
problems were likely to occur in embarking vehicles, guns and equipment in all types of landing
that the prati an onsideratos was dise granting or the Parating bly he so a each. masslea
operation. The main difficulty encountered was that vehicles with low ground clearance, or long
overhanging sections such as guns and tank transporters, were unable to negotiate the steep angle
of the ramps. It was decided that there were two potential lines of enquiry which should be pursued.
First, how could landing craft be modified to enable the vehicles to be landed on the flatter beach
gradients, and, secondly, what modifications could be carried out to the vehicles which would
enable them to be landed without difficulty? It was at first thought that only certain vehicles would
be affected, but it was soon found that the problem applied to the majority of vehicles, and could
only be overcome by the modification of either the vehicle or the craft, or in some cases, both.
This was an extremely serious matter for it meant that, in
the short time remaining before
" Overlord,"
every type of vehicle, gun and equipment destined to take part in that operation had
to be subjected to trials by the establishment.
This involved the examination of some 260 different
types of equipment, most of which had to be subjected to actual disembarkation trials on the
Deaches in the area.
WO 277/21
27
30
REORGANISATION TO PREPARE FOR THE WAR IN THE FAR EAST.
OCTOBER, 1943
TO THE END OF THE WAR.
Reorganisation of C.O.H.Q. On the Functional Group System and its Effects on D.X.O.R.
On completion of most of the experimental work on equipment required for the assault on
Europe, the thoughts of C.O.H.Q. as a whole were turning to the Far Eastern War.
that this would involve a series of combined operations, and problems not associated with the
165
