replenishment.
The organization for taking trate essentials to the Division
existed, and worked perfectly,
but the organization for receiving them was
not, and in the circumstances could not, be employed.
The risks taken and
losses incurred by the Air Force and military crew personnel were fruitless.
obe opinion was expressed that, if every maintenance load which arrived by
air over Arnhem could have been distributed to the units of the division, the
necessity to withdraw would probably not have arisen.
The following are
the reasons advanced by D.D.S.T., airborne corps, for collection and delivery
being impossible.
In his
view the fundamental error appeared to be one of incorrect
appreciation of the conditions of employment of airborne forces.
The theory
was that airborne divisions would be relieved in 48 hours, and that mainten-
ance by air would therefore be confined to one or two drops, followed, after
the join-up with ground forces, by air delivery of urgent items.
In fact, early
relief did not occur; in the Normandy assault, 6 Airborne Division was not
relieved as a whole in 48 hours, and at Arnhem 1 Airborne Division was not
relieved at all.
It was, therefore, unsafe to plan for relief in a stated time,
and the worst case, not the best, should be covered by the plan.
This meant
that air maintenance for several days must be provided for, and it could
then be continued indefinitely or stopped at will.
Complete organizations existed at the Base and within airborne divisions,
to provide for air maintenance, weather permitting; but certain conditions
were necessary for their effective employment.
These are outlined below.
Maintenance, was impossible without a secure dropping point; but 1 Air-
borne Division held no such point, and the supplies flown to them could not
therefore be collected after dropping. Given a supply dropping point, main-
tenance of a division was still impracticable without the organization necessary
to run the S.D.P., and handle the stores.
This must cover layout, siting of
dumps, provision of labour and transport for clearing the S.D.P., unpacking
panniers, stock holding, and daily delivery to units.
The Airborne Light Composite Company, R.A.S.C., had been designed
and trained for this work, and it was essential that it should be flown in with
the division in time to prepare for and receive the first maintenance drop.
To the objection that to do so would reduce the lift of fighting troops, it
might be answered that the R.A.S.C. unit was composed entirely of fighting
troops, and it was quite possible to give it an alternative organization on
infantry lines, so that if at any time fighting became more important than
maintenance, it could act as an effective infantry reserve unit.
He suggested that Operation " Market" showed that the R.A.S.C. unis
necessary for such an operation were :
(a) Air Despatch Crew Companies, providing some 240 operating crews,
(b) Transport companies for the road lift from RHM A to delivery
plus a reserve.
points, after the road link is established; these units would also be
needed during non-operational periods.
(c) The Airborne Light Composite Company.
Airborne Composite Transport Companies one of which belonaed to the
In fact. duing " Market" crews were nrovided by using the personnel of
354
other Airborne Division, and personnel lent by Air Despatch Group. The
companies were thus lost during the whole operation
The requirement of transport in advance of R.H.M.A. he estimated at
borne Divisional Troops.
two transport companies, each of three 3-ton platoons, which should be Air-
SECTION 4. -The WINTER CAMPAIGN AND THE LAST ROUND
Operational Background
The most vital of the operations that took place during the period, 27th
September, 1944, to early January, 1945, were those to open the port of
Antwerp, as the entire administrative build-up for the force depended upon
their successful and early conclusion.
These operations, which included
the capture of Walcheren Island, were completed by early December; but,
hefore the next stage could be undertaken, the Germans had launched their
offensive in the Ardennes, and this had to be dealt with first.
The salient
was gradually eliminated, and, by the middle of January, it was possible to
enter upon the second phase of our offensive.
This consisted of clearing the
area between the Maas and the Rhine as a preliminary to the final assault in
to Germany and across the Rhine.
By 10th March, this had been achieved
and 21 Army Group was ranged along the west bank of the Rhine from
Dusseldorf to Arnhem.
The assault across the Rhine was carried out by means of two operations,
"Plunder" to be carried out by the ground troops, and "Varsity", which
was the airborne drop across the Rhine.
The latter was carried out, as far
as the British were concerned, by the 6 Airborne Division.
Operation
"Plunder" was launched on the night of 23rd/24th March, 1945, and Opera-
tion "Varsity" on the following morning, both successfully, and progress
thereafter was rapid.
Second Army crossed the Elbe on 29th April, and
6 Airborne Division went on to make contact with the Russians at Wismar
on the Baltic coast.
12 Corps entered Hamburg on 3rd May, and on the
4th the German High Command surrendered to the Commander-in-Chief,
21 Army Group, the " cease fire" becoming efective next day.
Administrative Picture at Beginning of Phase
The area of Antwerp and Brussels was selected for the location of the
advanced base because i was suitsbly situated both for stocking from the
ports and for delivery to the troops.
The depots could not, however, be fully
end of November.
stocked until the port of Antwerp was open, which did not happen until the
In the meantime, commodities were delivered by road
and rail, supplemented by inland water transport, from the
Channel ports
and the R.M.A.
required for daily maintenance, it would be necessary to accumulate in the
It was estimated that, besides the intake of all commodities
20,000 tons of
advance base, beforeinter acenching of a major advandla
other stores.
supplies, 40,000 tons each of P.O.L. and ammunition, and large quantities oi
By late September the administrative difficulties created by the sweep
across France and Relium were haina overcame hut it hecame evident tha
It was therefore
the long L. of C. should be shortened as soon as practicable.
decided that once the nort of Antwerp was onened. the R.M.A. should begin
355
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
