All R.A.F. stocks were to be held packed, but it is difficult to
imagine what degree of efficiency could have resulted from trying to
fuel 39 squadrons of aircraft with 4-gallon cans.
It was realized that, owing to heavy demands on the tin plant at Abadan,
the target figure could not be reached for a considerable time, and it was
accepted that surplus production of 100 Octane which could
not be tinned
off would be held in bulk at Abadan.
D.S.T., P.A.I.C., was uneasy as to the feasibility of maintaining the
essential P.O.L. supplies of a force operating in
North Persia
by
daily
consignments from a base 600 miles back, along a vulnerable L. of C.
He asked that consideration be given to establishing a substantial reserve
holding of P.O.L. in a forward location.
This
was met in part by the
planning of an advanced base at Mushkabad.
In January, 1943, the scale of the programme was reduced to 11 divisions,
and again in March to seven divisions for 60 days, and 15 squadrons.
The
effect of these gradual reductions was that, in May, 1943, it was necessary
to cut down stocks of packed motor spirit at some depots, at the expense
of bulk issues.
This opportunity of turnover was welcomed, as the packed
stocks were showing signs of great deterioration.
Up to the end of August,
1943. there was no opportunity to turn over R.A.F. stocks, as very few aircraft
had actually operated within P.A.I.C.
This tied up personnel who might
otherwise have been released for other duties.
Standards of P.O.L.
War Office decision to standardize an " all purpose" 80 octane motor
spirit could not be put into effect in P.A.I.C.
Production from the Kirkuk
crude oil was impossible, and could only be arranged at Khanagin and
Kermanshah at the expense of a lead content of 3•6 c.cm., 25 per cent. re-
duction in the output of motor spirit, and a dangerously high vapour pressure,
8•1/2 1b. (The safe maximum limit for canned petrol in P.A.I.C. is 7z lb.)
The reduction in output would have meant increased transportation tonnage
lift from Abadan over an already heavily loaded L. of C.
Kirkuk, Kerman-
shah, and Khanagin were producing 70 octane, and War Office agreed to
this being continued, provided distribution was strictly controlled.
This was
not possible, as the forces received 50 per cent. of regurements from Abadan,
and 50 per cent. from the Northern refineries.
In addition, the constantly
changing distribution of the Forces, the laying down of reserves from each
producing point, the necessity for using container filling plants at each location
the best advantage,
limitations
of transport, and
causes temporarily
affecting output at a location, made the segregation of stocks impossible.
It was also necessary at this time to continue provision of 87 octane
to meet the needs of Grant tanks of old design.
P.A.I.C.
was therefore
allowed to continue using 70 octane for M.T., and 87 octane for A.F.VS.,
changing to 80 octane for the latter when new equipment was received.
Abadan was, of course, exporting 80 octane to theatres using this fuel, and
tetraethy-lead had to be imported from US A hon making this and also
aviation spirit 100 octane.
386
MAP NO 5
BuiDdi
Chalus
Nau - Sh
WSs7et17
WO 277/21:
27
NO277726
