5 Division advanced up the west coast road, while the Canadians used
the roads in the centre and east of the "toe".
because of the mountains, and the lack of roads and ports.
Maintenance was difficult
On 9th Septem-
ber, 1 Airborne Division landed from ships at Taranto (Operation "Slap-
stick"') with the object of securing the "heel" as a firm administrative base
for operations on the east coast; but before these could begin, Eighth Army
had to advance up the west coast to help the Fifth Army, which had
landed south of Salerno and was being hard pressed.
Fifth Army was partly American and partly British, the latter element
consisting of 10 Corps,
which included 7 Armoured Division, 46 and 56
Infantry Divisions, and 23 Armoured Brigade.
The Salerno landings, some
200 miles by land north of the Straits of Messina, were known as " Opera-
tion Avalanche", and were not easy or unopposed; and, although bridge-
heads were established, the port itself was not captured on the first day as
planned.
Resistance was stiff, and it was not until 16th September that
the enemy began to withdraw, partly due to the near approach of 5 Division.
On the same day, the Canadian Division made contact with 1 Airborne
Division.
Naples was captured on Ist October, and was at once brought into use
as a port, although to a limited extent owing to demolitions, etc.
The Allied
line now stretched right across from east to west, and the ports of Brindisi
and Bari had been occupied.
The next stage was the advance on Rome, but this was to take a long
time to reach.
The attack began on 12th October, and in early November
the enemy was holding the line of the Gargliano and Sangro Rivers.
There-
after progress was slow, partly due to the withdrawal of 7 Armoured Divi
sion
231
Brigade,
which
were
required for the build-up of the
forces to take part in the Normandy landings.
In an endeavour to assist
the advance a panting the Murmandy lae Anzio beaches on 22nd Jan war,
1944, and although it was initially succes ul, it met heay resistance, while.
the main advance was halted along the entire tront by the end of that
month. February and March were marked chiefly by our unsuccessful assaults
on the Monte Cassino position.
winter campaign, and had not sufficient local superiority in men to break
The Allies had suffered heavily during the
The Allied Armies were reorganized, and the summer offensive opened
on 11th May, 1944, Monte Cassino falling a few days later, after holding
us up for four months.
Rome was liberated on 4th June.
and the Allies then raced to the Gothic line 170 miles to the north, which
The Germans
was the enemy's chosen position for the defence of Northern Italy.
made stands on the line of Take Trasimend and in the moumans ring
Arezzo, but in the middle of July fell back to the River Arno, or Gothic
Meanwhile, three U.S. and four French Divisions, and most of the U.S.
12th Air Force, together with a large number of Army and corps troops,
were also withdrawn from Italy to get ready for the forthcoming
of Southern France.
In place of these, only one U.S. and one
Division were brought in.
264
The Gothic Line was a series of prepared positions in depth, with behind
it a succession of ridges,
which were ideal natural defences.
The Army
Group attacked it in the autumn of 1944, but although the main position
was broken the Allies could not get through to the Po Valley.
In January,
the attacks were discontinued, and the two Armies settled down into
defensive positions for the rest of the winter.
Their strength was still
further depleted by the withdrawal of the Canadian Corps for transfer to
21 Army Group.
The winter was a mild one, but even so the conditions were very bad
for operations.
Until mid-December, the rainfall is very heavy, and then
the high ground has a deep covering of snow for two months, while on
the lower reaches of the valleys the mud remains until March.
The final Allied offensive in 1945 began early in April and, after some
resistance by the
enemy, the attack developed into a pursuit from 19th
April, the speed of which increased daily.
The River Po caused only a
slight delay and, after a week of rapid advances across the whole of Northern
Italy, the Germans surrendered on 2nd May, 1945.
Chain of Command
The Allied Forces in Italy were originally known as 15 Army Group.
Its administrative agency was at first called Fortbase, which was located in
Sicily, and was replaced by an Advanced Administrative Echelon (Flambo)
at Naples, whose function was to supply the administrative needs of all
troops in Italy.
The representatives of the services at Flambo consisted
mainly of the directorates formed for, but never used by, 15 Army Group
for the Sicily campaign.
A few months later, H.Q., 15 Army Group changed its name, first to
H.O, Allied Central Mediterranean Force, and then to H.O., Allied Armies
in Tialy (A.A.l. becoming a G.H.Q, in which the services representation
was provided by Flambo, which disappeared as such.
In the summer of
194, A.. H.O. movembo, Ailies to taly; but, by the end of the year. as
became evident moved from A some duplication of effort, and A.A.I. was
disbanded, is that there was some a new H.O., 15 Army Group as an
operational H.Q. with a small service advisory staff.
The S.T. representation in A.F.H.Q. is described in Section 1 of this
There were a D.D.S.T. (Brigadier) at H.Q., A.A.L, a D.D.S.T.
(Brigadier) at H.Q. of Armies, and D.Ds.S.T. (Colonels) at H.Q. of Districts.
Subordinate organization was normal.
Fifth Army-British Increment
In Fifth Army, which was predominantly American,
administration of
the British element (10 Corps) was exercised through a British Increment
forming part of Headquarters, Fifth Army.
When this increment was first
a Lieut.-Col's, level.
formed, it was small, with the senior representatives of services mostly on
administratively.
only with 10 Carna to dietnto and nurnoses an independent formation
It was at first intended to act in an advisory capacity
most of the increment se at tale masked nurpose and it was too weak to
During the period when this arrangement was in force,
265
Mars micro 0.5 mm
WO 211/21
27
WO 277/26
