The Study of Fire Support for the Assault
C.C.O.
set up an Assault Committee under the chairmanship of the Chief of Staff with
representatives from the Admiralty and War Office to study all aspects of the problem
assault against well-defended beaches and, at its first meeting on lIth November, 1942, three
sub-committees were formed:—
No. 1 Sub-Committee (Chairman M.G.C.T.) to decide the scale of maximum opposition
that is considered reasonable to engage when planning an assault.
No. 2 Suit it (Chaim agai he pool potion ition a to the susan.
No. 3 Sub-Committee (Chairman D.X.O.R.) to report on how recommendations of
No. 2 Sub-Committee could be met.
The War Office Staff, under the orders of the C.I.G.S., were at that time preparing a paper on
"Fire Power required during an Assault."
C.C.O. wrote a memorandum' to the Chiefs of Staff Committee on 16th November, pointing
out that the overriding lesson learned from Dieppe was the need for overwhelming fire support in
the initial stages of an assault and that no standard naval craft had the necessary qualities or
equipment to provide such support.
He asked the Chief of Staff Committee to invite the Admiralty
TO .
(1) State what the cost to the naval building programme would be if heavy and small
monitors were included in the programme about to be considered.
(2) Consider as a matter of urgent necessity, a programme of shallow-draught protected
gunboats of fair speed for close inshore support fire for the initial assaults
This memorandum was discussed at a Chiefs of Staff meeting on 2nd December, 1942, and it
was decided, on the recommendation of the First Sea Lord, to form a Technical Sub-Committee
to consider and report on :—
(1) Whether the requirements of fire support in assaults could be met by bombing, gunfire
from ships, or a combination of both.
(2) What special measures were to be taken to meet this requirement.
This Committee was formed under the Chairmanship of the Assistant Chief of Naval Staff
(Weapons) (A.C.N.S. (W) ), Rear-Admiral P. R. McGrigor, the other members being the A.C.I.G.S.,
the Director of Bomber Operations and V.C.C.O. (Major-General J. C. Haydon).
Recommendations of the Assault Committee
Before the Technical Sub-Committee held its first meeting, C.C.O.'s Assault Committee
produced a paper—" Summary of recommendations of C.O.H.Q. Assault Committee on Fire Support
for the Assault on Defended Beaches," and this was used by the V:C.C.O. as a basis of C.C.O.'s views,
In the production of this paper, technical advice was given by the Admiralty, the War Office.
G.H.Q. Home Forces, Canadian Military H.O., and the Ministry of Supply.
It detailed the type
and weight of fire required and proposed which Service should provide it during the various phases
of the assault. The conclusions of this paper were as follows :—
"To summarise, in order to ensure that the assaulting troops can get ashore and can
maintain their attack beyond the beach, it is considered, that in addition to whatever
naval and air bombardment can be included in the plan (and this should obviously be the
maximum possible), the following additional methods of producing fire support are essential:-
(a) Support of the initial waves by direct close range fire, and by indirect fire when required.
some form of gun comparable to the 25-pdr. gun now carried in special craft.
This is fundamentally a military problem so far as the provision
their manning and their employment is concerned.
of the weapons,
to be provided by the Navy.
The craft would, however, have
(b) The support of the assault beyond the beach.
This is fundamentally a military problem
naval responsibility.
though again the provision of the craft in which the guns are carried would be a
The requirement could be met by :—
(i) Some form of gun comparable to the 25-pdr, gun now mounted in self-propelled
armoured tracked carriers.
(i) HE. firing rocket projectors mounted in L.C. T.s provided trials proved satisfactory.
1 C.O.S. (42) 402 (O) dated 16th November, 1942.
Fighter Direction Tender.
Fighter Direction Ship (H.M.S. Boxer).
WO 277/21
27
3ф
