Harbour Launch Companies
A later development was the result of a recommendation by 21 Army
Group as the result of operational experience off the Normandy beaches.
Gas to as the re that of poratil motor boat companies had, not enough work!
shop personnel.
A new tune of company was, therefore, proposed, to
called a Harbour Launch Company,
with a larger workshop section, as
necessary for the maintenance of 40 harbour launches.
Fire Boat Sections
In 1943, the policy was decided that the provision equipping and manning,
of fire 19, alod or tire defence during the mounting phase of an opera.
tion, or for use in captured ports, would be an Army responsibility.
tion, overe to be organized as Fire Boat Sections under the operational control
of the Army Fire Service.
The War Establishments made provision for fire-
tittie personnel, and also for the attachment of R.A.5.C, personnel for
operating the boats.
In this connection it may be observed that the R.A.S.C.
had tim any years provided the transport personnel for Army fire brigades,
and maintained the vehicles; and that, after the end of the war in Europe, the
R.A.S.C. was to take over the Army Fire Services altogether.
The complement of fire boats originally consisted of six fire-fighting per.
sonnel, and a crew of three R.A.S.C. men (coxswain, 2nd coxswain, and
engineet) in the 61}-ft. vessels, and of five fire fighters and two crew in the
45-ft. type; but see Appendix VIIE for the eventual crew complement.
personnel employed in fire boat sections received special training, the A.F.S.
men as deckhands, and the R.A.S.C. in fire fighting duties.
later organized in fire boat companies of 15 sections each.
Fire boats were
For other parti-
culars, see Chapter XII, Section 3.
Other Waterborne Units
Fast Launch Companies were formed initially for employment in con-
nection with the invasion of France in operation
" Overlord".
The craft
were particularly required for the control of DUKWs, which played a most
important part in the operation, in the conveyance of stores from ship to
shore.
The need for the fast launches had been realized during the Sicilian
landings, when the amphibian jeeps provided for the purpose of control were
found to be unsuitable.
Military Oil Barge Companies were also intended for employment with
21 Army Group, for the carriage of petrol in bulk;
but they were in fac
employed at first on carrying water to ships in United Kingdom ports.
further details about the above two types of company, see Chapter VIII; and
for Military Oil Barge Companies, Appendix IIJ.
Ambulance Launch Companies were designed for the evacuation of
casualties by water during the amphibious operations anticipated in the wai
in the Far East.
and amphibians in the same theatre.
Floating Workshops were intended for the repair of crat
in Chapter XI.
Further details of these units are found
102
CHAPTER IV
BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, FRANCE, 1939-1940
SECTION I-PLANNING
Introductory
It was the policy of the British Government in 1939, as in 1914, in the event
of war with Germany, to send to the Continent the small available field force
of the Regular Army, and to follow this up with Territorial and newly raised
formations as they could be made ready.
The composition of the Field Force, as it was expected to be after Ist
September, 1939, was planned to take the form of a first contingent, to consist
of a general headquarters, a lines of communication organization, two corps,
and four regular divisions, and to be put overseas within one month from the
outbreak of war.
This was to be followed by a Territorial Army increment
of two divisions in the next three months, making a total first contingent of
two corps, each of three divisions.
In addition, a component of the R.A.F.
and an advanced air striking force were to be sent overseas with the original
A second Territorial Army contingent of four divisions was planned to
be ready at the end of the fifth month of the war, and the force was intended
ultimately to reach a total of six regular and 26 Territorial Army Divisions,
plus R.A.F.; but that lay in the realm of long-term planning.
Germany invaded Poland on the 1st September, 1939, and the British
Army began to mobilize the same day.
War was declared against Germany
on the 3rd September.
The first day of movement (M day) of troops and stores to France was
6th September, and the plans were duly put into operation.
Army contingent, the Air component, and the advanced air striking force,
were landed in France without the enemy interference which had been antici-
This was, in fact, the first sign of what came to be known as the
phoney", or sham, war, which was to last until the following May.
This period of inaction had the advantage, from our point of view, of
enabling us to repair many deficiencies of organization, equipment, and train-
ing, and it was probably fortunate our forces were not called upon to face
the full blast of a German attack in the state of unreadiness which was their
actual condition in September, 1939.
The task of the S. and T. Directorate at the War Office, in the days before
the war, was to plan for the maintenance of the Regular first contingent and
the advanced air striking force, with a total strength of 170,000 men, in
supplies, petrol and lubricants.
The force would be fully mechanized, and
the average consumption of P.O.L., excluding the requirements of the R.A.F.,
was estimated at 192,000 gallons a day, this including petrol for cooking, as
all troops were equipped with petrol cookers. The calculations for this figure
are given in Appendix XA.
Plans had also to be made for the mobilization of all R.A.S.C. units, for
the provision of all R.A.S.C.-driven vehicles, and for the necessary organi-
zation and equipment for their repair and maintenance.
103
Westet1t
WO 277/21
WO 277/26
