the form of ice, and quantities of this were held in readiness.
Air Despatch
thes not developed in this theatre in the same way as in others and the
R.A.S.C. had no special part to play in this connection.
Second Battle of Libya
On 18th November, 1941, the offensive known as "Crusader" begar
30 Corps armour was repulsed with heavy losses, and the corps failed to
relieve the Tobruk garrison.
13 Corps,
however,
advanced through the
coastal zone, and made contact with Tobruk by the end of November, and
had cleared that area and reopened the port by 10th December. Then,
reinforced by the remains of 30 Corps armour, 13 Corps continued the
navance.
capturing Benghazi on 27th December, and Agedabia on 1th
January.
The rest of 30 Corps was engaged in operations to clear the
Sollum-Halfaya-Bardia area of the enemy, who still resisted there.
During the advance west of Tobruk, 13 Corps was maintained by thid
line transport from Tobruk to a succession of F.M.Cs., of which the last
was at Msus.
These convoys worked with almost complete regularity, and
the daily quota of essential supplies of all natures never failed to be delivered.
Even when
the enemy overran some F.M.Cs. on 24th November, and
scattered some transport echelons, the forward supply system had stood up
to what might have been a serious blow, and no serious disruption of supply
affected operations.
Owing to bad
weather, enemy demolitions, and enemy air attacks,
Benghazi could not be successfully exploited either as a port or an advanced
base.
This meant that all stores had to be brought by road and deset
convoy to Msus and Benghazi areas from Derna and Tobruk, adding over
200 miles of bad going to the L. of C.
The port of Tobruk did not rceiv
adequate intakes of stores and P.O.L. by sea to maintain Eighth Army
It was therefore necessary to supplement these by a daily convoy from
Misheifa railhead to the El Adem area south of Tobruk (170 miles), which
tied up G.T. companies urgently needed in the forward area with 13 Cops.
It had not been possible to extend the railway as planned, as the Germans
still held the coast.
There was also a call on third line transport to maint
the troops under 30 Corps engaged in the frontier area.
The " Jerrican " Arrives
During the advance westwards from Tobruk, and throughout the phas
from 26th Decemher to 21ct Tanuary, the principal difficulty was to maintai
an adequate supply of petrol, partly due to leakage, and partly.
shortage of ships suitable for carrving cased petrol, a number of which had
been sunk.
M.T. spirit in pack; tin-making plants were extended to their utmost capaity.
The second battle of Libya created an enormous demand for
and much packed petrol was imported.
There was a marked decline in
and to hasty production, taken in conjunction with a design at best f
quality of the locally produced tin, owing to lack of skilled person
satisfactory for Army purposes.
waste of metrol and consequently of transport in spite of all possible measur
Weak and faulty tins caused very grea
Wastage on the road was reckoned at one per cent
to miles caised stage literally dripped trom the lorries, Some of wis
188
exploded when the fumes were ignited by static electricity. For planning
head and the forward base, and 25
purposes, the waste from sea kage was estimated at 15 percent, between rail-
per cent. from forward base to vehicle:
but the actual loss often exceeded 30 per cent. in each stage.
In fact, now that a force of considerable size was deployed in the desert,
the shortcomings of the 4-gallon tin became still more apparent.
The funda-
mental trouble was our failure in years of peace to appreciate correctly
the elementary needs of a mechanized force.
Suggestions for the intro-
duction of a returnable container had been rejected, on the grounds that
the 4-gallon tin, which had for so long survived transport by camel and
donkey in the Middle East and Asia generally, was therefore unquestionably
suitable for use in war.
The Germans on the other hand had made a careful study of the con-
tainer problem, and had evolved, before the war began, a 20-litre (42-gallon)
welded container, in which they had eliminated the worst weaknesses of
the civilian type of can.
Containers of this type were known to have been
used by the enemy in the Norway campaign of 1940, but it did not come into
our hands until August, 1941.
It was then at once evident that the
" Jerri-
can", as it was nicknamed, was far in advance of any known type of con-
tainer for operational purposes, and it was brought to the notice of War
Office.
An appreciation prepared at this time estimated the saving by the
adoption of the jerrican as the standard container at a monthly figure of
over €400,000 in cost and 15,700 tons of shipping in the maintenance
petroleum
products
to a force of 20 Divisions, of which five were bulk-
supplied.
A copy
of this appreciation is at Appendix XK.
At that time, there was no hope of securing any form of returnable
container in quantities sufficient for anything more than semi-bulk distribu-
tion in base and L. of C. areas; and, apart from barrels, the only types of
returnable containers known to us were the rectangular 4-gallon can
(admittedly the product of emergency and opportunity, evolved when the
situation in France in 1940 demanded a heavy gauge container which could
be manufactured quickly and in large quantities on existing machinery) and
the round 4-gallon drum.
(For illustrations of these, see Appendix XJ.)
Both these types had screw bungs, and pressed top and bottom seams.
While
stronger than the 4-gallon tin, both had many disadvantages as a package
for operational areas.
transport.
The round type, in particular, was uneconomical in
By the end of 1941, between 50 per cent. and 60 per cent. of the main-
that only a
tenance tonnage for Eighth Army was P.O.L., and it had become evident
handling, without enormous wastage of containers, products, and transport.
container with welded joints would stand up to operational
Middle Bast urged that all container plants sent to the theatre should be
capable of producing the welded article.
The 2-gallon cans with pressed
and soldered joints, used in vehicle racks or spare water and petrol, were
not standing up to conditions, and the Directorate of Works began to make
2 gallon cans ( to conditions, palic an ") with sunken welded vertical seams,
copied from the jerrican, from steel sheet.
Although these had screw bungs,
they were a great success: but all the first year's output was required t
replace the former pattern
on vehicles and for the distribution of water.
(37452)
wer
17
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
