Te was ruled that no iccue of compo rations, mess-tin rations, or emergencu
rations, could be made except on the authority of Army H.Q. OF A.P.H.O.
This order was necessary in order to check excessive issues of Compo rations.
The feeding strength in Italy fluctuated between 700,000 in September,
1943, and 12 million in May, 1945.
The shift in feeding strength from
North Africa
to the mainland of Europe is indicated in the schedule of
feeding strengths shown in Appendix VIIIA.
Catering Services
A very high standard of messing was set in the forward areas. A
brigadier put it that troops no longer simply consumed food, they ate meals.
The outstanding example was probably Anzio. There was seldom any
period in the campaign when the men wrote so much about the excellence
of their feeding arrangements.
In the conditions of the
beach-head, of
which practically every part was under enemy observation, it seemed at first
that the only satisfactory ration would be Compo or 24-hour ration, and it
was evident that to maintain morale such points as feeding would have to
be exceptionally good.
Catering advisers, including those at Army H.Q., spent much time with
forward troops, and some lived
with forward infantry companies.
men's meals were prepared in unit lines in the rear of brigade headquarters,
and packed in ammunition boxes for carriage forward at night, day move-
ment far forward being impossible.
The intention was that every man should
receive a variety of pre-cooked
dishes, capable of being eaten cold, of
easily warmed in a mess-tin as required.
The result was that the demand
for Compo rations sank to an average of about 3,000 a day, and those
were believed to be demanded more for special items and as a change than
for preference.
During the first part of the campaign, the overriding necessity was to
train men to make good the enormous deficiency of cooks in the theatre,
amounting to 7.000
As the result of intensive training at field cookery
training centres, this was changed, by the tend of the campaign, to a paper
surplus of 300.
Supply of Coal
carried out when the campaigns in Sicily and Italy began, and coal was
The same procedure as that
originally
used for North Africa was
shipped from the United Kingdom in maintenance
arrangements.
An average of 120 000 tone a month. includina shout 100.000
convoys under S.T.1
tons from British sources, was shipped to the Mediterranean forces during
Early in 1944, an existing undertaking required the United Kingdom to
supply a quantity of coal to thunderiking nd Portuguese Governments.
security reasons, this was effected for some months by diverting ships from
South Africa bound for the Mediterranean theatre.
were treated thus, renlacements being arranged hu Ministro of Fuel an
Power and M.O.W.T. direct from the United Kingdom.
276
Provision of P.O.L.
As a common-user item P.O.L.
continued to be
Africa by the petroleum section, A.F. H.O., to which D.S.T. submitted monthly
bids for the services and agencies supplied by S.T.
At first, the S.T. bid for
Traly was consolidated, but later it was submitted in four slates (see Appen-
dix XIN) viz., North-west, South-west, North-east, and South-east.
The basis of calculation of the British bid was 45,000 Imperial gallons
a day, plus about 4,000 gallons a day for winter heating and cooking re-
quirements, for each "Divisional Slice".
Divisional Slices were allotments
on the following scale:
(a) Each Division in the British (as opposed to
U.S.) Order of Battle, including proportion
of L. of C. Troops and Tactical Air Force
(b) Each Independent Brigade, including pro-
portion of L. of C. Troops and Tactical Air
Force
(c) Strategical Air Force
One-third of a Slice.
Three Slices.
(d) Operations under direction of H.Q., Special
Operations, Mediterranean ...
Half a Slice.
At the beginning of 1945, the strength of the theatre was calculated at
24 divisional slices.
Supply of P.O.L. to R.A.F.
For the most part, the R.A.F. operated alongside the U.S.A.A.F. as
part of the Mediterranean Allied Force, and petrol supplies were therefore
arranged on a common user basis. For those areas where the R.A.F. operated
alone, the following policy was observed:
Bulk stocks were held in Army Base Depots, and delivered direct
to airfield tankage,
where available.
If there was no tankage, the
Army delivered to within three miles of airfield perimeter. The R.A.F.
manned the airfield tankage, and the Army operated tankage elsewhere.
Packed stocks were held at the base by Army depots, and delivered
to either a DAF air ammunition park (usually located within 40 miles
of the squadrong it served) or to Army wilhead or roadhead within
25 to 40 miles of operational squadrons where an air ammunition park
was not justified.
P.O.L. Reserves
The scale of reserves held during the latter part of the campaign for
British and US ground and air forces and for the Allied and co-belligerent
forces in the Order of Battle, was laid down as follows: —
Fuels.
Lubricants
Minimum 45 days, maximum 75 days.
Minimum 45 days.
The minimum reserve for Italy was ultimately held entirely in that
country, reserves in excess of 45 days being held anywhere in the A.F.H.Q
was held in bulk.
Of the maximum reserve, at least 30, and at most 45 days' reserve
A minimum of 15 days' and a maximum of 30 days'
277
w0217/2t
27
W027/26
